Jrann-Pttt made a gesture of distaste. _He was unfortunately good at
other things, too. But let's not discuss him. I'm not staying with the
strangers because I want to pick up one or two little things--mostly
some of our food to serve them. I used up all the supplies in my pack
and I want them to think we're living off the land. They believe me to
be a primitive and it's best that they should until I decide just how
I'm going to make most efficient use of them. Besides, I didn't want to
leave you alone._

The younger saurian sniffed skeptically.

       *       *       *       *       *

"Honestly, Pitt," Mrs. Bernardi said, keeping to leeward of the
tablecloth the lizard-man was efficiently shaking out of the airlock,
"I've never had a--an employee as competent as you." But the word she
had in mind, of course, was "servant." "I do wish you'd come back to
Earth with us."

"Perhaps you would compel me to come?" he suggested, as Algol and the
mosquito-bat entered into hot competition to catch the crumbs before
they sank into the purple ooze.

"Oh, no! We'd want you to come as our guest--our friend." _Naturally_,
her thoughts ran, _a house guest would be expected to help with the
washing up and lend a hand with the cooking--and, of course, we wouldn't
have to pay him. Though my husband, I suppose, would requisition him as
a specimen._

_I fully intend to go to Earth with them_, Jrann-Pttt mused, _but
certainly not in that capacity. Nor would I care to be a specimen. I
must formulate some concrete plan._

The captain was crawling on top of the spaceship, scraping off the dried
mud, brushing away the leaves and dust that marred its shining purity.
The hot, humid haze that poured down from the yellow clouds made the
metal surface a little hell. Yet it was hardly less warm on the other
side of the clearing, where Miss Anspacher tried desperately to write up
her notes on a table that kept sinking into the spongy ground, and
hindered by the thick wind that had arisen half an hour before and which
kept blowing her papers off. The sweet odor of the flowers tucked in the
open neck of her already grimy white blouse suddenly sickened her and
she flung them into the mud.

"We won't be going back to Earth for a long time!" she called. Gathering
up the purple-stained papers, she came toward the others, little puffs
of mist rising at each step. "We like it here. Lovely country."

How could she think to please even the savage she fancied him to be by
such an inanity, Jrann-Pttt wondered. No one could possibly like that
fetid swamp. Or was it not so much that she was trying to please him as
convince herself? Was there some reason the terrestrials had for needing
to like Venus. It hovered on the edge of the women's minds. If only it
would emerge completely, he could pick it up, but it lurked in the
shadows of their subconscious, tantalizing him.

"I'd like to know when we're going to start putting up the shelters,"
Mrs. Bernardi said, pushing a streak of fog-yellow hair out of her eyes.
"I can't stand being cooped up for another night on that ship."

"You're planning to put up shelters--to live outside of the ship?" This
would seem to confirm his darkest suspicions. Even a temporary
settlement would leave them too open to visitation from the commandant.
What his attitude toward the aliens might be, Jrann-Pttt didn't know. He
might consider them as specimens, as enemies or as potential allies.
What his attitude toward Jrann-Pttt and his companion would be, however,
the saurian knew only too well. Had they reported the lieutenant's
demise immediately, it was possible the commandant might have been
brought to believe it was an accident. Now he would unquestionably think
Jrann-Pttt had killed Merglyt-Ruuu on purpose--which was not true; how
was Jrann-Pttt to know that the mud into which he'd knocked the
lieutenant was quicksand?

"Anything against putting up shelters?" Captain Greenfield growled from
his perch.

"Monster!" the mosquito-bat shrieked at the cat. "Monster! Monster!"

       *       *       *       *       *

There was a painfully embarrassed silence.

"The creature is not intelligent," Jrann-Pttt explained, smiling. "It
merely has vocal apparatus that can reproduce a frequently heard word,
like--you have a bird, I believe, a--" he searched their minds for the
word--"a parrot."

"Monster!" the mosquito-bat continued. "Monster! Monster!"

"Shut up or I'll wring your neck!" the captain snarled. The mosquito-bat
obeyed sullenly, apparently recognizing the threat in his tone.

But the concept of "monster" hung heavily in the air between the
terrestrials and the lizard-man. _They should not feel so bad about it_,
he thought, _for they are the monsters themselves. But that would never
occur to them and I can hardly reassure them by saying...._

"Don't worry," Professor Bernardi said smoothly. "To him, it's we who
are the monsters."

A sudden gust of wind nearly whipped the tablecloth out of Jrann-Pttt's
hands. He fought with it for a moment, glad of something tangible to
contend with. "About the shelters," he said. "They might not stand up
against a storm."

"So this is monsoon country," Bernardi observed thoughtfully. "Do you
know when the storms usually come, Jrann-Pttt?" The other shook his
head. "Peculiar. There usually is a season for that sort of thing."

"I ... come from another part of the planet."

"Storms here are bad, eh?" the captain commented, swinging himself down
easily. "Frankly, that worries me. Ship's resting on mud as far as I can
see, and if there's one thing I do know something about, it's mud. If it
got any wetter, the ship might sink."

"Maybe we should leave," Mrs. Bernardi suggested. "Go to another part of
the planet where it's drier, or--" she tried not to show the sudden
surge of hope--"leave for home and come back after the rainy season."

There was a sudden silence, and Jrann-Pttt found himself able to pick up
the answers to some of his questions from the alien minds. His worst
fears were confirmed. Plan A was out. But something could still be done
with these creatures.

"Doesn't she know?" the captain demanded accusingly. "You brought her
here without telling her?"

Bernardi spread his hands wide in a futile gesture. "She should know;
I've told her repeatedly. She just doesn't understand ... or doesn't
want to."

"I know they'll forgive us," Mrs. Bernardi said stubbornly.
"We--you--haven't done anything really wrong, so how could they do
anything terrible to us? After all, didn't they refuse you the funds
because they said you couldn't--"

"Shhh, Louisa," her husband commanded.

Jrann-Pttt smiled to himself.

--"do it," she went on. "And you did. So they were wrong and they'll
have to forgive us."

"Tcha!" Miss Anspacher said. "Since when was there any fairness in
justice?"

"On the other hand," Mrs. Bernardi continued, "we have no idea of how
dangerous the storms here could be."

"Very dangerous," Jrann-Pttt said.

"For you, perhaps," the captain retorted. "Maybe not for us."

"Now that's silly," Miss Anspacher said. "You can see that Jrann-Pttt is
much more--" she blushed--"sturdily built than we are."

"I don't mean that we could face it without protection," the captain
replied angrily. "Naturally I mean that our superior technology could
cope with the effects of any storm."

"Well, Captain, we'll have to put that superior technology to use at
once," the professor told him. "You'd better start blasting that rock."

Laden with equipment and malevolent thoughts, the captain trudged off
into the murky jungle. The others would not even offer to help.
Confounded scientists; they certainly took his status as captain
seriously. He wished, for a disloyal moment, that he had stayed on
Earth. The quiet routine of a test pilot had prepared him for nothing
like this. Were Miss Anspacher and adventure worth it? At the moment, he
thought not. But he was on Venus and it was too late to change his mind.

Jrann-Pttt followed him into the jungle, keeping some distance behind,
for he had good reason to suspect that Greenfield would take his warm
interest in terrestrial technology for plain spying. Or, worse yet, he
might try to press the lizard-man into service; Jrann-Pttt felt he had
demeaned himself quite enough already.

"Have you noticed," Miss Anspacher asked, pushing the mass of damp brown
hair off her neck as she came alongside him, "how the--the smell--" _a
scientist does not mince words_--"of the swamp has grown stronger?"

Jrann-Pttt halted. He had a good idea of what the captain's reactions to
the sight of himself and Miss Anspacher arriving hand-in-hand would be.
"Yes, it is getting rather overpowering. Perhaps, for a lady of your
delicate sensibilities, it would be best to--"

"I can stand a bad smell just as well as a male--any male!"

"Perhaps even better," Jrann-Pttt said, "for I was on the verge of
turning back myself."

"Oh," she said, appeased. "Well, in that case, I'll go back with
you ... how quiet everything is!"

He had not noticed. For him, it would never be quiet because of the
stream of jangled thoughts constantly pouring into the back of his mind
from everything sentient that surrounded him.

For a moment, he wondered what it would be like to be non-telepathic
like the terrestrials, to have peace from the clamor of confused
impressions, emotions and ideas that persistently beat at his mind. But
that would be wondering how it was to be deaf to avoid discord, or blind
to shut out ugliness.

"The lull before the storm, I suppose," she said brightly. _Now is his
opportunity to kiss me--only perhaps they don't have kissing in his
society. His mouth does seem to be the wrong shape. And if I kissed him,
it might violate a taboo._

During their short absence, the citrine clouds that closed off the sky
had changed to a sinister umber. It was now almost as dusky in the
clearing as in the jungle itself, when Jrann-Pttt and Miss Anspacher
returned and joined the others.

Professor Bernardi stood looking up with sharp gray eyes at a sky he
could not see. "I hope Greenfield can finish the blasting more quickly
than he estimated," he muttered.

"Will we hear the noise way out here, Carl?" his wife worried nervously.

"Only two kilometers away? Of course we'll hear it. I do wish you
