bones.

She carried gold and precious stones--and more important yet, women
being furloughed home after forced labor in the mines of Soviet Umbriel.
The _Starhound_ and the _Arrow_ bracketed her a million miles above the
plane of the ecliptic near Saturn's orbit, and killed her. We drew
abreast of her and forced her valves. We boarded her and took what we
chose. Then we slaughtered her men and sent them on their long voyage.
That was the beginning.

The attack against Corfu was our next move. This is the battle that
Celia Witmar Day has described in verse. Very bad verse.

    "_Corfu slumbered, gorged and proud--
    While _Arrow_, _Hound_ and _Maid_ marshalled
    Freedom's might above the tyrant's ground,
    And rained down death--_"

There is much more, of course. Brave phrases of emotion and fanciful
unreality written by one who never saw the night of space agleam with
stars.

There was no talk of tyranny or liberty aboard the _Hound_ that day we
leveled with the _Maid_ and the _Arrow_ a thousand miles over the
Russian Base of Corfu. There _was_ talk of the bullion stored under the
fortress' turrets.

Merril's face appeared in my visor screen, superimposed on the image of
the grimy little asteroid floating darkly against the starfields.

"Their radar has picked us up by now, and they're wondering who we are,"
he said, "Take the _Hound_ out on tangent left and join the _Maid_.
Cover my attack and stand by to put a landing party aground."

I watched the image of the _Arrow_--a sliver of darkness against the
crescent of Corfu--lancing down at the fortress. Her forward tubes were
glowing with the familiar pre-discharge emanation.

Below us, confusion reigned. For the first time in memory an asteroid
Base was under attack. Merril brought the _Arrow_ in to within fifty
miles and then unleashed the fury of his forward tubes. Hellfire
coruscated over the steel turrets and stone walls of Corfu. It splashed
like a liquid flame over men and metal and twisted the towers and
buttresses into spidery tendrils of glowing thread. Corfu died without
firing a shot.

We put a party from the _Hound_ aground ten hours later. Even then, we
had to wear insulated suits to walk in that still molten inferno.
Charred bodies had become one with the stuff of the fortress, and
nothing living was left within the keep. We looted Corfu's treasure and
lifted into space heavy with gold.

       *       *       *       *       *

Time passed in an orgy of looting for the men of the Compact. We grew
rich and arrogant, for in space we were kings. Torn by suspicion of one
another, America and Russia could do nothing against us. They had built
an Iron Curtain in space, and it kept them divided and weak.

Endymion felt our blasts, and Clio. Then came Tethys, Rhea, Iapetus. We
cared nothing for the flag these Bases flew. They were the gathering
points for all the gold and treasure of space and we of the Compact took
what we wished of it, leaving a trail of blood and rapine behind us. No
nation claimed our loyalty; space was our mother and lust our father.

Thus, the Peacemakers.

       *       *       *       *       *

For five full years--the long years of the Outer Belt--the _Arrow_, the
_Starhound_, the _Moonmaid_, the _Lady_ and the _Argonaut_ were the
scourges of the spacelanes. No patrol could find us, and no defense
could contain us. I recall how we laughed at the angry sputtering of
Earth's radio. Vast sums were spent in searches and new weapons to
protect the meek and the mutually distrustful from Merril and the men of
the Compact. Budgets, already strained to the breaking point by
generations of the cold war, creaked and groaned as Russians and
Americans spent furiously to build up their defenses against our
depredations. But though we were few and they many--space was large and
it hid us well.

And then one darkling day, Jaq Merril and I stood on the thin methane
snow that carpeted our Base's landing ramp, waiting under our own
blue-black sky for the return of the _Argonaut_. Merril had sent her
sunward to strike at the mines of Loki, an asteroid where Russian
_komisars_ rolled in mountains of blood-red rubies.

We waited through the day and into the sable night, but the _Argonaut_
did not return. For the first time since the formation of the Compact,
we had lost a ship, and something like unease crept into our hearts. The
carousal that night had no gaiety, and there was the sound of bereaved
women weeping.

