broad, green, glassy depths, by whispering sandy channels atrail with
sea-weed, and on, on, out into the vague, cool sea, I sped, rising to
the top, sinking, gliding. Then at last I flung myself out of water,
hands raised, and the clamor of the gulls filled my ears.

"As I lay, breathing fast, drifting on the sea, far out beyond the
gulls I saw a flash of white, and an arm was lifted, signalling me.

"'Daisy!' I called.

"A clear hail came across the water, distinct on the sea-wind, and at
the same instant we raised our hands and moved towards each other.

"How we laughed as we met in the sea! The white dawn came up out of
the depths, the zenith turned to rose and ashes.

"And with the dawn came the wind--a great sea-wind, fresh, aromatic,
that hurled our voices back into our throats and lifted the sheeted
spray above our heads. Every wave, crowned with mist, caught us in a
cool embrace, cradled us, and slipped away, only to leave us to
another wave, higher, stronger, crested with opalescent glory,
breathing incense.

"We turned together up the coast, swimming lightly side by side, but
our words were caught up by the winds and whirled into the sky.

"We looked up at the driving clouds; we looked out upon the pallid
waste of waters, but it was into each other's eyes we looked,
wondering, wistful, questioning the reason of sky and sea And there in
each other's eyes we read the mystery, and we knew that earth and sky
and sea were created for us alone.

"Drifting on by distant sands and dunes, her white fingers touching
mine, we spoke, keying our tones to the wind's vast harmony. And we
spoke of love.

"Gray and wide as the limitless span of the sky and the sea, the winds
gathered from the world's ends to bear us on; but they were not
familiar winds; for now, along the coast, the breakers curled and
showed a million fangs, and the ocean stirred to its depths, uneasy,
ominous, and the menace of its murmur drew us closer as we moved.

"Where the dull thunder and the tossing spray warned us from sunken
reefs, we heard the harsh challenges of gulls; where the pallid surf
twisted in yellow coils of spume above the bar, the singing sands
murmured of treachery and secrets of lost souls agasp in the throes of
silent undertows.

"But there was a little stretch of beach glimmering through the
mountains of water, and towards this we turned, side by side. Around
us the water grew warmer; the breath of the following waves moistened
our cheeks; the water itself grew gray and strange about us.

"'We have come too far,' I said; but she only answered:

"'Faster, faster! I am afraid!' The water was almost hot now; its
aromatic odor filled our lungs.

"'The Gulf loop!' I muttered. 'Daisy, shall I help you?'

"'No. Swim--close by me! Oh-h! Dick--'

"Her startled cry was echoed by another--a shrill scream, unutterably
horrible--and a great bird flapped from the beach, splashing and
beating its pinions across the water with a thundering noise.

"Out across the waves it blundered, rising little by little from the
water, and now, to my horror, I saw another monstrous bird swinging in
the air above it, squealing as it turned on its vast wings. Before I
could speak we touched the beach, and I half lifted her to the shore.

"'Quick!' I repeated. 'We must not wait.'

"Her eyes were dark with fear, but she rested a hand on my shoulder,
and we crept up among the dune-grasses and sank down by the point of
sand where the rough shelter stood, surrounded by the iron-ringed
piles.

"She lay there, breathing fast and deep, dripping with spray. I had no
power of speech left, but when I rose wearily to my knees and looked
out upon the water my blood ran cold. Above the ocean, on the breast
of the roaring wind, three enormous birds sailed, turning and wheeling
among one another; and below, drifting with the gray stream of the
Gulf loop, a colossal bulk lay half submerged--a gigantic lizard,
floating belly upward.

"Then Daisy crept kneeling to my side and touched me, trembling from
head to foot.

"'I know,' I muttered. 'I must run back for the rifle.'

"'And--and leave me?'

"I took her by the hand, and we dragged ourselves through the
wire-grass to the open end of a boiler lying in the sand.

"She crept in on her hands and knees, and called to me to follow.

"'You are safe now,' I cried. 'I must go back for the rifle.'

"'The birds may--may attack you.'

"'If they do I can get into one of the other boilers,' I said. 'Daisy,
you must not venture out until I come back. You won't, will you?'

"'No-o,' she whispered, doubtfully.

"'Then--good-bye.'

"'Good-bye,' she answered, but her voice was very small and still.

"'Good-bye,' I said again. I was kneeling at the mouth of the big
iron tunnel; it was dark inside and I could not see her, but, before I
was conscious of it, her arms were around my neck and we had kissed
each other.

"I don't remember how I went away. When I came to my proper senses I
was swimming along the coast at full speed, and over my head wheeled
one of the birds, screaming at every turn.

"The intoxication of that innocent embrace, the close impress of her
arms around my neck, gave me a strength and recklessness that neither
fear nor fatigue could subdue. The bird above me did not even frighten
me. I watched it over my shoulder, swimming strongly, with the tide
now aiding me, now stemming my course; but I saw the shore passing
quickly, and my strength increased, and I shouted when I came in sight
of the house, and scrambled up on the sand, dripping and excited.
There was nobody in sight, and I gave a last glance up into the air
where the bird wheeled, still screeching, and hastened into the house.
Freda stared at me in amazement as I seized the rifle and shouted for
the professor.

"'He has just gone to town, with Captain McPeek in his wagon,'
stammered Freda.

"'What!' I cried. 'Does he know where his daughter is?'

"'Miss Holroyd is asleep--not?' gasped Freda.

"'Where's Frisby?' I cried, impatiently.

"'Yimmie?' quavered Freda.

"'Yes, Jimmie; isn't there anybody here? Good Heavens! where's that
man in the shop?'

"'He also iss gone,' said Freda, shedding tears, 'to buy papier-mache.
Yimmie, he iss gone to post bills.'

"I waited to hear no more, but swung my rifle over my shoulder, and,
hanging the cartridge-belt across my chest, hurried out and up the
beach. The bird was not in sight.

"I had been running for perhaps a minute when, far up on the dunes, I
saw a yellow dog rush madly through a clump of sweet-bay, and at the
same moment a bird soared past, rose, and hung hovering just above the
thicket. Suddenly the bird swooped; there was a shriek and a yelp from
the cur, but the bird gripped it in one claw and beat its wings upon
the sand, striving to rise. Then I saw Frisby--paste, bucket, and
brush raised--fall upon the bird, yelling lustily. The fierce creature
relaxed its talons, and the dog rushed on, squeaking with terror. The
bird turned on Frisby and sent him sprawling on his face, a sticky
mass of paste and sand. But this did not end the struggle. The bird,
croaking horridly, flew at the prostrate bill-poster, and the sand
whirled into a pillar above its terrible wings. Scarcely knowing what
I was about, I raised my rifle and fired twice. A scream echoed each
shot, and the bird rose heavily in a shower of sand; but two bullets
were embedded in that mass of foul feathers, and I saw the wires and
scarlet tape uncoiling on the sand at my feet. In an instant I seized
them and passed the ends around a cedar-tree, hooking the clasps
tight. Then I cast one swift glance upward, where the bird wheeled,
screeching, anchored like a kite to the pallium wires; and I hurried
on across the dunes, the shells cutting my feet and the bushes tearing
my wet swimming-suit, until I dripped with blood from shoulder to
ankle. Out in the ocean the carcass of the thermosaurus floated, claws
outspread, belly glistening in the gray light, and over him circled
two birds. As I reached the shelter I knelt and fired into the mass of
scales, and at my first shot a horrible thing occurred--the
lizard-like head writhed, the slitted yellow eyes sliding open from
the film that covered them. A shudder passed across the undulating
body, the great scaled belly heaved, and one leg feebly clawed at the
air.

"The thing was still alive!

"Crushing back the horror that almost paralyzed my hands, I planted
shot after shot into the quivering reptile, while it writhed and
clawed, striving to turn over and dive; and at each shot the black
blood spurted in long, slim jets across the water. And now Daisy was
at my side, pale and determined, swiftly clasping each tape-marked
wire to the iron rings in the circle around us. Twice I filled the
magazine from my belt, and twice I poured streams of steel-tipped
bullets into the scaled mass, twisting and shuddering on the sea.
Suddenly the birds steered towards us. I felt the wind from their vast
wings. I saw the feathers erect, vibrating. I saw the spread claws
outstretched, and I struck furiously at them, crying to Daisy to run
into the iron shelter. Backing, swinging my clubbed rifle, I
retreated, but I tripped across one of the taut pallium wires, and in
an instant the hideous birds were on me, and the bone in my forearm
snapped like a pipe-stem at a blow from their wings. Twice I struggled
to my knees, blinded with blood, confused, almost fainting; then I
fell again, rolling into the mouth of the iron boiler.

       *       *       *       *       *

"When I struggled back to consciousness Daisy knelt silently beside
me, while Captain McPeek and Professor Holroyd bound up my shattered
arm, talking excitedly. The pain made me faint and dizzy. I tried to
speak and could not. At last they got me to my feet and into the
wagon, and Daisy came, too, and crouched beside me, wrapped in
oilskins to her eyes. Fatigue, lack of food, and excitement had
combined with wounds and broken bones to extinguish the last atom of
strength in my body; but my mind was clear enough to understand that
the trouble was over and the thermosaurus safe.

"I heard McPeek say that one of the birds that I had anchored to a
cedar-tree had torn loose from the bullets and had winged its way
heavily out to sea. The professor answered: 'Yes, the ekaf-bird; the
others were ool-ylliks. I'd have given my right arm to have secured
them.' Then for a time I heard no more; but the jolting of the wagon
over the dunes roused me to keenest pain, and I held out my right hand
to Daisy. She clasped it in both of hers, and kissed it again and
again.

       *       *       *       *       *

"There is little more to add, I think. Professor Bruce Stoddard's
scientific pamphlet will be published soon, to be followed by
Professor Holroyd's sixteen volumes. In a few days the stuffed and
mounted thermosaurus will be placed on free public exhibition in the
arena of Madison Square Garden, the only building in the city large
enough to contain the body of this immense winged reptile."

       *       *       *       *       *

The young man hesitated, looking long and earnestly at Miss Barrison.

"Did you marry her?" she asked, softly.

"You wouldn't believe it," said the young man, earnestly--"you
wouldn't believe it, after all that happened, if I should tell you
that she married Professor Bruce Stoddard, of Columbia--would you?"

"Yes, I would," said Miss Barrison. "You never can tell what a girl
will do."

"That story of yours," I said, "is to me the most wonderful and
valuable contribution to nature study that it has ever been my fortune
to listen to. You are fitted to write; it is your sacred mission to
produce. Are you going to?"

"I am writing," said the young man, quietly, "a nature book. Sir Peter
Grebe's magnificent monograph on the speckled titmouse inspired me.
But nature study is not what I have chosen as my life's mission."

He looked dreamily across at Miss Barrison. "No, not natural
phenomena," he repeated, "but unnatural phenomena. What Professor
Hyssop has done for Columbia, I shall attempt to do for Harvard. In
fact, I have already accepted the chair of Psychical Phenomena at
Cambridge."

I gazed upon him with intense respect.

"A personal experience revealed to me my life's work," he, went on,
thoughtfully stroking his blond mustache. "If Miss Barrison would care
to hear it--"

"Please tell it," she said, sweetly.

"I shall have to relate it clothed in that artificial garb known as
literary style," he explained, deprecatingly.

"It doesn't matter," I said, "I never noticed any style at all in your
story of the thermosaurus."

He smiled gratefully, and passed his hand over his face; a far-away
expression came into his eyes, and he slowly began, hesitating, as
though talking to himself:




XXII


"It was high noon in the city of Antwerp. From slender steeples
floated the mellow music of the Flemish bells, and in the spire of the
great cathedral across the square the cracked chimes clashed discords
until my ears ached.

"When the fiend in the cathedral had jerked the last tuneless clang
from the chimes, I removed my fingers from my ears and sat down at one
of the iron tables in the court. A waiter, with his face shaved blue,
brought me a bottle of Rhine wine, a tumbler of cracked ice, and a
siphon.

"'Does monsieur desire anything else?' he inquired.

"'Yes--the head of the cathedral bell-ringer; bring it with vinegar
and potatoes,' I said, bitterly. Then I began to ponder on my
great-aunt and the Crimson Diamond.

"The white walls of the Hotel St. Antoine rose in a rectangle around
the sunny court, casting long shadows across the basin of the
fountain. The strip of blue overhead was cloudless. Sparrows twittered
under the eaves the yellow awnings fluttered, the flowers swayed in
the summer breeze, and the jet of the fountain splashed among the
water-plants. On the sunny side of the piazza the tables were vacant;
on the shady side I was lazily aware that the tables behind me were
occupied, but I was indifferent as to their occupants, partly because
I shunned all tourists, partly because I was thinking of my
great-aunt.

"Most old ladies are eccentric, but there is a limit, and my
great-aunt had overstepped it. I had believed her to be wealthy--she
died bankrupt. Still, I knew there was one thing she did possess, and
that was the famous Crimson Diamond. Now, of course, you know who my
great-aunt was.

"Excepting the Koh-i-noor and the Regent, this enormous and unique
stone was, as everybody knows, the most valuable gem in existence. Any
ordinary person would have placed that diamond in a safe-deposit. My
great-aunt did nothing of the kind. She kept it in a small velvet bag,
which she carried about her neck. She never took it off, but wore it
dangling openly on her heavy silk gown.

"In this same bag she also carried dried catnip-leaves, of which she
was inordinately fond. Nobody but myself, her only living relative,
knew that the Crimson Diamond lay among the sprigs of catnip in the
little velvet bag.

"'Harold,' she would say, 'do you think I'm a fool? If I place the
Crimson Diamond in any safe-deposit vault in New York, somebody will
steal it, sooner or later.' Then she would nibble a sprig of catnip
and peer cunningly at me. I loathed the odor of catnip and she knew
it. I also loathed cats. This also she knew, and of course surrounded
herself with a dozen. Poor old lady! One day she was found dead in her
bed in her apartments at the Waldorf. The doctor said she died from
natural causes. The only other occupant of her sleeping-room was a
cat. The cat fled when we broke open the door, and I heard that she
was received and cherished by some eccentric people in a neighboring
