
9. Of elimination: Observe all the conditions that favor the regular
discharge of waste materials from the body.

Obedience to these laws is of vast importance in the proper management of
the body. They should, indeed, be so thoroughly impressed upon the mind as
to become fixed habits. There are, however, other conditions that relate
to this problem, and it is to these that we now turn. These conditions
have reference more specifically to

*The Prevention of Disease.*--While the average length of life is not far
from thirty-five years, the length of time which the average individual is
capable of living is, according to some of the lowest estimates, not less
than seventy years. This difference is due to disease. People do not, as a
rule, die on account of the wearing out of the body as seen in extreme old
age, but on account of the various ills to which flesh is heir. It is true
that many people meet death by accident and not a few are killed in wars,
but these numbers are small in comparison with those that die of bodily
disorders. The prevention of disease is the greatest of all human
problems. Though the fighting of disease is left largely to the physician,
much is to be gained through a more general knowledge of its causes and
the methods of its prevention.

*Causes of Disease.*--Disease, which is some _derangement of the vital
functions_, may be due to a variety of causes. Some of these causes, such
as hereditary defects, are remote and beyond the control of the
individual. Others are the result of negligence in the observance of
well-recognized hygienic laws. Others still are of the nature of
influences, such as climate, the house in which one lives, or one's method
of gaining a livelihood, that produce changes in the body, imperceptible
at the time, but, in the long run, laying the foundations of disease. And
last, and most potent, are the minute living organisms, called microbes or
germs, that find their way into the body. Although there are two general
kinds of germs, known as _bacteria_ (one-celled plants) and _protozoa_
(one-celled animals), most of our germ diseases are caused by bacteria.

*Effects of Germs.*--While there are many kinds of germs that have no ill
effect upon the body and others that are thought to aid it in its work,
there are many well-known varieties that produce effects decidedly
harmful. They gain an entrance through the lungs, food canal, or skin,
and, living upon the fluids and tissues, multiply with great rapidity
until they permeate the entire body. Not only do they destroy the
protoplasm, but they form waste products, called _toxins_, which act as
poisons. Diseases caused by germs are known as infectious, or contagious,
diseases.(129) The list is a long one and includes smallpox, measles,
diphtheria, scarlet fever, typhoid fever, tuberculosis, la grippe,
malaria, yellow fever, and others of common occurrence. In addition to the
diseases that are well pronounced, it is probable that germs are
responsible also for certain bodily ailments of a milder character.(130)

*Avoidance of Germ Diseases.*--The problem of preventing diseases caused by
germs is an exceedingly difficult one and no solution for all diseases has
yet been found. One's chances of avoiding such diseases, however, may be
greatly enhanced:

1. By strengthening the body through hygienic living so that it offers
greater resistance to the invasions of germs.

2. By living as far as possible under conditions that are unfavorable to
germ life.

3. By understanding the agencies through which disease germs are spread
from person to person.

*Conditions Favorable and Unfavorable for Germs.*--Conditions favorable for
germ life are supplied by animal and vegetable matter, moisture, and a
moderate degree of warmth. Hence disease germs may be kept alive in damp
cellars and places of filth. Even living rooms that are poorly lighted or
ventilated may harbor them. Water may, if it contain a small per cent of
organic matter, support such dangerous germs as those of typhoid fever.
Fresh air, sunlight, dryness, cleanliness, and a high temperature, on the
other hand, are destructive of germs. The germs in impure water, as
already noted (page 165), are destroyed by boiling.

*How Germs are Spread.*--Some of the more common methods by which the germs
of disease are spread, and by so doing find new victims, are as follows:

1. _By Means of Foods._--Foods, on account of the locality in which they
are produced or the method of gathering or of handling-them, may become
contaminated with germs, which are then transported with the foods to the
consumer.

2. _By Means of Dust._--Material containing germs, _e.g._, discharges from
the throat and lungs, will on drying form dust. This is lifted with other
fine particles by the air and may be carried quite a distance. The dust
from public halls and other places where people congregate is the kind
most likely to contain disease germs. Dust should be breathed as little as
possible and only through the nostrils. Where one is compelled, as in
sweeping, to breathe dust-laden air for some time, he should inhale
through a moistened sponge, or cloth, tied in front of the nostrils.

3. _By Means of Domestic Pets and Different Kinds of Household
Vermin._--Germs sticking to the bodies of small animals are carried about
and may be easily communicated to people. By this means, rats, mice,
bedbugs, etc., where such exist, are frequently the means of spreading
disease; and particularly dangerous, on this account, is the common house
fly. Feeding as it does on filth of all kinds, it is easy for it to
transfer the bacteria that may stick to its body to the food which is
supplied to the table. The proper screening of houses and the destruction
of material in which flies may develop, such as the refuse from stables,
are necessary precautions.

Germs are spread also by the clothing of people, by railroad and steamship
lines, by the mails, and by the natural elements. In fact, any kind of
carrier, in or upon which germs can live, may serve as a means of
spreading those of certain kinds.

*Public Sanitation.*--The general conditions under which germs may thrive
and some of the means by which they are scattered, emphasize the practical
value of measures which have for their purpose the making of one's
surroundings more wholesome and hygienic. Such measures may be directed
both toward one's immediate surroundings--the home--and toward the
neighborhood, town, or city in which one lives. The hygienic conditions of
primary importance in every city or town are as follows:

1. An adequate public supply of pure water.

2. An efficient system of underground pipes for the removal of sewage.

3. An efficient system for removing from the streets and alleys everything
of the nature of waste.

4. Prevention, by enforcement of ordinances, of spitting upon sidewalks
and the floors of public halls and conveyances.

5. A hospital or sanitarium in which people can be cared for when sick
with infectious diseases.

In the larger cities other hygienic measures demand attention, such as
provisions for parks and playgrounds, the proper housing of the poor of
the city, and the suppression of the smoke and dust nuisances. Crowded
together as people are in the cities, the welfare of each individual
depends in a large measure upon the welfare of all. Hence the problems of
public sanitation are matters in which all are vitally concerned.

*Sanitary Conditions of the Home.*--The home, being the feeding and resting
place for the entire family, is the most important factor in one's
physical, as well as moral, environment. For this reason there is no place
where careful attention to hygienic requirements will yield better
results. Much of the danger from germs may be prevented by instituting and
maintaining proper sanitary conditions in and about the home.

One of the first requisites of the home is a suitable location for the
house. The house should be built upon ground that is well drained, and if
natural drainage be lacking, artificial drainage must be supplied. It
should not be situated nearer than a quarter of a mile to any marsh or
swamp and, if so near as that, it ought to be on the side from which the
wind usually blows. A stone foundation should be provided, and at least
eighteen inches of ventilated air space should be left between the ground
and the floor. Ample provisions must be made for pure air and sunlight in
all the rooms. The cellar, if one is desired, needs to be constructed with
special care. It should be perfectly dry and provided with windows for
light and ventilation. Adequate means must also be provided, by sewage
pipes and other methods, for the disposal of all waste. Where drainage
pipes are provided, care must be taken to prevent the entrance of sewer
gas into the house and also the passage of material from these pipes into
the water supply. The placing and connecting of sewer pipes should, of
course, be under the direction of a plumber.

*The Water Supply.*--Since water readily takes up and holds the impurities
with which it comes in contact, it should be exposed as little as possible
in the process of collecting. Where cistern water is used, care must be
taken to prevent filth from the roof (Fig. 168), water pipes, or soil from
getting into the reservoir. Water should be collected from the roof only
after it has rained long enough for the roof and pipes to have been
thoroughly cleaned. The cistern should have no leaks (Fig. 169), and the
top should be tightly closed to prevent the entrance of small animals and
rubbish.

                                [Fig. 168]


 Fig. 168--*Contamination of cistern water* by birds nesting in the gutter
                                 trough.


Shallow wells are to be condemned, as a rule, because of the likelihood of
surface drainage (Fig. 169), and water from springs should, for the same
reason, be used with caution. Deep wells that are kept clean usually may
be relied on to furnish water free from organic impurities, but such water
often holds in solution so much of mineral impurities as to render it
unfit for drinking. The presence in water of any considerable quantity of
the compounds of iron or calcium makes it objectionable for regular use.

                                [Fig. 169]


      Fig. 169--*Sources of contamination of cistern and well water.*
 Illustration shows liability of contamination from surface drainage and
                      from entrance of filth at top.


*Hygienic Housekeeping.*--However carefully a house has been constructed
from a sanitary standpoint, the constant care of an intelligent
housekeeper is required to keep it a healthful place in which to live.
Daily cleaning and airing of all living rooms are necessary, while such
places as the kitchen, the cellar, and the closets need extra
thoughtfulness and, at times, hard work. Moreover, the problem is not all
indoors. The immediate premises must be kept clean and sightly, and all
decaying vegetable and animal matter should be removed. Home sanitation
consists, not of one, but of many, problems, all more or less complex.
None of these can be slighted or turned over to a novice.

*Destruction of Infectious Material.*--At times the housekeeping has to be
directed especially toward hygienic requirements, such an occasion being
the sickness of one of the inmates with some contagious disease. Unless
special precautions are taken, the disease will spread to other members of
the household and may reach people in the neighborhood. Not only must
great care be exercised that nothing used in connection with the sick
shall serve as a carrier of disease, but germs passing from the patient
should, as far as possible, be actually destroyed. All discharges from the
body likely to contain bacteria, should be burned or treated with
disinfectants and buried deeply at a remote distance from the water supply
to the house.

After recovery all clothing, bedding, and furniture used in connection
with the sick should be disinfected or burned. The room also in which the
sick was cared for should be thoroughly disinfected and cleaned; in some
instances the woodwork ought to be repainted and the walls repapered or
calcimined. The purpose is, of course, to destroy all germs and prevent,
by this means, a recurrence of the disease.

*Fumigation.*--To destroy germs in the air or adhering to the walls of
rooms, furniture, clothing, etc., fumigation is employed. This is
accomplished by saturating the air of rooms with some vapor or gas which
will destroy the germs. Fumigation is quite generally employed in the
general cleaning after the patient leaves his room. This, to be effective,
must be thorough. Formaldehyde is considered the best disinfectant for
this purpose, and it should be evaporated with heat in the proportion of
one half pint of the 40 per cent solution to 1000 cu. ft. of space. Since
formaldehyde is inflammable and easily boils over, it has to be evaporated
with care. It should be boiled in a tall vessel (a tin or copper vessel
which holds about four times the quantity to be evaporated) over a quick
fire, the room being tightly closed (openings around windows and doors
plugged with cotton or cloth). After three or four hours the room may be
opened and thoroughly aired. Since formaldehyde is most disagreeable to
breathe, one should not attempt to occupy the room until it is free from
the gas. This will require a day or more of thorough ventilation.

*Facts Relating to the Spread of Certain Diseases.*--The problem of
preventing disease in general often resolves itself into the problem of
preventing the spread of some particular disease. It is then of vital
importance to know the special method by which the germs of this disease
leave the body of the patient and are conveyed to the bodies of others.
Some of these methods are novel in the extreme, and are not at all in
accord with prevailing notions. Particularly is this true of that disease
known as

*Malaria, or Malarial Fever.*--This disease, so common in warm climates and
also prevalent to a large extent in the temperate zones, is due to animal
germs (protozoa), which attack and destroy the red corpuscles of the
blood. These germs, it is found, pass from malarial patients to others
through the agency of a variety of mosquitoes known as _Anopheles_. In
sucking the blood of a malarial patient, the mosquito first infects her
own body.(131) In the body of the mosquito the germs undergo an essential
stage of their development, after which they are injected beneath the skin
of whomsoever the mosquito feeds upon. For the spreading of malaria, then,
two conditions are necessary: first, there must be people who have the
disease; and second, there must be in the neighborhood the special variety
of mosquito that spreads the disease. If either condition be lacking, the
disease is not spread. The malarial mosquito (_Anopheles_) may be
distinguished from the harmless variety (_Culex_) by the position which it
assumes in resting, as shown in Fig. 170.

                                [Fig. 170]


 Fig. 170--*Mosquitoes* in resting position. (From Howard's _Mosquitoes_.)
  On left the malarial mosquito (_Anopheles_); on the right the harmless
                           mosquito (_Culex_).


*Remedies against Mosquitoes.*--The natural method of preventing the spread
of malaria is, of course, the destruction of mosquitoes. This is
accomplished by draining pools of water where they are likely to breed,
and by covering pools of water that cannot be drained with crude petroleum
or kerosene. The kerosene, by destroying the larvae, prevents the
development of the young. In communities where such measures have been
diligently carried out, the mosquito pest has been practically eliminated.
Other methods are also under investigation, such as the stocking of
shallow bodies of water with varieties of fish that feed upon the mosquito
larvae.

                                [Fig. 171]


     Fig. 171--*Stegomyia*, the yellow-fever mosquito (after Howard).


*Yellow Fever.*--This scourge of the tropics is, like malaria, caused by
animal germs. It is also propagated in the same manner as malaria, but by
a different variety of mosquito (_Stegomyia_, Fig. 171). The stamping out
of yellow fever in Havana, the Panama Canal Zone, and other places,
through the destruction of this variety of mosquito, affords ample proof
of the correctness of the "mosquito theory."

                                [Fig. 172]


  Fig. 172--*Consumption germs* from the spit of one having the disease.
 Highly magnified and stained. (Huber's _Consumption and Civilization_.)


*Consumption*, or tuberculosis of the lungs, spoken of as the "white
plague," was among the first diseases shown to be due to bacteria.
Consumption is now recognized as an infectious disease, though not so
readily communicated as some other diseases. Several methods are
recognized by which the germs are passed from the sick to the well, the
most important being as follows:

1. By personal contact of the sick with the well, especially in kissing.

2. By the sputum, or spit, which, if allowed to dry, is blown about as
dust and breathed into the lungs(132) (Fig. 172).

3. By means of objects (drinking cups, tableware, etc.) that have been
handled by consumptives.

4. By infectious material associated with houses or rooms in which
consumptives have lived.

These methods of spreading consumption suggest the necessity for the
greatest care, on the part of both the patient and those having him in
charge.(133) The material coughed up from the lungs and throat should be
collected on cloths or paper handkerchiefs and afterwards burned. The
house where a consumptive has lived should be disinfected, repapered or
calcimined, and thoroughly cleaned before it is again occupied. The inside
woodwork should also be repainted. The approaches to the house where the
patient may have expectorated should be disinfected and cleaned. Since the
germs are able to live in the soil, fresh lime or wood ashes should be
spread around the doorsteps and along the walks.

*Typhoid Fever*, one of our most dangerous diseases, is caused by germs
(bacteria) that enter the body through the food canal. They attack certain
glands in the walls of the small intestine, where they produce toxins that
pass with the germs to all parts of the body. Typhoid fever germs spread
from those having the disease to others, chiefly through the discharges
from the bowels and the kidneys. The germs contained in these, if not
destroyed by disinfectants, find their way into the soil, or into sewage,
where they may be picked up by water and widely distributed. Finding
suitable places, such as those containing decaying material, the germs may
rapidly increase in number, and from these sources find their way into the
bodies of new victims. They are likely, on account of manures, to get on
vegetables; on account of uncleanly methods of milking, to get into the
milk supply; and from sewerage outlets, to get into the oysters that grow
in bays and harbors near seaboard cities; but they are most frequently
introduced into the body through the drinking of impure water.

*Diphtheria*, also known as "membranous croup," is caused by germs that
attack the membranes of the throat. This most dangerous of children's
diseases is spread chiefly by discharges from the mouth and throat. These
should be collected on cloths and burned, or rendered harmless with
disinfectants. The disease may be spread also by objects brought into
contact with the mouth, such as cups, toys, pencils, etc. Children are
known to have diphtheria germs in the mouth for some time after recovering
from the disease, and should, for this reason, be kept away from other
children until pronounced safe by the physician.

The _antitoxin method_ of treating diphtheria has robbed this disease of
much of its terror, yet it not infrequently happens that the physician is
called too late to administer this remedy to the best advantage. Since
certain cases of diphtheria are likely to be mistaken for croup, the
parent frequently does not realize the serious condition of the child. A
croupy cough _that lasts through the day_, or a sore throat which shows
small white patches, are indications of diphtheria.

*Scarlet Fever, Measles, Chicken Pox, and Smallpox*, on account of the
eruptions of the skin which attend them, are classed as eruptive diseases.
As the eruptions heal, scales separate from the skin, and these are
supposed to be the chief means of spreading the germs. Attention must be
given to the destruction of these scales by burning or thoroughly
disinfecting all objects, such as clothing, bedding, etc., that may serve
as carriers of them. Those having eruptive diseases should be confined to
their rooms as long as the scales continue to separate from the body.

*Vaccination.*--The method of preventing smallpox known as vaccination,
which has been practiced since its discovery in 1796 by Jenner, has always
proved effective. In some instances the sore arm causes considerable
inconvenience, but this generally results from neglect to cleanse the arm
thoroughly before applying the virus, or from contact of the sore with the
clothing later. The virus should be applied by a physician and the wound
should be protected after the operation. If discomfort is felt when it
"takes," medical advice should be sought.

*Isolation*, or quarantining, is a most important method of combating
contagious diseases. By removing the sick from the well many outbreaks of
disease are quickly checked. Isolation of individual patients, and
sometimes of infected neighborhoods, is absolutely necessary; and while
this works a hardship to the few, it is frequently the only safeguard of
the many. The community, on the other hand, should make ample provision
for the care of the afflicted in the way of hospitals, or sanitaria, and
if it is deemed necessary to remove people from their homes, they should
not be subjected to unnecessary hardship.

Where one is sick from some contagious disease in the home and there is
liability of communicating it to the other members of the family, _room
isolation_ should be practiced. Infection cannot spread through solid
walls, and where the doors, and the cracks around the doors, are kept
completely closed and the usual precautions are observed by those
attending the patient, the other inmates of the house can be protected
from the disease.

*The Physician and His Work.*--In combating disease the services of the
physician are a prime necessity. The special knowledge which he has at his
command enables the conflict to be carried on according to scientific
requirements and vastly increases the chances for recovery. He should be
called early and his directions should be carefully followed. Everything,
however, must not be left to the physician, for recovery depends as much
upon proper nursing and feeding as upon the drugs that are administered.
Of great importance is _the saving of the energy of the patient_, and to
accomplish this visitors should, as a rule, be excluded from the sick
room.

*Precautions in Recovery from Disease.*--Many diseases, if severe, not only
leave the body in a weakened condition, but may, through the toxins which
the germs deposit, cause untold harm if the patient leaves his bed or
resumes his usual activities too soon. Especially is this true of typhoid
fever,(134) diphtheria, scarlet fever, and measles. Rheumatism and
affections of the heart, lungs, kidneys, and other bodily organs
frequently follow these diseases, as the result of slight exposure or
exertion before the body has sufficiently recovered from the effects of
the toxins. To guard against such results, certain physicians require
their patients to keep their beds for a week, or longer, after apparent
recovery from diseases like typhoid fever, diphtheria, and scarlet fever.

*Relation of Vocation to Disease.*--With a few exceptions, the pursuit of
one's vocation, or calling in life, does not supply either the quantity or
the kind of activity that is most in harmony with the plan of the body.
Especially is this true of work that requires most of the time to be spent
indoors, or which exercises but a small portion of the body. The effect of
such vocations, if not counteracted, is to weaken certain organs, thereby
disturbing the functional equilibrium of the body--a result that may be
brought about either by the overwork of particular organs or by lack of
exercise of others. Herein lies the explanation of the observed fact that
people of the same calling in life have similar diseases.

*A Special Problem for the Brain Worker.*--Farthest removed from those
forms of activity which harmonize with the plan of the body, and which
therefore are most hygienic, is that class of workers known as the
professional class, or the "brain workers." This class includes not only
the members of the learned professions--law, medicine, and the ministry--but
a vast army of business men, engineers, teachers, stenographers, office
clerks, etc., a class that is ever increasing as our civilization
advances. It is this class in particular that must give attention to those
conditions that indirectly, but profoundly, influence the bodily
well-being and must seek to obviate if possible such weaknesses as the
occupation induces.

*The Remedy* lies in two directions--that of spending sufficient time away
from one's work to allow the body to recover its normal condition, and
that of counteracting the effect of the work by special exercise or other
means. In many cases the first symptoms of weakness indicate a suitable
remedy. Thus exhaustion from overwork suggests rest and recreation. The
diverting of too much blood from other parts of the body to the brain
suggests some form of exercise which will equalize the circulation. If
feebleness of the digestive organs is being induced, some natural method
of increasing the blood supply to these organs is to be looked for. And
effects arising from lack of fresh air and sunlight are counteracted by
spending more time out of doors.

*Exercise as a Counteractive Agent.*--In counteracting tendencies to
disease and in the maintenance of the functional equilibrium of the body,
no agent has yet been discovered of greater importance than physical
exercise, when applied systematically and persistently. This may consist
of exercises that call into play all the muscles of the body, or which are
concentrated upon special parts. When general tonic effects are desired,
the exercise should be well distributed; but when counteractive or
remedial effects are wanted, it must be applied chiefly to the parts that
are weak or that have not been called into action by the regular work.
Unfortunately, health is sometimes confused with physical strength and
exercise is directed toward the stronger parts of the body with the effect
of making them still stronger. Not only is health not to be measured by
the pounds that one can lift or by some gymnastic feat that one can
perform, but the possession of great muscular power may, if the heart and
other vital organs be not proportionally strong, prove a menace to the
health. This being true, one having his health primarily in view will use
physical exercise, in part at least, as a means of building up organs that
are weak. Since the body, like a chain, can be no stronger than its
weakest part, this is clearly the logical method of fortifying it against
disease.

*Value of Work.*--Although there may exist in one's vocation certain
tendencies to disease, it must not be inferred that work in itself is
detrimental to health. Health demands activity, and those forms of
activity that provide a regular and systematic outlet for one's surplus
energy and compel the formation of correct habits of eating, sleeping, and
recreating best serve the purpose. Work furnishes activity of this kind
and serves also as a safeguard against the unhealthful and immoral habits
contracted so often from idleness. Even physical exercise which has for
its purpose the reenforcement of the body against disease may frequently
consist of useful work without diminishing its hygienic effects.

*The Mental Attitude.*--While a proper thoughtfulness and care for the body
is both desirable and necessary, it is also true that over-anxiety about,
or an unnatural attention to, the needs of the body reacts unfavorably
upon the nervous system. Observance of the laws of health, therefore,
should be natural and without special effort--a matter of habit. The
attention should never be turned with anxiety upon any organ or process,
but the mental attitude should at all times be that of _confidence in the
power of the body organization to do its work_. Fear and morbidity, which
are disturbing and paralyzing factors, should be supplanted by courage,
cheerfulness, and hopefulness.

Let it be borne in mind that hygienic living requires nothing more than
the application of the same intelligence and practical common sense to the
care of the body that the skillful mechanic applies to an efficient, but
delicate, machine. And, just as in the case of the machine, care of the
body keeps its efficiency at the maximum and lengthens the period that it
may be used. This end and aim of hygienic living is best attained by
cultivating that attitude of mind toward the body that avoids interference
in the vital processes and permits the natural appetites, sensations, and
desires to indicate very largely the body's needs.

*Attitude toward Habit-forming Drugs.*--Among the different substances
introduced into the body, either as foods or as medicines, are a number
which have the effect of developing an artificial appetite or craving
which leads to their continued use. Since the effect of such substances is
usually harmful and since they tend to engraft themselves upon communities
as social customs, they present a twofold relation to the general problem
of keeping well. The individual may be injured through the personal use
which he makes of them, or he may be injured through the effect which they
have upon relatives or friends or upon society at large. Since our social
environment is a factor in health little less important than our physical
environment, the conditions that make for their continuance should be more
generally understood.

*How Social Agencies perpetuate the Use of Habit-forming Drugs.*--When the
use of some habit-forming drug has risen to the importance of a general
custom, a number of conditions arise which tend to continue its use, even
though the fact may be quite generally known that the substance does harm.
In the first place, those who have formed the habit suffer inconvenience
and distress when deprived of its use. In the second place, a number of
people will have become interested in the production and sale of the
substance, and these will lose financially if it is discontinued. In the
third place, those of the rising generation will, from imitation or
persuasion, be constantly acquiring the habit before they are sufficiently
mature to decide what is best for them. Thus may the use of a substance
most harmful, such as the opium of the Chinese, be indefinitely
continued--a species of slavery from which the individual finds it hard to
escape.

Such is human nature and such are the forces and influences of human
society, that the freeing of a people from the bondage of some
