He tapped the lip of the bell. A muted _thunk_ was the only response.
Then he tried with a coin, a paper knife, and the bottom of a glass.
In each instance the resulting sound was nothing like a bell ringing.

"If you've finished, Mark," Edith said then, with feminine tolerance,
"let me show you how it's done."

"Gladly," her husband agreed. She took the bell and turned away for a
moment. Then she shook the bell vigorously. A clear, sweet ringing
shivered through the room--so thin and etherial that small involuntary
shivers crawled up his spine.

"Good Lord!" he exclaimed. "How did you do that?"

"I just put the clapper back in place with some thread," Edith told
him.

"The clapper?" He struck his forehead with his palm. "Don't tell
me--the crystal necklace we bought twenty years ago!"

"Of course." Her tone was composed. "As soon as young Sam Kee told us
about his father's separating the clapper and the bell, I remembered
the central crystal pendant on my necklace. It _is_ shaped like a bell
clapper--we mentioned it once.

"I guessed right away we had the missing clapper. But I didn't say so.
I wanted to score on you, Mark--" she smiled affectionately at
him--"and because, you know, I had a queer feeling Sam Kee, junior,
wouldn't let us have the bell if he guessed we had the clapper."

"I don't think he would." Mark Williams picked up his pipe and rubbed
the bowl with his thumb. "Yet he didn't really believe that story he
told us any more than we do."

"No, but his father did. And if old Sam Kee had told it to
us--remember how wrinkled and wise he seemed?--I do believe we'd have
believed the story."

"You're probably right." Dr. Williams rang the bell and waited. The
thin, sweet sound seemed to hang in the air a long moment, then was
gone.

"Nope," he said. "Nothing happened. Although, of course, that may be
because there was no deceased around to respond."

"I'm not sure I feel like joking about the story." A small frown
gathered on Edith's forehead. "I had planned to use the bell as a
dinner bell and to tell the story to our guests. But now--I'm not
sure."

Frowning, she stared at the bell until the ringing of the telephone in
the hall brought her out of her abstraction.

"Sit still, I'll answer." She hurried out. Dr. Williams, turning the
rose crystal bell over in his hand, could hear the sudden tension in
her voice as she answered. He was on his feet when she reentered.

"An emergency operation at the hospital," she sighed. "Nice young
man--automobile accident. Fracture of the skull, Dr. Amos says. He
wouldn't have disturbed you but you're the only brain man in town,
with Dr. Hendryx away on vacation."

"I know." He was already in the hall, reaching for his hat. "Man's
work is from sun to sun, but a doctor's work is never done," he
misquoted.

"I'll drive you." Edith followed him out. "You sit back and relax for
another ten minutes...."

       *       *       *       *       *

Two hours later, as they drove homeward, the traffic was light, which
was fortunate. More than once Mark, in a frowning abstraction, found
himself on the left of the center line and had to pull back into his
own lane.

He had lost patients before, but never without a feeling of personal
defeat. Edith said he put too much of himself into every operation.
Perhaps he did. And yet--No, there was every reason why the young man
should have lived. Yet, just as Mark Williams had felt that he had
been successful, the patient had died.

In twenty years of marriage, Edith Williams had learned to read his
thoughts at times. Now she put a hand comfortingly on his arm.

"These things happen, darling," she said. "You know that. A doctor can
only do so much. Some of the job always remains in the hands of
Nature. And she does play tricks at times."

"Yes, confound it, I know it," her husband growled. "But I resent
losing that lad. There was no valid reason for it--unless there was
some complication I overlooked." He shook his head, scowling. "I
ordered an autopsy but--Yes, I'm going to do that autopsy myself. I'm
going to turn back and do it now. I have to know!"

He pulled abruptly to the left to swing into a side road and turn.
Edith Williams never saw the car that hit them. She heard the frantic
blare of a horn and a scream of brakes, and in a frozen instant
realized that there had been someone behind them, about to pass. Then
