print--"

"And did what seemed logical." Statement, then a very quiet question.
"What happened to your accent?"

The little man looked blank.

Vogel took a slow deep breath. "I've got a material planning job
open," he said tightly. "Three-fifty to start. Interested?"

For a moment he thought Amenth would lick his hand.

The little man took to planning sheets like a duck to water. He pored
feverishly over blueprints, turning out travelers in a steady flood.

Vogel watched him. He went over to Personnel, requested Amenth's
employment application, read it and scowled. It was a masterpiece of
anonymity. Birthplace: New York. Former Occupation: Laborer. Hobbies:
None. He memorized Amenth's address and returned the application.

Vogel always ate lunch in the office with his expediters. That noon
two of them got into an argument about the planets.

"I say there is life on Mars," Pete Stone insisted stubbornly. "When
the polar ice cap melts, the water runs along the canals and traces of
green from growing vegetation can be spotted."

"Which proves nothing," Harvey Lamb yawned. Lamb was chief expediter.
"Man couldn't live there, anyway. There's not enough oxygen."

"You would be amazed," Amenth said quietly, "at the adaptability of
Man."

Vogel set down his thermos and leaned forward. "You mean Martians, for
instance, could live here, assuming they existed and had spaceships?"

Amenth's smile was infinitely bitter. "Until they'd go mad."

The talk turned to baseball. Vogel lit his pipe and gave Amenth a
surreptitious glance. The little man slumped in the corner, bleak and
withdrawn.

This was delicious.

       *       *       *       *       *

Vogel left the shop and drove across town to Amenth's address. It
turned out to be an ancient rooming house on the West Side. Mrs.
Reardon, the landlady, was an apathetic woman who brightened when he
asked her about Amenth.

"He moved in just three weeks ago." Her face softened in recollection.
"He was like a lost dog coming in out of the rain. Couldn't hardly
speak English and he wanted me to trust him for the rent. I must have
been crazy." Her nostrils flared. "Not that he hasn't paid up. Are you
a cop?"

Vogel nodded as he took out his wallet. In it was his honorary
sheriff's badge, but he doubted if the woman would know the
difference. She didn't. She led the way upstairs to Amenth's room,
worrying, and Vogel assured her they were only looking for a
hit-and-run witness, that it was strictly routine.

Amenth's room was incredibly aseptic, barren of pictures, ash trays,
dirty laundry, any of the normal masculine debris. Vogel got the stark
impression of a convict's cell. In the bleak dresser were two pair of
socks, underwear, one tie. In the closet hung one white shirt ...
period. Everything wore an indefinable patina of newness. Two books
graced the top of the dresser. Vogel recognized one of them, a text on
fabrication and design which Amenth had borrowed from his office. The
other was a child's primer of English.

"He stays in his room almost every night--reads mostly, and he speaks
English much better now," said Mrs. Reardon. "A good tenant--I can't
complain--and he's quiet and clean." She described Amenth and Vogel
shook his head.

"Our man is about sixty, with a beard," he said. "Funny coincidence.
It's a strange name."

Mrs. Reardon agreed.

Vogel drove back to the shop, whistling.

[Illustration]

He did not go to his chess club that night, but went to the library
instead. He read about Flying Saucers, about space travel, about the
possibility of life on other planets. Sometimes he chuckled. Once he
frowned deeply and bit his lip.

