"Even before I got so old?" Thin parchment-white hands lifted slowly
to rub a thin parchment-white face. "Things were always pretty much as
you see them now. I looked about the same to your ancestors as I do to
you. Your ancestors didn't think anybody could be smart unless they
were old. Of course, that's all changed now." He paused and nodded
twice. "Oh, I've managed to fix myself up a good deal; I'm not in
nearly as bad shape as I was at first, but that's all inside. I'm in
pretty good condition now, for having been stuck here seven thousand
years." The cackling laugh sounded briefly in the small room.

"Could you tell me how it all happened?" asked Garth curiously.

"Be glad to. It's a pleasure to have a human to shoot the bull with.
Sit down and make yourself comfortable and have a bite to eat."

       *       *       *       *       *

Looking behind him, Garth saw that a table and chair had appeared in
the otherwise unfurnished room.

"The chair was made for people built just a little different than
you," said The Visitor. "You may have to turn it back-to-front and
straddle it to keep your tail out of the way. The food on the table's
good, though, and so's the drink. Have a snack while I talk."

"Thank you, my Lord," said Garth, lifting his long tail with its
paddlelike tip out of the way and sitting down carefully.

"Comfortable?" asked The Visitor. "Well, then. I was on a routine
flight from old Earth to a star you've never heard of, a good many
light-years from here. We had pulled away from TransLunar Station on
ion drive and headed for deep space. They trusted me, all those men
and women, both passengers and crew. They knew that I was careful and
accurate. I'd made a thousand flights and had never had any trouble.

"In six hours of flight, we were clear enough from all planetary
masses and my velocity vector was right on the nose, so I shifted over
into hyper-space. You won't ever see hyper-space, my boy, and your
kids and their kids won't see it for another two hundred years or
more, but it's the most beautiful sight in the Universe. It never
grows old, never grows tiresome."

His thin voice faded away for a few moments.

"It's a sight I haven't seen for seven thousand years, boy," he said
softly, "and the lack of it has been a deep hurt for every minute of
all that time. I wish I could tell you what it's like, but that can't
be done. You will never know that beauty." He was silent again, for
long minutes.

"The long, lazy, lovely days of subjective time passed," he said
finally, "while we slid light-years away from Earth. Everything worked
smoothly, the way it always did, until suddenly, somehow, the
near-impossible happened. My hydrogen fusion power sphere started to
oscillate critically and wouldn't damp. I had only seconds of time in
which to work.

"In the few seconds before the sphere would have blown, turning all of
us into a fine grade of face powder, I had to find a star with a
planet that would support human life, bring the ship down out of
hyper-space with velocity matched closely enough so that I could land
on the planet, and jettison the sphere that was going wild.

"Even while I did it, I knew that it wasn't good enough. But there was
no more time. The accelerations were terrific and all my people died.
I managed to save myself, and I barely managed that. I did all that
could be done, but it just wasn't enough. I circled your sun for many
years before I could make enough repairs to work the auxiliary drive.
Then I landed here on this mountaintop. I've been here ever since.

"It has been a lonely time," he added wistfully.

       *       *       *       *       *

Garth's mind tried to absorb all the vastness of that understatement,
and failed. He could not begin to comprehend the meaning of seven
thousand years of separation from his own kind.

The Visitor's high-pitched voice continued for several minutes,
explaining how Garth's ancestors of several thousand years
before--naked and primitive, barbarous, with almost no culture of
their own--had made contact with The Visitor from space, and had been
gently lifted over the millennia toward higher and higher levels of
civilization.

Garth had trouble keeping his attention on the words. His mind kept
reverting to the thought of one badly injured survivor, alone on a
