to standard?"

"I'm scared purple," she replied, nestling against him, "or, at least,
if not exactly scared, I'm apprehensive and nervous. I always thought I
had good nerves, but everything here is so horrible and unreal, that I
can't help but feel it. When I'm with you I really enjoy the experience,
but when I'm alone or with Peggy, especially in the sleeping-period,
which is so awfully long and when it seems that something terrible is
going to happen every minute, my mind goes off in spite of me into
thoughts of what may happen. Why, last night, Peggy and I just huddled
up to each other in a ghastly yellow funk--dreading we knew not
what--the two of us slept hardly at all."

"I'm sorry, little girl," replied Seaton, embracing her tenderly,
"sorrier than I can say. I know that your nerves are all right, but you
haven't roughed it enough, or lived in strange environments enough, to
be able to feel at home. The reason you feel safer with me is that I
feel perfectly at home here myself, not that your nerves are going to
pieces or anything like that. It won't be for long, though,
sweetheart--as soon as we get the chariot fixed up we'll beat it back to
the Earth so fast it'll make your head spin."

"Yes, I think that's the reason, lover. I hope you won't think I'm a
clinging vine, but I can't help being afraid of something here every
time I'm away from you. You're so self-reliant, so perfectly at ease
here, that it makes me feel the same way."

"I am perfectly at ease. There's nothing to be afraid of. I've been in
hundreds of worse places, right on Earth. I sure wish I could be with
you all the time, sweetheart girl--only you can understand just how much
I wish it--but, as I said before, it won't be long until we can be
together all the time."

Dorothy pushed him into his room, followed him within it, closed the
door, and put both hands on his arm.

"Dick, sweetheart," she whispered, while a hot blush suffused her face,
"you're not as dumb as I thought you were--you're dumber! But if you
simply won't say it, I will. Don't you know that a marriage that is
legal where it is performed is legal anywhere, and that no law says that
the marriage must be performed upon the Earth?"

He pressed her to his heart in a mighty embrace, and his low voice
showed in every vibration the depth of the feeling he held for the
beautiful woman in his arms as he replied:

"I never thought of that, sweetheart, and I wouldn't have dared mention
it if I had. You're so far away from your family and your friends that
it would seem...."

"It wouldn't seem anything of the kind," she broke in earnestly. "Don't
you see, you big, dense, wonderful man, that it is the only thing to do?
We need each other, or at least, I need you, so much now...."

"Say 'each other'; it's right," declared her lover with fervor.

"It's foolish to wait. Mother would like to have seen me married, of
course; but there will be great advantages, even on that side. A grand
wedding, of the kind we would simply have to have in Washington, doesn't
appeal to me any more than it does to you--and it would bore you to
extinction. Dad would hate it, too--it's better all around to be married
here."

Seaton, who had been trying to speak, silenced her.

"I'm convinced, Dottie, have been ever since the first word. If you can
see it that way I'm so glad that I can't express it. I've been scared
stiff every time I thought of our wedding. I'll speak to the Karfedix
the first thing in the morning, and we'll be married tomorrow--or rather
today, since it is past the zero kam," as he glanced at the chronometer
upon his wrist, which, driven by wireless impulses from the master-clock
in the national observatory, was clicking off the darkamo with an almost
inaudible purr of its smoothly-revolving segments.

"How would it be to wake him up and have it done now?"

"Oh, Dick, be reasonable! That would never do. Tomorrow will be most
awfully sudden, as it is! And Dick, please speak to Martin, will you?
Peggy's even more scared than I am, and Martin, the dear old stupid, is
even less likely to suggest such a thing as this kind of a wedding than
you are. Peggy's afraid to suggest it to him."

"Woman!" he said in mock sternness, "Is this a put-up job?"

"It certainly is. Did you think I had nerve enough to do it without
help?"

Seaton turned and opened the door.

"Mart! Bring Peggy over here!" he called, as he led Dorothy back into
the girls' room.

"Heavens, Dick, be careful! You'll spoil the whole thing!"

"No, I won't. Leave it to me--I bashfully admit that I'm a regular
bear-cat at this diplomatic stuff. Watch my smoke!"

"Folks," he said, when the four were together, "Dottie and I have been
talking things over, and we've decided that today's the best possible
date for a wedding. Dottie's afraid of these long, daylight nights, and
I admit that I'd sleep a lot sounder if I knew where she was all the
time instead of only part of it. She says she's willing, provided you
folks see it the same way and make it double. How about it?"

Margaret blushed furiously and Crane's lean, handsome face assumed a
darker color as he replied:

"A marriage here would, of course, be legal anywhere, provided we have a
certificate, and we could be married again upon our return if we think
it desirable. It might look as though we were taking an unfair advantage
of the girls, Dick, but considering all the circumstances, I think it
would be the best thing for everyone concerned."

He saw the supreme joy in Margaret's eyes, and his own assumed a new
light as he drew her into the hollow of his arm.

"Peggy has known me only a short time, but nothing else in the world is
as certain as our love. It is the bride's privilege to set the date, so
I will only say that it cannot be too soon for me."

"The sooner the better," said Margaret, with a blush that would have
been divine in any earthly light, "did you say 'today,' Dick?"

"I'll see the Karfedix as soon as he gets up," he answered, and walked
with Dorothy to his door.

"I'm just too supremely happy for words," Dorothy whispered in Seaton's
ear as he bade her good-night. "I won't be able to sleep or anything!"




CHAPTER XVI

An Osnomian Marriage


Seaton awoke, hot and uncomfortable, but with a great surge of joy in
his heart--this was his wedding day! Springing from the bed, he released
the full stream of the "cold" water, filling the tank in a few moments.
Poising lightly upon the edge, he made a clean, sharp dive, and yelled
in surprise as he came snorting to the surface. For Dunark had made good
his promise--the water was only a few degrees above the freezing point!
After a few minutes of vigorous splashing in the icy water, he rubbed
himself down with a coarse towel, shaved, threw on his clothes, and
lifted his powerful, but musical, bass voice in the wedding chorus from
"The Rose Maiden."

    _"Rise, sweet maid, arise, arise,
    Rise, sweet maid, arise, arise,
    'Tis the last fair morning for thy maiden eyes,"_

he sang lustily, out of his sheer joy in being alive, and was surprised
to hear Dorothy's clear soprano, Margaret's pleasing contralto, and
Crane's mellow tenor chime in from the adjoining room. Crane threw open
the door and Seaton joined the others.

"Good morning. Dick, you sound happy," said Crane.

"Who wouldn't be? Look what's doing today," as he ardently embraced his
bride-to-be. "Besides, I found some cold water this morning."

"Everyone in the palace heard you discovering it," dryly returned Crane,
and the girls laughed merrily.

"It surprised me at first," admitted Seaton, "but it's great after a
fellow once gets wet."

"We warmed ours a trifle," said Dorothy. "I like a cold bath myself, but
not in ice-water."

All four became silent, thinking of the coming event of the day, until
Crane said:

"They have ministers here, I know, and I know something of their
religion, but my knowledge is rather vague. You know more about it than
we do, Dick, suppose you tell us about it while we wait."

Seaton paused a moment, with an odd look on his face. As one turning the
pages of an unfamiliar book of reference, he was seeking the answer to
Crane's question in the vast store of Osnomian information received from
Dunark. His usually ready speech came a little slowly.

"Well, as nearly as I can explain it, it's a funny kind of a
mixture--partly theology, partly Darwinism, or at least, making a fetish
of evolution, and partly pure economic determinism. They believe in a
Supreme Being, whom they call the First Cause--that is the nearest
English equivalent--and they recognize the existence of an immortal and
unknowable life-principle, or soul. They believe that the First Cause
has decreed the survival of the fittest as the fundamental law, which
belief accounts for their perfect physiques...."

"Perfect physiques? Why, they're as weak as children," interrupted
Dorothy.

"Yes, but that is because of the smallness of the planet," returned
Seaton. "You see, a man of my size weighs only eighty-six pounds here,
on a spring balance, so he would need only the muscular development of a
boy of twelve or so. In a contest of strength, either of you girls could
easily handle two of the strongest men upon Osnome. In fact, the average
Osnomian could stand up on our Earth only with the greatest difficulty.
But that isn't the fault of the people; they are magnificently developed
for their surroundings. They have attained this condition by centuries
of weeding out the unfit. They have no hospitals for the feeble-minded
or feeble-bodied--abnormal persons are not allowed to live. The same
reasoning accounts for their perfect cleanliness, moral and physical.
Vice is practically unknown. They believe that clean living and clean
thinking are rewarded by the production of a better physical and mental
type...."

"Yes, especially as they correct wrong living by those terrible
punishments the Kofedix told us about," interrupted Margaret.

"That probably helps some. They also believe that the higher the type
is, the faster will evolution proceed, and the sooner will mankind reach
what they call the Ultimate Goal, and know all things. Believing as they
do that the fittest must survive, and thinking themselves, of course,
the superior type, it is ordained that Mardonale must be destroyed
utterly, root and branch. They believe that the slaves are so low in the
scale, millions of years behind in evolution, that they do not count.
Slaves are simply intelligent and docile animals, little more than
horses or oxen. Mardonalians and savages are unfit to survive and must
be exterminated.

"Their ministers are chosen from the very fittest. They are the
strongest, cleanest-living, and most vigorous men of this clean and
vigorous nation, and are usually high army officers as well as
ministers."

       *       *       *       *       *

An attendant announced the coming of the Karfedix and his son, to pay
the call of state. After the ceremonious greetings had been exchanged,
all went into the dining hall for darprat. As soon as the meal was over,
Seaton brought up the question of the double wedding that kokam, and the
Karfedix was overjoyed.

"Karfedix Seaton," he said earnestly, "nothing could please us more than
to have such a ceremony performed in our palace. Marriage between such
highly-evolved persons as are you four is wished by the First Cause,
whose servants we are. Aside from that, it is an unheard-of honor for
any ruler to have even one karfedix married beneath his roof, and you
are granting me the privilege of two! I thank you, and assure you that
we will do our poor best to make the occasion memorable."

"Don't do anything fancy," said Seaton hastily. "A simple, plain wedding
will do."

Unheeding Seaton's remark, the Karfedix took his wireless from its hook
at his belt and sent a brief message.

"I have summoned Karbix Tarnan to perform the ceremony. Our usual time
for ceremonies is just before koprat--is that time satisfactory to you?"

Assured that it was, he turned to his son.

"Dunark, you are more familiar than I with the customs of our
illustrious visitors. May I ask you to take charge of the details?"

While Dunark sent a rapid succession of messages, Dorothy whispered to
Seaton:

"They must be going to make a real function of our double wedding, Dick.
The Karbix is the highest dignitary of the church, isn't he?"

"Yes, in addition to being the Commander-in-Chief of all the Kondalian
armies. Next to the Karfedix he is the most powerful man in the empire.
Something tells me, Dottie, that this is going to be SOME ceremony!"

As Dunark finished telegraphing, Seaton turned to him.

"Dorothy said, a while ago, that she would like to have enough of that
tapestry-fabric for a dress. Do you suppose it could be managed?"

"Certainly. In all state ceremonials we always wear robes made out of
the same fabric as the tapestries, but much finer and more delicate. I
would have suggested it, but thought perhaps the ladies would prefer
their usual clothing. I know that you two men do not care to wear our
robes?"

"We will wear white ducks, the dressiest and coolest things we have
along," replied Seaton. "Thank you for your offer, but you know how it
is. We should feel out of place in such gorgeous dress."

"I understand. I will call in a few of our most expert robe-makers, who
will weave the gowns. Before they come, let us decide upon the ceremony.
I think you are familiar with our marriage customs, but I will explain
them to make sure. Each couple is married twice. The first marriage is
symbolized by the exchange of plain bracelets and lasts four karkamo,
during which period divorce may be obtained at will. The children of
such divorced couples formerly became wards of the state, but in my
lifetime I have not heard of there being any such children--all divorces
are now between couples who discover their incompatibility before
children are conceived."

"That surprises me greatly," said Crane. "Some system of trial-marriage
is advocated among us on Earth every few years, but they all so surely
degenerate into free love that no such system has found a foothold."

"We are not troubled in that way at all. You see, before the first
marriage, each couple, from the humblest peasantry to the highest
royalty, must submit to a mental examination. If they are marrying for
any reason at all other than love, such as any thought of trifling in
the mind of the man, or if the woman is marrying him for his wealth or
position, he or she is summarily executed, regardless of station."

No other questions being asked, Dunark continued:

"At the end of four karkamo the second marriage is performed, which is
indissoluble. In this ceremony jeweled bracelets are substituted for the
plain ones. In the case of highly-evolved persons it is permitted that
the two ceremonies be combined into one. Then there is a third ceremony,
used only in the marriage of persons of the very highest evolution, in
which the 'eternal' vows are taken and the faidon, the eternal jewel, is
exchanged. As you are all in the permitted class, you may use the
eternal ceremony if you wish."

"I think we all know our minds well enough to know that we want to be
married for good--the longer the better," said Seaton, positively.
"We'll make it the eternal, won't we, folks?"

"I should like to ask one question," said Crane, thoughtfully. "Does
that ceremony imply that my wife would be breaking her vows if she
married again upon my death?"

"Far from it. Numbers of our men are killed every karkam. Their wives,
if of marriageable age, are expected to marry again. Then, too, you know
that most Kondalian men have several wives. No matter how many wives or
husbands may be linked together in that way, it merely means that after
death their spirits will be grouped into one. Just as in your
chemistry," smiling in comradely fashion at Seaton, "a varying number of
elements may unite to form a stable compound."

       *       *       *       *       *

After a short pause, the speaker went on:

"Since you are from the Earth and unaccustomed to bracelets, rings will
be substituted for them. The plain rings will take the place of your
Earthly wedding rings, the jeweled ones that of your engagement rings.
The only difference is that while we discard the plain bracelets, you
will continue to wear them. Have you men any objections to wearing the
rings during the ceremony? You may discard them later if you wish and
still keep the marriage valid."

