have; the record of something he had no business knowing.

_And he wished to Heaven he didn't!_

_This_, Karnes considered, _is a problem_. _The stuff is so_ alien!
_Just a series of things I know, but can't explain. Like a dream; you
know all about it, but it's practically impossible to explain it to
anybody else._

At the spaceport, he was met by an official car. George Lansberg, one
of the New York agents, was sitting in the back seat.

"Hi, sleuth. I heard you were coming in, so I asked to meet you." He
lowered his voice as Karnes got in and the car pulled away from the
parking lot. "How about our boy, Avery?"

Karnes shook his head. "Too late. Thirty million bucks worth of
material lost and Avery lost too."

"How come?"

"Had to kill him to keep him from getting away with these."

He showed Lansberg the microfilm squares.

"The photocircuit inserts for the new autopilot. We'd lose everything
if the League ever got its hands on these."

"Didn't learn anything from Avery, eh?" Lansberg asked.

"Not a thing." Karnes lapsed into silence. He didn't feel it necessary
to mention the mind impressor just yet.

Lansberg stuck a cigarette into his mouth and talked around it as he
lit it.

"We've got something you'll be getting in on, now that Avery is taken
care of. We've got a fellow named Brittain, real name Bretinov, who is
holed up in a little apartment in Brooklyn. He's the sector head for
that section, and we know who his informers are, and who he gives
orders to. What we don't know is who gives orders to him.

"Now we have it set up for Brittain to get his hands on some very
honest-looking, but strictly phony stuff for him to pass on to the
next echelon. Then we just sit around and watch until he does pass
it."

       *       *       *       *       *

Karnes found he was listening to Lansberg with only half an ear. His
brain was still buzzing with things he'd never heard of, trying to fit
things he had always known in with things he knew now but had never
known before. Damn that "cigarette case"!

"Sounds like fun," he answered Lansberg.

"Yeah. Great. Well, here we are." They had driven to the Long Island
Spaceways Building which also housed the local office.

They got out and went into the building, up the elevator, down a
corridor, and into an office suite.

Lansberg said: "I'll wait for you here. We'll get some coffee
afterwards."

The redhead behind the front desk smiled up at Karnes.

"Go on in; he's expecting you."

"I don't know whether I ought to leave you out here with Georgie or
not," Karnes grinned. "I think he has designs."

"Oh, goodie!" she grinned back.

_My, my aren't we clever!_ His thought was bitter, but his face didn't
show it.

Before he went in, he straightened his collar before the wall mirror.
He noticed that his plain, slightly tanned face still looked the same
as ever. Same ordinary gray-green eyes, same ordinary nose.

_Chum, you_ look _perfectly sane_. _You_ are _perfectly sane. But who
in hell would believe it?_

It wouldn't, after all, do any good for him to tell anyone anything he
had found. No matter what the answer was, there wasn't anything he
could do about it. There wasn't anything _anyone_ could do about it.

Thus, Karnes' report to his superior was short, to the point, and
censored.

That evening, Karnes sat in his apartment, chain-smoking, and staring
out the window. Finally, he mashed out a stub, stood up, and said
aloud: "Maybe if I write it down I can get it straight."

He sat down in front of the portable on his desk, rolled in a sheet
of paper, and put his fingers on the keys. Then, for a long time, he
just sat there, turning it over and over in his mind. Finally, he
began to type.

     _A Set of General Instructions and a Broad Outline on the
     Purposes and Construction of the Shrine of Earth._

     _Part One: Historical._

     _Some hundred or so millennia ago, insofar as the most
     exacting of historical research can ascertain, our remote
     ancestors were confined to one planet of the Galaxy; the
     legendary Earth._

     _The third planet of Sun (unintelligible number) has long
     been suspected of being Earth, but it was not until the
     development of the principles of time transfer that it
     became possible to check the theory completely._

     _The brilliant work done by--_

     (Karnes hesitated over the name, then wrote--)

     _--Starson on the ancient history and early evolution of the
     race has shown the theory to be correct. This has opened a
     new and fascinating field for the study of
     socioanthropology._

     _Part Two: Present Purposes and Aims._

     _Because of the great energy transfer and cosmic danger
     involved in too frequent or unrestricted time travel, it has
     been decided that the best method for studying the social
     problems involved would be to rebuild, in toto, the ancient
     Earth as it was just after the initial discoveries of atomic
     power and interplanetary space travel._

     _In order to facilitate this work, the Surveying Group will
     translate themselves to the chronological area in question,
     and obtain complete records of that time, covering the years
     between (1940) and (2020)._

     _When the survey is complete, the Construction Group will
     rebuild that civilization with as great an exactness as
     possible, complete with population, fossil strata, edifices,
     etc._

     _Upon the occasion of the opening of the Shrine, the replica
     of our early civilization will be begun as it was on
     (January 3, 1953). The population, having been impregnated
     with the proper memories, will be permitted to go about
     their lives unhampered._

Karnes stopped again and reread the paragraph he had just written. It
sounded different when it was on paper. The dates, for instance, he
had put in parentheses because that was the way he had understood
them. But he knew that whoever had made the mind-impressor didn't use
the same calendar he was used to.

He frowned at the paper, then went on typing.

     _Part Three: Conduct of Students._

     _Students wishing to study the Shrine for the purpose of
     (unintelligible again) must obtain permits from the Galactic
     Scholars Council, and, upon obtaining such permits, must
     conduct themselves according to whatever rules may be laid
     down by such Council._

     _Part Four: Corrective Action to be Taken._
