
"I'll get something to eat," she said practically. "You see about the
radar."

Diane went aft while he remained there in the tiny control cabin. By the
time she brought the heated cans back with her, he knew it was hopeless.
Diane was not the sort of woman you had to humor about a thing like
that. She offered him a can of pork and beans and looked at his face,
and when he nodded she said:

"It's no use?"

"We couldn't fix it. The scopes just wore out, Diane. Hell, if they
haven't been replaced since this tub rolled off the assembly line,
they're thirty years old. She's an '87."

"Is there anything we can do?"

He shrugged. "We're going to try. We'll check the air and water and see
what we have. Then we start looking."

"Start looking? I don't understand."

"For a series eighty Gormann cruiser."

Diane's eyes widened. "You mean--out there?"

"I mean out there. If we find a series eighty cruiser--and we might--and
if I'm able to transfer the radarscopes after we find out they're in
good shape, then we have a chance."

Diane nodded slowly. "If there are any other minor repairs to make, I
could be making them while you look for a series eighty Gormann."

But Ralph shook his head. "We'll probably have only a few hours of air
to spare, Diane. If we both look, we'll cover more ground. I hate to ask
you, because it won't be pretty out there. But it might be our only
chance."

"I'll go, of course. Ralph?"

"Yes?"

"What is this sargasso, anyway?"

       *       *       *       *       *

He shrugged as he read the meters on the compressed air tanks. Four
tanks full, with ten hours of air, for two, in each. One tank half full.
Five hours. Five plus forty. Forty-five hours of air.

They would need a minimum of thirty-five hours to reach Mars.

"No one knows for sure about the sargasso," he said, wanting to talk,
wanting to dispel his own fear so he would not communicate it to her as
he took the spacesuits down from their rack and began to climb into one.
"They don't think it's anything but the ships, though. It started with a
few ships. Then more. And more. Trapped by mutual gravity. It got bigger
and bigger and I think there are almost a thousand derelicts here now.
There's talk of blasting them clear, of salvaging them for metals and so
on. But so far the planetary governments haven't co-operated."

"But how did the first ships get here?"

"It doesn't make a hell of a lot of difference. One theory is ships
only, and maybe a couple of hunks of meteoric debris in the beginning.
Another theory says there may be a particularly heavy small asteroid in
this maze of wrecks somewhere--you know, superheavy stuff with the atoms
stripped of their electrons and the nuclei squeezed together, weighing
in the neighborhood of a couple of tons per square inch. That could
account for the beginning, but once the thing got started, the wrecked
ships account for more wrecked ships and pretty soon you have--a
sargasso."

Diane nodded and said, "You can put my helmet on now."

"All right. Don't forget to check the radio with me before we go out. If
the radio doesn't work, then you stay here. Because I want us in
constant radio contact if we're both out there. Is that understood?"

"Yes, sir, captain," she said, and grinned. It was her old grin. He had
not seen her grin like that for a long time. He had almost forgotten
what that grin was like. It made her face seem younger and prettier, as
he had remembered it from what seemed so long ago but was only three
years. It was a wonderful grin and he watched it in the split-second
which remained before he swung the heavy helmet up and in place over her
shoulders.

Then he put on his own helmet awkwardly and fingered the outside radio
controls. "Hear me?" he said.

"I can hear you." Her voice was metallic but very clear through the suit
radios.

"Then listen. There shouldn't be any danger of getting lost. I'll leave
a light on inside the ship and we'll see it through the ports. It will
be the only light, so whatever you do, don't go out of range. As long as
you can always see it, you'll be O.K. Understand?"

"Right," she said as they both climbed into the Gormann '87's airlock
and waited for the pressure to leave it and the outer door to swing out
into space. "Ralph? I'm a little scared, Ralph."

"That's all right," he said. "So am I."

