But it was important.

Trigger: Trigger Argee might be able to tell them why Trigger was
important. Doctor Fayle certainly could. So could the top ranks of the
Devagas hierarchy. Lyad, at the moment, could not. She did know that
Trigger Argee's importance was associated directly with that of plasmoid
113-A. This information had been obtained from a Devagas operator, now
dead. Not Balmordan. The operator had been in charge of the attempted
pickup on Evalee. The much more elaborate affair at the Colonial School
had been a Tranest job. A Devagas group had made attempts to interfere
with it, but had been disposed of.

Pluly: Lyad had strings on Belchik. He was afraid of the Devagas but
somewhat more terrified of her. His fear of the Devagas was due to the
fact that he and an associate had provided the hierarchy with a very
large quantity of contraband materials. The nature of the materials
indicated the Devagas were constructing a major fortified outpost on a
world either airless or with poisonous atmosphere. Pluly's associate had
since been murdered. Pluly believed he was next in line to be silenced.

Balmordan: Balmordan had been a rather high-ranking Devagas Intelligence
agent. Lyad had heard of him only recently. He had been in charge of the
attempts to obtain 113-A. Lyad had convinced him that she would make a
very dangerous competitor in the Manon area. She also had made
information regarding her activities there available to him. So
Balmordan and a select group of his gunmen had attended Pluly's party on
Pluly's yacht. They had been allowed to force their way into the sealed
level and were there caught in a black-light trap. The gunmen had been
killed. Balmordan had been questioned.

The questioning revealed that the Devagas had found Doctor Fayle and the
112-113 unit, almost immediately after Fayle's disappearance. They had
succeeded in creating some working plasmoids. To go into satisfactory
operation, they still needed 113-A. Balmordan had not known why. But
they no longer needed Trigger Argee. Trigger Argee was now to be
destroyed at the earliest opportunity. Again Balmordan had not known
why. Fayle and his unit were in the fortress dome the Devagas had been
building. It was in the area Lyad had indicated. It was supposed to be
very thoroughly concealed. Balmordan might or might not have known its
exact coordinates. His investigators made the inevitable slip finally
and triggered a violent mind-block reaction. Balmordan had died.
Dead-braining him had produced no further relevant information.

The little drumfire of questions ended abruptly. Trigger glanced at her
watch. It had been going on for only fifteen minutes, but she felt
somewhat dizzy by now. The Ermetyne just looked a little more wilted.

After a minute, Commissioner Tate inquired politely whether there was
any further information the First Lady could think of to give them at
this time.

She shook her head. No.

Only Professor Mantelish believed her.

But the interrogation was over, apparently.




24


Quillan took over the ship controls, and the Commissioner and Trigger
went with the recorder into the little office back of the transmitter
cabinet, to slam out some fast reports to the Hub and other points. Lyad
was apologizing profoundly to Mantelish as they left the lounge. The
professor was huffing back at her, rather mildly.

A little while later, Lyad, showing indications of restrained surprise,
was helping Trigger prepare dinner. They took it into the lounge.
Quillan remained at the controls while the others started eating.
Trigger fixed up a tray and brought it to him.

"Thanks for the rescue, Major!" she said.

He grinned up at her. "It was a pleasure."

Trigger glanced back at the little group in the lounge. "Think she was
fibbing a bit?"

"Sure. Mainly she'd decided in advance how much to tell and how much
not. She thinks fast in action though! No slips. What she told of what
she knows makes a solid story, and with angles we can check on fast. So
it's bound to have plenty of information in it. It'll do for the
moment."

"She's already started buttering up Mantelish," said Trigger.

"She'll do that," Quillan said. "By the time we reach Luscious, the prof
probably might as well be back in the trances. The Commissioner intends
to give her a little rope, I think."

"How close is Luscious to that area she showed?"

Quillan flicked on their course screen and superimposed the map Lyad had
marked. "Red dot's well inside," he pointed out. "That bit was probably
quite solid info." He looked up at her. "Did it bother you much to hear
the Devagas have dropped the grab idea and are out to do you in?"

Trigger shook her head. "Not really," she said. "Wouldn't make much
difference one way or the other, would it?"

"Very little." He patted her hand. "Well, they're not going to get you,
doll--one way _or_ the other!"

Trigger smiled. "I believe you," she said. "Thanks." She looked back
into the lounge again. Just at present she did have a feeling of
relaxed, unconcerned security. It probably wasn't going to last, though.
She glanced at Quillan.

"Those computers of yours," she said. "What did they have to say about
that not-catassin you squashed?"

"The crazy things claim now it was a plasmoid," Quillan said, "Revolting
notion! But it makes some sense for once. Checks with some of the things
Lyad just told us, too. Do you remember that Vethi sponge Balmordan was
carrying?"

"Yes."

"It didn't come off the ship with him. He checked it out as having died
en route."

"That is a revolting notion!" Trigger said after a moment. "Well, at
least we've got detectors now."

But the feeling of security had faded somewhat again.

Before dinner was half over, the long-range transmitters abruptly came
to life. For the next thirty minutes or so, messages rattled in
incessantly, as assorted Headquarters here and there reacted to the
Ermetyne's report. The Commissioner sat in the little office and sorted
over the incoming information. Trigger stayed at the transmitters,
feeding it to him as it arrived. None of it affected them directly--they
were already headed for the point in space a great many other people
would now start heading for very soon.

Then business dropped off again almost as suddenly as it had picked up.
A half dozen low priority items straggled in, in as many minutes. The
transmitters purred idly. Then the person-to-person buzzer sounded.

Trigger punched the screen button. A voice pronounced the ship's dial
number.

"Acknowledging," Trigger said. "Who is it?"

"Orado ComWeb Center," said the voice. "Stand by for contact with
Federation Councilman Roadgear."

Trigger whacked the panic button. Roadgear was a NAME! "Standing by,"
she said.

Commissioner Tate came in through the door and slipped into the chair
she'd already vacated. Trigger took another seat a few feet away. She
felt a little nervous, but she'd always wanted to see a high-powered
diplomat in action.

The screen lit up. She recognized Roadgear from his pics. Tall,
fine-looking man of the silvered sideburns type. He was in an armchair
in a very plush office.

"Congratulations, Commissioner!" he said, smiling. "I believe you're
aware by now that your latest report has set many wheels spinning
rapidly!"

"I rather expected it would," the Commissioner admitted. He also smiled.

They pitched it back and forth a few times, very chummy. Roadgear didn't
appear to be involved in any specific way with the operations which soon
would center about Luscious. Trigger began to wonder what he was after.

"A few of us are rather curious to know," Roadgear said, "why you didn't
acknowledge the last Council Order sent you."

Trigger didn't quite start nervously.

"When was this?" asked the Commissioner.

Roadgear smiled softly and told him.

"Got a record here of some scrambled item that arrived about then," the
Commissioner said. "Very good of you to call me about it, Councilman.
What was the order content?"

"It's dated now, as it happens," Roadgear said. "Actually I'm calling
about another matter. The First Lady of Tranest appears to have been
very obliging about informing you of some of her recent activities."

The Commissioner nodded. "Yes, very obliging."

"And in so short a time after her, ah, detainment. You must have been
very persuasive?"

"Well," Holati Tate said, "no more than usually."

"Yes," said Councilman Roadgear. "Now there's been some slight concern
expressed by some members of the Council--well, let's say they'd just
like to be reassured that the amenities one observes in dealing with a
head of state actually are being observed in this case. I'm sure they
are, of course."

The Commissioner was silent a moment. "I was informed a while ago," he
said, "that full responsibility for this Head of State has been assigned
to my group. Is that correct?"

The Councilman reddened very slightly. "Quite," he said. "The official
Council Order should reach you in a day or so."

"Well, then," said the Commissioner, "I'll assure you and you can assure
the Councilmen who were feeling concerned that the amenities are being
observed. Then everybody can relax again. Is that all right?"

"No, not quite," Roadgear said annoyedly. "In fact, the Councilmen
would very much prefer it, Commissioner, if I were given an opportunity
to speak to the First Lady directly to reassure myself on the point."

"Well," Commissioner Tate said, "she can't come to the transmitters
right now. She's washing the dishes."

The Councilman reddened very considerably this time. He stared at the
Commissioner a moment longer. Then he said in a very soft voice, "Oh,
the hell with it!" He added, "Good luck, Commissioner--you're going to
need it some time."

The screen went blank.

       *       *       *       *       *

The scouts of Selan's Independent Fleet, who had first looked this
planet over and decided to call it Luscious, had selected a name,
Trigger thought, which probably would stick. Because that was what it
was, at least in the area where they were camping.

She rolled over from her side to her face and gave herself a push away
from the rock she'd been regarding contemplatively for the past few
minutes. Feet first, she went drifting out into a somewhat deeper
section of Plasmoid Creek.

None of it was very deep. There were pools here and there, in the
stretch of the creek she usually came to, where she could stand on her
toes in the warm clear water and, arms stretched straight up, barely
tickle the surface with her finger tips. But along most of the stretch
the bigger rocks weren't even submerged.

She came sliding over the sand to another rock, turned on her back and
leaned up against the rock, blinking at sun reflections along the water.
Camp was a couple of hundred yards down the valley, its sounds cut off
by a rise of the ground. The Commissioner's ship was there, plus a half
dozen tents, plus a sizable I-Fleet unit with lab facilities which
Selan's outfit had loaned Mantelish for the duration. There were some
fifteen, twenty people in all about the camp at the moment. They knew
she was loafing around in the water up here and wouldn't disturb her.

Strictly speaking, of course, she wasn't loafing. She was learning how
to listen to herself think. She didn't feel she was getting the knack of
it too quickly; but it was coming. The best way seemed to be to let go
mentally as much as possible; to wait without impatience, really to
more-or-less listen quietly within yourself, as if you were looking
around in some strange forest, letting whatever wanted to come to view
come, and fade again, as something else rose to view instead. The main
difficulty was with the business of relaxing mentally, which wasn't at
all her natural method of approaching a problem.

But when she could do it, information of a kind that was beginning to
look very interesting was likely to come filtering into her awareness.
Whatever was at work deep in her mind--and she could give a pretty fair
guess at what it was now--seemed as weak and slow as the Psychology
Service people had indicated. The traces of its work were usually faint
and vague. But gradually the traces were forming into some very definite
pictures.

Lazing around in the waters of Plasmoid Creek for an hour or so every
morning had turned out to be a helpful part of the process. On the
flashing, all-out run to Luscious, subspace all the way, with the
Commissioner and Quillan spelling each other around the clock at the
controls, the transmitters clattering for attention every half hour, the
ship's housekeeping had to be handled, and somebody besides Mantelish
needed to keep a moderately beady eye on the Ermetyne, she hadn't even
thought of acting on Pilch's suggestion.

But once they'd landed, there suddenly wasn't much to keep her busy, and
she could shift priority to listening to herself think. It was one of
those interim periods where everything was being prepared and nothing
had got started. As a plasmoid planet, Luscious was pretty much of a
bust. It was true that plasmoids were here. It was also true that until
fairly recently plasmoids were being produced here.

By the simple method of looking where they were thickest, Selan's people
even had located the plasmoid which had been producing the others,
several days before Mantelish arrived to confirm their find. This one,
by the plasmoid standards of Luscious, was a regular monster, some
twenty-five inches high; a gray, mummylike thing, dead and half rotted
inside. It was the first plasmoid--with the possible exception of
whatever had flattened itself out on Quillan's gravity mine--known to
have died. There had been very considerable excitement when it was first
discovered, because the description made it sound very much as if they'd
finally located 112-113.

They hadn't. This one--if Trigger had followed Mantelish
correctly--could be regarded as a cheap imitation of 112. And its
productions, compared with the working plastic life of Harvest Moon,
appeared to be strictly on a kindergarten level: nuts and bolts and less
than that. To Trigger, most of the ones that had been collected looked
like assorted bugs and worms, though one at least was the size of a
small pig.

"No form, no pattern," Mantelish rumbled. "Was the thing practicing? Did
it attempt to construct an assistant and set it down here to test it?
Well, now!" He went off again to incomprehensibilities, apparently no
longer entirely dissatisfied. "Get me 112!" he bellowed. "Then this
business will be solved! Meanwhile we now at least have plasmoid
material to waste. We can experiment boldly! Come, Lyad, my dear."

And Lyad followed him into the lab unit, where they went to work again,
dissecting, burning, stimulating, inoculating and so forth great numbers
of more or less pancake-sized subplasmoids.

       *       *       *       *       *

This morning Trigger wasn't getting down to the best semidrowsy level at
all readily. And it might very well be that Lyad-my-dear business. "You
know," she had told the Commissioner thoughtfully the day before, "by
the time we're done, Lyad will know more about plasmoids than anyone in
the Hub except Mantelish!"

He didn't look concerned. "Won't matter much. By the time we're done,
she and the rest of the Ermetynes will have had to cough up control of
Tranest. They've broken treaty with this business."

"Oh," Trigger said. "Does Lyad know that?"

"Sure. She also knows she's getting off easy. If she were a Federation
citizen, she'd be up for compulsory rehabilitation right now."

"She'll try something if she gets half a chance!" Trigger warned.

"She sure will!" the Commissioner said absently. He went on with his
work.

It didn't seem to be Lyad that was bothering. Trigger lay flat on her
back in the shallow sand bar, arms behind her head, feeling the sun's
warmth on her closed eyelids. She watched her thoughts drifting by
slowly.

It just might be Quillan.

Ole Major Quillan. The rescuer in time of need. The not-catassin
smasher. Quite a guy. The water murmured past her.

On the ride out here they'd run by one another now and then, going from
job to job. After they'd arrived, Quillan was gone three quarters of the
time, helping out in the hunt for the concealed Devagas fortress. It was
still concealed; they hadn't yet picked up a trace.

But every so often he made it back to camp. And every so often when he
was back in camp and didn't think she was looking, he'd be sitting there
looking at her.

Trigger grinned happily. Ole Major Quillan--being bashful! Well now!

And that did it. She could feel herself relaxing, slipping down and
away, drifting down through her mind ... farther ... deeper ... toward
the tiny voice that spoke in such a strange language and still was
becoming daily more comprehensible.

"Uh, say, Trigger!"



