
"This is the official attire prescribed for us by the State
Department," Johnny said, a little anxiously, I thought. It was hardly
the formal speech of welcome he, as planet administrator, must have
prepared.

"I have no doubt of it," Aunt Mattie said, and her tone told them what
she thought of the State Department under the present administration.
"You would hardly have met ladies in such--ah--otherwise." I could see
that she was making a mental note to speak to the State Department
about it.

"Make a note," she said and turned to Miss Point. "I will speak to the
State Department. How can one expect natives to ... if our own
representatives don't ... etc., etc."

"May I show you to your quarters, ma'am?" Johnny asked humbly. "No
doubt you will wish to freshen up, or...."

Miss Point blushed furiously.

"We are already quite fresh, young man," Aunt Mattie said firmly.

I happened to know that Aunt Mattie didn't like to browbeat people,
not at all. It would all have been so much more pleasant, gracious, if
they'd been brought up to know right from wrong. But what parents and
schools had failed to do, she must correct as her duty. I thought it
about time I tried to smooth things over. I stepped up into their
focus.

"Aunt Mattie," I said. "This is Johnny McCabe. We were at school
together."

Her eyebrows shot upward.

"You were?" she asked, and looked piercingly at Johnny. "Then, I
realize, young man, that your attire is not your fault. You must have
been acting under orders, and against your personal knowledge of what
would be correct. I understand." She turned again to Miss Point.
"Underscore that note to the State Department," she said. "Mark it
emergency." She turned back to Johnny. "Very well, Mr. McCabe, we
would appreciate it, after all, if you would show us to our quarters
so that we may--ah--freshen up a bit. It is rather a warm day, isn't
it?"

She was quite gracious now, reassured because Johnny was an old school
mate of mine, and would therefore know right from wrong. If I
sometimes didn't seem to, she knew me well enough to know it had not
been the fault of the school.

The three of us, Johnny on one side of Aunt Mattie and I on the other
side, started toward the frame building on the other side of the
bubble, which I assumed was the hotel. The four subordinates trailed
along behind, silent, wary of one another.

Behind them the baggage truck, which had been piled high by the ship's
crew, hissed into life and started moving along on its tractor treads.
Johnny caught a glimpse of it, without actually turning around, and
his eyes opened wide. He misinterpreted, of course. From the mountain
of baggage it looked like our intention to stay a long time.

But then he wouldn't have been particularly reassured, either, had he
realized that our own supplies were quite scant and these bags, boxes,
and crates contained sewing machines and many, many bolts of gaily
colored cloth.

       *       *       *       *       *

I had hardly more than--ah--freshened up a bit myself in my hotel
room, when I heard a discreet knock on my door. I opened it and saw
Johnny McCabe.

"May I come in, Hap?" he asked. As if against his will, he glanced
quickly down the hall toward the suite where aunt and her committee
had been put.

"Sure, Johnny," I said, and opened the door wide. I pointed to an
aluminum tube torture rack, government issue's idea of a chair. "You
can have the chair," I said. "I'll sit on the edge of the bed."

"I'm sorry about the furnishings," he said apologetically as he sat
down and I closed the door. "It's the best government will issue us in
this hole."

"Aunt Mattie would be disappointed if it were better," I said as I sat
on the edge of the bed, which was little softer than the chair. "She
expects to rough it, and finds special virtue in doing her duty as
uncomfortably as possible."

He looked sharply at me, but I had merely stated an accepted fact, not
an opinion, and was therefore emotionless about it.

"I'm in trouble, Hap," he said desperately. He leaned forward with
his clasped hands held between his knees.

"Well, old man," I answered. "You know me."

"Yes," he said. "But there isn't anybody else I can turn to."

"Then we understand each other," I agreed. He looked both resentful
and puzzled.

"No, I never did understand you," he disagreed. "I suppose it's all
those billions that act as shock insulation for you. You never had to
plan, and scheme, and stand alert indefinitely like a terrier at a rat
hole waiting for opportunity to stick out its nose so you could pounce
on it. So I don't see how you can appreciate my problem now."

"I might try," I said humbly.

"This job," he said. "It's not much, and I know it. But it was a
start. The department doesn't expect anything from me but patience.
It's not so much ability, you know, just a matter of who can hang on
the longest without getting into trouble. I've been hanging on, and
keeping out of trouble."

"But you're in trouble now."

"I will be when your aunt fails to put mother hubbards on the
natives."

"She won't fail," I said confidently.

"And when she storms into the State Department with fire in her eye
and starts turning things upside down, it'll be my fault--somehow," he
said miserably.

"So let her put some clothes on some natives," I said. "She'll go away
happy and then, for all you care, they can take 'em off and burn 'em
if they insist on going around naked. Just swing with the punch, man.
Don't stand up and let 'em knock your block off. Surely you have some
influence with the natives. I don't hear any war drums, any tom-toms.
I don't see them trying to tear holes in the sides of your bubble to
let the air out. You must be at peace with them. You must have some
kind of mutual cooperation. So just get a tribe or so to go along with
the idea for a while."

He looked at me and shook his head sadly. Sort of the way Aunt Mattie
shook her head after a conference with my psychiatrist. But Johnny
didn't seem somehow happier. He had a pretty good chest, but it didn't
look enormous enough to carry any burden.

"I've been pretty proud of myself," he said. "After five years of
daily attempts, and after using everything I ever learned in school
courses on extraterrestrial psychology, plus some things I've made up
myself, I established a kind of communication with the natives--if you
could call it communication. I'd go out in my spacesuit into their
chlorinated atmosphere, I'd stand in front of one of them and talk a
