
"I'm using the Kaldekooz time-scale," the robot explained. "But really
only for convenience. Now do you want the ideal ecological differential
or don't you? Because--" Here he flourished the red ribbon again, peered
into the helmet, looked narrowly at Martin, and shook his head.

"I'm sorry," the robot said. "I'm afraid this won't work. Your head's
too small. Not enough brain-room, I suppose. This helmet's for an eight
and a half head, and yours is much too--"

"My head _is_ eight and a half," Martin protested with dignity.

"Can't be," the robot said cunningly. "If it were, the helmet would fit,
and it doesn't. Too big."

"It does fit," Martin said.

"That's the trouble with arguing with pre-robot species," ENIAC said, as
to himself. "Low, brutish, unreasoning. No wonder, when their heads are
so small. Now Mr. Martin--" He spoke as though to a small, stupid,
stubborn child. "Try to understand. This helmet's size eight and a half.
Your head is unfortunately so very small that the helmet wouldn't fit--"

"Blast it!" cried the infuriated Martin, caution quite lost between
Scotch and annoyance. "It does fit! Look here!" Recklessly he snatched
the helmet and clapped it firmly on his head. "It fits perfectly!"

"I erred," the robot acknowledged, with such a gleam in his eye that
Martin, suddenly conscious of his rashness, jerked the helmet from his
head and dropped it on the desk. ENIAC quietly picked it up and put it
back into his sack, stuffing the red ribbon in after it with rapid
motions. Martin watched, baffled, until ENIAC had finished, gathered
together the mouth of the sack, swung it on his shoulder again, and
turned toward the door.

"Good-bye," the robot said. "And thank you."

"For what?" Martin demanded.

"For your cooperation," the robot said.

"I won't cooperate," Martin told him flatly. "It's no use. Whatever fool
treatment it is you're selling, I'm not going to--"

"Oh, you've already had the ecology treatment," ENIAC replied blandly.
"I'll be back tonight to renew the charge. It lasts only twelve hours."

"_What!_"

ENIAC moved his forefingers outward from the corners of his mouth,
sketching a polite smile. Then he stepped through the door and closed it
behind him.

Martin made a faint squealing sound, like a stuck but gagged pig.

_Something was happening inside his head._




II


Nicholas Martin felt like a man suddenly thrust under an ice-cold
shower. No, not cold--steaming hot. Perfumed, too. The wind that blew in
from the open window bore with it a frightful stench of gasoline,
sagebrush, paint, and--from the distant commissary--ham sandwiches.

"Drunk," he thought frantically. "I'm drunk--or crazy!" He sprang up and
spun around wildly; then catching sight of a crack in the hardwood floor
he tried to walk along it. "Because if I can walk a straight line," he
thought, "I'm not drunk. I'm only crazy...." It was not a very
comforting thought.

He could walk it, all right. He could walk a far straighter line than
the crack, which he saw now was microscopically jagged. He had, in fact,
never felt such a sense of location and equilibrium in his life. His
experiment carried him across the room to a wall-mirror, and as he
straightened to look into it, suddenly all confusion settled and ceased.
The violent sensory perceptions leveled off and returned to normal.

Everything was quiet. Everything was all right.

Martin met his own eyes in the mirror.

Everything was _not_ all right.

He was stone cold sober. The Scotch he had drunk might as well have been
spring-water. He leaned closer to the mirror, trying to stare through
his own eyes into the depths of his brain. For something extremely odd
was happening in there. All over his brain, tiny shutters were beginning
to move, some sliding up till only a narrow crack remained, through
which the beady little eyes of neurons could be seen peeping, some
sliding down with faint crashes, revealing the agile, spidery forms of
still other neurons scuttling for cover.

Altered thresholds, changing the yes-and-no reaction time of the
memory-circuits, with their key emotional indices and associations ...
huh?

The robot!

Martin's head swung toward the closed office door. But he made no
further move. The look of blank panic on his face very slowly, quite
unconsciously, began to change. The robot ... could wait.

Automatically Martin raised his hand, as though to adjust an invisible
monocle. Behind him, the telephone began to ring. Martin glanced at it.

His lips curved into an insolent smile.

Flicking dust from his lapel with a suave gesture, Martin picked up the
telephone. He said nothing. There was a long silence. Then a hoarse
voice shouted, "Hello, hello, hello! Are you there? You, Martin!"

Martin said absolutely nothing at all.

"You keep me waiting," the voice bellowed. "Me, St. Cyr! Now jump! The
rushes are ... Martin, do you hear me?"

Martin gently laid down the receiver on the desk. He turned again toward
the mirror, regarded himself critically, frowned.

"Dreary," he murmured. "Distinctly dreary. I wonder why I ever bought
this necktie?"

The softly bellowing telephone distracted him. He studied the instrument
briefly, then clapped his hands sharply together an inch from the
mouthpiece. There was a sharp, anguished cry from the other end of the
line.

"Very good," Martin murmured, turning away. "That robot has done me a
considerable favor. I should have realized the possibilities sooner.
After all, a super-machine, such as ENIAC, would be far cleverer than a
man, who is merely an ordinary machine. Yes," he added, stepping into
the hall and coming face to face with Toni LaMotta, who was currently
working for Summit on loan. "'_Man is a machine, and woman--_'" Here he
gave Miss LaMotta a look of such arrogant significance that she was
quite startled.

"'_And woman--a toy_,'" Martin amplified, as he turned toward Theater
One, where St. Cyr and destiny awaited him.

        *        *       *        *        *

Summit Studios, outdoing even MGM, always shot ten times as much footage
as necessary on every scene. At the beginning of each shooting day, this
confusing mass of celluloid was shown in St. Cyr's private projection
theater, a small but luxurious domed room furnished with lie-back chairs
and every other convenience, though no screen was visible until you
looked up. Then you saw it on the ceiling.

When Martin entered, it was instantly evident that ecology took a sudden
shift toward the worse. Operating on the theory that the old Nicholas
Martin had come into it, the theater, which had breathed an expensive
air of luxurious confidence, chilled toward him. The nap of the Persian
rug shrank from his contaminating feet. The chair he stumbled against in
the half-light seemed to shrug contemptuously. And the three people in
the theater gave him such a look as might be turned upon one of the
larger apes who had, by sheer accident, got an invitation to Buckingham
Palace.

DeeDee Fleming (her real name was impossible to remember, besides having
not a vowel in it) lay placidly in her chair, her feet comfortably up,
her lovely hands folded, her large, liquid gaze fixed upon the screen
where DeeDee Fleming, in the silvery meshes of a technicolor mermaid,
swam phlegmatically through seas of pearl-colored mist.

Martin groped in the gloom for a chair. The strangest things were going
on inside his brain, where tiny stiles still moved and readjusted until
he no longer felt in the least like Nicholas Martin. Who did he feel
like, then? What had happened?

He recalled the neurons whose beady little eyes he had fancied he saw
staring brightly into, as well as out of, his own. Or had he? The memory
was vivid, yet it couldn't be, of course. The answer was perfectly
simple and terribly logical. ENIAC Gamma the Ninety-Third had told him,
somewhat ambiguously, just what his ecological experiment involved.
Martin had merely been given the optimum reactive pattern of his
successful prototype, a man who had most thoroughly controlled his own
environment. And ENIAC had told him the man's name, along with several
confusing references to other prototypes like an Ivan (who?) and an
unnamed Uighur.

The name for Martin's prototype was, of course, Disraeli, Earl of
Beaconsfield. Martin had a vivid recollection of George Arliss playing
the role. Clever, insolent, eccentric in dress and manner, exuberant,
suave, self-controlled, with a strongly perceptive imagination....

"No, no, no!" DeeDee said with a sort of calm impatience. "Be careful,
Nick. Some other chair, please. I have my feet on this one."

"T-t-t-t-t," said Raoul St. Cyr, protruding his thick lips and snapping
the fingers of an enormous hand as he pointed to a lowly chair against
the wall. "Behind me, Martin. Sit down, sit down. Out of our way. Now!
Pay attention. Study what I have done to make something great out of
your foolish little play. Especially note how I have so cleverly ended
the solo by building to five cumulative pratt-falls. Timing is all," he
finished. "Now--SILENCE!"

For a man born in the obscure little Balkan country of Mixo-Lydia, Raoul
St. Cyr had done very well for himself in Hollywood. In 1939 St. Cyr,
growing alarmed at the imminence of war, departed for America, taking
with him the print of an unpronounceable Mixo-Lydian film he had made,
which might be translated roughly as _The Pores In the Face of the
Peasant_.

With this he established his artistic reputation as a great director,
though if the truth were known, it was really poverty that caused _The
Pores_ to be so artistically lighted, and simple drunkenness which had
made most of the cast act out one of the strangest performances in film
history. But critics compared _The Pores_ to a ballet and praised
inordinately the beauty of its leading lady, now known to the world as
DeeDee Fleming.

DeeDee was so incredibly beautiful that the law of compensation would
force one to expect incredible stupidity as well. One was not
disappointed. DeeDee's neurons didn't know _anything_. She had heard of
emotions, and under St. Cyr's bullying could imitate a few of them, but
other directors had gone mad trying to get through the semantic block
that kept DeeDee's mind a calm, unruffled pool possibly three inches
deep. St. Cyr merely bellowed. This simple, primordial approach seemed
to be the only one that made sense to Summit's greatest investment and
top star.

With this whip-hand over the beautiful and brainless DeeDee, St. Cyr
quickly rose to the top in Hollywood. He had undoubted talent. He could
make one picture very well indeed. He had made it twenty times already,
each time starring DeeDee, and each time perfecting his own feudalistic
production unit. Whenever anyone disagreed with St. Cyr, he had only to
threaten to go over to MGM and take the obedient DeeDee with him, for he
had never allowed her to sign a long-term contract and she worked only
on a picture-to-picture basis. Even Tolliver Watt knuckled under when
St. Cyr voiced the threat of removing DeeDee.

        *        *       *        *        *

"Sit down, Martin," Tolliver Watt said. He was a tall, lean,
hatchet-faced man who looked like a horse being starved because he was
too proud to eat hay. With calm, detached omnipotence he inclined his
grey-shot head a millimeter, while a faintly pained expression passed
fleetingly across his face.

"Highball, please," he said.

A white-clad waiter appeared noiselessly from nowhere and glided forward
with a tray. It was at this point that Martin felt the last stiles
readjust in his brain, and entirely on impulse he reached out and took
the frosted highball glass from the tray. Without observing this the
waiter glided on and presented Watt with a gleaming salver full of
nothing. Watt and the waiter regarded the tray.

Then their eyes met. There was a brief silence.

"Here," Martin said, replacing the glass. "Much too weak. Get me
another, please. I'm reorienting toward a new phase, which means a
different optimum," he explained to the puzzled Watt as he readjusted a
chair beside the great man and dropped into it. Odd that he had never
before felt at ease during rushes. Right now he felt fine. Perfectly at
ease. Relaxed.

"Scotch and soda for Mr. Martin," Watt said calmly. "And another for
me."

"So, so, so, now we begin," St. Cyr cried impatiently. He spoke into a
hand microphone. Instantly the screen on the ceiling flickered noisily
and began to unfold a series of rather ragged scenes in which a chorus
of mermaids danced on their tails down the street of a little Florida
fishing village.
