
"Sid swears they're convinced it will. The factors, on paper, check out.
But there's been no experimentation, because it involves the human
personality. This thing, when used, is supposed to perform a definite
personality change on the individual subjected."

"How?"

"You know the theory of psychiatric therapy--the theory of shock
treatment. The effect is some what similar, but a thousand times more
effective."

"What _is_ the effect?"

"A gradual dissolving of inferiority influences, or inhibitions, from
the personality. A clear mind resulting. A healthy ego."

"And?"

"Confidence."

Cutter stared at Quay's eyes, assimilating the information. "That's all
very damned nice. Now where does it fit in with Cutter Products?"

Quay drew a notebook from his coat pocket swiftly. "You remember that
efficiency check we had made two months ago--the rating of individual
departments on comparable work produced?"

Cutter nodded.

Quay looked at his notebook. "All administrative personnel departments
showed an average of--"

"Thirty-six point eight less efficiency than the skilled and unskilled
labor departments," Cutter finished.

Quay smiled slightly. He snapped the notebook shut. "Right. So that's
our personnel efficiency bug."

"Christ, I've known that for twenty years," Cutter snapped.

"Okay," Quay said quickly, alerting himself back to the serious effort.
"Now then, you'll remember we submitted this efficiency report to
Babcock and Steele for analysis, and their report offered no answer,
because their experience showed that you _always_ get that kind of
ratio, because of personality differences. The administrative personnel
show more inferiority influences per man, thus less confidence, thus
less efficiency."

"I remember all that," Cutter said.

"Their report also pointed out that this inevitable loss of efficiency
is leveled out, by proportionately smaller wage compensation. The
administrative personnel gets approximately twenty-five percent less
compensation than the skilled labor personnel, and the remaining eleven
point eight percent loss of efficiency is made up by the more highly
efficient unskilled labor receiving approximately the same compensation
as the administrative personnel."

"I remember all that nonsense, too," Cutter reddened faintly with a
sudden anger. He did not believe the statistics were nonsense, only that
you should expect to write off a thirty-six point eight efficiency loss
on the basis of adjusted compensation. A thirty-six point eight
efficiency loss was a comparable loss in profits. You never compensated
a loss in profits, except by erasing that loss. "And so this is supposed
to fix it?"

Quay's head bobbed. "It's worth a try, it seems to me. I've talked to
Sid about it extensively, and he tells me that Bolen, who's developed
this thing, would be willing to install enough units to cover the entire
administrative force, from the department-head level down."

"How?"

Quay motioned a hand. "It's no larger than a slightly thick saucer. It
could be put inside the chairs." Quay smiled faintly. "They sit on it,
you see, and--"

Cutter was not amused. "How much?"

"Nothing," Quay said quickly. "Absolutely nothing. Bolen wants actual
tests badly, and the Institute wouldn't do it. Snap your fingers, and
give him a hundred and fifty people to work on, and it's yours to use
for nothing. He'll do the installing, and he _wants_ to keep it secret.
It's essential, he says, to get an accurate reaction from the subjects
affected. For him it's perfect, because we're running a continuous
efficiency check, and if this thing does the job like it's supposed to
do it, we'll have gained the entire benefits for nothing. How can we
lose?"

Cutter stared at Quay for a moment, his mind working swiftly. "Call
Horner in on this, but nobody else. Absolutely nobody else. Tell Horner
to write up a contract for this fellow to sign. Get a clause in there to
the effect that this fellow, Bolen, assumes all responsibility for any
effects not designated in the defining part of the contract. Fix it up
so that he's entirely liable, then get it signed, and let's see what
happens."

Quay smiled fully and stood up. "Right, sir." He had done a good job, he
knew. This was the sort of thing that would keep him solidly entrenched
in Cutter's favor. "Right, George," he said, remembering that he didn't
need to call Cutter sir anymore, but he knew he wouldn't hear any more
from Cutter, because Cutter was already looking over a blueprint, eyes
thin and careful, mind completely adjusted to a new problem.

       *       *       *       *       *

Edward Bolen called the saucer-sized disk, the Confidet. He was a thin,
short, smiling man with fine brown hair which looked as though it had
just been ruffled by a high wind, and he moved, Cutter noticed, with
quick, but certain motions. The installing was done two nights after
Cutter's lawyer, Horner, had written up the contract and gotten it
signed by Bolen. Only Quay, Bolen, and Cutter were present.

Bolen fitted the disks into the base of the plastic chair cushions, and
he explained, as he inserted one, then another:

"The energy is inside each one, you see. The life of it is indefinite,
and the amount of energy used is proportionate to the demand created."

"What the hell do you mean by energy?" Cutter demanded, watching the
small man work.

Bolen laughed contentedly, and Quay flushed with embarrassment over
anyone laughing at a question out of Cutter's lips. But Cutter did not
react, only looked at Bolen, as though he could see somehow, beneath
