fifth page from the end, and was everything the writer had claimed. A
five-sided figure drawn on the floor with ordinary candle wax, a pinch
of sugar inside, a bit of something bitter outside, two odd but simple
finger gestures, and a string of words in bad Latin and worse Greek.
There was a warning that it would work without the pentagram, sugar
and bitters, but at parlous risk to the conjurer without such
protection.

He frowned. Too simple for the cultists, he realized--unless he could
somehow persuade them that the trick lay in some exact phrasing or
gesturing pattern which took experiment. They liked things made
difficult, so they'd have a good alibi for their faith when the
tricks failed. If he could show them in advance that it didn't work,
but hint that a good occultist might figure out the right rhythm, or
whatever....

He read it through again, trying to memorize the whole thing. The
gestures were--so--and the words--umm....

There was no flash of fire, no smell of sulphur, and no clap of
thunder. There was simply a tall creature with yellowish skin and
flashing yellow eyes standing in front of the television set. His head
was completely hairless, and he was so tall that he had to duck
slightly to keep from crashing into the ceiling. His features were too
sharp for any human face. There were no scales, however; his gold cape
and black tights were spangled, and he wore green shoes with turned up
toes. But generally, he wasn't bad looking.

"Mind if I sit down?" the creature asked. He took Henry's assent for
granted and dropped into Emma's chair, folding his cape over one arm
and reaching for an apple on the side table. "Glad to see you're not
superstitious enough to keep me locked up in one of those damned
pentagrams. Drat it, I thought the last copy of that book was burned
and I was free. Your signal caught me in the middle of dinner."

       *       *       *       *       *

Henry swallowed thickly, feeling the sweat trickle down his nose. The
book had warned against summoning the demon without the protective
devices! But the thing seemed peaceful enough for the moment. He
cleared his voice. "You mean--you mean magic works?"

"Magic--shmagic!" the creature snorted. He jerked his thumb toward the
television. "To old Ephriam--the crackpot who wrote the book before he
went completely crazy--that set would have been more magic than I am.
I thought this age knew about dimensions, planes of vibrations, and
simultaneous universes. You humans always were a backward race, but
you seemed to be learning the basic facts. Hell, I suppose that means
you'll lay a geas on me, after I was hoping it was just an
experimental summons!"

Henry puzzled it over, with some of the fright leaving him. The
scientific sounding terms somehow took some of the magic off the
appearance of the thing. "You mean those passes and words set up some
sort of vibrational pattern...."

The hairless fellow snorted again, and began attacking the grapes.
"Bunk, Henry! Oh, my name's Alfear, by the way. I mean I was a fool. I
should have gone to my psychiatrist and taken the fifty year course,
as he advised. But I thought the books were all burned and nobody knew
the summons. So here I am, stuck with the habit. Because that's all it
is--a conditioned reflex. Pure compulsory behavior. I'm sensitized to
receive the summons, and when it comes, I teleport into your plane
just the way you pull your hand off a hot stove. You read the whole
book, I suppose? Yeah, just my luck. Then you know I'm stuck with any
job you give me--practically your slave. I can't even get back without
dismissal or finishing your task! That's what comes of saving money
by not going to my psychiatrist."

He muttered unhappily, reaching for more grapes, while Henry began to
decide nothing was going to happen to him, at least physically. Souls
were things he wasn't quite sure of, but he couldn't see how just
talking to Alfear could endanger his.

"Still," the creature said thoughtfully, "it could be worse. No
pentagram. I never did get mixed up with some of the foul odors and
messes some of my friends had to take. And I've developed quite a
taste for sugar; tobacco, too." He reached out and plucked a cigarette
out of Henry's pack, then a book of matches. He lighted it, inhaled,
and rubbed the flame out on his other palm. "Kind of weak tobacco, but
not bad. Any more questions while I smoke this? There's no free oxygen
where I come from, so I can't smoke there."

"But if you demons answer such--such summons, why don't people know
about it now?" Henry asked. "I'd think more and more people would be
going in for this sort of thing. If the wizards were right all
along...."

"They weren't, and we're not demons. It didn't get started until your
Middle Ages. And if it hadn't been for old Apalon...." Alfear lighted
another cigarette off the butt, which he proceeded to extinguish on
the tip of his sharp tongue. He scratched his head thoughtfully, and
then went on.

