from behind a rock and stared at us in utter horror.

Janus raised his gun again.

"Don't bother," said Allenby tiredly. "I don't think it intends to
attack."

"But--"

"I'm sure it isn't a Martian with religious convictions."

Janus wet his lips and looked a little shamefaced. "I guess I'm kind of
taut."

"That's what I _taut_," said Allenby.

The creature darted from behind its rock and, looking at us over its
shoulder, employed six legs to make small but very fast tracks.

We turned our attention again to the desert. Far out, black against
Mars' azure horizon, was a line of low hills.

"Shall we go look?" asked Burton, eyes gleaming at the mystery.

Janus hefted his gun nervously. It was still crackling faintly from the
discharge. "I say let's get back to the ship!"

Allenby sighed. "My leg hurts." He studied the hills. "Give me the
field-glasses."

Randolph handed them over. Allenby put them to the shield of his mask
and adjusted them.

After a moment he sighed again. "There's a hole. On a plane surface
that catches the Sun. A lousy damned round little impossible hole."

"Those hills," Burton observed, "must be thousands of feet thick."

       *       *       *       *       *

The argument lasted all the way back to the ship.

Janus, holding out for his belief that the whole thing was of religious
origin, kept looking around for Martians as if he expected them to pour
screaming from the hills.

Burton came up with the suggestion that perhaps the holes had been made
by a disintegrator-ray.

"It's possible," Allenby admitted. "This might have been the scene of
some great battle--"

"With only one such weapon?" I objected.

Allenby swore as he stumbled. "What do you mean?"

"I haven't seen any other lines of holes--only the one. In a battle, the
whole joint should be cut up.

That was good for a few moments' silent thought. Then Allenby said, "It
might have been brought out by one side as a last resort. Sort of an ace
in the hole."

I resisted the temptation to mutiny. "But would even one such weapon, in
battle make only _one_ line of holes? Wouldn't it be played in an arc
against the enemy? You know it would."

"Well--"

"Wouldn't it cut slices out of the landscape, instead of boring holes?
And wouldn't it sway or vibrate enough to make the holes miles away from
it something less than perfect circles?"

"It could have been very firmly mounted."

"Hugh, does that sound like a practical weapon to you?"

Two seconds of silence. "On the other hand," he said, "instead of a war,
the whole thing might have been designed to frighten some primitive
race--or even some kind of beast--the _hole_ out of here. A
demonstration--"

"Religious," Janus grumbled, still looking around.

We walked on, passing the cactus on the low ridge.

"Interesting," said Gonzales. "The evidence that whatever causes the
phenomenon has happened again and again. I'm afraid that the war
theory--"

"Oh, my God!" gasped Burton.

We stared at him.

"The ship," he whispered. "It's right in line with the holes! If
whatever made them is still in operation...."

"Run!" yelled Allenby, and we ran like fiends.

       *       *       *       *       *

We got the ship into the air, out of line with the holes to what we
fervently hoped was safety, and then we realized we were admitting our
fear that the mysterious hole-maker might still be lurking around.

Well, the evidence was all for it, as Gonzales had reminded us--that
cactus had been oozing.

We cruised at twenty thousand feet and thought it over.

Janus, whose only training was in photography, said, "Some kind of
omnivorous animal? Or bird? Eats rocks and everything?"

"I will not totally discount the notion of such an animal," Randolph
said. "But I will resist to the death the suggestion that it forages
with geometric precision."

After a while, Allenby said, "Land, Burton. By that 'canal.' Lots of
plant life--fauna, too. We'll do a little collecting."

Burton set us down feather-light at the very edge of the sprawling flat
expanse of vegetation, commenting that the scene reminded him of his
native Texas pear-flats.

We wandered in the chilly air, each of us except Burton pursuing his
specialty. Randolph relentlessly stalked another of the rabbity
creatures. Gonzales was carefully digging up plants and stowing them in
jars. Janus was busy with his cameras, recording every aspect of Mars
transferable to film. Allenby walked around, helping anybody who needed
it. An astronomer, he'd done half his work on the way to Mars and would
