premises and declared, in spite of his lifelong rule to the contrary,
that it could be mixed with Irish whisky to make a drink so agreeable
that no sane man would want a better. The girls, particularly Winifred,
were enchanted with my private woods, the gardens and the deerpark; but
Mama, throughout their visits, remained almost entirely silent and aloof
except for the rare remarks which seemed to burst from her as though by
an inescapable inward compulsion. These were always insulting and always
directed at me, but I overlooked them, knowing her to be deranged.


_79._ Perhaps one of the things I most enjoyed about The Ivies was
wandering through its acres, breathing through my pores, as it were, the
sense of possession. I was walking through the cowslips and violets
punctuating the meadow bordering one of the many little streams, when I
came upon a fellow roughly dressed, the pockets of his shootingjacket
bulging and a fishingline in his hand. For a moment I thought him one of
the gamekeepers and nodded, but his quick look and furtive gestures
instantly revealed him as a poacher.

"Youre trespassing, you know," I said with some severity.

"I know, guvner," he admitted readily, "but I wasnt doing no harm; just
looking at this bit of water here and listening to the birds."

"With a fishingline in your hands?"

"Well, now, guvner, that's by way of being a precaution. You see, when I
go out on a little expedition like this, to inspect the beauties of
nature--which I admit I have no right to do, they being on someone
else's land--I always say to myself, 'Suppose you run into some gent
looking at a lovely fat trout in a brook and he hasnt got no fishline
with him? What could be more philanthropic than I produce my bit of
string and help him out?' Aint that a proper Christian attitude,
guvner?"

"Possibly; but what, may I ask, makes your pockets bulge so
suspiciously? Is that another philanthropy?"

"Accident, guvner, sheer accident. Walking along like this with my head
down I always seem to come upon two or three dead hares or now and then
a partridge or grouse. Natural mortality, you understand. Well, what
could be more humane than to stuff them in my pockets and take them home
for proper burial?"

"You know in spite of all the Labour Governments and strange doings in
Parliament, there are still pretty strict laws against poaching."

"Poaching, guvner? I wouldnt poach. I respect what's yours, just as I
respect what's my own. Trespassing maybe. I likes to look at a little
bit of sky or hear a meadowlark or smell a flower or two, but
poaching--! Really, guvner, you hadnt ought to take away a man's
character."

I thought it a shame so sturdy and amusing a fellow should have to eke
out his living so precariously. "I'll tell you what I'll do," I said.
"I'll give you a note right now to my head gamekeeper and have him put
you on as an assistant. Thirty shillings a week I think it pays."

"Well, now, thank you, guvner, but really, I don't want it. Thirty bob a
week! What should I do with it? Nothing but go down to the Holly Tree
and get drunk every night. I'm much better off as I am--total
abstinence, in a manner of speaking. No, no, guvner, I appreciate your
big heart, but I'm happy with my little bit of fish and a rabbit in the
pot--why should I set up to be an honest workingman and get dissatisfied
with my life?"

His refusal of my wellintentioned offer did not irk me. In a large and
tolerant view you could almost say we were both parasites upon The Ivies
and it would not hurt me if he stole a little of my game to keep himself
alive. I gave him a note to protect him against any of the keepers who
might come upon him as I had, and we parted with mutual liking; I
remembering for my part that I was an American and all men, poacher and
landlord alike, were created equal, no matter how far each had come from
his beginnings.


_80._ Shortly after, Miss Francis ended her long sojourn at Mount
Whitney and returned to England. The ordeal of living surrounded by the
Grass, which had destroyed her assistants, seemed to have made no other
change in her than the fading of her hair, which was now completely
white, and a loss of weight, giving her a deceptive appearance of
fragility at variance with the forthrightness of her manner.

I put down her immunity to agoraphobia as just another evidence that she
was already mad. Her refusal to accept the limitations of her sex and
her complete indifference to our respective stations were mere
confirmations. With her usual disregard of realities she assumed I would
go on financing her indefinitely in spite of the hundreds of thousands
of pounds I had paid out without visible result.

"Ive really got it now, Weener," she assured me in a tone hardly
befitting a suppliant for funds. "In spite of the incompetents you kept
sending, in spite of mistakes and blind alleys, the work on Whitney is
done--and successfully. The rest is routine laboratory work--a matter of
quantities and methods of application."

"I don't know that I can spare you any more money, Miss Francis."

She laughed. "What the devil's the matter with you, Weener? Are your
millions melting away? Or do you think any of the spies you set on me
capable of carrying on--or are you just trying to crack the whip?"

"I set no spies and I have no whip. I merely feel it may not be
profitable to waste any more money on fruitless experiments."

She snorted. "Time has streamlined and inflated your platitudes. When I
am too old to work and ready for euthanasia I shall have you come and
talk me to death. To hear you one would almost think you had no interest
in finding a method to counter the Grass."

Her egomania and impertinence were really insufferable; her notion of
her own importance was ludicrous.

"Interested or not, I have no reason to believe you alone are capable of
scientific discovery. Anyway, the world seems pretty well off as it is."

She tugged at her hair as if it were false and would come off if she
jerked hard enough. "Of course it's well enough off from your
pointofview. It offers you more food than you could eat if you had a
million bellies, more clothes than you could wear out in a million
years, more houses than you could live in if the million contradictions
which go to make up any single human were suddenly made corporeal. Of
course youre satisfied; why shouldnt you be? If the Grass were to be
pushed back and the world once more enlarged, if hope and
dissatisfaction were again to replace despair and content, you might not
find yourself such a big toad in a small puddle--and you wouldnt like
that, would you?"

I had intended all along to give her a small pension to keep her from
want and allow her to putter around, but her irrational accusations and
insults only showed her to be the kind from whom no gratitude could be
expected.

"I'm afraid we can be of no further use to each other."

"Look here, Weener, you can't do this. The life of civilization depends
on countering the Grass. Don't tell me the world can go on only half
alive. Look around you and notice the recession every day. Outside of
your own subservient laboratories what scientific work is being done?
Since Palomar and Mount Wilson and Flagstaff went what has happened in
astronomy? If you pick up the shrunken pages of your _Times_ or
_Tatler_, do you wonder at the reason for their shrinkage or do you
realize there are fewer literates in the world than there were ten years
ago?

"The Americas were upstart continents, werent they? I am not speaking
sarcastically, my point is not a chauvinistic one, not even
hemispherically prideful. And the Old World the womb of culture? But how
much culture has that womb borne since the Americas disappeared? Without
a doubt there are exactly the same number of composers and painters,
writers and sculptors alive on the four continents today as there were
when there were six, but in this drowsy halfworld how many books of
importance are being produced?"

"There are plenty of books already in existence; besides, those things
go by cycles."

"God give me patience; this is the man who has humanity prostrate."

"Humanity seems quite content in the position you ascribe to it."

"Of course, of course--that's the tragedy. It's content the same way a
man who has just had his legs cut off is content; suffering from shock
and loss of blood he enters a merciful coma from which he may never
emerge. The legs do not write the books or think the thoughts, whether
these activities wait for the cyclical moment or not, but the brain,
dependent on the circulation of the blood and the wellbeing of the rest
of the body for proper functioning. And who are you, little man, to
stand in the way of assisting the patient?"

"I shall not argue with you any further, Miss Francis. If mankind is
really as subject to your efforts as your conceit leads you to believe
then I am sure you will find some way to continue them."

"I'm sure I will," she said, and we left it at that.

To say her accusations had been gravely unjust would be to defend myself
where no defense is called for. I merely remark in passing that I gave
orders to set aside a still greater fund toward finding a reagent
against the Grass, and to put those who had lately assisted Miss Francis
in charge. I did this, not because I swallowed her strained analogy
about a sufferer with his legs cut off, but for purely practical
reasons. The world was very well as it was, but an effective weapon
against the Grass might at last make possible the neverdiscarded vision
of utilizing it beneficially.


_81._ Meanwhile life went on with a smoothness strange and gratifying to
those of us born into a period of strife and restlessness. No more wars,
strikes, riots, agitation for higher wages or social experiments by
wildeyed fanatics. Those whose limitations laid out a career of toil
performed their function with as much efficiency as one could expect and
we others who had risen and separated ourselves from the herd carried
our responsibilities and accepted the rewards which went with them. The
ships of the World Congress continued patrolling the coasts of the
deserted continents and restrictions were so far relaxed as to permit
planeflights over the area to take motionpictures and confirm the Grass
had lost none of its vigor. Beyond this, the generality of mankind
forgot the weed and the regions it covered, living geographically as
though Columbus had never set forth from Palos.

It was at this time a new philosophic idea was advanced--giving the lie
to Miss Francis' dictum that no new thoughts were being thought--which
was, briefly, that the Grass was essentially a good thing in itself;
that the world had not merely made the best of a bad situation, but had
been brought to a beneficent condition through the loss of the Western
Hemisphere. Mankind had desperately needed a brake upon its heedless
course; some instrumentality to limit it and bring it to realization of
its proper province. The Grass had acted as such an agent and now,
rightly chastised, man could go about his fit business.

This concept gained almost immediate popular support, so far as it
filtered down to the masses at all; prominent schoolmen endorsed it
wholeheartedly; statesmen gave it qualified approval--"in
principle"--and the Pope issued an encyclical calling for a return of
Christian resignation and submission. Hardly was the ink dry upon the
expressions of thanksgiving for the punishment which had brought about a
new and better frameofmind than the philosophy was suddenly and
dramatically tested by events.

The island of Juan Fernandez, Robinson Crusoe's island, a peak pushed
out of the waters of the Pacific 400 miles west of Chile, densely
populated with refugees and a base for patrolboats, was overrun by the
Grass. It was an impossible happening. Every inhabitant had had personal
experience of the Grass and was fearfully alert against its appearance.
The patrols covered the sea between it and the mainland constantly; the
distance was too far for windborne seeds. The tenuous hypothesis that
gulls had acted as carriers was accepted simply for want of a better.

But the World Congress wasted no time looking backward. Although between
Juan Fernandez and the next land westward the distance was three times
greater than between it and South America, the Congress seized upon the
only island to which it could possibly spread, Sala-y-Gomez, and made of
it a veritable fortress against the Grass. Not only did ships guard its
waters by day and keep it brilliantly lit with their searchlights at
night, but swift pursuitplanes bristling with machineguns brought down
every bird in flight within a thousand miles.

The island itself was sown with salt a halfmile thick after being mined
with enough explosives to blow it into the sea. The world, or that
portion of it which had not fully accepted all the implications of the
doctrine of submission, watched eagerly. But the ships patrolled an
empty sea, the searchlights reflected only the glittering saline
crystals, the migrant birds never reached their destination. The outpost
held, impregnable. Again everyone breathed easier.

Five hundred miles beyond this focalpoint, its convict settlement long
abandoned, was Easter Island, Rapa Nui, home of the great monoliths
whose origin had ever been a puzzle. Erect or supine, these colossal
statues were strewn all over the island. Anthropologists and
archaeologists still came to give them cursory inspection and it was on
such a visit an unmistakable clump of Grass was found.

Immediately the ships were rushed from Sala-y-Gomez, planes carrying
tons of salt took off from Australia and the whole machinery of the
World Congress was swiftly put in operation. But it was too late; Easter
Island was swamped, uninhabited Ducie went next, and Pitcairn, home of
the descendants of the _Bounty_ mutineers followed before even the
slightest precautions could be taken. The Grass was jumping gaps of
thousands of miles in a breathless steeplechase.

On Pitcairn there was nothing to do but rescue the inhabitants. Vessels
stood by to carry them and their livestock off. The palebrown men and
women left for the most part docilely, but the last Adams and the last
McCoy refused to go. "Once before, our people were forced to leave
Pitcairn and found nothing but unhappiness. We will stay on the island
to which our fathers brought their wives."

There was no stopping the Grass now, even if the means had been to hand.
The Gambiers, the Tuamotus and the Marquesas were swallowed up. Tahiti,
dwellingplace of beautiful if syphilitic women, disappeared under a
green blanket, as did the Cook Islands, Samoa and the Fijis. The Grass
jumped southward to a foothold in New Zealand and northward into
Micronesia. Panic infected the Australians and a mass migration to the
central part of the country was begun, but with little hope the
surrounding deserts would offer any effective barrier.


_82._ My first thought when I heard the Grass for the second time had
broken its bounds, was that I had perhaps been a little hasty with Miss
Francis. It was not at all likely she would succeed where so many better
trained and better equipped scientists had so far failed, but I felt a
vicarious sympathy with her, as being out of the picture when all her
colleagues were striving with might and main to save the world;
especially after the years she had spent on Mount Whitney. It would be
an act of simple generosity on my part, I thought, to give her the
wherewithal to entertain the illusion of importance. When all was said
and done, she was a woman, and I could afford a chivalrous gesture even
in the face of her overweening arrogance.

I am sorry to say she responded with complete illgrace. "I knew youd
eventually have to come crawling to me to save your hide."

"You mistake the situation entirely, Miss Francis," I informed her with
dignity. "I am conferring, not asking favors. I have every confidence in
my research staff--"

"My God! Those guineapig murderers; those discoveryforgers; those
whitesmocked acolytes in the temple of Yes. You value your life or your
purse at exactly what theyre worth if you expect those drugstoreclerks
to preserve them for you."

"I doubt if either is in the slightest danger," I assured her
confidently. "Hysterics have lost perspective. Long before the Grass
becomes an immediate concern my drugstoreclerks, with less exalted
opinions of their talents than you, will have found the means to destroy
it."

"A soothing fairytale. Weener, the truth is not in you. You know the
reason you come to me is that youre frightened, scared, terrified. Well,
strangely enough, I'm not going to reject your munificence. I'll accept
it, because to do God's work is more important than any personal pride
of mine or any knowledge that one of the best things _Cynodon dactylon_
could do--if I do not take too much upon myself in judging a
fellowcreature--would be to bury Albert Weener."

I remained unmoved by her tirade. "When you returned from Whitney you
told me there remained only details to be worked out. About how long do
you think it will be before you have a workable compound?"

She burst into a laugh and took out her toothpick to point it at me. "Go
and put your penny in another slot if you want an answer to an idiot
question like that. How long? A day, a month, a year, ten years."

"In ten years--" I began.

"Exactly," she said and put away the toothpick.


_83._ I phoned Stuart Thario to fly over right away for a conference.
"General," I began, "we'll have to start looking ahead and making
plans."

He hid his mustache with the side of his forefinger. "Don't quite
understand, Albert--have details here of activities ... next three
years ..."

I pressed the buzzer for my secretary. "Bring General Thario some
refreshment," I ordered.

The command was not only familiar on the occasion of his visits, but
evidently anticipated, for she appeared in a moment with a trayful of
bottles.

"Bad habit of yours, Albert, teetotalism ... makes the brain cloudy ...
insidious." He took a long drink. "Very little real bourbon left ...
European imitation vile ... learning to like Holland gin." He drank
again.

"To get back to the business of making plans, General," I urged gently.

"Not one of those people getting worried about the Grass?"

"Not worried. Just trying to look ahead. I can't afford to be caught
napping."

"Well, well," he said, "can't pull another South American this time."

"No, no--and besides, I'm not concerned with money."

"Now, Albert, don't tell me youve finally got enough."

"This is not the time to be avaricious," I reproved him. "If the Grass
continues to spread--and there seems to be little doubt it will--"

"All of New Zealand's North Island was finished this morning," he
interrupted.

"I heard it myself; anyway, that's the point. As the Grass advances
there will be new hordes of refugees--"

He was certainly in an impatient mood this morning, for he interrupted
me again. "New markets for concentrates," he suggested.

I looked at him pityingly. Was the old man's mind slipping? I wondered
if it would be necessary to replace him. "General," I said gently, "with
rare exceptions these people will have nothing but worthless currency."

"Goods. Labor."

"Have you seen the previous batches of refugees foresighted enough to
get out any goods of value before starting off? And as for labor, all
our workers are now so heavily subsidized by the dole that to cut wages
another cent--"

"Ha'penny," corrected General Thario.

"Centime if you like. --would be merely to increase our taxes."

"Well, well," he said. "I see I have been hasty. What did you have in
mind, Albert?"

"Retrenchment. Cut production; abandon the factories in the immediate
path of the Grass. Fix on reasonably safe spots to store depots of the
finished concentrates, others for raw materials. Or perhaps they might
be combined."

"What about the factories?"

"Smaller," I said. "Practically portable."

"Hum." He frowned. "You do intend to do business on a small scale."

"Minute," I confirmed.

"What about the mines? The steelmills, the oilfields, the airplane and
automobile factories? The shipyards?"

"Shut them down," I ordered. "Ruthlessly. Except maybe a few in
England."

"The countries where theyre located will grab them."

"There isnt a government in existence who would dare touch anything
belonging to Consolidated Pemmican. If any should come into existence
our individualistic friends would take care of the situation."

"Pay gangsters to overturn governments?"

"They would hardly be legitimate governments. Anyway, a man has a right
to protect his property."

"Albert," he complained querulously, "youre condemning civilization to
death."

"General," I said, "youre talking like a wildeyed crackpot. A
businessman's concern is with business; he leaves abstractions to
visionaries. Our plants will be closed down, because until the Grass is
stopped they can make us no profit. Let some idealistic industrialist
take care of civilization."

"Albert, you know very well no business of any size can operate today
without your active support. Think again, Albert; listen to me as a
friend; we have been associated a long time and to some extent you have
taken Joe's place in my mind. Consider the larger aspects. Suppose you
don't make a profit? Suppose you even take a loss. You can afford to do
it for common humanity."

"I certainly think I do my share for common humanity, General Thario,
and it cuts me to the heart that you of all people should imply such a
sentimental and unjust reproach against me. You know as well as I do I
have given more than half my fortune to charitable works."

"Albert, Albert, need there be this hypocrisy between you and me?"

"I don't know what you mean. I only know I called you to evolve specific
plans and you have embarked instead on windy platitudes and personal
insult."

He sat for a long time quietly, his drink untouched before him. I did
not disturb his meditation, but indulged in one on my own account,
thinking of all I had done for him and his family. But only a foolish
man expects gratitude, or for that matter any reward at all for his
kindnesses.

At last he broke his silence, speaking slowly, almost painfully. "I
have not had what could be called a successful life, even though today I
am a wealthy man." He resumed his drink again and I wondered what this
remark had to do with the subject in hand. Perhaps nothing, I thought;
he is just rambling along while he reconciles himself to the situation.
I was glad he was going to be sensible afterall. Not that it mattered; I
could get many able lieutenants, but for oldtime's sake I was pleased at
the abandonment of his recalcitrance. He relaxed further into the chair
