obviousless that whatsoever I closest intimute of Dear Late Doctor--"
here he raised his eyes again and clapped a hand to his chest before he
finished--"I should wallow in step-tracks."

"Why, absolutely," I agreed emphatically. "No question about it."

From talking to some of the SRI members after meetings or at beach
sessions, I had gained the definite impression that Zan Blekeke had been
a sort of a servant to "Dear Late Doctor," and would continue to be a
servant to whoever was elected in his place.

But instead, they had elected the Martian himself. Logical, in a
cockeyed way.

This was the first time I'd ever really talked to him. I'd seen him at
the few meetings of SRI I had attended, but he had seemed pretty quiet
there, letting others do most of the talking. He was in charge of
administering the daily Sun-Ray treatments, which I had taken once or
twice myself just for the experience; but on those occasions, he had
been very cold and professional.

_Closest intimute of Dear Late Doctor...._

I had never been able to find out much about the Doctor. He was too
sacred a subject for any of the members to even talk about. Of course, I
hadn't tried very hard, because I wasn't especially interested in this
assignment--I was supposed to be on vacation.

Now that a successor had been chosen, I wondered if the show was over
and everyone could go home. I asked Blekeke about it.

"Not while yet," he replied. "Colonial could be. All live one. Dear Late
Doctor--" hand to heart, face to Heaven, Amen--"often told wanted
colossal."

It wasn't too clear, but I nodded anyway. Frankly, my interest in the
whole thing was at a very low ebb. With the drinks and the effort of
untangling Blekeke's twisted English, I was becoming listless and
sleepy.

But he insisted on knowing where I had been when the meeting was held. I
told him I'd had to hurry back to New York for a conference with my
publisher.

He said, "Ah, yes. Writer." He pointed to the defense mech on the seat
beside me. "That typer?"

"Huh? Oh, no ... that's a portable radio. Carry it around with me, in
case the conversation gets dull." I was at the point where I didn't care
much what I said.

He must have taken it as a gentle hint, because in a little while he got
up and left, shrilling: "So gladly seeing you. Wanted know."

I nodded and waved a limp hand at him.

       *       *       *       *       *

As I was passing the desk on the way up to my room, the clerk called,
"Mr. Langston, Mr. Langston. Long distance call for you, sir. I was just
ringing your room. You can take it in a booth there, if you wish, sir."

I nodded and walked to the row of vp booths. Closing the door, I sat
down in front of the screen and picked up the mike. The visiphone screen
lighted and the speaker crackled. The chubby face and shoulders of
Carson Newell took form and floated on the plate.

"Wanted to be sure you got the latest dope on Grogan before you see
him," Newell said. "Just now got the report."

"Go ahead," I said.

"Well, then--" The boss looked up from his note pad. "About how long had
the telenosis been on you? How many days?"

"H'm. Don't know. It's hard to tell, if it's handled right. Weird
nightmares, daydreams, absent-mindedness, sudden impulses, optical
illusions--it can be telenosis, and it can be just you. I'd say three or
four days, but--"

"Wouldn't necessarily prove anything, anyway," Newell broke in. "Here's
the report on Grogan. Been out of Corrective for a little more than a
month now. Went directly to Memphis. Cleared up business affairs there,
then went to Palm Beach for vacation. Arrived late Tuesday
afternoon--four days ago. Took a suite in Space Verge hotel with four
quote secretaries unquote, and has refused to see anyone. No unusually
large baggage. No unusual activities reported. So much for that."

He turned a page of the note pad and went on: "Corrective Institute
record: responded favorably to treatment. Occupational training in
administrative accounting. Special courses in business and political
ethics. Now get this--it's the one thing that gives your hunch any
credibility at all. Three months intermittent telenosis therapy for
slight paranoiac tendencies. Response favorable. Dismissed from C.I.
after five years, three weeks and six days. Classification: Apparent
cure, but possibility of relapse."

We were both quiet for a while, looking at each other.

Then I said, "Well, I'll see him tomorrow. Remember, it's nothing but a
hunch--not even that."

"Be careful, dammit," Newell cautioned.

... I woke up sometime in the early morning, before it was light, with a
clicking noise in my ears. I lay there in bed, gazing into the darkness,
wondering, yet knowing, what would happen if the defense mech should
break down--if a tube should give out, or if some little coil should
prove defective.

The clicking stopped after a while, but it was a long time before I got
back to sleep.

       *       *       *       *       *

I had no trouble getting an interview with Grogan. I'd known I wouldn't.
It was a simple matter of calling his suite and telling the
loose-mouthed, scar-cheeked "secretary" who answered that Earl Langston
would like to make an appointment with Isaac Grogan for, say, 10:30.

"Grogan ain't seein' nobody," the secretary growled.

"Ask him," I said.

The face vanished and reappeared on the screen a few moments later.
"Okay. Come up anytime you're ready."

"Fifteen minutes," I said, and replaced the mike.

I turned up the volume of the defense mech as high as it would go, and
left it in my room when I left.

The same hideous secretary, with the loose jowels and the deep, livid
scar on his right cheek, met me at the door of Grogan's suite.

"Th' boss'll see you in th' library," the bodyguard rumbled, and led me
to the room. The door closed, but did not click behind me.

Isaac Grogan was slouched on a sofa, hands in his pockets, looking at
the floor.

I stood for a moment, looking at him.

He had changed only a little in five years. He was a big man with a
broad, pleasant face and thick black hair. A deep dimple divided his
chin. The last time I'd seen him, he had been getting a little paunchy,
and there had been wrinkles developing in his neck and bags under his
eyes. But that had been from strain and worry, and he looked a lot
better now.

"You're looking well," I told him.

"What the hell do you want?" Grogan said quietly. "Why can't you leave
me alone? I don't want any trouble."

"Neither do I."

And suddenly I felt very awkward. What the hell _did_ I want? Just
exactly what had I expected to accomplish with this visit? I didn't
really know.

I cleared my throat. "I've got one question, Grogan. Maybe two. Then
I'll leave."

He looked at me.

"Do you still blame me for what happened in Memphis?" I asked.

Grogan shifted his position and gave a sort of half-laugh. "Langston,
I've never liked you, and I don't now. But I can't say that I blame you
for the Memphis mess--if I ever did. Now, what's your other question?"

"Telenosis," I said.

He waited, looking straight at me. "Well? What about it?"

"According to your C.I. record," I said, "you had three months of
intermittent telenosis therapy."

He shrugged. "That's right. Lots of people do. You still haven't asked
your question."

"Yes, I have," I replied. "I'll leave now. Thanks for your time."

       *       *       *       *       *

The gorilla-secretary was opening the front door for me, when Grogan
spoke again. "Langston."

I turned around.

Grogan was standing in the door of the library.

"Langston," he repeated. "I don't know what your angle is. I don't know
why you came here, or whether you got what you wanted. Furthermore, I
don't care much. Five years ago is not today, Langston. I've changed.
Just the same, I don't believe I want to see you again. I don't like
you. Okay?"

I said, "Okay," and left.

Back in my hotel room, I first turned down the volume of the defense
mech, then sat down at the visiphone and put in a call to New York. The
pudgy image of Carson Newell appeared.

"I'm stumped," I told him.

"What's the matter? Did you see Grogan?"

"Yeah. Just now."

"Well?"

"Nothing. I'm stumped. He's completely changed. If there was ever a case
of full and complete correction, I'd say Grogan is it."

Newell tapped his fingertips together, then shrugged impatiently. "Well,
hell, I don't think we're getting anywhere on this. I'll turn it over to
the C.I.D. and let them worry about it."

"So what happens now?" I asked. "What am I supposed to do?"

"Take a vacation. But hang on to that defense mech. Stay in Palm Beach
and contact me pronto if anything happens. Buzz me at least once a day,
even if anything doesn't happen."

He started to put down the mike, then lifted it again. "How's the SRI?"

"Oh, that. I'll whip out a story on it in a couple of days."

"No hurry. Find out all you can about it. Give you something to do while
you're waiting around."

He put down the mike and faded from the screen.

       *       *       *       *       *

So I promptly did my damnedest to forget all about Isaac Grogan and
telenosis. I spent the rest of the day at the beach, sprawled out on the
hot sand with the defense mech beside me and an army of people--humans
and aliens--surrounding me. Only once, at about four o'clock, did the
defense mech start going _click-click-click_. I timed it. It lasted
three minutes and then quit.

When I got back to the hotel, at about five, a man fell into step with
me as soon as I entered the lobby.

"Name's Maxwell," he told me. "C.I.D. I'm one of your bodyguards for a
while."

"How many others do I rate?" I asked.

He was a tall, heavily built young man in his middle twenties. He
carried a briefcase. We headed for the elevator.

"Only one," he replied, "but he'll stay pretty much out of sight. He'll
join us in your room after a while. We have to ask you a lot of
questions."

The other bodyguard, who slipped into my room without knocking twenty
minutes later, was shorter, thinner and older. He was bald except for a
gray fringe, and his name was Johnson.

The C.I.D. men spent a half-hour checking for hidden mikes and cameras
before they said much of anything. Then they plopped down on the edge of
the bed, and the young man opened his briefcase.

The older one said, "Have your dinner sent up here. We'll get started on
some of these questions right away."
