
"Go on. Tell me about it, if you wish."

"It's a long shot, this project. It may not work at all, but we have
to give it a try."

"It's obvious that you came here because of it," Professor Thomas
murmured. "I'm becoming curious. Go on."

       *       *       *       *       *

After Kramer finished the old man lay back in the bed without
speaking. At last he sighed.

"I understand. A human mind, taken out of a human body." He sat up a
little, looking at Kramer. "I suppose you're thinking of me."

Kramer said nothing.

"Before I make my decision I want to see the papers on this, the
theory and outline of construction. I'm not sure I like it.--For
reasons of my own, I mean. But I want to look at the material. If
you'll do that--"

"Certainly." Kramer stood up and went to the door. Gross and the two
Security Agents were standing outside, waiting tensely. "Gross, come
inside."

They filed into the room.

"Give the Professor the papers," Kramer said. "He wants to study them
before deciding."

Gross brought the file out of his coat pocket, a manila envelope. He
handed it to the old man on the bed. "Here it is, Professor. You're
welcome to examine it. Will you give us your answer as soon as
possible? We're very anxious to begin, of course."

"I'll give you my answer when I've decided." He took the envelope with
a thin, trembling hand. "My decision depends on what I find out from
these papers. If I don't like what I find, then I will not become
involved with this work in any shape or form." He opened the envelope
with shaking hands. "I'm looking for one thing."

"What is it?" Gross said.

"That's my affair. Leave me a number by which I can reach you when
I've decided."

Silently, Gross put his card down on the dresser. As they went out
Professor Thomas was already reading the first of the papers, the
outline of the theory.

       *       *       *       *       *

Kramer sat across from Dale Winter, his second in line. "What then?"
Winter said.

"He's going to contact us." Kramer scratched with a drawing pen on
some paper. "I don't know what to think."

"What do you mean?" Winter's good-natured face was puzzled.

"Look." Kramer stood up, pacing back and forth, his hands in his
uniform pockets. "He was my teacher in college. I respected him as a
man, as well as a teacher. He was more than a voice, a talking book.
He was a person, a calm, kindly person I could look up to. I always
wanted to be like him, someday. Now look at me."

"So?"

"Look at what I'm asking. I'm asking for his life, as if he were some
kind of laboratory animal kept around in a cage, not a man, a teacher
at all."

"Do you think he'll do it?"

"I don't know." Kramer went to the window. He stood looking out. "In a
way, I hope not."

"But if he doesn't--"

"Then we'll have to find somebody else. I know. There would be
somebody else. Why did Dolores have to--"

The vidphone rang. Kramer pressed the button.

"This is Gross." The heavy features formed. "The old man called me.
Professor Thomas."

"What did he say?" He knew; he could tell already, by the sound of
Gross' voice.

"He said he'd do it. I was a little surprised myself, but apparently
he means it. We've already made arrangements for his admission to the
hospital. His lawyer is drawing up the statement of liability."

Kramer only half heard. He nodded wearily. "All right. I'm glad. I
suppose we can go ahead, then."

"You don't sound very glad."

"I wonder why he decided to go ahead with it."

"He was very certain about it." Gross sounded pleased. "He called me
quite early. I was still in bed. You know, this calls for a
celebration."

"Sure," Kramer said. "It sure does."

       *       *       *       *       *

Toward the middle of August the project neared completion. They stood
outside in the hot autumn heat, looking up at the sleek metal sides of
the ship.

Gross thumped the metal with his hand. "Well, it won't be long. We can
begin the test any time."

"Tell us more about this," an officer in gold braid said. "It's such
an unusual concept."

"Is there really a human brain inside the ship?" a dignitary asked, a
small man in a rumpled suit. "And the brain is actually alive?"

"Gentlemen, this ship is guided by a living brain instead of the usual
Johnson relay-control system. But the brain is not conscious. It will
function by reflex only. The practical difference between it and the
Johnson system is this: a human brain is far more intricate than any
man-made structure, and its ability to adapt itself to a situation, to
respond to danger, is far beyond anything that could be artificially
built."

Gross paused, cocking his ear. The turbines of the ship were beginning
to rumble, shaking the ground under them with a deep vibration. Kramer
was standing a short distance away from the others, his arms folded,
watching silently. At the sound of the turbines he walked quickly
around the ship to the other side. A few workmen were clearing away
the last of the waste, the scraps of wiring and scaffolding. They
glanced up at him and went on hurriedly with their work. Kramer
mounted the ramp and entered the control cabin of the ship. Winter was
sitting at the controls with a Pilot from Space-transport.

"How's it look?" Kramer asked.

"All right." Winter got up. "He tells me that it would be best to take
off manually. The robot controls--" Winter hesitated. "I mean, the
built-in controls, can take over later on in space."

"That's right," the Pilot said. "It's customary with the Johnson
system, and so in this case we should--"

"Can you tell anything yet?" Kramer asked.

"No," the Pilot said slowly. "I don't think so. I've been going over
everything. It seems to be in good order. There's only one thing I
wanted to ask you about." He put his hand on the control board. "There
are some changes here I don't understand."

"Changes?"

"Alterations from the original design. I wonder what the purpose is."

Kramer took a set of the plans from his coat. "Let me look." He turned
the pages over. The Pilot watched carefully over his shoulder.

"The changes aren't indicated on your copy," the Pilot said. "I
wonder--" He stopped. Commander Gross had entered the control cabin.

"Gross, who authorized alterations?" Kramer said. "Some of the wiring
has been changed."

"Why, your old friend." Gross signaled to the field tower through the
window.

"My old friend?"

"The Professor. He took quite an active interest." Gross turned to the
Pilot. "Let's get going. We have to take this out past gravity for the
test they tell me. Well, perhaps it's for the best. Are you ready?"

"Sure." The Pilot sat down and moved some of the controls around.
"Anytime."

"Go ahead, then," Gross said.

"The Professor--" Kramer began, but at that moment there was a
tremendous roar and the ship leaped under him. He grasped one of the
wall holds and hung on as best he could. The cabin was filling with a
steady throbbing, the raging of the jet turbines underneath them.

The ship leaped. Kramer closed his eyes and held his breath. They were
moving out into space, gaining speed each moment.

       *       *       *       *       *

"Well, what do you think?" Winter said nervously. "Is it time yet?"

"A little longer," Kramer said. He was sitting on the floor of the
cabin, down by the control wiring. He had removed the metal
covering-plate, exposing the complicated maze of relay wiring. He was
