He started the atomic reactors, a mighty purring here in the sealed
cabin. Gently, watching the instruments, he tested bow and stern
rockets, matching fore and aft forces delicately, tentatively increasing
stern thrust until the craft barely stirred in its silicone-greased,
magnetized launching rack.

"Two minutes to take-off."

They placed their faces against soft masks in the couch, down through
which they could watch the instruments, in a mirror, the video screen
and bow viewport. The couch encompassed them, their arms in padded slots
reaching to the controls.

"... thirty-four, thirty-three, thirty-two, thirty-one...."

Thunder hammered at their ears. The couch squeezed them as the
_Latecomer_ shot beyond its ramp, increased its velocity. Ken gripped a
lever which cut in the autopilot to take them beyond atmosphere, beyond
gravity.

       *       *       *       *       *

Ken unhooded the viewport, leaving covered only that section which
blocked a tiny blinding sun. They stared into an utter, absolute ebony
that suddenly seemed to be straining against the thick canopy, mocking
the dim lights of the compartment. For many hours now, nothing to do but
wait and watch, make occasional control corrections.

He caused the couch to relax, offered Carol a water sausage. They had
eaten nothing, and drunk but sparingly, since twenty-four hours before
take-off. Her hand touched his as she took the container. It was like an
electric shock, and his heart thudded. Deliberately, he brushed his
fingers over hers, clasped her wrist, looking at her.

She became motionless. Then she looked up at him, lingeringly. Her lips
parted.

The pressure within him mounted. Almost reverently he reached for
her--then stopped when tears formed in her eyes. He drew back,
uncomprehending. Could desire be coupled with sorrow? Or was he merely
reading desire into some emotion not remotely connected with passion?
She had been given to him without reservation, but he could not bring
himself to take her unwillingly. The difference, he realized, between
love and lust--damn the psychologists. He let out his breath, fumbled in
a small plastic box near the controls, dug out several nutriment bars.
He handed a couple to Carol without looking at her and munched unhappily
at the chocolate-flavored ration.

They watched the blackness of space for hours. The stars appeared as
bright glowing blobs sunk dismally far into the heavy depths of some
Stygian jelly. It was a time to be savoring the first experience of man
beyond his mortal sphere, but Ken stared unseeingly, his mind dulled,
vacant with indecision and disillusion that was almost a physical hurt.
The zest of adventure, in the midst of adventure, was throttled before
it saw life. The sustaining dreams of training and preparation were
dusty misery. Robotically, he watched the instruments, occasionally made
microscopic adjustments. Carol's hands, close to his, infrequently
changed camera settings.

Unexpectedly the radio sounded. Ken tuned to maximum volume, strained to
hear the muted words. It was a moment before he realized they were
drawling, abnormally slow, like one of the old spring-wound phonographs
running down. When he caught it, the message stunned him.

"_Late-comm-merr_ pers-sonn-nell. Re-turnn noww, noww, noww.
Emerr-genn-cy orr-derr of the Prezz-zi-dent. _Llate-comm-merr_
pers-sonn-nell...."

He listened to it twice more before silencing the radio. Turn back? Now?
He looked at Carol. She returned his stare, drawing her arms up out of
the slots and leaning on her elbows, frowning in puzzlement. Her breasts
were pendent promises of--further disappointment? Were both love and
life to be reduced, in a day, to twin voids of defeat? Love was Carol
and life was a successful flight around the moon.

Discipline kept his act just short of viciousness as he slapped the
controls back to manual. Grimly he silenced the stern rockets, cut in
the bow units slowly. The flight was to have been a loop "over" the
moon, almost intersecting its orbit at the precise time it swung
ponderously by. What possible emergency could have arisen?

       *       *       *       *       *

Ken couldn't remember just when the fear had started--maybe on the way
outward, now that he thought of it: the feeling of deep depression. They
were in free fall, weightless, the couch adjusted to keep them floating
within a few inches of its confines. The brilliant, abandoned moon had
just swung behind its big-sister world, the glaring furnace of Sol was
still thwarted by a section of bow hood.

He felt the fear mount--little tugging fingers frantically at work
within his chest. The blue sphere of Earth seemed to recede in the black
muck, although he knew it was only an optical effect of space--of the
vast, scornful emptiness in which the stars were but helpless,
hopelessly enmeshed droplets of dross.

He shivered involuntarily. With the movement he touched the side of the
couch and rebounded against Carol.

She screamed.

He stared at her, his fear mounting swiftly through panic to abject,
uncaring terror. Carol had drawn herself up into a knot, the fetal
position of infantile regression; her eyes were wide, unseeing, her
