    internus all made their appearance. From what I had seen and read of
    this disease, I believed it to belong to inflammations, and at an
    earlier period I should be tempted to bleed as largely as for
    pneumonia. The fluid found after death in the ventricules of the brain
    I impute to debility of the absorbents induced by inflammation. My
    reasons are briefly these; 1. The acuteness of the pain. 2. The state
    of the pulse. In the above case for the first 9 or 10 days it did not
    exceed 110, and was full and strong.

    3. To find out whether any febrile alternations took place, Master L.'s
    feet were frequently felt, and they were found at times cold, and at
    other times of a dry heat. I have many times seen this disease, but the
    patients were too young, or too far advanced, to inform me, whether
    they had chillness succeeded by heat at its onset. 4. The disorders to
    which the young are more peculiarly liable afford a presumption, that
    hydrocephalus internus is an inflammatory disease; and this is
    confirmed by the regularity of the period, within which it finishes its
    course. And lastly, does it not happen more frequently than is
    suspected from external injury?

    I have just now been well informed, that Dr. Rush has lately cured five
    out of six patients by copious bleedings. I relate here the reasons for
    an opinion without pretending to a discovery. Something like this
    doctrine may be found in certain modern publications, but it is
    delivered in that vague and diffuse style, which I trust your example
    will banish from medical literature."

      Clifton, near Bristol,
      _July 28, 1795_.

To this idea of Dr. Beddoes may be added, that the hydrocele generally
succeeds an injury, and consequent inflammation of the bag, which contains
it. And that other dropsies, which principally attend inebriates, are
consequent to too great action of the mucous membranes by the stimulus of
beer, wine, and spirits. And lastly, that as these cases of hydrocephalus
end so fatally, a new mode of treating them is much to be desired, and
deserves to be seriously attended to.

ADDITION III. ON VERTIGO.

_To be placed after the additional Note at the end of Vol. I. on this
Subject._

Having reperused the ingenious Essay of Dr. Wells on Single Vision, and his
additional observations in the Gentleman's Magazine on the apparent
retrogression of objects in vertigo, I am induced to believe, that this
apparent retrogression of objects is not always owing to the same cause.

When a person revolves with his eyes closed, till he becomes vertiginous,
and then stands still without opening them, he seems for a while to go
forward in the same direction. This hallucination of his ideas cannot be
owing to ocular spectra, because, as Dr. Wells observes, no such can have
been formed; but it must arise from a similar continuance or repetition of
ideas belonging to the sense of touch, instead of to the sense of vision;
and should therefore be called a tangible, not a visual, vertigo. In common
language this belief of continuing to revolve for some time, after he
stands still, when a person has turned round for a minute in the dark,
would be called a deception of imagination.

Now at this time if he opens his eyes upon a gilt book, placed with other
books on a shelf about the height of his eye, the gilt book seems to recede
in the contrary direction; though his eyes are at this time kept quite
still, as well as the gilt book. For if his eyes were not kept still, other
books would fall on them in succession; which, when I repeatedly made the
experiment, did not occur; and which thus evinces, that no motion of the
eyes is the cause of the apparent retrocession of the gilt book. Why then
does it happen?--Certainly from an hallucination of ideas, or in common
language the deception of imagination.

The vertiginous person still imagines, that he continues to revolve
forwards, after he has opened his eyes; and in consequence that the
objects, which his eyes happen to fall upon, are revolving backward; as
they would appear to do, if he was actually turning round with his eyes
open. For he has been accustomed to observe the motions of bodies, whether
apparent or real, so much more frequently by the eye than by the touch;
that the present belief of his gyration, occasioned by the hallucinations
of the sense of touch, is attended with ideas of such imagined motions of
visible objects, as have always accompanied his former gyrations, and have
thus been associated with the muscular actions and perceptions of touch,
which occurred at the same time.

When the remains of colours are seen in the eye, they are termed ocular
spectra; when remaining sounds are heard in the ear, they may be called
auricular murmurs; but when the remaining motions, or ideas, of the sense
of touch continue, as in this vertigo of a blindfolded person, they have
acquired no name, but may be termed evanescent titillations, or tangible
hallucinations.

Whence I conclude, that vertigo may have for its cause either the ocular
spectra of the sense of vision, when a person revolves with his eyes open;
or the auricular murmurs of the sense of hearing, if he is revolved near a
cascade; or the evanescent titillations of the sense of touch, if he
revolves blindfold. All these I should wish to call vanishing ideas, or
sensual motions, of those organs of sense; which, ideas, or sensual
motions, have lately been associated in a circle, and therefore for a time
continue to be excited. And what are the ideas of colours, when they are
excited by imagination or memory, but the repetition of finer ocular
spectra? What the idea of sounds, but the repetition of finer auricular
murmurs? And what the ideas of tangible objects, but the repetition of
finer evanescent titillations?

The tangible, and the auricular, and the visual vertigo, are all perceived
by many people for a day or two after long travelling in a boat or coach;
the motions of the vessel, or vehicle, or of the surrounding objects, and
the noise of the wheels and oars, occur at intervals of reverie, or at the
commencement of sleep. See Sect. XX. 5. These ideas, or sensual motions, of
sight, of hearing, and of touch, are succeeded by the same effects as the
ocular spectra, the auricular murmurs, and the evanescent titillations
above mentioned; that is, by a kind of vertigo, and cannot in that respect
be distinguished from them. Which is a further confirmation of the truth of
the doctrine delivered in Sect. III. of this work, that the colours
remaining in the eyes, which are termed ocular spectra, are ideas, or
sensual motions, belonging to the sense of vision, which for too long a
time continue their activity.

ADDITION IV. OF VOLUNTARY MOTIONS.

A correspondent acquaints me, that he finds difficulty in understanding how
the convulsions of the limbs in epilepsy can be induced by voluntary
exertions. This I suspect first to have arisen from the double meaning of
the words "involuntary motions;" which are sometimes used for those
motions, which are performed without the interference of volition, as the
pulsations of the heart and arteries; and at other times for those actions,
which occur, where two counter volitions oppose each other, and the
stronger prevails; as in endeavouring to suppress laughter, and to stop the
shudderings, when exposed to cold. Thus when the poet writes,

  ------video meliora, proboque,
  Deteriora sequor.----

The stronger volition actuates the system, but not without the
counteraction of unavailing smaller ones; which constitute deliberation.

A second difficulty may have arisen from the confined use of the words "to
will," which in common discourse generally mean to choose after
deliberation; and hence our will or volition is supposed to be always in
our own power. But the will or voluntary power, acts always from motive, as
explained in Sect. XXXIV. 1. and in Class IV. 1. 3. 2. and III. 2. 1. 12.
which motive can frequently be examined previous to action, and balanced
against opposite motives, which is called deliberation; at other times the
motive is so powerful as immediately to excite the sensorial power of
volition into action, without a previous balancing of opposite motives, or
counter volitions. The former of these volitions is exercised in the common
purposes of life, and the latter in the exertions of epilepsy and insanity.

It is difficult _to think without words_, which however all those must do,
who discover new truths by reasoning; and still more difficult, when the
words in common use deceive us by their twofold meanings, or by the
inaccuracy of the ideas, which they suggest.

ADDITION V. OF FIGURE.

I feel myself much obliged by the accurate attention given to the first
volume of Zoonomia, and by the ingenious criticisms bestowed on it, by the
learned writers of that article both in the Analytical and English Reviews.
Some circumstances, in which their sentiments do not accord with those
expressed in the work, I intend to reconsider, and to explain further at
some future time. One thing, in which both these gentlemen seem to dissent
from me, I shall now mention, it is concerning the manner, in which we
acquire the idea of figure; a circumstance of great importance in the
knowledge of our intellect, as it shews the cause of the accuracy of our
ideas of motion, time, space, number, and of the mathematical sciences,
which are concerned in the mensurations or proportions of figure.

This I imagine may have in part arisen from the prepossession, which has
almost universally prevailed, that ideas are immaterial beings, and
therefore possess no properties in common with solid matter. Which I
suppose to be a fanciful hypothesis, like the stories of ghosts and
apparitions, which have so long amused, and still amuse, the credulous
without any foundation in nature.

The existence of our own bodies, and of their solidity, and of their
figure, and of their motions, is taken for granted in my account of ideas;
because the ideas themselves are believed to consist of motions or
configurations of solid fibres; and the question now proposed is, how we
become acquainted with the figures of bodies external to our organs of
sense? Which I can only repeat from what is mentioned in Sect. XIV. 2. 2.
that if part of an organ of sense be stimulated into action, as of the
sense of touch, that part so stimulated into action must possess figure,
which must be similar to the figure of the body, which stimulates it.

Another previous prepossession of the mind, which may have rendered the
manner of our acquiring the knowledge of figure less intelligible, may have
arisen from the common opinion of the perceiving faculty residing in the
head; whereas our daily experience shews, that our perception (which
consists of an idea, and of the pleasure or pain it occasions) exists
principally in the organ of sense, which is stimulated into action; as
every one, who burns his finger in the candle, must be bold to deny.

When an ivory triangle is pressed on the palm of the hand, the figure of
the surface of the part of the organ of touch thus compressed is a
triangle, resembling in figure the figure of the external body, which
compresses it. The action of the stimulated fibres, which constitute the
idea of hardness and of figure, remains in this part of the sensorium,
which forms the sense of touch; but the sensorial motion, which constitutes
pleasure or pain, and which is excited in consequence of these fibrous
motions of the organ of sense, is propagated to the central parts of the
sensorium, or to the whole of it; though this generally occurs in less
degree of energy, than it exists in the stimulated organ of sense; as in
the instance above mentioned of burning a finger in the candle.

Some, who have espoused the doctrine of the immateriality of ideas, have
seriously doubted the existence of a material world, with which only our
senses acquaint us; and yet have assented to the existence of spirit, with
which our senses cannot acquaint us; and have finally allowed, that all our
knowledge is derived through the medium of our senses! They forget, that if
the spirit of animation had no properties in common with matter, it could
neither affect nor be affected by the material body. But the knowledge of
our own material existence being granted, which I suspect few rational
persons will seriously deny, the existence of a material external world
follows in course; as our perceptions, when we are awake and not insane,
are distinguished from those excited by sensation, as in our dreams, and
from those excited by volition or by association as in insanity and
reverie, by the power we have of comparing the present perceptions of one
sense with those of another, as explained in Sect. XIV. 2. 5. And also by
comparing the tribes of ideas, which the symbols of pictures, or of
languages, suggest to us, by intuitive analogy with our previous
experience, that is, with the common course of nature. See Class III. 2. 2.
3. on Credulity.

ADDITION VI.

_Please to add the following in page 14, after line 20._

_Cold and hot Fit._

As the torpor, with which a fit of fever commences, is sometimes owing to
defect of stimulus, as in going into the cold-bath; and sometimes to a
previous exhaustion of the sensorial power by the action of some violent
stimulus, as after coming out of a hot room into cold air; a longer time
must elapse, before there can be a sufficient accumulation of sensorial
power to produce a hot fit in one case than in the other. Because in the
latter case the quantity of sensorial power previously expended must be
supplied, before an accumulation can begin.

The cold paroxysm commences, when the torpor of a part becomes so great,
and its motions in consequence so slow or feeble, as not to excite the
sensorial power of association; which in health contributes to move the
rest of the system, which is catenated with it. And the hot fit commences
by the accumulation of the sensorial power of irritation of the part first
affected, either so as to counteract its deficient stimulus, or its
previous waste of sensorial power; and it becomes general by the
accumulation of the sensorial power of association; which is excited by the
renovated actions of the part first affected; or becomes so great as to
overbalance the deficient excitement of it. On all these accounts the hot
fit cannot be supposed to bear any proportion to the cold one in length of
time, though the latter may be the consequence of the former. See Suppl. I.
16. 8.

ADDITION VII. ON WARMTH.

_To be added at the end of the Species Sudor Calidus, in Class I. 1. 2. 3._

When the heat of the body in weak patients in fevers is increased by the
stimulus of the points of flannel, a greater consequent debility succeeds,
than when it is produced by the warmth of fire; as in the former the heat
is in part owing to the increased activity of the skin, and consequent
expenditure of sensorial power; whereas in the latter case it is in part
owing to the influx of the fluid matter of heat.

So the warmth produced by equitation, or by rubbing the body and limbs with
a smooth brush or hand, as is done after bathing in some parts of the East,
does not expend nearly so much sensorial power, as when the warmth is
produced by the locomotion of the whole weight of the body by muscular
action, as in walking, or running, or swimming. Whence the warmth of a fire
is to be preferred to flannel shirts for weak people, and the agitation of
a horse to exercise on foot. And I suppose those, who are unfortunately
lost in snow, who are on foot, are liable to perish sooner by being
exhausted by their muscular exertions; and might frequently preserve
themselves by lying on the ground, and covering themselves with snow,
before they were too much exhausted by fatigue. See Botan. Garden, Vol. II.
the note on Barometz.

ADDITION VIII. PUERPERAL FEVER.

_To be added to Class II. 1. 6. 16._

A very interesting account of the puerperal fever, which was epidemic at
Aberdeen, has been lately published by Dr. Alexander Gordon. (Robinson,
London.) In several dissections of those, who died of this disease,
purulent matter was found in the cavity of the abdomen; which he ascribes
to an erysipelatous inflammation of the peritonaeum, as its principal seat,
and of its productions, as the omentum, mesentery, and peritonaeal coat of
the intestines.

He believes, that it was infectious, and that the contagion was always
carried by the accoucheur or the nurse from one lying-in woman to another.

The disease began with violent unremitting pain of the abdomen on the day
of delivery, or the next day, with shuddering, and very quick pulse, often
140 in a minute. In this situation, if he saw the patient within 12 or 24
hours of her seizure, he took away from 16 to 24 ounces of blood, which was
always sizy. He then immediately gave a cathartic consisting of three
grains of calomel, and 40 grains of powder of jalap. After this had
operated, he gave an opiate at night; and continued the purging and the
opiate for several days.

He asserts, that almost all those, whom he was permitted to treat in this
manner early in the disease, recovered to the number of 50; and that almost
all the rest died. But that when two or three days were elapsed, the
patient became too weak for this method; and the matter was already formed,
which destroyed them. Except that he saw two patients, who recovered after
discharging a large quantity of matter at the navel. And a few, who were
relieved by the appearance of external erysipelas on the extremities.

This disease, consisting of an erysipelatous inflammation, may occasion the
great debility sooner to occur than in inflammation of the uterus; which
latter is neither erysipelatous, I suppose, nor contagious. And the success
of Dr. Gordon's practice seems to correspond with that of Dr. Rush in the
contagious fever or plague at Philadelphia; which appeared to be much
assisted by early evacuations. One case I saw some time ago, where violent
unceasing pain of the whole abdomen occurred a few hours after delivery,
with quick pulse; which ceased after the patient had twice lost about eight
ounces of blood, and had taken a moderate cathartic with calomel.

This case induces me to think, that it might be safer and equally
efficacious, to take less blood at first, than Dr. Gordon mentions, and to
repeat the operation in a few hours, if the continuance of the symptoms
should require it. And the same in respect to the cathartic, which might
perhaps be given in less quantity, and repeated every two or three hours.

Nor should I wish to give an opiate after the first venesection and
cathartic; as I suspect that this might be injurious, except those
evacuations had emptied the vessels so much, that the stimulus of the
opiate should act only by increasing the absorption of the new vessels or
fluids produced on the surfaces of the inflamed membranes. In other
inflammations of the bowels, and in acute rheumatism, I have seen the
disease much prolonged, and I believe sometimes rendered fatal, by the too
early administration of opiates, either along with cathartics, or at their
intervals; while a small dose of opium given after sufficient evacuations
produces absorption only by its stimulus, and much contributes to the cure
of the patient. We may have visible testimony of this effect of opium, when
a solution of it is put into an inflamed eye; if it be thus used previous
to sufficient evacuation, it increases the inflammation; if it be used
after sufficient evacuation, it increases absorption only, and clears the
eye in a very small time.

I cannot omit observing, from considering these circumstances, how unwise
is the common practice of giving an opiate to every woman immediately after
her delivery, which must often have been of dangerous consequence.

END OF THE SECOND PART.

       *       *       *       *       *

ZOONOMIAE AUCTORI

_S.P.D._

AMICUS.

       *       *       *       *       *

_CURRUS TRIUMPHALIS MEDICINAE._

       *       *       *       *       *

  Currus it Hygeiae, Medicus movet arma triumphans,
    Undique victa fugit lurida turma mali.----
  Laurea dum Phoebi viridis tua tempora cingit,
    Nec mortale sonans Fama coronat opus;
  Post equitat trepidans, repetitque Senectus in aurem,
    Voce canens stridula, "sis memor ipse mori!"

       *       *       *       *       *


INDEX OF THE CLASSES.

                  A.

  Abortion, i. 2. 1. 14.
  ---- from fear, iv. 3. 1. 7.
  ---- not from epilepsy, iii. 1. 1. 7.
  ---- not from hepatitis, ii. 1. 2. 12.
  Absorption of solids, i. 2. 2. 14.
  ---- of matter, ii. 1. 6. 2. and 6.
  ---- cellular, iv. 1. 1. 6.
  ---- from the lungs, iv. 3. 1. 5. Suppl. i. 8. 6.
  Abstinence of young ladies, ii. 2. 2. 1.
  Accumulation of feces, ii. 2. 2. 7.
  Acupuncture, iii. 1. 1. 8.
  Adipsia, ii. 2. 2. 2.
  Aegritudo ventriculi, i. 2. 4. 4.
  ---- See Sickness.
  Agrypnia. See Vigilia.
  Ague-cakes, Suppl. i. 2. 3.
  Alum in ulcers of the mouth, ii. 1. 3. 1.
  Ambition, iii. 1. 2. 9.
  Amaurosis, i. 2. 5. 5.
  Anasarca of the lungs, i. 2. 3. 16.
  Anger, iii. 1. 2. 17.
  Anger, tremor of, iv. 2. 3. 4.
  ---- blush of, iv. 2. 3. 5.
  Angina. See Tonsillitis.
  ---- pectoris. See Asthma painful.
  Anhelitus, ii. 1. 1. 4.
  Anhelatio spasmodica, i. 3. 3. 3.
  Annulus repens, ii. 1. 5. 10.
  Anorexia, ii. 2. 2. 1.
  ---- maniacalis, Suppl. i. 14. 3.
  ---- epileptica, ii. 2. 2. 1. iii. 1. 1. 7.
  Apepsia, i. 3. 1. 3. Suppl. i. 8. 11.
  Aphtha, ii. 1. 3. 17.
  Apoplexy, iii. 2. 1. 16.
  Appetite defective, ii. 2. 2. 1.
  ---- depraved, iii. 1. 2. 19.
  ---- from abstinence, ii. 2. 2. 1.
  ---- destroyed, iii. 1. 2. 20.
  ---- from epilepsy, ii. 2. 2. 1.
  Arm, pain of, iv. 2. 2. 13.
  ---- palsy of, iii. 2. 1. 4.
  Arsenic in tooth-ach, i. 2. 4. 12.
  ---- in head-ach, i. 2. 4. 11.
  Arthrocele, ii. 1. 4. 17.
  Arthropuosis, ii. 1. 4. 18.
  Arthritis. See Gout.
  Ascarides, i. 1. 4. 12. iv. 1. 2. 9.
  Ascites, i. 2. 3. 13.
  Associations affected four ways, iv. 1. 1. G.
  ---- how produced, iv. 1. 1. H.
  ---- distinct from catenations, iv. 1. 1. A.
  ---- three kinds of, iv. 1. 1. B.
  ---- tertian, iv. 1. 1. K.
  ---- of the fauces and pubis, iv. 1. 2. 7.
  ---- sensitive, a law of, iv. 2. 2. 2.
  ---- sensitive iv. 2. 1.
  ---- accumulates, Suppl. i. 8. 3. i. 11. 4.
  Asthma humoral, ii. 1. 1. 7. i. 3. 2. 8.
  ---- of infants, i. 1. 3. 4.
  ---- convulsive, iii. 1. 1. 10.
  ---- painful, iii. 1. 1. 11.
  Auditus acrior, i. 1. 5. 2.
  ---- imminutus, i. 2. 5. 6.
  Azote, Suppl. i. 9. 3. i. 11. 6.

                  B.

  Bandages, ill effect of, ii. 1. 1. 12.
  ---- promote absorption, i. 1. 3. 13.
  Bath, cold, i. 2. 2. 1.
  ---- warm, Addit. vii.
  Beauty, iii. 1. 2. 4.
  ---- loss of, iii. 1. 2. 12.
  Bile-duct, pain of, iv. 2. 2. 4.
  Bile crystalized, i. 1. 3. 8.
  Bitter taste, i. 1. 3. 1.
  ---- not from bile, i. 1. 3. 1.
  Bleeding. See Haemorrhage.
  Bladder, distention of, ii. 2. 2. 6.
  ---- stone of, i. 1. 3. 10.
  ---- catarrh of, ii. 1. 4. 11.
  Blindness, i. 2. 5. 5.
  Blush of anger, iv. 2. 3. 5. Suppl. i. 12. 7.
  ---- of guilt, iv. 2. 3. 6. Suppl. i. 12. 7.
  Bones, innutrition of, i. 2. 2. 14.
  ---- caries of, ii. 1. 4. 19.
  Borborigmus, i. 3. 1. 9.
  Bougies, ii. 1. 4. 11.
  Brachiorum paralysis, iii. 2. 1. 4.
  Brain stimulated, Suppl. i. 16. 9.
  Bronchocele, i. 2. 3. 20.
  Burns, i. 1. 3. 13.
  Butterflies, experiment on, i. 1. 2. 3.

                  C.

  Cacositia, iii. 1. 2. 20.
  Calculi productio, i. 1. 3. 9. ii. 1. 2. 14.
  ---- renis, i. 1. 3. 9. iv. 2. 3. 3.
  ---- vesicae, i. 1. 3. 10. iv. 2. 2. 2.
  Callico shirts, i. 1. 2. 3.
  Callus, i. 2. 2. 12.
  Canities. See Hair grey.
  Calor febrilis, i. 1. 2. 1.
  Calves fed on gruel, i. 1. 2. 5.
  ---- hydatides of, i. 2. 5. 4.
  Cancer, ii. 1. 4. 16. ii. 1. 6. 13.
  Cantharides, large dose of, iv. 2. 2. 2.
  Carbonic acid gas, Suppl. i. 9. 3.
  Cardialgia, i. 2. 4. 5.
  Carcinoma, ii. 1. 4. 16. ii. 1. 6. 13.
  Caries ossium, ii. 1. 4. 19.
  Cataract, i. 2. 2. 13.
  Catarrh, warm, i. 1. 2. 7.
  ---- cold, i. 2. 3. 3.
  ---- lymphatic, i. 3. 2. 1.
  ---- sensitive, ii. 1. 3. 5.
  ---- epidemic, ii. 1. 3. 6.
  ---- of dogs and horses, ii. 1. 3. 6.
  ---- from cold skin, iv. 1. 1. 5.
  ---- periodic, iv. 3. 4. 1.
  Catamenia, i. 2. 1. 11. iv. 2. 4. 7.
  Catalepsis, iii. 2. 1. 9.
  Cats, mumps of, ii. 1. 3. 4.
  Cephalaea frigida, i. 2. 4. 11. iv. 2. 2. 7.
  Charcoal tooth-powder, i. 2. 4. 12.
  Cheek, torpor of, iv. 2. 2. 1.
  Chicken pox, ii. 1. 3. 15.
  Chin-cough, ii. 1. 3. 8.
  Child-bed fever, ii. 1. 6. 16.
  Children, new born, ii. 1. 1. 12.
  ---- gripes and purging of, i. 1. 2. 5.
  Chlorosis, i. 2. 3. 10. Suppl. i. 8. 11.
  Chorea St. Viti, iv. 2. 3. 2.
  Citta, iii. 1. 2. 19.
  Clamor, iii. 1. 1. 3.
  Clavicular animals, ii. 1. 2. 6.
  Clavus hystericus, iv. 2. 2. 8.
  Claudicatio coxaria, i. 2. 2. 17.
  Cold in the head. See Catarrh.
  Colic, flatulent, i. 2. 4. 7.
  ---- from lead, i. 2. 4. 8.
  ---- hysteric, i. 2. 4. 7. iii. 1. 1. 8.
  Cold air in fevers, iii. 2. 1. 12. iv. 2. 4. 11.
  ---- effects of, iii. 2. 1. 17.
  ---- how to be used, iv. 1. 1. 4.
  Compassion, iii. 1. 2. 24.
  Consumption, ii. 1. 6. 7.
  Convulsion, iii. 1. 1. 5.
  ---- weak, iii. 1. 1. 5.
  ---- from bad air, iii. 1. 1. 5.
  ---- painful, iii. 1. 1. 6. iv. 2. 4. 5.
  Consternation, i. 1. 5. 11.
  Constipation, i. 1. 3. 5. ii. 2. 2. 7.
  Contagious matter of two kinds, ii. 1. 3.
  ---- is oxygenated, ii. 1. 5.
  ---- produces fever, how, Suppl. i. 16. 7.
  Cornea to perforate, i. 1. 3. 14.
  ---- scars of seen on milk, i. 1. 3. 14.
  Corpulency, i. 2. 3. 17.
  Coryza. See Catarrh.
  Costiveness, i. 1. 3. 5. ii. 2. 2. 7.
  Cough of drunkards, ii. 1. 1. 5.
  ---- hooping, ii. 1. 3. 8.
  ---- hepatic, iv. 2. 1. 8.
  ---- gouty, iv. 2. 1. 9.
  ---- periodic, iv. 2. 4. 6. iv. 3. 4. 2.
  ---- from cold feet, iv. 2. 1. 7.
  Cows, pestilence of, ii. 1. 3. 13.
  ---- bloody urine of, ii. 1. 3. 13.
  Cramp, iii. 1. 1. 13.
  ---- painful, iii. 1. 1. 14.
  ---- in diarrhoea, iv. 1. 2. 10.
  Crab-lice, i. 1. 4. 14.
  Credulity, iii. 2. 2. 3.
  Crines novi, i. 1. 2. 15.
  Croup, i. 1. 3. 4. ii. 1. 2. 4. ii. 1. 3. 3.
  Crusta lactea, ii. 1. 5. 12.
  Cutis arida, i. 1. 3. 6.
  Cynanche. See Tonsillitis.
  ---- parotidaea. See Parotitis.

                  D.

  Darkness in fevers, i. 2. 5. 3.
  Deafness, two kinds of, i. 2. 5. 6.
  Debility, three kinds of, i. 2. 1.
  ---- and strength metaphors, i. 2. 1.
  Decussation of nerves, iii. 2. 1. 10.
  Deglutition, ii. 1. 1. 1.
  ---- involuntary, iv. 1. 3. 1.
  Dentition, i. 1. 4. 5.
  Dentium dolor a stridore, iv. 1. 2. 3.
  Descent of the uterus, i. 1. 4. 8.
  Diabetes, i. 3. 2. 6.
  ---- foul tongue in, i. 1. 3. 1.
  ---- irritative, iv. 3. 1. 1.
  ---- from fear, iv. 3. 1. 3.
  Diarrhoea warm, i. 1. 2. 5.
  ---- of infants, i. 1. 2. 5.
  ---- lymphatic, i. 3. 2. 4.
  ---- chyliferous, i. 3. 2. 5.
  ---- cold, i. 2. 3. 6.
  ---- rheumatic, iv. 1. 2. 16.
  ---- from fear, iv. 3. 1. 4.
  ---- from toothing, iv. 2. 2. 14.
  ---- in fevers, Suppl. i. 2. 4.
  ---- cure of, iv. 1. 1. f.
  Digestion increased by cold, iv. 1. 1. 4.
  ---- decreased by cold, iv. 2. 1. 6.
  Dilirium febrile, ii. 1. 7. 1.
  ---- of drunkenness, ii. 1. 7. 3.
  ---- maniacal, ii. 1. 7. 2.
  ---- in parotitis, iv. 1. 2. 19.
  Diluents, use of, ii. 1. 2. 1.
  Distention of the nipples, ii. 1. 7. 10. iv. 1. 2. 7.
  Diuretics useless in dropsy, i. 1. 3. 7.
  Dizziness. See Vertigo.
  Dogs, catarrh of, ii. 1. 3. 6.
  Dolor digiti sympathet, iv. 2. 2. 12.
  ---- ductus choledochi, iv. 2. 2. 4.
  ---- humeri in hepatitide, iv. 2. 2. 9.
  ---- pharyngis ab acido, iv. 2. 2. 5.
  ---- testium nephriticus, iv. 2. 2. 11.
  ---- urens, i. 1. 5. 10.
  Dracunculus, i. 1. 4. 13.
  Dreams, ii. 1. 7. 4.
  Dropsy of the brain, i. 2. 3. 12.
  ---- of the belly, i. 2. 3. 13.
  ---- of the chest, i. 2. 3. 14.
  ---- of the ovary, i. 2. 3. 15.
  ---- of the lungs, i. 2. 3. 16.
  ---- of the scrotum, i. 2. 3. 11.
  Dysentery, ii. 1. 3. 18.
  Dysmenorrhagia, i. 2. 1. 12.
  Dyspnoea from cold bath, iv. 2. 1. 5.
  ---- rheumatica, iv. 1. 2. 16.
  Dyspepsia, i. 3. 1. 3.
  ---- a frigore, iv. 2. 1. 6.
  Dysuria insensitiva, ii. 2. 2. 6.

                  E.

  Ears, discharge behind, i. 1. 2. 9.
  ---- noise in them, iv. 2. 1. 15.
  Ear-ach, iv. 2. 2. 8.
  Ebrietas, i. 1. 1. 2.
  Education, iii. 2. 1. 8. iii. 1. 2. 24.
  ---- heroic, iii. 1. 2. 25.
  Egg boiled for inflamed eyes, ii. 1. 4. 1.
  ---- boiled soonest, Suppl. i. 7.
  ---- life of, iv. 1. 4. 1.
  Electric shocks, iv. 1. 4. 5.
  Electrized zinc and silver, i. 2. 5. 5.
  ---- in paralysis, ii. 1. 1. 9.
  ---- in scrophula, i. 2. 3. 21.
  ---- in hoarseness, iii. 2. 1. 5.
  Empyema, ii. 1. 6. 4.
  Enteralgia rheumatica, iv. 1. 2. 16.
  Enteritis, ii. 1. 2. 11.
  ---- superficialis, ii. 1. 3. 20.
  Epilepsy, iii. 1. 1. 7. iv. 3. 1. 6.
  ---- painful, iii. 1. 1. 8. iv. 2. 4. 4.
  ---- terminates with sleep, iii. 1. 1.
  ---- in parturition, iii. 1. 1. 7.
  ---- with indigestion, ii. 2. 2. 1.
  Epistaxis. See Haemorraghia.
  Epoulosis. See Cicatrix.
  Erotomania, iii. 1. 2. 4.
  Eructation, voluntary, iv. 3. 3. 3.
  Eruption of small-pox, iv. 1. 2. 12. iv. 2. 2. 10.
  Erysipelas, iv. 1. 2. 17. ii. 1. 3. 2. iv. 2. 4. 10.
  ---- seldom suppurates, why, ii. 1. 3. 2.
  Esuries, i. 2. 4. 2.
  Evil, i. 2. 3. 21.
  Expectoration, warm, i. 1. 2. 8.
  ---- solid, i. 1. 3. 4.
  ---- cold, i. 2. 3. 4.
  Exsudation behind the ears, i. 1. 2. 9.
  Eyes, blue under the, i. 2. 2. 2. ii. 1. 4. 4.
  Eyelid inverted, cure of, ii. 1. 1. 8.
  ---- coloured with antimony, ii. 1. 4. 3.

                  F.

  Face, pimpled, ii. 1. 4. 6.
  ---- red after meals, Suppl. i. 12. 7.
  ---- flushed after dinner, iv. 1. 1. 1.
  Fat people why short breathed, ii. 1. 1. 4.
  Fear, syncope from, i. 2. 1. 4.
  ---- abortion from, iv. 3. 1. 7.
  ---- produces absorption, ii. 1. 6. 4.
  ---- paleness in, iv. 3. 1. 5.
  ---- of death, iii. 1. 2. 14.
  ---- of hell, iii. 1. 2. 15.
  ---- of poverty, iii. 1. 2. 13.
  Feet cold produces heartburn. Suppl. i. 8. 5.
  ---- fetid, i. 1. 2. 14.
  ---- cold in small-pox, iv. 2. 2. 10.
  Fevers, five kinds, ii. 1. 2. Suppl. i. 1. 2.
  ---- irritative, i. 1. 1. 1. iv. 1. 1. 8.
  ---- inirritative, i. 2. 1. 1. iv. 2. 1. 19. Suppl. i. 1. 2.
  ---- sensitive, ii. 1. 6. 1.
  ---- sensitive irritated, ii. 1. 2. 1.
  ---- sensitive inirritated, ii. 1. 3. 1.
  ---- intermit, why, Suppl. i.
  ---- continue, why, Suppl. i.
  ---- periods of, iv. 2. 4. 11.
  ---- simple, Suppl. i. 1.
  ---- compound, Suppl. i. 2.
  ---- termination of cold fit, Suppl. i. 3.
  ---- return of cold fit, Suppl. i. 4.
  ---- sensation in, Suppl. i. 5.
  ---- circles of motions in, Suppl. i. 6.
  ---- cold and hot fits, Suppl. i. 7.
  ---- continued, Suppl. i. 8.
  ---- torpor of lungs in, Suppl. i. 9. 1.
  ---- not determinable in cold fit, i. 1. 1. 1.
  ---- frequency of pulse in, i. 1. 1. 1.
  ---- not an effort to cure, i. 1. 2. 3.
  ---- puerperal, ii. 1. 6. 16. i. 2. 4. 9.
  ---- from inclosed matter, ii. 1. 6. 2.
  ---- from aerated matter, ii. 1. 6. 6.
  ---- from contagious matter, ii. 1. 6. 11.
  ---- from contagious sanies, ii. 1. 6. 15.
  ---- torpor of the stomach, Suppl. i. 12.
  ---- case of, Suppl. i. 13.
  ---- termination of, Suppl. i. 14.
  ---- inflammation excited, Suppl. i. 15.
  ---- returns of, Suppl. i. 4.
  ---- when cold air in, Suppl. i. 2. 2.
  ---- sympathetic, theory of, Suppl. i.
  ---- duration of explained, Suppl. i. 2. 5.
  Fingers, playing with, iv. 1. 3. 4.
  ---- pain of, iv. 2. 2. 12.
  Fish live longer with injured brain, i. 2. 5. 10.
  Fistula in ano, ii. 1. 4. 10.
  ---- lacrymalis, ii. 1. 4. 9.
  ---- urethra, ii. 1. 4. 11.
  Flannel shirt in diarrhoea, iv. 1. 1. 3.
  ---- injurious in summer, i. 1. 2. 3.
  Fluor albus warm, i. 1. 2. 11.
  ---- cold, i. 2. 3. 7.
  Frigus febrile, i. 2. 2. 1.
  ---- chronicum, i. 2. 2. 1.

                  G.

  Gall-stone, i. 1. 3. 8.
  Gangreen, ii. 1. 6. 17.
  Gargles, ii. 1. 3. 3.
  Gastritis, ii. 1. 2. 10.
  ---- superficialis, ii. 1. 3. 19.
  Genu tumor albus, i. 2. 3. 19.
  Gleet. See Gonorrhoea.
  Globus hystericus, i. 3. 1. 7.
  Gonorrhoea warm, i. 1. 2. 10.
  ---- cold, i. 2. 3. 8.
  Gout, iv. 1. 2. 15. iv. 2. 4. 9.
  ---- of the liver, ii. 1. 1. 7.
  ---- cases of, iv. 1. 2. 15.
  ---- cough, iv. 2. 1. 9.
  ---- of the stomach, i. 2. 4. 6.
  ---- haemorrhage in, i. 1. 1. 4.
  Grace defined, iii. 1. 2. 4.
  Gravel distinguished from salts, i. 1. 3. 10.
  Gravitation, iv. 2. 4.
  Green-sickness. See Chlorosis.
  Grief, iii. 1. 2. 10.
  Gripes of children, i. 1. 2. 5. iv. 2. 1. 3.
  Gustus acrior, i. 1. 5. 4.
  ---- imminutus, i. 2. 5. 8.
  Gutta rosea, ii. 1. 4. 6. iv. 1. 2. 13. and 14.
  ---- serena, i. 2. 5. 5.

                  H.

  Haemorrhage arterial, i. 1. 1. 3.
  ---- of the lungs, i. 1. 1. 4.
  ---- of the nose, i. 1. 1. 5.
  ---- venous, i. 2. 1. 5.
  ---- of the rectum, i. 2. 1. 6.
  ---- of the kidnies, i. 2. 1. 7.
  ---- of the liver, i. 2. 1. 8.
  Haemoptoe arterial, i. 1. 1. 4.
  ---- venous, i. 2. 1. 9.
  Haemorrhois cruenta, i. 2. 1. 6. iv. 2. 4. 8.
  ---- alba, i. 1. 2. 12.
  Hair, grey, i. 2. 2. 11.
  ---- new, i. 1. 2. 15.
  ---- white by uterine pressure, Addit. i.
  Hallucination of sight, ii. 1. 7. 5.
  ---- of hearing, ii. 1. 7. 6.
  ---- maniacal, iii. 1. 2. 1.
  ---- studiosa, iii. 1. 2. 2.
  Harrogate water fact, i. 1. 4. 12.
  Head-ach. See Hemicrania and Cephalaea.
  Hearing acuter, i. 1. 5. 2.
  ---- diminished, i. 2. 5. 6.
  Heart-burn, i. 2. 4. 5.
  Heart stimulated, Suppl. i. 11. 7. i. 16. 9.
  Heat, animal, i. 1. 2. 1. i. 1. 2. 3.
  ---- sense of acuter, i. 1. 5. 6.
  ---- elemental, iv. 2. 4.
  ---- hectic lessened by swinging, iv. 2. 1. 10.
  ---- not perceived by the lungs, iii. 1. 1. 10.
  ---- not estimated by thermometers, Suppl. i. 7.
  ---- of the breath, Suppl. i. 2. 2.
  Hemicrania, iv. 2. 2. 8. iv. 2. 4. 3.
  ---- relieved by mercury, iv. 2. 2. 8.
  Hemiplegia, iii. 2. 1. 10.
  Hepatis tumor, i. 2. 3. 9.
  Hepatitis, ii. 1. 2. 12.
  ---- chronica, ii. 1. 4. 12.
  Herpes, ii. 1. 5. 8.
  ---- nephritica, iv. 1. 2. 11.
  Hiccough, ii. 1. 1. 6. iv. 1. 1. 7.
  Hip-joint injured, i. 2. 2. 17.
  Hoarseness, ii. 1. 3. 5. iii. 2. 1. 5.
  Horses, broken wind of, i. 2. 4. 9.
  Humectation of the body, iv. 1. 4. 7.
  Hunger, i. 2. 4. 2.
  Hydatides in calves, i. 2. 5. 4.
  Hydrocele, i. 2. 3. 11.
  Hydrocephalus inter, i. 2. 3. 12. i. 2. 5. 4. iii. 2. 1. 10.
  ---- from inflammation, Addit. ii.
  Hydrogene gas. Suppl. i. 9. 3. i. 11. 6.
  ---- in fevers, Suppl. i. 11. 6. i. 16. 9.
  Hydrothorax, i. 2. 3. 14. case of, iv. 2. 2. 13.
  Hydro-carbonate gas, Suppl. i. 9. 1. Suppl. i. 15. 3.
  Hydrops ovarii, i. 2. 3. 15.
  Hydrophobia, i. 3. 1. 11. iii. 1. 1. 15. iv. 1. 2. 7.
  Hypochondriasis, i. 2. 4. 10.
  Hysteralgia frigida, i. 2. 4. 17.
  Hysteria, i. 3. 1. 10. Suppl. i. 8. 11.
  ---- from fear, iv. 3. 1. 8.
  ---- from cold, iv. 3. 4. 3.
  ---- convulsions in, iii. 1. 1. 5.
  ---- laughter in, iii. 1. 1. 5.
  Hysteritis, ii. 1. 2. 16.

                  I.

  Jactitatio, iii. 1. 1. 1.
  Jaundice, i. 1. 3. 8. i. 2. 4. 19.
  Icterus, i. 1. 3. 8. i. 2. 4. 19.
  Ileus, i. 3. 1. 6. ii. 1. 2. 11.
  Impotentia, ii. 2. 2. 3.
  Indigestion, i. 3. 1. 3.
  ---- See Anorexia and Apepsia.
  ---- from cold feet, iv. 2. 1. 6. Sup. i. 8. 5.
  Incubus, iii. 2. 1. 13.
  Infants, green stools of, i. 1. 2. 5.
  ---- new born, ii. 1. 1. 12.
  Inflammation of the eye, ii. 1. 2. 2.
  ---- superficial, ii. 1. 4. 1.
  ---- of the brain, ii. 1. 2. 3.
  ---- of the lungs, ii. 1. 2. 4.
  ---- superficial, ii. 1. 3. 7.
  ---- of the pleura, ii. 1. 2. 5.
  ---- of the diaphragm, ii. 1. 2. 6.
  ---- of the heart, ii. 1. 2. 7.
  ---- of the peritoneum, ii. 1. 2. 8.
  ---- of the mesentery, ii. 1. 2. 9.
  ---- of the stomach, ii. 1. 2. 10.
  ---- superficial, ii. 1. 3. 19.
  ---- of the bowels, ii. 1. 2. 11.
  ---- superficial, ii. 1. 3. 20.
  ---- of the liver, ii. 1. 2. 12.
  ---- chronical, ii. 1. 4. 12.
  ---- of the spleen, ii. 1. 2. 13. Sup. i. 16. 6.
  ---- of the kidnies, ii. 1. 2. 14.
  ---- of the bladder, ii. 1. 2. 15.
  ---- of the womb, ii. 1. 2. 16.
  ---- of the tonsils, ii. 1. 3. 3.
  ---- of the parotis, ii. 1. 3. 4.
  Inirritability of lacteals, i. 2. 3. 26.
  ---- of lymphatics, i. 2. 3. 27.
