it were a fixed point in the heavens. This language is sufficiently
correct when we embrace only a moderate period of time in our review. It
is no doubt true that the pole lies near the Pole Star at the present
time. It did so during the lives of the last generation, and it will do
so during the lives of the next generation. All this time, however, the
pole is steadily moving in the heavens, so that the time will at length
come when the pole will have departed a long way from the present Pole
Star. This movement is incessant. It can be easily detected and measured
by the instruments in our observatories, and astronomers are familiar
with the fact that in all their calculations it is necessary to hold
special account of this movement of the pole. It produces an apparent
change in the position of a star, which is known by the term
"precession."

[Illustration: Fig. 100.]

The movement of the pole is very clearly shown in the accompanying
figure (Fig. 100), for which I am indebted to the kindness of the late
Professor C. Piazzi Smyth. The circle shows the track along which the
pole moves among the stars.

The centre of the circle in the constellation of Draco is the pole of
the ecliptic. A complete journey of the pole occupies the considerable
period of about 25,867 years. The drawing shows the position of the
pole at the several dates from 4000 B.C. to 2000 A.D. A glance at this
map brings prominently before us how casual is the proximity of the pole
to the Pole Star. At present, indeed, the distance of the two is
actually lessening, but afterwards the distance will increase until,
when half of the revolution has been accomplished, the pole will be at a
distance of twice the radius of the circle from the Pole Star. It will
then happen that the pole will be near the bright star Vega or a
Lyrae, so that our successors some 12,000 years hence may make use of
Vega for many of the purposes for which the Pole Star is at present
employed! Looking back into past ages, we see that some 2,000 or 3,000
years B.C. the star a Draconis was suitably placed to serve as the
Pole Star, when b and d of the Great Bear served as pointers.
It need hardly be added, that since the birth of accurate astronomy the
course of the pole has only been observed over a very small part of the
mighty circle. We are not, however, entitled to doubt that the motion of
the pole will continue to pursue the same path. This will be made
abundantly clear when we proceed to render an explanation of this very
interesting phenomenon.

The north pole of the heavens is the point of the celestial sphere
towards which the northern end of the axis about which the earth rotates
is directed. It therefore follows that this axis must be constantly
changing its position. The character of the movement of the earth, so
far as its rotation is concerned, may be illustrated by a very common
toy with which every boy is familiar. When a peg-top is set spinning, it
has, of course, a very rapid rotation around its axis; but besides this
rotation there is usually another motion, whereby the axis of the
peg-top does not remain in a constant direction, but moves in a conical
path around the vertical line. The adjoining figure (Fig. 101) gives a
view of the peg-top. It is, of course, rotating with great rapidity
around its axis, while the axis itself revolves around the vertical line
with a very deliberate motion. If we could imagine a vast peg-top which
rotated on its axis once a day, and if that axis were inclined at an
angle of twenty-three and a half degrees to the vertical, and if the
slow conical motion of the axis were such that the revolution of the
axis were completed in about 26,000 years, then the movements would
resemble those actually made by the earth. The illustration of the
peg-top comes, indeed, very close to the actual phenomenon of
precession. In each case the rotation about the axis is far more rapid
than that of the revolution of the axis itself; in each case also the
slow movement is due to an external interference. Looking at the figure
of the peg-top (Fig. 101) we may ask the question, Why does it not fall
down? The obvious effect of gravity would seem to say that it is
impossible for the peg-top to be in the position shown in the figure.
Yet everybody knows that this is possible so long as the top is
spinning. If the top were not spinning, it would, of course, fall. It
therefore follows that the effect of the rapid rotation of the top so
modifies the effect of gravitation that the latter, instead of producing
its apparently obvious consequence, causes the slow conical motion of
the axis of rotation. This is, no doubt, a dynamical question of some
difficulty, but it is easy to verify experimentally that it is the case.
If a top be constructed so that the point about which it is spinning
shall coincide with the centre of gravity, then there is no effect of
gravitation on the top, and there is no conical motion perceived.

[Illustration: Fig. 101.--Illustration of the Motion of Precession.]

If the earth were subject to no external interference, then the
direction of the axis about which it rotates must remain for ever
constant; but as the direction of the axis does not remain constant, it
is necessary to seek for a disturbing force adequate to the production
of the phenomena which are observed. We have invariably found that the
dynamical phenomena of astronomy can be accounted for by the law of
universal gravitation. It is therefore natural to enquire how far
gravitation will render an account of the phenomenon of precession; and
to put the matter in its simplest form, let us consider the effect which
a distant attracting body can have upon the rotation of the earth.

To answer this question, it becomes necessary to define precisely what
we mean by the earth; and as for most purposes of astronomy we regard
the earth as a spherical globe, we shall commence with this assumption.
It seems also certain that the interior of the earth is, on the whole,
heavier than the outer portions. It is therefore reasonable to assume
that the density increases as we descend; nor is there any sufficient
ground for thinking that the earth is much heavier in one part than at
any other part equally remote from the centre. It is therefore usual in
such calculations to assume that the earth is formed of concentric
spherical shells, each one of which is of uniform density; while the
density decreases from each shell to the one exterior thereto.

A globe of this constitution being submitted to the attraction of some
external body, let us examine the effects which that external body can
produce. Suppose, for instance, the sun attracts a globe of this
character, what movements will be the result? The first and most obvious
result is that which we have already so frequently discussed, and which
is expressed by Kepler's laws: the attraction will compel the earth to
revolve around the sun in an elliptic path, of which the sun is in the
focus. With this movement we are, however, not at this moment concerned.
We must enquire how far the sun's attraction can modify the earth's
rotation around its axis. It can be demonstrated that the attraction of
the sun would be powerless to derange the rotation of the earth so
constituted. This is a result which can be formally proved by
mathematical calculation. It is, however, sufficiently obvious that the
force of attraction of any distant point on a symmetrical globe must
pass through the centre of that globe: and as the sun is only an
enormous aggregate of attracting points, it can only produce a
corresponding multitude of attractive forces; each of these forces
passes through the centre of the earth, and consequently the resultant
force which expresses the joint result of all the individual forces must
also be directed through the centre of the earth. A force of this
character, whatever other potent influence it may have, will be
powerless to affect the rotation of the earth. If the earth be rotating
on an axis, the direction of that axis would be invariably preserved; so
that as the earth revolves around the sun, it would still continue to
rotate around an axis which always remained parallel to itself. Nor
would the attraction of the earth by any other body prove more
efficacious than that of the sun. If the earth really were the
symmetrical globe we have supposed, then the attraction of the sun and
moon, and even the influence of all the planets as well, would never be
competent to make the earth's axis of rotation swerve for a single
second from its original direction.

We have thus narrowed very closely the search for the cause of the
"precession." If the earth were a perfect sphere, precession would be
inexplicable. We are therefore forced to seek for an explanation of
precession in the fact that the earth is not a perfect sphere. This we
have already demonstrated to be the case. We have shown that the
equatorial axis of the earth is longer than the polar axis, so that
there is a protuberant zone girdling the equator. The attraction of
external bodies is able to grasp this protuberance, and thereby force
the earth's axis of rotation to change its direction.

There are only two bodies in the universe which sensibly contribute to
the precessional movement of the earth's axis: these bodies are the sun
and the moon. The shares in which the labour is borne by the sun and the
moon are not what might have been expected from a hasty view of the
subject. This is a point on which it will be desirable to dwell, as it
illustrates a point in the theory of gravitation which is of very
considerable importance.

The law of gravitation asserts that the intensity of the attraction
which a body can exercise is directly proportional to the mass of that
body, and inversely proportional to the square of its distance from the
attracted point. We can thus compare the attraction exerted upon the
earth by the sun and by the moon. The mass of the sun exceeds the mass
of the moon in the proportion of about 26,000,000 to 1. On the other
hand, the moon is at a distance which, on an average, is about one-386th
part of that of the sun. It is thus an easy calculation to show that the
efficiency of the sun's attraction on the earth is about 175 times as
great as the attraction of the moon. Hence it is, of course, that the
earth obeys the supremely important attraction of the sun, and pursues
an elliptic path around the sun, bearing the moon as an appendage.

But when we come to that particular effect of attraction which is
competent to produce precession, we find that the law by which the
efficiency of the attracting body is computed assumes a different form.
The measure of efficiency is, in this case, to be found by taking the
mass of the body and dividing it by the _cube_ of the distance. The
complete demonstration of this statement must be sought in the formulae
of mathematics, and cannot be introduced into these pages; we may,
however, adduce one consideration which will enable the reader in some
degree to understand the principle, though without pretending to be a
demonstration of its accuracy. It will be obvious that the nearer the
disturbing body approaches to the earth the greater is the _leverage_
(if we may use the expression) which is afforded by the protuberance at
the equator. The efficiency of a given force will, therefore, on this
account alone, increase in the inverse proportion of the distance. The
actual intensity of the force itself augments in the inverse square of
the distance, and hence the capacity of the attracting body for
producing precession will, for a double reason, increase when the
distance decreases. Suppose, for example, that the disturbing body is
brought to half its original distance from the disturbed body, the
leverage is by this means doubled, while the actual intensity of the
force is at the same time quadrupled according to the law of
gravitation. It will follow that the effect produced in the latter case
must be eight times as great as in the former case. And this is merely
equivalent to the statement that the precession-producing capacity of a
body varies inversely as the cube of the distance.

It is this consideration which gives to the moon an importance as a
precession-producing agent to which its mere attractive capacity would
not have entitled it. Even though the mass of the sun be 26,000,000
times as great as the mass of the moon, yet when this number is divided
by the cube of the relative value of the distances of the bodies (386),
it is seen that the efficiency of the moon is more than twice as great
as that of the sun. In other words, we may say that one-third of the
movement of precession is due to the sun, and two-thirds to the moon.

For the study of the joint precessional effect due to the sun and the
moon acting simultaneously, it will be advantageous to consider the
effect produced by the two bodies separately; and as the case of the sun
is the simpler of the two, we shall take it first. As the earth travels
in its annual path around the sun, the axis of the earth is directed to
a point in the heavens which is 23-1/2 deg. from the pole of the ecliptic.
The precessional effect of the sun is to cause this point--the pole of
the earth--to revolve, always preserving the same angular distance from
the pole of the ecliptic; and thus we have a motion of the type
represented in the diagram. As the ecliptic occupies a position which
for our present purpose we may regard as fixed in space, it follows that
the pole of the ecliptic is a fixed point on the surface of the heavens;
so that the path of the pole of the earth must be a small circle in the
heavens, fixed in its position relatively to the surrounding stars. In
this we find a motion strictly analogous to that of the peg-top. It is
the gravitation of the earth acting upon the peg-top which forces it
into the conical motion. The immediate effect of the gravitation is so
modified by the rapid rotation of the top, that, in obedience to a
profound dynamical principle, the axis of the top revolves in a cone
rather than fall down, as it would do were the top not spinning. In a
similar manner the immediate effect of the sun's attraction on the
protuberance at the equator would be to bring the pole of the earth's
axis towards the pole of the ecliptic, but the rapid rotation of the
earth modifies this into the conical movement of precession.

The circumstances with regard to the moon are much more complicated.
The moon describes a certain orbit around the earth; that orbit lies in
a certain plane, and that plane has, of course, a certain pole on the
celestial sphere. The precessional effect of the moon would accordingly
tend to make the pole of the earth's axis describe a circle around that
point in the heavens which is the pole of the moon's orbit. This point
is about 5 deg. from the pole of the ecliptic. The pole of the earth is
therefore solicited by two different movements--one a revolution around
the pole of the ecliptic, the other a revolution about another point 5 deg.
distant, which is the pole of the moon's orbit. It would thus seem that
the earth's pole should make a certain composite movement due to the two
separate movements. This is really the case, but there is a point to be
very carefully attended to, which at first seems almost paradoxical. We
have shown how the potency of the moon as a precessional agent exceeds
that of the sun, and therefore it might be thought that the composite
movement of the earth's pole would conform more nearly to a rotation
around the pole of the plane of the moon's orbit than to a rotation
around the pole of the ecliptic; but this is not the case. The
precessional movement is represented by a revolution around the pole of
the ecliptic, as is shown in the figure. Here lies the germ of one of
those exquisite astronomical discoveries which delight us by
illustrating some of the most subtle phenomena of nature.

The plane in which the moon revolves does not occupy a constant
position. We are not here specially concerned with the causes of this
change in the plane of the moon's orbit, but the character of the
movement must be enunciated. The inclination of this plane to the
ecliptic is about 5 deg., and this inclination does not vary (except within
very narrow limits); but the line of intersection of the two planes does
vary, and, in fact, varies so quickly that it completes a revolution in
about 18-2/3 years. This movement of the plane of the moon's orbit
necessitates a corresponding change in the position of its pole. We thus
see that the pole of the moon's orbit must be actually revolving around
the pole of the ecliptic, always remaining at the same distance of 5 deg.,
and completing its revolution in 18-2/3 years. It will, therefore, be
obvious that there is a profound difference between the precessional
effect of the sun and of the moon in their action on the earth. The sun
invites the earth's pole to describe a circle around a fixed centre; the
moon invites the earth's pole to describe a circle around a centre which
is itself in constant motion. It fortunately happens that the
circumstances of the case are such as to reduce considerably the
complexity of the problem. The movement of the moon's plane, only
occupying about 18-2/3 years, is a very rapid motion compared with the
whole precessional movement, which occupies about 26,000 years. It
follows that by the time the earth's axis has completed one circuit of
its majestic cone, the pole of the moon's plane will have gone round
about 1,400 times. Now, as this pole really only describes a
comparatively small cone of 5 deg. in radius, we may for a first
approximation take the average position which it occupies; but this
average position is, of course, the centre of the circle which it
describes--that is, the pole of the ecliptic.

We thus see that the average precessional effect of the moon simply
conspires with that of the sun to produce a revolution around the pole
of the ecliptic. The grosser phenomena of the movements of the earth's
axis are to be explained by the uniform revolution of the pole in a
circular path; but if we make a minute examination of the track of the
earth's axis, we shall find that though it, on the whole, conforms with
the circle, yet that it really traces out a sinuous line, sometimes on
the inside and sometimes on the outside of the circle. This delicate
movement arises from the continuous change in the place of the pole of
the moon's orbit. The period of these undulations is 18-2/3 years,
agreeing exactly with the period of the revolution of the moon's nodes.
The amount by which the pole departs from the circle on either side is
only about 9.2 seconds--a quantity rather less than the
twenty-thousandth part of the radius of the sphere. This phenomenon,
known as "nutation," was discovered by the beautiful telescopic
researches of Bradley, in 1747. Whether we look at the theoretical
interest of the subject or at the refinement of the observations
involved, this achievement of the "Vir incomparabilis," as Bradley has
been called by Bessel, is one of the masterpieces of astronomical
genius.

The phenomena of precession and nutation depend on movements of the
earth itself, and not on movements of the axis of rotation within the
earth. Therefore the distance of any particular spot on the earth from
the north or south pole is not disturbed by either of these phenomena.
The latitude of a place is the distance of the place from the earth's
equator, and this quantity remains unaltered in the course of the long
precession cycle of 26,000 years. But it has been discovered within the
last few years that latitudes are subject to a small periodic change of
a few tenths of a second of arc. This was first pointed out about 1880
by Dr. Kuestner, of Berlin, and by a masterly analysis of all available
observations, made in the course of many years past at various
observatories, Dr. Chandler, of Boston, has shown that the latitude of
every point on the earth is subject to a double oscillation, the period
of one being 427 days and the other about a year, the mean amplitude of
each being O".14. In other words, the spot in the arctic regions,
directly in the prolongation of the earth's axis of rotation, is not
absolutely fixed; the end of the imaginary axis moves about in a
complicated manner, but always keeping within a few yards of its average
position. This remarkable discovery is not only of value as introducing
a new refinement in many astronomical researches depending on an
accurate knowledge of the latitude, but theoretical investigations show
that the periods of this variation are incompatible with the assumption
that the earth is an absolutely rigid body. Though this assumption has
in other ways been found to be untenable, the confirmation of this view
by the discovery of Dr. Chandler is of great importance.




CHAPTER XXV.

THE ABERRATION OF LIGHT.


     The Real and Apparent Movements of the Stars--How they can be
     Discriminated--Aberration produces Effects dependent on the
     Position of the Stars--The Pole of the Ecliptic--Aberration makes
     Stars seem to Move in a Circle, an Ellipse, or a Straight Line
     according to Position--All the Ellipses have Equal Major Axes--How
     is this Movement to be Explained?--How to be Distinguished from
     Annual Parallax--The Apex of the Earth's Way--How this is to be
     Explained by the Velocity of Light--How the Scale of the Solar
     System can be Measured by the Aberration of Light.

We have in this chapter to narrate a discovery of a recondite character,
which illustrates in a forcible manner some of the fundamental truths of
Astronomy. Our discussion of it will naturally be divided into two
parts. In the first part we must describe the nature of the phenomenon,
and then we must give the extremely elegant explanation afforded by the
properties of light. The telescopic discovery of aberration, as well as
its explanation, are both due to the illustrious Bradley.

The expression _fixed_ star, so often used in astronomy, is to be
received in a very qualified sense. The stars are, no doubt, well fixed
in their places, so far as coarse observation is concerned. The
lineaments of the constellations remain unchanged for centuries, and, in
contrast with the ceaseless movements of the planets, the stars are not
inappropriately called fixed. We have, however, had more than one
occasion to show throughout the course of this work that the expression
"fixed star" is not an accurate one when minute quantities are held in
estimation. With the exact measures of modern instruments, many of these
quantities are so perceptible that they have to be always reckoned with
in astronomical enquiry. We can divide the movements of the stars into
two great classes: the real movements and the apparent movements. The
proper motion of the stars and the movements of revolution of the binary
stars constitute the real movements of these bodies. These movements are
special to each star, so that two stars, although close together in the
heavens, may differ in the widest degree as to the real movements which
they possess. It may, indeed, sometimes happen that stars in a certain
region are animated with a common movement. In this phenomenon we have
traces of a real movement shared by a number of stars in a certain
group. With this exception, however, the real movements of the stars
seem to be governed by no systematic law, and the rapidly moving stars
are scattered here and there indiscriminately over the heavens.

The apparent movements of the stars have a different character, inasmuch
as we find the movement of each star determined by the place which it
occupies in the heavens. It is by this means that we discriminate the
real movements of the star from its apparent movements, and examine the
character of both.

In the present chapter we are concerned with the apparent movements
only, and of these there are three, due respectively to precession, to
nutation, and to aberration. Each of these apparent movements obeys laws
peculiar to itself, and thus it becomes possible to analyse the total
apparent motion, and to discriminate the proportions in which the
precession, the nutation, and the aberration have severally contributed.
We are thus enabled to isolate the effect of aberration as completely as
if it were the sole agent of apparent displacement, so that, by an
alliance between mathematical calculation and astronomical observation,
we can study the effects of aberration as clearly as if the stars were
affected by no other motions.

Concentrating our attention solely on the phenomena of aberration we
shall describe its particular effect upon stars in different regions of
the sky, and thus ascertain the laws according to which the effects of
aberration are exhibited. When this step has been taken, we shall be in
a position to give the beautiful explanation of those laws dependent
upon the velocity of light.

At one particular region of the heavens the effect of aberration has a
degree of simplicity which is not manifested anywhere else. This region
lies in the constellation Draco, at the pole of the ecliptic. At this
pole, or in its immediate neighbourhood, each star, in virtue of
aberration, describes a circle in the heavens. This circle is very
minute; it would take something like 2,000 of these circles together to
form an area equal to the area of the moon. Expressed in the usual
astronomical language, we should say that the diameter of this small
circle is about 40.9 seconds of arc. This is a quantity which, though
small to the unaided eye, is really of great relative magnitude in the
present state of telescopic research. It is not only large enough to be
perceived, but it can be measured, with an accuracy which actually does
not admit of a doubt, to the hundredth part of the whole. It is also
observed that each star describes its little circle in precisely the
same period of time; and that period is one year, or, in other words,
the time of the revolution of the earth around the sun. It is found that
for all stars in this region, be they large stars or small, single or
double, white or coloured, the circles appropriate to each have all the
same size, and are all described in the same time. Even from this alone
it would be manifest that the cause of the phenomenon cannot lie in the
star itself. This unanimity in stars of every magnitude and distance
requires some simpler explanation.

Further examination of stars in different regions sheds new light on the
subject. As we proceed from the pole of the ecliptic, we still find that
each star exhibits an annual movement of the same character as the stars
just considered. In one respect, however, there is a difference. The
apparent path of the star is no longer a circle; it has become an
ellipse. It is, however, soon perceived that the shape and the position
of this ellipse are governed by the simple law that the further the star
is from the pole of the ecliptic the greater is the eccentricity of the
ellipse. The apparent path of the stars at the same distance from the
pole have equal eccentricity, and of the axes of the ellipse the shorter
is always directed to the pole, the longer being, of course,
perpendicular to it. It is, however, found that no matter how great the
eccentricity may become, the major axis always retains its original
length. It is always equal to about 40.9 seconds--that is, to the
diameter of the circle of aberration at the pole itself. As we proceed
further and further from the pole of the ecliptic, we find that each
star describes a path more and more eccentric, until at length, when we
examine a star on the ecliptic, the ellipse has become so attenuated
that it has flattened into a line. Each star which happens to lie on the
ecliptic oscillates to and fro along the ecliptic through an amplitude
of 40.9 seconds. Half a year accomplishes the journey one way, and the
other half of the year restores the star to its original position. When
we pass to stars on the southern side of the ecliptic, we see the same
series of changes proceed in an inverse order. The ellipse, from being
actually linear, gradually grows in width, though still preserving the
same length of major axis, until at length the stars near the southern
pole of the ecliptic are each found to describe a circle equal to the
paths pursued by the stars at the north pole of the ecliptic.

The circumstance that the major axes of all those ellipses are of equal
length suggests a still further simplification. Let us suppose that
every star, either at the pole of the ecliptic or elsewhere, pursues an
absolutely circular path, and that all these circles agree not only in
magnitude, but also in being all parallel to the plane of the ecliptic:
it is easy to see that this simple supposition will account for the
observed facts. The stars at the pole of the ecliptic will, of course,
show their circles turned fairly towards us, and we shall see that they
pursue circular paths. The circular paths of the stars remote from the
pole of the ecliptic will, however, be only seen somewhat edgewise, and
thus the apparent paths will be elliptical, as we actually find them. We
can even calculate the degree of ellipticity which this surmise would
require, and we find that it coincides with the observed ellipticity.
Finally, when we observe stars actually moving in the ecliptic, the
circles they follow would be seen edgewise, and thus the stars would
have merely the linear movement which they are seen to possess. All the
observed phenomena are thus found to be completely consistent with the
supposition that every star of all the millions in the heavens describes
once each year a circular path; and that, whether the star be far or
near, this circle has always the same apparent diameter, and lies in a
plane always parallel to the plane of the ecliptic.

We have now wrought the facts of observation into a form which enables
us to examine into the cause of a movement so systematic. Why is it that
each star should seem to describe a small circular path? Why should that
path be parallel to the ecliptic? Why should it be completed exactly in
a twelvemonth? We are at once referred to the motion of the earth around
the sun. That movement takes place in the ecliptic. It is completed in a
year. The coincidences are so obvious that we feel almost necessarily
compelled to connect in some way this apparent movement of the stars
with the annual movement of the earth around the sun. If there were no
such connection, it would be in the highest degree improbable that the
planes of the circles should be all parallel to the ecliptic, or that
the time of revolution of each star in its circle should equal that of
the revolution of the earth around the sun. As both these conditions are
fulfilled, the probability of the connection rises to a value almost
infinite.

The important question has then arisen as to why the movement of the
earth around the sun should be associated in so remarkable a manner with
this universal star movement. There is here one obvious point to be
noticed and to be dismissed. We have in a previous chapter discussed the
important question of the annual parallax of stars, and we have shown
how, in virtue of annual parallax, each star describes an ellipse. It
can further be demonstrated that these ellipses are really circles
parallel to the ecliptic; so that we might hastily assume that annual
parallax was the cause of the phenomenon discovered by Bradley. A single
circumstance will, however, dispose of this suggestion. The circle
described by a star in virtue of annual parallax has a magnitude
dependent on the distance of the star, so that the circles described by
various stars are of various dimensions, corresponding to the varied
distances of different stars. The phenomena of aberration, however,
distinctly assert that the circular path of each star is of the same
size, quite independently of what its distance may be, and hence annual
parallax will not afford an adequate explanation. It should also be
noticed that the movements of a star produced by annual parallax are
much smaller than those due to aberration. There is not any known star
whose circular path due to annual parallax has a diameter one-twentieth
part of that of the circle due to aberration; indeed, in the great
majority of cases the parallax of the star is an absolutely insensible
quantity.

There is, however, a still graver and quite insuperable distinction
between the parallactic path and the aberrational path. Let us, for
simplicity, think of a star situated near the pole of the ecliptic, and
thus appearing to revolve annually in a circle, whether we regard either
the phenomenon of parallax or of aberration. As the earth revolves, so
does the star appear to revolve; and thus to each place of the earth in
its orbit corresponds a certain place of the star in its circle. If the
movement arise from annual parallax, it is easy to see where the place
of the star will be for any position of the earth. It is, however, found
that in the movement discovered by Bradley the star never has the
position which parallax assigns to it, but is, in fact, a quarter of the
circumference of its little circle distant therefrom.

A simple rule will find the position of the star due to aberration. Draw
from the centre of the ellipse a radius parallel to the direction in
which the earth is moving at the moment in question, then the extremity
of this radius gives the point on its ellipse where the star is to be
found. Tested at all seasons, and with all stars, this law is found to
be always verified, and by its means we are conducted to the true
explanation of the phenomenon.

We can enunciate the effects of aberration in a somewhat different
manner, which will show even more forcibly how the phenomenon is
connected with the motion of the earth in its orbit. As the earth
pursues its annual course around the sun, its movement at any moment may
be regarded as directed towards a certain point of the ecliptic. From
day to day, and even from hour to hour, the point gradually moves along
the ecliptic, so as to complete the circuit in a year. At each moment,
however, there is always a certain point in the heavens towards which
the earth's motion is directed. It is, in fact, the point on the
celestial sphere towards which the earth would travel continuously if,
at the moment, the attraction of the sun could be annihilated. It is
found that this point is intimately connected with the phenomenon of
aberration. In fact, the aberration is really equivalent to drawing each
star from its mean place towards the Apex of the Earth's Way, as the
point is sometimes termed. It can also be shown by observation that the
amount of aberration depends upon the distance from the apex. A star
which happened to lie on the ecliptic will not be at all deranged by
aberration from its mean place when it happens that the apex coincides
with the star. All the stars 10 deg. from the apex will be displaced each by
the same amount, and all directly in towards the apex. A star 20 deg. from
the apex will undergo a larger degree of displacement, though still in
the same direction, exactly towards the apex; and all stars at the same
distance will be displaced by the same amount. Proceeding thus from the
apex, we come to stars at a distance of 90 deg. therefrom. Here the amount
of displacement will be a maximum. Each one will be about twenty seconds
from its average place; but in every case the imperative law will be
obeyed, that the displacement of the star from its mean place lies
towards the apex of the earth's way. We have thus given two distinct
descriptions of the phenomenon of aberration. In the first we find it
convenient to speak of a star as describing a minute circular path; in
the other we have regarded aberration as merely amounting to a
derangement of the star from its mean place in accordance with specified
laws. These descriptions are not inconsistent: they are, in fact,
geometrically equivalent; but the latter is rather the more perfect,
inasmuch as it assigns completely the direction and extent of the
derangement caused by aberration in any particular star at any
particular moment.

The question has now been narrowed to a very definite form. What is it
which makes each star seem to close in towards the point towards which
the earth is travelling? The answer will be found when we make a minute
enquiry into the circumstances in which we view a star in the telescope.

The beam of rays from a star falls on the object-glass of a telescope;
those rays are parallel, and after they pass through the object-glass
they converge to a focus near the eye end of the instrument. Let us
first suppose that the telescope is at rest; then if the telescope be
pointed directly towards the star, the rays will converge to a point at
the centre of the field of view where a pair of cross wires are placed,
whose intersection defines the axis of the telescope. The case will,
however, be altered if the telescope be moved after the light has passed
through the objective; the rays of light in the interior of the tube
will pursue a direct path, as before, and will proceed to a focus at the
same precise point as before. As, however, the telescope has moved, it
will, of course, have carried with it the pair of cross wires; they will
no longer be at the same point as at first, and consequently the image
of the star will not now coincide with their intersection.

The movement of the telescope arises from its connection with the earth:
for as the earth hurries along at a speed of eighteen miles a second,
the telescope is necessarily displaced with this velocity. It might at
first be thought, that in the incredibly small fraction of time
necessary for light to pass from the object-glass to the eye-piece, the
change in the position of the telescope must be too minute to be
appreciable. Let us suppose, for instance, that the star is situated
near the pole of the ecliptic, then the telescope will be conveyed by
the earth's motion in a direction perpendicular to its length. If the
tube of the instrument be about twenty feet long, it can be readily
demonstrated that during the time the light travels down the tube the
movement of the earth will convey the telescope through a distance of
about one-fortieth of an inch.[42] This is a quantity very distinctly
measurable with the magnifying power of the eye-piece, and hence this
derangement of the star's place is very appreciable. It therefore
follows that if we wish the star to be shown at the centre of the
instrument, the telescope is not to be pointed directly at the star, as
it would have to be were the earth at rest, but the telescope must be
pointed a little in advance of the star's true position; and as we
determine the apparent place of the star by the direction in which the
telescope is pointed, it follows that the apparent place of the star is
altered by the motion of the earth.

Every circumstance of the change in the star's place admits of complete
explanation in this manner. Take, for instance, the small circular path
which each star appears to describe. We shall, for simplicity, refer
only to a star at the pole of the ecliptic. Suppose that the telescope
is pointed truly to the place of the star, then, as we have shown, the
image of the star will be at a distance of one-fortieth of an inch from
the cross wires. This distance will remain constant, but each night the
direction of the star from the cross wires will change, so that in the
course of the year it completes a circle, and returns to its original
position. We shall not pursue the calculations relative to other stars;
suffice it here to say that the movement of the earth has been found
adequate to account for the phenomena, and thus the doctrine of the
aberration of light is demonstrated.

It remains to allude to one point of the utmost interest and importance.
We have seen that the magnitude of the aberration can be measured by
astronomical observation. The amount of this aberration depends upon the
velocity of light, and on the velocity with which the earth's motion is
performed. We can measure the velocity of light by independent
measurements, in the manner already explained in Chapter XII. We are
thus enabled to calculate what the velocity of the earth must be, for
there is only one particular velocity for the earth which, when combined
with the measured velocity of light, will give the measured value of
aberration. The velocity of the earth being thus ascertained, and the
length of the year being known, it is easy to find the circumference of
the earth's path, and therefore its radius; that is, the distance from
the earth to the sun.

Here is indeed a singular result, and one which shows how profoundly the
various phenomena of science are interwoven. We make experiments in our
laboratory, and find the velocity of light. We observe the fixed stars,
and measure the aberration. We combine these results, and deduce
therefrom the distance from the earth to the sun! Although this method
of finding the sun's distance is one of very great elegance, and admits
of a certain amount of precision, yet it cannot be relied upon as a
perfectly unimpeachable method of deducing the great constant. A perfect
method must be based on the operations of mere surveying, and ought not
to involve recondite physical considerations. We cannot, however, fail
to regard the discovery of aberration by Bradley as a most pleasing and
beautiful achievement, for it not only greatly improves the calculations
of practical astronomy, but links together several physical phenomena of
the greatest interest.




CHAPTER XXVI.

THE ASTRONOMICAL SIGNIFICANCE OF HEAT.


     Heat and Astronomy--Distribution of Heat--The Presence of Heat in
     the Earth--Heat in other Celestial Bodies--Varieties of
     Temperature--The Law of Cooling--The Heat of the Sun--Can its
     Temperature be Measured?--Radiation connected with the Sun's
     Bulk--Can the Sun be Exhausting his Resources?--No marked Change
     has occurred--Geological Evidence as to the Changes of the Sun's
     Heat Doubtful--The Cooling of the Sun--The Sun cannot be merely an
     Incandescent Solid Cooling--Combustion will not Explain the
     Matter--Some Heat is obtained from Meteoric Matter, but this is not
     Adequate to the Maintenance of the Sun's Heat--The Contraction of a
     Heated Globe of Gas--An Apparent Paradox--The Doctrine of
     Energy--The Nebular Theory--Evidence in Support of this
     Theory--Sidereal Evidence of the Nebular Theory--Herschel's View of
     Sidereal Aggregation--The Nebulae do not Exhibit Changes within the
     Limits of our Observation.

That a portion of a work on astronomy should bear the title placed at
the head of this chapter will perhaps strike some of our readers as
unusual, if not actually inappropriate. Is not heat, it may be said, a
question merely of experimental physics? and how can it be legitimately
introduced into a treatise upon the heavenly bodies and their movements?
Whatever weight such objections might have once had need not now be
considered. The recent researches on heat have shown not only that heat
has important bearings on astronomy, but that it has really been one of
the chief agents by which the universe has been moulded into its actual
form. At the present time no work on astronomy could be complete without
some account of the remarkable connection between the laws of heat and
