    Both where the morning Sun first warmly smote
    The open field, and where the unpierced shade
    Imbrowned the noontide bowers.--iv. 205-46.

Milton's description of Paradise is not less remarkable in its way than
the lurid scenes depicted by him in Pandemonium. The versatility of his
poetic genius is nowhere more apparent than in the charming pastoral
verse contained in this part of his poem. The poet has lavished the
whole wealth of his luxuriant imagination in his description of Eden and
blissful Paradise with its 'vernal airs' and 'gentle gales,' its verdant
meads, and murmuring streams, 'rolling on orient-pearl and sands of
gold;' its stately trees laden with blossom and fruit; its spicy groves
and shady bowers, over which there breathed the eternal Spring.

In Book IX. Satan expresses himself in an eloquent apostrophe to the
primitive Earth, over which he previously wandered for seven days--

    O Earth, how like to Heaven, if not preferred
    More justly, seat worthier of gods, as built
    With second thoughts, reforming what was old!
    For what God, after better, worse would build?
    Terrestrial Heaven, danced round by other Heavens,
    That shine, yet bear their bright officious lamps,
    Light above light, for thee alone, as seems,
    In thee concentring all their precious beams
    Of sacred influence! As God in Heaven
    Is centre, yet extends to all, so thou
    Centring receiv'st from all those orbs; in thee,
    Not in themselves, all their known virtue appears,
    Productive in herb, plant, and nobler birth
    Of creatures animate with gradual life
    Of growth, sense, reason, all summed up in Man,
    With what delight I could have walked thee round,
    If I could joy in aught--sweet interchange
    Of hill and valley, rivers, woods, and plains,
    Now land, now sea, and shores with forest crowned,
    Rocks, dens, and caves.--ix. 99-118.

Though it is impossible to regard the Earth as possessing the importance
ascribed to it by the ancient Ptolemaists; nevertheless, our globe is a
great and mighty world, and appears to be one of the most favourably
situated of all the planets, being neither near the Sun nor yet very far
distant from the orb; and although, when compared with the universe, it
is no more than a leaf on a tree in the midst of a vast forest; still,
it is not the least important among other circling worlds, and
unfailingly fulfils the part allotted to it in the great scheme of
creation.


THE PLANET HESPERUS

This is the beautiful morning and evening star, the peerless planet that
ushers in the twilight and the dawn, the harbinger of day and unrivalled
queen of the evening. Venus, called after the Roman goddess of Love, and
also identified with the Greek Aphrodite of ideal beauty, is the name by
which the planet is popularly known; but Milton does not so designate
it, and the name 'Venus' is not found in 'Paradise Lost.' The ancients
called it Lucifer and Phosphor when it shone as a morning star before
sunrise, and Hesperus and Vesper when it became visible after sunset. It
is the most lustrous of all the planets, and at times its brilliancy is
so marked as to throw a distinct shadow at night.

Venus is the second planet in order from the Sun. Its orbit lies between
that of Mercury and the Earth, and in form approaches nearer to a circle
than that of any of the other planets. It travels round the Sun in
224.7 days, at a mean distance of 67,000,000 miles, and with an average
velocity of 80,000 miles an hour. Its period of rotation is unknown. By
the observation of dusky spots on its surface, it has been surmised that
the planet completes a revolution on its axis in 23-1/4 hours; but other
observers doubt this and are inclined to believe that it always presents
the same face to the Sun. When at inferior conjunction Venus approaches
nearer to the Earth than any other planet, its distance then being
27,000,000 miles. Its greatest elongation varies from 45 deg. to 47 deg. 12'; it
therefore can never be much more than three hours above the horizon
before sunrise, or after sunset. Venus is a morning star when passing
from inferior to superior conjunction, and during the other half of its
synodical period it is an evening star. The planet attains its greatest
brilliancy at an elongation 40 deg. west or east of the Sun--five weeks
before and after inferior conjunction. It is at these periods, when at
its greatest brilliancy, that it casts a shadow at night.

Though so pleasing an object to the unaided eye, Venus, when observed
with the telescope, is often a source of disappointment--this is on
account of its dazzling brilliancy, which renders any accurate
definition of its surface impossible. Sir John Herschel writes: 'The
intense lustre of its illuminated part dazzles the sight, and
exaggerates every imperfection of the telescope; yet we see clearly that
its surface is not mottled over with permanent spots like the Moon; we
notice in it neither mountains nor shadows, but a uniform brightness, in
which sometimes we may indeed fancy, or perhaps more than fancy,
brighter or obscurer portions, but can seldom or never rest fully
satisfied of the fact.' It is believed that the surface of the planet is
invisible on account of the existence of a cloud-laden atmosphere by
which it is enveloped, and which may serve as a protection against the
intense glare of the sunshine and heat poured down by the not
far-distant Sun. Schroeter, a German astronomer, believed that he saw
lofty mountains on the surface of the planet, but their existence has
not been confirmed by any other observer. The Sun if viewed from Venus
would have a diameter nearly half as large again as when seen from the
Earth; it is therefore probable that the planet is subjected to a much
higher temperature than what is experienced on our globe.

The phases of Venus are similar to those exhibited by the Moon, and are
caused by a change in position of the illumined hemisphere of the planet
with regard to the Earth. At superior conjunction the whole enlightened
disc of the planet is turned towards the Earth, but is invisible by
being lost in the Sun's rays. Shortly before or after it arrives at this
point, its form is gibbous, the illumined portion being less than a
circle but greater than a semi-circle. At its greatest elongation west
or east of the Sun the planet resembles the Moon in quadrature--a half
moon--and between those points and inferior conjunction it is visible
as a beautiful crescent. It becomes narrower and sharper as it
approaches inferior conjunction, until it resembles a curved luminous
thread prior to its disappearance at the conjunction. After having
passed this point it reappears on the other side of the Sun as the
morning star.

It would be only natural to imagine that this peerless orb, the most
beautiful and lustrous of the planets, upon which men have gazed with
longing admiration, and designated the emblem of 'all beauty and all
love,' should have impressed Milton's poetical imagination with its
charming appearance, and stimulated the flow of his captivating muse. He
addresses the orb as

    Fairest of Stars, last in the train of night,
    If better thou belong not to the dawn,
    Sure pledge of day, that crown'st the smiling morn
    With thy bright circlet, praise Him in thy sphere
    While day arises, that sweet hour of prime.--v. 166-70.

In these lines the poet alludes to Venus as the morning star.

In the other passages in his poem Milton associates the planet sometimes
with the morning and at other times with the evening--

    His countenance, as the Morning Star that guides
    The starry flock.--v. 708-709.

    Or if the Star of Evening and the Moon
    Haste to thy audience, Night with her will bring
    Silence, and Sleep listening to thee will watch.--vii. 104-106.

    And hence the morning planet gilds her horns.--vii. 366.

    The Sun was sunk and after him the Star
    Of Hesperus, whose office is to bring
    Twilight upon the Earth, short arbiter
    Twixt day and night.--ix. 47-50.

                      and bid haste the Evening Star
    On his hill top to light the bridal lamp.--viii. 519-20.

Milton knew of the phases of Venus and was aware that at certain times
the planet was visible in the telescope as a beautiful crescent. The
line in which he mentions her as gilding her horns is an allusion to
this appearance of Venus.


THE PLEIADES

The beautiful cluster of the Pleiades or Seven Sisters has been regarded
with hallowed veneration from time immemorial. The happy influences
believed to be shed down upon the Earth by those stars and their close
association with human destinies have rendered them objects of almost
sacred interest among the different races of mankind. In every region of
the globe and in every clime, among civilised nations and savage
fetish-worshipping tribes, the same benign influences were ascribed to
the stars which form this interesting group.

In Greek mythology they were known as the seven daughters of Atlas and
Pleione. Different versions are given of their fate. By some writers it
is said they died from grief in consequence of the death of their
sisters, the Hyades, or on account of the fate of their father, who,
for treason, was condemned by Zeus to bear on his head and hands the
vault of heaven, on the mountains of north-west Africa which bear his
name. According to others they were the companions of Diana, and, in
order to escape from Orion, by whom they were pursued, the gods
translated them to the sky.

All writers agree in saying that after their death or translation they
were transformed into stars. Their names are Alcyone, Electra, Maia,
Merope, Sterope, Taygeta, and Celaeno. The seventh Atlantid is said to
be the 'lost Pleiad,' but it can be perceived without difficulty by a
person possessing good eyesight. In the book of Job there is a beautiful
allusion to the Pleiades (chap. xxxviii.) when God speaks out of the
whirlwind and asks the patriarch to answer Him--

    Canst thou bind the sweet influences of the Pleiades, or loose the
        bands of Orion?
    Canst thou bring forth Mazzaroth in his season? or canst thou guide
        Arcturus with his sons?
    Knowest thou the ordinances of heaven? canst thou set the dominion
        thereof in the earth?

Admiral Smyth says that this noble passage is more correctly rendered as
follows:

    Canst thou bind the delightful teemings of Cheemah?
    Or the contractions of Chesil canst thou open?
    Canst thou draw forth Mazzaroth in his season
    Or Ayeesh and his sons canst thou guide?

He writes: 'In this very early description of the cardinal
constellations, _Cheemah_ denotes Taurus with the Pleiades; _Chesil_ is
Scorpio; Mazzaroth is Sirius in "the chambers of the south;" and Ayeesh
the Greater Bear, the Hebrew word signifying a _bier_, which was shaped
by the four well-known bright stars, while the three forming the tail
were considered as children attending a funeral.' The Greeks at an early
period were attracted by this cluster of stars, and Hesiod alludes to
them in his writings. One passage converted into rhyme reads as follows:

    There is a time when forty days they lie,
    And forty nights, conceal'd from human eye;
    But in the course of the revolving year,
    When the swain sharps the scythe, again appear.

Their heliacal rising was considered a favourable time for setting out
on a voyage, and their midnight culmination, which occurred shortly
after the middle of November, was celebrated by some nations with
festivals and public ceremonies. Considerable diversity of opinion
existed among the ancients with regard to the number of stars which
constitute this group. It was affirmed by some that only six were
visible, whilst others maintained that seven could be seen. Ovid writes:

    Quae septem dici, sex tamen esse solent.

Homer and Attalus mention six; Hipparchus and Aratus seven. The legend
with regard to the lost Pleiad would seem to indicate that, during a
period in the past, the star possessed a superior brilliancy and was
more distinctly visible than it is at the present time. This may have
been so, for, should it belong to the class of variable stars, there
would be a periodic ebb and flow of its light, by which its fluctuating
brilliance could be explained. When looked at directly only six stars
can be seen in the group, but should the eye be turned sideways more
than this number become visible. Several observers have counted as many
as ten or twelve, and it is stated by Kepler that his tutor, Maestlin,
was able to enumerate fourteen stars and mapped eleven in their relative
positions. With telescopic aid the number is largely increased--Galileo
observed thirty-six with his instrument and Hooke, in 1664, counted
seventy-eight. Large modern telescopes bring into view several thousand
stars in this region.

The Pleiades are situated at a profound distance in space. Their light
period is estimated at 250 years, indicating a distance of 1,500
billions of miles. Our Sun if thus far removed would be reduced to a
tenth-magnitude star. 'There can be little doubt,' says Miss Agnes
Clerke, 'that the solar brilliancy is surpassed by sixty to seventy of
the Pleiades. And it must be in some cases enormously surpassed; by
Alcyone 1,000, by Electra 480, by Maia nearly 400 times. Sirius itself
takes a subordinate rank when compared with the five most brilliant
members of a group, the real magnificence of which we can thus in some
degree apprehend.' This is the only star cluster which can be perceived
to be moving in space, or which has an ascertained common proper motion.
Its constituents form a magnificent system in which the stars bear a
mutual relationship to each other, and perform intricate internal
revolutions, whilst they in systemic union drift along through the
depths of space. There are two allusions to the Pleiades in 'Paradise
Lost.' In describing the path of the newly created Sun, Milton
introduces them as indicative of the joyfulness associated with the
birth of the Universe--

    First in his east the glorious lamp was seen,
    Regent of day, and all the horizon round
    Invested with bright rays, jocund to run
    His longitude through heaven's high road; the grey
    Dawn, and the Pleiades before him danced,
    Shedding sweet influence.--vii. 370-75.

It was believed that the Earth was created in the spring; and towards
the end of April this group rises a little before the Sun and precedes
him in his course, 'shedding sweet influences.' The ancients believed
that the good or evil influences of the stars were exercised not in the
night but during the day, when their rays mingled with those of the Sun.
The pernicious influence of the Dog-star is mentioned by Latin writers
as being most pronounced during the dog-days, at the end of summer and
commencement of autumn, the time of the heliacal rising of this star.

The other allusion to the Pleiades is in Book X., line 673, where
Milton, in describing the altered path of the Sun consequent upon the
Fall, mentions how the orb travels through Taurus with the Seven
Atlantic Sisters--the seven daughters of Atlas, the Pleiades, which are
situated on the shoulder of the animal representing this zodiacal
constellation.


THE GALAXY

The Galaxy or Milky Way is the great luminous zone encircling the
heavens, which can be seen extending across the sky from horizon to
horizon. Its diffused nebulous appearance caused the ancients much
perplexity, and many quaint opinions were hazarded as to the nature of
this celestial highway; but the mystery associated with it was not
solved until Galileo directed his newly invented telescope to this
lucent object, when, to his intense delight, he discovered that it
consists of myriads of stars--millions upon millions of suns so distant
as to be individually indistinguishable to ordinary vision, and so
closely aggregated, that their blended light gives rise to the milky
luminosity signified by its name. This stelliferous zone almost
completely encircles the sphere, which it divides into two nearly equal
parts, and is inclined at an angle of 63 deg. to the celestial equator. In
Centaurus it divides into two portions, one indistinct and of
interrupted continuity, the other bright and well defined; these, after
remaining apart for 120 deg., reunite in Cygnus. The Milky Way is of
irregular outline and varies in breadth from 5 deg. to 16 deg.; it intersects
the equinoctial in the constellations Monoceros and Aquila, and
