to appear, strongly-walled as the custom is, to ward off the attacks of
beasts, the logs which aforetime had barred the gateway lay strewn in
a sprouting undergrowth, and naught but the kitchen middens remained to
prove that once they had sheltered human tenants. Phorenice's influence
seemed to have spread as though it were some horrid blight over the
whole face of what was once a smiling and an easy-living land.

So far I had met with little enough interference from any men I had come
across. Many had fled with their women into the depths of the forest at
the bare sight of me; some stood their ground with a threatening face,
but made no offer to attack, seeing that I did not offer them insult
first; and a few, a very few, offered me shelter and provision. But as
I neared the city, and began to come upon muddy beaten paths, I passed
through governments that were more thickly populated, and here appeared
strong chance of delay. The watcher in the tower which is set above each
village would spy me and cry: "Here is a masterless man," and then the
people that were within would rush out with intent to spoil me of my
weapons, and afterwards to appoint me as a labourer.

I had no desire to slay these wretched folk, being filled with pity at
the state to which they had fallen; and often words served me to make
them stand aside from the path, and stare wonderingly at my fierceness,
and let me go my ways. And when at other times words had no avail, I
strove to strike as lightly as could be, my object being to get forward
with my journey and leave no unnecessary dead behind me. Indeed, having
found the modern way of these villages, it grew to be my custom to turn
off into the forest, and make a circuit whenever I came within smell of
their garbage.

Similarly, too, when I got farther on, and came amongst greater towns
also, I kept beyond challenge of their walls, having no mind to risk
delay from the whim of any new law which might chance to be set up by
their governors. My progress might be slinking, but my pride did not
upbraid me very loudly; indeed, the fever of haste burned within me so
hot and I had little enough carrying space for other emotions.

But at last I found myself within a half-day's journey the city of
Atlantis itself, with the Sacred Mountain and its ring of fires looming
high beside it, and the call for caution became trebly accentuated.
Everywhere evidences showed that the country had been drained of its
fighting men. Everywhere women prayed that the battles might end
with the rout of the Priests or the killing of Phorenice, so that the
wretched land might have peace and time to lick its wounds.

An army was investing the Sacred Mountain, and its one approach was most
narrowly guarded. Even after having journeyed so far, it seemed as if I
should have to sit hopelessly down without being able to carry out the
orders which had been laid upon me by the High Council, and earn the
reward which had been promised. Force would be useless here. I should
have one good fight--a gorgeous fight--one man against an army, and my
usefulness would be ended.... No; this was the occasion for guile, and
I found covert in the outskirts of a wood, and lay there cudgelling my
brain for a plan.

Across the plain before me lay the grim great walls of the city, with
the heads of its temples, and its palaces, and its pyramids showing
beyond. The step-sides of the royal pyramid held my eye. Phorenice had
expended some of her new-found store of gold in overlaying their former
whiteness with sheets of shining yellow metal. But it was not that
change that moved me. I was remembering that, in the square before the
pyramid, there stood a throne of granite carved with the snake and the
outstretched hand, and in the hollow beneath the throne was Nais, my
love, asleep these eight years now because of the drug that had been
given to her, but alive still, and waiting for me, if only I on my
part could make a way to the place where Zaemon defied the Empress, and
announce my coming.

In that covert of the woods I lay a day and a night raging with myself
for not discovering some plan to get within the defences of the Sacred
Mountain, but in the morning which followed, there came a man towards me
running.

"You need not threaten me with your weapons," he cried. "I mean no harm.
It seems that you are Deucalion; though I should not have known you
myself in those rags and skins, and behind that tangle of hair and
beard. You will give me your good word I know. Believe me, I have not
loitered unduly."

He was a lower priest whom I knew, and held in little esteem; his name
was Ro, a greedy fellow and not overworthy of trust. "From whom do you
come?" I asked.

"Zaemon laid a command on me. He came to my house, though how he got
there I cannot tell, seeing that Phorenice's army blocks all possible
passage to and from the Mountain. I told him I wished to be mixed with
none of his schemings. I am a peaceful man, Deucalion, and have taken a
wife who requires nourishment. I still serve in the same temple, though
we have swept out the old Gods by order of the Empress, and put her
image in their place. The people are tidily pious nowadays, those that
are left of them, and the living is consequently easy. Yes, I tell you
there are far more offerings now than there were in the old days. And
so I had no wish to be mixed with matters which might well make me be
deprived of a snug post, and my head to boot."

"I can believe it all of you, Ro."

"But there was no denying Zaemon. He burst into one of his black furies,
and while he spoke at me, I tell you I felt as good as dead. You know
his powers?"

"I have seen some of them."

"Well, the Gods alone know which are the true Gods, and which are the
others. I serve the one that gives me employment. But those that Zaemon
serves give him power, and that's beyond denying. You see that right
hand of mine? It is dead and paralysed from the wrist, and that is
a gift of Zaemon. He bestowed it, he said, to make me collect my
attention. Then he said more hard things concerning what he was pleased
to term my apostasy, not letting me put up a word in my own defence of
how the change was forced upon me. And finally, said he, I might
either do his bidding on a certain matter to the letter, or take that
punishment which my falling away from the old Gods had earned. 'I
shall not kill you,' said he, 'but I will cover all your limbs with a
paralysis, such as you have tasted already, and when at length death
reaches you in some gutter, you will welcome it.'"

"If Zaemon said those words, he meant them. So you accepted the
alternative?"

"Had I, with a wife depending on me, any other choice? I asked his
pleasure. It was to find you when you came in here from some distant
part of the land, and deliver to you his message.

"'Then tell me where is the meeting place,' said I, 'and when.'

"'There is none appointed, nor is the day fixed,' said he. 'You must
watch and search always for him. But when he comes, you will be guided
to his place.' Well, Deucalion, I think I was guided, but how, I do
not know. But now I have found you, and if there's such a thing as
gratitude, I ask you to put in your word with Zaemon that this deadness
be taken away from my hand. It's an awful thing for a man to be forced
to go through life like this, for no real fault of his own. And Zaemon
could cure it from where he sat, if he was so minded."

"You seem still to have a very full faith in some of the old Gods'
priests," I said. "But so far, I do not see that your errand is done. I
have had no message yet."

"Why, the message is so simple that I do not see why he could not have
got some one else to carry it. You are to make a great blaze. You may
fire the grasses of the plain in front of this wood if you choose. And
on the night which follows, you are to go round to that flank of the
Sacred Mountain away from the city where the rocks run down sheer, and
there they will lower a rope and haul you up to their hands above."

"It seems easy, and I thank you for your pains. I will ask Zaemon that
your hand may be restored to you."

"You shall have my prayers if it is. And look, Deucalion, it is a small
matter, and it would be less likely to slip your memory if you saw to it
at once on your landing. Later, you may be disturbed. Phorenice is bound
to pull you down off your perch up there now she has made her mind to
it. She never fails, once she has set her hand to a thing. Indeed,
if she was no Goddess at birth, she is making herself into one very
rapidly. She has got all the ancient learning of our Priests, and more
besides. She has discovered the Secret of Life these recent months--"

"She has found that?" I cried, fairly startled. "How? Tell me how? Only
the Three know that. It is beyond our knowledge even who are members of
the Seven."

"I know nothing of her means. But she has the secret, and now she is as
good an immortal (so she says) as any of them. Well, Deucalion, it is
dangerous for me to be missing from my temple overlong, so I will go.
You will carry that matter we spoke of in your mind? It means much
to me."--His eye wandered over my ragged person--"And if you think my
service is of value to you--"

"You see me poor, my man, and practically destitute."

"Some small coin," he murmured, "or even a link of bronze? I am at
great expense just now buying nourishment for my wife. Well, if you have
nothing, you cannot give. So I'll just bid you farewell."

He took himself off then, and I was not sorry. I had never liked Ro. But
I wasted no more precious time then. The grass blazed up for a signal
almost before his timorous heels were clear of it, and that night when
the darkness gave me cover, I took the risk of what beasts might be
prowling, and went to the place appointed. There was no rope dangling,
but presently one came down the smooth cliff face like some slender
snake. I made a loop, slipped it over a leg, and pulled hard as a
signal. Those above began to haul, and so I went back to the Sacred
Mountain after an absence of so many toilsome and warring years. There
were none to disturb the ascent. Phorenice's troops had no thought to
guard that gaunt, bare, seamless precipice.

The men who hauled me up were old, and panted heavily with their task,
and, until I knew the reason, I wondered why a knot of younger priests
had not been appointed for the duty. But I put no question. With us of
the Priests' Clan on the Sacred Mountain, it is always taken as granted
that when an order is given, it is given for the best. Besides, these
priests did not offer themselves to question. They took me off at once
to Zaemon, and that is what I could have wished.

The old man greeted me with the royal sign. "All hail to Deucalion," he
cried, "King of Atlantis, duly called thereto by the High Council of the
priests."

"Is Phorenice dead?" I asked.

"It remains for you to slay her, and take your kingdom, if, indeed,
when all is done, there remains a man or a rood of land to govern. The
sentence has gone out that she is to die, and it shall be carried into
effect, even though we have to set loose the most dreadful powers that
are stored in the Ark of the Mysteries, and wreck this continent in our
effort. We have borne with her infamies all these years by command sent
down by the most High Gods; but now she has gone beyond endurance, and
They it is who have given the word for her cutting off."

"You are one of the highest Three; I am only one of the Seven; you best
know the cost."

"There can be no counting the cost now, my brother, and my king. It is
an order."

"It is an order," I repeated formally, "so I obey."

"If it were not impious to do so, it would be easy to justify this
decision of the Gods. The woman has usurped the throne; yet she was
forgiven and bidden rule on wisely. She has tampered with our holy
religion; yet she was forgiven. She has killed the peoples of Atlantis
in greedy useless wars, and destroyed the country's trade; yet she was
forgiven. She has desecrated the old temples, and latterly has set up
in them images of herself to be worshipped as a deity; yet she was
forgiven. But at last her evil cleverness has discovered to her the
tremendous Secret of Life and Death, and there she overstepped the
boundary of the High Gods' forbearance.

"I myself went to carry a final warning, and once more faced her in
the great banqueting-hall. Solemnly I recited to her the edict, and she
chose to take it as a challenge. She would live on eternally herself and
she would share her knowledge with those that pleased her. Tatho that
was her husband should also be immortal. Indeed, if she thought fit, she
would cry the secret aloud so that even the common people might know it,
and death from mere age would become a legend.

"She cared no wit how she might upset the laws of Nature. She was
Phorenice, and was the highest law of all. And finally she defied me
there in that banqueting-hall and defied also the High Gods that stood
behind my mouth. 'My magic is as strong as yours, you pompous fool,'
she cried, 'and presently you shall see the two stand side by side upon
their trial.'

"She began to collect an army from that moment, and we on our part made
our preparations. It was discovered by our arts that you still lived,
and King of Atlantis you were made by solemn election. How you were
summoned, you know as nearly as it is lawful that one of your degree
should know; how you came, you understand best yourself; but here you
are, my brother, and being King now, you must order all things as you
see best for the preservation of your high estate, and we others live
only to give you obedience."

"Then being King, I can speak without seeming to make use of a threat.
I must have my Queen first, or I am not strong enough to give my whole
mind to this ruling."

"She shall be brought here."

"So! Then I will be a General now, and see to the defences of this
place, and view the men who are here to stand behind them."

I went out of the dwelling then, Zaemon giving place and following me.
It was night still but there is no darkness on the upper part of the
Sacred Mountain. A ring of fires, fed eternally from the earth-breath
which wells up from below, burns round one-half of the crest, lighting
it always as bright as day, and in fact forming no small part of its
fortification. Indeed, it is said that, in the early dawn of history,
men first came to the Mountain as a stronghold because of the natural
defence which the fires offered.

There is no bridging these flames or smothering them. On either side
of their line for a hundred paces the ground glows with heat, and a man
would be turned to ash who tried to cross it. Round full one-half the
mountain slopes the fires make a rampart unbreakable, and on the other
side the rock runs in one sheer precipice from the crest to the plain
which spreads beyond its foot. But it is on this farther side that there
is the only entrance way which gives passage to the crest of the Sacred
Mountain from below. Running diagonally up the steep face of the cliff
is a gigantic fissure, which succeeding ages (as man has grown more
luxurious) have made more easy to climb.

Looking at the additions, in the ancient days, I can well imagine that
none but the most daring could have made the ascent. But one generation
has thrown a bridge over a bad gap here, and another has cut into the
living stone and widened a ledge there, till in these latter years there
is a path with cut steps and carved balustrade such as the feeblest or
most giddy might traverse with little effort or exertion. But always
when these improvers made smooth the obstacles, they were careful to
weaken in no possible way the natural defences but rather to add to
them.

Eight gates of stone there were cutting the pathway, each commanding
a straight, steep piece of the ascent, and overhanging each gate was a
gallery secure from arrow-shot, yet so contrived that great stones could
be hurled through holes in the floor of it, in such a manner that they
must irretrievably smash to a pulp any men advancing against it from
below. And in caves dug out from the rock on either hand was a great
hoard of these stones, so that no enemy through sheer expenditure of
troops could hope to storm a gate by exhausting its ammunition.

But though there were eight of these granite gates in the series, we had
the whole number to depend on no longer. The lowest gate was held by
a garrison of Phorenice's troops, who had built a wall above them to
protect their occupation. The gate had been gained by no brilliant feat
of arms--it had been won by threats, bribery, and promises; or, in other
words, it had been given up by the blackest treachery.

And here lay the keynote of the weakness in our defence. The most
perfect ramparts that brain can invent are useless without men to line
them, and it was men we lacked. Of students entering into the colleges
of the Sacred Mountain, there had been none now for many a year. The
younger generation thought little of the older Gods. Of the men that had
grown up amongst the sacred groves, and filled offices there, many had
become lukewarm in their faith and remained on only through habit, and
because an easy living stayed near them there; and these, when the siege
began, quickly made their way over to the other side.

Phorenice was no fool to fight against unnecessary strength. Her heralds
made proclamation that peace and a good subsistence would be given to
those who chose to come out to her willingly; and as an alternative she
would kill by torture and mutilation those she caught in the place when
she took it by storm, as she most assuredly would do before she had
finished with it. And so great was the prestige of her name, that quite
one-half of these that remained on the mountain took themselves away
from the defence.

There was no attempt to hold back these sorry priests, nor was there any
punishing them as they went. Zaemon, indeed, was minded (so he told me
with grim meaning himself) to give them some memento of their apostasy
to carry away which would not wear out, but the others of the High
Council made him stay his vengeful hand. And so when I came to the place
the garrison numbered no more than eighty, counting even feeble old
