out my astonishing offers.


_Earn While Learning_

If you need part-time work to help pay your living expenses I'll help
you get it and when you graduate I'll give you lifetime employment
service. And, in 12 brief weeks, =in the great roaring shops of Coyne=,
I train you as you never dreamed you could be trained ... on one of the
greatest outlays of electrical apparatus ever assembled ... real
dynamos, engines, power plants, autos, switchboards, transmitting
stations ... everything from door bells to farm power and lighting ...
full sized ... in full operation every day!


_No Books--No Lessons_

No dull books, no baffling charts, no classes, you get individual
training ... all real actual work ... building real batteries ...
winding real armatures, operating real motors, dynamos and generators,
wiring houses, etc.

=GET THE FACTS= Coyne is your one great chance to get into electricity.
Every obstacle is removed. This school is 30 years old--Coyne training
is tested--proven beyond all doubt--endorsed by many large electrical
concerns. You can find out everything absolutely free. Simply mail the
coupon and let me send you the big, free Coyne book of 150 photographs
... facts ... jobs ... salaries ... opportunities. Tells you how many
earn expenses while training and how we assist our graduates in the
field. This does not obligate you. So act at once. Just mail coupon.


BIG BOOK _FREE_!

Send for my big book containing 150 photographs telling complete
story--absolutely FREE

  COYNE ELECTRICAL SCHOOL
  500 S. Paulina St., Dept. 20-66, Chicago, Ill.

       *       *       *       *       *

  COYNE ELECTRICAL SCHOOL, H. C. Lewis, Pres.
  500 S. Paulina Street,
  Dept. 20-66,
  Chicago, Illinois

Dear Mr. Lewis: Without obligation send me your big, free catalog and
all details of Free Employment Service, Radio, Airplane, and Automotive
Electrical Courses, and how I may "earn while learning."

  _Name_ ..........................................

  _Street_ ........................................

  _City_ ...................... _State_ ...........

       *       *       *       *       *


[Illustration: Buy a Watch the Modern Way]

This 21 Jewel--Santa Fe Special Sent You On-Approval Wear 30 Days
=Free=!

Thank you for making it possible for me to own a 21-jewel Santa Fe
Special, write thousands of our customers.


Buy Direct

Our catalogue is our showroom. Any watch will be sent for you to see
without one penny down. No obligation to buy.


Save 1/3 to 1/2

on the price you pay for a similar watch made by other Manufacturers.
Most liberal offer. Our "Direct to You" offer and Extra Special
Distribution Plan is fully explained in the New Santa Fe Special Booklet
just off the press. The "Santa Fe Special" Plan means a big saving of
money to you and you get the best watch value on the market today.


Railroad Accuracy Beauty Unsurpassed Life-long Dependability

--all are combined in the highest degree in the famous "Santa Fe
Special" Watch.

These watches are now in service on practically every railroad in the
United States and in every branch of the Army and Naval service.
Thousands of them are distributed around the world. You will never miss
the few cents a day that will make you own one of these watches.


Just Out!

Send coupon for our New Watch Book--just off the press. All the newest
watch case designs in white or green gold, fancy shapes and thin models
are shown. Read our easy payment offer. Wear the watch 30 days FREE.

  SANTA FE WATCH CO.
  Dept. 255
  Thomas Bldg.
  Topeka, Kans.

       *       *       *       *       *

SANTA FE WATCH CO., Dept. 255, Thomas Bldg., Topeka, Kansas.

Please send me absolutely Free your New Watch Book [ ] Diamond Book [ ].

  Name ........................................

  Address ...................... State ........

       *       *       *       *       *

Please mention NEWSSTAND GROUP--MEN'S LIST, when answering
advertisements

       *       *       *       *       *


[Illustration: COOLS while you shave and the coolness lingers! Listerine
Shaving Cream]


"Pardon me, gentlemen!"

_Business men gargle daily to check colds and sore throat_

Why is Listerine to be found in the offices of a majority of American
business men? Why do they use it at the noon hour? Why do they sometimes
halt important meetings, to gargle with it?

Simply because, like you, they recognize in this safe antiseptic a
swift, effective enemy of sore throat and the common cold. Used at the
first sign of trouble, it has prevented thousands of cases from becoming
serious.

Its effectiveness is due to its amazing power to destroy disease germs,
millions of which lodge in the oral cavity. Though safe to use and
pleasant to taste, full strength Listerine kills even such resistant
organisms as the Staphylococcus Aureus (pus) and Bacillus Typhosus
(typhoid) in counts ranging to 200,000,000 in 15 seconds. We could not
make this statement unless prepared to prove it to the entire
satisfaction of the medical profession and the U.S. Government.

As a preventive of sore throat and colds use Listerine systematically
every day. And at the first definite sign that either is developing,
increase the frequency of the gargle. You will be amazed to see how
quickly the condition disappears. Lambert Pharmacal Co., St. Louis, Mo.


LISTERINE _for_ SORE THROAT

_Kills 200,000,000 germs in 15 seconds_

       *       *       *       *       *

Please mention NEWSSTAND GROUP--MEN'S LIST, when answering
advertisements

       *       *       *       *       *


Go to School at Home!

[Illustration: High School Course in Two Years!]


You Want to Earn Big Money!

=And you will not be satisfied unless you earn steady promotion.= But
are you prepared for the job ahead of you? Do you measure up to the
standard that insures success? For a more responsible position a fairly
good education is necessary. To write a sensible business letter, to
prepare estimates, to figure cost and to compute interest, you must have
a certain amount of preparation. All this you must be able to do before
you will earn promotion.

Many business houses hire no men whose general knowledge is not equal to
a high school course. Why? Because big business refuses to burden itself
with men who are barred from promotion by the lack of elementary
education.


Can You Qualify for a Better Position

We have a plan whereby you can. We can give you a complete but
simplified high school course in two years, giving you all the
essentials that form the foundation of practical business. It will
prepare you to hold your own where competition is keen and exacting. Do
not doubt your ability, but make up your mind to it and you will soon
have the requirements that will bring you success and big money. YOU CAN
DO IT.

Let us show you how to get on the road to success. It will not cost you
a single working hour. Write today. It costs you nothing but a stamp.


American School

  Dept. H-237
  Drexel Ave. and 58th St., Chicago

       *       *       *       *       *

  =American School=
  Dept. H-237
  Drexel Ave. and 58th St., Chicago

Send me full information on the subject checked and how you will help me
win success.

  ....Architect
  ....Building Contractor
  ....Automobile Engineer
  ....Automobile Repairman
  ....Civil Engineer
  ....Structural Engineer
  ....Business Manager
  ....Cert. Public Accountant
  ....Accountant and Auditor
  ....Bookkeeper
  ....Draftsman and Designer
  ....Electrical Engineer
  ....Electric Light & Power
  ....General Education
  ....Vocational Guidance
  ....Business Law
  ....Lawyer
  ....Machine Shop Practice
  ....Mechanical Engineer
  ....Shop Superintendent
  ....Employment Manager
  ....Steam Engineer
  ....Foremanship
  ....Sanitary Engineer
  ....Surveyor (& Mapping)
  ....Telephone Engineer
  ....Telegraph Engineer
  ....High School Graduate
  ....Wireless Radio
  ....Undecided

  Name .....................................

  Address ..................................

       *       *       *       *       *


EXTRA STRONG IMPROVED MODEL COPPER BOILER

Catalog Free

[Illustration:
  SOLID CAST
  NO SCREW TOP]

  HEAVY COPPER

  5 Gallon  $6.50
  7          8.85
  10        11.90
  15        14.20
  20        18.50
  25        22.50
  30        27.50


SAVE 20% _NOW_!

Most Practical Boiler & Cooker

Made with large 5-inch Improved Cap and Spout. Safe, practical and
simple. Nothing to get out of order, most substantial and durable on the
market. Will last a lifetime, gives real service and satisfaction.


Easily Cleaned

Cap removed in a second; no burning of hands. An ideal low
pressure-boiler and pasteurizer for home and farm.

=Save 20%= by ordering direct from factory. No article of such high
quality and utility ever sold at such amazingly low prices. Prices
quoted are each with order or one-fourth cash, balance C.O.D. Send check
or money order: prompt shipment made in plain strong box. The only
boiler worth having. Large Catalog Free.

  HOME MANUFACTURING CO.
  Dept. 5850
  18 E. Kinzie St.
  Chicago, Illinois

       *       *       *       *       *


Agents! Sell Shirts

[Illustration: Bostonian]

Start =without investment= in a profitable shirt business of your own.
Take orders in your district for nationally known Bostonian Shirts.
=$1.50 commission= for you on sale of 3 shirts for $6.95--=Postage
Paid=. $9 value, guaranteed fast colors. No experience needed. Complete
selling equipment =FREE=!


=Good Pay for Honest Workers=

Big earnings for ambitious workers. Genuine Broadcloth in four fast
colors. Write for money-making plan, free outfit, with actual cloth
samples and everything need to start. Name and address on postal will
do. =Write TODAY! SURE!=

BOSTONIAN MFG. CO., B-300, 89 Bickford St., Boston, Mass.

       *       *       *       *       *

DEAFNESS IS MISERY

Multitudes of persons with defective hearing and Head Noises enjoy
conversation, go to Theatre and Church because they Use Leonard
Invisible Ear Drums which resemble Tiny Megaphones fitting in the Ear
entirely out of sight. No wires, batteries or head piece. They are
inexpensive. Write for booklet and sworn statement of the inventor who
was himself deaf.

=A. O. LEONARD, Inc., Suite 683, 70 5th Ave., New York=

       *       *       *       *       *

Denison's Plays

_54 Years of Hits_

We supply all entertainment needs for dramatic clubs, schools, lodges,
etc., and for every occasion.

  Songs
  Minstrels
  Musical Comedies
  Revues
  Vaudeville Acts
  Blackface Skits

_Catalogue Free_

=T. S. Denison & Co. 623 S. Wabash, Dept. 130 Chicago=

       *       *       *       *       *

Don't Stop Tobacco

Without precautions against injurious effects. Baco-Cure gives the
necessary assistance. Use tobacco while you take it. Has aided hundreds.
Complete $5.00 treatment guaranteed to get results or money refunded.
Write for booklet.

Eureka Chemical Co., B-26 Columbus, Ohio

       *       *       *       *       *

Please mention NEWSSTAND GROUP--MEN'S LIST, when answering
advertisements

       *       *       *       *       *


Easy, Quick Way To Get Into Aviation

[Illustration]

_Let_ Major Rockwell Train You AT HOME

My new, practical, amazing, Home Study Course prepares you quickly to
fill any of the fascinating Aviation jobs, either on the ground or as a
skilled flyer, paying $50 to $150 a week. I train you to succeed
quickly, to fill one of the thousands of air and ground jobs now open,
and I help you find your right place in Aviation.


=I'll Help You Get Your Job=

[Illustration: FREE BOOK WRITE!]

Learn at home in your spare hours. In 12 short weeks you can be ready to
take your flying instructions at greatly reduced rates at any airport
near your home, or right here in Dayton. Or you can step into any
aviation ground job with my help. Experience or advanced education not
necessary. Aviation--the fastest growing industry is calling you! You
risk nothing. If you are not satisfied after completing my course, I'll
refund your tuition. Take the first step by writing NOW for my big FREE
Book and Tuition offer. State age.

  =MAJOR R. L. ROCKWELL=

  _The Dayton School of Aviation_
  =Desk B-6=
  =Dayton, Ohio=

       *       *       *       *       *


SAXOPHONE

  Easy to Play
  Easy To Pay

Simplified Key Arrangement

Fingers fall naturally into playing position. Makes it extremely easy to
play rapidly on the Buescher.

[Illustration]

The Buescher True-Tone Saxophone is the easiest of all wind instruments
to play and one of the most beautiful. You can learn the scale in an
hour, and in a few weeks be playing popular music. First 3 lessons free,
with each new Saxophone. For home entertainment--church--lodge--school
or for Orchestra Dance Music, the Saxophone is the ideal instrument.

=FREE TRIAL=--We allow 6 days' free trial on any Buescher Saxophone in
your own home and arrange easy payments so you can pay while you play.
Write for Saxophone Catalog.

