
       *       *       *       *       *

They were low enough now that they were flying horizontally rather than
dropping vertically. They were still searching for traces of some kind
of artifacts. They were also searching, Lt. Harper advised them at last,
for a suitable place to land. They wanted a higher ground than the delta
country so they might be free of insect pests, assuming there were some
since deer could be seen throwing their heads back along their sides as
if to chase away flies. They wanted higher ground with a stream of water
going over falls to supplement their limited power in the lifeship. On
the chance there were fish, it would be nice to be handy to a lake. A
forest for game. A level ground for a permanent camp.

Since they were here, and it might be some time before they could figure
out a way to return to Old Earth, they may as well make the best of it.

They found the kind of place they wanted, a little to the west of the
Mississippi. They grounded the lifeship at the edge of a natural
clearing beside a lake where a stream of sparkling water dropped from a
rock ledge.

They settled the ship on the springy turf, then sat and looked at one
another as if they were suddenly all strangers. Wordlessly, Lt. Harper
got up and opened the door of the lifeship. He threw down the hinged
metal steps. He stood back. Miss Kitty went through the door first and
down the steps. The two men followed.

They stood on the ground of New Earth, and looked at one another the way
they had in the ship. In the minds of each there was the thought that
some kind of a ceremonial speech should be made, but no one volunteered
it.

"I suppose we should have a campfire," Miss Kitty said doubtfully.

They did not realize it at the time, but it was the most effective
speech which could have been devised. It was a symbol. Man had
discovered and taken possession of New Earth. His instinctive thought
was to place his brand upon it, an artificial fire.

All of them missed the significance of the fact that it was Miss Kitty
who had made the first move in the domestication of this New Earth.

       *       *       *       *       *

In the weeks which followed, Miss Kitty began to be dimly aware of the
significance. At first they had lived a sort of Robinson Crusoe kind of
life, leaning pretty heavily upon the stores of the liferaft.

It had been she who had converted it over into more of the Swiss Family
Robinson pattern of making use of the resources about them.

The resources were abundant, bountiful. Yet the two men seemed little
interested, and appeared content to live off the stores within the
liferaft. They devoted almost all their time, except that little for
bringing up firewood and trapping game, to fiddling with that gadget
they called a warp motor. They were trying to hook it up to the radio
sets, they said.

Miss Kitty detested women who nagged at men, but she felt compelled to
point out that this was the fall season upon New Earth, and winter would
soon be upon them. It should not be a severe winter at this latitude,
but they must be prepared for it with something more substantial than
her uncomfortable sleeping place in the liferaft; nor would the two of
them continue to enjoy sleeping out under the trees, if a blanket of
snow fell some night.

"I was hoping we could be back home before winter sets in, Miss Kitty,"
Lt. Harper apologized mildly.

She had not nagged them. She had simply shut her lips and walked away.

The next day they began cutting logs.

It was odd, the basic pleasure she felt in seeing the sides of the cabin
start to take form. Certainly she was not domestic by nature. And this
could, in no sense, be considered a home. Still, she felt it might have
gone up faster, if the men had used their muscles--their brute
strength--rather than spend so much futile time trying to devise power
tools.

They were also inclined to talk too much about warping radio wave bands
through cross sections of sinowaves, and to drop their work on the cabin
in favor of spending long hours trying new hookups.

But Miss Kitty never nagged about it. She had even tried to follow some
of the theory, to share in their efforts to put such theory into
practice, to be just a third fellow. Instead she found her thoughts
wandering to how an oven could be constructed so she could bake and
roast meats instead of broiling and frying them over an open fire.

Game was plentiful, fish seemed to be begging for the hook. Every day,
without going too far away from camp, she found new foods; watercress,
mustard greens, wild turnips, wild onions, occasionally a turkey nest
with eggs still edible, hollow trees where wild bees had stored honey,
persimmons still astringent, but promising incredibly sweet and
delicious flavor when frost struck them, chinquapin, a kind of chestnut,
black walnuts. There was no end to what the country provided. Yet the
men, instead of laying in winter stores, spent their time with the warp
motor.

       *       *       *       *       *

Without meaning to, Miss Kitty interrupted an explanation of Lt.
Harper's on how they were calibrating the torquing degrees. She told him
that he and Sam simply must help her harvest a hillside patch of wild
maise she had found, before the rains came and ruined all the grain with
mold, or the migrating birds ate it all.

The cabin they were erecting would contain only two rooms--a large
general room for cooking, eating, visiting, such as an old-fashioned
farm kitchen had once been. A little room, opening off it, would be her
sleeping room. She raised her eyebrows questioningly, and Sam explained
they would build a small, separate bunkhouse for himself and Lt. Harper.

She had a curious sense of displeasure at the arrangement. She knew she
should be pleased at their understanding of the need for privacy. There
was no point in becoming primitive savages. She should be grateful that
they shared her determination to preserve the civilized codes. She told
herself, rather severely, that the preservation of civilized mores was
extremely important. And she brought herself up short with a shocking
question, equal to a slap in the face.

_Why?_

She realized then she had intuitively known from the first that they
would never get back to Old Earth. Her instincts had been functioning,
insuring their lives, where intellect had failed them completely. She
tried to laugh scornfully at herself, in feminist tradition. Imagine!
Katheryn Kittredge, Career Woman, devoted to the intellectual
advancement of Man, thinking that mere cooking and cleaning and mending
was the supremely important thing.

But she failed in her efforts to deride herself. The intellectual
discussions among the small groups of intelligent girls back on Old
Earth were far away and meaningless. She discovered she was a little
proud and strangely contented that she could prepare edible food.
Certainly the two men were not talented; and someone had to accept the
responsibility for a halfway decent domestic standard and comfort.

As, for example, with the walls of the cabin halfway up, it was
necessary to point out that while they may be going to put the little
cookstove--welded together out of metal scrap--in the cabin, there was
no provision for a fireplace. How would they keep warm through the long
winter months this year, and in the years to come?

Lt. Harper had started to say something. Then he shrugged and a hopeless
look came over his face.

"Perhaps you are right, Miss Kitty," he said humbly. "It may be spring,
at that, before we can finish trying the more obvious combinations.
We're trying to...." He broke off, turned away, and began to mark off
the spot where they would saw down through the logs to fit in a
fireplace.
