sword in hand._ Simon clenched his fist, the tears falling unceasingly.
_By the wounds in Christ's body I swear I will avenge the wounds that
killed you, Alain._

Simon remembered now that the watch was on the way. When they got here
they would ask him questions about what he and Alain were doing here,
questions he did not want to answer until he had time to think.

_A scandal would give de Verceuil a chance to eat me alive. And I must
get Friar Mathieu to help me._

"Send someone to the Palazzo Monaldeschi for my horse," he said to the
innkeeper, standing suddenly.

"As you wish, Your Signory." The innkeeper hurried off.

Simon swept the crowd with his gaze. "Remember, all of you. Anyone who
saw anything, heard anything. You will be paid. Come to the Palazzo
Monaldeschi."

Simon sat down on the stone street to wait for the horse. Silently the
crowd that had gathered waited with him.

When the innkeeper's servant brought the horse, Simon lifted Alain's
body with the help of two other men and lashed it securely facedown over
his horse's back with the rope he had used to climb to Sophia's room.

_Sophia._ He had been so happy just moments ago because she said she
loved him as they parted. Was she looking down now, seeing this pitiful
sight?

Fresh sobs forced their way into his throat, and he leaned against his
horse, covering his face with his arms.

_I have to get away from here quickly._

He forced himself to stop crying and took hold of the reins. The
Orvietans fell back as he led the horse up the street leading northward
to the Monaldeschi palace. He felt warmth on his neck and looked up to
see the sun through a break in the clouds.

Alain would never see the sun again.

_Whoever did this to you, Alain, I will not rest until I have killed him
with my own hands._




XXXIV


Sordello's face, looking as if hewn from granite by an indifferent
sculptor, was gray with fatigue. His arms bound behind his back, he
knelt before Daoud, wearing a tattered brown frieze robe Tilia had
somewhere found for him.

Daoud sat once again on the former papal throne. Dressed in black
cassocks and hoods that covered their faces, Lorenzo and five of Tilia's
black servants stood along the walls of the room. Every so often
Sordello's eyes flickered to the implements of torture around the room
and quickly away again.

Yet the night's assault on his mind had not altogether broken his
spirit. "If you think to frighten me with this clowning, think again,
Messer David. I have stood undaunted before the Inquisition in my day,
and they are a good deal more fearsome than you and your henchmen."

_Leave him his shred of dignity_, Daoud thought. _A man who has lost
that is too dangerous._

"We are beyond fear now, Sordello, are we not?"

Sordello's eyes glowed in the torchlight like a trapped animal's. "What
kind of devil are you?"

Daoud tried to smile kindly. "You call me a devil after I have sent you
to paradise?"

The old bravo sighed, and his eyes closed. "I did not know that my body
was capable of feeling so much pleasure. Even when I was twenty and at
my best, I never knew such delight. It shook me to the very root of my
soul."

"I know," said Daoud. He was thinking back to his own initiation. Given
sanctuary in Egypt, the Hashishiyya had built a tent-palace of wood and
silk west of El Kahira, at the foot of the pyramids. Over a series of
moonlit nights, Daoud had drunk the Old Man of the Mountain's brew. He
had entered hell in the bowels of the Great Pyramid and then had
ascended into paradise, where the houris promised by the Prophet had
ministered to him for what seemed an eternity. Yes, he knew very well
what spirit-freezing delights Sordello had experienced.

"What are you, then?" Sordello growled, his eyes flashing open. "Some
kind of stregone? What was that witches' potion you made me drink?"

"Do you wish to return to paradise?"

"You _are_ a devil, Maestro. You want my soul."

The man was quick, Daoud thought. For all that he was a flawed man, he
had a strong mind. He remembered being made to drink the preparation of
wine and hashish. And he already realized why Daoud had done this to
him.

_So delicate, this part._

Now the bond must be forged. As a succession of Old Men of the Mountain
had forged it between themselves and their disciples in Alamut, in
Masyaf, in all those mountain strongholds across Persia and Syria from
which terror had gone forth for more than a hundred and fifty years.

"I am but a man like you, Sordello. I do not want your soul. I want your
loyalty."

"You want my treachery, you mean. You want me to betray my master, the
Count de Gobignon."

There was more than quickness here, Daoud thought. There was that
foolhardiness he had seen in Sordello before. A man of sense, knowing
that he was in the power of a force beyond his control, even beyond his
understanding, would do nothing to antagonize that force. Yet Sordello
persisted in challenging Daoud.

At the mention of Simon de Gobignon's name, Daoud's concentration
wavered. When de Gobignon found his knight dead outside Ugolini's
mansion, what would he do? There would be trouble over this, surely
there would be trouble. Daoud cursed himself for leaving Tilia's house
and going back to the cardinal's mansion.

He forced his mind back to Sordello. How to work with this provoking
spirit?

"To send you into the enemy camp as he did, Count Simon must have great
confidence in your ability."

Sordello laughed angrily. "Confidence? That high and mighty French fop?
He was probably hoping you would catch me. Sia maledetto!"

He curses de Gobignon. Excellent. Or is this merely for my benefit?
Daoud peered at Sordello, wishing the room were lit by more than a few
torches burning in cressets. The flickering light was impressive, like
this gilded throne, but if Daoud could get closer to Sordello and see
better, he could be more sure of what the man was really feeling.

Daoud said, "He who is loyal to me is never cast out, no matter how
foolishly he behaves."

"Does he who is loyal to you get to go to paradise often, Maestro?"
Sordello's voice was thick with yearning.

It was time for the final step. Daoud beckoned. The nearest hooded
figure on his right, who was actually Lorenzo, came forward with a green
earthenware cup. He bent and held it before the kneeling Sordello.

"More of your stregoneria? Or have you finally decided to poison me?"

"Would I have showered you with wonders, as I have tonight, only to kill
you? No, I have one final wonder to show you. Drink, Sordello."

_This wonder probably will be the death of you, but not for a while._

After a long hesitation, the old bravo lifted his head and swallowed the
liquid Lorenzo poured down his throat. He made a sour face. "Paugh! It
tastes bad!"

Daoud said nothing and waited. After a few moments of silence Sordello
sat back on his heels. His gray head began to nod. His eyes closed.

Daoud arose from the throne and went down to him, holding a candle in
one hand.

"Look at me, Sordello." The prisoner's head lifted, and his brown eyes
stared fixedly into Daoud's. Daoud bent and passed the candle flame
before Sordello's face, but his eyes remained motionless.

"Do you love Simon de Gobignon, or do you hate him?"

"Hate. I hate him," Sordello said in a dull voice. "I have suffered much
on his account."

"Would you kill him if you had the chance?"

Even in his trance Sordello's eyes seemed to glow, and his face flushed.
"Yes. Oh, yes, Maestro. Gladly."

That was good. The will must already be there. Then it remained only to
shape the deed. Daoud reached inside the collar of his tunic and pulled
out the silver locket Blossoming Reed had given him. It was, he had
decided, better than a word or combination of words. It was something
Sordello would never see again unless Daoud wished him to see it.

He dangled the locket by its chain before Sordello's face, letting it
swing from side to side. He held the candle so its flame reflected from
the silver disk.

"Watch the locket, Sordello. Look closely at it. The design on its face
is like no other in the world. Make certain that you would know it if
you saw it again."

For a time he let the locket swing, and Sordello's head turned from side
to side, following it.

"Do you know this locket now, Sordello? Truly know it?"

"Yes, Maestro."

"Could you mistake it for another?"

"No, Maestro."

"Good. Now I command you. When you see this locket again, it will be a
sign. It will mean that you are to kill Simon de Gobignon at once. As
soon as you see the locket, you will take up the first weapon that
comes to hand, and you will await your first good chance, and you will
strike him down. Do you understand?"

"Yes, Maestro."

"Will you do it?"

"Yes, Maestro. With much joy."

"Say what you will do, Sordello."

"When I see that locket, I will kill Simon de Gobignon at once."

"That is good. Now, in a little while you will wake up. And you will not
remember anything I have said to you about the locket and about killing
Simon de Gobignon. You will forget all about it until you see the locket
again. And then you will strike."

"Yes, Maestro."

Daoud went back to the throne and sat down. He slipped the locket's
chain over his head and dropped the silver disk back inside his tunic.
Sordello slumped in his kneeling posture like a figure of wax that had
been placed too close to a fire.

Daoud waited patiently, and in a few moments Sordello raised his head,
his eyes bloodshot but alert.

"Will you let me visit paradise again soon?" His memory had gone back to
the moment before he drank the drug.

"Not _very_ soon," said Daoud. "But serve me well, and it will happen
again." He could not make Sordello wait a year, as the Hashishiyya
usually did with their initiates. But it must be a wait of some months,
or the experience would lose its magic. And in months his work in
Orvieto might be done.

_And then again, I might still be here ten years from now._

"Tell me what I have to do, Maestro."

"Serve me faithfully, and from time to time, when it pleases me, you
will visit paradise. Disobey me or betray me--we will know instantly if
you do--and when you least expect it you will find yourself in hell. Not
the one we created for you last night. The real one."

"You don't need to threaten me," said Sordello with a flash of his old
rebelliousness. "Just tell me what you want."

"Simply go on doing what you have been doing. You will give the Count de
Gobignon information about us--but from now on we will tell you what to
tell him. And you will keep me informed about the young count. Hardly
any work at all, you see."

Sordello grunted. "I doubt it will be that easy. But as long as you
offer a reward so great, I am your man."

_My slave_, thought Daoud, hoping that his pity for this creature did
not show in his face.

But he must remember that there were hidden places in this man's soul.
And he had never before tried to enslave a man as the Hashishiyya did
it. He could not be sure that he had succeeded fully, and so he had made
a creature potentially as dangerous to himself as to anyone else. The
flesh on the back of his neck crawled.

       *       *       *       *       *

She was sitting by the window, staring out at the spot on the street
where the young man's body had lain. She heard the door open behind her.
She turned, and there was David. Golden-haired, lean, tall, with those
light-filled eyes. She forgot herself and felt a leap of love, and then
her heart clenched like a fist with anger.

_Wait, let him tell it before I judge him._

He closed the door slowly, a strange expression on his face. She looked
from him to the image of the saint. Yes. The look around the eyes was
the same. They had accepted pain and sorrow, did not struggle against it
as ordinary people did, and they knew _something_.

Except that David's eyes were not the bright blue of the saint's.
David's eyes seemed to reflect whatever color was about him.

How could it be that the icon she had painted could remind her of two
such different men as Simon de Gobignon and David of Trebizond?

He stood there looking at her, and she realized that he was waiting for
her to speak. He wanted to know what she and Simon had done in this
room, and he did not want to ask. And she knew at that instant, watching
his face, that he was expecting to be hurt by what she would tell him
about herself and Simon.

_But what about that young Frenchman in the street? I saw Simon kneel by
him, weep for him, bear him away._

"Something terrible has happened," she said.

His eyes narrowed. "You did not succeed with de Gobignon?"

"No, someone killed his friend, who was waiting for him, down there in
the street. Everything is ruined. Simon will not want to see me again.
He will be certain to blame me for that young man's death."

"Why should he?" David walked over to the chest, where the enameled
candlesticks on either side of the painting of the saint still held
burnt-out stumps of candles. He sat cross-legged on the floor in front
of the chest. He rested his forearms on his knees and his gaze on the
flame and azure carpet. There were deep lines in his face. He looked as
if he had not slept all last night.

His face in front of the saint's face. Looking from one to the other,
Sophia saw the resemblance more plainly than ever.

She sighed and spoke with elaborate patience. "What else can Simon think
but that his friend was killed by some overzealous protector of mine?"

"Why would a protector kill a man standing in the street when there is
another man up in the bedroom with the woman he is supposed to protect?"
There was something in the harshness of his gaze, a flatness in his
steel-colored eyes, that told her beyond the possibility of doubt that
it was he who had killed Simon's young companion.

But had he not been at Tilia's house all night?

She nodded her head slowly. "Simon will probably think that way, too."

From his seat on the floor, David looked up at her with a hard smile.
"And, since I am certain you gave him incomparable pleasure in bed, he
will overcome any objections he has to seeing you again."

She felt as if he had stamped on her heart. To him she was nothing but a
harlot to be used to ensnare his enemies.

And if that was all _he_ thought she was, how could she find it possible
to think any better of herself?

_If I am not a whore, what am I?_

But she would tell him the truth whether or not he chose to believe it.

"Nothing happened between us," she said tonelessly.

He stared at the carpet. She saw hope struggling with doubt in his face.

Doubt won. His smile was cynical.

"You failed to seduce him? I cannot believe that."

"Whatever you may believe, that was how it was."

"Why do you bother to lie to me?" Anger smoldered in his face. His
cheeks were reddening.

"Why _would_ I lie to you? It would make no difference to you if I went
to bed with Simon."

"If, as you say, nothing happened, then explain to me why it did not."
He folded his arms and sat hunched forward.

"When a man like Simon is in love--" she said, and stopped. "You _do_
understand what I mean by love?" How did a man brought up in Egypt as a
slave to Turks feel about women? Saracens, she knew, kept their many
wives locked up most of the time.

Daoud shrugged. "I can only guess at what _you_ mean by love."

"A man like Simon shows his love by holding back his ardor. He does not
realize that I know this. I have let him think he is teaching me about
courtly love."

"And what did you learn by letting him woo you in this courtly way?" He
looked pleased. He was beginning to believe her.

"He tried to find out things from me. He is such an innocent. He had no
idea that I was telling him what you told me to tell him."

David sighed, stood up, and walked to the window. She could see the
tension in his back. How broad his shoulders were. Not huge, like those
of some knights, but graceful and powerful. His posture was not just
erect; it was perfect, straight yet flexible, like a blade of the finest
steel. She imagined him with his shirt off. The palms of her hands
tingled at the thought of stroking his shoulders.

"Did you not want to take him into your bed?" His voice was cold.

She thought back to her night with Simon. During those hours when she
had been Sophia Orfali, she had been disappointed when Simon insisted
that he would not touch her. But Sophia Orfali had to accept his
judgment.

Earlier, she had wanted to take Simon to bed as a kind of revenge on
David for letting Rachel be used by the Tartar. But last night she had
let Simon decide what they would do. When she was with Simon, she was
what Simon wanted her to be.

_Is that what I am, a woman who becomes whatever the man she is with
wishes?_

She expelled her breath in a short, sharp sigh.

"I wanted to do whatever was necessary. If it had been necessary to make
love to him, I would have done it."

She shut her eyes momentarily. Her head spun. Now, with David here, she
wanted David, not Simon. And she hated herself for wanting him, when he
saw her as no more than a useful object, as Manfred had.

_If only Alexis had lived. These loves I feel for men, for Manfred, for
Simon, for David. I cannot help myself, and it betrays me. It divides me
against myself. And they do not return my love._

And yet, she was sure David did care for her, perhaps even loved her,
though he would never admit it. Why else this jealous questioning?

_That might even have been why he killed Simon's friend!_

The thought made her heart stop beating for an instant and her body turn
cold. Killing Simon would have upset David's plans, but he might have
taken out his jealous rage on Simon's friend.

"But what did you _want_ to do with de Gobignon?" he demanded, turning
from the window.

He would not let it alone. She slid off the bed and got to her feet. She
went to the chest and stood with her back to David, staring at the
picture of the saint. Anger clouded over her vision so that she could
not see the painting. She clasped her hands together to control their
trembling.

"I do not have to tell you that," she said in a choked voice. "It does
not matter. I do what is necessary."

"As I do!" There was a snarl in his voice.

What did he mean by that, she wondered. She turned and the look she saw
on his face made her stomach knot itself. His teeth were bared and his
eyes were narrowed to glowing slits.

Now she had to hear him say it. "Did you kill that boy?"

She watched him slowly regain command of himself. Calm returned to the
hard, tan features. His eyes held hers, and their color seemed to change
from white-hot to the cold gray of iron.

"Of course."

She felt something break inside her. Grief overwhelmed her. She mourned
for the young Frenchman. She did not know the man David had killed, but
she imagined him to be just like Simon. She wept for him and for Simon.
And for David. She did not want to cry, but she could not help herself.
She walked slowly to her bed and sat down heavily. She could feel the
tears running down her cheeks.

"Why did you kill him?"

"I had to leave Tilia's. I made the mistake of coming back here. From
across the street I saw de Gobignon in this window." His voice was
tight, his words clipped, as if he were trying to hold something in. "At
the same time, the Frank, who was on watch, saw me. If I had allowed him
to live, de Gobignon would have known that I approved of his being with
you. And he was no boy, but a knight, strong and trained."

"He could have been no match for you."

"I gave him no chance to match himself against me. This is not some
tournament. Your life is in as much danger as mine is."

"I never forget that," she said.

David had killed Simon's friend. She wished that she had gone to bed
with Simon.

"Do you think de Gobignon will now be afraid to try to see you again?"
There was a sneer in David's voice, and she felt the heated blood rising
to her face.

"He is no coward."

He looked at her with weary eyes and a tight little smile. "Well, then.
He will want to see you again. Send a message to him. Have him meet you
someplace other than here. Someplace where he will feel safe. A church,
perhaps."

"A church. Yes, that is a good suggestion. Then you will not have to
wonder what we are doing."

"From what I have heard of Christian churches, that is not necessarily
true."

She wished she had the skull to throw at him again. That was all that
poor young knight would soon be--a skull, buried in the earth.

"How dare you insult the religion you were born into?" she shouted.
"Have you forgotten that I am a Christian?"

He glared at her, turned on his heel, and slammed the door behind him.

Feeling alone, unloved, and desolate, not even sure who she was, Sophia
sat heavily on her bed. Sobs racked her chest, one after the other. Not
willing to admit how much Daoud had hurt her, she struggled with her
tears for a time, then gave in and threw herself full length on the bed,
pain spreading through her body.




XXXV


"Is it not a sin, Father, to explore a man's body like that?"

"It is considered a crime in many places. But it is not a sin when it is
done with reverence, to discover the truth."

Watching Friar Mathieu, Simon felt his stomach rebel. The old priest
bent over the long naked form of Alain de Pirenne, stretched out on
Simon's bed, wielding a freshly sharpened carving knife borrowed from
the Monaldeschi kitchen. The knife flashed in the light of the many
candles set around the bed as Friar Mathieu enlarged the wound in
Alain's belly. Simon kept looking away and then staring back,
fascinated.

"It hurts me to see you treat Alain so," said Simon. "Though I know you
mean to do good."

"My brother Franciscan, Friar Roger of Oxford, says that if you want to
know God, you must look as closely as possible at His works. He says
that to read the book of God's creation is better than reading
philosophy, and is a form of prayer."

"Philosophy. Yes," said Simon. "I learned last night that Fra Tomasso
d'Aquino is an enemy."

"One moment." Friar Mathieu had tripled the width of the lower wound and
was now pulling the lips of the gash apart, peering intently into it. If
Alain had been alive, Simon knew, blood would have been pouring out of
that incision.

Sickened, Simon turned away. He wondered if he could sleep again in this
bed, knowing that Alain's poor naked body had been stretched out there,
to be tormented in death by this old Franciscan physician-priest.

If he abandoned the bed, he would have to give up the room, though, and
it was one of the few private rooms in the Monaldeschi palace. It was a
warlike room, as befitted a young knight, decorated with battered
Monaldeschi arms. Crossed halberds, spotted with rust, were hung on the
stone chimney that ran up from the kitchen on the first floor. Shields,
dented and scratched, each almost as tall as a man, faced each other
from opposite walls. They were probably quite old, since they bore
simple blazons. The one on Simon's right was ocher, with a black chevron
dividing it across the middle. The other bore an azure cross against a
white background.

This being the top floor of the palace, the mullioned window was
spacious, and Friar Mathieu had drawn back the curtains and pulled the
twin window frames inward on their hinges to get more light. Simon went
to the window and looked through the protective iron grill down into the
square. Two men and three horses were gathered by the steps leading to
the front door. They wore yellow and blue livery, the colors of the city
of Orvieto.

"I think I have found something," said Friar Mathieu. Just as he
finished speaking, Simon's door shook under a heavy knock.

"Say nothing," said the Franciscan. "I will tell you later."

The knock sounded again. Simon went to the door and opened it. A stocky
man whose bald head came up to the middle of Simon's chest stood there.
Simon observed that the man carried more muscle than fat on his sturdy,
barrel-shaped frame. He wore a yellow silk tunic trimmed with blue, and
a short sky-blue cape. A bright gold medallion on a gold chain hung from
his neck. Two daggers, one long and stout, the other short and slender,
hung from the right side of his belt. The sword on his left side reached
from his waist to his ankle. Simon knew he had seen him before, but he
could not remember where.

"Your Signory, Count de Gobignon, it is my honor to address you," the
stout man said. His words were polite, but his tone was perfunctory. He
had to tilt his head back to look at Simon, but his voice and expression
made Simon feel very young and small. Even so, Simon held his silence
and did not step aside to let the man in. Let him introduce himself
first.

After a pause, the man said, "Your Signory, I am Frescobaldo d'Ucello,
podesta of Orvieto." He stopped, eyeing Simon. He had sparkling black
eyes, and his black mustache was trimmed so that it was no more than a
thin line above his mouth. Simon remembered now having seen this man,
the governor of the city, at the execution of that poor heretic a month
ago.

"Signore Podesta," Simon bowed. "The honor is mine."

"Not at all, Your Signory." Now the stout man looked past Simon into the
room, and his eyebrows flew up. Simon turned and saw Friar Mathieu
anointing Alain's brow with his oil-dipped thumb, forming a cross on the
white forehead. Most of Alain's body was under an embroidered coverlet,
and the kitchen knife had disappeared.

D'Ucello blessed himself and said in a low voice, "I will examine the
body after the good father is finished with the last rites. Would you be
so kind as to step out of the room, Count, so that we can talk?"

Closing the door behind him, Simon followed d'Ucello through the
corridor out to the colonnaded galleria overlooking the lemon trees
where he and Sophia had kissed on the night of the contessa's reception
for the Tartars.

So long ago that seemed now, though it was little more than a month, and
so much tragedy had come of it.

Simon told d'Ucello the story he had worked out, that he and Alain had
gone to that inn searching for women and had gotten separated.

There were large bags under the podesta's eyes, dark as bruises. They
contracted as he listened to Simon.

"Forgive me, Your Signory, but I must be clear. Are you telling me that
you slept with a woman last night?"

Simon tried to look abashed and reluctant to speak. "Yes."

"And where did this take place, Your Signory?"

"In my private room at the inn."

"Who was she?"

Simon had prepared his answer. "I do not know. A pleasant lady whom I
met in the common room."

The bags under d'Ucello's eyes twitched. "There are no whores in that
part of town, Signore. It is one of my duties to see that the
prostitutes are limited to a quarter of the city where they will not
offend the holy or the well-born. A cardinal has his residence across
the street from where your friend's body was found." D'Ucello's mouth
stretched, but neither his eyes nor the dark bulges under them joined in
the smile. "The woman who entertained you must have been an ordinarily
respectable person who chose to go astray that evening." He paused and
looked grimly up at Simon.

Simon felt as if a clammy hand had taken him by the back of the neck. He
should have realized this vaguely imagined woman would not satisfy any
determined questioner. He struck his fist against his leg. D'Ucello's
eyes flickered, and Simon knew he had caught the gesture. He felt as if
a net were slowly being drawn around him, and he resented it. Back home
no mere city governor would dare trouble the Count de Gobignon any more
than he would disturb the king or one of his brothers.

As d'Ucello continued to stare silently at him, Simon studied the
podesta. This was a man who was jealous of his power, Simon decided. A
man who, despite his politeness, would enjoy embarrassing a young
nobleman.

"What was the woman's name?" d'Ucello pressed him.

"I have no idea."

The thick black eyebrows rose again, wrinkling the balding scalp. "You
spent the entire night with this woman and never called her by name?"

Simon had been intending to claim that honor forbade him to tell the
woman's name. He felt certain the governor would reject that argument as
trivial under the circumstances.

"We spoke very little. I addressed her with various foolish
endearments."

"Could you describe her?"

"Most of the time we were in the dark." Simon felt d'Ucello had pressed
him enough. It was time to fight back. "Signore Podesta, my good friend
and vassal was murdered in the street, a street supposedly under the
protection of your watch. I fail to see how it helps you to do your duty
of finding his killer by questioning me as if I were a criminal."

The podesta's brows drew together, and he took a few steps backward,
diminishing the importance of the difference in height between him and
Simon.

"Your Signory, I have questioned everyone who lives in that
neighborhood, and everyone I could find who was passing through it last
night," he said. "I learned from the innkeeper at the Vesuvio that your
friend slept alone last night. I know that you did not meet anyone in
the inn, woman or man. You stopped there briefly, left your friend, and
went somewhere else. You did not engage a private room for yourself. The
innkeeper and several other people agree to that. Will Your Signory be
good enough to tell me where you did go?"

Simon heard with dismay the weakness in his tone and was appalled at how
easily d'Ucello had exposed his lies. "Those you spoke to about what I
did must have been mistaken," he said. "Perhaps they did not notice my
return to the inn." An inspiration struck him. "They may be trying to
protect the woman I was with."

D'Ucello smiled thinly. "I see. Then you are telling me that you had
carnal relations with this woman while your good friend and vassal
looked on."

Simon was momentarily at a loss for words. It would have delighted him
to reply by running d'Ucello through.

They stood bristling at each other like two hostile hounds when Simon
heard a door open. A moment later, to his enormous relief, Friar Mathieu
joined them by the marble railing overlooking the atrium.

"If you wish to examine young Sire de Pirenne's body, he lies in Count
Simon's room waiting for you, Signore," said Friar Mathieu. "This is a
very sad day for us."

With a black look at Simon, d'Ucello bowed to the old priest and left
the galleria.

When they were alone, Friar Mathieu grunted. "A good thing I merely
extended the wounds Sire Alain had already suffered. The podesta might
well bring charges against me for desecrating a corpse if he saw I had
made incisions in the body."

"Did you learn anything?" Simon asked.

"I am convinced that Sire Alain was not merely stabbed to death."

"What do you mean?" Simon was eager to get Friar Mathieu's advice on how
to handle the podesta, but this was more important.

"When I looked closely at the wound in his stomach, I discovered that it
was two wounds," said Friar Mathieu. "He was punctured there by a thin,
round object, like a large needle. Then he was stabbed through the
heart, and blood poured out of him. And then the killer stabbed him in
the belly to try to mask the dart wound."

"How do you know that?"

"The belly wound did not bleed much, so the heart wound must have
preceded it. When the killer drove his knife into the puncture in the
belly, it did not go in exactly the same direction. The smaller wound
goes upward at a slight angle, as if the needle were driven in from the
level of the killer's waist. The knife wound goes straight in. I had to
dig below the skin and ribs to discover the needle wound."

"A needle could not have killed Alain."

"It could have been a poisoned dart. Alain's lips are blue. That is
sometimes a sign of poison."

Simon heard a clumping of boots in the corridor. He hurried in from the
galleria to find Cardinal Paulus de Verceuil, accompanied by two
black-robed priests, striding toward the room where Alain lay.

"Now one of your knights has been killed!" de Verceuil boomed. He was
dressed in a dark cerise tunic with particolored hose and forest-green
boots with pointed toes. The only indications of his ecclesiastical
office were the absence of a sword and the presence of the large jeweled
cross hanging from his neck. A purple velvet cap adorned with a black
feather was draped over his glossy black hair.

Simon told the cardinal he and Alain had been out late and had decided
to stay at an inn rather than cross town during the dangerous night
hours. Friar Mathieu came and stood beside him, greeting the two priests
who had accompanied de Verceuil. They loftily eyed the old Franciscan's
brown robe and responded with curt nods.

When Simon finished his recital, de Verceuil leaned forward, his small
lower lip outthrust. "If you cannot protect your own knights, how can
you protect the emissaries from Tartary?"

That was not a question but an assault, Simon decided, and required no
answer. "We are doing everything we can to find his killer, Your
Eminence."

