necessarily to be derived therefrom that the conception of the nebulae as
remote galaxies, which Lord Rosse's resolution of many into stellar
points had appeared to support, began to withdraw into the region of
discarded and half-forgotten speculations. In the Nubeculae, as Whewell
insisted,[1613] "there coexist, in a limited compass and in
indiscriminate position, stars, clusters of stars, nebulae, regular and
irregular, and nebulous streaks and patches. These, then, are different
kinds of things in themselves, not merely different to us. There are
such things as nebulae side by side with stars and with clusters of
stars. Nebulous matter resolvable occurs close to nebulous matter
irresolvable."

This argument from coexistence in nearly the same region of space,
reiterated and reinforced with others by Mr. Spencer, was urged with his
accustomed force and freshness by Mr. Proctor. It is unanswerable. There
is no maintaining nebulae to be simply remote worlds of stars in the face
of an agglomeration like the Nubecula Major, containing in its
(certainly capacious) bosom _both_ stars and nebulae. Add the facts that
a considerable proportion of these perplexing objects are gaseous, and
that an intimate relation obviously subsists between the mode of their
scattering and the lie of the Milky Way, and it becomes impossible to
resist the conclusion that both nebular and stellar systems are parts of
a single scheme.[1614]

As to the stars themselves, the presumption of their approximate
uniformity in size and brightness has been effectually dissipated.
Differences of distance can no longer be invoked to account for
dissimilarity in lustre. Minute orbs, altogether invisible without
optical aid, are found to be indefinitely nearer to us than such radiant
objects as Canopus, Betelgeux, or Rigel. Moreover, intensity of light is
perceived to be a very imperfect index to real magnitude. Brilliant suns
are swayed from their course by the attractive power of massive yet
faintly luminous companions, and suffer eclipse from obscure
interpositions. Besides, effective lustre is now known to depend no less
upon the qualities of the investing atmosphere than upon the extent and
radiative power of the stellar surface. Red stars must be far larger in
proportion to the light diffused by them than white or yellow
stars.[1615] There can be no doubt that our sun would at least double
its brightness were the absorption suffered by its rays to be reduced to
the Sirian standard; and, on the other hand, that it would lose half its
present efficiency as a light-source if the atmosphere partially veiling
its splendours were rendered as dense as that of Aldebaran.

Thus, variety of all kinds is seen to abound in the heavens; and it must
be admitted that the consequent insecurity of all hypotheses as to the
relative distances of individual stars singularly complicates the
question of their allocation in space. Nevertheless, something has been
learnt even on that point; and the tendency of modern research is, on
the whole, strongly confirmatory of the views expressed by Herschel in
1802. He then no longer regarded the Milky Way as the mere visual effect
of an enormously extended stratum of stars, but as an actual
aggregation, highly irregular in structure, made up of stellar clouds
and groups and nodosities. All the facts since ascertained fit in with
this conception, to which Proctor added arguments favouring the view,
since adopted by Barnard[1616] and Easton,[1617] that the stars forming
the galactic stream are not only situated more closely together, but are
also really, as well as apparently, of smaller dimensions than the lucid
orbs studding our skies. By the laborious process of isographically
charting the whole of Argelander's 324,000 stars, he brought out in
1871[1618] signs of relationship between the distribution of the
brighter stars and the complex branchings of the Milky Way, which has
been stamped as authentic by Newcomb's recent statistical
inquiries.[1619] There is, besides, a marked condensation of stars,
especially in the southern hemisphere, towards a great circle inclined
some twenty degrees to the galactic plane; and these were supposed by
Gould to form with the sun a subordinate cluster, of which the
components are seen projected upon the sky as a zone of stellar
brilliants.[1620] The zone has, however, galactic rather than solar
affinities, and represents, perhaps, not a group, but a stream.

The idea is gaining ground that the Milky Way is designed, in its main
outlines, on a spiral pattern, and that its various branches and
sections are consequently situated at very different distances from
ourselves. Proctor gave a preliminarily interpretation of their
complexities on this principle, and Easton of Rotterdam[1621] has
renewed the attempt with better success.

A most suggestive delineation of the Milky Way, completed in 1889, after
five years of labour, by Dr. Otto Boedicker, Lord Rosse's astronomer at
Parsonstown, was published by lithography in 1892. It showed a curiously
intricate structure, composed of dimly luminous streams, and shreds, and
patches, intermixed with dark gaps and channels. Ramifications from the
main trunk ran out towards the Andromeda nebula and the "Bee-hive"
cluster in Cancer, involved the Pleiades and Hyades, and, winding round
the constellation of Orion, just attained the Sword-handle nebula. The
last delicate touches had scarcely been put to the picture, when the
laborious eye-and-hand method was, in this quarter, as already in so
many others, superseded by a more expeditious process. Professor Barnard
took the first photographs ever secured of the true Milky Way, July 28,
August 1 and 2, 1889, at the Lick Observatory. Special conditions were
required for success; above all, a wide field and a strong light-grasp,
both complied with through the use of a 6-inch portrait-lens. Even thus,
the sensitive plate needed some hours to pick out the exceedingly faint
stars collected in the galactic clouds. These cannot be photographed
under the nebulous aspect they wear to the eye; the camera takes note of
their real nature, and registers their constituent stars rank by rank.
Hence the difficulty of disclosing them. "In the photographs made with
the 6-inch portrait-lens," Professor Barnard wrote, "besides myriads of
stars, there are shown, for the first time, the vast and wonderful
cloud-forms, with all their remarkable structure of lanes, holes, and
black gaps, and sprays of stars. They present to us these forms in all
their delicacy and beauty, as no eye or telescope can ever hope to see
them."[1622] In Plate VI. one of these strange galactic landscapes is
reproduced. It occurs in the Bow of Sagittarius, not far from the Trifid
nebula, where the aggregations of the Milky Way are more than usually
varied and characteristic. One of their distinctive features comes out
with particular prominence. It will be noticed that the bright mass near
the centre of the plate is tunnelled with dark holes and furrowed by
dusky lanes. Such interruptions recur perpetually in the Milky Way. They
are exemplified on the largest scale in the great rift dividing it into
two branches all the way from Cygnus to Crux; and they are reproduced in
miniature in many clusters.


PLATE VI.

[Illustration: Region of the Milky Way in Sagittarius--showing a double
black aperture.

Photographed by Professor E. E. Barnard.]


Mr. H. C. Russell, at Sydney in 1890, successfully imitated Professor
Barnard's example.[1623] His photographs of the southern Milky Way have
many points of interest. They show the great rift, black to the eye, yet
densely star-strewn to the perception of the chemical retina; while the
"Coal-sack" appears absolutely dark only in its northern portion. His
most remarkable discovery, however, was that of the spiral character of
the two Nubeculae. With an effective exposure of four and a half hours,
the Greater Cloud came out as "a complex spiral, with two centres";
while the similar conformation of its minor companion developed only
after eight hours of persistent actinic action. The revelation is full
of significance.

Scarcely less so, although after a different fashion, is the disclosure
on plates exposed by Dr. Max Wolf, with a 5-inch lens, in June, 1891, of
a vastly extended nebula, bringing some of the leading stars in Cygnus
into apparently organic connection with the piles of galactic star-dust
likewise involved by it.[1624] Barnard has similarly found great tracts
of the Milky Way to be photographically nebulous, and the conclusion
seems inevitable that we see in it a prodigious mixed system, resembling
that of the Pleiades in point of composition, though differing widely
from it in plan of structure. Of corroborative testimony, moreover, is
the discovery independently resulting from Gill's and Pickering's
photographic reviews, that stars of the first type of spectrum largely
prevail in the galactic zone of the heavens.[1625] With approach to that
zone, Kapteyn noticed a steady growth of actinic intensity relative to
visual brightness in the stars depicted on the Cape Durchmusterung
plates.[1626] In other words, stellar light is, in the Milky Way,
_bluer_ than elsewhere. And the reality of the primitive character hence
to be inferred for the entire structure was, in a manner, certified by
Mr. McClean's observation that Helium stars--the supposed immediate
products of nebulous matter--crowd towards its medial plane.

The first step towards the unravelment of the tangled web of stellar
movements was taken when Herschel established the reality, and indicated
the direction of the sun's journey. But the gradual shifting backward of
the whole of the celestial scenery amid which we advance accounts for
only a part of the observed displacements. The stars have motions of
their own besides those reflected upon them from ours. All attempts,
however, to grasp the general scheme of these motions have hitherto
failed. Yet they have not remained wholly fruitless. The community of
slow movement in Taurus, upon which Maedler based his famous theory, has
proved to be a fact, and one of very extended significance.

In 1870 Mr. Proctor undertook to chart down the directions and
proportionate amounts of about 1,600 proper motions, as determined by
Messrs. Stone and Main, with the result of bringing to light the
remarkable phenomenon termed by him "star-drift."[1627] Quite
unmistakably, large groups of stars, otherwise apparently disconnected,
were seen to be in progress together, in the same direction and at the
same rate, across the sky. An example of this kind of unanimity was
alleged by him in the five intermediate stars of the Plough; and that
the agreement in thwartwise motion is no casual one is practically
demonstrated by the concordant radial velocities determined at Potsdam
for four out of the five objects in question. All of these approach the
earth at the rate of about eighteen miles a second; and the fifth and
faintest, Delta Ursae, though not yet measured, may be held to share
their advance. One of them, moreover, Zeta Ursae, alias Mizar,
carries with it three other stars--Alcor, the Arab "Rider" of the horse,
visible to the naked eye, besides a telescopic and a spectroscopic
attendant. So that the group may be regarded as octuple. It is of vast
compass. Dr. Hoeffler assigned to it in 1897[1628]--although on grounds
more or less hypothetical--a mean parallax corresponding to a
light-journey of 192 years, which would give to the marching squadron a
total extent of at least fourteen times the distance from the sun to
Alpha Centauri, while implying for its brightest member--Eta
Ursae Majoris--the lustre of six hundred suns. The organising principle
of this grand scheme must long remain mysterious.

It is no solitary example. Particular association, indeed--as was
surmised by Michell far back in the eighteenth century--appears to be
the rule rather than an exception in the sidereal system. Stars are
bound together by twos, by threes, by dozens, by hundreds. Our own sun
is, perhaps, not exempt from this gregarious tendency. Yet the search
for its companions has, up to the present, been unavailing. Gould's
cluster[1629] seems remote and intangible; Kapteyn's collection of solar
stars proved to have been a creation of erroneous data, and was
abolished by his unrelenting industry. Rather, we appear to have secured
a compartment to ourselves for our long journey through space. A
practical certainty has, at any rate, been gained that whatever
aggregation holds the sun as a constituent is of a far looser build than
the Pleiades or Praesepe. Of all such majestic communities the laws and
revolutions remain, as yet, inaccessible to inquiry; centuries may
elapse before even a rudimentary acquaintance with them begins to
develop; while the economy of the higher order of association, which we
must reasonably believe that they unite to compose, will possibly
continue to stimulate and baffle human curiosity to the end of time.


FOOTNOTES:

[Footnote 1369: _Report Brit. Assoc._, 1868, p. 166. Rutherfurd gave a
rudimentary sketch of a classification of the kind in December, 1862,
but based on imperfect observation. See _Am. Jour. of Sc._, vol. xxxv.,
p. 77.]

[Footnote 1370: _Publicationem_, Potsdam, No. 14, 1884, p. 31.]

[Footnote 1371: Von Konkoly _once_ derived from a slow-moving meteor a
hydro-carbon spectrum. A. S. Herschel, _Nature_, vol. xxiv., p. 507.]

[Footnote 1372: _Phil. Trans._, vol. cliv., p. 429.]

[Footnote 1373: _Am. Jour. of Sc._, vol. xix., p. 467.]

[Footnote 1374: _Photom. Unters._, p. 243.]

[Footnote 1375: _Spectre Solaire_, p. 38.]

[Footnote 1376: Mr. J. Birmingham, in the Introduction to his Catalogue
of Red Stars, adduced sundry instances of colour-change in a direction
the opposite to that assumed by Zoellner to be the inevitable result of
time. _Trans. R. Irish Acad._, vol. xxvi., p. 251. A learned discussion
by Dr. T. J. J. See, moreover, enforces the belief that Sirius was
absolutely _red_ eighteen hundred years ago. _Astr. and Astroph._, vol.
xi., p. 269.]

[Footnote 1377: _Phil. Trans.,_ vol. clxiv., p. 492.]

[Footnote 1378: _Astr. Nach._, No. 2,000.]

[Footnote 1379: _Proc. Roy. Soc._, vols. xvi., p. 31; xvii., p. 48.]

[Footnote 1380: _Annalen der Physik_, Bd. xx., p. 155.]

[Footnote 1381: _Ibid._, p. 153.]

[Footnote 1382: _Knowledge_, vol. xiv., p. 101.]

[Footnote 1383: _Meteoritic Hypothesis_, p. 380.]

[Footnote 1384: _Phil. Trans._, vol. cxci. A., p. 128; _Spectra of
Southern Stars_, p. 3.]

[Footnote 1385: See the author's _System of the Stars_, p. 84.]

[Footnote 1386: A designation applied by Sir Norman Lockyer to
third-type stars.]

[Footnote 1387: See _ante_, p. 198.]

[Footnote 1388: _Bothkamp Beobachtungen_, Heft ii., p. 146.]

[Footnote 1389: _Astr. Nach._, No. 2,539.]

[Footnote 1390: _Ibid._, No. 2,548; _Observatory_, vol. vi., p. 332.]

[Footnote 1391: _Month. Not._, vol. xlvii., p. 92.]

[Footnote 1392: _Publ. Astr. Pac. Soc._, vol. i., p. 80; _Observatory_,
vol. xiii., p. 46.]

[Footnote 1393: _Lockyer, Proc. Roy. Soc._, vol. lvii., p. 173.]

[Footnote 1394: _Astr. Nach._, No. 3,129.]

[Footnote 1395: _Month. Not._, vol. lix., p. 505.]

[Footnote 1396: _Astr. Nach._, No. 2,581.]

[Footnote 1397: _Ibid._, Nos. 2,651-2.]

[Footnote 1398: _Ibid._, No. 3,051; _Astr. and Astrophysics_, vol. xi.,
p. 25; Belopolsky, _Astr. Nach._, No. 3,129.]

[Footnote 1399: _Comptes Rendus_, t. lxv., p. 292.]

[Footnote 1400: _Copernicus_, vol. iii., p. 207.]

[Footnote 1401: _System of the Stars_, p. 70; _Harvard Annals_, vol.
xxviii., pt. ii., p. 243 (Miss Cannon).]

[Footnote 1402: _Potsdam Publ._, No. 14, p. 17.]

[Footnote 1403: _Proc. Roy. Soc._, vol. xlix., p. 33.]

[Footnote 1404: Miss A. J. Cannon, _Harvard Annals_, vol. xxviii., pt.
ii., p. 141.]

[Footnote 1405: _Astr. and Astroph._, vol. xiii., p. 448.]

[Footnote 1406: _Potsdam Publ._, No. 2.]

[Footnote 1407: The results of Von Konkoly's extension of Vogel's work
to 15 deg. of south declination were published in _O Gyalla
Beobachtungen_, Bd. viii., Th. ii., 1887.]

[Footnote 1408: _Astroph. Jour._, vols. viii., p. 237; ix., p. 271.]

[Footnote 1409: _Ibid._, vol. ix., p. 119.]

[Footnote 1410: _Phil. Trans._, vol. cliv., p. 413. Some preliminary
results were embodied in a "note" communicated to the Royal Society,
February 19, 1863 (_Proc. Roy. Soc._, vol. xii., p. 444).]

[Footnote 1411: _Bothkamp Beob._, Heft i., p. 25.]

[Footnote 1412: _Astroph. Jour._, vol. vi., p. 423.]

[Footnote 1413: _Phil. Trans._, vol. cliv., p. 429, _note_.]

[Footnote 1414: _Month. Not._, vol. xxiii., p. 180.]

[Footnote 1415: _Proc. Roy. Soc._, vol. xxv., p. 446.]

[Footnote 1416: _Phil. Trans._, vol. clxxi., p. 669; _Atlas of Stellar
Spectra_, p. 22.]

[Footnote 1417: _Astr. Nach._, No. 2,301; _Monatsb._, Berlin, 1879, p.
119; 1880, p. 192.]

[Footnote 1418: _Jour. de Physique_, t. v., p. 98.]

[Footnote 1419: _System of the Stars_, p. 39.]

[Footnote 1420: See _ante_, p. 198.]

[Footnote 1421: _Proc. Roy. Soc._, vol. xlviii., p. 314.]

[Footnote 1422: _Harvard Circulars_, Nos. 12, 18; _Astroph. Jour._, vol.
v., p. 92.]

[Footnote 1423: _Astroph. Jour._, vol. vi., p. 233.]

[Footnote 1424: McClean, _Phil. Trans._, vol. cxci. A., p. 129.]

[Footnote 1425: _Proc. Roy. Soc._, vol. lxii., p. 417.]

[Footnote 1426: _Ibid._, April 27, 1899; _Astroph. Jour._, vol. x., p.
272.]

[Footnote 1427: _Astr. Nach._, No. 3,565.]

[Footnote 1428: _Ibid._, No. 3,583.]

[Footnote 1429: Lunt, _Astroph. Jour._, vol. xi., p. 262; _Proc. Roy.
Soc._, vol. lxvi., p. 44; Lockyer, _ibid._, November 23, 1899; _Nature_,
vol. lxi., p. 263.]

[Footnote 1430: _Die Spectralanalyse_, p. 314.]

[Footnote 1431: _Henry Draper Memorial, First Ann. Report_, 1887.]

[Footnote 1432: _Mem. Amer. Acad._, vol. xi., p. 215.]

[Footnote 1433: _Harvard Annals_, vol. xxvii.]

[Footnote 1434: _Harvard Annals_, vol. xxviii., parts i. and ii.]

[Footnote 1435: See _ante_, p. 201.]

[Footnote 1436: _Phil. Trans._, vol. clviii., p. 529.]

[Footnote 1437: Schellen, _Die Spectralanalyse_, Bd. ii., p. 326 (ed.
1883).]

[Footnote 1438: _Proc. Roy. Soc._, vol. xx., p. 386.]

[Footnote 1439: _System of the Stars_, p. 199.]

[Footnote 1440: Pickering, _Am. Jour. of Sc._, vol. xxxix., p. 46;
Vogel, _Astr. Nach._ No. 3,017.]

[Footnote 1441: _Sitzungsberichte_, Berlin, May 2, 1901; _Astroph.
Jour._, vol. xiii., p. 324.]

[Footnote 1442: The "relative orbit" of a double star is that described
by one round the other as a fixed point. Micrometrical measures are
always thus executed. But in reality both stars move in opposite
directions, and at rates inversely as their masses round their common
centre of gravity.]

[Footnote 1443: Vogel, _Astr. Nach._, Nos. 3,017, 3,039.]

[Footnote 1444: Huggins, _Pres. Address_, 1891; Cornu, _Sur la Methode
Doppler-Fizeau_ p. D. 38.]

[Footnote 1445: _Sitzungsb._, Berlin, 1890, p. 401; _Astr. Nach._, No.
2,995.]

[Footnote 1446: _Ibid._]

[Footnote 1447: _Astroph. Jour._, vol. v., p. 1; Newall, _Month. Not._,
vol. lvii., p. 575.]

[Footnote 1448: _Bull. de l'Acad. de St. Petersb._, tt. vi., viii.]

[Footnote 1449: _Astroph. Jour._, vol. x., p. 177; _Month. Not._, vol.
lx., p. 418; Vogel, _Sitzungsb._, Berlin, April 19, 1900.]

[Footnote 1450: _Month. Not._, vol. lx., p. 595.]

[Footnote 1451: Hussey, _Astr. Jour._, No. 484.]

[Footnote 1452: _Astroph. Jour._, vols. x, p. 180; xiv., p. 140; _Lick
Bulletin_, No. 4; Belopolsky, _Astr. Nach._, No. 3,637.]

[Footnote 1453: The significance of the name "El Ghoul" leaves little
doubt that the Arab astronomers took note of this star's variability. E.
M. Clerke, _Observatory_, vol. xv., p. 271.]

[Footnote 1454: _Phil. Trans._, vol. lxxiii., p. 484.]

[Footnote 1455: _Proc. Amer. Acad._, vol. xvi., p. 17; _Observatory_,
vol. iv., p. 116. For a preliminary essay by T. S. Aldis, see _Phil.
Mag._, vol. xxxix., p. 363, 1870.]

[Footnote 1456: _Astr. Nach._, No. 2,947.]

[Footnote 1457: _Astr. Jour._, Nos. 165-6, 255-6, 509. See also
_Knowledge_, vol. xv., p. 186.]

[Footnote 1458: Bauschinger, _V. J. S. Astr. Ges._, Jahrg. xxix.; but
_cf._ Searle, _Harvard Annals_, vol. xxix., p. 223; Boss, _Astr. Jour._,
No. 343.]

[Footnote 1459: _Comptes Rendus_, t. cxx., p. 125.]

[Footnote 1460: Myers, _Astroph. Jour._, vol. vii., p. 1; A. W. Roberts,
_Ibid._, vol. xiii., p. 181.]

[Footnote 1461: _Proc. R. Irish Ac._, July, 1884.]

[Footnote 1462: _Ibid._, vol. i., p. 97.]

[Footnote 1463: _Astr. Jour._, Nos. 179, 180.]

[Footnote 1464: _Ibid._, Nos. 300, 379.]

[Footnote 1465: _Astr. Jour._, Nos. 491-2.]

[Footnote 1466: _System of the Stars_, p. 125.]

[Footnote 1467: _Proc. Roy. Soc._, vol. xv., p. 146.]

[Footnote 1468: Weiss, _Astr. Nach._, No. 1,590; Espin, _Ibid._, No.
3,200.]

[Footnote 1469: _Comptes Rendus_, t. lxxxiii., p. 1172.]

[Footnote 1470: _Monatsb._, Berlin, 1877, pp. 241, 826.]

[Footnote 1471: _Copernicus_, vol. ii., p. 101.]

[Footnote 1472: Burnham, _Month. Not._, vol. lii., p. 457.]

[Footnote 1473: _Astr. Nach._, No. 2,682.]

[Footnote 1474: A. Hall, _Am. Jour. of Sc._, vol. xxxi., p. 301.]

[Footnote 1475: Young, _Sid. Messenger_, vol. iv., p. 282; Hasselberg,
_Astr. Nach._, No. 2,690.]

[Footnote 1476: _Report Brit. Assoc._, 1885, p. 935.]

[Footnote 1477: _Month. Not._, vol. xlvii., p. 54.]

[Footnote 1478: _Nature_, vol. xxxii., p. 522.]

[Footnote 1479: _Astr. Nach._, Nos. 1,267, 2,715.]

[Footnote 1480: _Month. Not._, vol. xxi., p. 32.]

[Footnote 1481: _Observatory_, vol. viii., p. 335.]

[Footnote 1482: _Astr. Nach._, No. 3,118; _Astr. and Astroph._, vol.
xi., p. 907.]

[Footnote 1483: _Cape Results_, p. 137.]

[Footnote 1484: _Trans. R. Soc. of Edinburgh_, vol. xxvii., p. 51;
_Astr. and Astroph._, August, 1892, p. 593.]

[Footnote 1485: Vogel, _Astr. Nach._, No. 3,079.]

[Footnote 1486: _Observatory_, vol. xv., p. 287; Seeliger, _Astr.
Nach._, No. 3,118; _Astr. and Astroph._, vol. xi., p. 906.]

[Footnote 1487: Ranyard, _Knowledge_, vol. xv., p. 110.]

[Footnote 1488: _Proc. Roy. Soc._, vol. li., p. 492.]

[Footnote 1489: Burnham, _Month. Not._, vol. liii., p. 58.]

[Footnote 1490: _Astr. Nach._, Nos. 3,118, 3,143.]

[Footnote 1491: Renz, _Ibid._, Nos. 3,119, 3,238; Huggins, _Astr. and
Astroph._, vol. xiii., p. 314.]

[Footnote 1492: _Astr. Nach._, No. 3,111.]

[Footnote 1493: Belopolsky, _Astr. Nach._, No. 3,120.]

[Footnote 1494: _Nature_, September 15, 1892.]

[Footnote 1495: _Astr. Nach._, Nos. 3,122, 3,129.]

[Footnote 1496: _Ibid._, No. 3,133; _Astr. and Astroph._, vol. xi., p.
715.]

[Footnote 1497: _Publ. Astr. Pac. Soc._, vol. iv., p. 244.]

[Footnote 1498: Barnard, _Astroph. Jour._, vol. xiv., p. 152; Campbell,
_Observatory_, vol. xxiv., p. 360.]

[Footnote 1499: _Pop. Astr._, March, 1895, p. 307.]

[Footnote 1500: _Harvard Circular_, No. 4, December 20, 1895. The first
Nova Persei was spectrographically recorded in 1887.]

[Footnote 1501: Vogel, _Sitzungsb._, Berlin, April 19, 1900, p. 389.]

[Footnote 1502: Sidgreaves, _Observatory_, vol. xxiv., p. 191.]

[Footnote 1503: _Ibid._, _Knowledge_, vol. xxv., p. 10.]

[Footnote 1504: _Lick Bulletin_, No. 8.]

[Footnote 1505: _Astr. Nach._, No. 3,736.]

[Footnote 1506: _Astroph. Jour._, vol. xiv., p. 167.]

[Footnote 1507: _Lick Bulletin_, No. 10.]

[Footnote 1508: _Astroph. Jour._, vols. xiv., p. 293; xv., p. 129.]

[Footnote 1509: _Cf._ the theories on the subject of M. Wolf, _Astr.
Nach._, Nos. 3,752, 3,753; Kapteyn, _Ibid._, No. 3,756; F. W. Very,
_Ibid._, No. 3,771; and W. E. Wilson, _Proc. Roy. Dublin Soc._, No. 45,
p. 556.]

[Footnote 1510: _Phil. Trans._, vol. cliv., p. 437.]

[Footnote 1511: _Phil. Trans._, vol. clviii., p. 540. The true
proportion seems to be about one-tenth (_Harvard Annals_, vol. xxvi.,
pt. ii., p. 205), the Tulse Hill working-list having been formed of
specially selected objects.]

[Footnote 1512: Scheiner, _Astr. Nach._, No. 3,476; _Astroph. Jour._,
vol. vii., p. 231; Campbell, _Ibid._, vols. ix., p. 312; x., p. 22.]

[Footnote 1513: _Proc. Roy. Soc._, vols. xlvi., p. 40; xlviii., p. 202.]

[Footnote 1514: _Publ. Astr. Pac. Soc._, vol. ii., p. 265; _Proc. Roy.
Soc._, vol. xlix., p. 399.]

[Footnote 1515: _Astr. Nach._, No 3,549.]

[Footnote 1516: _Atlas of Stellar Spectra_, p. 125.]

[Footnote 1517: _Knowledge_, vol. xix., p. 39.]

[Footnote 1518: _Astr. Nach._, Nos. 1,366, 1,391, 1,689; Chambers,
_Descriptive Astr._ (3rd ed.), p. 543; Flammarion, _L'Univers Sideral_,
p. 818.]

[Footnote 1519: _Month. Not._, vol. li., p. 94.]

[Footnote 1520: _Ibid._, vol. lix., p. 372.]

[Footnote 1521: _Ibid._, vol. lx., p. 424.]

[Footnote 1522: Dreyer, _Ibid._, vol. lii., p. 100.]

[Footnote 1523: _Wash. Obs._, vol. xxv., App. 1.]

[Footnote 1524: _Am. Jour. of Sc._, vol. xiv., p. 433; C. Dreyer,
_Month. Not._, vol. xlvii., p. 419.]

[Footnote 1525: _Ibid._, vol. li., p. 496.]

[Footnote 1526: Reproduced in _Knowledge_, April, 1893.]

[Footnote 1527: Unless an exception be found in the Pleiades nebulae,
which may be assumed to share the small apparent movement of the stars
they adhere to.]

[Footnote 1528: _Abhandl. Akad. der Wiss._, Leipzig, 1857, Bd. iii., p.
295.]

[Footnote 1529: _Month. Not._, vol. lii., p. 31.]

[Footnote 1530: _Proc. Roy. Soc._, 1874, p. 251.]

[Footnote 1531: _Publ. Astr. Pac. Soc._, vol. ii., p. 278.]

[Footnote 1532: _System of the Stars_, p. 257.]

[Footnote 1533: _Proc. Roy. Soc._, vol. xlix., p. 399.]

[Footnote 1534: _Potsdam Publ._, Bd. vii., Th. i.]

[Footnote 1535: _Astr. Nach._, No. 2,714; Schoenfeld, _V. J. S. Astr.
Ges._, Jahrg. xxi., p. 58.]

[Footnote 1536: _Astroph. Journ._, vol. xiii., p. 80.]

[Footnote 1537: _Proc. Roy. Soc._, vol. xxxiii., p. 425; _Report Brit.
Assoc._, 1882, p. 444. An impression of the four lower lines in the same
spectrum was almost simultaneously obtained by Dr. Draper. _Comptes
Rendus_, t. xciv., p. 1243.]

[Footnote 1538: _Proc. Roy. Soc._, vol. xlviii., p. 213.]

[Footnote 1539: _Month. Not._, vol. xlviii., p. 360.]

[Footnote 1540: _Proc. Roy. Soc._, vol. xlvi., p. 40; _System of the
Stars_, p. 79.]

[Footnote 1541: _Sitzungsb._, Berlin, February 13, 1890.]

[Footnote 1542: _Wash. Obs._, vol. xxv., App. i., p. 226.]

[Footnote 1543: _Comptes Rendus_, t. xcii., p. 261.]

[Footnote 1544: _Month. Not._, vol. xliii., p. 255.]

[Footnote 1545: _Harvard Annals_, vol. xviii., p. 116.]

[Footnote 1546: _Sid. Mess._, vol. ix., p. 1.]

[Footnote 1547: _Knowledge_, vol. xv., p. 191.]

[Footnote 1548: _Month. Not._, vol. xlix., p. 65.]

[Footnote 1549: _System of the Stars_, p. 269.]

[Footnote 1550: _Astr. Nach._, Nos. 2,749, 2,754.]

[Footnote 1551: Vogel, _Astr. Nach._, 2,854.]

[Footnote 1552: _Nature_, vol. xliii., p. 419.]

[Footnote 1553: _L'Astronomie_, t. xl., p. 171.]

[Footnote 1554: _Astr. Nach._, Baende xlvii., p. 1; xlviii., p. 1; xlix.,
p. 81. Pickering, _Mem. Am. Ac._, vol. xi., p. 180.]

[Footnote 1555: Gould on Celestial Photography, _Observatory_, vol. ii.,
p. 16.]

[Footnote 1556: _Annals N. Y. Acad. of Sciences_, vol. vi., p. 239,
1892; Elkin, _Publ. Astr. Pac. Soc._, vol. iv., p. 134.]

[Footnote 1557: _Trans. Yale Observatory_, vol. i., pt. i.]

[Footnote 1558: _Astroph. Jour._, vol. xiii., p. 56.]

[Footnote 1559: _Astr. Nach._, No. 2,719.]

[Footnote 1560: _Ibid._, No. 2,726.]

[Footnote 1561: _Ibid._, No. 2,730.]

[Footnote 1562: _Month. Not._, vol. xlvii., p. 24.]

[Footnote 1563: _Les Mondes_, t. iii., p. 529.]

[Footnote 1564: Mouchez, _Comptes Rendus_, t. cvi., p. 912.]

[Footnote 1565: _Astr. Nach._, No. 3,422.]

[Footnote 1566: _Ibid._, No. 3,441.]

[Footnote 1567: _Ibid._, Nos. 3,018, 3,032.]

[Footnote 1568: _Journ. Brit. Astr. Assoc._, vol. ix., p. 133.]

[Footnote 1569: _Astr. Nach._, No. 3,253.]

[Footnote 1570: _Observatory_, vol. xxi., pp. 351, 386.]

[Footnote 1571: Reproduced in _Astroph. Journ._, vol. xi., p. 324.]

[Footnote 1572: _Ibid._, p. 347.]

[Footnote 1573: _Astr. Nach._, No. 3,704.]

[Footnote 1574: _Sitzungsb. Bayer. Akad._, March 23, 1901.]

[Footnote 1575: _Annals of the Cape Observatory_, vols. iii., iv., v.]

[Footnote 1576: _Month. Not._, vol. lx., p. 381.]

[Footnote 1577: D. Klumpke, _Observatory_, vol. xv., p. 305.]

[Footnote 1578: Gilbert, _Sid. Mess._, vol. i., p. 288.]

[Footnote 1579: _Astr. Papers for the Amer. Ephemeris_, vol. viii., pt.
ii.]

[Footnote 1580: _Nature_, vol. xxiv., p. 91; _Dunsink Observations_, pt.
v., 1884.]

[Footnote 1581: Elkin, _Report for 1891-92_, p. 25; Newcomb, _The
Stars_, p. 151.]

[Footnote 1582: _Annals of the Cape Observatory_, vol. viii., pt. ii.
Some of the measures were made by Messrs. Finlay and de Sitter.]

[Footnote 1583: _Astr. Nach._, No. 3,483; _Observatory_, vol. xxi., p.
180.]

[Footnote 1584: _Annalen der Sternwarte in Leiden_, Bd. vii.]

[Footnote 1585: _Report of Harvard Conference in 1898_ (Snyder).]

[Footnote 1586: _Researches in Stellar Parallax_, pt. ii., 1892.]

[Footnote 1587: _V. J. S. Astr. Ges._, Jahrg., xxviii., p. 117.]

[Footnote 1588: _Bulletin de la Carte du Ciel_, No. 1, p. 262.]

[Footnote 1589: _Publ. of the Astr. Laboratory at Groningen_, No. 1.]

[Footnote 1590: _Nature_, vol. xxvi., p. 177.]

[Footnote 1591: _Proc. R. Irish Acad._, vol. i., p. 571, ser. iii.]

[Footnote 1592: _Mem. R. A. S._, vol. xlvii., p. 178.]

[Footnote 1593: _Astr. Nach._, No. 3,142.]

[Footnote 1594: _Publ. Astr. Pac. Soc._, No. 76.]

[Footnote 1595: Campbell, _Lick Bulletin_, No. 4.]

[Footnote 1596: _Publ. Yerkes Observatory_, vol. i., 1900.]

[Footnote 1597: _Annals Cape Observatory_, vol. ii., pt. ii.]

[Footnote 1598: _Astr. Jour._, Nos. 431-2.]

[Footnote 1599: W. J. Hussey, _Publ. Astr. Pac. Soc._, No. 74.]

[Footnote 1600: _Astr. Jour._, No. 258.]

[Footnote 1601: _Sitzungsberichte_, Berlin, October 26, 1893.]

[Footnote 1602: _Annales de l'Obs. de Nice_, t. ii.]

[Footnote 1603: _Washington Observations_, 1888, App. i.]

[Footnote 1604: _Publ. Lick Observatory_, vol. v., 1901.]

[Footnote 1605: T. Lewis, _Observatory_, vol. xvi., p. 312.]

[Footnote 1606: _Harvard Annals_, vol. xiv., pt. i., 1884.]

[Footnote 1607: _Observatory_, vol. viii., p. 309.]

[Footnote 1608: _Month. Not._, vol. xlvi., p. 277.]

[Footnote 1609: _Harvard Annals_, vol. xxxiv.]

[Footnote 1610: _Ibid._, vol. xlv.]

[Footnote 1611: _Carte Phot. du Ciel. Reunion du Comite Permanent_,
Paris, 1891, p. 100.]

[Footnote 1612: _Essays_ (2nd ser.), _The Nebular Hypothesis_.]

[Footnote 1613: _On the Plurality of Worlds_, p. 214 (2nd ed.).]

[Footnote 1614: Proctor, _Month. Not._, vol. xxix., p. 342.]

[Footnote 1615: This remark was first made by J. Michell, _Phil.
Trans._, vol. lvii., p. 25 (1767).]

[Footnote 1616: _Pop. Astr._, No. 45.]

[Footnote 1617: _Astroph. Jour._, vol. i., p. 220.]

[Footnote 1618: _Month. Not._, vols. xxxi., p. 175; xxxii., p. 1.]

[Footnote 1619: _The Stars_, p. 273.]

[Footnote 1620: _System of the Stars_, p. 384; _Old and New Astronomy_,
p. 749 (Ranyard).]

[Footnote 1621: _Astroph. Jour._, vol. xii., p. 156.]

[Footnote 1622: _Publ. Astr. Pac. Soc._, vol. ii., p. 242.]

[Footnote 1623: _Month. Not._, vol. li., pp. 40, 97. For reproductions
of some of the photographs in question, see _Knowledge_, vol. xiv., p.
50.]

[Footnote 1624: _Astr. Nach._, No. 3,048; _Observatory_, vol. xiv., p.
301.]

[Footnote 1625: _Proc. Roy. Inst._, May 29, 1891 (Gill).]

[Footnote 1626: _Annals Cape Obs._, iii., Introduction, p. 22.]

[Footnote 1627: _Proc. Roy. Soc._, vol. xviii., p. 169.]

[Footnote 1628: _Astr. Nach._, No. 3,456; _Observatory_, vol. xxi., p.
65; Newcomb, _The Stars_, p. 80.]

[Footnote 1629: _Month. Not._, vol. xl., p. 249.]




                                CHAPTER XIII

                            _METHODS OF RESEARCH_


Comparing the methods now available for astronomical inquiries with
those in use forty years ago, we are at once struck with the fact that
they have multiplied. The telescope has been supplemented by the
spectroscope and the photographic camera. Now, this really involves a
whole world of change. It means that astronomy has left the place where
she dwelt apart in rapt union with mathematics, indifferent to all
things on earth save only to those mechanical improvements which should
aid her to penetrate further into the heavens, and has descended into
the forum of human knowledge, at once a suppliant and a patron,
alternately invoking help from and promising it to each of the sciences,
and patiently waiting upon the advances of all. The science of the
heavenly bodies has, in a word, become a branch of terrestrial physics,
or rather a higher kind of integration of all their results. It has,
however, this leading peculiarity, that the materials for the whole of
its inquiries are telescopically furnished. They are such as come very
imperfectly, or not at all, within the cognisance of the unarmed eye.

Spectroscopic and photographic apparatus are simply additions to the
telescope. They do not supersede or render it of less importance. On the
contrary, the efficacy of their action depends primarily upon the
optical qualities of the instruments they are attached to. Hence the
development, to their fullest extent, of the powers of the telescope is
of vital moment to the progress of modern physical astronomy, while the
older mathematical astronomy could afford to remain comparatively
indifferent to it.

The colossal Rosse reflector still marks, as to size, the _ne plus
ultra_ of performance in that line. A mirror four feet in diameter was,
however, sent out to Melbourne by the late Thomas Grubb of Dublin in
1870. This is mounted in the Cassegrainian manner, so that the observer
looks straight through it towards the object viewed, of which he really
sees a twice-reflected image. The dust-laden atmosphere of Melbourne is
said to impede very seriously the usefulness of this originally fine
instrument.

It may be doubted whether so large a spectrum will ever again be
constructed. A new material for the mirrors of reflecting telescopes,
proposed by Steinheil in 1856, and independently by Foucault in
1857,[1630] has in a great measure superseded the use of a metallic
alloy. This is glass upon which a thin film of silver has been deposited
by a chemical process originally invented by Liebig. It gives a
peculiarly brilliant reflective surface, throwing back more light than a
metallic mirror of the same area, in the proportion of about sixteen to
nine. Resilvering, too, involves much less risk and trouble than
repolishing a speculum. The first use of this plan on a large scale was
in an instrument of thirty-six inches aperture, finished by Calver for
Dr. Common in 1879. To its excellent qualities turned to account with
rare skill, his triumphs in celestial photography are mainly due. A more
daring experiment was the construction and mounting, by Dr. Common
himself, of a 5-foot reflector. But the first glass disc ordered from
France for the purpose proved radically defective. When figured,
polished, and silvered, towards the close of 1888, it gave elliptical
instead of circular star-images.[1631] A new one had to be procured, and
was ready for astronomical use in 1891. The satisfactory nature of its
performance is vouched for by the observations made with it upon
Jupiter's new satellite in December, 1892. This instrument, to which a
Newtonian form has been given, had no rival in respect of
light-concentration at the time when it was built. It has now two--the
Paris 50-inch refractor and the Yerkes 5-foot reflector.

It is, however, in the construction of refracting telescopes that the
most conspicuous advances have recently been made. The Harvard College
15-inch achromatic was mounted and ready for work in June, 1847. A
