dripped moisture. There was a hollow panicky feeling in his stomach. Now
he was confused as well as afraid.

Another couple was sitting next to a fountain, and a bubbling brook ran
past them, singing into the darkness. Bowren crouched behind a bush and
listened. It might have been the man he had just left, still talking.
The voice was slightly different, but the dialogue sounded very much the
same.

"It must be wonderful to be a woman, dear, and voyage between the stars.
But as I say, I'm glad to stay here and tend the home and mind the
children, glad to be here, my arms open to you when you come back."

"It's so wonderful to know that you care so much. I'm so glad you never
let me forget that you love me."

"I love you, every minute of every day. Just think--two more months and
one week and we will have been married ten years."

"It's so lovely," she said. "It seems like ten days. Like those first
thrilling ten days, darling, going over and over again."

"I'll always love you, darling."

"Always?"

"Always."

The man got up, lifted the woman in his arms, held her high. "Darling,
let's go for a night ride across the desert."

"Oh, you darling. You always think of these little adventures."

"All life with you is an adventure."

"But what about little Jimmie and Janice?"

"I've arranged a sitter for them."

"But darling--you mean you--Oh, you're so wonderful. You think of
everything. So practical, yet so romantic ... so--"

He kissed her and ran away, holding her high in the air, and her
laughter bubbled back to where Bowren crouched behind the bush. He kept
on crouching there, staring numbly at the vacancy the fleeing couple had
left in the shadows. "Good God," he whispered. "After ten years--"

He shook his head and slowly licked his lips. He'd been married five
years.

It hadn't been like this. He'd never heard of any marriage maintaining
such a crazy high romantic level of manic neuroticism as this for very
long. Of course the women had always expected it to. But the men--

And anyway--_where did the men come from?_

       *       *       *       *       *

Bowren moved down a winding lane between exotic blossoms, through air
saturated with the damp scent of night-blooming flowers. He walked
cautiously enough, but in a kind of daze, his mind spinning. The
appearance of those men remained in his mind. When he closed his eyes
for a moment, he could see them.

Perfectly groomed, impeccably dressed, smiling, vital, bronze-skinned,
delicate, yet strong features; the kind of male who might be considered,
Bowren thought, to be able to assert just the right degree of
aggressiveness without being indelicate.

Why, he thought, they've found perfect men, their type of men.

He dodged behind a tree. Here it was again. Same play, same scene
practically, only the players were two other people. A couple standing
arm in arm beside a big pool full of weird darting fish and throwing
upward a subdued bluish light. Music drifted along the warm currents of
air. The couple were silhouetted by the indirect light. The pose is
perfect, he thought. The setting is perfect.

"You're so wonderful, darling," the man was saying, "and I get so lonely
without you. I always see your face, hear your voice, no matter how long
you're away."

"Do you? Do you?"

"Always. Your hair so red, so dark it seems black in certain lights.
Your eyes so slanted, so dark a green they seem black usually too. Your
nose so straight, the nostrils flaring slightly, the least bit too much
sometimes. Your mouth so red and full. Your skin so smooth and dark. And
you're ageless, darling. Being married to you five years, it's one
exciting adventure."

"I love you so," she said. "You're everything any woman could want in a
husband. Simply everything, yet you're so modest with it all. I still
remember how it used to be. Back there ... with the other men I mean?"

"You should forget about _them_, my dear."

"I'm forgetting, slowly though. It may take a long time to forget
completely. Oh, he was such an unpleasant person, so uninteresting after
a while. So inconsiderate, so self-centered. He wasn't romantic at all.
He never said he loved me, and when he kissed me it was mere routine. He
never thought about anything but his work, and when he did come home at
night, he would yell at me about not having ordered the right dinner
from the cafelator. He didn't care whether he used hair remover on his
face in the mornings or not. He was surly and sullen and selfish. But I
could have forgiven everything else if he had only told me every day
that he loved me, that he could never love anyone else. The things that
you do and say, darling."

"I love you," he said. "I love you, I love you. But please, let's not
talk about _him_ anymore. It simply horrifies me!"

Bowren felt the sudden sickening throbbing of his stomach. The
description. Now the slight familiarity of voice. And then he heard the
man say, murmuring, "Lois ... darling Lois...."

Lois! LOIS!

Bowren shivered. His jowls darkened, his mouth pressed thin by the
powerful clamp of his jaws. His body seemed to loosen all over and he
fell into a crouch. Tiredness and torn nerves and long-suppressed
emotion throbbed in him, and all the rage and suppression and
frustration came back in a wave. He yelled. It was more of a sound, a
harsh prolonged animal roar of pain and rage and humiliation.

"Lois ..." He ran forward.

She gasped, sank away as Bowren hit the man, hard. The man sighed and
gyrated swinging his arms, teetering and flipped backward into the pool
among the lights and the weird fish. A spray of cold water struck
Bowren, sobering him a little, sobered his burst of mindless passion
enough that he could hear the shouts of alarm ringing through the trees.
He turned desperately.

Lois cringed. He scarcely remembered her now, he realized. She was
different. He had forgotten everything except an image that had changed
