illustrate this.

_A Thistle Funnel._--This is made by blowing a fairly thick-walled bulb
on a glass tube, bursting a hole by heating and blowing, and enlarging
the burst-out part by heating and rotating against a turn-pin.

_Bending Glass Tube._--Small tubing may be bent in a flat flame gas
burner and offers no special difficulty. Large or thin-walled tubing
should be heated in the blowpipe flame and a slight bend made; another
zone of the tube, just touching the first bend, should now be heated and
another slight bend made. In this way it is possible to avoid flattening
and a bend having any required angle can gradually be produced. A final
shaping of the bend may be made by heating in a large blowpipe flame and
expanding slightly by air pressure.

_Glass Spirals._--If a tube is heated by means of a long, flat-flame
burner, the softened tube may be wound on to an iron mandrel which has
previously been covered with asbestos. The mandrel should be made
slightly conical in order to facilitate withdrawal. It is desirable to
heat the surface of the asbestos almost to redness by means of a second
burner, and thus avoid undue chilling of the glass and the consequent
production of internal strain.

[Illustration: Fig. 7]

_A Thermo-Regulator for Gas._--Fig. 7, _a-e_, shows an easily
constructed thermo-regulator. The mercury reservoir, _a_, and the upper
part, _b_, are made by joining two larger pieces of tubing on to the
capillary. The gas inlet passes through a rubber stopper, in order to
allow of adjustment for depth of insertion, and the bye-pass branches,
_d_ and _e_, are connected by a piece of rubber tubing which can be
compressed by means of a screw clip, thus providing a means of
regulating the bye-pass.

_Use of Glass Rod._--Apart from its most common laboratory use for
stirring; glass rod may be used in building up such articles as
insulating feet for electrical apparatus or acid-resisting cages for
chemical purposes. Such a cage is shown by _f_, _g_ and _h_, Fig. 7.
Further, by an elaboration of the method of making an exhaustion branch,
given on page 18, blown articles may also be constructed from rod. Note
the added parts of _e_, Fig. 9.

_A Simple Foot._--The form of foot shown by Fig. 7, _k_, is easy to make
and has many uses. First join a glass rod to a length of glass tubing as
shown (the joint should be expanded slightly by blowing), cut off the
tube and heat the piece remaining on the rod until it can be turned out
as shown by _i_. This should be done with the large turn-pin, and care
should be taken not to heat the supporting rod too strongly, otherwise
the piece of tube will become bent and distorted; it is better to
commence by heating the edge of the piece of tube and turn out a lip,
then extend the heating by degrees and turn out more and more until the
foot looks like that shown by _i_.

We now need to make three projections of glass rod. These are produced
as follows:--Heat the end of the glass rod until a thoroughly melted
mass of glass has accumulated (the rod must be rotated while this is
being done, otherwise the glass will drop off); when sufficient melted
glass has been obtained, the edge of the turned-out foot should be
heated to dull redness over about one-third of its circumference, and
the melted glass on the rod should be drawn along the heated portion
until both are so completely in contact as to form one mass of
semi-fluid glass. The rod should now be drawn away slowly, and, finally,
separated by melting off, thus producing a flat projection. A repetition
of the process will give the other two projections, and the finished
foot may be adjusted to stand upright by heating the projections
slightly and standing it on the carbon plate mentioned on page 7. After
the foot is adjusted it should be annealed slightly by heating to just
below the softening point of the glass and then rotating in a smoky gas
flame until it is covered with a deposit of carbon, after which it
should be allowed to cool in a place free from draughts and where the
hot glass will not come in contact with anything. The finished foot is
shown by _k_, Fig. 7.

_Building up from Glass Rod._--A glass skeleton-work can be constructed
from rod without much difficulty, and is sometimes useful as a container
for a substance which has to be treated with acid, or for similar
purposes. The method is almost sufficiently explained by the
illustration in Fig. 7; _f_ shows the initial stage, _g_ the method of
construction of the net-work, and _h_ the finished container. It is
convenient to introduce the substance at the stage indicated by _g_. The
important points to observe in making this contrivance are that the
glass rod must be kept hot by working while it is actually in the flame,
and that the skeleton must be made as thin as possible with the
avoidance of heavy masses of glass at any place. If these details are
neglected it will be almost certain to crack.

_Stirrers._--These are usually made from glass rod, and no special
instructions are necessary for their construction, except that the glass
should be in a thoroughly fused condition before making any joins and
the finished join should be annealed slightly by covering with a deposit
of soot, as explained on page 16. The flat ends shown in _a_, Fig. 8,
are made by squeezing the soft glass rod between two pieces of carbon,
and should be re-heated to dull redness after shaping. Fig. 8 also shows
various forms of stirrer.

In order to carry out stirring operations in the presence of a gas or
mixture of gases other than air, some form of gland or seal may be
necessary where the stirrer passes through the bearing in which it runs.
A flask to which is fitted a stirrer and gas seal is shown in section by
_b_, Fig. 8. The liquid used in this seal may be mercury, petroleum, or
any other that the experimental conditions indicate.

[Illustration: Fig. 8]

If the bearing for a stirrer is made of glass tube, it is desirable to
lubricate rather freely; otherwise heat will be produced by the
friction of the stirrer and the tube will probably crack. Such
lubrication may be supplied by turning out the top of the bearing tube
and filling the turned-out portion with petroleum jelly mixed with a
small quantity of finely ground or, better, colloidal graphite, and the
bearing should also be lubricated with the same composition. Care
should be taken not to employ so soft a lubricant or so large an excess
as to cause it to run down the stirrer into the liquid which is being
stirred.

_Leading a Crack._--It sometimes happens that a large bulb or specially
thin-walled tube has to be divided. In such a case it is scarcely
practicable to use the method recommended for small tubes on page 12,
but it is quite easy to lead a crack in any desired direction. A
convenient starting point is a file cut; this is touched with hot glass
until a crack is initiated. A small flame or a bead of hot glass is now
used to heat the article at a point about a quarter of an inch from the
end of the crack and in whatever direction it has to be led. The crack
will now extend towards the source of heat, which should be moved
farther away as the crack advances. In this manner a crack may be caused
to take any desired path and can be led round a large bulb.

_Cutting Glass with the Diamond._--Slips of window-glass can be used in
place of glass rod for some purposes, and as cutting them involves the
use of the glaziers' diamond or a wheel-cutter, they may well be
mentioned under this heading.

In cutting a sheet of glass with the diamond, one needs a flat surface
on which to rest the glass, and a rule against which to guide the
diamond. The diamond should be held in an almost vertical position, and
drawn over the surface of the glass with slight pressure. While this is
being done the angle of the diamond should be changed by bringing the
top of the handle forward until the sound changes from one of scratching
to a clear singing note. When this happens the diamond is cutting. A few
trials will teach the student the correct angle for the diamond with
which he works, and the glass, if properly cut, will break easily. If
the cut fails it is better to turn the glass over and make a
corresponding cut on the other side rather than make any attempt to
improve the original cut. The diamond is seldom used for cutting small
glass tubes.

The use of the wheel-cutter calls for no special mention as it will cut
at any angle, although the pressure required is somewhat greater than
that needed by most diamonds.




CHAPTER III

     Internal Seals, Air-Traps, Spray Arresters,
     Filter-Pumps--Sprays, Condensers; Plain, Double Surface, and
     Spherical--Soxhlet Tubes and Fat Extraction
     Apparatus--Vacuum Tubes, Electrode Work, Enclosed
     Thermometers, Alarm Thermometers, Recording Thermometers,
     "Spinning" Glass.


_Internal Seals._--It is convenient to class those cases in which a
glass tube passes through the wall of another tube or bulb under the
heading of "Internal Seals." These are met with in barometers, spray
arresters, and filter pumps, in condensers and some forms of vacuum
tube. The two principal methods of making such seals will be considered
first and their special application afterwards.

_An Air Trap on a Barometer Tube._--This involves the use of the first
method, and is perhaps the simplest example that can be given. Fig. 9,
_a_, _a1_ and _a2_, show the stages by which this form of internal seal
is made. For the first trials, it is well to work with fairly
thick-walled tubing, which should be cut into two pieces, each being
about eight inches long.

[Illustration: Fig. 9]

First seal the end of one tube as described on page 13, heat the sealed
end and expand to a thick walled bulb. Fuse the end of the other tube,
attach a piece of glass rod to serve as a handle, and draw out; cut off
the drawn-out portion: leaving an end like _a_.

Now heat a small spot at the end of the bulb, blow, burst out, and
remove the thin fragments of glass. Heat a zone on the other tube at the
point where the drawn-out portion commences and expand as shown by _a1_.

The next stage is to join the tubes. Heat the ragged edges of the
burst-out portion until they are thoroughly rounded. At the same time
heat the drawn-out tube to just below softening point. Then, while the
rounded edges of the burst-out portion are still soft, insert the other
tube; rotate the join in the blowpipe flame until it is quite soft, and
expand by blowing. If necessary, re-heat and expand again. The finished
seal, which should be slightly annealed by smoking in a sooty flame, is
shown by _a2_.

_A Spray Arrester._--This is made by the second method, in which the
piece of tube which projects inside the bulb is fused in position first
and the outer tube is then joined on. The various stages of making are
illustrated by _b_, _b1_ and _b2_, Fig. 9.

A bulb is blown between two tubes by the method given on page 22, the
larger tube is then cut off and the small piece of tube introduced into
the bulb after having been shaped as shown in by _b_, Fig. 9. The
opening in the bulb is sealed as shown by _b1_. The sealed part is now
heated and the bulb inclined downwards until the inner tube comes in
contact with the seal and is fused in position. This operation requires
some practice in order to prevent the inner tube either falling through
the soft glass or becoming unsymmetrical. The end of the bulb, where the
inner tube comes in contact with it, is now perforated by heating and
blowing, thus giving the form shown by _b2_, and the outer tube is
joined on. The finished spray arrester is shown by _b3_. Practice alone
will give the power to produce a symmetrical and stable piece of work.

_Two Forms of Filter Pump._--That illustrated by _d_, Fig. 9, is made by
the method explained under "An Air Trap on a Barometer Tube." That
illustrated by _c_ is made by the method explained under "A Spray
Arrester." No new manipulation is involved, and the construction should
be clear from a study of the drawings.

_Multiple and Branched Internal Seals._--A fuller consideration of these
will be found on page 39, but one general principle may well be borne in
mind; that, as far as is possible, a tube having both ends fastened
inside another tube or bulb should be curved or have a spiral or bulb at
some point in its length, otherwise any expansion or contraction will
put great strain on the joints.

_Sprays._--A spray which is easy to make, easy to adjust, and easy to
clean after use is shown by _e_, Fig. 9. The opening on the top of the
bulb is made by melting on a bead of glass, expanding, bursting, and
fusing the ragged edges. The two branches which form the spray producing
junction are made by the method used for an exhaustion branch and
described on page 18.

A spray which can be introduced through the neck of a bottle is shown by
_h_, Fig. 9. The various stages in making this are illustrated by _f_,
and _g_. If the inner tube is made by drawing out from a larger piece of
glass so that two supporting pieces are left on each side of the place
where it is intended to make the final bend, that bend can be made in a
flat-flame gas burner without causing the inner tube to come in contact
with the walls of the outer tube. Care must be taken when joining on the
side piece that the inner tube is not heated enough to fuse it. The
small hole in the side of the outer tube is produced by heating and
bursting.

_A Liebig's Condenser._--This consists of a straight glass tube passing
through an outer cooling jacket. In practice it is better to make the
jacket as a separate piece, and to effect a water-tight junction by
means of two short rubber tubes. It may, however, be made with two
internal seals of the class described under "A Spray Arrester." There is
much less risk of these seals cracking if the inner tube is made in the
form of a spiral or has a number of bulbs blown on it in order to give a
certain amount of elasticity.

_A Double-Surface Condenser._--Fig. 10 shows a condenser of this nature
