
[Illustration: _When the bells rang they would arise...._]

"Hello," Marquis said. The man shivered, then opened dull eyes and
looked up at Marquis. "I just got in. Name's Charles Marquis."

The man blinked. "I'm--I'm--No. 4901." He looked down at his chest,
repeated the number. His fingers shook a little as he touched his lips.

Marquis said. "What's this indoctrination?"

"You--learn. The bells ring--you forget--and learn--"

"There's absolutely no chance of escaping?" Marquis whispered, more to
himself than to 4901.

"Only by dying," 4901 shivered. His eyes rolled crazily, then he turned
over and buried his face in his arms.

The situation had twisted all the old accepted values squarely around.
Preferring death over life. But not because of any anti-life attitude,
or pessimism, or defeatism. None of those negative attitudes that would
have made the will-to-die abnormal under conditions in which there would
have been hope and some faint chance of a bearable future. Here to keep
on living was a final form of de-humanized indignity, of humiliation, of
ignominy, of the worst thing of all--loss of one's-self--of one's
individuality. To die as a human being was much more preferable over
continuing to live as something else--something neither human or
machine, but something of both, with none of the dignity of either.

       *       *       *       *       *

The screening process hadn't detected the capsule of poison in Marquis'
tooth. The capsule contained ten grains of poison, only one of which was
enough to bring a painless death within sixteen hours or so. That was
his ace in the hole, and he waited only for the best time to use it.

Bells rang. The prisoners jumped from their beds and went through a few
minutes of calisthenics. Other bells rang and a tray of small tins of
food-concentrates appeared out of a slit in the wall by each bed. More
bells rang, different kinds of bells, some deep and brazen, others high
and shrill. And the prisoners marched off to specialized jobs
co-operating with various machines.

You slept eight hours. Calisthenics five minutes. Eating ten minutes.
Relaxation to the tune of musical bells, ten minutes. Work period eight
hours. Repeat. That was all of life, and after a while Marquis knew, a
man would not be aware of time, nor of his name, nor that he had once
been human.

Marquis felt deep lancing pain as he tried to resist the bells. Each
time the bells rang and a prisoner didn't respond properly, invisible
rays of needle pain punched and kept punching until he reacted properly.

And finally he did as the bells told him to do. Finally he forgot that
things had ever been any other way.

Marquis sat on his bed, eating, while the bells of eating rang across
the bowed heads in the gray uniforms. He stared at the girl, then at the
man, 4901. There were many opportunities to take one's own life here.
That had perplexed him from the start--_why hasn't the girl, and this
man, succeeded in dying?_

And all the others? They were comparatively new here, all these in this
indoctrination ward. Why weren't they trying to leave in the only
dignified way of escape left?

No. 4901 tried to talk, he tried hard to remember things. Sometimes
memory would break through and bring him pictures of other times, of
happenings on Earth, of a girl he had known, of times when he was a
child. But only the mildest and softest kind of recollections....

Marquis said, "I don't think there's a prisoner here who doesn't want to
escape, and death is the only way out for us. We know that."

For an instant, No. 4901 stopped eating. A spoonful of food concentrate
hung suspended between his mouth and the shelf. Then the food moved
again to the urging of the bells. Invisible pain needles gouged Marquis'
neck, and he ate again too, automatically, talking between tasteless
bites. "A man's life at least is his own," Marquis said. "They can take
everything else. But a man certainly has a right and a duty to take that
life if by so doing he can retain his integrity as a human being.
Suicide--"

No. 4901 bent forward. He groaned, mumbled "Don't--don't--" several
times, then curled forward and lay on the floor knotted up into a
twitching ball.

The eating period was over. The lights went off. Bells sounded for
relaxation. Then the sleep bells began ringing, filling up the absolute
darkness.

Marquis lay there in the dark and he was afraid. He had the poison. He
had the will. But he couldn't be unique in that respect. What was the
matter with the others? All right, the devil with them. Maybe they'd
been broken too soon to act. He could act. Tomorrow, during the work
period, he would take a grain of the poison. Put the capsule back in the
tooth. The poison would work slowly, painlessly, paralyzing the nervous
system, finally the heart. Sometime during the beginning of the next
sleep period he would be dead. That would leave six or seven hours of
darkness and isolation for him to remain dead, so they couldn't get to
him in time to bring him back.

He mentioned suicide to the girl during the next work period. She moaned
a little and curled up like a fetus on the floor. After an hour, she got
up and began inserting punch cards into the big machine again. She
avoided Marquis.

Marquis looked around, went into a corner with his back to the room,
slipped the capsule out and let one of the tiny, almost invisible
grains, melt on his tongue. He replaced the capsule and returned to the
machine. A quiet but exciting triumph made the remainder of the work
period more bearable.
