even the slightest."

We walked back to the concrete command-post. We didn't talk, though it
had been years since we had seen each other. My brain was numbed, I
know. I had seen plenty of fighting, watched many a man go to his
death in the seven months since the war began. But this, somehow, was
different.

An hour passed. Jim busied himself with routine paper work. At least
he had that relief. I paced about his tiny office. Already I was
making plans. Force had failed. Strategy must take its place. I must
get in there. But how?

Bradley looked up from his work, his face grim. "No news, Eric. If you
were right we should have heard something from the _New York_ by this
time. They're gone, all right."

"Yes, they're gone," I answered. "It's up to me, then."

       *       *       *       *       *

He stared in surprise. "Up to you? What do you mean?"

"Just that. I'm going in there, God helping." I made sure the room was
shut tight against eavesdroppers. Then, briefly as I could, I told him
of my orders, showing him the document I had received the day before.
He shook his head.

"But it's impossible. Their ray network, and the undersea barrier,
are absolutely solid here. I don't think even a mouse could get
through. And even if you did get behind their lines, how on earth are
you going to get into the area underneath that devilish cloud. You saw
what happened to the _New York_, protected as she was."

"Yes. I know all that. Nevertheless it's got to be done." Just then I
got the glimmering of an idea. "Tell me, Jim, are they doing much
scouting here. Undersea, I mean."

"The usual one-man shell, radio-propelled. We get one once in a while.
Most of them, however, even if we do smash them, are pulled back on
the wave before we can grab them. It's a bit easier than most places,
though: our depth's only about six hundred feet."

"What! Why, I thought the bottom averaged three thousand all along
the line."

"It does. But what would be a mountain ridge, if this were dry land,
runs out from the mainland. We're over a big plateau here. It goes on
east another twenty-five miles, or so. See, here's the chart."

A warning bell seemed to ring somewhere within me. Had this peculiar
formation of the ocean bed anything to do with the problem at hand?
But I kept to the immediate step. My plan was rapidly taking shape in
my mind.

"What are the scouts--black, yellow, or--"

"Russians, mostly."

"Good. Now listen, Jim. Send down word that the next scout-sub that is
caught is not to be ripped, but simply held against the attraction of
the return wave. The television eye is to be smashed at once, and
radio communication jammed. Can you do it as if something had happened
to the shell?"

"Sure thing, but what's the big idea?"

"You'll see. I've worked the thing out now."

Just then a red light on Bradley's desk winked three times. "There's
one between the lines now!" he exclaimed.

"Quick, man, shoot my orders down."

He pressed a yellow button and spoke quietly but emphatically into a
mouth piece. "O.K. They understand."

"Now take me down."

He looked at me as if I had taken leave of my senses, but complied.

       *       *       *       *       *

The door of the elevator that lowered us from the surface clanged
open. We stepped out on a balcony that ran around a large, steel-lined
room. The walls were dripping, and on the floor, twenty feet beneath,
a black pool sloshed about with the heaving of the raft, in whose
interior we were. Rubber-clad soldiers moved about in the blue glow of
the globes sending down their heatless light from the ceiling. One sat
at a desk near the elevator. As I spied him a green light glowed in
front of him twice.

"They've got him, sir, bringing him in."

A low-toned order. The soldiers sprang to their post. A whirring
signal. At the other end of the room the steel wall began to move
upward, and water rushed in. A tremendous vibration shook the chamber:
a ponderous thudding. The water rose to the level of the balcony and
stopped. I looked at Bradley.

"We're beneath the surface, aren't we?" I asked. "How is it that the
water doesn't fill the room?"

"Pumps," he replied. "Tremendous pumps that draw the water out just as
fast as it comes in, and shoot it out again into the sea. We can
maintain any desired level in here."

Then I noticed that the black flood was rushing by beneath me at a
terrific rate.

Something bulked in the opening. Two tiny subs drew in, a black and a
green. The steel wall rushed down again, and the vibration ceased.
From the green craft heavy grapples extended, clutching the black,
enemy scout. I saw a gaping hole in the black boat's nose, where its
eye had been smashed.

Men were clambering over both vessels' hulls, tugging at the hatchway
fastenings. The black one flew open. I leaped to the deck. Bradley
after me, and jumped down into the hold.

In the little cubby-hole that was all the machinery left space for, a
pale-faced form in green-gray crouched against the wall. His eyes
stared in fear. A Russian, praise be. And not far from my size and
build.

"Off with his clothes, quick!" I yelled, stripping mine as I spoke.
Bradley looked at me queerly, and shrugged his shoulders. "Quick, man!
Everything depends on speed!"

He shook his head, as one who listens to the vaporings of an imbecile,
but turned to obey. I was standing there--naked, studying the
Easterner's face, his body. No scars. Good.

       *       *       *       *       *

Jim turned to me, the prisoner's clothing in his hands. An exclamation
burst from him. He looked back at the trembling Russ, then at me. "My
God, Eric, how did you do it?" he asked.

I smiled. "All right, is it?"

"You're his twin; no, you're himself! If I'd had a drink to-day I'd be
sure I was seeing double. How on earth--you had no make-up, no time--"

I was sliding into the Red's gear as I talked! "I've trained all the
little muscles in my face--muscles you others don't even know you
have. Started when I was a kid, then made a good living at it, acting.
Comes in handy now, damn handy. I can make anything of my face, and
hold it forever if I have to. Chink, Russ--anything. Distort my limbs
too, and change my voice. That won't be necessary now. Simple, but it
takes a lot of practice."

I was dressed by then, a counterpart of the enemy officer--I hoped. If
I wasn't--well, I wouldn't live much longer.

"Now, out with the Russ and my clothes. Don't leave a bit, if you
value my life."

A light of comprehension illumined Jim's face. "You're going to pass
yourself off as this man? You've got your nerve with you!" he
exclaimed.

"Exactly." The cubby-hole was clear now. "Now take that spanner, and
bang me over the head. Not too hard; I don't want a cracked skull,
only a splashed scalp. Then pile me where it will seem I crashed
against a projection of some kind when the grapples took hold. That
bunk edge will do. Batten the hatch, and cast off the grapples. I hope
their automatic control is still working, otherwise my scheme's
gaflooey."

Jim stuck out his great paw. "Good luck, Eric," he said, simply. Then
he clutched the spanner. I saw it go over my head....

       *       *       *       *       *

Voices around me, harsh, guttural voices. Russian! By the Nine Dogs of
War, I had pulled it off! But what were they saying? I was inside the
lines, but was my deception successful? Or had my face relaxed with
the shock of the blow? I thanked my Russian grandmother then for all
the time she had spent teaching me her mother tongue.

"_Boszhe moi_, the poor fellow must have had an awful smash. He hasn't
come to yet."

"The doctor will be here in a minute. He'll revive him."

I breathed a prayer of gratitude. They didn't suspect! But I didn't
like this doctor business. Well, I'd have to stall through that as
best I could.

I seemed to be lying on hard rock. I opened my eyes, staring blankly,
straight up. A bearded face was bending over me, the captain's crossed
sickles on the shoulder straps just within my vision. Behind, and
above him, towering straight up--my God!--what was it? A green wall, a
vertical green wall, going up and up! It looked like--but no: how
could water stand straight up like that, for hundreds of feet?

I almost betrayed myself with a gasp! A dim bulk showed in the
translucent depths of the wall. It rushed toward me, took form. A
fish, a huge, blind fish, its cavernous mouth stretched wide. It came
straight for me, just above. In a second it would leap through. A
scream of terror trembled in my throat. Then it hit the edge of the
translucent green wall--and vanished! Was I dreaming? Had Jim hit me
too hard?

Something stirred in the back of my mind. I sensed dimly that here lay
the explanation of the disappearance of the _New York_, the very
mystery that I had come to solve. Almost I had it; then it slipped
away.

       *       *       *       *       *

"Here's the doctor!" someone said. There was a little stir of activity
about me. I allowed my eyes to close, as if in utter weariness.

"What's all this? What have you got here?" A gruff voice, intolerant.

"One of our sub-sea scouts, sir. Just come back, after some delay. Her
eye was smashed, and there are grapple marks on her. Must have been
caught, and then slipped away. She was leaking badly. We got her
through the lock just in time." Jim had evidently added a few touches
of his own. "Comrade Pauloff seems to have been seriously injured.
He's got a bad cut on his scalp, and was unconscious till a moment
ago. Opened his eyes just as you came along."

"Hm. Let's see." I felt a none too gentle hand finger my wound. It
throbbed maddeningly. The doctor spoke again. "A nasty crack, but no
fracture. Here, you--wake up." I made no move. "Come on, wake up!" I
heard the plop of a cork being drawn from a bottle; a pungent odor
assailed my nostrils, choked me. I writhed, pulled at the hand holding
the bottle to my nose and opened my eyes.

"That's better. How do you feel now?"

I raised a hand to my injury and muttered, in Russian. "Hurts,
papashka." I kept my expression as blank, as uncomprehending, as I
could.

The doctor flashed an understanding glance at the captain, then turned
back to me. "What's your name?"

Memories of my grandmother's tales of her youth came flooding back to
me. "Pavel, son of Pauloff."

It was the formula of the Russian student, in his teens.

"Your rank?"

"Second year. Petrovski Gymnasium."

The physician turned away. "No use bothering him now. A clear case of
amnesia.

"He's been thrown back to his high school days. I've had a number of
cases like that among your scouts lately." Blessed inspiration! "Only
cure is rest. Get him over to the infirmary. We'll evacuate him to a
base hospital to-morrow."

       *       *       *       *       *

I was in a cool white bed, in a low ceilinged room, white painted.
There were other beds, vacant. A uniformed male nurse puttered around.
There was an elusive green tinge to the light that poured in through
the one window.

The door opened and a sergeant came in. "Comrade Alexis!"

"Well, what is it now? Have they found another gold-bricking officer
to mess up my clean beds?"

"A party from corps headquarters will be here in fifteen minutes for
inspection."

"Let them come. They won't find any specks of rust on my instruments,
like they did on Comrade Borisoff's."

"They'd better not. You know what happened to him."

"Yeah. Chucked into the ray. Well, he didn't give the burial squad any
work." And the two laughed, a laugh that had more than a hint of
sadistic cruelty in it. "If I had my way," the nurse went on, "I'd do
the same with all these nuts that come back from the scout ships
raving of home and mother. It's my idea that they're all bluffing.
It's a good way to be shipped to the rear, where the captured dames
are. Say, did I tell you about the last time I was on leave--"

The two whispered, their heads close together. My brain was working
frantically. Things had gone well so far, but I had to get out of here
before the morning, or I'd be sent to the base and lose all that I had
gained by my daring.

The door snapped open. "_Smirnow!_" (Atten-_shun!_)

       *       *       *       *       *

I was on my side, facing away from the wall. I remained so, staring
blankly across the room. I hoped the inspection would be over quickly.
The fewer the enemy officers I had looking me over, the better.
Someone back there was snapping questions. That voice--where had I
heard it before?

"Your patient. What's his trouble?"

"Amnesia, sir. One of the scouts."

"Oh, yes. Let's look at him."

Someone was walking across the room, then standing above me. His hand
was just at the level of my eyes--a hand with the little finger
twisted queerly into the palm. I knew that hand: it was the
_Ferret's_! A cold shiver ran up my back. I almost stopped breathing.

Of all the infernal luck in the world, to have the Ferret walk in
here! He was chief of the Red's Intelligence Service, the shrewdest,
sharpest, cruelest of them all. Many of our best men had gone west
because of his uncanny instinct for piercing disguise. They said he
could _smell_ an American. And many of our most strictly guarded plans
had been smashed through his infernally clever spying. Only a month
before I had him in my clutches; saw the very rope around his neck.
But he had slipped away, and left me empty-handed and kicking myself
for an ass.

I held my breath as I felt those gimlet eyes of his boring into me.
Would he sense who I was? Surely he could hear the pounding of my
heart. How long he stood there I don't know. It seemed like hours. I
tautened, waiting for him to call out, determined to sell my life as
dearly as I could.

But for once the Ferret was fooled. He turned away. "Take us into your
kitchen," he snapped at the nurse, then there was the tramping of feet
and the slamming of a door.

       *       *       *       *       *

The breath whistled from me in relief. I turned cautiously. I was
alone. Now was my chance. I jumped from the bed and started toward the
window. Once out, I'd find some place to hide. I let my face relax;
there was no use for that particular disguise any longer. The window
was up. I was on the sill. Another second and I'd be out in the open.

"Just where do you think you're going?" came the Ferret's silky, cruel
voice. I whirled. There he was, just inside the door. His little black
eyes glinted dangerously over his hooked nose and sharp chin.

"Oh--Bolton! Something made me turn back. Glad to see you."

His hand flashed to the ray-tube in his belt. At the same moment I
left the window sill in a desperate leap. Clear across the room I
sprang, and before he had time to pull his weapon I had one hand
clamped around his wrist, the other clutching his throat. We crashed
to the ground.

I was in pyjamas, barefooted, he fully clothed. His leather shoes
drove into me viciously, even as his face turned purple. The pain was
excruciating, but I dared not cry out. His left thumb found my eye,
was digging in.
