
After the meal, which tasted unlike anything which the young man had
ever eaten before, the beautiful nurse again essayed conversation with
him. She seemed perplexed and a bit frightened that he could not
understand her words. Somehow, the young man sensed that this girl had
never heard any other language than her own, and that she did not even
know that other languages existed.

       *       *       *       *       *

Strengthened by his food, he determined to set about learning her
language as soon as possible. So he pointed at her and asked, "Milli?"

She nodded, and spoke some word which he took for "yes."

Then he pointed to himself and said, "George."

She understood, but the word was a difficult one for her to duplicate
in the metallic tongue of her people. She made several attempts, until
he laughingly spoke her word for "yes."

Then he pointed to other objects about the room. She gave him the
names of these, but he could easily see that she felt that, if he did
not know the names for all these common things, there must be
something the matter with him.

He wondered how he could make her understand that there were other
languages in the world than her own; and then he remembered the sharks
with their hands and what he had taken to be their sign language.
Perhaps Milli at least knew of the existence of the sign language.
This would afford a parallel; for if she realized that there were two
languages in the world, might there not be three?

So Abbot made some meaningless signs with his fingers. Milli quite
evidently was accustomed to this kind of talk, but she was further
perplexed to find that George talked gibberish with his hands as well
as with his mouth.

She made some signs with her hands, and then said something orally.
Young Abbot instantly pointed to her mouth, and held up one finger;
then to her hands, and held up two; then to his own mouth, and held up
three, at the same time speaking a sentence of English. Instantly she
caught on: there were three languages in the world. And thereafter she
no longer regarded him as crazy.

For several hours she taught him. Then another meal was brought, after
which she left him, and the lights went out.

       *       *       *       *       *

He awakened feeling thoroughly rested and well. The lights were on and
Milli was beside him.

He asked for his clothes. They were brought. Milli withdrew and he put
them on.

After breakfast, which they ate together, one of the bearded men came
and led him out through a number of winding corridors into a larger
room, in which there was a closed spherical glass tank, about ten feet
in diameter, containing one of the human sharks. Around the tank stood
five of the bearded men.

One of them proceeded to address Abbot, but of course the young
American could not make out what he was saying. This apparent lack of
intelligence seemed to exasperate the man; and finally he turned
toward the tank, and engaged in a sign language conference with the
fish; then turned back to Abbot again and spoke to him very sternly.

But Abbot shook his head and replied, "Milli. Bring Milli."

One of the other men flashed a look of triumph at their leader, and
laughed.

"Yes," he added, "bring Milli."

The leader scowled at him, and some words were interchanged, but it
ended in Milli being sent for. She apparently explained the situation
to the satisfaction of the fish, to the intense glee of the man who
had sent for her, and to the rather complete discomfiture of the
leader of the five.

Abbot later learned that the leader's name was Thig, and that the name
of the gleeful man was Dolf.

The reception over, Milli led Abbot back to his room.

       *       *       *       *       *

There ensued many days--very pleasant days--of language instruction
from Milli. Dolf and Thig and others of the five came frequently, to
note his progress and to talk with him and ask him questions.

A sitting room was provided for him, adjoining his sleeping quarters.
Milli occupied quarters nearby.

Within a week he had mastered enough of the language of these people,
for their strange history began to be intelligible to him.

In spite of the fact that the air here was at merely atmospheric
pressure, nevertheless this place was one mile beneath the surface of
the Pacific. Milli and her people lived in a city hollowed out of a
reef of rocks, reinforced against the terrific weight of the water and
filled with laboratory-made air. They had never been to the surface of
the sea.

The fish with the human arms were their creators and their masters.

Professor Osborne had been right. The fish of the deep, having a head
start on the rest of the world, had evolved to a perfectly
unbelievable degree of intelligence. Centuries ago they had built for
themselves the exact analog of George Abbot's bathysphere, and in it
they had made much the same sort of exploring trips to the surface
that he had made down into the deeps. But their spheres had been
constructed to keep in, rather than to keep out, great pressure.

Their scientists had gathered a wealth of data as to conditions on the
surface, and had even seen and studied human beings. But their
insatiable scientific curiosity had led them to want to know more
about the strange country above them and the strange persons who
inhabited it. And so they set about breeding, in their own
laboratories, creatures which should be as like as possible to those
whom they had observed on the surface.

       *       *       *       *       *

Of course, this experiment necessitated their first setting up an
air-filled partial vacuum similar to that which surrounds the earth.
But they had persisted. They had brought down samples of air from the
surface of the sea, and had analyzed and duplicated it on a large
scale.

Finally, through long years, they had so directed--and controlled the
course of evolution, in their breederies, as first to be able to
produce creatures which could live in air at low pressures, and then
to evolve the descendants of those creatures into intelligent human
beings.

Some of the lower types of this evolutionary process, both in the
direct line of descent of man, and among the collateral offshoots, had
been retained for food and other purposes. Abbot, with intense
scientific interest, studied these specimens in the zoo of the
underwater city where he was staying.

Plans had been in progress for some time, among the fish-folk and
their human subjects, to send an expedition to the surface. And now
the shark masters had fortunately been able to secure alive an actual
specimen of the surface folk--namely, George Abbot. The expedition was
accordingly postponed until they could pump out of the young scientist
all the information possible.

Abbot was naturally overjoyed at the prospect. This would not only get
him out of here--but think what it would mean to science!

The plans of the sharks were entirely peaceful. Furthermore there were
only about two hundred of their laboratory-bred synthetic human
beings, and so these could constitute no menace to mankind.
Accordingly he enthusiastically assured them that they could depend
upon the hearty cooperation of the scientists of the outer earth.

       *       *       *       *       *

During all his stay so far in this cave city, Abbot had been permitted
to come in contact only with Milli, the members of the Committee of
Five, and an occasional guard or laboratory assistant. Yet, in spite
of the absence of personal contacts with other members of this strange
race, Abbot was constantly aware of a background of many people and
tense activity, which kept the wheels of industry and domestic economy
turning in this undersea city.

Although the young man readily accustomed himself to the speech and
food and customs of this strange race, his personal modesty and
neatness revolted at the loin-cloths and beards of the men; and so, by
special dispensation, he was permitted to wear his sailor suit and to
shave.

The Committee of Five, who constituted a sort of ruling body for the
city, interviewed him at length, cross-examined him most skilfully and
took copious notes. But there seemed to be a strange lack of common
meeting ground between their minds and his, so that very often they
were forced to call on Milli to act as an intermediary. The beautiful
young girl seemed able to understand both George Abbot and the leaders
of her own people with equal facility.

A number of specially constructed submarines had already been built to
carry the expedition to the surface. Before it came time to use them,
Abbot tried to paint as glowing a picture as possible of life on
earth; but he found it necessary to gloss over a great many things.
How could he explain and justify war, liquor, crime, poverty, graft,
and the other evils to which constant acquaintance has rendered the
human race so calloused?

       *       *       *       *       *

He was unable to deceive the men of the deep. With their
super-intelligence, they relentlessly unearthed from him all the
salient facts. And, as a result of their discoveries, their initial
friendly feeling for the world of men rapidly developed into supreme
contempt.

But Abbot on the other hand developed a deep respect for them. Their
chemistry and their electrical and mechanical devices amazed and
astounded him. They even were able to keep sun-time and tell the
seasons, by means of gyroscopes!

Age was measured much as it is on the surface. This fact was brought
to Abbot's attention by the approach of Milli's twentieth birthday.

Strange to relate, she seemed to dread the approach of that
anniversary, and finally told Abbot the reason.

"It is the custom," said she, "when a girl or a boy reaches twenty, to
give a very rigorous intelligence test. In fact, such a test is given
on every birthday, but the one on the twentieth is the hardest. So
far, I have just barely passed each test, which fact marks me as of
very low mentality indeed. And, if I fail _this_ time, they will kill
me, so as to make room for others who have a better right to live."

"Impossible!" exclaimed the young man indignantly. "Why, you have a
better mind than those of many of the leading scientists of the outer
world!"

"All the same," she gloomily replied, "it is way below standard for
down here."

       *       *       *       *       *

On the day of the test, he did his best to cheer her up. Dolf also
came--she seemed to be an especial protege of his--and gave her his
encouragement. He had been coaching her heavily for the examinations
for some time previous.

But later in the day she returned in tears to report to Abbot that she
had failed, and had only twenty-four hours to live. Before he realized
what he was doing, Abbot had seized her in his arms, and was pouring
out to her a love which up to that moment he had not realized
existed.

Finally her sobbing ceased, and she smiled through her tears.

"George, dear," said she, "it is worth dying, to know that you care
for me like this."

"I won't let them kill you!" asserted the young man belligerently.
"They owe me something for the assistance which I am to give them on
their expedition. I shall demand your life as the price of my
cooperation. Besides, you are the only one of all your people who has
brains enough to understand what I tell them about the outer earth. It
is they who are weak-minded; not you!"

But she sadly shook her head.

"It would never do for you to sponsor me," said she, "for it would
alienate my one friend in power, Dolf. He loves me; no, don't scowl,
for I do not love him. But, for the safety of both of us, we must not
let him know of our love--yet."

"'Yet'?" exclaimed Abbot, "when you have less than a day to live?"

"You have given me hope," the girl replied, "and also an idea. Dolf
promised to appeal to the other members of the Five. I have just
thought of a good ground for his appeal; namely, my ability to
translate your clumsy description into a form suited to the high
intelligence of our superiors."

"'Clumsy'?" exclaimed the young man, a bit nettled.

"Oh, pardon me, dear. I'm so sorry," said she contritely. "I didn't
mean to let it slip. And now I must rush to Dolf and tell him my
idea."

"Don't let him make love to you, though!" admonished Abbot gloomily.

She kissed him lightly, and fled.

       *       *       *       *       *

A half hour later she was back, all smiles. The idea had gone across
big. Dolf, as the leader of the projected expedition, had demanded
that Milli be brought along as liaison officer between them and their
guide; and the other four committeemen had reluctantly acceded. The
execution was accordingly indefinitely postponed.

The young couple spent the evening making happy plans for their life
together on the outer earth, for as soon as they should arrive in
America, Dolf would have no further hold over them.

The next day, the Committee of Five announced that, for a change, they
were going to give George Abbot an intelligence test. He had
represented himself as being one of the scientists of the outer earth;
accordingly, they could gauge the caliber of his fellow countrymen by
determining his I. Q.

Milli was quite agitated when this program was announced, but the
ordeal held no terrors for George Abbot. Had he not taken many such
tests on earth and passed them easily?

So he appeared before the Committee of Five with a rather cocky air.
He had yet to see an intelligence test too tricky for him to eat
alive.

"Start him with something easy," suggested Dolf. "Perhaps they don't
have tests on the outer earth. You know, one gains a certain facility
by practice."

"Milli didn't, in spite of all the practicing which you gave her,"
maliciously remarked Thig.

Dolf glowered at him.

       *       *       *       *       *

"What is the cube root of 378?" suddenly asked one of the other
members of the committee.

"Oh, a little over seven," hazarded Abbot.

"Come, come," boomed Thig: "give it to us exactly."

"Well, seven-point-two, I guess."

"Don't guess. Give it exact, to four decimal places."

"In my head?" asked Abbot incredulously.

"Certainly!" replied Thig. "Even a child could do that. We're giving
you easy questions to start with."

"Start him on _square_ root," suggested Dolf kindly. "Remember he
isn't used to these tests like our people are."

So they tried him with square root, in which he turned out to be
equally dumb.

Abstract questions of physics and chemistry he did better on; but the
actual quantitative problems, which they expected him to solve in his
head, stumped him completely.

Then they asked him about education on earth, and the qualifications
for becoming a scientist, and who were the leaders in his field, and
what degrees they held, and what one had to do to get those degrees,
etc. Finally they dismissed him. Dolf then sent for Milli.

She was gone about an hour, and returned to Abbot wide-eyed and
incredulous.

"Oh, George," said she, lowering her voice. "Dolf tells me that your
