



THE PRINCIPLE OF PHASE STABILITY


Fortunately, Drs. Veksler and McMillan showed that relatively low dee
voltages can be used to accelerate ions to very high energies. This is
possible if the oscillator frequency is continuously decreased to keep
it in synchronism with the decreasing rotational frequency of the ions.
This would allow an ion to make many revolutions without becoming out of
phase. This principle of phase stability was experimentally verified
with the 37-inch cyclotron before being incorporated into the design of
the 184-inch machine. Because it utilizes this principle, this machine
has usually been referred to as a "synchrocyclotron" or
"frequency-modulated cyclotron." However, it is sometimes called simply
a "cyclotron."

The 184-inch synchrocyclotron was first operated in November 1946. With
a maximum dee voltage of only 20,000 volts, it accelerated deuterons to
190 Mev and alpha particles to 380 Mev.[4] In 1949 it was modified to
permit production of 350-Mev protons also.

Between 1955 and 1957 the synchrocyclotron was rebuilt so that now the
following energies can be obtained:

    Protons  Deuterons  Alpha Particles  Helium-3 nuclei[5]
    -------  ---------  ---------------  ---------------
    730 Mev   460 Mev       910 Mev         1140 Mev

In reaching an energy of 730 Mev a proton, for example, makes 75,000
revolutions in just 6 milliseconds (msec). It travels a distance of 450
miles and attains a velocity of 152,000 miles per second, or 82% of the
speed of light! During this brief journey its mass increases 75%, giving
very convincing evidence for the validity of Einstein's theory. Similar
data for other ions may be found in the appendix.

FOOTNOTES:

[4] A deuteron is the nucleus of an atom of heavy hydrogen and contains
one proton and one neutron; it carries a single positive electric
charge. An alpha particle is the nucleus of a helium atom and is made up
of two protons and two neutrons; it carries two positive charges.

[5] The machine is equipped for helium-3 operation, but to date it has
not been used for that purpose.




DESIGN AND CONSTRUCTION OF THE 184-INCH SYNCHROCYCLOTRON


_Magnet_

During the rebuilding of the cyclotron, the diameter of the magnet pole
pieces was increased from 184 to 188-3/4 inches. Also, the pole gap at
the center was reduced from 21 to 14 inches. These changes increased the
weight of steel in the magnet from 3700 to 4000 tons.

The main exciting coils, which contain 1300 turns of copper-bar
conductor each, were not altered. Two auxiliary coils containing 425
turns each were added. This brought the total weight of copper from 300
to 340 tons. The coils are layer-wound around the pole pieces close to
the pole gap. Other data about the coils are given in the appendix.

The effect of these modifications was to increase the field strength at
the center of the pole gap from 15,000 to 23,400 gauss. This increase
made it possible to obtain the higher-energy ions.

Power is supplied to the coils by two motor generator sets, which
produce the direct current required for a steady magnetic field. The
direct current from the motor generators is regulated so that the
magnetic-field fluctuation is less than one part in 10,000. This is
necessary if one wants an external beam of nearly uniform energy.

In order to prevent the beam from becoming unstable and striking the
dee, the magnetic field must be strongest at the center and decrease
radially (Fig. 4a). With flat pole faces the field does not decrease
uniformly. To give the desired rate of decrease, the pole faces are
shimmed with concentric steel rings of varying thickness, as shown in
Fig. 4b. In a radially decreasing magnetic field, the lines of magnetic
flux bow outward, as represented in Fig. 4b. Ions moving in a magnetic
field are deflected at right angles to these flux lines. Ions above the
midplane of the cyclotron are directed downward; those below the
midplane are directed upward. In this way an ion oscillates about the
midplane and vertical focusing is achieved.

[Illustration: Fig. 4.

(a) Plot of magnetic-field strength vs radius. The field strength
decreases gradually out to a radius of about 83-in., after which it
falls off sharply. This point marks the maximum usable radius for
particle orbits. Further out they are unstable.

(b) Magnetic flux lines are represented as broken arrows, and focusing
forces as solid arrows. An ion above the midplane is directed downward,
while an ion below the midplane is directed upward.]

Radial focusing is accomplished in a somewhat analogous manner. If the
magnetic field decreases with radius, radial restoring forces are
established. An ion at too large a radius is directed inward, and an ion
at too small a radius is directed outward. In this fashion, the ion
oscillates about the synchronous orbit. Thus, radial focusing is
achieved.


_Vacuum System_

The vacuum tank (acceleration chamber) is a steel box 20 x 25 ft and 4 ft
high. It is evacuated to a pressure of 10^{-5} millimeter of mercury
(about one 100-millionth of atmospheric pressure). The pumping equipment
consists of six oil-diffusion pumps and four mechanical vacuum pumps.
The pumping speed of the six 20-in. oil-diffusion pumps is a total of
20,000 liters/sec.

