both clear and loud, and being susceptible of considerable training, is
highly prized in the choral services of the church and cathedral. At about
fourteen years of age the voice is said to change; that is, it becomes
hoarse and unsteady by reason of the rapid growth of the larynx. In the
case of the girl, the change is not very marked, except that the voice
becomes stronger and has a wider compass; but in the boy, the larynx nearly
doubles its size in a single year, the vocal cords grow thicker, longer,
and coarser, and the voice becomes masculine in character. During the
progress of this change, the use of the voice in singing is injudicious.

[Sidenote: 13. The range of the voice? Result of careful training of the
vocal organs?]

13. The ordinary range of each of the four varieties of {234} the voice is
about two octaves; but this is exceeded in the case of several celebrated
vocalists. Madame Parepa-Rosa has a compass of three full octaves. When the
vocal organs have been subjected to careful training, and are brought under
complete control of the will, the tension of the cords become exact, and
their vibrations become exceedingly precise and true. Under these
circumstances the voice is said to possess "purity" of tone, and can be
heard at a great distance, and above a multitude of other sounds. The power
of a pure voice to make itself heard was recently exemplified in a striking
manner: at a musical festival held in an audience-room of extraordinary
size, and amid an orchestra of a thousand instruments and a chorus of
twelve thousand voices, the artist named above also sang; yet such was the
purity and strength of her voice that its notes could be clearly heard
rising above the vast waves of sound produced by the full accompaniment of
chorus and orchestra.

[Sidenote: 14. The production of the articulate sounds? What experiment is
mentioned?]

14. In the production of the articulate sounds of speech, the larynx is not
directly concerned, but those sounds really depend upon alterations in the
shape of the air-passages above that organ. That speech is not necessarily
due to the action of the larynx is proven by the following simple
experiment. Let an elastic tube be passed through the nostril to the back
of the mouth. Then, while the breath is held, cause the tongue, teeth, and
lips to go through the form of pronouncing words, and at the same time, let
a second person blow through the tube into the mouth. Speech, pure and
simple, or, in other words, a whisper is produced. Still further continue
the experiment, while permitting vocal sounds to be made, and there will be
produced a loud and whispering speech at the same moment; thus showing that
voice and speech are the result of two distinct acts. Sighing, in like
manner, is {235} produced in the mouth and throat; if, however, a vocal
sound be added, the sigh is changed into a groan.

[Sidenote: 15. What is ventriloquism? Indication of the original meaning of
the word? How are the ventriloquous sounds produced?]

15. VENTRILOQUISM is a peculiar modification of natural speech, which
consists in so managing the voice that words and sounds appear to issue,
not from the person, but from some distant place, as from the chimney,
cellar, or the interior of a chest. The original meaning of the word
ventriloquism (that is, speaking from the belly), indicates the early
belief that this mode of speech was dependent upon the possession and use
of some special organ besides the larynx and mouth; but at the present
time, it is known that it is produced by these organs alone, and that the
sources of deception consist on the part of the performer, in the dexterous
management of the voice, together with a talent for mimicry; and, on the
part of the auditory, in the liability of the sense of hearing to error in
respect to the direction of sounds. The ventriloquist not only seems to
"throw his voice," as it is said, or simulates the sound as it usually
appears at a distance with but little motion of the lips and face, but he
imitates the voices of an infant and of a feeble old man, of a drunken man
disputing with an exasperated wife, the broken language of a foreigner, the
cry of an animal in distress, demonstrating that the performer must be
proficient in the art of mimicry. Ventriloquism was known to the ancient
Romans and Greeks; and it is thought that the mysterious responses that
were said to issue from the sacred trees and shrines of the oracles at
Dodona and Delphi, were really uttered by priests who had the power of
producing this form of speech.

       *       *       *       *       *


{236}

CHAPTER XII.

THE USE OF THE MICROSCOPE IN THE STUDY OF PHYSIOLOGY.

[Sidenote: 1. The will of the Creator, by what obeyed? The power of a
muscle? Amount of duty performed by the liver?]

1. THE LAW OF THE TISSUES.--The will of an infinite Creator is obeyed by
atoms as well as by worlds. He has seen fit to commit all the functions of
life to structures or tissues so small as to be invisible to the naked eye.
A muscle, for example, as we have already learned, is composed of
innumerable filaments, visible only by the aid of the microscope; and the
power of the muscular mass is but the sum of the contractile power of the
filaments which enter into its composition. Again, each cell of the liver,
invisible to unassisted sight, is a secreting organ, and the liver performs
as much duty as the sum of these minute organs renders possible and no
more.

[Sidenote: 2. Necessity for using the microscope? The advantages gained by
its use?]

2. THE NECESSITY OF THE MICROSCOPE.--If, therefore, we would know the real
structure of the human body, we must make use of the microscope. We are not
at liberty either to use it or not; we _must_ have recourse to it in order
to obtain a real knowledge of the human body. Our eyes are constructed for
the common offices of life, to provide for our wants and guard us from the
ordinary sources of danger; but by arming them with _lenses_, the real
structure of plants and animals is revealed to our intelligence; and
enemies, otherwise invisible, that lie in wait in the air we breathe, and
in our daily food and drink, to destroy life, are guarded against.

[Sidenote: 3. What are convex lenses? Kind of lenses used in microscopes?
Experiment? Picture thrown upon the eye? Derivation of the word
microscope?]

3. CONVEX LENSES, or magnifying glasses, are disks of glass or other
transparent substance, which have the {237} property of picturing upon the
retina of the eye an image of an object larger than the image produced
there without their aid. The glasses used in microscopes are either double
convex lenses (_a_) or plano-convex lenses (_b_). If a double convex lens
or a plano-convex one be placed over a hole in the shutter of a darkened
room, or over the key-hole of a door, and a piece of paper be held at a
proper distance, a picture of all objects in front of the lens will be
thrown on the paper, as in the camera-obscura or the magic-lantern. Now, in
the same manner, a lens throws a picture of objects to which it is directed
on the retina of the eye, and when that picture is larger than the image
made in the eye by the object, without the aid of the lens, it is
magnified, or the lens has served as a _microscope_, so called, from its
use in seeing small objects, from _mikros_, small, and _skopeo_, to see.

[Illustration]

[Sidenote: 4. Kinds of microscope? What are simple microscopes?]

4. DIFFERENT KINDS OF MICROSCOPES.--Microscopes are either _simple_ or
_compound_. The glasses of magnifying spectacles, like those commonly used
by aged persons, are simple microscopes. Magnifying glasses, mounted in
frames such as are for sale by opticians and others, for the detection of
counterfeit money, are simple microscopes, and are useful in studying the
coarser structure of plants and animals.

[Sidenote: 5. Construction of the most powerful simple microscopes? In
practice? A doublet? Triplet? Why are compound microscopes superior to
simple ones?]

5. The most powerful simple microscopes are made by melting in a flame a
thread of spun glass, so as to form a {238} minute globule or bead, which,
when set in a piece of metal and used to examine objects on a plate of
glass held up to the light, gives a high magnifying power. In practice,
however, it is found better to use several magnifying glasses of moderate
power, than a simple lens alone of high power. A combination of two lenses
is called a _doublet_--of three, a _triplet_. All _simple_ microscopes
throw an enlarged image of the object upon the retina. _Compound_
microscopes are so constructed that the enlarged image of an object is
again magnified by a second lens, and hence their magnifying power is
vastly superior to that of simple microscopes.

[Sidenote: 6. Explain, by means of the diagram, the action of the compound
microscope.]

6. The accompanying diagrams will explain the action of the compound
microscope compared with that of the simple microscope. In Fig. 58, which
represents the working of the simple microscope, the rays from the object
(_a b_), passing through the lens (L), form an image (_a' b'_) in the
retina of the eye (E), and as all images are inverted in the eye, the
object is seen as all other objects are, and appears erect. In Fig. 59 is
seen the action of the compound microscope. An inverted image (_a' b'_) of
the object (_a b_) is magnified by the second lens (L'), and an erect image
is thrown upon the retina, which, as all other objects seen erect with the
naked eye are inverted, gives to the image a contrary direction, or inverts
it to the mind.

[Illustration: FIG. 58.--SIMPLE MICROSCOPE.]

{239}

[Sidenote: 7. Portions, in a compound microscope? The glasses?]

7. A COMPOUND MICROSCOPE consists of two portions: the optical portion, or
the lenses, and the mechanical portion, or the instrument which bears the
lenses. The glasses of a compound microscope are two: the _object-glass_
(D), Fig. 60, and the lower lens of Fig. 59, and the _ocular_ or
_eye-piece_ (A), Fig. 60, and the upper piece of Fig. 59. Both the
object-glass and the eye-piece may, and usually do, consist of more than
one lens, for, as previously mentioned, better results are obtained by a
combination of lenses of moderate power than by single lenses of high power
and great curvature.

[Sidenote: 8. How to choose a microscope? How to use it?]

8. HOW TO CHOOSE AND USE A MICROSCOPE.--No attractiveness in the mechanical
part of a microscope can compensate for inferior lenses; and the very first
consideration in the choice of an instrument should be the excellence of
the optical part of the instrument. In the use of the instrument, care
should be exercised to keep the lenses clean, free from dust, not to press
the object-glass upon the object under observation, and not to wet it in
the water in which most objects are examined. A good microscope requires
its own table; and when not in use should be covered by a bell glass or a
clean linen cloth.

[Illustration: FIG. 59. COMPOUND MICROSCOPE.]

{240} [Illustration: FIG. 60.

A, Eye-piece. B, Body. C, Collar. D, Object-glass. E, Stage. F, Hinge.
G, Mirror. H, Stand.]

[Sidenote: 9. The characteristics of the best instrument? What special
requisites should be insisted upon? Why, as to a horizontal stage?]

9. The mechanical portion of the instrument varies greatly in different
instruments. That one is the best which is simplest, the most solid and
easily managed. The stage (E), upon which the object is placed, should not
be movable: it should be solid and firm. The screw by which the focal
distance is adjusted, and which {241} is in constant use, should be so
placed that it can be worked by the hand resting on the table: otherwise
fatigue is soon induced. The direction of the tube carrying the glasses
should be perpendicular, and the stage therefore horizontal. Most objects
in human anatomy are examined in water or in other liquids, or they are
themselves liquids; hence an oblique stage is often inconvenient.

[Illustration: FIG. 61.]

{242}

[Sidenote: 10. Slides? Covers, square and circular? How kept?]

10. ADDITIONAL APPARATUS.--As almost all objects in human anatomy are
examined by transmitted light thrown up from the mirror (G, Fig. 60)
beneath the stage through the object to the eye, they must be placed upon
strips of clear glass about three inches long and one inch wide, commonly
called "slides." These should be procured with the microscope. Again, most
objects seen with high powers require to be covered with a thin plate of
glass, very properly called a "cover," that the moisture of the specimen
may not tarnish the object-glass. Square or circular covers of very thin
glass are therefore provided; and a good supply of these should be always
on hand. These glasses should be kept in a covered dish filled with a
mixture of alcohol and water. Simple water will not remove the fatty matter
which exists in all animal tissues, and, therefore, the glasses cannot be
thoroughly cleaned with it alone.

[Sidenote: 11. Cleaning the glasses? Knives, scissors, etc.? Various
liquids?]

11. When glasses are required for use, they should be removed from the
liquid and wiped clean and dry with a soft linen handkerchief. Delicate
knives, scissors, needles mounted in handles, forceps, pipettes or little
tubes for taking up water, should be obtained; these are essential to all
microscopical study. The table should be supplied with glass-stoppered
bottles containing the various liquids ordinarily used in the study of
physiology. Thus, tincture of iodine is indispensable in studying vegetable
structure, acetic acid in the study of animal tissues; and other articles
will have to be added from time to time, as your progress in study demands
them. {243}

[Sidenote: 12. Bodies, in air and water? The examination of starch?]

12. PRELIMINARY STUDIES.--In order to prepare the way for the study of any
department of science with the aid of the microscope--for the microscope is
but an eye, and can be turned in almost any direction for purposes of
investigation--it is necessary to become acquainted with the many objects
which are liable to complicate the examination of particular structures.
Both air and water are full of floating bodies, and the most common of
these should first occupy the attention. In the city, particles of starch
are always floating in the air. Take a very minute portion of wheat flour,
place it in the middle of a clean glass "slide," drop upon it a drop of
pure water, cover it with a plate of thin glass, and examine it with a
power of from one hundred to six hundred diameters. It will be found to be
composed of minute grains or granules, the largest of which are made up of
coats or layers, like an onion, arranged around a central spot called the
_hilum_.

[Sidenote: 13. The examination with solution of iodine? Advice respecting
other articles?]

13. Make another preparation in the same manner, and, after adding the
water and before covering with the thin glass cover, add a small drop of a
solution of iodine. Now, upon examining the specimen, every grain will be
seen to be of a beautiful deep blue color. After thus studying wheat
starch, the starch of Indian corn, of arrowroot, and of various grains
should be examined in like manner, and their resemblances and differences
noted. The granules of potato-starch are as distinctly marked as any. (See
Fig. 15, page 61.)

[Sidenote: 14. Directions for examining cotton and other fibres? Vegetable
hairs?]

14. Fibres of cotton, lint, and wool are liable to be found in every
specimen prepared for microscopical examination. In order to study these,
any cotton, woollen, or linen fabric, or garment, may be scraped, and the
scrapings placed on a piece of glass moistened with water, covered with the
thin glass plate or cover as before, and {244} examined with the same
magnifying power, namely, from one hundred to six hundred diameters.
Vegetable hairs or down are constantly floating in air and water. These are
of very various forms, are simple or grouped, and form very interesting
objects of study. They are readily procured from the epidermis or outer
membrane of the leaves or stems of plants, by section with a delicate
knife.

[Sidenote: 15. Directions for examining various tissues? Down of moths, and
other structures?]

15. The tissues of plants, epidermis, ducts, and woody fibres are
constantly found in microscopic preparations. They may be studied in
delicate sections made with a sharp knife, or by tearing vegetable tissues
apart with needles. The down of moths, the hairs of different animals, the
fibres of paper, the most common animalcules in water, the dust of shelves,
and generally the structures found in all vegetable and animal substances
by which we are surrounded, should be studied as a preliminary to any
special line of microscopical investigation.

[Sidenote: 16. Directions for examining a drop of blood?]

16. THE STUDY OF HUMAN TISSUES.--When this has been done and familiarity
with the use of the instrument has been obtained, proceed to the study of
the human body, for human physiology is our subject. If the end of the
finger be pricked with a pin, a drop of blood may be procured for
examination. Place this on one of the glass slides, cover it with a thin
piece of glass, press down the cover so as to make a thin layer, and then
examine with the magnifying power just mentioned. Do not add water, for
that will cause the blood corpuscles to disappear. If the drop of blood is
placed under the microscope at once after being drawn from the finger, most
interesting phenomena will be observed. The red corpuscles will be seen to
arrange themselves in rows, like piles of coin, while the blood is
coagulating. The spherical, white corpuscles will {245} be left out of the
rows of red disks, and, if the highest power be used, will be seen to
change their shape constantly.

[Sidenote: 17. Examination of the scales of the mouth? Dandruff?]

17. If you scrape with a dull knife the inside of the cheek, the flattened
scales of "pavement epithelium," or of the insensible covering which,
analogous to the scarf-skin on the outer surface of the body, lines the
cavities of its interior, may be readily studied. They have the appearance
of transparent tiles, each enclosing a round or oval body, called its
nucleus. Dandruff and the scrapings from the skin of the body are composed
of scales like those of the mouth, but they differ somewhat in being
hardened by horny matter, and in having a very faint central body or
nucleus.

[Sidenote: 18. In what, as respects the tissues, do the warm blooded
animals differ? Statement of Milne Edwards?]

18. THE TISSUES OF THE INFERIOR ANIMALS.--The warm-blooded animals do not
