
A few dozen of the shattered cells had indeed let their contents spill
out onto the slide of his 'scope.

"I wonder," he mused, "if it is viable?"

Wouldn't _that_ make for an interesting paper, he went on, building his
dreams upon dreams. A moonplant! Growing in my garden! He decided, as
is the way with botanists, to name his--it was now "his"; having
abandoned liberty when it abandoned the moon--to name his plant after
himself.

And that's how it came to be called the "Peter W. Merrill Moonplant." He
put it in his garden, arranged a small protective wire cylinder around
it, and sprinkled it with water. Then he went into the house to start
typing up his notes for that forthcoming paper.

       *       *       *       *       *

As he lay there in the soft loam, feeling the cool trickling of the
water passing over his stiff tendrils, the newly christened Pete felt a
stirring within himself. The sunlight that now struck him was filtered
by an atmosphere, and gentle in its action upon him. Pete prodded his
memory, and suddenly decided that silicates, after all, are not the most
comfortable of linings for one's tender green cells. He seemed to recall
a state of lush, sybaritic softness, in pre-silicate times. Decidedly,
the silicates must go, thought Pete.

And go they did, molecule by molecule, down into the earth through his
roots, which were now acting as tiny spigots, getting rid of the
scratchy stuff that had bolstered the cell walls against change for
millennia past, leaving Pete softer, greener, livelier, and a constant
delight to the heart of Peter W. Merrill the First, whenever he came out
to tend his plant, between pages of his thesis.

Pete, after spewing the last hateful molecule away, reversed his tiny
fibre engines, and began to draw in. He drew in all sorts of things, as
the days passed. A lot of minerals, and just enough water to float them
in. Mostly, Pete's growing hunger sought out iron. Pete didn't know why
he wanted iron, any more than a smoker knows why he wants another
cigarette, but Pete's interest in iron was as intense as any smoker's in
tobacco.

Above the ground, he grew very few inches larger, merely broadening his
dark, green spiral leaves a bit to catch the tiny amount of warmth he
required for growth. But beneath the soil, as with any tuberous plant,
his roots were spread in a rough circular spoke-like pattern that
reached about ten miles in every direction.

Pete Senior, had he tried to dig his plant up, would have been very much
surprised to find he could not do it. But he didn't try, so his life
went on as usual, with no surprises, which is the way he preferred it,
so he was happy enough.

It wasn't until his paper had been duly published, and botanical cronies
had shaken the dust from their whiskers and toddled around to see this
enviable possession, that something of the root structure was
discovered.

"Seems to spread underground," one remarked.

"Kind of a lunatic crab-grass," another jibed.

"Sure you're not pulling our leg, Merrill?" said a third. "Seems a bit
stunted."

"Gravity," said Pete Senior. "Not used to it yet."

Then they all had coffee and cake, shook hands with Pete Senior, and
went to their homes and laboratories.

By this time, of course, at the farthest reaches of Pete's root network,
duplicate Petes were popping up above ground, quietly and
unostentatiously (Pete stood barely five inches high), and much like
their parent. They, too, began sending out spoke-like root networks.
Some of them, stronger than others, sent roots for a radius of a hundred
miles, others for a few leagues and no more.

