the constants of nature, but also in the fixation of clear ideas
as to the possibilities of future conquests in the same
direction. Nothing, for example, is more satisfactory and
instructive in the history of science than the success with which
the unique method of least squares has been applied to the
problems presented by the earth and the other members of the
solar system. So great, in fact, are the practical value and
theoretical importance of least squares, that it is frequently
mistaken for the whole theory of errors, and is sometimes
regarded as embodying the major part of the doctrine of
probability itself.--WOODWARD, R. S.

                         _Probability and Theory of Errors (New
                         York, 1906), pp. 9-10._


=1975.= Direct and inverse ratios have been applied by an
ingenious author to measure human affections, and the moral worth
of actions. An eminent Mathematician attempted to ascertain by
calculation, the ratio in which the evidence of facts must
decrease in the course of time, and fixed the period when the
evidence of the facts on which Christianity is founded shall
become evanescent, and when in consequence no faith shall be
found on the earth.--REID, THOMAS.

                         _Essays on the Powers of the Human Mind
                         (Edinburgh, 1812), Vol. 2, p. 408._




  CHAPTER XX

  THE FUNDAMENTAL CONCEPTS, TIME AND SPACE


=2001.= Kant's Doctrine of Time.

I. Time is not an empirical concept deduced from any experience,
for neither co-existence nor succession would enter into our
perception, if the representation of time were not given _a
priori_. Only when this representation _a priori_ is given,
can we imagine that certain things happen at the same time
(simultaneously) or at different times (successively).

II. Time is a necessary representation on which all intuitions
depend. We cannot take away time from phenomena in general,
though we can well take away phenomena out of time. In time alone
is reality of phenomena possible. All phenomena may vanish, but
time itself (as the general condition of their possibility)
cannot be done away with.

III. On this _a priori_ necessity depends also the possibility of
apodictic principles of the relations of time, or of axioms of
time in general. Time has one dimension only; different times are
not simultaneous, but successive, while different spaces are
never successive, but simultaneous. Such principles cannot be
derived from experience, because experience could not impart to
them absolute universality nor apodictic certainty....

IV. Time is not a discursive, or what is called a general
concept, but a pure form of sensuous intuition. Different times
are parts only of one and the same time....

V. To say that time is infinite means no more than that every
definite quantity of time is possible only by limitations of one
time which forms the foundation of all times. The original
representation of time must therefore be given as unlimited. But
when the parts themselves and every quantity of an object can be
represented as determined by limitation only, the whole
representation cannot be given by concepts (for in that case the
partial representation comes first), but must be founded on
immediate intuition.--KANT, I.

                         _Critique of Pure Reason [Max Mueller]
                         (New York, 1900), pp. 24-25._


=2002.= Kant's Doctrine of Space.

I. Space is not an empirical concept which has been derived from
external experience. For in order that certain sensations should
be referred to something outside myself, i.e. to something in a
different part of space from that where I am; again, in order
that I may be able to represent them as side by side, that
is, not only as different, but as in different places, the
representation of space must already be there....

II. Space is a necessary representation _a priori_, forming the
very foundation of all external intuitions. It is impossible to
imagine that there should be no space, though one might very well
imagine that there should be space without objects to fill it.
Space is therefore regarded as a condition of the possibility of
phenomena, not as a determination produced by them; it is a
representation _a priori_ which necessarily precedes all external
phenomena.

III. On this necessity of an _a priori_ representation of space
rests the apodictic certainty of all geometrical principles, and
the possibility of their construction _a priori_. For if the
intuition of space were a concept gained _a posteriori_, borrowed
from general external experience, the first principles of
mathematical definition would be nothing but perceptions. They
would be exposed to all the accidents of perception, and there
being but one straight line between two points would not be a
necessity, but only something taught in each case by experience.
Whatever is derived from experience possesses a relative
generality only, based on induction. We should therefore not be
able to say more than that, so far as hitherto observed, no space
has yet been found having more than three dimensions.

IV. Space is not a discursive or so-called general concept of
the relations of things in general, but a pure intuition. For,
first of all, we can imagine one space only, and if we speak of
many spaces, we mean parts only of one and the same space. Nor
can these parts be considered as antecedent to the one and
all-embracing space and, as it were, its component parts out
of which an aggregate is formed, but they can be thought of
as existing within it only. Space is essentially one; its
multiplicity, and therefore the general concept of spaces in
general, arises entirely from limitations. Hence it follows that,
with respect to space, an intuition _a priori_, which is not
empirical, must form the foundation of all conceptions of
space....

V. Space is represented as an infinite given quantity. Now it is
quite true that every concept is to be thought as a representation,
which is contained in an infinite number of different possible
representations (as their common characteristic), and therefore
comprehends them: but no concept, as such, can be thought as if
it contained in itself an infinite number of representations.
Nevertheless, space is so thought (for all parts of infinite space
exist simultaneously). Consequently, the original representation
of space is an _intuition a priori_, and not a concept.--KANT, I.

                         _Critique of Pure Reason [Max Mueller]
                         (New York, 1900), pp. 18-20 and
                         Supplement 8._


=2003.=

             _Schopenhauer's Predicabilia a priori._[11]

              OF TIME                            OF SPACE

   1. There is but _one time_, all    1. There is but _one space_,
      different times are parts of       all different spaces are
      it.                                parts of it.

   2. Different times are not         2. Different spaces are not
      simultaneous but successive.       successive but
                                         simultaneous.

   3. Everything in time may be       3. Everything in space may be
      thought of as non-existent,        thought of as non-existent,
      but not time.                      but not space.

   4. Time has three divisions:       4. Space has three dimensions:
      past, present and future,          height, breadth, and
      which form two directions          length.
      with a point of indifference.

   5. Time is infinitely              5. Space is infinitely
      divisible.                         divisible.

   6. Time is homogeneous and a       6. Space is homogeneous and a
      continuum: i.e. no part is         continuum: i.e. no part
      different from another, nor        is different from another,
      separated by something             nor separated by something
      which is not time.                 which is not space.

   7. Time has no beginning nor       7. Space has no limits
      end, but all beginning and         [Graenzen], but all limits
      end is in time.                    are in space.

   8. Time makes counting             8. Space makes measurement
      possible.                          possible.

   9. Rhythm exists only in time.     9. Symmetry exists only in
                                         space.

  10. The laws of time are _a        10. The laws of space are _a
      priori_ conceptions.               priori_ conceptions.

  11. Time is perceptible _a         11. Space is immediately
      priori_, but only by a             perceptible _a priori_.
      means of a line-image.

  12. Time has no permanence but     12. Space never passes but is
      passes the moment it is            permanent throughout
      present.                           all time.

  13. Time never rests.              13. Space never moves.

  14. Everything in time has         14. Everything in space has
      duration.                          position.

  15. Time has no duration, but      15. Space has no motion, but
      all duration is in time;           all motion is in space;
      time is the persistence of         space is the change in
      what is permanent in               position of that which
      contrast with its restless         moves in contrast to its
      course.                            imperturbable rest.

  16. Motion is only possible in     16. Motion is only possible in
      time.                              space.

  17. Velocity, the space being      17. Velocity, the time being
      the same, is in the inverse        the same, is in the direct
      ratio of the time.                 ratio of the space.

  18. Time is not directly           18. Space is measurable directly
      measurable by means of             through itself and
      itself but only by means of        indirectly through motion
      motion which takes place in        which takes place in both
      both space and time....            time and space....

  19. Time is omnipresent: each      19. Space is eternal: each
      part of it is everywhere.          part of it exists always.

  20. In time alone all things       20. In space alone all things
      are successive.                    are simultaneous.

  21. Time makes possible the        21. Space makes possible the
      change of accidents.               endurance of substance.

  22. Each part of time contains     22. No part of space contains
      all substance.                     the same substance as
                                         another.

  23. Time is the _principium        23. Space is the _principium
      individuationis_.                  individuationis_.

  24. The now is without             24. The point is without
      duration.                          extension.

  25. Time of itself is empty and    25. Space is of itself empty
      indeterminate.                     and indeterminate.

  26. Each moment is conditioned     26. The relation of each
      by the one which precedes          boundary in space to every
      it, and only so far as this        other is determined by its
      one has ceased to exist.           relation to any one.
      (Principle of sufficient           (Principle of sufficient
      reason of being in time.)          reason of being in space.)

  27. Time makes Arithmetic          27. Space makes Geometry
      possible.                          possible.

  28. The simple element of          28. The element of Geometry
      Arithmetic is unity.               is the point.
                                               --SCHOPENHAUER, A.

                         _Die Welt als Vorstellung und Wille;
                         Werke (Frauenstaedt) (Leipzig, 1877), Bd.
                         2, p. 55._

    [11]  Schopenhauer's table contains a third column
          headed "of matter" which has here been omitted.


=2004.= The clear possession of the Idea of Space is the first
requisite for all geometrical reasoning; and this clearness of
idea may be tested by examining whether the axioms offer
themselves to the mind as evident.--WHEWELL, WILLIAM.

                         _The Philosophy of the Inductive
                         Sciences, Part 1, Bk. 2, chap. 4, sect.
                         4 (London, 1858)._


=2005.= Geometrical axioms are neither synthetic _a priori_
conclusions nor experimental facts. They are conventions:
our choice, amongst all possible conventions, is guided by
experimental facts; but it remains free, and is only limited by
the necessity of avoiding all contradiction.... In other words,
axioms of geometry are only definitions in disguise.

That being so what ought one to think of this question: Is the
Euclidean Geometry true?

The question is nonsense. One might as well ask whether the
metric system is true and the old measures false; whether
Cartesian co-ordinates are true and polar co-ordinates false.

                                                   --POINCARE, H.

                         _Non-Euclidean Geometry; Nature, Vol 45
                         (1891-1892), p. 407._


=2006.= I do in no wise share this view [that the axioms are
arbitrary propositions which we assume wholly at will, and that
in like manner the fundamental conceptions are in the end only
arbitrary symbols with which we operate] but consider it the
death of all science: in my judgment the axioms of geometry are
not arbitrary, but reasonable propositions which generally have
the origin in space intuition and whose separate content and
sequence is controlled by reasons of expediency.--KLEIN, F.

                         _Elementarmathematik vom hoeheren
                         Standpunkte aus (Leipzig, 1909), Bd. 2,
                         p. 384._


=2007.= Euclid's Postulate 5 [The Parallel Axiom].

That, if a straight line falling on two straight lines make the
interior angles on the same side less than two right angles, the
two straight lines, if produced indefinitely, meet on that side
on which are the angles less than the two right angles.--EUCLID.

                         _The Thirteen Books of Euclid's Elements
                         [T. L. Heath] Vol. 1 (Cambridge, 1908),
                         p. 202._


=2008.= It must be admitted that Euclid's [Parallel] Axiom is
unsatisfactory as the basis of a theory of parallel straight
lines. It cannot be regarded as either simple or self-evident,
and it therefore falls short of the essential characteristics of
an axiom....--HALL, H. S. and STEVENS, F. H.

                         _Euclid's Elements (London, 1892), p.
                         55._


=2009.= We may still well declare the parallel axiom the simplest
assumption which permits us to represent spatial relations, and
so it will be true generally, that concepts and axioms are not
immediate facts of intuition, but rather the idealizations of
these facts chosen for reasons of expediency.--KLEIN, F.

                         _Elementarmathematik vom, hoeheren
                         Standpunkte aus (Leipzig, 1909), Bd. 2,
                         p. 382._


=2010.= The characteristic features of our space are not
necessities of thought, and the truth of Euclid's axioms, in so
far as they specially differentiate our space from other
conceivable spaces, must be established by experience and by
experience only.--BALL, R. S.

                         _Encyclopedia Britannica, 9th Edition;
                         Article "Measurement."_


=2011.= Mathematical and physiological researches have shown that
the space of experience is simply an _actual_ case of many
conceivable cases, about whose peculiar properties experience
alone can instruct us.--MACH, ERNST.

                         _Popular Scientific Lectures (Chicago,
                         1910), p. 205._


=2012.= The familiar definition: An axiom is a self-evident
truth, means if it means anything, that the proposition which we
call an axiom has been approved by us in the light of our
experience and intuition. In this sense mathematics has no
axioms, for mathematics is a formal subject over which formal and
not material implication reigns.--WILSON, E. B.

                         _Bulletin American Mathematical Society,
                         Vol. 2 (1904-1905), p. 81._


=2013.= The proof of self-evident propositions may seem, to the
uninitiated, a somewhat frivolous occupation. To this we might
reply that it is often by no means self-evident that one obvious
proposition follows from another obvious proposition; so that we
are really discovering new truths when we prove what is evident
by a method which is not evident. But a more interesting retort
is, that since people have tried to prove obvious propositions,
they have found that many of them are false. Self-evidence is
often a mere will-o'-the-wisp, which is sure to lead us astray if
we take it as our guide.--RUSSELL, BERTRAND.

                         _Recent Work on the Principles of
                         Mathematics; International Monthly, Vol.
                         4 (1901), p. 86._


=2014.= The problem [of Euclid's Parallel Axiom] is now at a par
with the squaring of the circle and the trisection of an angle by
means of ruler and compass. So far as the mathematical public is
concerned, the famous problem of the parallel is settled for all
time.--YOUNG, JOHN WESLEY.

                         _Fundamental Concepts of Algebra and
                         Geometry (New York, 1911), p. 32._


=2015.= If the Euclidean assumptions are true, the constitution
of those parts of space which are at an infinite distance from
us, "geometry upon the plane at infinity," is just as well known
as the geometry of any portion of this room. In this infinite and
thoroughly well-known space the Universe is situated during at
least some portion of an infinite and thoroughly well-known time.
So that here we have real knowledge of something at least that
concerns the Cosmos; something that is true throughout the
Immensities and the Eternities. That something Lobatchewsky and
his successors have taken away. The geometer of to-day knows
nothing about the nature of the actually existing space at an
infinite distance; he knows nothing about the properties of this
present space in a past or future eternity. He knows, indeed,
that the laws assumed by Euclid are true with an accuracy that no
direct experiment can approach, not only in this place where we
are, but in places at a distance from us that no astronomer has
conceived; but he knows this as of Here and Now; beyond this
range is a There and Then of which he knows nothing at present,
but may ultimately come to know more.--CLIFFORD, W. K.

                         _Lectures and Essays (New York, 1901),
                         Vol. 1, pp. 358-359._


=2016.= The truth is that other systems of geometry are possible,
yet after all, these other systems are not spaces but other
methods of space measurements. There is one space only, though we
may conceive of many different manifolds, which are contrivances
or ideal constructions invented for the purpose of determining
space.--CARUS, PAUL.

                         _Science, Vol. 18 (1903), p. 106._


=2017.= As I have formerly stated that from the philosophic side
Non-Euclidean Geometry has as yet not frequently met with full
understanding, so I must now emphasize that it is universally
recognized in the science of mathematics; indeed, for many
purposes, as for instance in the modern theory of functions, it
is used as an extremely convenient means for the visual
representation of highly complicated arithmetical relations.

                                                      --KLEIN, F.

                         _Elementarmathematik vom hoeheren
                         Standpunkte aus (Leipzig, 1909), Bd. 2,
                         p. 377._


=2018.= Everything in physical science, from the law of
gravitation to the building of bridges, from the spectroscope to
the art of navigation, would be profoundly modified by any
considerable inaccuracy in the hypothesis that our actual space
is Euclidean. The observed truth of physical science, therefore,
constitutes overwhelming empirical evidence that this hypothesis
is very approximately correct, even if not rigidly true.

                                             --RUSSELL, BERTRAND.

                         _Foundations of Geometry (Cambridge,
                         1897), p. 6._


=2019.= The most suggestive and notable achievement of the last
century is the discovery of Non-Euclidean geometry.--HILBERT, D.

                         _Quoted by G. D. Fitch in Manning's "The
                         Fourth Dimension Simply Explained," (New
                         York, 1910), p. 58._


=2020.= Non-Euclidean geometry--primate among the emancipators of
the human intellect....--KEYSER, C. J.

                         _The Foundations of Mathematics; Science
                         History of the Universe, Vol. 8 (New
                         York, 1909), p. 192._


=2021.= Every high school teacher [Gymnasial-lehrer] must of
necessity know something about non-euclidean geometry, because it
is one of the few branches of mathematics which, by means of
certain catch-phrases, has become known in wider circles, and
concerning which any teacher is consequently liable to be asked
at any time. In physics there are many such matters--almost every
new discovery is of this kind--which, through certain catch-words
have become topics of common conversation, and about which
therefore every teacher must of course be informed. Think of a
teacher of physics who knows nothing of Roentgen rays or of
radium; no better impression would be made by a mathematician who
is unable to give information concerning non-euclidean geometry.

                                                      --KLEIN, F.

                         _Elementarmathematik vom hoeheren
                         Standpunkte_ aus _(Leipzig, 1909), Bd.
                         2, p. 378._


=2022.= What Vesalius was to Galen, what Copernicus was to
Ptolemy, that was Lobatchewsky to Euclid. There is, indeed, a
somewhat instructive parallel between the last two cases.
Copernicus and Lobatchewsky were both of Slavic origin. Each of
them has brought about a revolution in scientific ideas so great
that it can only be compared with that wrought by the other. And
the reason of the transcendent importance of these two changes is
that they are changes in the conception of the Cosmos.... And in
virtue of these two revolutions the idea of the Universe, the
Macrocosm, the All, as subject of human knowledge, and therefore
of human interest, has fallen to pieces.--CLIFFORD, W. K.

                         _Lectures and Essays (New York, 1901),
                         Vol. 1, pp. 356, 358._


=2023.= I am exceedingly sorry that I have failed to avail myself
of our former greater proximity to learn more of your work on
the foundations of geometry; it surely would have saved me
much useless effort and given me more peace, than one of my
disposition can enjoy so long as so much is left to consider in a
matter of this kind. I have myself made much progress in this
matter (though my other heterogeneous occupations have left me
but little time for this purpose); though the course which I have
pursued does not lead as much to the desired end, which you
assure me you have reached, as to the questioning of the truth of
geometry. It is true that I have found much which many would
accept as proof, but which in my estimation proves _nothing_, for
instance, if it could be shown that a rectilinear triangle is
possible, whose area is greater than that of any given surface,
then I could rigorously establish the whole of geometry. Now most
people, no doubt, would grant this as an axiom, but not I; it is
conceivable that, however distant apart the vertices of the
triangle might be chosen, its area might yet always be below a
certain limit. I have found several other such theorems, but none
of them satisfies me.--GAUSS.

                         _Letter to Bolyai (1799); Werke, Bd. 8
                         (Goettingen, 1900), p. 159._


=2024.= On the supposition that Euclidean geometry is not valid,
it is easy to show that similar figures do not exist; in that
case the angles of an equilateral triangle vary with the side in
which I see no absurdity at all. The angle is a function of the
side and the sides are functions of the angle, a function which,
of course, at the same time involves a constant length. It seems
somewhat of a paradox to say that a constant length could be
given a priori as it were, but in this again I see nothing
inconsistent. Indeed, it would be desirable that Euclidean
geometry were not valid, for then we should possess a general a
priori standard of measure.--GAUSS.

                         _Letter to Gerling (1816); Werke, Bd. 8
                         (Goettingen, 1900), p. 169._


=2025.= I am convinced more and more that the necessary truth of
our geometry cannot be demonstrated, at least not _by_ the
_human_ intellect _to_ the human understanding. Perhaps in
another world we may gain other insights into the nature of space
which at present are unattainable to us. Until then we must
consider geometry as of equal rank not with arithmetic, which is
purely a priori, but with mechanics.--GAUSS.

                         _Letter to Olbers (1817); Werke, Bd. 8
                         (Goettingen, 1900), p. 177._


=2026.= There is no doubt that it can be rigorously established
that the sum of the angles of a rectilinear triangle cannot
exceed 180 deg. But it is otherwise with the statement that the sum
of the angles cannot be less than 180 deg.; this is the real Gordian
knot, the rocks which cause the wreck of all.... I have been
occupied with the problem over thirty years and I doubt if anyone
has given it more serious attention, though I have never
published anything concerning it. The assumption that the angle
sum is less than 180 deg. leads to a peculiar geometry, entirely
different from the Euclidean, but throughout consistent with
itself. I have developed this geometry to my own satisfaction so
that I can solve every problem that arises in it with the
exception of the determination of a certain constant which cannot
be determined a priori. The larger one assumes this constant the
more nearly one approaches the Euclidean geometry, an infinitely
large value makes the two coincide. The theorems of this geometry
seem in part paradoxical, and to the unpracticed absurd; but on a
closer and calm reflection it is found that in themselves they
contain nothing impossible.... All my efforts to discover some
contradiction, some inconsistency in this Non-Euclidean geometry
have been fruitless, the one thing in it that seems contrary to
reason is that space would have to contain a _definitely
determinate_ (though to us unknown) linear magnitude. However, it
seems to me that notwithstanding the meaningless word-wisdom of
the metaphysicians we know really too little, or nothing,
concerning the true nature of space to confound what appears
unnatural with the _absolutely impossible._ Should Non-Euclidean
geometry be true, and this constant bear some relation to
magnitudes which come within the domain of terrestrial or
celestial measurement, it could be determined a posteriori.

                                                         --GAUSS.

                         _Letter to Taurinus (1824); Werke, Bd. 8
                         (Goettingen, 1900), p. 187._


=2027.= There is also another subject, which with me is nearly
forty years old, to which I have again given some thought during
leisure hours, I mean the foundations of geometry.... Here, too,
I have consolidated many things, and my conviction has, if
possible become more firm that geometry cannot be completely
established on a priori grounds. In the mean time I shall
probably not for a long time yet put my _very extended_
investigations concerning this matter in shape for publication,
possibly not while I live, for I fear the cry of the Boeotians
which would arise should I express my whole view on this
matter.--It is curious too, that besides the known gap in
Euclid's geometry, to fill which all efforts till now have been
in vain, and which will never be filled, there exists another
defect, which to my knowledge no one thus far has criticised and
which (though possible) it is by no means easy to remove. This is
the definition of a plane as a surface which wholly contains the
line joining any two points. This definition contains more than
is necessary to the determination of the surface, and tacitly
involves a theorem which demands proof.--GAUSS.

                         _Letter to Bessel (1829); Werke, Bd. 8
                         (Goettingen, 1900), p. 200._


=2028.= I will add that I have recently received from Hungary a
little paper on Non-Euclidean geometry, in which I rediscover all
_my own ideas_ and _results_ worked out with great elegance, ....
The writer is a very young Austrian officer, the son of one of my
early friends, with whom I often discussed the subject in 1798,
although my ideas were at that time far removed from the
development and maturity which they have received through the
original reflections of this young man. I consider the young
geometer v. Bolyai a genius of the first rank.--GAUSS.

                         _Letter to Gerling (1832); Werke, Bd. 8
                         (Goettingen, 1900), p. 221._


=2029.= Think of the image of the world in a convex mirror.... A
well-made convex mirror of moderate aperture represents the
objects in front of it as apparently solid and in fixed positions
behind its surface. But the images of the distant horizon and of
the sun in the sky lie behind the mirror at a limited distance,
equal to its focal length. Between these and the surface of the
mirror are found the images of all the other objects before it,
but the images are diminished and flattened in proportion to the
distance of their objects from the mirror.... Yet every straight
line or plane in the outer world is represented by a straight [?]
line or plane in the image. The image of a man measuring with a
rule a straight line from the mirror, would contract more and
more the farther he went, but with his shrunken rule the man in
the image would count out exactly the same number of centimeters
as the real man. And, in general, all geometrical measurements of
lines and angles made with regularly varying images of real
instruments would yield exactly the same results as in the outer
world, all lines of sight in the mirror would be represented by
straight lines of sight in the mirror. In short, I do not see how
men in the mirror are to discover that their bodies are not rigid
solids and their experiences good examples of the correctness of
Euclidean axioms. But if they could look out upon our world as
we look into theirs without overstepping the boundary, they must
declare it to be a picture in a spherical mirror, and would speak
of us just as we speak of them; and if two inhabitants of the
different worlds could communicate with one another, neither, as
far as I can see, would be able to convince the other that he had
the true, the other the distorted, relation. Indeed I cannot see
that such a question would have any meaning at all, so long as
mechanical considerations are not mixed up with it.--HELMHOLTZ, H.

                         _On the Origin and Significance of
                         Geometrical Axioms; Popular Scientific
                         Lectures, second series (New York,
                         1881), pp. 57-59._


=2030.= That space conceived of as a locus of points has but
three dimensions needs no argument from the mathematical point of
view; but just as little can we from this point of view prevent
the assertion that space has really four or an infinite number of
dimensions though we perceive only three. The theory of
multiply-extended manifolds, which enters more and more into the
foreground of mathematical research, is from its very nature
perfectly independent of such an assertion. But the form of
expression, which this theory employs, has indeed grown out of
this conception. Instead of referring to the individuals of a
manifold, we speak of the points of a higher space, etc. In
itself this form of expression has many advantages, in that it
facilitates comprehension by calling up geometrical intuition.
But it has this disadvantage, that in extended circles,
investigations concerning manifolds of any number of dimensions
are considered singular alongside the above-mentioned conception
of space. This view is without the least foundation. The
investigations in question would indeed find immediate geometric
applications if the conception were valid but its value and
purpose, being independent of this conception, rests upon its
essential mathematical content.--KLEIN, F.

                         _Mathematische Annalen, Bd. 43 (1893),
                         p. 95._


=2031.= We are led naturally to extend the language of geometry
to the case of any number of variables, still using the word
_point_ to designate any system of values of n variables (the
coordinates of the point), the word _space_ (of n dimensions) to
designate the totality of all these points or systems of values,
_curves_ or _surface_ to designate the spread composed of
points whose coordinates are given functions (with the proper
restrictions) of one or two parameters (the _straight line_ or
_plane_, when they are linear fractional functions with the same
denominator), etc. Such an extension has come to be a necessity
in a large number of investigations, in order as well to give
them the greatest generality as to preserve in them the intuitive
character of geometry. But it has been noted that in such use of
geometric language we are no longer constructing truly a
geometry, for the forms that we have been considering are
