It is a far more remarkable problem how the members of this family, and
Pinguicula, and, as Dr. Hooker has recently shown, Nepenthes, could all
have acquired the power of secreting a fluid which dissolves or digests
animal matter. The six genera of the Droseraceae very probably
inherited this power from a common progenitor, but this cannot apply to
[page 362] Pinguicula or Nepenthes, for these plants are not at all
closely related to the Droceraceae. But the difficulty is not nearly so
great as it at first appears. Firstly, the juices of many plants
contain an acid, and, apparently, any acid serves for digestion.
Secondly, as Dr. Hooker has remarked in relation to the present subject
in his address at Belfast (1874), and as Sachs repeatedly insists,* the
embryos of some plants secrete a fluid which dissolves albuminous
substances out of the endosperm; although the endosperm is not actually
united with, only in contact with, the embryo. All plants, moreover,
have the power of dissolving albuminous or proteid substances, such as
protoplasm, chlorophyll, gluten, aleurone, and of carrying them from
one part to other parts of their tissues. This must be effected by a
solvent, probably consisting of a ferment together with an acid.  Now,
in the case of plants which are able to absorb already soluble matter
from captured insects, though not capable of true digestion, the
solvent just referred to, which must be occasionally present in the
glands, would be apt to exude from the glands together with the viscid
secretion, inasmuch as endosmose is accompanied by exosmose. If such
exudation did ever occur, the solvent would act on the animal matter
contained within the captured insects, and this would be an act of true
digestion. As it cannot be doubted that this process would be of high
service to plants

* 'Trait de Botanique' 3rd edit. 1874, p. 844. See also for following
facts pp. 64, 76, 828, 831.

  Since this sentence was written, I have received a paper by
  Gorup-Besanez ('Berichte der Deutschen Chem. Gesellschaft,' Berlin,
1874, p. 1478), who, with the aid of Dr. H. Will, has actually made the
discovery that the seeds of the vetch contain a ferment, which, when
extracted by glycerine, dissolves albuminous substances, such as
fibrin, and converts them into true peptones.  [page 363]

growing in very poor soil, it would tend to be perfected through
natural selection. Therefore, any ordinary plant having viscid glands,
which occasionally caught insects, might thus be converted under
favourable circumstances into a species capable of true digestion. It
ceases, therefore, to be any great mystery how several genera of
plants, in no way closely related together, have independently acquired
this same power.

As there exist several plants the glands of which cannot, as far as is
known, digest animal matter, yet can absorb salts of ammonia and animal
fluids, it is probable that this latter power forms the first stage
towards that of digestion. It might, however, happen, under certain
conditions, that a plant, after having acquired the power of digestion,
should degenerate into one capable only of absorbing animal matter in
solution, or in a state of decay, or the final products of decay,
namely the salts of ammonia. It would appear that this has actually
occurred to a partial extent with the leaves of Aldrovanda; the outer
parts of which possess absorbent organs, but no glands fitted for the
secretion of any digestive fluid, these being confined to the inner
parts.

Little light can be thrown on the gradual acquirement of the third
remarkable character possessed by the more highly developed genera of
the Droseraceae, namely the power of movement when excited. It should,
however, be borne in mind that leaves and their homologues, as well as
flower-peduncles, have gained this power, in innumerable instances,
independently of inheritance from any common parent form; for instance,
in tendril-bearers and leaf-climbers (i.e. plants with their leaves,
petioles and flower-peduncles, &c., modified for prehension) belonging
to a large [page 364] number of the most widely distinct orders,--in
the leaves of the many plants which go to sleep at night, or move when
shaken,--and in the irritable stamens and pistils of not a few species.
We may therefore infer that the power of movement can be by some means
readily acquired. Such movements imply irritability or sensitiveness,
but, as Cohn has remarked,* the tissues of the plants thus endowed do
not differ in any uniform manner from those of ordinary plants; it is
therefore probable that all leaves are to a slight degree irritable.
Even if an insect alights on a leaf, a slight molecular change is
probably transmitted to some distance across its tissue, with the sole
difference that no perceptible effect is produced. We have some
evidence in favour of this belief, for we know that a single touch on
the glands of Drosera does not excite inflection; yet it must produce
some effect, for if the glands have been immersed in a solution of
camphor, inflection follows within a shorter time than would have
followed from the effects of camphor alone. So again with Dionaea, the
blades in their ordinary state may be roughly touched without their
closing; yet some effect must be thus caused and transmitted across the
whole leaf, for if the glands have recently absorbed animal matter,
even a delicate touch causes them to close instantly. On the whole we
may conclude that the acquirement of a high degree of sensitiveness and
of the power of movement by certain genera of the Droseraceae presents
no greater difficulty than that presented by the similar but feebler
powers of a multitude of other plants.

* See the abstract of his memoir on the contractile tissues of plants,
in the 'Annals and Mag.  of Nat. Hist.' 3rd series, vol. xi. p. 188.)
[page 365]

The specialised nature of the sensitiveness possessed by Drosera and
Dionaea, and by certain other plants, well deserves attention. A gland
of Drosera may be forcibly hit once, twice, or even thrice, without any
effect being produced, whilst the continued pressure of an extremely
minute particle excites movement. On the other hand, a particle many
times heavier may be gently laid on one of the filaments of Dionaea
with no effect; but if touched only once by the slow movement of a
delicate hair, the lobes close; and this difference in the nature of
the sensitiveness of these two plants stands in manifest adaptation to
their manner of capturing insects. So does the fact, that when the
central glands of Drosera absorb nitrogenous matter, they transmit a
motor impulse to the exterior tentacles much more quickly than when
they are mechanically irritated; whilst with Dionaea the absorption of
nitrogenous matter causes the lobes to press together with extreme
slowness, whilst a touch excites rapid movement.  Somewhat analogous
cases may be observed, as I have shown in another work, with the
tendrils of various plants; some being most excited by contact with
fine fibres, others by contact with bristles, others with a flat or a
creviced surface. The sensitive organs of Drosera and Dionaea are also
specialised, so as not to be uselessly affected by the weight or impact
of drops of rain, or by blasts of air. This may be accounted for by
supposing that these plants and their progenitors have grown accustomed
to the repeated action of rain and wind, so that no molecular change is
thus induced; whilst they have been rendered more sensitive by means of
natural selection to the rarer impact or pressure of solid bodies.
Although the absorption by the glands of Drosera of various fluids
excites move- [page 366] ment, there is a great difference in the
action of allied fluids; for instance, between certain vegetable acids,
and between citrate and phosphate of ammonia. The specialised nature
and perfection of the sensitiveness in these two plants is all the more
astonishing as no one supposes that they possess nerves; and by testing
Drosera with several substances which act powerfully on the nervous
system of animals, it does not appear that they include any diffused
matter analogous to nerve-tissue.

Although the cells of Drosera and Dionaea are quite as sensitive to
certain stimulants as are the tissues which surround the terminations
of the nerves in the higher animals, yet these plants are inferior even
to animals low down in the scale, in not being affected except by
stimulants in contact with their sensitive parts. They would, however,
probably be affected by radiant heat; for warm water excites energetic
movement. When a gland of Drosera, or one of the filaments of Dionaea,
is excited, the motor impulse radiates in all directions, and is not,
as in the case of animals, directed towards special points or organs.
This holds good even in the case of Drosera when some exciting
substance has been placed at two points on the disc, and when the
tentacles all round are inflected with marvellous precision towards the
two points. The rate at which the motor impulse is transmitted, though
rapid in Dionaea, is much slower than in most or all animals. This
fact, as well as that of the motor impulse not being specially directed
to certain points, are both no doubt due to the absence of nerves.
Nevertheless we perhaps see the prefigurement of the formation of
nerves in animals in the transmission of the motor impulse being so
much more rapid down the confined space within the tentacles of Drosera
than [page 367] elsewhere, and somewhat more rapid in a longitudinal
than in a transverse direction across the disc. These plants exhibit
still more plainly their inferiority to animals in the absence of any
reflex action, except in so far as the glands of Drosera, when excited
from a distance, send back some influence which causes the contents of
the cells to become aggregated down to the bases of the tentacles. But
the greatest inferiority of all is the absence of a central organ, able
to receive impressions from all points, to transmit their effects in
any definite direction, to store them up and reproduce them.  [page
368]


                          CHAPTER XVI.

                          PINGUICULA.

Pinguicula vulgaris--Structure of leaves--Number of insects and other
objects caught-- Movement of the margins of the leaves--Uses of this
movement--Secretion, digestion, and absorption--Action of the secretion
on various animal and vegetable substances--The effects of substances
not containing soluble nitrogenous matter on the glands--Pinguicula
grandiflora--Pinguicula lusitanica, catches insects--Movement of the
leaves, secretion and digestion.

PINGUICULA VULGARIS.--This plant grows in moist places, generally on
mountains. It bears on an average eight, rather thick, oblong, light
green leaves, having scarcely any footstalk. A full-sized leaf is about
1 1/2 inch in length and 3/4 inch in breadth. The young central leaves
are deeply concave, and project upwards; the older ones towards the
outside are flat or convex, and lie close to the ground, forming a
rosette from 3 to 4 inches in diameter. The margins of the leaves are
incurved. Their upper surfaces are thickly covered with two sets of
glandular hairs, differing in the size of the glands and in the length
of their pedicels. The larger glands have a circular outline as seen
from above, and are of moderate thickness; they are divided by
radiating partitions into sixteen cells, containing light-green,
homogeneous fluid. They are supported on elongated, unicellular
pedicels (containing a nucleus with a nucleolus) which rest on slight
prominences. The small glands differ only in being formed of about half
the number of cells, containing much paler fluid, and supported on much
shorter pedicels. Near the midrib, towards the base of the leaf, the
[page 369] pedicels are multicellular, are longer than elsewhere, and
bear smaller glands. All the glands secrete a colourless fluid, which
is so viscid that I have seen a fine thread drawn out to a length of 18
inches; but the fluid in this case was secreted by a gland which had
been excited.  The edge of the leaf is translucent, and does not bear
any glands; and here the spiral vessels, proceeding from the midrib,
terminate in cells marked by a spiral line, somewhat like those within
the glands of Drosera.

The roots are short. Three plants were dug up in North Wales on June
20, and carefully washed; each bore five or six unbranched roots, the
longest of which was only 1.2 of an inch.  Two rather young plants were
examined on September 28; these had a greater number of roots, namely
eight and eighteen, all under 1 inch in length, and very little
branched.

I was led to investigate the habits of this plant by being told by Mr.
W. Marshall that on the mountains of Cumberland many insects adhere to
the leaves.

[A friend sent me on June 23 thirty-nine leaves from North Wales, which
were selected owing to objects of some kind adhering to them. Of these
leaves, thirty-two had caught 142 insects, or on an average 4.4 per
leaf, minute fragments of insects not being included.  Besides the
insects, small leaves belonging to four different kinds of plants,
those of Erica tetralix being much the commonest, and three minute
seedling plants, blown by the wind, adhered to nineteen of the leaves.
One had caught as many as ten leaves of the Erica. Seeds or fruits,
commonly of Carex and one of Juncus, besides bits of moss and other
rubbish, likewise adhered to six of the thirty-nine leaves. The same
friend, on June 27, collected nine plants bearing seventy-four leaves,
and all of these, with the exception of three young leaves, had caught
insects; thirty insects were counted on one leaf, eighteen on a second,
and sixteen on a third. Another friend examined on August 22 some
plants in Donegal, Ireland, and found insects on 70 out of 157 leaves;
fifteen of [page 370] these leaves were sent me, each having caught on
an average 2.4 insects. To nine of them, leaves (mostly of Erica
tetralix) adhered; but they had been specially selected on this latter
account. I may add that early in August my son found leaves of this
same Erica and the fruits of a Carex on the leaves of a Pinguicula in
Switzerland, probably Pinguicula alpina; some insects, but no great
number, also adhered to the leaves of this plant, which had much better
developed roots than those of Pinguicula vulgaris. In Cumberland, Mr.
Marshall, on September 3, carefully examined for me ten plants bearing
eighty leaves; and on sixty-three of these (i.e. on 79 per cent.) he
found insects, 143 in number; so that each leaf had on an average 2.27
insects. A few days later he sent me some plants with sixteen seeds or
fruits adhering to fourteen leaves. There was a seed on three leaves on
the same plant. The sixteen seeds belonged to nine different kinds,
which could not be recognised, excepting one of Ranunculus, and several
belonging to three or four distinct species of Carex. It appears that
fewer insects are caught late in the year than earlier; thus in
Cumberland from twenty to twenty-four insects were observed in the
middle of July on several leaves, whereas in the beginning of September
the average number was only 2.27. Most of the insects, in all the
foregoing cases, were Diptera, but with many minute Hymenoptera,
including some ants, a few small Coleoptera, larvae, spiders, and even
small moths.]

We thus see that numerous insects and other objects are caught by the
viscid leaves; but we have no right to infer from this fact that the
habit is beneficial to the plant, any more than in the before given
case of the Mirabilis, or of the horse-chestnut. But it will presently
be seen that dead insects and other nitrogenous bodies excite the
glands to increased secretion; and that the secretion then becomes acid
and has the power of digesting animal substances, such as albumen,
fibrin, &c. Moreover, the dissolved nitrogenous matter is absorbed by
the glands, as shown by their limpid contents being aggregated into
slowly moving granular masses of protoplasm. The same results follow
when insects are naturally captured, and as the plant lives in poor
soil and has small roots, there can be no [page 371] doubt that it
profits by its power of digesting and absorbing matter from the prey
which it habitually captures in such large numbers. It will, however,
be convenient first to describe the movements of the leaves.

Movements of the Leaves.--That such thick, large leaves as those of
Pinguicula vulgarisshould have the power of curving inwards when
excited has never even been suspected. It is necessary to select for
experiment leaves with their glands secreting freely, and which have
been prevented from capturing many insects; as old leaves, at least
those growing in a state of nature, have their margins already curled
so much inwards that they exhibit little power of movement, or move
very slowly. I will first give in detail the more important experiments
which were tried, and then make some concluding remarks.

[Experiment 1.--A young and almost upright leaf was selected, with its
two lateral edges equally and very slightly incurved. A row of small
flies was placed along one margin. When looked at next day, after 15
hrs., this margin, but not the other, was found folded inwards, like
the helix of the human ear, to the breadth of 1/10 of an inch, so as to
lie partly over the row of flies (fig. 15). The glands on which the
flies rested, as well as those on the over-lapping margin which had
been brought into contact with the flies, were all secreting
copiously.

FIG. 15.  (Pinguicula vulgaris.) Outline of leaf with left margin
inflected over a row of small flies.

Experiment 2.--A row of flies was placed on one margin of a rather old
leaf, which lay flat on the ground; and in this case the margin, after
the same interval as before, namely 15 hrs., had only just begun to
curl inwards; but so much secretion had been poured forth that the
spoon-shaped tip of the leaf was filled with it.

Experiment 3.--Fragments of a large fly were placed close to the apex
of a vigorous leaf, as well as along half one margin.  [page 372] After
4 hrs. 20 m. there was decided incurvation, which increased a little
during the afternoon, but was in the same state on the following
morning. Near the apex both margins were inwardly curved. I have never
seen a case of the apex itself being in the least curved towards the
base of the leaf. After 48 hrs. (always reckoning from the time when
the flies were placed on the leaf) the margin had everywhere begun to
unfold.

Experiment 4.--A large fragment of a fly was placed on a leaf, in a
medial line, a little beneath the apex. Both lateral margins were
perceptibly incurved in 3 hrs., and after 4 hrs. 20 m. to such a degree
that the fragment was clasped by both margins. After 24 hrs. the two
infolded edges near the apex (for the lower part of the leaf was not at
all affected) were measured and found to be .11 of an inch (2.795 mm.)
apart. The fly was now removed, and a stream of water poured over the
leaf so as to wash the surface; and after 24 hrs. the margins were .25
of an inch (6.349 mm.) apart, so that they were largely unfolded. After
an additional 24 hrs. they were completely unfolded. Another fly was
now put on the same spot to see whether this leaf, on which the first
fly had been left 24 hrs., would move again; after 10 hrs.  there was a
trace of incurvation, but this did not increase during the next 24 hrs.
A bit of meat was also placed on the margin of a leaf, which four days
previously had become strongly incurved over a fragment of a fly and
had afterwards re-expanded; but the meat did not cause even a trace of
incurvation. On the contrary, the margin became somewhat reflexed, as
if injured, and so remained for the three following days, as long as it
was observed.

Experiment 5.--A large fragment of a fly was placed halfway between the
apex and base of a leaf and halfway between the midrib and one margin.
A short space of this margin, opposite the fly, showed a trace of
incurvation after 3 hrs., and this became strongly pronounced in 7 hrs.
After 24 hrs. the infolded edge was only .16 of an inch (4.064 mm.)
from the midrib. The margin now began to unfold, though the fly was
left on the leaf; so that by the next morning (i.e. 48 hrs. from the
time when the fly was first put on) the infolded edge had almost
completely recovered its original position, being now .3 of an inch
(7.62 mm.), instead of .16 of an inch, from the midrib. A trace of
flexure was, however, still visible.

Experiment 6.--A young and concave leaf was selected with its margins
slightly and naturally incurved. Two rather large, oblong, rectangular
pieces of roast meat were placed with their ends touching the infolded
edge, and .46 of an inch (11.68 mm.) [page 373] apart from one another.
After 24 hrs. the margin was greatly and equally incurved (see fig.
16) throughout this space, and for a length of .12 or .13 of an inch
(3.048 or 3.302 mm.) above and below each bit; so that the margin had
been affected over a greater length between the two bits, owing to
their conjoint action, than beyond them. The bits of meat were too
large to be clasped by the margin, but they were tilted up, one of them
so as to stand almost vertically. After 48 hrs. the margin was almost
unfolded, and the bits had sunk down. When again examined after two
days, the margin was quite unfolded, with the exception of the
naturally inflected edge; and one of the bits of meat, the end of which
had at first touched the edge, was now .067 of an inch (1.70 mm.)
distant from it; so that this bit had been pushed thus far across the
blade of the leaf.

FIG. 16.  (Pinguicula vulgaris.) Outline of leaf, with right margin
inflected against two square bits of meat.

Experiment 7.--A bit of meat was placed close to the incurved edge of a
rather young leaf, and after it had re-expanded, the bit was left lying
.11 of an inch (2.795 mm.) from the edge.  The distance from the edge
to the midrib of the fully expanded leaf was .35 of an inch (8.89 mm.);
so that the bit had been pushed inwards and across nearly one-third of
its semi-diameter.

Experiment 8.--Cubes of sponge, soaked in a strong infusion of raw
meat, were placed in close contact with the incurved edges of two
leaves,--an older and younger one. The distance from the edges to the
midribs was carefully measured. After 1 hr. 17 m. there appeared to be
a trace of incurvation. After 2 hrs. 17 m. both leaves were plainly
inflected; the distance between the edges and midribs being now only
half what it was at first. The incurvation increased slightly during
the next 4 1/2 hrs., but remained nearly the same for the next 17 hrs.
30 m. In 35 hrs. from the time when the sponges were placed on the
leaves, the margins were a little unfolded--to a greater degree in the
younger than in the older leaf. The latter was not quite unfolded until
the third day, and now both bits of sponge were left at the distance of
.1 of an inch (2.54 mm.) from the edges; or about a quarter of the
distance between the edge and midrib. A third bit of sponge adhered to
the edge, and, as the margin unfolded, was dragged backwards, into its
original position.  [page 374]

Experiment 9.--A chain of fibres of roast meat, as thin as bristles and
moistened with saliva, were placed down one whole side, close to the
narrow, naturally incurved edge of a leaf. In 3 hrs. this side was
greatly incurved along its whole length, and after 8 hrs. formed a
cylinder, about 1/20 of an inch (1.27 mm) in diameter, quite concealing
the meat. This cylinder remained closed for 32 hrs., but after 48 hrs.
was half unfolded, and in 72 hrs. was as open as the opposite margin
where no meat had been placed. As the thin fibres of meat were
completely overlapped by the margin, they were not pushed at all
inwards, across the blade.

Experiment 10.--Six cabbage seeds, soaked for a night in water, were
placed in a row close to the narrow incurved edge of a leaf. We shall
hereafter see that these seeds yield soluble matter to the glands. In 2
hrs. 25 m. the margin was decidedly inflected; in 4 hrs. it extended
over the seeds for about half their breadth, and in 7 hrs. over
three-fourths of their breadth, forming a cylinder not quite closed
along the inner side, and about .7 of an inch (1.778 mm.) in diameter.
After 24 hrs. the inflection had not increased, perhaps had decreased.
The glands which had been brought into contact with the upper surfaces
of the seeds were now secreting freely. In 36 hrs. from the time when
the seeds were put on the leaf the margin had greatly, and after 48
hrs. had completely, re-expanded. As the seeds were no longer held by
the inflected margin, and as the secretion was beginning to fail, they
rolled some way down the marginal channel.

Experiment 11.--Fragments of glass were placed on the margins of two
fine young leaves.  After 2 hrs. 30 m. the margin of one certainly
became slightly incurved; but the inflection never increased, and
disappeared in 16 hrs. 30 m. from the time when the fragments were
first applied. With the second leaf there was a trace of incurvation in
2 hrs. 15 m., which became decided in 4 hrs. 30 m., and still more
strongly pronounced in 7 hrs., but after 19 hrs.  30 m. had plainly
decreased. The fragments excited at most a slight and doubtful increase
of the secretion; and in two other trials, no increase could be
perceived. Bits of coal-cinders, placed on a leaf, produced no effect,
either owing to their lightness or to the leaf being torpid.

Experiment 12.--We now turn to fluids. A row of drops of a strong
infusion of raw meat were placed along the margins of two leaves;
squares of sponge soaked in the same infusion being placed on the
opposite margins. My object was to ascer- [page 375] tain whether a
fluid would act as energetically as a substance yielding the same
soluble matter to the glands. No distinct difference was perceptible;
certainly none in the degree of incurvation; but the incurvation round
the bits of sponge lasted rather longer, as might perhaps have been
expected from the sponge remaining damp and supplying nitrogenous
matter for a longer time. The margins, with the drops, became plainly
incurved in 2 hrs. 17 m. The incurvation subsequently increased
somewhat, but after 24 hrs. had greatly decreased.

Experiment 13.--Drops of the same strong infusion of raw meat were
placed along the midrib of a young and rather deeply concave leaf. The
distance across the broadest part of the leaf, between the naturally
incurved edges, was .55 of an inch (13.97 mm.). In 3 hrs. 27 m. this
distance was a trace less; in 6 hrs. 27 m. it was exactly .45 of an
inch (11.43 mm.), and had therefore decreased by .1 of an inch (2.54
mm.). After only 10 hrs. 37 m. the margin began to re-expand, for the
distance from edge to edge was now a trace wider, and after 24 hrs. 20
m.  was as great, within a hair's breadth, as when the drops were first
placed on the leaf. From this experiment we learn that the motor
impulse can be transmitted to a distance of .22 of an inch (5.590 mm.)
in a transverse direction from the midrib to both margins; but it would
be safer to say .2 of an inch (5.08 mm.) as the drops spread a little
beyond the midrib. The incurvation thus caused lasted for an unusually
short time.

Experiment 14.--Three drops of a solution of one part of carbonate of
ammonia to 218 of water (2 grs. to 1 oz.) were placed on the margin of
a leaf. These excited so much secretion that in 1 h. 22 m. all three
drops ran together; but although the leaf was observed for 24 hrs.,
there was no trace of inflection. We know that a rather strong solution
of this salt, though it does not injure the leaves of Drosera,
paralyses their power of movement, and I have no doubt, from the
following case, that this holds good with Pinguicula.

Experiment 15.--A row of drops of a solution of one part of carbonate
of ammonia to 875 of water (1 gr. to 2 oz.) was placed on the margin of
a leaf. In 1 hr. there was apparently some slight incurvation, and this
was well-marked in 3 hrs. 30 m. After 24 hrs. the margin was almost
completely re-expanded.

Experiment 16.--A row of large drops of a solution of one part of
phosphate of ammonia to 4375 of water (1 gr. to 10 oz.) was placed
along the margin of a leaf. No effect was produced, and after 8 hrs.
fresh drops were added along the same margin without the least effect.
We know that a solution of this [page 376] strength acts powerfully on
Drosera, and it is just possible that the solution was too strong. I
regret that I did not try a weaker solution.

Experiment 17.--As the pressure from bits of glass causes incurvation,
I scratched the margins of two leaves for some minutes with a blunt
needle, but no effect was produced. The surface of a leaf beneath a
drop of a strong infusion of raw meat was also rubbed for 10. m.  with
the end of a bristle, so as to imitate the struggles of a captured
insect; but this part of the margin did not bend sooner than the other
parts with undisturbed drops of the infusion.]

We learn from the foregoing experiments that the margins of the leaves
curl inwards when excited by the mere pressure of objects not yielding
any soluble matter, by objects yielding such matter, and by some
fluids--namely an infusion of raw meat and a week solution of carbonate
of ammonia. A stronger solution of two grains of this salt to an ounce
of water, though exciting copious secretion, paralyses the leaf. Drops
of water and of a solution of sugar or gum did not cause any movement.
Scratching the surface of the leaf for some minutes produced no effect.
Therefore, as far as we at present know, only two causes--namely slight
continued pressure and the absorption of nitrogenous matter--excite
movement. It is only the margins of the leaf which bend, for the apex
never curves towards the base. The pedicels of the glandular hairs have
no power of movement. I observed on several occasions that the surface
of the leaf became slightly concave where bits of meat or large flies
had long lain, but this may have been due to injury from
over-stimulation.

The shortest time in which plainly marked movement was observed was 2
hrs. 17 m., and this occurred when either nitrogenous substances or
fluids were placed on the leaves; but I believe that in some cases
[page 377] there was a trace of movement in 1 hr. or 1 hr. 30 m. The
pressure from fragments of glass excites movement almost as quickly as
the absorption of nitrogenous matter, but the degree of incurvation
thus caused is much less. After a leaf has become well incurved and has
again expanded, it will not soon answer to a fresh stimulus. The margin
was affected longitudinally, upwards or downwards, for a distance of
.13 of an inch (3.302 mm.) from an excited point, but for a distance of
.46 of an inch between two excited points, and transversely for a
distance of .2 of an inch (5.08 mm.). The motor impulse is not
accompanied, as in the case of Drosera, by any influence causing
increased secretion; for when a single gland was strongly stimulated
and secreted copiously, the surrounding glands were not in the least
affected. The incurvation of the margin is independent of increased
secretion, for fragments of glass cause little or no secretion, and yet
excite movement; whereas a strong solution of carbonate of ammonia
quickly excites copious secretion, but no movement.

One of the most curious facts with respect to the movement of the
leaves is the short time during which they remain incurved, although
the exciting object is left on them. In the majority of cases there was
well-marked re-expansion within 24 hrs. from the time when even large
pieces of meat, &c., were placed on the leaves, and in all cases within
48 hrs. In one instance the margin of a leaf remained for 32 hrs.
closely inflected round thin fibres of meat; in another instance, when
a bit of sponge, soaked in a strong infusion of raw meat, had been
applied to a leaf, the margin began to unfold in 35 hrs. Fragments of
glass keep the margin incurved for a shorter time than do nitrogenous
bodies; for in the former case there was [page 378] complete
re-expansion in 16 hrs. 30 m. Nitrogenous fluids act for a shorter time
than nitrogenous substances; thus, when drops of an infusion of raw
meat were placed on the midrib of a leaf, the incurved margins began to
unfold in only 10 hrs. 37 m., and this was the quickest act of
re-expansion observed by me; but it may have been partly due to the
distance of the margins from the midrib where the drops lay.

We are naturally led to inquire what is the use of this movement which
lasts for so short a time? If very small objects, such as fibres of
meat, or moderately small objects, such as little flies or
cabbage-seeds, are placed close to the margin, they are either
completely or partially embraced by it. The glands of the overlapping
margin are thus brought into contact with such objects and pour forth
their secretion, afterwards absorbing the digested matter. But as the
incurvation lasts for so short a time, any such benefit can be of only
