asteroids. That much of remote history was already known from the
research-expeditions that had gone out to the Red Planet, and beyond.

The queer, advanced equipment of these two beings from two small,
swift-cooling worlds--which had borne life early, and whose cultures had
rivalled briefly for dominance of the solar system until they had wiped
each other out those fifty million years ago--lay scattered near them.
It was still as bright and new as yesterday, preserved by the Moon's
vacuum: Cameras, weapons, instruments--rich loot, now, to be sold to
labs that sought to add the technology of other minds to human
knowledge.

For a year, things went well. The names, BRINKER and COPELAND,
footprinted into the lunar dust, helped build the new reputation that
Brinker wanted. Copeland and he were a hard-working team; they covered
more ground than any other Moon explorers.

The fights that Brinker got into with other toughs at the various supply
stations, and never lost, added to the legend--that old Tom's son was
savage and dangerous, but with a gentler side. For instance he once
carried a crazed Moon-tramp, whom Copeland was too slight to have
handled for a minute, fifty miles on his back to a station. Oh,
sure--the stunt could be pure ballyhoo, not charity. But Copeland knew
that more and more people had begun to admire his buddy.

Brinker never found a weak spot in the lunar crust. "It's always about
two hundred miles deep, Cope," he said. "Lots thicker than Earth's
shell, because the Moon, being smaller, cooled more. But don't worry;
nothing is impossible. Soon I'll have enough money to make minor tests.
And maybe enough friends for serious support."

Yeah--maybe it was all just a brain-bubble. But Copeland had seen enough
of desolation to grind the spirit of the Brinker idea into his
bones--even if he didn't think it was quite practical.

"I'll throw my dough in with yours, Jess," he said.

Their named bootprints helped build their fame as explorers; but there
was a flaw and an invitation here which they both must have
realized--and still faced as a calculated risk.

       *       *       *       *       *

A lunar day later, they were plodding through the Fenwick mountains on
the far hemisphere, when streams of bullets made lava chips fly.

As they flopped prone in the dust, a scratchy voice chuckled: "Hello,
Brinker. Maybe you and your pal want my bunch to escort you back to
Tycho Station. We might as well have the reward. Robbery of a minerals
caravan and three killings, they say. It's terrible how you scatter your
tracks around...."

Brinker grasped Copeland's wrist to form a sound-channel, so that they
could converse without using their radiophones. "That was Krell
talking," he said. "Dad's old partner."

Luckily, it was not many hours to sunset. The mountain ridges, slanting
up to the peaks, cast inky shadows that could hide anything. Brinker was
canny; while more bullets spurted, he led a dash back to a ridge-shadow
that went clear to the range-crest. Even with bulky packs, climbing was
a lot faster than on Earth, where things weigh six times as much.

So they got away, over the mountains. The black night of the far side of
the Moon, where Earth never shines, hid them.

"Making boot-soles with our names on them," Brinker growled bitterly,
using the radiophone at reduced range. "The crudest kind of frameup."

"Your Krell is quite a man," Copeland stated.

"He _could_ have arranged all of it--sure," Brinker answered. "He knows
I suspect that he finished Pop, so I'm dangerous to him. He might hate
me, too, as part of my Old Man--sort of ... Whatever it was he got sore
about, originally--money or principle, no doubt ... Besides, I don't
think he wants the Moon to be a little more livable. It would encourage
too many colonists to come, increase metals production, spoil prices,
cheapen his claims. He's a corny man, with all the corny reasons ...

"He, and some of his guys, could have robbed and killed and left
footprints like ours. But any other lugs, seeking someone else to blame
for their crimes, could have done all that. If that is so, Krell has got
me even _legally_--without blame to himself."

"Footprints!" Copeland snapped. "They're so obviously a frame that it's
silly; anyone could see that! Another thing--maybe Krell was kidding,
scaring us by saying that we are wanted. Tell you what, Jess: In any
case I won't seem as guilty as you; I'll go back alone to Tycho Station,
and clear us both."

"You're an optimist, ain't you?" Brinker laughed. "Krell wasn't kidding;
and in a rough place like the Moon, justice jumps to conclusions and
gets mean, fast. Sure, the purpose of the footprints is obvious. But
I've been fighting uphill against my Old Man's reputation for a long
time. Who's gonna say I haven't backslid? What I want to accomplish is
tough enough with everything in my favor."

Brinker's voice was now a sinister rumble with a quiver in it. Arne
Copeland turned wary again; he had never lost entirely the deepseated
notion that Brinker might cause him misfortune.

"So now what?" he demanded softly, flashing his ato-light beam against
Brinker's face-window, so that he could see his expression. Copeland
meant to forestall danger aggressively.

But as the darkness between them was swept aside, he also saw the muzzle
of Brinker's pistol levelled at him. The bigger man's grin was lopsided.
"I'd give you my neck, Cope," he rumbled. "But I'd give both our necks
for you-know-what. Now, because that's all there's left, I'm gonna try
it Pop's crazy way. You're gonna help. If you and I can last through a
couple of years of _real_ silence and solitude, it might have a chance.
I got a ship hidden. Give me your gun. Easy! If you think I wouldn't
shoot, you're a fool. Now I'll wire one of your wrists to mine; we've
got a long march ahead."

       *       *       *       *       *

Some march it was! Copeland was fiercely independent. The warnings about
Brinker had gone to waste; so had his own wariness. Bitterness made him
savage. The harshness of the Moon still ached in his guts--he wanted the
steam and gases of its interior tapped and used, yes--but by some
reasonable means. Jess Brinker must be truly Moon-balmy, now.
Desolation-nuts. Wild for the sight of growing things. Else how could he
think seriously of using Brulow's Comet? Was it hard to guess how?
Copeland knew that he and Brinker had courage, and willingness to work
for a sound purpose. But to trade long effort and hardship in a
