339.) On cultivated trees of the Walnut and Mulberry, the male flowers have been
observed to abort on certain individuals, which have thus been converted into
females; but whether there are any species in a state of nature which co-exist
as monoecious and female individuals, I do not know. (Introduction/18.
'Gardener's Chronicle' 1847 pages 541, 558.)

The third Class consists of dioecious species, and the remarks made under the
last class with respect to the amount of difference between the male and female
flowers are here applicable. It is at present an inexplicable fact that with
some dioecious plants, of which the Restiaceae of Australia and the Cape of Good
Hope offer the most striking instance, the differentiation of the sexes has
affected the whole plant to such an extent (as I hear from Mr. Thiselton Dyer)
that Mr. Bentham and Professor Oliver have often found it impossible to match
the male and female specimens of the same species. In my seventh chapter some
observations will be given on the gradual conversion of heterostyled and of
ordinary hermaphrodite plants into dioecious or sub-dioecious species.

The fourth and last Class consists of the plants which were called polygamous by
Linnaeus; but it appears to me that it would be convenient to confine this term
to the species which coexist as hermaphrodites, males and females; and to give
new names to several other combinations of the sexes--a plan which I shall here
follow. Polygamous plants, in this confined sense of the term, may be divided
into two sub-groups, according as the three sexual forms are found on the same
individual or on distinct individuals. Of this latter or trioicous sub-group,
the common Ash (Fraxinus excelsior) offers a good instance: thus, I examined
during the spring and autumn fifteen trees growing in the same field; and of
these, eight produced male flowers alone, and in the autumn not a single seed;
four produced only female flowers, which set an abundance of seeds; three were
hermaphrodites, which had a different aspect from the other trees whilst in
flower, and two of them produced nearly as many seeds as the female trees,
whilst the third produced none, so that it was in function a male. The
separation of the sexes, however, is not complete in the Ash; for the female
flowers include stamens, which drop off at an early period, and their anthers,
which never open or dehisce, generally contain pulpy matter instead of pollen.
On some female trees, however, I found a few anthers containing pollen grains
apparently sound. On the male trees most of the flowers include pistils, but
these likewise drop off at an early period; and the ovules, which ultimately
abort, are very small compared with those in female flowers of the same age.

Of the other or monoicous sub-group of polygamous plants, or those which bear
hermaphrodite, male and female flowers on the same individual, the common Maple
(Acer campestre) offers a good instance; but Lecoq states that some trees are
truly dioecious, and this shows how easily one state passes into another.
(Introduction/19. 'Geographie Botanique' tome 5 page 367.)

A considerable number of plants generally ranked as polygamous exist under only
two forms, namely, as hermaphrodites and females; and these may be called gyno-
dioecious, of which the common Thyme offers a good example. In my seventh
chapter I shall give some observations on plants of this nature. Other species,
for instance several kinds of Atriplex, bear on the same plant hermaphrodite and
female flowers; and these might be called gyno-monoecious, if a name were
desirable for them.

Again there are plants which produce hermaphrodite and male flowers on the same
individual, for instance, some species of Galium, Veratrum, etc.; and these
might be called andro-monoecious. If there exist plants, the individuals of
which consist of hermaphrodites and males, these might be distinguished as
andro-dioecious. But, after making inquiries from several botanists, I can hear
of no such cases. Lecoq, however, states, but without entering into full
details, that some plants of Caltha palustris produce only male flowers, and
that these live mingled with the hermaphrodites. (Introduction/20. 'Geographie
Botanique' tome 4 page 488.) The rarity of such cases as this last one is
remarkable, as the presence of hermaphrodite and male flowers on the same
individual is not an unusual occurrence; it would appear as if nature did not
think it worth while to devote a distinct individual to the production of
pollen, excepting when this was indispensably necessary, as in the case of
dioecious species.

I have now finished my brief sketch of the several cases, as far as known to me,
in which flowers differing in structure or in function are produced by the same
species of plant. Full details will be given in the following chapters with
respect to many of these plants. I will begin with the heterostyled, then pass
on to certain dioecious, sub-dioecious, and polygamous species, and end with the
cleistogamic. For the convenience of the reader, and to save space, the less
important cases and details have been printed in smaller type [].

I cannot close this Introduction without expressing my warm thanks to Dr. Hooker
for supplying me with specimens and for other aid; and to Mr. Thiselton Dyer and
Professor Oliver for giving me much information and other assistance. Professor
Asa Gray, also, has uniformly aided me in many ways. To Fritz Muller of St.
Catharina, in Brazil, I am indebted for many dried flowers of heterostyled
plants, often accompanied with valuable notes.


CHAPTER I.

HETEROSTYLED DIMORPHIC PLANTS: PRIMULACEAE.

Primula veris or the cowslip.
Differences in structure between the two forms.
Their degrees of fertility when legitimately and illegitimately united.
P. elatior, vulgaris, Sinensis, auricula, etc.
Summary on the fertility of the heterostyled species of Primula.
Homostyled species of Primula.
Hottonia palustris.
Androsace vitalliana.

(FIGURE 1.1. Primula veris.
Left: Long-styled form.
Right: Short-styled form.)

It has long been known to botanists that the common cowslip (Primula veris,
Brit. Flora, var. officinalis, Lin.) exists under two forms, about equally
numerous, which obviously differ from each other in the length of their pistils
and stamens. (1/1. This fact, according to Von Mohl 'Botanische Zeitung' 1863
page 326, was first observed by Persoon in the year 1794.) This difference has
hitherto been looked at as a case of mere variability, but this view, as we
shall presently see, is far from the true one. Florists who cultivate the
Polyanthus and Auricula have long been aware of the two kinds of flowers, and
they call the plants which display the globular stigma at the mouth of the
corolla, "pin-headed" or "pin-eyed," and those which display the anthers,
"thrum-eyed." (1/2. In Johnson's Dictionary, "thrum" is said to be the ends of
weavers' threads; and I suppose that some weaver who cultivated the Polyanthus
invented this name, from being struck with some degree of resemblance between
the cluster of anthers in the mouth of the corolla and the ends of his threads.)
I will designate the two forms as the long-styled and short-styled.

The pistil in the long-styled form is almost exactly twice as long as that of
the short-styled. The stigma stands in the mouth of the corolla or projects just
above it, and is thus externally visible. It stands high above the anthers,
which are situated halfway down the tube and cannot be easily seen. In the
short-styled form the anthers are attached near the mouth of the tube, and
therefore stand above the stigma, which is seated in about the middle of the
tubular corolla. The corolla itself is of a different shape in the two forms;
the throat or expanded portion above the attachment of the anthers being much
longer in the long-styled than in the short-styled form. Village children notice
this difference, as they can best make necklaces by threading and slipping the
corollas of the long-styled flowers into one another. But there are much more
important differences. The stigma in the long-styled form is globular; in the
short-styled it is depressed on the summit, so that the longitudinal axis of the
former is sometimes nearly double that of the latter. Although somewhat variable
in shape, one difference is persistent, namely, in roughness: in some specimens
carefully compared, the papillae which render the stigma rough were in the long-
styled form from twice to thrice as long as in the short-styled. The anthers do
not differ in size in the two forms, which I mention because this is the case
with some heterostyled plants. The most remarkable difference is in the pollen-
grains. I measured with the micrometer many specimens, both dry and wet, taken
from plants growing in different situations, and always found a palpable
difference. The grains distended with water from the short-styled flowers were
about .038 millimetres (10 to 11/7000 of an inch) in diameter, whilst those from
the long-styled were about .0254 millimetres (7/7000 of an inch), which is in
the ratio of 100 to 67. The pollen-grains therefore from the longer stamens of
the short-styled form are plainly larger than those from the shorter stamens of
the long-styled. When examined dry, the smaller grains are seen under a low
power to be more transparent than the larger grains, and apparently in a greater
degree than can be accounted for by their less diameter. There is also a
difference in shape, the grains from the short-styled plants being nearly
spherical, those from the long-styled being oblong with the angles rounded; this
difference disappears when the grains are distended with water. The long-styled
plants generally tend to flower a little before the short-styled: for instance,
I had twelve plants of each form growing in separate pots and treated in every
respect alike; and at the time when only a single short-styled plant was in
flower, seven of the long-styled had expanded their flowers.

We shall, also, presently see that the short-styled plants produce more seed
than the long-styled. It is remarkable, according to Professor Oliver, that the
ovules in the unexpanded and unimpregnated flowers of the latter are
considerably larger than those of the short-styled flowers (1/3. 'Natural
History Review' July 1862 page 237.); and this I suppose is connected with the
long-styled flowers producing fewer seeds, so that the ovules have more space
and nourishment for rapid development.

To sum up the differences:--The long-styled plants have a much longer pistil,
with a globular and much rougher stigma, standing high above the anthers. The
stamens are short; the grains of pollen smaller and oblong in shape. The upper
half of the tube of the corolla is more expanded. The number of seeds produced
is smaller and the ovules larger. The plants tend to flower first.

The short-styled plants have a short pistil, half the length of the tube of the
corolla, with a smooth depressed stigma standing beneath the anthers. The
stamens are long; the grains of pollen are spherical and larger. The tube of the
corolla is of uniform diameter except close to the upper end. The number of
seeds produced is larger.

I have examined a large number of flowers; and though the shape of the stigma
and the length of the pistil both vary, especially in the short-styled form, I
have never met with any transitional states between the two forms in plants
growing in a state of nature. There is never the slightest doubt under which
form a plant ought to be classed. The two kinds of flowers are never found on
the same individual plant. I marked many cowslips and primroses, and on the
following year all retained the same character, as did some in my garden which
flowered out of their proper season in the autumn. Mr. W. Wooler, of Darlington,
however, informs us that he has seen early blossoms on the Polyanthus, which
were not long-styled, but became so later in the season. (1/4. I have proved by
numerous experiments, hereafter to be given, that the Polyanthus is a variety of
Primula veris.) Possibly in this case the pistils may not have been fully
developed during the early spring. An excellent proof of the permanence of the
two forms may be seen in nursery-gardens, where choice varieties of the
Polyanthus are propagated by division; and I found whole beds of several
varieties, each consisting exclusively of the one or the other form. The two
forms exist in the wild state in about equal numbers: I collected 522 umbels
from plants growing in several stations, taking a single umbel from each plant;
and 241 were long-styled, and 281 short-styled. No difference in tint or size
could be perceived in the two great masses of flowers.

We shall presently see that most of the species of Primula exist under two
analogous forms; and it may be asked what is the meaning of the above-described
important differences in their structure? The question seems well worthy of
careful investigation, and I will give my observations on the cowslip in detail.
The first idea which naturally occurred to me was, that this species was tending
towards a dioecious condition; that the long-styled plants, with their longer
pistils, rougher stigmas, and smaller pollen-grains, were more feminine in
nature, and would produce more seed;--that the short-styled plants, with their
shorter pistils, longer stamens and larger pollen-grains, were more masculine in
nature. Accordingly, in 1860, I marked a few cowslips of both forms growing in
my garden, and others growing in an open field, and others in a shady wood, and
gathered and weighed the seed. In all the lots the short-styled plants yielded,
contrary to my expectation, most seed. Taking the lots together, the following
is the result:--

TABLE 1.1.

Column 1: Plant.
Column 2: Number of Plants.
Column 3: Number of Umbels Produced.
Column 4: Number of Capsules Produced.
Column 5: Weight of Seed In Grains.

Short-styled cowslips :  9 : 33 : 199 : 83.
Long-styled cowslips  : 13 : 51 : 261 : 91.

If we compare the weight from an equal number of plants, and from an equal
number of umbels, and from an equal number of capsules of the two forms, we get
the following results:--

TABLE 1.2.

Column 1: Plant.
Column 2: Number of Plants.
Column 3: Weight of Seed in grains.
...
Column 4: Number of Umbels.
Column 5: Weight of Seed.
...
Column 6: Number of Capsules.
Column 7: Weight of Seed in grains.

Short-styled cowslips : 10 : 92 :: 100 : 251 :: 100 : 41.
Long-styled cowslips : 10 : 70 :: 100 : 178 :: 100 : 34.

So that, by all these standards of comparison, the short-styled form is the more
fertile; if we take the number of umbels (which is the fairest standard, for
large and small plants are thus equalised), the short-styled plants produce more
seed than the long-styled, in the proportion of nearly four to three.

In 1861 the trial was made in a fuller and fairer manner. A number of wild
plants had been transplanted during the previous autumn into a large bed in my
garden, and all were treated alike; the result was:--

TABLE 1.3.

Column 1: Plant.
Column 2: Number of Plants.
Column 3: Number of Umbels.
Column 4: Weight of Seed in grains.

Short-styled cowslips : 47 : 173 : 745.
Long-styled cowslips  : 58 : 208 : 692.

These figures give us the following proportions:--

TABLE 1.4.

Column 1: Plant.
Column 2: Number of Plants.
Column 3: Weight of Seed in grains.
...
Column 4: Number of Umbels.
Column 5: Weight of Seed in grains.

Short-styled cowslips : 100 : 1585 :: 100 : 430.
Long-styled cowslips  : 100 : 1093 :: 100 : 332.

The season was much more favourable this year than the last; the plants also now
grew in good soil, instead of in a shady wood or struggling with other plants in
the open field; consequently the actual produce of seed was considerably larger.
Nevertheless we have the same relative result; for the short-styled plants
produced more seed than the long-styled in nearly the proportion of three to
two; but if we take the fairest standard of comparison, namely, the product of
seeds from an equal number of umbels, the excess is, as in the former case,
nearly as four to three.

Looking to these trials made during two successive years on a large number of
plants, we may safely conclude that the short-styled form is more productive
than the long-styled form, and the same result holds good with some other
species of Primula. Consequently my anticipation that the plants with longer
pistils, rougher stigmas, shorter stamens and smaller pollen-grains, would prove
to be more feminine in nature, is exactly the reverse of the truth.

In 1860 a few umbels on some plants of both the long-styled and short-styled
form, which had been covered by a net, did not produce any seed, though other
umbels on the same plants, artificially fertilised, produced an abundance of
seed; and this fact shows that the mere covering in itself was not injurious.
Accordingly, in 1861, several plants were similarly covered just before they
expanded their flowers; these turned out as follows:--

TABLE 1.5.

Column 1: Plant.
Column 2: Number of Plants.
Column 3: Number of Umbels produced.
Column 4: Product of Seed.

Short-styled :  6 : 24 : 1.3 grain weight of seed, or about 50 in number.
Long-styled  : 18 : 74 : Not one seed.

Judging from the exposed plants which grew all round in the same bed, and had
been treated in the same manner, excepting that they had been exposed to the
visits of insects, the above six short-styled plants ought to have produced 92
grains' weight of seed instead of only 1.3; and the eighteen long-styled plants,
which produced not one seed, ought to have produced above 200 grains' weight.
The production of a few seeds by the short-styled plants was probably due to the
action of Thrips or of some other minute insect. It is scarcely necessary to
give any additional evidence, but I may add that ten pots of Polyanthuses and
cowslips of both forms, protected from insects in my greenhouse, did not set one
pod, though artificially fertilised flowers in other pots produced an abundance.
We thus see that the visits of insects are absolutely necessary for the
fertilisation of Primula veris. If the corolla of the long-styled form had
dropped off, instead of remaining attached in a withered state to the ovarium,
the anthers attached to the lower part of the tube with some pollen still
adhering to them would have been dragged over the stigma, and the flowers would
have been partially self-fertilised, as is the case with Primula Sinensis
through this means. It is a rather curious fact that so trifling a difference as
the falling-off of the withered corolla, should make a very great difference in
the number of seeds produced by a plant if its flowers are not visited by
insects.

The flowers of the cowslip and of the other species of the genus secrete plenty
of nectar; and I have often seen humble bees, especially B. hortorum and
muscorum, sucking the former in a proper manner, though they sometimes bite
holes through the corolla. (1/5. H. Muller has also seen Anthophora pilipes and
a Bombylius sucking the flowers. 'Nature' December 10, 1874 page 111.) No doubt
moths likewise visit the flowers, as one of my sons caught Cucullia verbasci in
the act. The pollen readily adheres to any thin object which is inserted into a
flower. The anthers in the one form stand nearly, but not exactly, on a level
with the stigma of the other; for the distance between the anthers and stigma in
the short-styled form is greater than that in the long-styled, in the ratio of
100 to 90. This difference is the result of the anthers in the long-styled form
standing rather higher in the tube than does the stigma in the short-styled, and
this favours their pollen being deposited on it. It follows from the position of
the organs that if the proboscis of a dead humble-bee, or a thick bristle or
rough needle, be pushed down the corolla, first of one form and then of the
other, as an insect would do in visiting the two forms growing mingled together,
pollen from the long-stamened form adheres round the base of the object, and is
left with certainty on the stigma of the long-styled form; whilst pollen from
the short stamens of the long-styled form adheres a little way above the
extremity of the object, and some is generally left on the stigma of the other
form. In accordance with this observation I found that the two kinds of pollen,
which could easily be recognised under the microscope, adhered in this manner to
the proboscides of the two species of humble-bees and of the moth, which were
caught visiting the flowers; but some small grains were mingled with the larger
grains round the base of the proboscis, and conversely some large grains with
the small grains near the extremity of the proboscis. Thus pollen will be
regularly carried from the one form to the other, and they will reciprocally
fertilise one another. Nevertheless an insect in withdrawing its proboscis from
the corolla of the long-styled form cannot fail occasionally to leave pollen
from the same flower on the stigma; and in this case there might be self-
fertilisation. But this will be much more likely to occur with the short-styled
form; for when I inserted a bristle or other such object into the corolla of
this form, and had, therefore, to pass it down between the anthers seated round
the mouth of the corolla, some pollen was almost invariably carried down and
left on the stigma. Minute insects, such as Thrips, which sometimes haunt the
flowers, would likewise be apt to cause the self-fertilisation of both forms.

The several foregoing facts led me to try the effects of the two kinds of pollen
on the stigmas of the two forms. Four essentially different unions are possible;
namely, the fertilisation of the stigma of the long-styled form by its own-form
pollen, and by that of the short-styled; and the stigma of the short-styled form
by its own-form pollen, and by that of the long-styled. The fertilisation of
either form with pollen from the other form may be conveniently called a
LEGITIMATE UNION, from reasons hereafter to be made clear; and that of either
form with its own-form pollen an ILLEGITIMATE UNION. I formerly applied the term
"heteromorphic" to the legitimate unions, and "homomorphic" to the illegitimate
unions; but after discovering the existence of trimorphic plants, in which many
more unions are possible, these two terms ceased to be applicable. The
illegitimate unions of both forms might have been tried in three ways; for a
flower of either form may be fertilised with pollen from the same flower, or
with that from a another flower on the same plant, or with that from a distinct
plant of the same form. But to make my experiments perfectly fair, and to avoid
any evil result from self-fertilisation or too close interbreeding, I have
invariably employed pollen from a distinct plant of the same form for the
illegitimate unions of all the species; and therefore it may be observed that I
have used the term "own-form pollen" in speaking of such unions. The several
