Conn. Winter term begins Jan.11

       *       *       *       *       *

FOR SALE--A splendid set of Sub-marine Diving Apparatus, but little
used, cheap. Address Box 1582, Norwich, Conn.

       *       *       *       *       *

We rarely open a more readable magazine than "The Galaxy." There is not
a dull page between its covers.--_N.Y. Times_.

Well sustains its reputation for vigorous and racy writing.--_N. Y.
Tribune_.

A model periodical; a credit to American periodical literature.--_Press,
Philadelphia_.

THE GALAXY FOR 1870.

GREAT ATTRACTIONS.

ARTICLES SECURED FROM

CHARLES READE, MRS. EDWARDS, RICHARD GRANT WHITE, ANTHONY TROLLOPE,
JUSTIN McCARTHY, PARK GODWIN, DR. J. C. DALTON, DR. DRAPER.

AND ALL THE LEADING WRITERS OF THE DAY.

FIRST.

PUT YOURSELF IN HIS PLACE.--Charles Reade's Great Story will continue
to delight the readers of the Galaxy the greater part of the year 1870.
Part First is is now ready in book form, and will be sent free with the
Galaxy for 1870 on receipt of $4, the regular subscription price.

SECOND.

A NEW STORY BY MRS. EDWARDS, author of "Susan Fielding," "Steven
Lawrence, Yeoman," etc. Mrs. Edwards is one of the very best female
novelists now writing in the English language.

THIRD.

ANTHONY TROLLOPE will furnish a series of "Editors' Tales," in which he
will work an entirely new vein.

FOURTH.

PARK GODWIN, one of the ablest American writers, will furnish a series
of noteworthy articles on Historical subjects.

FIFTH.

RICHARD GRANT WHITE will continue his critical and social essays.

SIXTH.

JUSTIN MCCARTHY, whose skill as an efficient magazine writer is almost
unequaled, has been engaged on the Editorial Staff, and will contribute
regularly to the Galaxy.

SEVENTH.

TEN YEARS IN ROME, giving an inside view of the Roman Catholic Church,
by a late Ecclesiastic, will be a noteworthy series of articles.

EIGHTH.

THE SCIENTIFIC ARTICLES will be prepared by Drs. Dalton and Draper, both
eminent Physiologists.

NINTH.

THE EDITORIAL STAFF of the Galaxy is now very large, and has on it the
best talent engaged on American periodical literature.

We have arranged for very liberal clubbing terms with the other leading
periodicals.

A sample copy will be sent on receipt of 25 cents.

Price, 35 cents per number; $4 per year.

NOW IS THE TIME TO SUBSCRIBE.

THE GALAXY IS THE BEST OF AMERICAN MAGAZINES.

SHELDON & COMPANY,

498 & 500 Broadway, New York.

       *       *       *       *       *

FOUND AT LAST.--Watches Superseded. The Dollar Time Keeper.--A Perfect
Gem.--Elegantly cased in Oriode of Gold, Superior Compass attachment,
Enameled Dial, Silver and Brass Works, glass crystal, size of Ladies'
Watch. Will denote correct time, warranted five years, superb and showy
case, entirely of metal. This is no wood Compass. Is entirely new,
patented. 6500 sold in three weeks. Only $1 each, three for $2, in neat
case, mailed free. Trade supplied. Address the sole manufacturers,
MAGNETIC WATCH CO>, Hinsdale, N. H.

       *       *       *       *       *

STOCKS, DIES, AND SCREW PLATES Horton's and other Chucks. JOHN ASHCKOFT,
50 John st., New York. 16 tf

       *       *       *       *       *

THE NOVELTY IRON WORKS--Foot E. 12th st., and 77 and 83 Liberty st.,
New York Manufacture the most approved Stationary Steam Engine, with
Variable Cut-off, now in use.

       *       *       *       *       *

ROBERT McCALVEY, Manufacturer of HOISTING MACHINES AND DUMB WAITERS. 602
Cherry st., Philadelphia, Pa.

       *       *       *       *       *

STATEMENT.

ORDINARY FURNACE, from 15th to 20th April, produced 23,195 lbs. of Muck
Bar, and 295 lbs. Scrap Bar, worked double turn. Day turn started at 3
A.M., and was done by 1 P.M. Night turn went on at 2 P.M., and was done
by 11 P.M., worked 5 heats to each turn. Consumed 350 bushels of coal.
Furnace was lighted on Sunday out of coal. The Stevenson Furnace, from
15th to 20th April, produced 29,160 lbs. of Muck Bar, and 515 lbs. of
Scrap Bar, worked double turn. Day turn started at 3 A.M., and was done
by 10 A.M. Night turn started at 11 A.M., and was done by 6 P.M., worked
6 heats to each turn. Consumed 300 bushels of coal. Furnace was lighted
on Sunday out of coal. The same weight of heats of Pig and Scrap were
weighed to each Furnace. On Stevenson Furnace, 3,963 lbs. more Muck Bar,
and 220 lbs. more Scrap Bar were made, with 50 bushels less coal than
were used in other furnace. The saving in ore (fix) in former over
latter during the week, was 450 lbs., by actual weight. A very important
feature is the great saving accomplished in brick and brick-laying. The
first Stevenson Furnace, put up three months, has not had any repair
put upon it, and is, to-day, in good working order, while the ordinary
furnaces are generally repaired about every two weeks. The cost, over
ordinary furnace, is about seventy dollars.

We cheerfully bear witness to the truth of the above statements of Mr.
Stevenson. They are rather under than over the mark. The quality of iron
made in his furnaces is the same as made by ordinary kind. We think it a
valuable improvement, and intend to introduce it as fast as possible in
our forge. J. PAINTER & SONS.

WILLIAM STEVENSON,

West Pittsburgh, Pa.

       *       *       *       *       *

FOR SALE.--The entire State Rights (except Georgia and Texas), of the
Self-supporting Gate. Every farmer wants it, and will give from three to
ten dollars for the right to make it for his own use. Address JOHN R.
DAVIS, Covington, Ca., stating what you will give.

[Illustration]

       *       *       *       *       *

LARGEST-BEST-CHEAPEST!

MOORE'S RURAL NEW-YORKER.

THE GREAT ILLUSTRATED

Rural, Literary, and Family Weekly.

MOORE'S RURAL Excels in CONTENTS, Size, Style, ILLUSTRATIONS, etc.
Sixteen Double-Quarto Pages of Five Columns Each. Ably Edited,
Beautifully Illustrated, Neatly Printed, and adapted to both Town and
Country. The RURAL is Profusely and Splendidly Illustrated--the vol.
just closed containing OVER EIGHT HUNDRED ENGRAVINGS!

The Rural for 1870

Will be the Largest, Best, and Cheapest ILLUSTRATED JOURNAL OF ITS CLASS
in the World! Only $3 a Year,--$2 50 in Clubs. All who form Clubs will
get

"GOOD PAY FOR DOING GOOD!"

A choice of OVER ONE HUNDRED VALUABLE PREMIUMS! Specimens, Premium
Lists, Posters, etc., sent free.

D. D. T. MOOME, 41 Park Row, N. Y,

       *       *       *       *       *

2d-Hand Machinery.

22x48; 16x36; 10x24; 9x12; 8x24, Stationary; and 2 Portable Engines, in
good order; Boilers of all sizes; Lathes; Wood and Iron Planers; Fay's
Molding Machine; Machinery bought, sold, and exchanged.

W. WILLARD,

47 Dey st., New York.

       *       *       *       *       *

THE GEM NOVELTY Combines a Superior Battonhole Cutter, Yard Measure,
Scissors Snarpener, Knife Sharpener, Pencil Sharpener, Emery Cushion,
Seam Ripper, Spool Stand,Thread Cutter, Scale, and Rule. A standard,
popular, and rich article for agents, very ornamental and useful. Rapid
sales guaranteed. Price prepaid by mail $1. For sample and liberal
terms. Address J. H. MARTIN, Hartford, N. Y.

       *       *       *       *       *

AN Experienced Civil and Mechanical Engineer is open for engagement as
Manager. Would undertake Contract Work. Address "Engineer," care of
Philip S. Justice Philadelphia, Pa.

       *       *       *       *       *

McCHESNEY'S IMP'VD GIG OR SCROLL

Saw.--First Medal and Diploma, Fair of the American Institute, N. Y.,
Sept. and Oct., 1869. Superior to any for either light or heavy work.
For description and price address

T.L. CORNELL, Birmingham, Conn.

       *       *       *       *       *

NATIONAL WAGES TABLES--

Showing at a glance any wages from $1 to $37, by hour, day, or week,
from half an hour to four weeks. Half bound, 50 cents; cloth, 75 cents;
in Morocco, $1. Sent by mail on receipt of Price. Address

NELSON ROW, Publisher,

149 Fulton st., New York.

       *       *       *       *       *

BAIRD'S CATALOGUE OF PRACTICAL & SCIENTIFIC BOOKS.

Sent free of postage to any one who will furnish his address to

HENRY CAREY BAIRD,

Industrial Publisher, 406 Walnut St.,

PHILADELPHIA.

       *       *       *       *       *

NOW READY.

Charles Reade's Great Story,

PUT YOURSELF IN HIS PLACE.

PART FIRST.

One volume, octavo, elegantly illustrated. Price, $1. Containing all
published in the "Galaxy" up to the January Number.

This great story will be continued in the "Galaxy" most of the year
1870.

PUT YOURSELF IN His PLACE will be sent with the "Galaxy," for 1870, on
receipt of $4. which is the regular subscription price of the "Galaxy."

THE GALAXY NOW STANDS AT THE HEAD OF AMERICAN MAGAZINES.

RECENTLY PUBLISHED.

SUSAN FIELDING.

A NOVEL, BY MRS. EDWARDS.

Author of "Archie Lovell" and "Steven Lawrence, Yeoman."

One vol., octavo. Elegantly Illustrated. Cloth, $2. Paper, $1 25.

Also, A New Edition of

ARCHIE LOVELL.

A NOVEL, BY MRS. EDWARDS.

One volume, octavo. Illustrated. Cloth. $1 75. Paper, $1.

STEVEN LAWRENCE, YEOMAK

A NOVEL, BY MRS. EDWARDS.

One volume, octavo. Illustrated. Cloth, $2; paper, $1 25

SHELDON & COMPANY, Publishers,

NEW YORK.

       *       *       *       *       *

"It Still Waves."

The old favorite, the "STAR SPANGLED BANNER." The Jan. No. just out, Now
is the Time to Subscribe Every No. contains 40 long columns, 8 pages,
Ledger size 480 long columns of splendid reading during 1870. Four
columns of "swindling exposures" in every No. In fact the whole paper
is brimming with Wit, Humor, Fun Sense & Nonsense, Wit, Wisdom, & Wind,
Fun, Fact, & Fancy. It is Rich, Rare, & Racy; Smart, Spicy, & Sparkling.
It exposed 100 swindlers last year, and is bound to "show up" rascality
without fear or favor. You Need it. There is nothing Like it. It will
instruct, amuse, and will Save You Money. We give the superb steel
plate, 11/2x2 feet in size, entitled "Evangeline," mount it on roller, and
send it Gratis, and the paper till 1871, all for only 75c. Engraving
alone sells for $2. It is not a "sell." Has been published regular since
1863. Largest circulation in New Hampshire. If you try it one year you
will come again. You have often thought of subscribing--Now is Just the
Time. We will refund your money if you are not Perfectly Satisfied it
Will Pay. You run no risk. Buy a copy of any newsman, or send six cents
and receive one by mail. Remember you get the elegant parlor engraving,
