Manhattan.' He leered and added, 'And everybody who'll be living here at
that time will be scattered into the atmosphere in fragments no bigger
than an amoeba.'

"'You fill me with anticipation,' I said.

"So I went back to my desk and wrote the story. You could guess what
kind it had to be. 'Time Travel Is Possible, Says Amateur
Scientist!'--that kind of thing. You can see it every week, in large
doses, in the feature sections of some of the biggest chain papers. It
went over like an average feature about life on the moon or prehistoric
animals surviving in remote mountain valleys, or what have you. Just
what Vanderkamp went back to after I left, I don't know, but I have an
idea that he gave his sister a devil of a time."

       *       *       *       *       *

_Vanderkamp stalked into the house and confronted his sister._

_"You see, Julie--a reporter. Can't you learn to hold your tongue?"_

_She threw him a scornful glance. "What difference does it make?" she
cried. "You're gone all the time."_

_"Maybe I'll take you along sometime. Just wait."_

_"Wait, wait! That's all I've been doing. Since I was ten years old I've
been waiting on you!"_

_"Oh, the hell with it!" He turned on his heel and left the house._

_She followed him to the door and shouted after him, "Where are you
going now?"_

_"To New Amsterdam for a little peace and quiet," he said testily._

_He threw open the thick-walled door of his time-machine and pulled it
shut behind him. He sat down before the controls and began to chart his
course for 1650. If his calculations were correct, he would shortly find
himself in the vicinity of that sturdy if autocratic first citizen of
the Dutch colony of New Amsterdam, Peter Stuyvesant, as well as Governor
Stuyvesant's friend and neighbor, Heinrich Vanderkamp. He gave not even
a figurative glance over his shoulder before he started out._

_When he emerged at last from his machine, he was in what appeared to be
the backyard of a modest residence on a street which, though he did not
know it, he suspected might be the Bouwerie. At the moment of his
emergence, a tall, angular woman stood viewing him, open-mouthed and
aghast, from the wooden stoop at the back door of her home. He looked at
her in astonishment himself. The resemblance to his sister Julie was
uncanny._

_With only the slightest hesitation, he addressed her in fluent Dutch.
"Pray do not be disturbed, young lady."_

_"A fine way for a gentleman to call!" she exclaimed in a voice
considerably more forceful than her appearance. "I suppose my father
sent you. And where did you get that outlandish costume?"_

_"I bought it," he answered, truthfully enough._

_"A likely tale," she said. "And if my father sent you, just go back and
tell him I'm satisfied the way I am. No woman needs a man to manage
her."_

_"I don't have the honor of your father's acquaintance," he answered._

_She gazed at him suspiciously from narrowed eyes. "Everyone in New
Amsterdam knows Henrik Van Tromp. He's as unloved as yonder bumblebee.
Stand where you are and say whence you came."_

_"I am a visitor in New Amsterdam," he said, standing obediently still.
"I confess I don't know my way about very well, and I chose to stop at
this attractive home."_

_"I know it's attractive," she said tartly. "And it's plain to see
you're a stranger here, or you'd never be wearing such clothes. Or is it
the fashion where you come from?" She gave him no opportunity to answer,
but added, after a moment of indecision, "Well, you look respectable
enough, though much like my rascally cousin Pieter Vanderkamp. Do you
know him?"_

_"No."_

_"Well, no matter. He's much older than you--near forty blessed years.
You're no more than twenty, I don't doubt."_

_Involuntarily Vanderkamp put his hand to his cheek, and smiled as he
felt its smooth roundness. "You may be right, at that," he said
cryptically._

_"You might as well come in," she said grudgingly. "What with the
traffic on the road outside, the Indians, and people who come in such
flighty vehicles as yours, I might as well live in the heart of the
colony."_

_He looked around. "And still," he said, "it is a pleasant
spot--peaceful, comfortable. I'm sure a man could live out his days here
in contentment."_

_"Oh, could he?" she said belligerently. "And where would I be while
