Suddenly his power of locomotion returned. He rolled over backward, and
scrambled along the ground to a tree. Grasping the rough trunk, he
pulled himself erect; and held himself in that position, panting.

He could see the thing more plainly now. It was like a long, green whip
in the grass. Its forepart was raised in the air, and terminated in a
triangular head, with two bright eyes whose steady, unwinking stare made
him tremble weakly. With an effort he took his eyes from the creature;
and, pushing himself away from the tree, ran desperately, as far as his
legs would carry him. When he fell, he continued to crawl--farther, and
ever farther into the green woods.

He wondered if all creatures crawled in this world of Toon. Perhaps the
great gravitational pull made erect postures impossible.

For a long time he climbed steadily, threading his way through the
underbrush, skirting fallen trees. He felt increasingly drowsy. His
sleep period would come soon, he knew. He could not stave it off much
longer. And when he had slept, he must eat....

He came to level ground. Ahead was an opening in the trees, where a wide
ledge of stone was revealed. Out upon this he crawled, and gazed at the
scene that opened out below. Miles of waving tree tops met his view; but
what held his attention was a strip of silver cutting the green.

He felt a warm glow of satisfaction. Water, in his mind, was closely
associated with organization, transportation facilities, reasoning
beings....

Yet he must be wary. He had no idea what sort of beings they might be.
This might be a canal, but it was strangely irregular in its course. At
least he was making progress....

A peculiar, ringing sound came from the trees below. It was utterly
unfamiliar to him. Nerving himself, he determined to discover what it
was. He climbed down from the stone, and began the journey down the
hill.

As he progressed the sound became louder, and others were added. He was
puzzled by a low, intermittent muttering. It made him vaguely uneasy,
and with every moment his agitation increased. The muttering was now
very definitely spaced into irregular but continuous tones.

And he knew that he was listening to a conversation.

He was frightened. Now that he was so near to what he had been seeking,
his courage left him; and he lay trembling, flat on the ground, awed by
the booming voices of the creatures.

They must be very large, he thought, to utter such deep tones.

He had lain there for perhaps five minutes, when, suddenly, there came a
rending crash; and, peering ahead, he saw the green top of a tree sway
violently, sink, and disappear from sight. At the same time there came a
louder cry, followed by the blending of two thunderous voices, speaking
simultaneously.... Then a heavy thud, and another cry....

       *       *       *       *       *

He crawled cautiously forward. He reached the fallen tree. Its trunk was
suspended above the ground by the projection of a number of its large
branches. He peered beneath it.

Directly before him, in a small clearing, two creatures were struggling
together. They stood erect upon their huge legs, using their crudely
bulky arms and hands to strike and tug at each other. They were
tremendous in size--fully three times human stature; yet their heads
were smaller than men's. Their erect posture gave them a weirdly
half-human look, which was belied by the brutal savagery of their
aspects. Their brows were low; their heads were covered with long hair;
and in their gaping mouths he saw rows of sharp, white fangs. Their
skin, instead of being golden, was a dirty grey in color, and was
covered with short curling hair or fur.

But he could see very little of their bodies, because--and this sight
seemed to him the strangest of all--they were almost entirely covered
with cloth. This woven material was brown in color, and shaped to hang
close to their bodies, even over the arms and legs. He lay very still,
watching the titanic struggle with ever growing wonder.

They appeared to be evenly matched. Once, one of them was hurled heavily
to the ground, but he leaped effortlessly to his feet. Both of them
grunted and uttered sharp exclamations at intervals. They tramped back
and forth, tearing up the grass, crushing down the small bushes.

They must greatly hate each other, he thought--or perhaps it was natural
for them to fight like this. Now one of them was tiring--the smaller.
Its movements were slower, and it stepped almost constantly backward.
Suddenly from its bulbous nose spurted a red stream. He shuddered. The
sight of these two strangely man-like creatures beating and tearing at
one another sickened him.

The larger creature was pressing its advantage, advancing upon the other
with cruel, flailing blows. Suddenly the smaller one crumpled to the
ground, and lay still. The other turned away. It seemed satisfied. It
grasped an object which was leaning against a tree--a cutting tool
apparently, consisting of an edged block of metal attached to a long
handle of wood; and without a backward glance at its fallen foe, made
off through the trees.

The creature on the ground was alive. He could see the rise and fall of
its breathing under the cloth covering of its breast. But the bright,
red blood was still running out of the nose. It had lost an astonishing
amount; and he feared that, unassisted, it would soon die. He must try
to help.

With wildly beating heart, he crawled under the tree trunk and out into
the clearing.

As he moved through the grass, he made a slight rustling sound, which
the creature heard. It turned its head, and stared directly at him. He
stopped fearfully....

The creature uttered a loud cry, and scrambled to its feet. He raised
one hand, attempting a friendly gesture; but the creature, after
watching him for a moment with wide eyes, bounded swiftly away into the
woods. He heard the thumping and crashing of its passage through the
underbrush long after it had disappeared from sight.

His first sensation was one of immense relief. He had been desperately
afraid.

Evidently the thing had been afraid of him, too. And that was
surprising.... Clearly, these could not be the reasoning things that had
built the flying machine he had seen. His relief was quickly followed by
disappointment. For a moment he had imagined that his first objective
had been reached. Now he realized that he might be as far from it as
ever. Toon was immense. Probably, now, he was in a country inhabited by
inferior beings--beings that would be constantly hostile and dangerous
to him. If that were so, his quest would end here, he knew. Sleep could
not be warded off any longer. He could not protect himself. Soon he
must eat--and there was no food.

He crawled into the bushes; and lay down, lonely and sick. He would stay
here. This was failure--and the end. But he was not sorry for having
tried....

Above him the sky was not blue, now; but a strange, dead grey. Nowhere
could he see the sun. The wind sighed mournfully in the trees.

He slept.




CHAPTER III.

In Confinement


He awakened in shivering terror. His entire body was wet. Water was
falling on him. It was falling on the ground all around and on the
trees--thousands, millions of drops. He choked, as he tried to breathe
the damp, saturated air. Desperately he looked around for some
protection, but there was none. He covered his face as best he could
with his folded arms, and cried out in fear.

There came a shout; and he heard something moving toward him, but he did
not care. Horror of the falling water crowded all other emotions from
his mind.

One of the creatures was standing over him. He heard others approaching.
They were shouting loudly back and forth to one another. In a moment,
there was a circle of them, all around him.

He was too distressed to pay them any attention. After a time one of
them bent down and grasped him under the armpits. He felt himself lifted
into the air. He did not struggle, even when their faces were all around
him--very close.

Now they were walking through the trees, one of them carrying him in its
huge arms, quite gently. He was scarcely conscious of his surroundings.
It was becoming more and more difficult to breathe.

Then he felt himself laid down on something soft and dry. The water was
not falling on him now. He opened his eyes.

