When Rilth did not answer, Sy gloomily watched the prisoner being
escorted across the field. Suddenly he stood up and squinted at the
group in the distance. "Say--who's that they're bringing in?"

Rilth strained to see. "Some rotten Earthling or Aldeberanian, no doubt.
They look alike to me--and both are Leaguers."

Sy tugged at the other's arm excitedly. "Come on--let's get over to
Detention Headquarters. If that's who I think it is, we'll have our new
engines--installed--in three months!"

The Sur-Malic jerked free of Sy's hand, but matched his trot across the
field. Although he moved carefully, it seemed that whenever he glanced
away from the ground, small stones somehow managed to be under the edges
of his soles, causing him to lurch, stumble and curse.

"You'll have to quit soaking up that cheap stuff, Rilth," taunted Sy.
"You're clumsy as a bovine!" He dropped slightly to the rear, his loose,
raw-boned frame jogging along without effort, his eyes darting ahead at
the terrain.

Rilth looked at him with a snarl, uttered a stream of invectives. But as
one foot landed on the end of a small branch the opposite end whipped up
and blocked his other ankle. He sprawled in the dirt.

"Slimy beast!" he raged. He drew away from Sy's mocking offer of
assistance. "It seems that in your vile presence all things go wrong!"

Inside the grey stone Detention building, Sy became suddenly exuberant.
He made for the prisoner eagerly. Guards, in deference to his uniform
insignia, stood aside at his approach.

"Arna!" He folded the girl in his arms, burying his face in the long
waves beneath her trim headgear. "Love me," he whispered quickly. "Hate
Earth--weak will--faint."

The girl looked at him. Her expression, which could be interpreted as
surprise either on the basis of recognition or of a stranger's
unexpected actions, changed to one of adoration. "Darling!" she gasped.
She tried to embrace him, but apparently the strain of her past few
hours had been too great; she slumped in his arms.

"Get a doctor!" Sy shouted to evoke maximum confusion. He lowered Arna
to the floor as though her weight were too much to hold; a living
pretense of physical weakness had served well to counteract envy. He
made no attempt to cover her long, smooth thigh when it became exposed
at the action--effectively diverting the guards' thoughts and
eradicating any suspicion they might have felt at his behavior. He
appealed to Rilth with his eyes. "She must be sick! Damn it, man, get a
doctor!"

The commandant regarded him narrowly. "Anyone with the mind of a worm
could see she has only fainted. She will revive shortly."

Arna did recover as predicted, coincident with the arrival of Lord Krut
of the High Command. Sy pleaded his case artfully. "It was the work of
genius, Your Lordship, to find Arna Matt--the one person in space who
can hasten our plans! As you know, she is a human calculator, as well
as--well--we were just about to escape the Earth laboratories and get
married when you found me and brought me here."

Lord Krut glowered. He pondered before answering. "We neither planned
her capture nor knew her qualities, High Technician Supcel," he said
heavily. "Our scout-ships noticed her craft near Aldebaran, marked with
the League military insignia. Following our policy of harassment, the
scouts destroyed her escort ships. She," he gestured, "surrendered." His
eyes raked slyly over the seemingly bewildered girl's body. "If we can
use her talents, the Great Mokaine himself will be pleased. In view of
your relationship, is it your opinion that she will not require
indoctrination other than your efforts?"

"Hell, yes, Your Lordship. Why, they _tortured_ her in the labs. If
anything she hates the League worse than I do!" He placed an arm about
the girl. "How about it, honey?"

Arna looked at Lord Krut with wide eyes. "Damn right," she said
uncertainly. And then she asked meekly, "Could I have a drink of water,
please?"

Sy seemed in no hurry to leave Detention Headquarters, even after Arna
had been given over officially into his care with a token military rank.
She had not batted an eyelash when Sy had explained to Rilth, with a
leer, that his quarters would suffice for them both; she had even
managed to simper a bit.

But, alone with Sy in his ample, almost luxurious apartment, with her
personal gear from the _Needle_ stacked in the main room, she placed
both hands on her hips and stared at him questioningly.

"Big stakes," said Sy with meaning. He rattled on with a patter of
propaganda tailored for possible ears in the walls. He grinned at her
obvious relief when he silently indicated a comfortable room for her
private bedchamber. When at last they were outdoors, Sy ignored the
ground vehicle at his disposal and led Arna along a winding, tree-lined
roadway which led to the cavernous hangars. Once out of earshot of the
buildings, he spoke abruptly: "They kill your escort?"

Arna looked surprised, then laughed throatily. "Poor Sy--always worrying
about our personnel!" Her voice was soothing and melodious. "The other
ships were dummies; Mek Enj rigged up a neat little auto-tronic device,
tuned to the _Needle's_ controls. After your message for aid came to
young Tel, I played meteor through half the galaxy, trying to get picked
up!" She smiled at him. "Anyway, here I am. Have you run into trouble?"

He slipped an arm about her waist. "Sure have. I missed you like the
devil."

Arna's smile faded. She slipped out of his embrace. "Sy! Do you mean to
say you risked exposure of the only Sur-Malic-type telepath that young
Tel can receive, when you didn't need help?"

Sy evaded the question. "Tomorrow we can shoot over to Haldane," he
suggested. "There's an old Earth clergyman there who got stranded when
the Alliance broke off chummy relations with Leaguers."

Arna eyed him icily. "And why should we visit this clergyman?"

"Well," said Sy innocently, "the old guy's almost two hundred now, which
is crowding the limit for his generation. And you know the Sur-Malic
don't have any marriage cere--"

"Oh, you knobhead! Here you have the most critical job of anyone in the
