light. The chain of rocks, clearly visible in their barren desolation
which stretched to the very summit, lay stretched out like some great
heap of gigantic, unformed things left by some primordial race of
Titans to stupefy human beings. Overturned towers...."

"It is shameful, downright shameful," the Professor was repeating.

"Overturned towers, crumbling citadels, cupolas fallen in, broken
pillars, mutilated colossi, prows of vessels, thighs of monsters,
bones of titans,--this mass, impassable with its ridges and gullies,
seemed the embodiment of everything huge and tragic. So clear were the
distances...."

"Downright shameful," M. Le Mesge kept on saying in exasperation,
thumping his fist on the table.

"So clear were the distances that I could see, as if I had it under my
eyes, infinitely enlarged, every contour of the rock which Violante
had shown me through the window with the gesture of a creator...."

Trembling, I closed the magazine. At my feet, now red, I saw the rock
which Antinea had pointed out to me the day of our first interview,
huge, steep, overhanging the reddish brown garden.

"That is my horizon," she had said.

M. Le Mesge's excitement had passed all bounds.

"It is worse than shameful; it is infamous."

I almost wanted to strangle him into silence. He seized my arm.

"Read that, sir; and, although you don't know a great deal about the
subject, you will see that this article on Roman Africa is a miracle
of misinformation, a monument of ignorance. And it is signed ... do
you know by whom it is signed?"

"Leave me alone," I said brutally.

"Well, it is signed Gaston Boissier. Yes, sir! Gaston Boissier, grand
officer of the Legion of Honor, lecturer at the _Ecole Normale
Superieure_, permanent secretary of the French Academy, member of the
Academy of Inscriptions and Literature, one of those who once ruled
out the subject of my thesis ... one of those ... ah, poor university,
ah, poor France!"

I was no longer listening. I had begun to read again. My forehead was
covered with sweat. But it seemed as if my head had been cleared like
a room when a window is opened; memories were beginning to come back
like doves winging their way home to the dovecote.

"At that moment, an irrepressible tremor shook her whole body; her
eyes dilated as if some terrible sight had filled them with horror.

"'Antonello,' she murmured.

"And for seconds, she was unable to say another word.

"I looked at her in mute anguish and the suffering which drew her dear
lips together seemed also to clutch at my heart. The vision which was
in her eyes passed into mine, and I saw again the thin white face of
Antonello, and the quick quivering of his eyelids, the waves of agony
which seized his long worn body and shook it like a reed."

I threw the magazine upon the table.

"That is it," I said.

To cut the pages, I had used the knife with which M. Le Mesge had cut
the cords of the bale, a short ebony-handled dagger, one of those
daggers that the Tuareg wear in a bracelet sheath against the upper
left arm.

I slipped it into the big pocket of my flannel dolman and walked
toward the door.

I was about to cross the threshold when I heard M. Le Mesge call me.

"Monsieur de Saint Avit! Monsieur de Saint Avit!

"I want to ask you something, please."

"What is it?"

"Nothing important. You know that I have to mark the labels for the
red marble hall...."

I walked toward the table.

"Well, I forgot to ask M. Morhange, at the beginning, the date and
place of his birth. After that, I had no chance. I did not see him
again. So I am forced to turn to you. Perhaps you can tell me?"

"I can," I said very calmly.

He took a large white card from a box which contained several and
dipped his pen.

"Number 54 ... Captain?"

"Captain Jean-Marie-Francois Morhange."

While I dictated, one hand resting on the table, I noticed on my cuff
a stain, a little stain, reddish brown.

"Morhange," repeated M. Le Mesge, finishing the lettering of my
friend's name. "Born at...?"

"Villefranche."

"Villefranche, Rhone. What date?"

"The fourteenth of October, 1859."

"The fourteenth of October, 1859. Good. Died at Ahaggar, the fifth of
January, 1897.... There, that is done. A thousand thanks, sir, for
your kindness."

"You are welcome."

I left M. Le Mesge.

My mind, thenceforth, was well made up; and, as I said, I was
perfectly calm. Nevertheless, when I had taken leave of M. Le Mesge, I
felt the need of waiting a few minutes before executing my decision.

First I wandered through the corridors; then, finding myself near my
room, I went to it. It was still intolerably hot. I sat down on my
divan and began to think.

The dagger in my pocket bothered me. I took it out and laid it on the
floor.

It was a good dagger, with a diamond-shaped blade, and with a collar
of orange leather between the blade and the handle.

The sight of it recalled the silver hammer. I remembered how easily it
fitted into my hand when I struck....

Every detail of the scene came back to me with incomparable vividness.
But I did not even shiver. It seemed as if my determination to kill
the instigator of the murder permitted me peacefully to evoke its
brutal details.

If I reflected over my deed, it was to be surprised at it, not to
condemn myself.

"Well," I said to myself, "I have killed this Morhange, who was once a
baby, who, like all the others, cost his mother so much trouble with
his baby sicknesses. I have put an end to his life, I have reduced to
nothingness the monument of love, of tears, of trials overcome and
pitfalls escaped, which constitutes a human existence. What an
extraordinary adventure!"

That was all. No fear, no remorse, none of that Shakespearean horror
after the murder, which, today, sceptic though I am and blase and
utterly, utterly disillusioned, sets me shuddering whenever I am alone
in a dark room.

"Come," I thought. "It's time. Time to finish it up."

I picked up the dagger. Before putting it in my pocket, I went through
the motion of striking. All was well. The dagger fitted into my hand.

I had been through Antinea's apartment only when guided, the first
time by the white Targa, the second time, by the leopard. Yet I found
the way again without trouble. Just before coming to the door with the
rose window, I met a Targa.

"Let me pass," I ordered. "Your mistress has sent for me." The man
obeyed, stepping back.

Soon a dim melody came to my ears. I recognized the sound of a
_rebaza_, the violin with a single string, played by the Tuareg women.
It was Aguida playing, squatting as usual at the feet of her mistress.
The three other women were also squatted about her. Tanit-Zerga was
not there.

Oh! Since that was the last time I saw her, let, oh, let me tell you
of Antinea, how she looked in that supreme moment.

Did she feel the danger hovering over her and did she wish to brave it
by her surest artifices? I had in mind the slender; unadorned body,
without rings, without jewels, which I had pressed to my heart the
night before. And now I started in surprise at seeing before me,
adorned like an idol, not a woman, but a queen!

The heavy splendor of the Pharaohs weighted down her slender body. On
her head was the great gold _pschent_ of Egyptian gods and kings;
emeralds, the national stone of the Tuareg, were set in it, tracing
and retracing her name in Tifinar characters. A red satin _schenti_,
embroidered in golden lotus, enveloped her like the casket of a jewel.
At her feet, lay an ebony scepter, headed with a trident. Her bare
arms were encircled by two serpents whose fangs touched her armpits as
if to bury themselves there. From the ear pieces of the _pschent_
streamed a necklace of emeralds; its first strand passed under her
determined chin; the others lay in circles against her bare throat.

She smiled as I entered.

"I was expecting you," she said simply.

I advanced till I was four steps from the throne, then stopped before
her.

She looked at me ironically.

"What is that?" she asked with perfect calm.

I followed her gesture. The handle of the dagger protruded from my
pocket.

I drew it out and held it firmly in my hand, ready to strike.

"The first of you who moves will be sent naked six leagues into the
red desert and left there to die," said Antinea coldly to her women,
whom my gesture had thrown into a frightened murmuring.

She turned to me.

"That dagger is very ugly and you hold it badly. Shall I send Sydya to
my room to get the silver hammer? You are more adroit with it than
with the dagger."

"Antinea," I said in a low voice, "I am going to kill you."

"Do not speak so formally. You were more affectionate last night. Are
you embarrassed by them?" she said, pointing to the women, whose eyes
were wide with terror.

"Kill me?" she went on. "You are hardly reasonable. Kill me at the
moment when you can reap the fruits of the murder of...."

"Did--did he suffer?" I asked suddenly, trembling.

"Very little. I told you that you used the hammer as if you had done
nothing else all your life."

"Like little Kaine," I murmured.

She smiled in surprise.

"Oh, you know that story.... Yes, like little Kaine. But at least
Kaine was sensible. You ... I do not understand."

"I do not understand myself, very well."

She looked at me with amused curiosity.

"Antinea," I said.

"What is it?"

"I did what you told me to. May I in turn ask one favor, ask you one
question?"

"What is it?"

"It was dark, was it not, in the room where _he_ was?"

"Very dark. I had to lead you to the bed where he lay asleep."

"He _was_ asleep, you are sure?"

"I said so."

"He--did not die instantly, did he?"

"No. I know exactly when he died; two minutes after you struck him and
fled with a shriek."

"Then surely _he_ could not have known?"

"Known what?"

"That it was I who--who held the hammer."

"He might not have known it, indeed," Antinea said. "But he did know."

"How?"

"He did know ... because I told him," she said, staring at me with
magnificent audacity.

"And," I murmured, "he--he believed it?"

"With the help of my explanation, he recognized your shriek. If he had
not realized that you were his murderer, the affair would not have
interested me," she finished with a scornful little smile.

Four steps, I said, separated me from Antinea. I sprang forward. But,
before I reached her, I was struck to the floor.

King Hiram had leapt at my throat.

At the same moment I heard the calm, haughty voice of Antinea:

"Call the men," she commanded.

A second later I was released from the leopard's clutch. The six white
Tuareg had surrounded me and were trying to bind me.

I am fairly strong and quick. I was on my feet in a second. One of my
enemies lay on the floor, ten feet away, felled by a well-placed blow
on the jaw. Another was gasping under my knee. That was the last time
