glands there was something of the dictator in his victim and something
of the victim in the dictator.

DOCTOR LANS RETURNED TO THE hospital later in the day, after seeing his
wife and daughter safely settled in a first class hotel. It was an
extravagence, in view of his uncertain prospects as a refugee, but they
had enjoyed no luxuries for years back _there_--he didn't consider it
his home country--and it was justified this once.

He inquired at the office of the hospital for his second patient. The
clerk looked puzzled. "But he is not here...."

"Not here?"

"Why, no. He was moved at the same time as His Excellency--back to your
country."

Lans did not argue. The trick was obvious; it was too late to do
anything for poor Samuel. He thanked his God that he had had the
foresight to place himself and his family beyond the reach of such
brutal injustice before operating. He thanked the clerk and left.

THE LEADER RECOVERED CONSCIOUSNESS AT LAST. His brain was confused--then
he recalled the events before he had gone to sleep. The operation!--it
was over! And he was alive! He had never admitted to anyone how terribly
frightened he had been at the prospect. But he had lived--he had lived!
He groped around for the bellcord, and failing to find it, gradually
forced his eyes to focus on the room. What outrageous nonsense was this?
This was no sort of a room for the Leader to convalesce in. He took in
the dirty white-washed ceiling, and the bare wooden floor with distaste.
And the bed! It was no more than a cot!

He shouted. Someone came in, a man wearing a uniform of a trooper in his
favorite corps. He started to give him the tongue-lashing of his life,
before having him arrested. But he was cut short.

"Cut out the racket, you unholy pig!"

At first he was too astounded to answer, then he shrieked, "Stand at
attention when you address the Leader! Salute!"

The trooper looked dumbfounded at the sick man--so totally different in
appearance from the Leader, then guffawed. He stepped to the cot, struck
a pose with his right arm raised in salute. He carried a rubber
truncheon in it. "Hail to our Leader!" he shouted, and brought his arm
down smartly. The truncheon crashed into the sick man's cheek bone.

Another trooper came in to see what the noise was while the first was
still laughing at his wittcism. "What's up, Jon? Say, you'd better not
handle that monkey too rough--he's still carried on the hospital list."
He glanced casually at the bloody face.

"Him? Didn't you know?" Jon pulled him to one side and whispered.

The second man's eyes widened; he grinned. "So? They don't want him to
get well, eh? Well, I could use a little exercise this morning--"

"Let's get Fats," the other suggested. "He's always so very amusing with
his ideas."

"Good idea." He stepped to the door and bellowed, "Hey, Fats!"

They didn't really start in on him until Fats was there to help.


THE END




the phantoms

_by_----Joseph E. Kellerman


    All day they played among the purple flowers
    That lay like frozen flames upon the lawn;
    Or dreamed within the shadows of the towers
    Whose turret tops were painted as the dawn.
    Bright was the garden; peace went everywhere
    There was no breath of movement nor any sound
    Save butterflies that clove the heavy air,
    Or when the bright fruit dropped slowly to the ground.
    Then the flowers drooped, from sliver thorns that tore;
    Too soon the sun had died in amber smoke,
    And frightened now but silent as before
    The phantoms watched the garden change its cloak.
    Great sable moths flew out, and one by one
    The towers melted with the fallen sun.

       *       *       *       *       *

     This is a plug [Illustration][1] for the Voice of the IMAGI-NATION.
     price 10c from Box 6475 Met Sta Los Angeles Cal.

[Footnote 1: The Art (Widner & otherwise) is a bit better.]




_THOUGHTS ON THE_ WORLDSTATE

_by henry kuttner_

[Illustration]

[Sidenote: The hideous Mr. Kuttner returns with an equally hideous tale.
We absolutely guarantee this story will induce nausea and slight
regurgitation. Lead on, McKuttner!]


I have, as usual, been brooding over the intricacies of modern
civilization. It seems to me that life is a peculiarly futile business.
This mood of mine may, perhaps, be attributed to my recent tragic
encounter with a horse at the corner of 42nd and Broadway.

I shall not dwell upon that incident, save to mention briefly that
horses should, at least, be careful of what they eat. One never knows
the result of the most innocent action, and that, by imperceptible
degrees, brings me to the subject of this article, PLAYING FAIR WITH
FANS, or, FANTASTIC DECENCY.

It has been said (and very loudly, too) that fans fight a lot. Well, I
do not care to refute that; I happen to know that a Californian fan, a
Mr. Ackerman, is in the habit of knocking down visitors and kicking them
in strategic places. The question naturally arises, does fantasy lead to
sadism?

I am reminded of the remarkable case of Scarlett O'God, an ardent fan
whose tininess led to her being occasionally called by the diminutive,
or fanny. This may seem somewhat confusing at first glance. Let us,
