
After a long time the normal course of underwater life resumed. The
wriggling caddis-flies in their quaintly ambitious houses reappeared.
Little flecks of silver swam into view--a school of tiny fish. Then a
larger fish appeared, moving slowly in the stream.

Burl's eyes glistened; his mouth watered. He reached down with his long
weapon. It barely broke through the still surface of the water below.
Disappointment filled him, yet the nearness and apparent probability of
success spurred him on.

He examined the shelf-fungi beneath him. Rising, he moved to a point
above them and tested one with his spear. It resisted. Burl felt about
tentatively with his foot, then dared to put his whole weight on the
topmost. It held firmly. He clambered down upon the lower ones, then
lay flat and peered over the edge.

The large fish, fully as long as Burl's arm, swam slowly to and fro
beneath him. Burl had seen the former owner of this spear strive to
thrust it into his adversary. The beetle had been killed by the more
successful stab of a similar weapon. Burl had tried this upon
toadstools, practising with it. When the silver fish drifted close by
again, he thrust sharply downward.

The spear seemed to bend when it entered the water. It missed its mark
by inches, much to Burl's astonishment. He tried again. Once more the
spear seemed diverted by the water. He grew angry with the fish for
eluding his efforts to kill it.

This anger was as much the reaction of a throw-back to a less fearful
time as the idea of killing itself. But Burl scowled at the fish.
Repeated strokes had left it untouched. It was unwary. It did not even
swim away.

Then it came to rest directly beneath his hand. He thrust directly
downward, with all his strength. This time the spear, entering
vertically, did not appear to bend, but went straight down. Its point
penetrated the scales of the swimming fish, transfixing the creature
completely.

An uproar began with the fish wriggling desperately as Burl tried to
draw it up to his perch. In his excitement he did not notice a tiny
ripple a little distance away. The monster crayfish, attracted by the
disturbance, was coming back.

The unequal combat continued. Burl hung on desperately to the end of his
spear. Then there was a tremor in the shelf-fungus on which he lay. It
yielded, collapsed, and fell into the stream with a mighty splash. Burl
went under, his eyes wide open, facing death. As he sank he saw the
gaping, horrible claws of the crustacean, huge enough to sever any of
Burl's limbs with a single snap.

He opened his mouth to scream, but no sound came out. Only bubbles
floated up to the surface. He beat the unresisting fluid in a frenzy of
horror with his hands and feet as the colossal crayfish leisurely
approached.

His arms struck a solid object. He clutched it convulsively. A second
later he had swung it between himself and the crustacean. He felt the
shock as the claws closed upon the cork-like fungus. Then he felt
himself drawn upward as the crayfish disgustedly released its hold and
the shelf-fungus floated slowly upward. Having given way beneath him, it
had been pushed below when he fell, only to rise within his reach just
when most needed.

Burl's head popped above-water and he saw a larger bit of the fungus
floating nearby. Even less securely anchored to the river-bank than the
shelf to which he had trusted himself, it had broken away when he fell.
It was larger and floated higher.

He seized it, crazily trying to climb up. It tilted under his weight and
very nearly overturned. He paid no heed. With desperate haste he clawed
and kicked until he could draw himself clear of the water.

As he pulled himself up on the furry, orange-brown surface, a sharp blow
struck his foot. The crayfish, disappointed at finding nothing tasty in
the shelf-fungus, had made a languid stroke at Burl's foot wriggling in
the water. Failing to grasp the fleshy member, it went annoyedly away.

Burl floated downstream, perched weaponless and alone upon a flimsy raft
of degenerate fungus; floated slowly down a stagnant river in which
death swam, between banks of sheer peril, past long reaches above which
death floated on golden wings.

It was a long while before he recovered his self-possession. Then--and
this was an action individual in Burl: none of his tribesmen would have
thought of it--he looked for his spear.

It was floating in the water, still transfixing the fish whose capture
had brought him to this present predicament. That silvery shape, so
violent before, now floated belly-up, all life gone.

Burl's mouth watered as he gazed at the fish. He kept it in view
constantly while the unsteady craft spun slowly downstream in the
current. Lying flat he tried to reach out and grasp the end of the spear
when it circled toward him.

The raft tilted, nearly capsizing. A little later he discovered that it
sank more readily on one side than the other. This was due, of course,
to the greater thickness of one side. The part next to the river-bank
had been thicker and was, therefore, more buoyant.

He lay with his head above that side of the raft. It did not sink into
the water. Wriggling as far to the edge as he dared, he reached out and
out. He waited impatiently for the slower rotation of his float to
coincide with the faster motion of the speared fish. The spear-end came
closer, and closer.... He reached out--and the raft dipped dangerously.
But his fingers touched the spear-end. He got a precarious hold, pulled
it toward him.

Seconds later he was tearing strips of scaly flesh from the side of the
fish and cramming the greasy stuff into his mouth with vast enjoyment.
He had lost the edible mushroom. It floated several yards away. He ate
contentedly none-the-less.

He thought of the tribesfolk as he ate. This was more than he could
finish alone. Old Tama would coax him avidly for more than her share.
She had a few teeth left. She would remind him anxiously of her gifts of
food to him when he was younger. Dik and Tet--being boys--would
clamorously demand of him where he'd gotten it. How? He would give some
to Cori, who had younger children, and she would give them most of the
gift. And Saya--.

Burl gloated especially over Saya's certain reaction.

Then he realized that with every second he was being carried further
away from her. The nearer river-bank moved past him. He could tell by
the motion of the vividly colored growths upon the shore.

Overhead, the sun was merely a brighter patch in the haze-filled sky. In
the pinkish light all about, Burl looked for the familiar and did not
find it, and dolefully knew that he was remote from Saya and going
farther all the time.

There were a multitude of flying objects to be seen in the miasmatic
air. In the daytime a thin mist always hung above the lowlands. Burl had
never seen any object as much as three miles distant. The air was never
clear enough to permit it. But there was much to be seen even within the
limiting mist.

Now and then a cricket or a grasshopper made its bullet-like flight from
one spot to another. Huge butterflies fluttered gaily above the silent,
loathesome ground. Bees lumbered anxiously about, seeking the
cross-shaped flowers of the giant cabbages which grew so rarely.
Occasionally a slender-waisted, yellow-bellied wasp flashed swiftly by.

But Burl did not heed any of them. Sitting dismally upon his fungus
raft, floating in midstream, an incongruous figure of pink skin and
luridly-tinted loin-cloth, with a greasy dead fish beside him, he was
filled with a panicky anguish because the river carried him away from
the one girl of his tiny tribe whose glances roused a commotion in his
breast.

The day wore on. Once, he saw a band of large amazon ants moving briskly
over a carpet of blue-green mould to raid the city of a species of black
ants. The eggs they would carry away from the city would hatch and the
small black creatures would become the slaves of the brigands who had
stolen them.

Later, strangely-shaped, swollen branches drifted slowly into view. They
were outlined sharply against the steaming mist behind them. He knew
what they were: a hard-rinded fungus growing upon itself in peculiar
mockery of the trees which Burl had never seen because no trees could
survive the conditions of the lowland.

Much later, as the day drew to an end, Burl ate again of the oily fish.
The taste was pleasant compared to the insipid mushrooms he usually ate.
Even though he stuffed himself, the fish was so large that the greater
part remained still uneaten.

The spear was beside him. Although it had brought him trouble, he still
associated it with the food it had secured rather than the difficulty
into which it had led him. When he had eaten his fill, he picked it up
to examine again. The oil-covered point remained as sharp as before.

Not daring to use it again from so unsteady a raft, he set it aside as
he stripped a sinew from his loin-cloth to hang the fish around his
neck. This would leave his arms free. Then he sat cross-legged, fumbling
with the spear as he watched the shores go past.




_2. A MAN ESCAPES_


It was near to sunset. Burl had never seen the sun, so it did not occur
to him to think of the coming of night as the setting of anything. To
him it was the letting down of darkness from the sky.

The process was invariable. Overhead there was always a thick and
unbroken bank of vapor which seemed featureless until sunset. Then,
toward the west, the brightness overhead turned orange and then pink,
while to the east it simply faded to a deeper gray. As nightfall
progressed, the red colorings grew deeper, moving toward mid-sky.
Ultimately, scattered blotches of darkness began to spot that reddening
sky as it grew darker in tone, going down toward that impossible
redness which is indistinguishable from black. It was slowly achieving
that redness.

Today Burl watched as never before. On the oily surface of the river the
colors and shadings of dusk were reflected with incredible faithfulness.
The round tops of toadstools along the shore glowed pink. Dragonflies
glinted in swift and angular flight, the metallic sheen of their bodies
flashing in the redness. Great, yellow butterflies sailed lightly above
the stream. In every direction upon the water appeared the scrap-formed
boats of a thousand caddis-flies, floating at the surface while they
might. Burl could have thrust his hand down into their cavities to seize
the white worms nesting there.

The bulk of a tardy bee droned heavily overhead. He saw the long
proboscis and the hairy hind-legs with their scanty load of pollen. The
great, multi-faceted eyes held an expression of stupid preoccupation.

The crimson radiance grew dim and the color overhead faded toward black.
Now the stalks of ten thousand domed mushrooms lined the river-bank.
Beneath them spread fungi of all colors, from the rawest red to palest
blue, now all fading slowly to a monochromatic background as the
darkness deepened.

The buzzing and fluttering and flapping of the insects of the day died
down. From a million hiding places there crept out--into the night--the
soft and furry bodies of great moths who preened themselves and smoothed
their feathery antennae before taking to the air. The strong-limbed
crickets set up their thunderous noise, grown gravely bass with the
increasing size of the noise-making organs. Then there began to gather
on the water those slender spirals of deeper mist which would presently
blanket the stream in fog.

Night arrived. The clouds above grew wholly black. Gradually the languid
fall of large, warm raindrops--they would fall all through the
night--began. The edge of the stream became a place where disks of cold
blue flame appeared.

The mushrooms on the river bank were faintly phosphorescent, shedding a
ghostly light over the ground below them. Here and there, lambent chilly
flames appeared in mid-air, drifting idly above the festering earth. On
other planets men call them "Will-o'-the-wisps," but on this planet
mankind had no name for them at all.

Then huge, pulsating glows appeared in the blackness: fireflies that
Burl knew to be as long as his spear. They glided slowly through the
darkness over the stream, shedding intermittent light over Burl crouched
on his drifting raft. On the shore, too, tiny paired lights glowed
eagerly upward as the wingless females of the species crawled to where
their signals could be seen. And there were other glowing things.
Fox-fire burned in the night, consuming nothing. Even the water of the
river glowed with marine organisms--adapted to fresh water
here--contributing their mites of brilliance.

The air was full of flying creatures. The beat of invisible wings came
through the night. Above, about, on every side the swarming, feverish
life of the insect world went on ceaselessly, while Burl rocked back and
forth upon his unstable raft, wanting to weep because he was being
carried farther away from Saya whom he could picture looking for him,
now, among the hidden, furtive members of the tribe. About him sounded
the discordant, machine-like mating cries of creatures trying to serve
life in the midst of death and the horrible noises of those who met
death and were devoured in the dark.

Burl was accustomed to such tumult. But he was not accustomed to such
despair as he felt at being lost from Saya of the swift feet and white
teeth and shy smile. He lay disconsolate on his bobbing craft for the
greater part of the night. It was long past midnight when the raft
struck gently, swung, and then remained grounded upon a shallow in the
stream.

When light came back in the morning, Burl gazed about him fearfully. He
was some twenty yards from the shore and thick greenish scum surrounded
his disintegrating vessel. The river had widened greatly until the
opposite bank was hidden in the morning mist, but the nearer shore
seemed firm and no more full of dangers than the territory inhabited by
Burl's tribe.

He tested the depth of the water with his spear, struck by the multiple
usefulness of the weapon. The water was no more than ankle-deep.

Shivering a little, Burl stepped down into the green scum and made for
the shore at top speed. He felt something soft clinging to his bare
foot. With a frantic rush he ran even faster and stumbled upon the shore
with horror not at his heels but on one. He stared down at his foot. A
shapeless, flesh-colored pad clung to the skin. As he watched, it
swelled visibly, the pink folds becoming a deeper shade.

It was no more than a leech, the size of his palm, sharing in the
enlargement nearly all the insect and fungoid world had undergone, but
Burl did not know that. He thrust at it with the edge of his spear,
scraping it frantically away. As it fell off Burl stared in horror,
first at the blotch of blood on his foot, then at the thing writhing and
pulsating on the ground. He fled.

A short while later he stumbled into one of the familiar toadstool
forests and paused, uncertainly. The towering toadstools were not
strange to Burl. He fell to eating. The sight of food always produced
hunger in him--a provision of nature to make up for the lack of any
instinct to store food away. In human beings the storage of food has to
be dictated by intellect. The lower orders of creatures are not required
to think.

Even eating, though, Burl's heart was small within him. He was far from
his tribe and Saya. By the measurements of his remotest ancestors, no
more than forty miles separated them. But Burl did not think in such
terms. He'd never had occasion to do so. He'd come down the river to a
far land filled with unknown dangers. And he was alone.

All about him was food, an excellent reason for gladness. But being
solitary was reason enough for distress. Although Burl was a creature to
whom reflection was normally of no especial value and, therefore, not
practiced in thought, this was a situation providing an emotional
paradox. A good fourth of the mushrooms in this particular forest were
edible. Burl should have gloated over this vast stock of food. But he
was isolated, alone; in particular, he was far away from Saya,
therefore, he should have wept. But he could not gloat because he was
away from Saya and he could not mourn because he was surrounded by food.

He was subject to a stimulus to which apparently only humankind can
respond: an emotional dilemma. Other creatures can respond to objective
situations where there is the need to choose a course of action: flight
or fighting, hiding or pursuit. But only man can be disturbed by not
knowing which of two emotions to feel. Burl had reason to feel two
entirely different emotional states at the same time. He had to resolve
the paradox. The problem was inside him, not out. So he thought.

He would bring Saya here! He would bring her and the tribe to this place
