"Not I! I'll wear mine all my life," responded Seaton earnestly, and
Crane expressed the same thought.

"There is only one more thing," added the Kofedix. "That is, about the
mental examination. Since it is not your custom, it is probable that the
justices would waive the ruling, especially since everyone must be
examined by a jury of his own or a superior rank, so that only one man,
my father alone, could examine you."

"Not in a thousand years!" replied Seaton emphatically. "I want to be
examined, and have Dorothy see the record. I don't care about having her
put through it, but I want her to know exactly the kind of a guy she is
getting."

Dorothy protested at this, but as all four were eager that they
themselves should be tested, the Karfedix was notified and Dunark
clamped sets of multiple electrodes, connected to a set of instruments,
upon the temples of his father, Dorothy, and Seaton. He pressed a lever,
and instantly Dorothy and Seaton read each other's minds to the minutest
detail, and each knew that the Karfedix was reading the minds of both.

After Margaret and Crane had been examined, the Karfedix expressed
himself as more than satisfied.

"You are all of the highest evolution and your minds are all untainted
by any base thoughts in your marriage. The First Cause will smile upon
your unions," he said solemnly.

"Let the robe-makers appear," the Karfedix ordered, and four women, hung
with spools of brilliantly-colored wire of incredible fineness and with
peculiar looms under their arms, entered the room and accompanied the
two girls to their apartment.

As soon as the room was empty save for the four men, Dunark said:

"While I was in Mardonale, I heard bits of conversation regarding an
immense military discovery possessed by Nalboon, besides the gas whose
deadly effects we felt. I could get no inkling of its nature, but feel
sure that it is something to be dreaded. I also heard that both of these
secrets had been stolen from Kondal, and that we were to be destroyed by
our own superior inventions."

The Karfedix nodded his head gloomily.

"That is true, my son--partly true, at least. We shall not be destroyed,
however. Kondal shall triumph. The discoveries were made by a Kondalian,
but I am as ignorant as are you concerning their nature. An obscure
inventor, living close to the bordering ocean, was the discoverer. He
was rash enough to wireless me concerning them. He would not reveal
their nature, but requested a guard. The Mardonalian patrol intercepted
the message and captured both him and his discoveries before our guard
could arrive."

"That's easily fixed," suggested Seaton. "Let's get the Skylark fixed
up, and we'll go jerk Nalboon out of his palace--if he's still
alive--bring him over here, and read his mind."

"That might prove feasible," answered the Kofedix, "and in any event we
must repair the Skylark and replenish her supply of copper immediately.
That must be our first consideration, so that you, our guests, will
have a protection in any emergency."

The Karfedix went to his duties and the other three made their way to
the wrecked space-car. They found that besides the damage done to the
hull, many of the instruments were broken, including one of the
object-compasses focused upon the Earth.

"It's a good thing you had three of them, Mart. I sure hand it to you
for preparedness," said Seaton, as he tossed the broken instruments out
upon the dock. Dunark protested at this treatment, and placed the
discarded instruments in a strong metal safe, remarking:

"These things may prove useful at some future time."

"Well, I suppose the first thing to do is to get some powerful jacks and
straighten these plates," said Seaton.

"Why not throw away this soft metal, steel, and build it of arenak, as
it should be built? You have plenty of salt," suggested Dunark.

"Fine! We have lots of salt in the galley, haven't we, Mart?"

"Yes, nearly a hundred pounds. We are stocked for emergencies, with two
years' supply of food, you know."

       *       *       *       *       *

Dunark's eyes opened in astonishment at the amount mentioned, in spite
of his knowledge of earthly conditions. He started to say something,
then stopped in confusion, but Seaton divined his thought.

"We can spare him fifty pounds as well as not, can't we, Mart?"

"Certainly. Fifty pounds of salt is a ridiculously cheap price for what
he is doing for us, even though it is very rare here."

Dunark acknowledged the gift with shining eyes and heartfelt, but not
profuse, thanks, and bore the precious bag to the palace under a heavy
escort. He returned with a small army of workmen, and after making tests
to assure himself that the power-bar would work as well through arenak
as through steel, he instructed the officers concerning the work to be
done. As the wonderfully skilled mechanics set to work without a single
useless motion, the prince stood silent, with a look of care upon his
handsome face.

"Worrying about Mardonale, Dunark?"

"Yes. I cannot help wondering what that terrible new engine of
destruction is, which Nalboon now has at his command."

"Say, why don't you build a bus like the Skylark, and blow Mardonale off
the map?"

"Building the vessel would be easy enough, but X is as yet unknown upon
Osnome."

"We've got a lot of it...."

"I could not accept it. The salt was different, since you have plenty.
X, however, is as scarce upon Earth as salt is upon Osnome."

"Sure you can accept it. We stopped at a planet that has lots of it, and
we've got an object-compass pointing at it so that we can go back and
get more of it any time we want it. We've got more of it on hand now
than we're apt to need for a long time, so have a hunk and get busy,"
and he easily carried one of the lumps out of his cabin and tossed it
upon the dock, from whence it required two of Kondal's strongest men to
lift it.

The look of care vanished from the face of the prince and he summoned
another corps of mechanics.

"How thick shall the walls be? Our battleships are armed with arenak the
thickness of a hand, but with your vast supply of salt you may have it
any thickness you wish, since the materials of the matrix are cheap and
abundant."

"One inch would be enough, but everything in the bus is designed for a
four-foot shell, and if we change it from four feet we'll have to
redesign our guns and all our instruments. Let's make it four feet."

Seaton turned to the crippled Skylark, upon which the first crew of
Kondalian mechanics were working with skill and with tools undreamed-of
upon Earth. The whole interior of the vessel was supported by a complex
falsework of latticed metal, then the four-foot steel plates and the
mighty embers, the pride of the great MacDougall, were cut away as
though they were made of paper by revolving saws and enormous power
shears. The sphere, grooved for the repellers and with the members,
braces, and central machinery complete, of the exact dimensions of the
originals, was rapidly moulded of a stiff, plastic substance resembling
clay. This matrix soon hardened into a rock-like mass into which the
doors, machine-gun emplacements, and other openings were carefully cut.
All surfaces were then washed with a dilute solution of salt, which the
workmen handled as though it were radium. Two great plates of platinum
were clamped into place upon either side of the vessel, each plate
connected by means of silver cables as large as a man's leg to the
receiving terminal of an enormous wireless power station. The current
was applied and the great spherical mass apparently disappeared, being
transformed instantly into the transparent metal arenak. Then indeed had
the Earth-men a vehicle such as had never been seen before! A four-foot
shell of metal five hundred times as strong and hard as the strongest
and hardest steel, cast in one piece with the sustaining framework
designed by the world's foremost engineer--a structure that no
conceivable force could deform or injure, housing an inconceivable
propulsive force!

       *       *       *       *       *

The falsework was rapidly removed and the sustaining framework was
painted with opaque varnish to render it plainly visible. At Seaton's
suggestion the walls of the cabins were also painted, leaving
transparent several small areas to serve as windows.

The second work-period was drawing to a close, and as Seaton and Crane
were to be married before koprat, they stopped work. They marveled at
the amount that had been accomplished, and the Kofedix told them:

"Both vessels will be finished tomorrow, except for the controlling
instruments, which we will have to make ourselves. Another crew will
work during the sleeping-period, installing the guns and other fittings.
Do you wish to have your own guns installed, or guns of our pattern?
You are familiar with them now."

"Our own, please. They are slower and less efficient than yours, but we
are used to them and have a lot of X-plosive ammunition for them,"
replied Seaton, after a short conference with Crane.

After instructing the officers in charge of the work, the three returned
to the palace, the hearts of two of them beating high in anticipation.
Seaton went into Crane's room, accompanied by two attendants bearing his
suitcase and other luggage.

"We should have brought along dress clothes, Mart. Why didn't you think
of that, too?"

"Nothing like this ever entered my mind. It is a good thing we brought
along ducks and white soft shirts. I must say that this is extremely
informal garb for a state wedding, but since the natives are ignorant of
our customs, it will not make any difference."

"That's right, too--we'll make 'em think it's the most formal kind of
dress. Dunark knows what's what, but he knows that full dress would be
unbearable here. We'd melt down in a minute. It's plenty hot enough as
it is, with only duck trousers and sport-shirts on. They'll look green
instead of white, but that's a small matter."

Dunark, as best man, entered the room some time later.

"Give us a look, Dunark," begged Seaton, "and see if we'll pass
inspection. I was never so rattled in my life."

They were clad in spotless white, from their duck oxfords to the white
ties encircling the open collars of their tennis shirts. The two tall
figures--Crane's slender, wiry, at perfect ease; Seaton's
broad-shouldered, powerful, prowling about with unconscious, feline
suppleness and grace--and the two handsome, high-bred, intellectual
faces, each wearing a look of eager happiness, fully justified Dunark's
answer.

"You sure will do!" he pronounced enthusiastically, and with Seaton's
own impulsive good will he shook hands and wished them an eternity of
happiness.

"When you have spoken with your brides," he continued, "I shall be
waiting to escort you into the chapel. Sitar told me to say that the
ladies are ready."

Dorothy and Margaret had been dressed in their bridal gowns by Sitar and
several other princesses, under the watchful eyes of the Karfedir
herself. Sitar placed the two girls side by side and drew off to survey
her work.

"You are the loveliest creatures in the whole world!" she cried.

They looked at each other's glittering gowns, then Margaret glanced at
Dorothy's face and a look of dismay overspread her own.

"Oh, Dottie!" she gasped. "Your lovely complexion! Isn't it terrible for
the boys to see us in this light?"

There was a peal of delighted laughter from Sitar and she spoke to one
of the servants, who drew dark curtains across the windows and pressed a
switch, flooding the room with brilliant white light.

"Dunark installed lamps like those of your ship for you," she explained
with intense satisfaction. "I knew in advance just how you would feel
about your color."

Before the girls had time to thank their thoughtful hostess she
disappeared and their bridegrooms stood before them. For a moment no
word was spoken. Seaton stared at Dorothy hungrily, almost doubting the
evidence of his senses. For white was white, pink was pink, and her hair
shone in all its natural splendor of burnished bronze.

In their wondrous Osnomian bridal robes the beautiful Earth-maidens
stood before their lovers. Upon their feet were jeweled slippers. Their
lovely bodies were clothed in softly shimmering garments that left their
rounded arms and throats bare--garments infinitely more supple than the
finest silk, thick-woven of metallic threads of such fineness that the
individual wires were visible only under a lens; garments that floated
and clung about their perfect forms in lines of exquisite grace. For
black-haired Margaret, with her ivory skin, the Kondalian princess had
chosen a background of a rare white metal, upon which, in complicated
figures, glistened numberless jewels of pale colors, more brilliant than
diamonds. Dorothy's dress was of a peculiar, dark-green shade,
half-hidden by an intricate design of blazing green gems--the strange,
luminous jewels of this strange world. Both girls wore their long, heavy
hair unbound, after the Kondalian bridal fashion, brushed until it fell
like mist about them and confined at the temples by metallic bands
entirely covered with jewels.

Seaton looked from Dorothy to Margaret and back again; looked down into
her violet eyes, deep with wonder and with love, more beautiful than any
jewel in all her gorgeous costume. Unheeding the presence of the others,
she put her dainty hands upon his mighty shoulders and stood on tiptoe.

"I love you, Dick. Now and always, here or at home or anywhere in the
Universe. We'll never be parted again," she whispered, and her own
beloved violin had no sweeter tones than had her voice.

A few minutes later, her eyes wet and shining, she drew herself away
from him and glanced at Margaret.

"Isn't she the most beautiful thing you ever laid eyes on?"

"No," Seaton answered promptly, "she is not--but poor old Mart thinks
she is!"

       *       *       *       *       *

Accompanied by the Karfedix and his son, Seaton and Crane went into the
chapel, which, already brilliant, had been decorated anew with even
greater splendor. Glancing through the wide arches they saw, for the
first time, Osnomians clothed. The great room was filled with the
highest nobility of Kondal, wearing their heavily-jeweled, resplendent
robes of state. Every color of the rainbow and numberless fantastic
patterns were there, embodied in the soft, lustrous, metallic fabric.

As the men entered one door Dorothy and Margaret, with the Karfedir and
Sitar, entered the other, and the entire assemblage rose to its feet and
snapped into the grand salute. Moving to the accompaniment of strange
martial music from concealed instruments, the two parties approached
each other, meeting at the raised platform or pulpit where Karbix
Tarnan, a handsome, stately, middle-aged man who carried easily his
hundred and fifty karkamo of age, awaited them. As he raised his arms,
the music ceased.

It was a solemn and wonderfully impressive spectacle. The room, of
burnished metal, with its bizarre decorations wrought in scintillating
gems; the constantly changing harmony of colors as the invisible lamps
were shifted from one shade to another; the group of mighty nobles
standing rigidly at attention in a silence so profound that it was an
utter absence of everything audible as the Karbix lifted both arms in a
silent invocation of the great First Cause--all these things deepened
the solemnity of that solemn moment.

When Tarnan spoke, his voice, deep with some great feeling, inexplicable
even to those who knew him best, carried clearly to every part of the
great chamber.

"Friends, it is our privilege to assist today in a most notable event,
the marriage of four personages from another world. For the first time
in the history of Osnome, one karfedix has the privilege of entertaining
the bridal party of another. It is not for this fact alone, however,
that this occasion is to be memorable. A far deeper reason is that we
are witnessing, possibly for the first time in the history of the
Universe, the meeting upon terms of mutual fellowship and understanding
of the inhabitants of two worlds separated by unthinkable distances of
trackless space and by equally great differences in evolution,
conditions of life, and environment. Yet these strangers are actuated by
the spirit of good faith and honor which is instilled into every worthy
being by the great First Cause, in the working out of whose vast
projects all things are humble instruments.

"In honor of the friendship of the two worlds, we will proceed with the
ceremony.

"Richard Seaton and Martin Crane, exchange the plain rings with Dorothy
Vaneman and Margaret Spencer."

They did so, and repeated, after the Karbix, simple vows of love and
loyalty.

"May the First Cause smile upon this temporary marriage and render it
worthy of being made permanent. As a lowly servant of the all-powerful
