
The potassium and ammonium salts of this acid are nearly insoluble in
water and alcohol. The acid is therefore used as a reagent to
precipitate potassium in analytical work. With potassium chloride the
equation is

    2KCl + H_{2}PtCl_{6} = K_{2}PtCl_{6} + 2HCl.

     ~Other metals of the family.~ The other members of the family
     have few applications. Iridium is used in the form of a
     platinum alloy, since the alloy is much harder than pure
     platinum and is even less fusible. This alloy is sometimes used
     to point gold pens. Osmium tetroxide (OsO_{4}) is a very
     volatile liquid and is used under the name of osmic acid as a
     stain for sections in microscopy.


GOLD

~Occurrence.~ Gold has been found in many localities, the most famous
being South Africa, Australia, Russia, and the United States. In this
country it is found in Alaska and in nearly half of the states of the
union, notably in California, Colorado, and Nevada. It is usually found
in the native condition, frequently alloyed with silver; in combination
it is sometimes found as telluride (AuTe_{2}), and in a few other
compounds.

~Mining.~ Native gold occurs in the form of small grains or larger nuggets
in the sands of old rivers, or imbedded in quartz veins in rocks. In the
first case it is obtained in crude form by placer mining. The sand
containing the gold is shaken or stirred in troughs of running waters
called sluices. This sweeps away the sand but allows the heavier gold to
sink to the bottom of the sluice. Sometimes the sand containing the gold
is washed away from its natural location into the sluices by powerful
streams of water delivered under pressure from pipes. This is called
hydraulic mining. In vein mining the gold-bearing quartz is mined from
the veins, stamped into fine powder in stamping mills, and the gold
extracted by one of the processes to be described.

~Extraction.~ 1. _Amalgamation process._ In the amalgamation process the
powder containing the gold is washed over a series of copper plates
whose surfaces have been amalgamated with mercury. The gold sticks to
the mercury or alloys with it, and after a time the gold and mercury are
scraped off and the mixture is distilled. The mercury distills off and
the gold is left in the retort ready for refining.

2. _Chlorination process._ When gold occurs along with metallic
sulphides it is often extracted by chlorination. The ore is first
roasted, and is then moistened and treated with chlorine. This dissolves
the gold but not the metallic oxides:

    Au + 3Cl = AuCl_{3}.

The gold chloride, being soluble, is extracted from the mixture with
water, and the gold is precipitated from the solution, usually by adding
ferrous sulphate:

    AuCl_{3} + 3FeSO_{4} = Au + FeCl_{3} + Fe_{2}(SO_{4})_{3}.

3. _Cyanide process._ This process depends upon the fact that gold is
soluble in a solution of potassium cyanide in the presence of the oxygen
of the air. The powder from the stamping mills is treated with a very
dilute potassium cyanide solution which extracts the gold:

    2Au + 4KCN + H_{2}O + O = 2KOH + 2KAu(CN)_{2}.

From this solution the gold can be obtained by electrolysis or by
precipitation with metallic zinc:

    2KAu(CN)_{2} + Zn = K_{2}Zn(CN)_{4} + 2Au.

~Refining of gold.~ Gold is refined by three general methods:

1. _Electrolysis._ When gold is dissolved in a solution of potassium
cyanide, and the solution electrolyzed, the gold is deposited in very
pure condition on the cathode.

2. _Cupellation._ When the gold is alloyed with easily oxidizable
metals, such as copper or lead, it may be refined by cupellation. The
alloy is fused with an oxidizing flame on a shallow hearth made of bone
ash, which substance has the property of absorbing metallic oxides but
not the gold. Any silver which may be present remains alloyed with the
gold.

3. _Parting with sulphuric acid._ Gold may be separated from silver, as
well as from many other metals, by heating the alloy with concentrated
sulphuric acid. This dissolves the silver, while the gold is not
attacked.

~Physical properties.~ Gold is a very heavy bright yellow metal,
exceedingly malleable and ductile, and a good conductor of electricity.
It is quite soft and is usually alloyed with copper or silver to give it
the hardness required for most practical uses. The degree of fineness is
expressed in terms of carats, pure gold being twenty-four carats; the
gold used for jewelry is usually eighteen carats, eighteen parts being
gold and six parts copper or silver. Gold coinage is 90% gold and 10%
copper.

~Chemical properties.~ Gold is not attacked by any one of the common
acids; aqua regia easily dissolves it, forming gold chloride (AuCl_{3}),
which in turn combines with hydrochloric acid to form chlorauric acid
(HAuCl_{4}). Fused alkalis also attack it. Most oxidizing agents are
without action upon it, and in general it is not an active element.

     ~Compounds.~ The compounds of gold, though numerous and varied in
     character, are of comparatively little importance and need not
     be described in detail. The element forms two series of salts
     in which it acts as a metal: in the aurous series the gold is
     univalent, the chloride having the formula AuCl; in the auric
     series it is trivalent, auric chloride having the formula
     AuCl_{3}. Gold also acts as an acid-forming element, forming
     such compounds as potassium aurate (KAuO_{2}). Its compounds
     are very easily decomposed, however, metallic gold separating
     from them.


EXERCISES

1. From the method of preparation of platinum, what metal is likely to
be alloyed with it?

2. The "platinum chloride" of the laboratory is made by dissolving
platinum in aqua regia. What is the compound?

3. How would you expect potassium aurate and platinate to be formed?
What precautions would this suggest in the use of platinum vessels?

4. Why must gold ores be roasted in the chlorination process?




CHAPTER XXXII

SOME SIMPLE ORGANIC COMPOUNDS


~Division of chemistry into organic and inorganic.~ Chemistry is usually
divided into two great divisions,--organic and inorganic. The original
significance of these terms was entirely different from the meaning
which they have at the present time.

1. _Original significance._ The division into organic and inorganic was
originally made because it was believed that those substances which
constitute the essential parts of living organisms were built up under
the influence of the life force of the organism. Such substances,
therefore, should be regarded as different from those compounds prepared
in the laboratory or formed from the inorganic or mineral constituents
of the earth. In accordance with this view organic chemistry included
those substances formed by living organisms. Inorganic chemistry, on the
other hand, included all substances formed from the mineral portions of
the earth.

In 1828 the German chemist Woehler prepared urea, a typical organic
compound, from inorganic materials. The synthesis of other so-called
organic compounds followed, and at present it is known that the same
chemical laws apply to all substances whether formed in the living
organism or prepared in the laboratory from inorganic constituents. The
terms "organic" and "inorganic" have therefore lost their original
significance.

2. _Present significance._ The great majority of the compounds found in
living organisms contain carbon, and the term "organic chemistry," as
used at present, includes not only these compounds but all compounds of
carbon. _Organic chemistry_ has become, therefore, _the chemistry of the
compounds of carbon_, all other substances being treated under the head
of inorganic chemistry. This separation of the compounds of carbon into
a group by themselves is made almost necessary by their great number,
over one hundred thousand having been recorded. For convenience some of
the simpler carbon compounds, such as the oxides and the carbonates, are
usually discussed in inorganic chemistry.

~The grouping of compounds in classes.~ The study of organic chemistry is
much simplified by the fact that the large number of bodies included in
this field may be grouped in classes of similar compounds. It thus
becomes possible to study the properties of each class as a whole, in
much the same way as we study a group of elements. The most important of
these classes are the _hydrocarbons_, the _alcohols_, the _aldehydes_,
the _acids_, the _ethereal salts_, the _ethers_, the _ketones_, the
_organic bases_, and the _carbohydrates_. A few members of each of these
classes will now be discussed briefly.

THE HYDROCARBONS

Carbon and hydrogen combine to form a large number of compounds. These
compounds are known collectively as the _hydrocarbons_. They may be
divided into a number of groups or series, each being named from its
first member. Some of the groups are as follows:

    METHANE SERIES
    CH_{4}      methane
    C_{2}H_{6}  ethane
    C_{3}H_{8}  propane
    C_{4}H_{10} butane
    C_{5}H_{12} pentane
    C_{6}H_{14} hexane
    C_{7}H_{16} heptane
    C_{8}H_{18} octane

    ETHYLENE SERIES
    C_{2}H_{4} ethylene
    C_{3}H_{6} propylene
    C_{4}H_{8} butylene

    BENZENE SERIES
    C_{6}H_{6}  benzene
    C_{7}H_{8}  toluene
    C_{8}H_{10} xylene

    ACETYLENE SERIES
    C_{2}H_{2} acetylene
    C_{3}H_{4} allylene

Only the lower members (that is, those which contain a small number of
carbon atoms) of the above groups are given. The methane series is the
most extensive, all of the compounds up to C_{24}H_{50} being known.

It will be noticed that the successive members of each of the above
series differ by the group of atoms (CH_{2}). Such a series is called an
_homologous series_. In general, it may be stated that the members of an
homologous series show a regular gradation in most physical properties
and are similar in chemical properties. Thus in the methane group the
first four members are gases at ordinary temperatures; those containing
from five to sixteen carbon atoms are liquids, the boiling points of
which increase with the number of carbon atoms present. Those containing
more than sixteen carbon atoms are solids.

~Sources of the hydrocarbons.~ There are two chief sources of the
hydrocarbons, namely, (1) crude petroleum and (2) coal tar.

1. _Crude petroleum._ This is a liquid pumped from wells driven into the
earth in certain localities. Pennsylvania, Ohio, Kansas, California, and
Texas are the chief oil-producing regions in the United States. The
crude petroleum consists largely of liquid hydrocarbons in which are
dissolved both gaseous and solid hydrocarbons. Before being used it must
be refined. In this process the petroleum is run into large iron stills
and subjected to fractional distillation. The various hydrocarbons
distill over in the general order of their boiling points. The
distillates which collect between certain limits of temperature are kept
separate and serve for different uses; they are further purified,
generally by washing with sulphuric acid, then with an alkali, and
finally with water. Among the products obtained from crude petroleum in
this way are the naphthas, including benzine and gasoline, kerosene or
coal oil, lubricating oils, vaseline, and paraffin. None of these
products are definite chemical compounds, but each consists of a mixture
of hydrocarbons, the boiling points of which lie within certain limits.

2. _Coal tar._ This product is obtained in the manufacture of coal gas,
as already explained. It is a complex mixture and is refined by the same
general method used in refining crude petroleum. The principal
hydrocarbons obtained from the coal tar are benzene, toluene,
naphthalene, and anthracene. In addition to the hydrocarbons, coal tar
contains many other compounds, such as carbolic acid and aniline.

~Properties of the hydrocarbons.~ The lower members of the first two
series of hydrocarbons mentioned are all gases; the succeeding members
are liquids. In some series, as the methane series, the higher members
are solids. The preparation and properties of methane and acetylene have
been discussed in a previous chapter. Ethylene is present in small
quantities in coal gas and may be obtained in the laboratory by
treating alcohol (C_{2}H_{6}O) with sulphuric acid:

    C_{2}H_{6}O = C_{2}H_{4} + H_{2}O.

Benzene, the first member of the benzene series, is a liquid boiling at
80 deg..

The hydrocarbons serve as the materials from which a large number of
compounds can be prepared; indeed, it has been proposed to call organic
chemistry _the chemistry of the hydrocarbon derivatives_.

~Substitution products of the hydrocarbons.~ As a rule, at least a part of
the hydrogen in any hydrocarbon can be displaced by an equivalent amount
of certain elements or groups of elements. Thus the compounds CH_{3}Cl,
CH_{2}Cl_{2}, CHCl_{3}, CCl_{4} can be obtained from methane by
treatment with chlorine. Such compounds are called _substitution
products_.

~Chloroform~ (CHCl_{3}). This can be made by treating methane with
chlorine, as just indicated, although a much easier method consists in
treating alcohol or acetone (which see) with bleaching powder.
Chloroform is a heavy liquid having a pleasant odor and a sweetish
taste. It is largely used as a solvent and as an anaesthetic in surgery.

~Iodoform~ (CHI_{3}). This is a yellow crystalline solid obtained by
treating alcohol with iodine and an alkali. It has a characteristic odor
and is used as an antiseptic.


ALCOHOLS

When such a compound as CH_{3}Cl is treated with silver hydroxide the
reaction expressed by the following equation takes place:

    CH_{3}Cl + AgOH = CH_{3}OH + AgCl.

Similarly C_{2}H_{5}Cl will give C_{2}H_{5}OH and AgCl. The compounds
CH_{3}OH and C_{2}H_{5}OH so obtained belong to the class of substances
known as _alcohols_. From their formulas it will be seen that they may
be regarded as derived from hydrocarbons by substituting the hydroxyl
group (OH) for hydrogen. Thus the alcohol CH_{3}OH may be regarded as
derived from methane (CH_{4}) by substituting the group OH for one atom
of hydrogen. A great many alcohols are known, and, like the
hydrocarbons, they may be grouped into series. The relation between the
first three members of the methane series and the corresponding alcohols
is shown in the following table:

    CH_{4}     (methane)       CH_{3}OH       (methyl alcohol).
    C_{2}H_{6} (ethane)        C_{2}H_{5}OH   (ethyl alcohol).
    C_{3}H_{8} (propane)       C_{3}H_{7}OH   (propyl alcohol).

~Methyl alcohol~ (_wood alcohol_) (CH_{3}OH). When wood is placed in an
air-tight retort and heated, a number of compounds are evolved, the most
important of which are the three liquids, methyl alcohol, acetic acid,
and acetone. Methyl alcohol is obtained entirely from this source, and
on this account is commonly called _wood alcohol_. It is a colorless
liquid which has a density of 0.79 and boils at 67 deg.. It burns with an
almost colorless flame and is sometimes used for heating purposes, in
place of the more expensive ethyl alcohol. It is a good solvent for
organic substances and is used especially as a solvent in the
manufacture of varnishes. It is very poisonous.

~Ethyl alcohol~ (_common alcohol_) (C_{2}H_{5}OH). 1. _Preparation._ This
compound may be prepared from glucose (C_{6}H_{12}O_{6}), a sugar easily
obtained from starch. If some baker's yeast is added to a solution of
glucose and the temperature is maintained at about 30 deg., bubbles of gas
are soon evolved, showing that a change is taking place. The yeast
contains a large number of minute organized bodies, which are really
forms of plant life. The plant grows in the glucose solution, and in so
doing secretes a substance known as _zymase_, which breaks down the
glucose in accordance with the following equation:

    C_{6}H_{12}O_{6} = 2C_{2}H_{5}OH + 2CO_{2}.

     ~Laboratory preparation of alcohol.~ The formation of alcohol and
     carbon dioxide from glucose may be shown as follows: About 100
     g. of glucose are dissolved in a liter of water in flask A
     (Fig. 90). This flask is connected with the bottle B, which
     is partially filled with limewater. The tube C contains solid
     sodium hydroxide. A little baker's yeast is now added to the
     solution in flask A, and the apparatus is connected, as shown
     in the figure. If the temperature is maintained at about 30 deg.,
     the reaction soon begins. The bubbles of gas escape through the
     limewater in B. A precipitate of calcium carbonate soon forms
     in the limewater, showing the presence of carbon dioxide. The
     sodium hydroxide in tube C prevents the carbon dioxide in the
     air from acting on the limewater. The alcohol remains in the
     flask A and may be separated by fractional distillation.

[Illustration: Fig. 90]

2. _Properties._ Ethyl alcohol is a colorless liquid with a pleasant
odor. It has a density of 0.78 and boils at 78 deg.. It resembles methyl
alcohol in its general properties. It is sometimes used as a source of
heat, since its flame is very hot and does not deposit carbon, as the
flame from oil does. When taken into the system in small quantities it
causes intoxication; in larger quantities it acts as a poison. The
intoxicating properties of such liquors as beer, wine, and whisky are
due to the alcohol present. Beer contains from 2 to 5% of alcohol, wine
from 5 to 20%, and whisky about 50%. The ordinary alcohol of the
druggist contains 94% of alcohol and 6% of water. When this is boiled
with lime and then distilled nearly all the water is removed, the
distillate being called _absolute alcohol_.

     ~Commercial preparation of alcohol.~ Alcohol is prepared
     commercially from starch obtained from corn or potatoes. The
     starch is first converted into a sugar known as maltose, by the
     action of _malt_, a substance prepared by moistening barley
     with water, allowing it to germinate, and then drying it. There
     is present in the malt a substance known as diastase, which has
     the property of changing starch into maltose. This sugar, like
     glucose, breaks down into alcohol and carbon dioxide in the
     presence of yeast. The resulting alcohol is separated by
     fractional distillation.

     ~Denatured alcohol.~ The 94% alcohol is prepared at present at a
     cost of about 35 cents per gallon, which is about half the cost
     of the preparation of methyl alcohol. The government, however,
     imposes a tax on all ethyl alcohol which amounts to $2.08 per
     gallon on the 94% product. This increases its cost to such an
     extent that it is not economical to use it for many purposes
     for which it is adapted, such as a solvent in the preparation
     of paints and varnishes and as a material for the preparation
     of many important organic compounds. By an act of Congress in
     1906, the tax was removed from _denatured_ alcohol, that is
     alcohol mixed with some substance which renders it unfit for
     the purposes of a beverage but will not impair its use for
     manufacturing purposes. Some of the European countries have
     similar laws. The substances ordinarily used to denature
     alcohol are wood alcohol and pyridine, the latter compound
     having a very offensive odor.

     ~Fermentation.~ The reaction which takes place in the preparation
     of ethyl alcohol belongs to the class of changes known under
     the general name of fermentation. Thus we say that the yeast
     causes the glucose to ferment, and the process is known as
     alcoholic fermentation. There are many kinds of fermentations,
     and each is thought to be due to the presence of a definite
     substance known as an _enzyme_, which acts by catalysis. In
     many cases, as in alcoholic fermentation, the change is brought
     about by the action of minute forms of life. These probably
     secrete the enzymes which cause the fermentation to take place.
     Thus the yeast plant is supposed to bring about alcoholic
     fermentation by secreting the enzyme known as zymase.

~Glycerin~ (C_{3}H_{5}(OH)_{3}). This compound may be regarded as derived
from propane (C_{3}H_{8}) by displacing three atoms of hydrogen by three
hydroxyl groups, and must therefore be regarded as an alcohol. It is
formed in the manufacture of soaps, as will be explained later. It is an
oily, colorless liquid having a sweetish taste. It is used in medicine
and in the manufacture of the explosives nitroglycerin and dynamite.


ALDEHYDES

When alcohols are treated with certain oxidizing agents two hydrogen
atoms are removed from each molecule of the alcohol. The resulting
compounds are known as aldehydes. The relation of the aldehydes derived
from methyl and ethyl alcohol to the alcohols themselves may be shown as
follows:

    Alcohols  {CH_{3}OH          Corresponding aldehydes  {CH_{2}O
              {C_{2}H_{5}OH                               {C_{2}H_{4}O

The first of these (CH_{2}O) is a gas known as formaldehyde. Its aqueous
solution is largely used as an antiseptic and disinfectant under the
name of _formalin_. Acetaldehyde (C_{2}H_{4}O) is a liquid boiling at
21 deg..


ACIDS

Like the other classes of organic compounds, the organic acids may be
arranged in homologous series. One of the most important of these series
is the _fatty-acid series_, the name having been given to it because
the derivatives of certain of its members are constituents of the fats.
Some of the most important members of the series are given in the
following table. They are all monobasic, and this fact is expressed in
the formulas by separating the replaceable hydrogen atom from the rest
of the molecule:

    H.CHO_{2}            formic acid, a liquid boiling at 100 deg..
    H.C_{2}H_{3}O        acetic acid, a liquid boiling at 118 deg..
    H.C_{3}H_{5}O_{2}    propionic acid, a liquid boiling at 140 deg..
    H.C_{4}H_{7}O_{2}    butyric acid, a liquid boiling at 163 deg..
    H.C_{16}H_{31}O_{2}  palmitic acid, a solid melting at 62 deg..
    H.C_{18}H_{35}O_{2}  stearic acid, a solid melting at 69 deg..

~Formic acid~ (H.CHO_{2}). The name "formic" is derived from the Latin
_formica_, signifying ant. This name was given to the acid because it
was formerly obtained from a certain kind of ants. It is a colorless
liquid and occurs in many plants such as the stinging nettles. The
inflammation caused by the sting of the bee is due to formic acid.

~Acetic acid~ (H.C_{2}H_{3}O_{2}). Acetic acid is the acid present in
vinegar, the sour taste being due to it. It can be prepared by either of
the following methods.

1. _Acetic fermentation._ This consists in the change of alcohol into
acetic acid through the agency of a minute organism commonly called
mother of vinegar. The change is represented by the following equation:

    C_{2}H_{5}OH + 2O = HC_{2}H_{3}O_{2} + H_{2}O.

The various kinds of vinegars are all made by this process. In the
manufacture of cider vinegar the sugar present in the cider first
undergoes alcoholic fermentation; the resulting alcohol then undergoes
acetic fermentation. The amount of acetic acid present in vinegars
varies from 3 to 6%.

2. _From the distillation of wood._ The liquid obtained by heating wood
in the absence of air contains a large amount of acetic acid, and this
can be separated readily in a pure state. This is the most economical
method for the preparation of the concentrated acid.

Acetic acid is a colorless liquid and has a strong pungent odor.
Many of its salts are well-known compounds. Lead acetate
(Pb(C_{2}H_{3}O_{2})_{2}) is the ordinary _sugar of lead_. Sodium
acetate (NaC_{2}H_{3}O_{2}) is a white solid largely used in making
chemical analyses. Copper acetate (Cu(C_{2}H_{3}O_{2})_{2}) is a blue
solid. When copper is acted upon by acetic acid in the presence of air a
green basic acetate of copper is formed. This is commonly known as
verdigris. All acetates are soluble in water.

~Butyric acid~ (H.C_{4}H_{7}O_{2}). Derivatives of butyric acid are
present in butter and impart to it its characteristic flavor.

~Palmitic and stearic acids.~ Ordinary fats consist principally of
derivatives of palmitic and stearic acids. When the fats are heated with
sodium hydroxide the sodium salts of these acids are formed. If
hydrochloric acid is added to a solution of the sodium salts, the free
palmitic and stearic acids are precipitated. They are white solids,
insoluble in water. Stearic acid is often used in making candles.

~Acids belonging to other series.~ In addition to members of the
fatty-acid series, mention may be made of the following well-known
acids.

~Oxalic acid~ (H_{2}C_{2}O_{4}). This is a white solid which occurs in
nature in many plants, such as the sorrels. Its ammonium salt
((NH_{4})_{2}C_{2}O_{4}) is used as a reagent for the detection of
calcium. When added to a solution of a calcium compound the white,
insoluble calcium oxalate (CaC_{2}O_{4}) precipitates.

~Tartaric acid~ (H_{2}.C_{4}H_{4}O_{6}). This compound occurs either in a
free state or in the form of its salts in many fruits. The potassium
acid salt (KHC_{4}H_{4}O_{6}) occurs in the juice of grapes. When the
juice ferments in the manufacture of wine, this salt, being insoluble in
alcohol, separates out on the sides of the cask and in this form is
known as argol. This is more or less colored by the coloring matter of
the grape. When purified it forms a white solid and is sold under the
name of cream of tartar. The following are also well-known salts of
tartaric acid: potassium sodium tartrate (Rochelle salt)
(KNaC_{4}H_{4}O_{6}), potassium antimonyl tartrate (tartar emetic)
(KSbOC_{4}H_{4}O_{6}).

     ~Cream of tartar baking powders.~ The so-called cream of tartar
     baking powders consist of a mixture of cream of tartar,
     bicarbonate of soda, and some starch or flour. When water is
     added to this mixture the cream of tartar slowly acts upon the
     soda present liberating carbon dioxide in accordance with the
     following equation:

     KHC_{4}H_{4}O_{6} + NaHCO_{3} = KNaC_{4}H_{4}O_{6} + H_{2}O +
     CO_{2}.

     The carbon dioxide evolved escapes through the dough, thus
     making it light and porous.

~Citric acid~ (H_{3}.C_{6}H_{5}O_{7}). This acid occurs in many fruits,
especially in lemons. It is a white solid, soluble in water, and is
often used as a substitute for lemons in making lemonade.

~Lactic acid~ (H.C_{3}H_{5}O_{3}). This is a liquid which is formed in the
souring of milk.

~Oleic acid~ (H.C_{18}H_{33}O_{2}). The derivatives of this acid
constitute the principal part of many oils and liquid fats. The acid
itself is an oily liquid.


ETHEREAL SALTS

When acids are brought in contact with alcohols under certain conditions
a reaction takes place similar to that which takes place between acids
and bases. The following equations will serve as illustrations:

    KOH + HNO_{3} = KNO_{3} + H_{2}O,

    CH_{3}OH + HNO_{3} = CH_{3}NO_{3} + H_{2}O.

The resulting compounds of which methyl nitrate (CH_{3}NO_{3}) may be
taken as the type belong to the class known as _ethereal salts_, the
name having been given them because some of them possess pleasant
ethereal odors. It will be seen that the ethereal salts differ from
ordinary salts in that they contain a hydrocarbon radical, such as
CH_{3}, C_{2}H_{5}, C_{3}H_{5}, in place of a metal.

~The nitrates of glycerin~ (_nitroglycerin_). Nitric acid reacts with
glycerin in the same way that it reacts with a base containing three
hydroxyl groups such as Fe(OH)_{3}:

    Fe(OH)_{3} + 3HNO_{3} = Fe(NO_{3})_{3} + 3H_{2}O,

    C_{3}H_{5}(OH)_{3} + 3HNO_{3} = C_{3}H_{5}(NO_{3})_{3} + 3H_{2}O.

The resulting nitrate (C_{3}H_{5}(NO_{3})_{3}) is the main constituent
of _nitroglycerin_, a slightly yellowish oil characterized by its
explosive properties. Dynamite consists of porous earth which has
absorbed nitroglycerin, and its strength depends on the amount present.
It is used much more largely than nitroglycerin itself, since it does
not explode so readily by concussion and hence can be transported with
safety.

~The fats.~ These are largely mixtures of the ethereal salts known
respectively as olein, palmitin, and stearin. These salts may be
