
25


Trigger gasped. Her eyes flew open. She made a convulsive effort to
vanish beneath the surface of the creek. Being flat on the sand as it
was, that didn't work. So she stopped splashing about and made rapid
covering-up motions here and there instead.

"You've got a nerve!" she snapped as her breath came back. "Beat it!
Fast!"

Ole bashful Quillan, standing on the bank fifteen feet above her, looked
hurt. He also looked.

"Look!" he said plaintively. "I just came over to make sure you were all
right--wild animals around! I wasn't studying the color scheme."

"_Beat it! At once!_"

Quillan inhaled with apparent difficulty.

"Though now it's been mentioned," he went on, speaking rapidly and
unevenly, "there _is_ all that brown and that sort of pink and that lovely
white." He was getting more enthusiastic by the moment; Trigger became
afraid he would fall off the bank and land in the creek beside her. "And
the--ooh-ummh!--wet red hair and the freckles!" he rattled along, his
eyes starting out of his head. "And the lovely--"

"Quillan!" she yelled. "Please!"

Quillan checked himself. "Uh!" he said. He drew a deep breath. The wild
look faded. Sanity appeared to return. "Well, it's the truth about those
wild animals! Some sort of large, uncouth critter was observed just now
ducking into the forest at the upper end of the valley!"

Trigger darted a glance along the bank. Her clothes were forty feet
away, just beside the water.

"I'm observing some sort of large, uncouth critter right here!" she said
coldly. "What's worse, it's observing me. Turn around!"

Quillan sighed. "You're a hard woman, Argee," he said. But he turned. He
was carrying a holstered gun, as a matter of fact; but he usually did
that nowadays anyway. "This thing," he went on, "is supposed to have a
head like a bat, three feet across. It flies."

"Very interesting," Trigger told him. She decided he wasn't going to
turn around again. "So now I'll just get into my clothes, and then--"

It came quietly out of the trees around the upper bend of the creek
sixty feet away. It had a head like a bat, and was blue on top and
yellow below. Its flopping wing tips barely cleared the bank on either
side. The three-foot mouth was wide open, showing very long thin white
teeth. It came skimming swiftly over the surface of the water toward
her.

"Quiiii-LLAN!"

       *       *       *       *       *

They walked back along the trail to camp. Trigger walked a few steps
ahead, her back very straight. The worst of it had been the smug look on
his face.

"Heel!" she observed. "Heel! Heel! Heel!"

"Now, Trigger," Quillan said calmly behind her. "After all, it was you
who came flying up the bank and wrapped yourself around my neck. All
wet, too."

"I was scared!" Trigger snarled. "Who wouldn't be? You certainly didn't
hesitate an instant to take full advantage of the situation!"

"True," Quillan admitted. "I'd dropped the bat. There you were. Who'd
hesitate? I'm not out of my mind."

She did two dance steps of pure rage and spun to face him. She put her
hands on her hips. Quillan stopped warily.

"Your mind!" she said. "I'd hate to have one like it. What do you think
I am? One of Belchik's houris?"

For a man his size, he was really extremely quick. Before she could
move, he was there, one big arm wrapped about her shoulders, pinning her
arms to her sides. "Easy, Trigger!" he said softly.

Well, others had tried to hold her like that when she didn't want to be
held. A twist, a jerk, a heave--and over and down they went. Trigger
braced herself quietly. If she was quick enough now---- She twisted,
jerked, heaved. She stopped, discouraged. The situation hadn't altered
appreciably.

She _had_ been afraid it wasn't going to work with Quillan.

"Let go!" she said furiously, aiming a fast heel at his instep. But the
instep flicked aside. Her shoe dug into the turf of the path. The ape
might even have an extra pair of eyes on his feet!

Then his free palm was cupped under her chin, tilting it carefully. His
other eyes appeared above hers. Very close. Very dark.

"I'll bite!" Trigger whispered fiercely. "I'll bi--mmph!

"Mmmph--grrmm!

"Grr-mm-mhm.... Hm-m-m ... mhm!"

       *       *       *       *       *

They walked on along the trail, hand in hand. They came up over the last
little rise. Trigger looked down on the camp. She frowned.

"Pretty dull!" she observed.

"Eh?" Quillan asked, startled.

"Not that, ape!" she said. She squeezed his hand. "Your morals aren't
good, but dull it wasn't. I meant generally. We're just sitting here now
waiting. Nothing seems to be happening."

It was true, at least on the surface. There were a great number of ships
and men around and near Luscious, but they weren't in view. They were
ready to jump in any direction, at any moment, but they had nothing to
jump at yet. The Commissioner's transmitters hadn't signaled more than
two or three times in the last two days. Even the short communicators
remained mostly silent.

"Cheer up, Doll!" Quillan said. "Something's bound to break pretty
soon."

That evening, a Devagas ship came zooming in on Luscious.

They were prepared for it, of course. That somebody came round from time
to time to look over the local plasmoid crop was only to be expected. As
the ship surfaced in atmosphere on the other side of the planet, four
one-man Scout fighters flashed in on it from four points of the horizon,
radiation screens up. They tacked holding beams on it and braced
themselves. A Federation destroyer appeared in the air above it.

The Devagas ship couldn't escape. So it blew itself up.

They were prepared for that, too. The Devagas pilot was being
dead-brained three minutes later. He didn't know a significant thing
except the exact coordinates of an armed, subterranean Devagas dome,
three days' run away.

The Scout ships that had been hunting for the dome went howling in
toward it from every direction. The more massive naval vessels of the
Federation followed behind. There was no hurry for the heavies. The
captured Devagas ship's attempt to beam a warning to its base had been
smothered without effort. The Scouts were getting in fast enough to
block escape attempts.

"And now we split forces," the Commissioner said. He was the only one,
Trigger thought, who didn't seem too enormously excited by it all.
"Quillan, you and your group get going! They can use you there a whole
lot better than we can here."

For just a second, Quillan looked like a man being dragged violently in
two directions. He didn't look at Trigger. He asked, "Think it's wise to
leave you people unguarded?"

"Quillan," said Commissioner Tate, "that's the first time in my life
anybody has suggested I need guarding."

"Sorry sir," said Quillan.

"You mean," Trigger said, "we're not going? We're just staying here?"

"You've got an appointment, remember?" the Commissioner said.

Quillan and company were gone within the hour. Mantelish, Holati Tate,
Lyad and Trigger stayed at camp.

Luscious looked very lonely.

       *       *       *       *       *

"It isn't just the king plasmoid they're hoping to catch there," the
Commissioner told Trigger. "And I wouldn't care, frankly, if the thing
stayed lost the next few thousand years. But we had a very odd report
last week. The Federation's undercover boys have been scanning the
Devagas worlds and Tranest very closely of late, naturally. The report
is that there isn't the slightest evidence that a single one of the top
members of the Devagas hierarchy has been on any of their worlds in the
past two months."

"Oh," she said. "They think they're out here? In that dome?"

"That's what's suspected."

"But why?"

He scratched his chin. "If anyone knows, they haven't told me. It's
probably nothing nice."

Trigger pondered. "You'd think they'd use facsimiles," she said. "Like
Lyad."

"Oh, they did," he said. "They did. That's one of the reasons for being
pretty sure they're gone. They're nowhere near as expert at that
facsimile business as the Tranest characters. A little study of the
recordings showed the facs were just that."

Trigger pondered again. "Did they find anything on Tranest?"

"Yes. One combat-strength squadron of those souped-up frigates of the
Aurora class they're allowed by treaty can't be accounted for."

Trigger cupped her chin in her hands and looked at him. "Is that why
we've stayed on Luscious, Holati--the four of us?"

"It's one reason. That Repulsive thing of yours is another."

"What about him?"

"I have a pretty strong feeling," he said, "that while they'll probably
find the hierarchy in that Devagas dome, they won't find the 112-113
item there."

"So Lyad still is gambling," Trigger said. "And we're gambling we'll get
more out of her next play than she does." She hesitated. "Holati--"

"Yes?"

"When did you decide it would be better if nobody ever got to see that
king plasmoid again?"

Holati Tate said, "About the time I saw the reconstruct of that yellow
monster of Balmordan's. Frankly, Trigger, there was a good deal of
discussion of possibilities along that line before we decided to
announce the discovery of Harvest Moon. If we could have just kept it
hidden away for a couple of centuries--until there was considerably more
good sense around the Hub--we probably would have done it. But somebody
was bound to run across it sometime. And the stuff did look as if it
might be extremely valuable. So we took the chance."

"And now you'd like to untake it?"

"If it's still possible. Half the Fed Council probably would like to see
it happen. But they don't even dare think along those lines. There could
be a blowup that would throw Hub politics back into the kind of snarl
they haven't been in for a hundred years. If anything is done, it will
have to look as if it had been something nobody could have helped. And
that still might be bad enough."

"I suppose so. Holati--"

"Yes?"

She shook her head. "Nothing. Or if it is, I'll ask you later." She
stood up. "I think I'll go have my swim."

She still went loafing in Plasmoid Creek in the mornings. The bat had
been identified as an innocent victim of appearances, a very
mild-mannered beast dedicated to the pursuit and engulfment of huge
mothlike bugs which hung around watercourses. Luscious still looked like
the safest of all possible worlds for any creature as vigorous as a
human being. But she kept the Denton near now, just in case.

She stretched out again in the sun-warmed water, selected a smooth rock
to rest her head on, wriggled into the sand a little so the current
wouldn't shift her, and closed her eyes. She lay still, breathing
slowly. Contact was coming more easily and quickly every morning. But
the information which had begun to filter through in the last few days
wasn't at all calculated to make one happy.

She was afraid now she was going to die in this thing. She had almost
let it slip out to Holati, which wouldn't have helped in the least.
She'd have to watch that in future.

Repulsive hadn't exactly said she would die. He'd said, "Maybe."
Repulsive was scared too. Scared badly.

Trigger lay quiet, her thoughts, her attention drifting softly inward
and down. Creek water rippled against her cheek.

It was all because that one clock moved so slowly. That was the thing
that couldn't be changed. Ever.




26


Three mornings later, the emergency signal called her back to camp on
the double.

Trigger ran over the developments of the past days in her mind as she
trotted along the path, getting dressed more or less on the way. The
Devagas dome was solidly invested by now, its transmitters blanked out.
It hadn't tried to communicate with its attackers. On their part, the
Fed ships weren't pushing the attack. They were holding the point,
waiting for the big, slow wrecking boats to arrive, which would very
gently and delicately start uncovering and opening the dome, taking it
apart, piece by piece. The hierarchy could surrender themselves and
whatever they were hiding in there at any point in the process. They
didn't have a chance. Nobody and nothing had escaped. The Scouts had
swatted down a few Devagas vessels on the way in; but those had been
headed toward the dome, not away from it.

Perhaps the Psychology Service ship had arrived, several days ahead of
time.

The other three weren't in camp, but the lock to the Commissioner's ship
stood open. Trigger went in and found them gathered up front. The
Commissioner had swung the transmitter cabinet aside and was back there,
prowling among the power leads.

"What's wrong?" Trigger asked.

"Transmitters went out," he said. "Don't know why yet. Grab some tools
and help me check."

She slipped on her work gloves, grabbed some tools and joined him. Lyad
and Mantelish watched them silently.

They found the first spots of the fungus a few minutes later.

"Fungus!" Mantelish said, startled. He began to rumble in his pockets.
"My microscope--"

"I have it." Lyad handed it to him. She looked at him with concern. "You
don't think--"

"It seems possible. We did come in here last night, remember? And we
came straight from the lab."

"But we had been decontaminated," Lyad said puzzledly.

"Don't try to walk in here, Professor!" Trigger warned as he lumbered
forward. "We might have to de-electrocute you. The Commissioner will
scrape off a sample and hand it out. This stuff--if it's what you think
it might be--is poisonous?"

"Quite harmless to life, my dear," said the professor, bending over the
patch of greenish-gray scum the Commissioner had reached out to him.
"But ruinous in delicate instruments! That's why we're so careful."

Holati Tate glanced at Trigger. "Better look in the black box, Trig," he
said.

She nodded and wormed herself farther into the innards of the
transmitters. A minute later she announced, "Full of it! And that's the
one part we can't repair or replace, of course. Is it your beast,
Professor?"

"It seems to be," Mantelish said unhappily. "But we have, at least, a
solvent which will remove it from the equipment."

Trigger came sliding out from under the transmitters, the detached black
box under one arm. "Better use it then before the stuff gets to the rest
of the ship. It won't help the black box." She shook it. It tinkled.
"Shot!" she said. "There went another quarter million of your credits,
Commissioner."

Mantelish and Lyad headed for the lock to get the solvent. Trigger
slipped off her work gloves and turned to follow them. "Might be a while
before I'm back," she said.

The Commissioner started to say something, then nodded and climbed back
into the transmitters. After a few minutes, Mantelish came puffing in
with sprayers and cans of solvent. "It's at least fortunate you tried to
put out a call just now," he said. "It might have done incalculable
damage."

"Doubt it," said Holati. "A few more instruments might have gone. Like
the communicators. The main equipment is fungus-proof. How do you
