
"Sorry, sir, but it is a nuisance."

"I know, but you have to get rid of it logically. When you get a chance
go to the local bank. It's the Superior State Bank on McEntee Street.
Show them your credentials from Riggs National and ask them to keep your
brief case in their vault. Get a receipt. Then, at your first
opportunity, burn the plastic key and your ID card."

"Yes, sir."

"Keep up your masquerade as a bank messenger and try to find out, as if
you were an ordinary curiosity-seeker, all you can about Cavalier
Institute. You've made a good start with the Garet girl. Get to know her
father, the professor."

"Yes, sir." Don realized with embarrassment that his little romantic
interlude with Alis must have been eavesdropped on. "Are there any
particular times I'm to report?"

"You will be reporting constantly. That's the beauty of this radio."

"You mean I can't turn it off? I won't have any privacy? There'll always
be somebody listening?"

"Exactly. But you mustn't be inhibited. Your private life is still your
own and no one will criticize. Your unofficial actions will simply be
ignored."

"Oh, great!"

"You must rely on our discretion, Sergeant. I'm sure you'll get used to
it. Enough of this for now. We mustn't excite Clark's suspicions. Go
back to him now and carry on. You'll receive further instructions as
they are necessary. And remember--don't be inhibited."

"No, sir," Don said ruefully. He went back to the printshop, feeling
like a goldfish bowl.




IV


Ed Clark took Don to the Superior State Bank and introduced him to the
president, who was delighted to do business with a representative of
Riggs National of Washington, D. C. Don told him nothing about the
contents of the brief case, but the banker seemed to be under the
impression they were securities or maybe even a million dollars cash,
and Don said nothing to spoil his pleasure.

Outside again, with the receipt in his wallet, Don stood with Clark on
the corner of McEntee Street and Broadway.

"This is the heart of town, you might say," the newspaper editor said.
"The bubble gum factory is over that way, on the railroad spur. Maybe
you can smell it. Smells real nice, I think."

Don rubbed the wrist that had been manacled for so long. He was sniffing
politely when there was a roar of engines and a squadron of fighter
planes buzzed Broadway.

They screamed over at little more than roof level, then were gone. They
were overhead so briefly that Don noticed only that they were P-38's, at
least four of them.

"Things are beginning to happen," Don said. "The Air Force is having a
look-see."

Clark shook his head. "That wasn't the Air Force. Those were the PP
boys. They're the only ones who fly those Lightnings these days."

"PP?"

"Private Pilots. Bobby the Bold's airborne vigilantes. Wonder what
they're up to?"

"Oh. Senator Bobby Thebold, S.O.B."

"If you want to put it that way, yes."

"It's a private joke. But I think I know what they're up to--or why. The
Senator's secretary is marooned up here, like me. She was on the train,
too."

"You don't say! I got scooped on that one. Which one is she?"

"The redhead. Geneva Jervis. I haven't seen her since last night, come
to think of it."

The P-38's screamed over again, this time from west to east. Don counted
six planes now and made out the PP markings. People had come out of
stores and business buildings and were looking out of upstairs windows
at the sky. They were rewarded by a third thundering flypast of the
fighter planes. They were higher this time, spread out laterally as if
to search maximum terrain.

"Big deal," Clark said. "This show would bring anyone outdoors, but even
if they see her what do you suppose they can do about it? There's no
place in town flat enough for a Piper Cub to land, let alone a fighter
plane."

"How about the golf course?"

"Raleigh? Worst set of links in the whole United States. A helicopter
could put down there, but that's about all. What's old Bobby so worked
up about, I wonder? Unless there's something to that gossip about this
Jervis girl being his mistress and he's showing off for her."

"He'd show off for anybody, they tell me," Don said. Then he remembered
that Military Intelligence was listening in. If any pro-Thebold people
were among his eavesdroppers, he hoped they respected his private right
to be anti-Thebold.

At that moment he and Clark were thrown against the side of the bank
building. They clung to each other and Don noticed that the sun had
moved a few degrees in the sky.

"Oh-oh," Clark grunted. "Superior's taking evasive action. Thinks it's
being attacked." As they regained their footing he asked, "Do you feel
heavy in the legs?"

"Yes. As if I were going up in an express elevator."

"Exactly. Somebody's getting us up beyond the reach of these pesky
planes, I'd guess."

The P-38's were overhead again, but now they seemed to be diving on the
town. More likely, if Clark's theory was right, it was an illusion--the
planes were flying level but the town was rising fast.

"They'd better climb," Don said, "or they'll crash!"

There was the sound of a crash almost immediately, from the south end of
town. Don and Clark ran toward it, fighting the heaviness in their legs.

A dozen others were ahead of them, running sluggishly across South Creek
Bridge. Beyond, just short of the edge, was the wreckage of a fighter
plane and, behind it, the torn-up ground of a crash landing. There was
no fire.

The pilot struggled out of the cockpit. He dropped to the ground, felt
himself to see if any bones were broken, then saw the crowd running
toward him.

The pilot hesitated, then ran toward the edge. Shouts came from the
crowd. With a last glance over his shoulder, the pilot leaped and went
over the edge.

The crowd, Don and Clark among them, approached more cautiously. They
made out a falling dot and, a second later, saw a parachute blossom
open. The other planes appeared and flew a wide protective circle around
the chutist.

"Do you think that's Bobby Thebold?" Don asked.

"Probably not. That was the last plane in the formation. Thebold would
be the leader."

They went back past the crashed plane, surrounded by a growing crowd
from town, and recrossed the bridge.

"Look at the water," the editor said. "Ice is forming."

"And we're still rising," Don said, "if my legs are any judge. Do you
think there's a connection?"

Clark shrugged. He turned up his coat collar and rubbed his hands. "All
I know is the higher we go the colder we get. Come on back to the shop
and warm up."

They turned at the sound of engines. Two of the five remaining P-38's
had detached themselves from their cover of the chutist and were flying
around the rim of Superior--as if unwilling to risk another flight
across the surface of the town that seemed determined to become a
satellite of Earth.

       *       *       *       *       *

When Don Cort reached the campus he was shivering, in spite of the
sweater and topcoat Ed Clark had lent him. He asked a student where the
Administration Building was and at the desk inquired for Professor
Garet.

A gray-haired, dedicated-looking woman told him impatiently that
Professor Garet was in his laboratory and couldn't be disturbed. She
wouldn't tell him where the laboratory was.

"Have you seen Miss Jervis?" Don wondered whether the redhead
appreciated the demonstration her boss, the flying Senator, had put on
for her.

The woman behind the desk shook her head. "You're two of the people from
the train, aren't you? Well, you're all supposed to report to the dining
room at two o'clock."

"What for?"

"You'll find out at two o'clock."

It was obvious he would get no more information from her. Don left the
building. It was half-past one. He crossed the near-deserted campus. His
legs still felt heavy and he assumed Superior was still rising. It
certainly seemed to be getting increasingly colder.

He wondered how high they were and whether it would snow. He hoped not.
How high did you have to be before you got up where it didn't snow any
more? He had no idea. He did recall that Mount Everest was 29,000 feet
up and that it snowed up there. Or would it be _down_ there, relatively
speaking? How high could they be, and didn't anybody care?

The frosty old receptionist seemed to be typical in her
business-as-usual, come-what-may attitude. Even Ed Clark didn't seem as
concerned as he ought to be about Superior's ascent into the
stratosphere. Clark was interested, certainly, but he'd given Don the
impression that he was no more curious than he would be about any other
phenomenon he'd write about in next week's paper--a two-headed calf, for
instance.

Don remembered now that the conquerors of Everest had needed oxygen in
the rarefied atmosphere near the summit and he experimentally took a
couple of deep breaths. No difficulty. Therefore they weren't 29,000
feet up--yet. Small comfort, he thought, as he shivered again.

He picked out a building at random. Classes were in session behind the
closed but windowed doors along the hall. From the third door he saw
Alis Garet, sitting at the back of a small classroom. Her attention had
wandered from the instructor and when she saw Don she smiled and
beckoned. He hesitated, then opened the door and went in as quietly as
he could. The instructor paused briefly, nodded, then went back to a
droning lecture. It seemed to be an English literature class.

Alis cleared some books off a chair next to her and Don sat down. "Who
turned you loose?" she whispered.

He realized she was referring to his de-handcuffed wrist and grinned,
indicating that he'd tell her later.

"I see you've been outfitted for our new climate," she went on. A
student in the row of chairs ahead turned and frowned. The instructor
talked on, oblivious.

Don nodded and said "_Sh_."

"Don't let them intimidate you. Did you see the planes?"

More students were turning and glaring and Don's embarrassment grew.
"Come on," he said. "Let's cut this class."

"Bravo!" she said. "Spoken like a true Cavalier."

She gathered up her books. The instructor, without interrupting his
lecture, followed them with his eyes as they left the room.

"Now I'll never know whether the young princes got out of the tower
alive," she said.

"They didn't. The question is, will we?"

"I certainly hope so. I'll have to speak to Father about it."

"He's locked up in his lab, they tell me. Where would that be?"

"In the tower, as a matter of fact. The bell tower that the founding
fathers built and then didn't have enough money to buy bells for. But
you can't go up there--it's the holy of holies."

"Can you?"

"No. Why? You don't think Father is making all this happen, do you?"

"Somebody is. Professor Garet seems as good a suspect as any."

"Oh, he likes to act mysterious, but it's all an act. Poor old Father is
just a crackpot theorist. I told you that. He couldn't pick up steel
filing with a magnet."

"I wonder. Look, somebody's called a meeting for us outsiders from the
train at two o'clock. It's almost that now. Maybe I'll have a chance to
ask some questions. Will your father be there?"

"I'm sure he will. He's a great meeting-caller. I'll go with you. And,
since you have two free hands now, you can hold my books. Maybe later
you'll get a chance to hold me."

       *       *       *       *       *

Among the people sitting around the bare tables in the dining room, Don
recognized the conductor and other trainmen, two stocky individuals who
had the look of traveling salesmen, an elderly couple who held hands, a
young couple with a baby, two nuns, a soldier apparently going on or
returning from furlough, and a tall, hawk-nosed man Don classified on no
evidence at all as a Shakespearean actor. All had been on the train. He
didn't see Geneva Jervis anywhere.

An improvised speaker's table had been set up at one end of the room,
near the door to the kitchen. A heavy-set man sat at the table talking
to Mrs. Garet, the professor's wife.

"The stoutish gentleman next to Mother is the president of Cavalier,"
Alis said. "Maynard Rubach. When you talk to him be sure to call him
_Doctor_ Rubach. He's not a Ph.D. and he's sensitive about it, but he
did used to be a veterinarian."

They sat down near the big table and Mrs. Garet smiled and waved at
them. Mayor Civek came in through the kitchen door, licking a finger as
if he'd been sampling something on the way, and sat down next to Mrs.
Garet.

At that moment Don's stomach gave a hop and he felt blood rushing to his
head. Others also had pained or nauseous expressions.

"Ugh," Alis said. "Now what?"

"I'd guess," Don said when his stomach had settled back in place, "that
we've stopped rising."

"You mean we've gone as high as we're going to go?"

"I hope so. We'd run out of air if we went much higher."

Professor Garet came in presently, looking pleased with himself. He
nodded to his wife and the men next to her and cleared his throat as he
looked out over the room.

"Altitude 21,500 feet," he announced without preamble. "Temperature
sixteen degrees Fahrenheit. From here on out--" he paused, repeated
"out" and chuckled--"it's going to be a bit chilly. Those of you who are
inadequately clothed will see my wife for extra garments. I believe you
have been comfortably housed and fed. There will, of course, be no
charge for these services while you are the guests of the Cavalier
Institute of Applied Sciences. Thank you. I now present Mr. Hector
Civek, the mayor of Superior, who will answer any other questions you
may have."

Don looked at Alis, who shrugged. The conductor stood and opened a
notebook which he consulted. "I have a few questions, Mr. Mayor. These
people have asked me to speak for them and there's one question that
outweighs all the others. That is--are you going to take us back to
Earth? If so, when? And how?"

Civek cleared his throat. He took a sip of water. "As for the first
question--we certainly hope to take you and ourselves back to Earth. I
can't answer the others."

"You hope to?"

"Earnestly. I turn blue easily myself, and I'm as anxious as you are to
get back. But when that will be depends entirely on circumstances.
Circumstances, uh, beyond my control."

"Who's controlling them, then? Your friend with the whiskers?"

Professor Garet smiled amiably and patted his beard. The portly Maynard
Rubach got up and Civek sat down.

"I am Dr. Maynard Rubach, president of Cavalier. I must insist that in
common decency we all refrain from personal references. Mr. Civek has
done his best to give you an explanation, but of course he is a layman
and, while he has many excellent qualities, we cannot expect him to be
conversant with the principles of science. I will therefore attempt to
explain.

"As you know, science has been aware for hundreds of years that the
Earth is a giant magnet...."

Don saw Geneva Jervis. She was at the kitchen door beyond the speaker's
table.

"... the isogenic and the isoclinic ..."

The red-haired Miss Jervis saw Don now and put her finger to her lips.

"... an ultimote, which is simultaneously an integral part of ..."

Now the redhead was beckoning to him urgently. He excused himself to
Alis, who frowned when she saw the other girl; then he went back of the
speaker's table ("... 1,257 tenescopes to the square centimeter ...")
into the kitchen. Jen Jervis was by now at the far end of it, motioning
him to hurry up.

"I've found something," she said. She was wearing a shapeless fur coat,
apparently borrowed.

"Come on. You'll have to see it."

"All right, but why me?"

"Aside from myself you seem to be the only one from the train with any
gumption. I know you've been spying around doing things while everybody
else sat back and waited for deliverance. Though I can't say I admire
your choice of companions. That tawdry blonde--"

"Now, really, Miss Jervis!"

"Tawny, then; sometimes I mix up my words."

"I'll bet."

She led him out the back door and across the frozen ground past several
buildings. They reached what once must have been an athletic field.

"At the far end," she said. "Come on."

"Where were you when your boy friend and his daredevil aces came over?"

"I saw them."

"Did they see you?"

"None of your business."

He shrugged. They were at a section of the grandstand at the end of the
field. Jen Jervis indicated a door and Don opened it. It led to a big
room under the stands. "What does this remind you of?" she asked.

Don looked blank. In the dim light he could see some planking, a
long-deflated football, ancient peanut shells and an empty pint bottle.
"I don't know. What?"

"Stagg Field? At the University of Chicago? Under the stands where they
first made an atomic pile work?" She looked at him with the air of an
investigator hot on the scent.

He shrugged. "Never been there. So what?"

"It's a pattern. This is where they've hidden their secret."

"It looks more like the place a co-ed and her boy friend might go to
have a little fun. In warmer weather, of course."

"Oh!" she said. "You're disgusting! Look over there."

He looked, wondering what made this young attractive woman
hypersensitive on the subject of sex. This was the second time she'd
blazed up over nothing. What he saw where she pointed was a door at a
45-degree angle to the ground, set into a triangular block of concrete.
"Where does that go?" he asked.

"Down," she said as they walked toward it. "And there's some machinery
or something down there. I heard it. Or maybe I only felt the
vibrations. It throbs, anyway."

"Probably the generator for the school's lighting system. Did you go
down and look?"

"No."

"All right, then." He opened the door. "Down we go."

At the bottom of a flight of steps there was a corridor lit by dim
electric light bulbs along one wall. The corridor became a tunnel,
sloping gradually downward. They had been going north, Don judged, but
then the tunnel made a right turn and now they were following it due
east. "I don't hear any throbbing," he said.

"Well, I did, and from way up here. They must have turned it off."

"How long ago was that?"

"An hour, maybe."

"While we were still rising. That would make sense. We've stopped again,
you know. Professor Garet gave us a bulletin on it."

He had been going ahead of her in the narrow tunnel. Now it widened and
they were able to walk side by side. There seemed to be no end to it.
But then they came to a sturdy-looking door, padlocked.

"That's that," Don said.

"That's that nothing," she said. "Break it down."

He laughed. "You flatter me. Come on back."

"Don't you think this is at all peculiar? A tunnel starting under an
abandoned grandstand, running all this way and ending in a locked door?"

"Maybe this was a station on the underground railway. It looks old
enough."

"We're going through that door." She opened her purse and took out a key
ring. On it was an extensive collection of keys. Eventually she found
one that opened the padlock.

"Well!" he said. "Who taught you _that_?"

"Open the door."

The corridor beyond the door was lined--walls, ceiling and floor--with a
silvery metal. It continued east a hundred yards or so, swung north and
then went east again, widening all the time.

It ended in a great room whose far wall was glass or some equally
transparent substance. The room was a huge observatory at the end of
Superior but below its rim. They could look down from it, not without a
touch of nausea, to the Earth four miles below.

Don, thinking of the surface of Superior above, thought it was as if
they were looking out of the gondola slung beneath a dirigible.

Or from one of the lower portholes in a giant flying saucer.




V


There were clouds below that occasionally hid the Earth from sight. For
a minute or more they gazed in silence at the magnificent view.

"This wasn't built in a day," Jen Jervis said at last.

"I should say not," Don agreed. "Millions of years."

She looked at him sharply. "I wasn't talking about the age of the Earth.
I mean this room--this lookout post--whatever it is."

He grinned at her. "I agree with you there, too. I'm really a very
agreeable fellow, Miss Jervis. Obviously, whoever built it knew well in
advance that Superior was going to take off. They also knew how much of
it was going up and exactly where this would have to be built so it
would be at the edge."

"Under the edge, you mean, with a downward view."

"That's right. From a distance I'd say Superior looked as if someone had
cut the end off an orange. The flat part--where the cut was made--is the
surface and we're looking out from a piece of the convex skin."

"You put things so simply, Mr. Cort, that even a child could
understand," she said acidly.

"Thank you," he said complacently. He had remembered that whoever was
listening in for Military Intelligence through the tiny radio under his
shirt could have only a vague idea of what was going on. Any little word
pictures he could supply, therefore, would help them understand. He had
to risk the fact that his companion might think him a bit of an idiot.

Of course with this Geneva Jervis it was easy to lay himself open to the
scathing comment and the barbed retort. He imagined she was extremely
useful in her role as Girl Friday to Senator Bobby Thebold.

"I don't think this is the work of those boobies at the booby hatch,"
she was saying.

"I beg your pardon?"

"The Cavalier Institution of Applied Foolishness, whatever they call it.
They just wouldn't be capable of an undertaking of this scope."

"Oh, I agree. That's why I let you drag me away from the meeting. It was
a lot of pseudo-scientific malarkey. Old Doc Rubach, D.V.M., was going
on about the ultimote being connected to the thighbone, way up in the
