3


In the darkness before dawn an unaccustomed sound disturbed the solitude
that slumbered over the reedy marshes and the misty waters of the coast.
It was not a drowsy water-fowl nor a waking beast. It was a human who
struggled through the thick reeds, which were taller than a man's head.

It was a woman, had there been anyone to see, tall and yellow-haired,
her splendid limbs molded by her draggled tunic. Octavia had escaped in
good earnest, every outraged fiber of her still tingling from her
experience in a captivity that had become unendurable.

Jehungir's mastery of her had been bad enough; but with deliberate
fiendishness Jehungir had given her to a nobleman whose name was a
byword for degeneracy even in Khawarizm.

Octavia's resilient flesh crawled and quivered at her memories.
Desperation had nerved her climb from Jelal Khan's castle on a rope made
of strips from torn tapestries, and chance had led her to a picketed
horse. She had ridden all night, and dawn found her with a foundered
steed on the swampy shores of the sea. Quivering with the abhorrence of
being dragged back to the revolting destiny planned for her by Jelal
Khan, she plunged into the morass, seeking a hiding-place from the
pursuit she expected. When the reeds grew thinner around her and the
water rose about her thighs, she saw the dim loom of an island ahead of
her. A broad span of water lay between, but she did not hesitate. She
waded out until the low waves were lapping about her waist; then she
struck out strongly, swimming with a vigor that promised unusual
endurance.

As she neared the island, she saw that it rose sheer from the water in
castle-like cliffs. She reached them at last, but found neither ledge to
stand on below the water, not to cling to above. She swam on, following
the curve of the cliffs, the strain of her long flight beginning to
weight her limbs. Her hands fluttered along the sheer stone, and
suddenly they found a depression. With a sobbing gasp of relief, she
pulled herself out of the water and clung there, a dripping white
goddess in the dim starlight.

She had come upon what seemed to be steps carved in the cliff. Up them
she went, flattening herself against the stone as she caught the faint
clack of muffled oars. She strained her eyes and thought she made out a
vague bulk moving toward the reedy point she had just quitted. But it
was too far away for her to be sure, in the darkness, and presently the
faint sound ceased, and she continued her climb. If it were her
pursuers, she knew of no better course than to hide on the island. She
knew that most of the islands off that marshy coast were uninhabited.
This might be a pirate's lair, but even pirates would be preferable to
the beast she had escaped.

A vagrant thought crossed her mind as she climbed, in which she mentally
compared her former master with the _kozak_ chief with whom--by
compulsion--she had shamelessly flirted in the pavilions of the camp by
Fort Ghori, where the Hyrkanian lords had parleyed with the warriors of
the steppes. His burning gaze had frightened and humiliated her, but his
cleanly elemental fierceness set him above Jelal Khan, a monster such as
only an overly opulent civilization can produce.

She scrambled up over the cliff edge and looked timidly at the dense
shadows which confronted her. The trees grew close to the cliffs,
presenting a solid mass of blackness. Something whirred above her head
and she cowered, even though realizing it was only a bat.

She did not like the look of those ebony shadows, but she set her teeth
and went toward them, trying not to think of snakes. Her bare feet made
no sound in the spongy loam under the trees. Once among them, the
darkness closed frighteningly about her. She had not taken a dozen steps
when she was no longer able to look back and see the cliffs and the sea
beyond. A few steps more and she became hopelessly confused and lost her
sense of direction. Through the tangled branches not even a star peered.
She groped and floundered on, blindly, and then came to a sudden halt.

Somewhere ahead there began the rhythmical booming of a drum. It was not
such a sound as she would have expected to hear in that time and place.
Then she forgot it as she was aware of a presence near her. She could
not see, but she knew that something was standing beside her in the
darkness.

With a stifled cry she shrank back, and as she did so, something that
even in her panic she recognized as a human arm curved about her waist.
She screamed and threw all her supple young strength into a wild lunge
for freedom, but her captor caught her up like a child, crushing her
frantic resistance with ease. The silence with which her frenzied pleas
and protests were received added to her terror as she felt herself being
carried through the darkness toward the distant drum which still pulsed
and muttered.




4


As the first tinge of dawn reddened the sea, a small boat with a
solitary occupant approached the cliffs. The man in the boat was a
picturesque figure. A crimson scarf was knotted about his head; his
wide silk breeches, of flaming hue, were upheld by a broad sash which
likewise supported a scimitar in a shagreen scabbard. His gilt-worked
leather boots suggested the horseman rather than the seaman, but he
handled his boat with skill. Through his widely open white silk shirt
showed his broad muscular breast, burned brown by the sun.

The muscles of his heavy bronzed arms rippled as he pulled the oars with
an almost feline ease of motion. A fierce vitality that was evident in
each feature and motion set him apart from common men; yet his
expression was neither savage nor somber, though the smoldering blue
eyes hinted at ferocity easily wakened. This was Conan, who had wandered
into the armed camps of the _kozaks_ with no other possession than his
wits and his sword, and who had carved his way to leadership among them.

He paddled to the carven stair as one familiar with his environs, and
moored the boat to a projection of the rock. Then he went up the worn
steps without hesitation. He was keenly alert, not because he
consciously suspected hidden danger, but because alertness was a part of
him, whetted by the wild existence he followed.

What Ghaznavi had considered animal intuition or some sixth sense was
merely the razor-edge faculties and savage wit of the barbarian. Conan
had no instinct to tell him that men were watching him from a covert
among the reeds of the mainland.

As he climbed the cliff, one of these men breathed deeply and stealthily
lifted a bow. Jehungir caught his wrist and hissed an oath into his ear.
'Fool! Will you betray us? Don't you realize he is out of range? Let him
get upon the island. He will go looking for the girl. We will stay here
awhile. He _may_ have sensed our presence or guessed our plot. He may
have warriors hidden somewhere. We will wait. In an hour, if nothing
suspicious occurs, we'll row up to the foot of the stair and await him
there. If he does not return in a reasonable time, some of us will go
upon the island and hunt him down. But I do not wish to do that if it
can be helped. Some of us are sure to die if we have to go into the bush
after him. I had rather catch him descending the stair, where we can
feather him with arrows from a safe distance.'

Meanwhile the unsuspecting _kozak_ had plunged into the forest. He went
silently in his soft leather boots, his gaze sifting every shadow in
eagerness to catch sight of the splendid tawny-haired beauty of whom he
had dreamed ever since he had seen her in the pavilion of Jehungir Agha
by Fort Ghori. He would have desired her even if she had displayed
repugnance toward him. But her cryptic smiles and glances had fired his
blood, and with all the lawless violence which was his heritage he
desired that white-skinned golden-haired woman of civilization.

He had been on Xapur before. Less than a month ago he had held a secret
conclave here with a pirate crew. He knew that he was approaching a
point where he could see the mysterious ruins which gave the island its
name, and he wondered if he would find the girl hiding among them. Even
with the thought he stopped as though struck dead.

Ahead of him, among the trees, rose something that his reason told him
was not possible. _It was a great dark green wall, with towers rearing
beyond the battlements._

Conan stood paralyzed in the disruption of the faculties which
demoralizes anyone who is confronted by an impossible negation of
sanity. He doubted neither his sight nor his reason, but something was
monstrously out of joint. Less than a month ago only broken ruins had
showed among the trees. What human hands could rear such a mammoth pile
as now met his eyes, in the few weeks which had elapsed? Besides, the
buccaneers who roamed Vilayet ceaselessly would have learned of any work
going on on such a stupendous scale, and would have informed the
_kozaks_.

There was no explaining this thing, but it was so. He was on Xapur and
that fantastic heap of towering masonry was on Xapur, and all was
madness and paradox; yet it was all true.

He wheeled back through the jungle, down the carven stair and across the
blue waters to the distant camp at the mouth of the Zaporoska. In that
