MRS. B.

It is by suffering none of these decaying bodies to be dissipated, but
in applying them duly to the soil. It is by a judicious preparation of
the soil, which consists in fitting it either for the general purposes
of vegetation, or for that of the particular seed which is to be sown.
Thus, if the soil be too wet, it may be drained; if too loose and sandy,
it may be rendered more consistent and retentive of water by the
addition of clay or loam; it may be enriched by chalk, or any kind of
calcareous earth. On soils thus improved, manures will act with double
efficacy, and if attention be paid to spread them on the ground at a
proper season of the year, to mix them with the soil so that they may be
generally diffused through it, to destroy the weeds which might
appropriate these nutritive principles to their own use, to remove the
stones which would impede the growth of the plant, &c. we may obtain a
produce an hundred fold more abundant than the earth would spontaneously
supply.

EMILY.

We have a very striking instance of this in the scanty produce of
uncultivated commons, compared to the rich crops of meadows which are
occasionally manured.

CAROLINE.

But, Mrs. B., though experience daily proves the advantage of
cultivation, there is still a difficulty which I cannot get over.
A certain quantity of elementary principles exist in nature, which it is
not in the power of man either to augment or diminish. Of these
principles you have taught us that both the animal and vegetable
creation are composed. Now the more of them is taken up by the vegetable
kingdom, the less, it would seem, will remain for animals; and,
therefore, the more populous the earth becomes, the less it will
produce.

MRS. B.

Your reasoning is very plausible; but experience every where contradicts
the inference you would draw from it; for we find that the animal and
vegetable kingdoms, instead of thriving, as you would suppose, at each
other's expense, always increase and multiply together. For you should
recollect that animals can derive the elements of which they are formed
only through the medium of vegetables. And you must allow that your
conclusion would be valid only if every particle of the several
principles that could possibly be spared from other purposes were
employed in the animal and vegetable creations. Now we have reason to
believe that a much greater proportion of these principles than is
required for such purposes remains either in an elementary state, or
engaged in a less useful mode of combination in the mineral kingdom.
Possessed of such immense resources as the atmosphere and the waters
afford us, for oxygen, hydrogen, and carbon, so far from being in danger
of working up all our simple materials, we cannot suppose that we shall
ever bring agriculture to such a degree of perfection as to require the
whole of what these resources could supply.

Nature, however, in thus furnishing us with an inexhaustible stock of
raw materials, leaves it in some measure to the ingenuity of man to
appropriate them to its own purposes. But, like a kind parent, she
stimulates him to exertion, by setting the example and pointing out the
way. For it is on the operations of nature that all the improvements of
art are founded. The art of agriculture consists, therefore, in
discovering the readiest method of obtaining the several principles,
either from their grand sources, air and water, or from the
decomposition of organised bodies; and in appropriating them in the best
manner to the purposes of vegetation.

EMILY.

But, among the sources of nutritive principles, I am surprised that you
do not mention the earth itself, as it contains abundance of coals,
which are chiefly composed of carbon.

MRS. B.

Though coals abound in carbon, they cannot, on account of their hardness
and impermeable texture, be immediately subservient to the purposes of
vegetation.

EMILY.

No; but by their combustion carbonic acid is produced; and this entering
into various combinations on the surface of the earth, may, perhaps,
assist in promoting vegetation.

MRS. B.

Probably it may in some degree; but at any rate the quantity of
nourishment which vegetables may derive from that source can be but very
trifling, and must entirely depend on local circumstances.

CAROLINE.

Perhaps the smoky atmosphere of London is the cause of vegetation being
so forward and so rich in its vicinity?

MRS. B.

I rather believe that this circumstance proceeds from the very ample
supply of manure, assisted, perhaps, by the warmth and shelter which the
town affords. Far from attributing any good to the smoky atmosphere of
London, I confess I like to anticipate the time when we shall have made
such progress in the art of managing combustion, that every particle of
carbon will be consumed, and the smoke destroyed at the moment of its
production. We may then expect to have the satisfaction of seeing the
atmosphere of London as clear as that of the country. --But to return to
our subject: I hope that you are now convinced that we shall not easily
experience a deficiency of nutritive elements to fertilise the earth,
and that, provided we are but industrious in applying them to the best
advantage by improving the art of agriculture, no limits can be assigned
to the fruits that we may expect to reap from our labours.

CAROLINE.

Yes; I am perfectly satisfied in that respect, and I can assure you that
I feel already much more interested in the progress and improvement of
agriculture.

EMILY.

I have frequently thought that the culture of the land was not
considered as a concern of sufficient importance. Manufactures always
take the lead; and health and innocence are frequently sacrificed to the
prospect of a more profitable employment. It has often grieved me to see
the poor manufacturers crowded together in close rooms, and confined for
the whole day to the most uniform and sedentary employment, instead of
being engaged in that innocent and salutary kind of labour, which Nature
seems to have assigned to man for the immediate acquirement of comfort,
and for the preservation of his existence. I am sure that you agree with
me in thinking so, Mrs. B.?

MRS. B.

I am entirely of your opinion, my dear, in regard to the importance of
agriculture; but as the conveniences of life, which we are all enjoying,
are not derived merely from the soil, I am far from wishing to
depreciate manufactures. Besides, as the labour of one man is sufficient
to produce food for several, those whose industry is not required in
tillage must do something in return for the food that is provided for
them. They exchange, consequently, the accommodations for the
necessaries of life. Thus the carpenter and the weaver lodge and clothe
the peasant, who supplies them with their daily bread. The greater stock
of provisions, therefore, which the husbandman produces, the greater is
the quantity of accommodation which the artificer prepares. Such are the
happy effects which naturally result from civilised society. It would be
wiser, therefore, to endeavour to improve the situation of those who are
engaged in manufactures, than to indulge in vain declamations on the
hardships to which they are too frequently exposed.

But we must not yet take our leave of the subject of agriculture; we
have prepared the soil, it remains for us now to sow the seed. In this
operation we must be careful not to bury it too deep in the ground, as
the access of air is absolutely necessary to its germination; the earth
must, therefore, lie loose and light over it, in order that the air may
penetrate. Hence the use of ploughing and digging, harrowing and raking,
&c. A certain degree of heat and moisture, such as usually takes place
in the spring, is likewise necessary.

CAROLINE.

One would imagine you were going to describe the decomposition of an old
plant, rather than the formation of a new one; for you have enumerated
all the requisites of fermentation.

MRS. B.

Do you forget, my dear, that the young plant derives its existence from
the destruction of the seed, and that it is actually by the saccharine
fermentation that the latter is decomposed?

CAROLINE.

True; I wonder that I did not recollect that. The temperature and
moisture required for the germination of the seed is then employed in
producing the saccharine fermentation within it?

MRS. B.

Certainly. But, in order to understand the nature of germination, you
should be acquainted with the different parts of which the seed is
composed. The external covering or envelope contains, besides the germ
of the future plant, the substance which is to constitute its first
nourishment; this substance, which is called the _parenchyma_, consists
of fecula, mucilage, and oil, as we formerly observed.

The seed is generally divided into two compartments, called _lobes_, or
_cotyledons_, as is exemplified by this bean (PLATE XV. Fig. 1.)--the
dark-coloured kind of string which divides the lobes is called the
_radicle_, as it forms the root of the plant, and it is from a
contiguous substance, called _plumula_, which is enclosed within the
lobes, that the stem arises. The figure and size of the seed depend very
much upon the cotyledons; these vary in number in different seeds; some
have only one, as wheat, oats, barley, and all the grasses; some have
three, others six. But most seeds, as, for instance, all the varieties
of beans, have two cotyledons. When the seed is buried in the earth, at
any temperature above 40 degrees, it imbibes water, which softens and
swells the lobes; it then absorbs oxygen, which combines with some of
its carbon, and is returned in the form of carbonic acid. This loss of
carbon increases the comparative proportion of hydrogen and oxygen in
the seed, and excites the saccharine fermentation, by which the
parenchymatous matter is converted into a kind of sweet emulsion. In
this form it is carried into the radicle by vessels appropriated to that
purpose; and in the mean time, the fermentation having caused the seed
to burst, the cotyledons are rent asunder, the radicle strikes into the
ground and becomes the root of the plant, and hence the fermented liquid
is conveyed to the plumula, whose vessels have been previously distended
by the heat of the fermentation. The plumula being thus swelled, as it
were, by the emulsive fluid, raises itself and springs up to the surface
of the earth, bearing with it the cotyledons, which, as soon as they
come in contact with the air, spread themselves, and are transformed
into leaves. --If we go into the garden, we shall probably find some
seeds in the state which I have described--

  [Illustration: Plate XV. Vol. II. p. 250

  Germination.
  Fig. 1 & 2.
  A.B Cotyledons.
  C Envelope.
  D Radicle.

  Fig. 3.
  A.B Cotyledons.
  C Plumula.
  D Radicle.

  Fig. 4.
  A.B. Cotyledons.
  C Plumula.
  D Radicle.

  Fig. 5. Apparatus to illustrate the mechanism of breathing.
  A.A Glass Bell.
  B Bladder representing the lungs.
  C Bladder representing the Diaphragm.]

EMILY.

Here are some lupines that are just making their appearance above
ground.

MRS. B.

We shall take up several of them to observe their different degrees of
progress in vegetation. Here is one that has but recently burst its
envelope--do you see the little radicle striking downwards? (PLATE XV.
Fig. 2.) In this the plumula is not yet visible. But here is another in
a greater state of forwardness--the plumula, or stem, has risen out of
the ground, and the cotyledons are converted into seed leaves. (PLATE
XV. Fig. 3.)

CAROLINE.

These leaves are very thick and clumsy, and unlike the other leaves,
which I perceive are just beginning to appear.

MRS. B.

It is because they retain the remains of the parenchyma, with which they
still continue to nourish the young plant, as it has not yet sufficient
roots and strength to provide for its sustenance from the soil. --But,
in this third lupine (PLATE XV. Fig. 4.), the radicle had sunk deep
into the earth, and sent out several shoots, each of which is furnished
with a mouth to suck up nourishment from the soil; the function of the
original leaves, therefore, being no longer required, they are gradually
decaying, and the plumula is become a regular stem, shooting out small
branches, and spreading its foliage.

EMILY.

There seems to be a very striking analogy between a seed and an egg;
both require an elevation of temperature to be brought to life; both at
first supply with aliment the organised being which they produce; and as
soon as this has attained sufficient strength to procure its own
nourishment, the egg-shell breaks, whilst in the plant the seed-leaves
fall off.

MRS. B.

There is certainly some resemblance between these processes; and when
you become acquainted with animal chemistry, you will frequently be
struck with its analogy to that of the vegetable kingdom.

As soon as the young plant feeds from the soil, it requires the
assistance of leaves, which are the organs by which it throws off its
super-abundant fluid; this secretion is much more plentiful in the
vegetable than in the animal creation, and the great extent of surface
of the foliage of plants is admirably calculated for carrying it on in
sufficient quantities. This transpired fluid consists of little more
than water. The sap, by this process, is converted into a liquid of
greater consistence, which is fit to be assimilated to its several
parts.

EMILY.

Vegetation, then, must be essentially injured by destroying the leaves
of the plant?

MRS. B.

Undoubtedly; it not only diminishes the transpiration, but also the
absorption by the roots; for the quantity of sap absorbed is always in
proportion to the quantity of fluid thrown off by transpiration. You
see, therefore, the necessity that a young plant should unfold its
leaves as soon as it begins to derive its nourishment from the soil;
and, accordingly, you will find that those lupines which have dropped
their seed-leaves, and are no longer fed by the parenchyma, have spread
their foliage, in order to perform the office just described.

But I should inform you that this function of transpiration seems to be
confined to the upper surface of the leaves, whilst, on the contrary,
the lower surface, which is more rough and uneven, and furnished with a
kind of hair or down, is destined to absorb moisture, or such other
ingredients as the plant derives from the atmosphere.

As soon as a young plant makes its appearance above ground, light, as
well as air, becomes necessary to its preservation. Light is essential
to the development of the colours, and to the thriving of the plant. You
may have often observed what a predilection vegetables have for the
light. If you make any plants grow in a room, they all spread their
leaves, and extend their branches towards the windows.

CAROLINE.

And many plants close up their flowers as soon as it is dark.

EMILY.

But may not this be owing to the cold and dampness of the evening air?

MRS. B.

That does not appear to be the case; for in a course of curious
experiments, made by Mr. Senebier, of Geneva, on plants which he reared
by lamp-light, he found that the flowers closed their petals whenever
the lamps were extinguished.

EMILY.

But pray, why is air essential to vegetation, plants do not breathe it
like animals?

MRS. B.

At least not in the same manner; but they certainly derive some
principles from the atmosphere, and yield others to it. Indeed, it is
chiefly owing to the action of the atmosphere and the vegetable kingdom
on each other, that the air continues always fit for respiration. But
you will understand this better when I have explained the effect of
water on plants.

I have said that water forms the chief nourishment of plants; it is the
basis not only of the sap, but of all the vegetable juices. Water is the
vehicle which carries into the plant the various salts and other
ingredients required for the formation and support of the vegetable
system. Nor is this all; part of the water itself is decomposed by the
organs of the plant; the hydrogen becomes a constituent part of oil, of
extract, of colouring matter, &c. whilst a portion of the oxygen enters
into the formation of mucilage, of fecula, of sugar, and of vegetable
acids. But the greater part of the oxygen, proceeding from the
decomposition of the water, is converted into a gaseous state by the
caloric disengaged from the hydrogen during its condensation in the
formation of the vegetable materials. In this state the oxygen is
transpired by the leaves of plants when exposed to the sun's rays. Thus
you find that the decomposition of water, by the organs of the plant, is
not only a means of supplying it with its chief ingredient, hydrogen,
but at the same time of replenishing the atmosphere with oxygen,
a principle which requires continual renovation, to make up for the
great consumption of it occasioned by the numerous oxygenations,
combustions, and respirations, that are constantly taking place on the
surface of the globe.

EMILY.

What a striking instance of the harmony of nature.

MRS. B.

And how admirable the design of Providence, who makes every different
part of the creation thus contribute to the support and renovation of
each other!

But the intercourse of the vegetable and animal kingdoms through the
medium of the atmosphere extends still further. Animals, in breathing,
not only consume the oxygen of the air, but load it with carbonic acid,
which, if accumulated in the atmosphere, would, in a short time, render
it totally unfit for respiration. Here the vegetable kingdom again
interferes; it attracts and decomposes the carbonic acid, retains the
carbon for its own purposes, and returns the oxygen for ours.

CAROLINE.

How interesting this is! I do not know a more beautiful illustration of
the wisdom which is displayed in the laws of nature.

MRS. B.

Faint and imperfect as are the ideas which our limited perceptions
enable us to form of divine wisdom, still they cannot fail to inspire us
with awe and admiration. What, then, would be our feelings, were the
complete system of nature at once displayed before us! So magnificent a
scene would probably be too great for our limited and imperfect
comprehension, and it is no doubt among the wise dispensations of
Providence, to veil the splendour of a glory with which we should be
overpowered. But it is well suited to the nature of a rational being to
explore, step by step, the works of the creation, to endeavour to
connect them into harmonious systems; and, in a word, to trace in the
chain of beings, the kindred ties and benevolent design which unites its
various links, and secure its preservation.

CAROLINE.

But of what nature are the organs of plants which are endued with such
wonderful powers?

MRS. B.

They are so minute that their structure, as well as the mode in which
they perform their functions, generally elude our examination; but we
may consider them as so many vessels or apparatus appropriated to
perform, with the assistance of the principle of life, certain chemical
processes, by means of which these vegetable compounds are generated. We
may, however, trace the tannin, resins, gum, mucilage, and some other
vegetable materials, in the organised arrangement of plants, in which
they form the bark, the wood, the leaves, flowers, and seeds.

The _bark_ is composed of the _epidermis_, the _parenchyma_, and the
_cortical layers_.

The epidermis is the external covering of the plant. It is a thin
transparent membrane, consisting of a number of slender fibres, crossing
each other, and forming a kind of net-work. When of a white glossy
nature, as in several species of trees, in the stems of corn and of
seeds, it is composed of a thin coating of siliceous earth, which
accounts for the strength and hardness of those long and slender stems.
Sir H. Davy was led to the discovery of the siliceous nature of the
epidermis of such plants, by observing the singular phenomenon of sparks
of fire emitted by the collision of ratan canes with which two boys were
fighting in a dark room. On analysing the epidermis of the cane, he
found it to be almost entirely siliceous.

CAROLINE.

With iron then, a cane, I suppose, will strike fire very easily?

MRS. B.

I understand that it will. --In ever-greens the epidermis is mostly
resinous, and in some few plants is formed of wax. The resin, from its
want of affinity for water, tends to preserve the plant from the
destructive effects of violent rains, severe climates, or inclement
seasons, to which this species of vegetables is peculiarly exposed.

EMILY.

Resin must preserve wood just like a varnish, as it is the essential
ingredient of varnishes?

MRS. B.

Yes; and by this means it prevents likewise all unnecessary expenditure
of moisture.

The parenchyma is immediately beneath the epidermis; it is that green
rind which appears when you strip a branch of any tree or shrub of its
external coat of bark. The parenchyma is not confined to the stem or
branches, but extends over every part of the plant. It forms the green
matter of the leaves, and is composed of tubes filled with a peculiar
juice.

The cortical layers are immediately in contact with the wood; they
abound with tannin and gallic acid, and consist of small vessels through
which the sap descends after being elaborated in the leaves. The
cortical layers are annually renewed, the old bark being converted into
wood.

EMILY.

But through what vessels does the sap ascend?

MRS. B.

That function is performed by the tubes of the alburnum, or wood, which
is immediately beneath the cortical layers. The wood is composed of
woody fibre, mucilage, and resin. The fibres are disposed in two ways;
some of them longitudinally, and these form what is called the silver
grain of the wood. The others, which are concentric, are called the
spurious grain. These last are disposed in layers, from the number of
which the age of the tree may be computed, a new one being produced
annually by the conversion of the bark into wood. The oldest, and
consequently most internal part of the alburnum, is called heart-wood;
it appears to be dead, at least no vital functions are discernible in
it. It is through the tubes of the living alburnum that the sap rises.
These, therefore, spread into the leaves, and there communicate with the
extremities of the vessels of the cortical layers, into which they pour
their contents.

CAROLINE.

Of what use, then, are the tubes of the parenchyma, since neither the
ascending nor descending sap passes through them?

MRS. B.

They are supposed to perform the important function of secreting from
the sap the peculiar juices from which the plant more immediately
derives its nourishment. These juices are very conspicuous, as the
vessels which contain them are much larger than those through which the
sap circulates. The peculiar juices of plants differ much in their
nature, not only in different species of vegetables, but frequently in
different parts of the same individual plant: they are sometimes
saccharine, as in the sugar-cane, sometimes resinous, as in firs and
evergreens, sometimes of a milky appearance, as in the laurel.

EMILY.

I have often observed, that in breaking a young shoot, or in bruising a
leaf of laurel, a milky juice will ooze out in great abundance.

MRS. B.

And it is by making incisions in the bark that pitch, tar, and
turpentine are obtained from fir-trees. The durability of this species
of wood is chiefly owing to the resinous nature of its peculiar juices.
The volatile oils have, in a great measure, the same preservative
effects, as they defend the parts, with which they are connected, from
the attack of insects. This tribe seems to have as great an aversion to
perfumes, as the human species have delight in them. They scarcely ever
attack any odoriferous parts of plants, and it is not uncommon to see
every leaf of a tree destroyed by a blight, whilst the blossoms remain
untouched. Cedar, sandal, and all aromatic woods, are on this account of
great durability.

EMILY.

But the wood of the oak, which is so much esteemed for its durability,
has, I believe, no smell. Does it derive this quality from its hardness
alone?

MRS. B.

Not entirely; for the chesnut, though considerably harder and firmer
than the oak, is not so lasting. The durability of the oak is,
I believe, in a great measure owing to its having very little
heart-wood, the alburnum preserving its vital functions longer than in
other trees.

CAROLINE.

If incisions are made into the alburnum and cortical layers, may not the
ascending and descending sap be procured in the same manner as the
peculiar juice is from the vessels of the parenchyma?

MRS. B.

Yes; but in order to obtain specimens of these fluids, in any quantity,
the experiment must be made in the spring, when the sap circulates with
the greatest energy. For this purpose a small bent glass tube should be
introduced into the incision, through which the sap may flow without
mixing with any of the other juices of the tree. From the bark the sap
will flow much more plentifully than from the wood, as the ascending sap
is much more liquid, more abundant, and more rapid in its motion than
that which descends; for the latter having been deprived by the
operation of the leaves of a considerable part of its moisture, contains
a much greater proportion of solid matter, which retards its motion. It
does not appear that there is any excess of descending sap, as none ever
exudes from the roots of plants; this process, therefore, seems to be
carried on only in proportion to the wants of the plant, and the sap
descends no further, and in no greater quantity, than is required to
nourish the several organs. Therefore, though the sap rises and descends
in the plant, it does not appear to undergo a real circulation.

The last of the organs of plants is the _flower_, or _blossom_, which
produces the _fruits_ and _seed_. These may be considered as the
ultimate purpose of nature in the vegetable creation. From fruits and
seeds animals derive both a plentiful source of immediate nourishment,
and an ample provision for the reproduction of the same means of
subsistence.

The seed which forms the final product of mature plants, we have already
examined as constituting the first rudiments of future vegetation.

These are the principal organs of vegetation, by means of which the
several chemical processes which are carried on during the life of the
plant are performed.

EMILY.

But how are the several principles which enter into the composition of
vegetables so combined by the organs of the plant as to be converted
into vegetable matter?

MRS. B.

By chemical processes, no doubt; but the apparatus in which they are
performed is so extremely minute as completely to elude our examination.
We can form an opinion, therefore, only by the result of these
operations. The sap is evidently composed of water, absorbed by the
roots, and holding in solution the various principles which it derives
from the soil. From the roots the sap ascends through the tubes of the
alburnum into the stem, and thence branches out to every extremity of
the plant. Together with the sap circulates a certain quantity of
carbonic acid, which is gradually disengaged from the former by the
internal heat of the plant.

CAROLINE.

What! have vegetables a peculiar heat, analogous to animal heat?

MRS. B.

It is a circumstance that has long been suspected; but late experiments
have decided beyond a doubt that vegetable heat is considerably above
that of unorganised matter in winter, and below it in summer. The wood
of a tree is about sixty degrees, when the thermometer is seventy or
eighty degrees. And the bark, though so much exposed, is seldom below
forty in winter.

It is from the sap, after it has been elaborated by the leaves, that
vegetables derive their nourishment; in its progress through the plant
from the leaves to the roots, it deposits in the several sets of vessels
with which it communicates, the materials on which the growth and
nourishment of each plant depends. It is thus that the various peculiar
juices, saccharine, oily, mucous, acid, and colouring, are formed; as
also the more solid parts, fecula, woody fibre, tannin, resins, concrete
salts; in a word, all the immediate materials of vegetables, as well as
the organised parts of plants, which latter, besides the power of
secreting these from the sap for the general purpose of the plant, have
also that of applying them to their own particular nourishment.

EMILY.

But why should the process of vegetation take place only at one season
of the year, whilst a total inaction prevails during the other?

MRS. B.

Heat is such an important chemical agent, that its effect, as such,
might perhaps alone account for the impulse which the spring gives to
vegetation. But, in order to explain the mechanism of that operation, it
has been supposed that the warmth of the spring dilates the vessels of
plants, and produces a kind of vacuum, into which the sap (which had
remained in a state of inaction in the trunk during the winter) rises:
this is followed by the ascent of the sap contained in the roots, and
room is thus made for fresh sap, which the roots, in their turn, pump up
from the soil. This process goes on till the plant blossoms and bears
fruit, which terminates its summer career: but when the cold weather
sets in, the fibres and vessels contract, the leaves wither, and are no
longer able to perform their office of transpiration; and, as this
secretion stops, the roots cease to absorb sap from the soil. If the
plant be an annual, its life then terminates; if not, it remains in a
state of torpid inaction during the winter; or the only internal motion
that takes place is that of a small quantity of resinous juice, which
slowly rises from the stem into the branches, and enlarges their buds
during the winter.

CAROLINE.

Yet, in evergreens, vegetation must continue throughout the year.

MRS. B.

Yes; but in winter it goes on in a very imperfect manner, compared to
the vegetation of spring and summer.

We have dwelt much longer on the history of vegetable chemistry than I
had intended; but we have at length, I think, brought the subject to a
conclusion.

CAROLINE.

I rather wonder that you did not reserve the account of the
fermentations for the conclusion; for the decomposition of vegetables
naturally follows their death, and can hardly, it seems, be introduced
with so much propriety at any other period.

MRS. B.

It is difficult to determine at what point precisely it may be most
eligible to enter on the history of vegetation; every part of the
subject is so closely connected, and forms such an uninterrupted chain,
that it is by no means easy to divide it. Had I begun with the
germination of the seed, which, at first view, seems to be the most
proper arrangement, I could not have explained the nature and
fermentation of the seed, or have described the changes which manure
must undergo, in order to yield the vegetable elements. To understand
the nature of germination, it is necessary, I think, previously to
decompose the parent plant, in order to become acquainted with the
materials required for that purpose. I hope, therefore, that, upon
second consideration, you will find that the order which I have adopted,
though apparently less correct, is in fact the best calculated for the
elucidation of the subject.




CONVERSATION XXIII.

ON THE COMPOSITION OF ANIMALS.


MRS. B.

We are now come to the last branch of chemistry, which comprehends the
most complicated order of compound beings. This is the animal creation,
the history of which cannot but excite the highest degree of curiosity
and interest, though we often fail in attempting to explain the laws by
which it is governed.

EMILY.

But since all animals ultimately derive their nourishment from
vegetables, the chemistry of this order of beings must consist merely in
the conversion of vegetable into animal matter.

MRS. B.

Very true; but the manner in which this is effected is, in a great
measure, concealed from our observation. This process is called
_animalisation_, and is performed by peculiar organs. The difference of
the animal and vegetable kingdoms does not however depend merely on a
different arrangement of combinations. A new principle abounds in the
animal kingdom, which is but rarely and in very small quantities found
in vegetables; this is nitrogen. There is likewise in animal substances
a greater and more constant proportion of phosphoric acid, and other
saline matters. But these are not essential to the formation of animal
matter.

CAROLINE.

Animal compounds contain, then, four fundamental principles; oxygen,
hydrogen, carbon, and nitrogen?

MRS. B.

Yes; and these form the immediate materials of animals, which are
