customs; and though it cost us some uneasy sensations at first, we
must learn to bear them patiently; a little time will reward us for
our forbearance, by a reestablishment of health and spirits.

I shall now proceed to examine the opposite class of nervous
complaints: or such as do really depend on debility, or an asthenic
state of the system. These may be divided into two orders; viz. those
of direct, and those of indirect debility. I shall first consider
those of direct debility.

Though these complaints originate from a deficiency of stimulus, yet
it is very seldom from a deficiency of the common stimulant powers.
The only people, who in general labour under this deficiency of the
common stimulants, are the poor; they are seldom troubled with
nervous complaints; their daily exercise, and constant attention to
procure common necessaries, prevent their feeling what so grievously
afflicts the rich and luxurious. These complaints arise chiefly from
a deficiency of mental stimuli. The most common cause of them, and
whose effects are the most difficult to remove, is to be looked for
in the mind.

The passions and emotions, when exercised with moderation, and kept
within proper bounds, are the sources of life and activity; without
these precious affections, we should be reduced to a kind of
vegetation, equally removed from pleasure and from pain. For want of
these elastic springs, the animal spirits lose their regularity and
play; life becomes a lethargic sleep, and we fall into indifference
and languor.

If then the passions are so necessary to the support of the health of
the body, when in a proper degree, can we expect, that when they are
inordinate or excessive, or even deficient, we shall escape with
impunity? tumultuous passions are like torrents, which overflow their
bounds, and tear up every thing before them; and mournful experience
convinces us, that these effects of the mind are easily communicated
to the body. We ought, therefore, to be particularly on our guard
against their seduction.

   "'Tis the great art of life to manage well
   The restless mind."

It is particularly in their infancy, if it may be so called, that we
ought to be upon our guard against their seduction; they are then
soothing and insidious; but if we suffer them to gain strength, and
establish their empire, reason, obscured and overcome, rests in a
shameful dependence upon the senses; her light becomes too faint to
be seen, and her voice too feeble to be heard; and the soul, hurried
on by an impulse to which no obstacle is presented, communicates to
the body its languor and debility. The passions, by which the body is
chiefly affected, are, joy, grief, hope, fear, love, hatred, and
anger. Any others may be reduced to some of these, or are compounded
of them. The pleasurable passions produce strong excitement of the
body, while the depressing passions diminish the excitement; indeed
it would seem that grief is only a diminution of joy, as cold is of
heat; when this passion exists in a proper degree, then we feel no
particular exhilarating sensation, but our spirits and health are
good: we cannot doubt, however, that we are excited by a pleasant
sensation, though we are unable to perceive it. In the same manner,
when heat acts moderately, or is about the degree we call temperate,
we do not perceive its effects on the body, though there can be no
doubt, that the body is under the influence of its stimulus, and
powerfully excited by it; for when it is diminished, or cold applied,
we feel a deficiency of excitement, and become afterwards more
sensible of heat afterwards applied.

The same takes place with respect to joy and grief, and proves, I
think, clearly, that the one is only a diminution of the other, and
that they are not different passions. When the body has been exposed
to severe cold, the excitability becomes so much accumulated with
respect to heat, that if it be afterwards applied too powerfully, a
violent action, with a rapid exhaustion of the excitability, which
ends in mortification, or death of the part, will take place. We
should therefore apply heat in the gentlest manner possible, and
gradually exhaust the morbidly accumulated excitability.

In the same manner, when the body has been under the influence of
violent grief, any sudden joy has been known to overpower the system,
and even produce instant death. We have an instance in history, of a
mother being plunged into the extreme of grief, on being informed
that her son was slain in battle; but when news was brought her, that
he was alive, and well, the effect upon her spirits was such, as to
bring on instant death. This event ought to have been unfolded to her
in the most gradual manner; she should have been told, for instance,
that he was severely wounded; but that it was not certain he was
dead; then that there was a report he was living, which should have
been gradually confirmed, as she could bear it. The same observations
may be made, with respect to hope and fear, or despair; the former is
an exciting passion, the latter, a depressing one; but the one is
only a lower degree of the other; for a moderate degree of hope
produces a pleasant state of serenity of the mind, and contributes to
the health of the body; but a diminution of it weakens; and a great
degree of despair so accumulates the excitability of the system, as
to render it liable to be overpowered by any sudden hope or joy
afterwards applied. What proves that joy and hope act by stimulating,
and grief and despair by withdrawing stimulant action from the body,
is, that the former exhaust excitability, while the latter accumulate
it. Joy, for instance, does not render the system more liable to be
affected by hope, but the reverse; and the same may be said of hope.
In the same way, heat does not render the body more liable to be
affected by food, but the reverse. Both these are stimulants, and
exhaust the excitability. But after heat has been applied, if it be
followed by cold, a great degree of languor or weakness will take
place; because we have here a direct debility, added to indirect
debility. In the same way, grief succeeding joy, or despair
succeeding hope, produce a greater degree of dejection, both of mind
and body, than if they had not been preceded by these stimulant
passions; because here, direct debility is added to indirect. The
excitability is first exhausted, and then the stimulus is withdrawn.

We see then, that the passions of the mind act as stimulants to the
body, that, when in a proper degree, they tend to preserve it in
health; but when their action is either too powerful, or too small,
they produce the same effects as the other powers. We should
therefore naturally expect, that when there is a deficient action of
this kind of mental stimulus, or when the mind is under the influence
of the depressing passions, a predisposition to diseases of direct
debility would take place, and even these diseases be produced.
Accordingly we find a numerous class of nervous complaints
originating from these causes. Indeed, the undue action of the mental
stimulants, produces more quick alterations in the state of the
excitement, than that of the other exciting powers. Violent grief, or
vexation, will immediately suspend the powers of the stomach. If we
suppose a person in the best health, and highest good humour, sitting
down to dinner with his friends, if he suddenly receives any
afflicting news, his appetite is instantly gone, he cannot swallow a
morsel. If the same thing happens after he has made a hearty dinner,
the action of the stomach is suddenly suspended, and the whole
process of digestion stopped, and what he has eaten, lies a most
oppressive load. But this is not all: the whole circulation of the
blood becomes disturbed; the contraction and dilatation of the heart
become irregular; it flutters, and palpitates; hence all the
secretions become irregular, some of the glands acting too
powerfully, others not at all; hence the increased action of the
kidneys, and hence a burst of tears; hysterical affections, epilepsy,
and syncope, frequently succeed, in which every muscle of the body
becomes convulsed. Indeed, many terrible diseases originate from this
source, which were formerly ascribed to witchcraft, and the
possession of devils.

In slower, more silent, but longer continued grief, the effects are
similar, but not so violent. The functions of the stomach are more
gently disturbed, its juices vitiated; and acidity, and other
symptoms of indigestion, will show themselves. Hence no bland and
nutritive chyle is conveyed into the blood; whence emaciation and
general debility must follow; and the patient will at last die, as it
is said, of a broken heart.

Besides the disturbed state of the stomach, and bad digestion, there
can be no sleep in this state of mind; for,

   "Sleep, like the world, his ready visit pays,
   Where fortune smiles; the wretched he forsakes;
   Swift on his downy pinion flies from woe,
   And lights on lids unsullied with a tear."

Hence the animal spirits will not be recruited, nor the worn out
organs restored to vigour.

The minds of patients labouring under this division of nervous
diseases, are likewise in general filled with over anxiety concerning
their health; attentive to every feeling, they find, in trifles light
as air, strong confirmations of their apprehensions.

It is evident, that in these cases, a state of direct debility
prevails, attended with a morbidly accumulated excitability; hence,
those remedies afford relief, which produce a quick exhaustion of
this principle, and thus blunt the feelings, and lull the mind into
some degree of forgetfulness of its woes. Hence opium, tobacco, and
the fetid gums are often resorted to; and in the hands of a judicious
practitioner, they will afford great relief, provided he carefully
watch the patient, and prevent their abuse; for, if left to the
discretion of the patient, he finds that kind of relief which he has
long wished for; his moderation knows no bounds, and he is apt to
take them in such a manner, as to add indirect debility, to direct,
and thus bring on a state of exhausted excitability, while there is
still a diminished state of mental stimulants. This will cause his
spirits to be more depressed than ever; he will therefore increase
the dose, whether it be of opium, tobacco, or spirituous liquors, and
thus he will be hurried on, adding fuel to the flame, till his
exhausted excitability becomes irrecoverable, and he ends his days in
a miserable state of imbecility, if not by suicide. Hence, though
some of these narcotic stimulants, which exhaust the excitability,
and blunt the feelings, may be employed with advantage, in order to
prepare the mind for those changes, which the physician wishes to
produce, they should be used with the greatest caution, and never
left in any degree to the discretion of the patient. The cure,
however, depends chiefly on regulating the state of the mind, or
interrupting the attention of the patient; and diverting it, if
possible, to other objects than his own feeling.

Whatever aversion to application of any kind we may meet with in
patients of this class, we may be assured that nothing is more
pernicious to them than absolute idleness, or a vacancy from all
earnest pursuit.

The occupations of business suitable to their circumstances, and
situations in life, if neither attended with emotion, anxiety, nor
fatigue, are always to be advised to such patients; but occupations
which are objects of anxiety, and more particularly such as are
exposed to accidental interruptions, disappointments, and failures,
are very improper for patients of this class.

To such patients exercise in the open air is of the utmost
consequence. Of all the various methods of preserving health and
preventing diseases, which nature has suggested, there is none more
efficacious than exercise. It puts the fluids all in motion,
strengthens the solids, promotes digestion, and perspiration, and
occasions the decomposition of a larger quantity of air in the lungs,
and thus not only more heat, but more vital energy is supplied to the
body; and of all the various modes of exercise, none conduces so much
to the health of the body, as riding on horseback: it is not attended
with the fatigue of walking, and the free air is more enjoyed in this
way, than by any other mode of exercise. The system of the vena
portarum, which collects the blood from the abdominal viscera, and
circulates it through the liver, is likewise rendered more active, by
this kind of exercise, than by any other, and thus a torpid state,
not only of the bowels, but of this system of vessels, and the
biliary system, is prevented.

When a patient of this class, however, goes out for the sake of
exercise only, it does not in general produce so good an effect, as
might be expected; for he is continually brooding over the state of
his health: there is no new object to arrest his attention, and he is
constantly reminded of the cause of his riding. Exercise will
therefore be most effectual when employed in the pursuit of a
journey, where a succession of pleasant scenes are likely to present
themselves, and new objects arise, which call forth his attention. A
journey likewise withdraws the patient from many objects of
uneasiness and care, which might present themselves at home.

With respect to medicines, costiveness, which often attends these
diseases, ought to be carefully avoided, by some mild laxative.
Calcined magnesia, and lemonade, have always seemed to me to answer
the purpose; but the most effectual method is to acquire a regular
habit, which may be done by perseverance, and strict attention.

Chalybeate waters have been frequently tried, and may in general be
recommended with success, particularly, as the amusement and exercise
generally accompanying the use of these waters, aid the tonic powers
of the iron. The bark may likewise be exhibited with advantage.

There is yet another class of nervous diseases which we have to
notice, which are by no means uncommon; yet they have, like the first
class, escaped the attention of writers on this subject, and of
medical practitioners in general: I mean those where the system is in
a state of torpor, or exhausted excitability.

This state of the system may be brought on by various causes, but
principally by the long continued use of opium, tobacco, or fermented
liquors.

When these substances, which are powerful stimulants, have been taken
for some time, they bring on a state of the system so torpid, that
the usual exciting powers, and the usual occurrences, which in
general produce pleasant sensations, do not occasion a sufficient
degree of excitement, in those whose excitability is thus exhausted.
They therefore feel continual languor and listlessness, unless when
under the influence of the stimulus which brought on the exhaustion.
Every scene, however beautiful, is beheld with indifference by such
patients, and the degree of ennui they feel is insupportable: this
makes them have recourse to the stimulus which has exhausted their
excitability, which in some degree removes this languor for a time;
but it returns with redoubled strength, and redoubled horror, when
the stimulant effect is over: and as this repetition exhausts the
excitability more and more, the stimulus is repeated in greater
quantity, and thus the disease increases to a most alarming degree.

There is no way of curing this state of nervous torpor, but by
leaving off the stimuli which caused the exhaustion; and if the
patient have resolution to do this for a few weeks, though, at first,
he will, no doubt, find his spirits a little depressed, he will
ultimately overcome the habit, and will be rewarded by alacrity of
spirits, such as he never experiences under the most powerful action
of artificial stimulants.

I must not, however, forget to notice, that there is a nervous state,
or ennui, originating from a wrong direction of mental exertion,
which exhausts the excitability to a great degree, and brings on a
state of depression scarcely to be born.

When a person has by habit made his mind constantly dependent on
dissipation, on gaming, and on frivolous, but not inactive pursuits,
in order to produce pleasurable sensations, and at the same time
neglected that culture of the understanding which will enable him to
retire into himself with pleasure, and receive more enjoyment from
the exercise of this cultivated understanding than he does in the
most noisy, or fashionable circle of dissipation: I say, when there
is this vacancy of mind, whenever it is not engaged in such pursuits
as I have mentioned, a languor and weariness is experienced, which is
intolerable, and which prompts the person so circumstanced, to fly
continually to the only scenes which interest his mind. Hence, the
passion for gaming, in which the anxiety attending it causes an
interest in the mind, which takes off the dreadful languor
experienced, when it is not thus employed.

It is owing to wealth, admitting of indolence, and yielding to the
pursuit of transitory and unsatisfying amusements, or to that of
exhausting pleasures only, that the present times exhibit to us so
many instances of persons suffering under this state: it is a state
totally unknown to the poor, who labour for their daily bread, and to
those whose minds are actively employed in study or business. It can
only be cured by cultivating the understanding, and applying to some
art or science, which will engage and interest the attention. I have
received the thanks of many for recommending the study of philosophy,
and particularly of chemistry, to their attention. This affords a
rational and interesting pursuit, which, if entered into with ardour,
and if the person actually works, or makes experiments himself, he
will soon experience an enjoyment and an interest, such as he never
experienced at the gaming table, or at any other place of fashionable
amusement. Nay, I will venture to say, that all elegant amusements
will be enjoyed with much greater relish by one who employs himself
in some rational pursuit, and only resorts to such amusements as a
relaxation, than by one who makes these amusements a business.

From the view we have taken of these complaints, it is evident, that
they are like other general diseases of the sthenic, or asthenic
kind; they seem to constitute a state of the body between
predisposition and disease; and they differ from most diseases in
this, that in most complaints the increase, or diminution of the
excitement is unequal in different parts of the body, and this gives
rise to the different forms of disease; but in nervous complaints the
excitement seems much more equably affected in different parts. These
complaints, as we have seen, may be divided into three classes;
sthenic; those of accumulated excitability; and those of exhausted
excitability: but though they are evidently distinguishable in this
manner, and require different modes of cure, I have never seen any
account of more than one kind in any medical writer: the same
remedies were prescribed for all, however different they might be.

Though medicines may relieve complaints of this kind, and
particularly those of the second class, yet from what has been said,
it must be evident, that much more may be done by regulating the
action of the common exciting powers. Indeed, this is the case in
most chronic diseases. Exercise and temperance will do infinitely
more than medicine. By their means, most diseases may be overcome;
but without them we may administer drugs as long as we please.

Voltaire sets this advice, which I have frequently inculcated, in so
strong a light, that it may perhaps carry more conviction than any
thing I can say. Ogul was a voluptuary, ambitious of nothing but good
living: he thought that God had sent him into the world for no other
purpose than to eat and drink: his physician, who had but little
credit with him, when he had a good digestion, governed him with
despotic sway, when he had eaten too much.

On feeling himself much and seriously indisposed by indolence and
intemperance, he requested to know what he was to do, and the doctor
ordered him to eat a basilisk, stewed in rose water, which he
asserted would effect a complete cure. His slaves searched in vain
for a basilisk; at last they met with Zadig, who was introduced to
this mighty lord, and spoke to him in the following terms.

"May immortal health descend from Heaven to bless all thy days! I am
a physician: at the report of thy indisposition, I flew to thy
castle, and have now brought thee a basilisk, stewed in rose water.
But, my lord, the basilisk is not to be eaten; all its virtue must
enter through thy pores. I have enclosed it in a little ball, blown
up and covered with a fine skin. Thou must strike this ball, with all
thy might, and I must strike it back for a considerable time: and by
observing this regimen for a few days, thou wilt see the effects of
my art." The first day Ogul was out of breath, and thought he should
have died with fatigue; the second he was less fatigued, and slept
better. In eight days he recovered all the strength, all the health,
all the agility and cheerfulness of his most agreeable years. Zadig
then said unto him, "there is no such thing in nature as a basilisk;
but thou hast taken exercise, and been temperate, and hast recovered
thy health." In the same manner I say, that temperance and exercise
are the two great preservers of health, and restorers of it when it
is lost; and that the art of reconciling intemperance and health is
as chimerical, as washing the Ethiopian white.

It will easily be perceived that the system of animal life which I
