  BUESCHER BAND INSTRUMENT CO.
  2980 Buescher Block (553)
  ELKHART, INDIANA

       *       *       *       *       *

[Illustration: =MEN WANTED FOR RAILROADS=]

Nearest their homes--everywhere--to train for Firemen, Brakemen; average
wages $150-$200 monthly. Promoted to Conductor or Engineer--highest
wages on railroads. Also clerks. Railway Educational Association, Dept.
D-30, Brooklyn, New York.

       *       *       *       *       *


BIG MONEY _IN POULTRY_!

[Illustration: How to RAISE POULTRY for PROFIT]

If you want a real job--at real pay or if you want to start profitable
business of your own--become a trained Poultryman. It's interesting,
healthful, profitable. Our famous home study Course gives short cuts to
success. Write for Free Book, "How to Raise Poultry for Profit."

=National Poultry Institute, Dept. 415-F, Washington, D.C.=

       *       *       *       *       *

SPORT OF A THOUSAND THRILLS

[Illustration: _Model shown is the popular "45" Twin_]

EAGER power under instant control--speed that leaves the car-parades
behind--lightning response to throttle and brakes--these are just a few
of the thousand thrills of motorcycling. Ask any Harley-Davidson
rider--he'll tell you of dozens more. And they are all yours at low
cost, in a Harley-Davidson "45"--the wonderful Twin at a popular price.

    Let your dealer show you the 1930 features of this
    motorcycle--try the comfortable, low-swung saddle--get the
    "feel" of this wonder Twin. Ask about his Pay-As-You-Ride Plan.


_Mail the Coupon!_

_for literature showing our full line of Singles, Twins, and Sidecars.
Motorcycle prices range from $235 f. o. b. factory_.

RIDE A HARLEY-DAVIDSON

       *       *       *       *       *

  HARLEY-DAVIDSON MOTOR COMPANY
  Dept. N. S. G., Milwaukee, Wis.

  Interested in your motorcycles. Send literature.

  Name .....................................

  Address ..................................

  My age is [ ] 16-19 years, [ ] 20-30 years, [ ] 31 years and
  up, [ ] under 16 years. Check your age group.

       *       *       *       *       *

Please mention NEWSSTAND GROUP--MEN'S LIST, when answering
advertisements

       *       *       *       *       *


"How I Licked Wretched Old Age at 63"

    I Quit Getting up Nights--Banished Foot and Leg Pains ... Got
    Rid of Rheumatic Pains and Constipation ... Improved My Health
    Generally ... Found Renewed Strength.

"At 61, I thought I was through. I blamed old age, but it never occurred
to me to actually fight back. I was only half-living, getting up nights
... constipated ... constantly tormented by aches and pains. At 62 my
condition became almost intolerable. I had about given up hope when a
doctor recommended your treatment. Then at 63, it seemed that I shook
off 20 years almost overnight."


_Forty_--The Danger Age

These are the facts, just as I learned them. In 65% of all men, the
vital prostate gland shows up soon after all. No pain is experienced,
but as this distressing condition continues, sciatica, backache, severe
bladder weakness, constipation, etc., often develop.

[Illustration]


PROSTATE TROUBLE

These are frequently the signs of prostate trouble. Now thousands suffer
these handicaps needlessly! For a prominent American Scientist after
seven years of research, discovered a new, safe way to stimulate the
prostate gland to normal health and activity in many cases. This new
hygiene is worthy to be called a notable achievement of the age.


A National Institution for Men Past 40

Its success has been startling, its growth rapid. This new hygiene is
rapidly gaining in national prominence. The institution in Steubenville
has now reached large proportions. Scores and even hundreds of letters
pour in every day, and in many cases reported results have been little
short of amazing. In case after case, men have reported that they have
felt ten years younger in six days. Now physicians in every part of the
country are using and recommending this treatment.

Quick as is the response to this new hygiene, it is actually a pleasant,
natural relaxation, involving no drugs, medicine or electric rays
whatever. The scientist explains this discovery and tells why many men
are old at forty in a new book now sent free, in 24-page, illustrated
form. Send for it. Every man past forty should know the true meaning of
three frank facts. No cost or obligation is incurred. But act at once
before this free edition is exhausted. Simply fill in your name below,
tear off and mail.

  =THE ELECTRO THERMAL COMPANY=
  4826 Morris Avenue
  Steubenville, Ohio

    If you live West of the Rockies, address The Electro Thermal
    Co., 303 Van Nuys Building, Dept. 48-C, Los Angeles, Calif. In
    Canada, address The Electro Thermal Co., Desk 48-C, 53 Yonge
    St., Toronto, Can.

  THE ELECTRO THERMAL CO.,
  4826 Morris Ave., Steubenville, Ohio.

  Name ........................................

  Address .....................................

  City ...................... State ...........

       *       *       *       *       *


How To Secure A Government Position

Why worry about strikes, layoffs, hard times? Get a Government job!
Increased salaries, steady work, travel, good pay. Examinations coming.
I'll help you become a Custom House Clerk, Railway Postal Clerk, Post
Office Clerk, City Mail Carrier, Rural Carrier--or get into any other
Government job you want. I was a Secretary-Examiner of Civil Service
Commission for 8 years. Have helped thousands.


NOW FREE

My 32-page book tells about the jobs open--and how I can help you get
one. Write TODAY. ARTHUR R. PATTERSON. Civil Service Expert. PATTERSON
SCHOOL, 1082 Wisner Building, Rochester. N.Y.

       *       *       *       *       *


Photos ENLARGED

Size 16x20 inches

98c

Same price for full length or best form groups, landscapes, or pet
animals, etc., enlargements of any part of group picture. Safe return of
your own original photo guaranteed.

   SPECIAL
   FREE OFFER

=SEND NO MONEY= Just mail photo or snapshot (any size) and within a week
you will receive your beautiful life-like enlargement size 16x20 in.
guaranteed fadeless. Pay postman 98c plus postage or send $1.00 with
order and we pay postage. With each enlargement we will send FREE a
hand-tinted miniature reproduction of photo sent. Take advantage now of
this amazing offer--send your photo today.

  =UNITED PORTRAIT COMPANY=
  1652 Ogden Ave. Dept. B-590, Chicago, Ill.

       *       *       *       *       *


BLANK CARTRIDGE PISTOL

This well made and effective pistol is modelled on the pattern of the
latest type of Revolver, the appearance of which alone is enough to
scare a burglar, whilst, when loaded, it will probably prove just as
effective as a revolver with real bullets without the danger to life. It
takes the standard .22 Calibre Blank Cartridges, that are obtainable
most everywhere. Special cash with order offer: 1 superior quality Blank
Cartridge Pistol. 100 Blank Cartridges, and our new 550-page DeLuxe
Catalog of latest novelties all for =ONLY $1.50=. Shipped by express
only. Cannot go by parcel post. Extra Blank Cartridges =50c per 100=.
Remember it is quite harmless, as it will not accommodate loaded
cartridges. Special Holster (Cowboy Type) for pistol 50c. No C.O.D.
Shipments.

=Special Offer=

1 Blank Cartridge Pistol, 100 Blank Cartridges, 1 550-page Novelty
Catalog =ONLY $1.50=

The Lot Shipped by Express Only Cash with Order Only

=JOHNSON SMITH & COMPANY.= Dept 212, Racine, Wisconsin

       *       *       *       *       *


BE A RAILWAY TRAFFIC INSPECTOR

EARN UP TO $250 Per Month Expenses Paid

[Illustration: No Hunting For a Position]

Unusual opportunities for men 19 to 55 in this uncrowded profession.
Travel or remain near home. Pleasant, fascinating work. Advancement
rapid. Prepare in 3 months' spare time, home instruction. We assist you
to a position upon completion, paying $120 to $135 per month, plus
expenses or refund your tuition. Learn about Traffic Inspection now. Our
free booklet shows how it can make your future a certainty. Write for it
today.

  =Standard Business Training Institute=
  =DIV. 13=
  =Buffalo, N.Y.=

       *       *       *       *       *


Sleep Disturbed?

If irritating kidney excretions frequently disturb your sleep or cause
backache, leg pains and make you feel tired, achy, depressed and
discouraged, why not try the Cystex 48 Hour Test? No dopes or
habit-forming drugs. List of pure ingredients in each package. Get
Cystex (pronounced Siss-tex) at your drug store for only 60c. Use all of
it. See how it works. Money back if it doesn't satisfy you completely.

       *       *       *       *       *

Please mention NEWSSTAND GROUP--MEN'S LIST, when answering
advertisements

       *       *       *       *       *


NEW WAY TO MAKE MONEY


Easy Cash--Sure and Quick

An opportunity to earn $15 a day or more taking orders from your friends
and neighbors for our fine tailoring. Orders come easy when you show our
swell samples and smart styles. =We Show You How=--you don't need to
know anything about tailoring--simply follow our directions--we make it
easy.


FREE SUIT OFFER

Make a few sales to your friends and get it finely tailored to your
order suit, in any style, absolutely FREE, in addition to your cash
profits.

  =FREE
  New, Big Sample
  OUTFIT=

New style convenient carrying outfit, large all-wool samples--all
supplies necessary to start at once--furnished =FREE=. =Write at once.=

=PROGRESS TAILORING CO., Dept. P-204, Chicago=

       *       *       *       *       *


MORE PAY with QUAKER FREE OUTFIT

  FREE SHIRTS TIES
  CASH BONUS GIVEN

_Earn big money right from the start. Let Quaker help you. Wonderful
free Sample outfit gets orders everywhere. Men's Shirts, Ties,
Underwear, Hosiery. Unmatchable values. Unique Selling features.
Ironclad guarantee. You can't fail with Quaker. Write for your Free
outfit NOW._

  QUAKER SHIRT CORPORATION
  Dept. K-2
  1107 Broadway, N.Y.

       *       *       *       *       *


FRENCH LOVE DROPS

An enchanting exotic perfume of irresistible charm, clinging for hours
like lovers loath to part. Just a few drops are enough. Full size bottle
98c prepaid or $1.39 C.O.D. plus postage. Directions with every order.
FREE: 1 full size bottle if you order 2 vials.

  =D'ORO CO.=
  =Box 90, Varick Station, New York=
  =Dept NSG 2=

       *       *       *       *       *


  NO JOKE TO BE DEAF
  --EVERY DEAF PERSON KNOWS THAT

[Illustration: Medicated Ear Drum]

I make myself hear, after being deaf for 25 years, with these Artificial
Ear Drums. I wear them day and night. They stop head noises and ringing
ears. They are perfectly comfortable. No one sees them. Write me and I
will tell you a true story, how I got deaf and how I make you hear.
Address

  GEO. P. WAY, Artificial Ear Drum Co. (Inc.)
  300 Hoffman Bldg.
  Detroit, Mich.

       *       *       *       *       *


Be A Detective

_Make Secret Investigations_

Earn Big Money. Work home or travel. Fascinating work. Experience
unnecessary. =DETECTIVE= Particulars FREE, Write NOW to =GEO. N. WAGNER,
2190 Broadway, New York=

       *       *       *       *       *


TOBACCO

Habit Overcome Or No Pay

Over 500,000 men and women used Superba Remedy to help stop Cigarettes,
Cigars, Pipe, Chewing or Snuff. Write for full treatment on trial.
Contains no dope or habit forming drugs. Costs $2.00 if successful,
nothing if not. SUPERBA CO., A-11, Baltimore, Md.

       *       *       *       *       *


Get Strong WITH

These Improved Muscle Builders

_All for $5.00_

[Illustration: Save $20.00 with this OFFER]

_Send no money_

GUARANTEE SATISFACTION OR MONEY BACK

Why pay an extravagant price for strength--here's an opportunity to get
all the equipment you require along with an excellent course of
instructions for only $5.00. Realize your ambition and develop muscles
of a super-man. Get strong and amaze your friends. We show you how to
easily master feats which now seem difficult--or if you just want
physical culture for your health's sake, this equipment is just what you
need. With this special offer you save at least $20.00. We furnish a ten
cable chest expander which is adjustable to give resistance up to 200
lbs. It is made of new live extra strength, springy rubber so as to
ensure long wear and give the resistance you need for real muscle
development. You also get a pair of patented hand grips for developing
powerful grip and forearms.

We include wall exercising parts which permit you to develop your back,
arms and legs--a real muscle necessity. You know that business men and
athletes, too, first show their age in their legs. Develop your leg
muscles with the foot strap which we furnish. This will give you speed
and endurance--but that isn't all that you get. In addition we include a
specially written course which contains pictures and diagrams showing
you how to develop any part of your body so that you will quickly get on
with these exercises and gain the greatest advantage from their use. Act
now while you can get in on this special offer. It might be withdrawn,
so rush the coupon.


SEND NO MONEY

All of the items pictured on this page are included in this big special
reduction offer. Sign your name and address to the coupon below and rush
it to us. We will send your ten cable chest developer, the wall parts, a
pair of hand grips, foot strap and the course by return mail. Pay the
postman only $5.00, plus the few cents postage on arrival. (If you
desire to send check or money order in advance, we pay postage.)


GUARANTEE

All Crusader products are guaranteed to give entire satisfaction or
money back.


  CRUSADER APPARATUS CO.,
  Dept. 2002, 44 Parker Ave., Maplewood, N.J.

I accept your offer. Send me everything described in your advertisement
by return mail. I will pay postman $5.00 plus postage on arrival. It is
understood if I am not entirely satisfied after examination I can return
the goods and you will refund my money.

Note:--No C.O.D. Orders to Foreign Countries or Canada.

  Name ........................................

  Address .....................................

  City ...................... State ...........

       *       *       *       *       *

