of the Atlanteans, and he, Lucille, and Parrish, were being reserved
for the final spectacle.

And at the sight of Lucille beside him, stonily unconscious, and yet
standing, and moving like a mechanical doll, in little forward
jerks--at the sight of the girl, hardly six feet distant, and yet
utterly beyond the touch of his finger-tips, Jim went mad. He would
not shout; he closed his lips in pride of race, pride of that
civilization that he had left twelve thousand years ahead of him. Not
like the shrieking Drilgoes on the platform, howling as each of them
in turn was forced into that maze of revolving knives. But he fought
as a madman fights. He hammered at the resilient air, while the sweat
ran down his face, he braced his feet upon the wooden tongue, and
sought to stay his forward progress. And all the while that infernal
force moved him steadily onward.

       *       *       *       *       *

He was on the platform now. He was traveling the same route that the
Drilgoes had taken. The unseen force was shuffling him, Lucille, and
Parrish, pushing and pulling them. And, despite Jim's efforts, it was
Lucille who was first of the three ... and Jim second ... and old
Parrish third....

Jim heard Parrish's hoarse whisper behind him, "Death! Death! The
uranium!" He was fumbling at his breast, but the significance of the
words and gestures escaped him. He was staring ahead. Only three
living Drilgoes of the whole number of prisoners remained alive, and
suddenly it was borne in upon Jim that he knew the last of the three.

It was the Drilgo, Cain, who had been their companion in the Atom
Smasher--there, not a dozen feet distant. Cain, his bestial face, with
the ridged eyebrows and great jaws convulsed with terror and dripping
sweat. Cain, immediately in front of Lucille.

"God, let her not wake! Let her never know!" Jim breathed. The agony
would be but momentary. And there was nothing a man could not endure
if he must. He could even endure to see Lucille become--what the
Drilgoes had become. It would soon be over now.

The Eye was blinking overhead. The hideous stone faces of the
Atlantean gods looked down in leering mockery. Another of the Drilgoes
had gone the same route as the others. Cain was the second now,
Lucille the third victim, and he, Jim, would be the fourth.

Gritting his teeth, Jim saw the next Drilgo propelled forward into the
whirling knives. He saw the man fling up his arms, as if to shield his
head--and then he was a man no longer, and the horrible knives
revolved, and "Aiah! Aiah! Aiah!" cried the multitude.

Once more the mechanism whirred.... Once more the arms revolved. A
howl of terror broke from Cain's lips as he was propelled onward....

Then suddenly the whirring stopped. The arms of the stone gods, with
their hooked, razorlike claws, to which clung particles of flesh, were
arrested in mid-air. Cain, unharmed, was leaning backward, his
features set in a mask of awful fear.

Simultaneously Jim knew that the force which had held him in thrall
was gone. He flung his arms out. He was free. He grasped Lucille, held
her tightly against his breast, stood there drawing great, labored
breaths, waiting--for what?

       *       *       *       *       *

A film was creeping over his eyes, but he was aware that the Eye had
suddenly gone out. And out of the dark the priest was chanting.

Then came a deep-drawn sigh from the spectators, followed by a ringing
shout. In place of the Eye the full moon appeared, sailing overhead.
And, holding off that deathly weakness, Jim understood. The sacrifice
had ended; a new month had begun....


CHAPTER VII

_Back to Long Island_

Jim, seated beside Lucille, was listening to Cain's gruntings and
chucklings as he expounded the situation to old Parrish.

It was the day following the scene in the amphitheatre. The four had
been escorted back along the tongue of flooring into a hall with walls
of fretted stone and sumptuous colorings. The floor was strewn with
rich rugs woven of some vegetable fibre. There were divans and low
chairs. At brief intervals, servitors, always smiling, passed carrying
trays with wines and foods. And in the corridors were always glimpses
of the guards.

"It was the rising of the full moon saved our lives, Dent," Parrish
explained. "It appears they have this sacrifice at each of the moon's
phases. The victims, captives or criminals, are eaten by the priests.
We've got a week's respite, Dent, and then--God help us."

Jim's arm tightened about Lucille, but the girl turned and smiled into
his face. There was no longer any fear there. And Jim swore to himself
that he would yet find some way of outwitting their devilish captors.

"What the devil are we supposed to be, criminals or what?" he asked
her father. "Why do they smile at us all the time in that confounded
way?"

Parrish questioned the Drilgo, but apparently he was unable to explain
himself to him. "Maybe they think it an honor for us, Dent," he
answered, "or maybe it's their idea of etiquette. Anyway, we four are
to head the list when the moon's at the three-quarters. God, if only
we could reach the Atom Smasher, I'm certain I could find out how it
works!"

       *       *       *       *       *

Jim had tried more than once to reach it. Through the colonnades at
the end of the hall he could see the mechanism standing on the
platform, always being inspected by half a dozen or so of the
dignitaries of Atlantis. But all his attempts to cross that tongue of
flooring had been vetoed by the guards.

They had presented their hands to him, palms outward, and on the palms
were fine steel points, about two inches long, set into leather
gauntlets. It had been impossible to try conclusions with them.

Two days went by. Once a group of dignitaries had entered the hall
and, with smiles and profuse bows, inspected the prisoners. Then they
had departed. And Jim had paced the floor, to and fro, thinking
desperately.

There was no sort of weapon with which to hazard an attack. Jim knew
that they were under the closest observation. He could only wait and
hope. And if all else failed, he meant to hurl himself, with Lucille
in his arms, off the tongue of floor into the depths below when their
time came.

On the third morning, after a troubled sleep induced by very
weariness, Jim was awakened by one of the guards, and started up to
see one of the bowing dignitaries before him, and Parrish and Lucille
sitting up among their rugs.

Bowing repeatedly, the smiling old man addressed some words to Jim,
and then turned to Parrish.

"He says he wants you to show him the way the Atom Smasher works,"
said Parrish. "Now's our chance, Dent. He thinks it's simply an
apparatus for neutralizing the blue-white ray. Don't let him guess--"

"I won't let him guess," Jim answered. "Tell him we'll go and show
him--"

"I've told him, and he says only you are to go. He's suspicious. Say
something quickly, Dent."

"Tell him," said Jim, "that I must have my two assistants and the
lady. Tell him I may also need the help of some of his people. It
requires many men to operate the machine."

       *       *       *       *       *

Parrish translated, speaking in the Drilgo tongue, which was their
only means of communication. The Atlantean considered. Then he spoke
again.

"He says that we three men may go, but Lucille must be left behind,"
groaned Parrish.

"The answer is no," said Jim.

The old dignitary, who seemed somewhat crestfallen, departed with an
expressive gesture. Jim and Parrish looked at each other.

"That's our end," groaned Parrish.

"No, he'll bite," answered Jim, with the first grin that had appeared
on his countenance since their arrival. "Let's make our plans quickly.
We must contrive to get Lucille inside the machine, under the pretense
of assisting with the mechanism. And Cain, of course," he added,
glancing at the goggly-eyed Drilgo. "You do your best to locate the
starting mechanism, Parrish, and signal me the moment you're ready.
We'll both leap in, and the four of us will sail--God, I don't care
where we sail to, so long as we get away from here! Into eternity, if
need be. But I hope it's Long Island!"

Back came the dignitary with two of the guards. Smiling at Jim, he
indicated by signs that the three others might accompany him. The
Atlanteans had bitten, as Jim had forecast.

The four proceeded along the hall and over the tongue of flooring.
This time the force that had previously controlled their movements was
not in action. At the farther end of the bridge they saw the group of
dignitaries gathered about the Atom Smasher, examining it curiously.
Over their heads the hooked arms of the hideous gods were raised. The
Eye was darkened, as if with a curtain, and through the glass roof,
high overhead, the sunlight streamed down upon the empty amphitheatre.

       *       *       *       *       *

In spite of their smiles, the dignitaries of Atlantis were very much
on the alert, as their tense attitudes denoted. Two more guards had
appeared, and Jim saw that they were uncovering some apparatus at the
base of the Eye. They were swinging a camera-like object toward him,
its lens focused upon the Atom Smasher. It was not difficult to
understand what was in the minds of the Atlanteans. The dignitaries
were uneasy and mistrustful, and at the first suspicion of treachery
they meant to loose the blue-white Ray contained in the apparatus, and
blow the Atom Smasher and the group about it to destruction.

Jim intercepted a sign from Parrish, indicating that he was to make
pretense of assisting him. He bent over the machine, Lucille beside
him. Parrish was busily examining the wheels and levers. He was
adjusting the thumbscrews, moving the needles along the dials.

One of the Atlanteans spoke, and Cain translated into "Drilgo" for
Parrish's benefit. Parrish answered. Then, without raising his head,
the old man said quietly, "I've located the starting lever, Dent. You
and Lucille get inside quickly and pretend you're doing something to
the machinery."

They stepped over the bow of the boat and stood beside Parrish, who
continued examining the wheels. "We mustn't forget Cain," whispered
the girl to her father. "Oh, I hope he understands!"

But there was no direct evidence that Cain did understand, and Parrish
dared not warn him in "Drilgo," for fear one of the Atlanteans might
understand the language. Cain was standing close beside the boat. But
he was not in the boat.

Again one of the Atlanteans shot a question at Parrish. Parrish
beckoned to Cain, and awaited the translation. He answered.

Each moment was growing tenser. It was impossible that the Atlanteans
could fail to understand what was being planned. The only saving
chance was that they did not realize the possibilities of escape that
the vessel offered. A full minute went by.

       *       *       *       *       *

Suddenly Parrish raised his head. "I've got it fixed, I think, Dent,"
he said. "I'm going to count. When I reach 'three,' seize Cain and
pull him aboard."

Jim nodded. The uneasiness was increasing. The guards at the
camera-like object were each holding some sort of mechanical accessory
in their hands. It looked like a small sphere of glass, and it
connected with the apparatus by means of a hollow tube of fibre. Jim
guessed that in an instant the Ray could be made to dart out of the
lens. It would be quick work--as nearly as possible instantaneous
work.

"Ready, Dent?" asked Parrish in an even voice. In this crisis the old
man had become astonishingly calm. He seemed the calmest of the lot.
"One!"

Jim beckoned to Cain, who came toward him, his eyes goggling in
inquiry.

"Two!"

Jim reached out and took Cain by the arm. There was a sharp question
from the Atlantean who had spoken before.

"Three!"

With all his force Jim yanked Cain over the edge of the boat. The
Drilgo stumbled and fell headlong with a howl of terror. But
headlong--inside.

What happened was practically instantaneous. A sudden whir of the
mechanism, a violet glow from the funnel, the smell of chlorine--a
flash of blinding blue-white light. The Atlantean guards had fired--a
quarter-second too late!

The thump, thump of the electrical discharge died away. The four were
in the boat, whirling away through space. Cain was rising to his
knees, a woe-begone expression on his face. And there was a clean cut,
with charred, black edges along one side of the boat, showing how near
the Atlanteans had come to success.

       *       *       *       *       *

The relief, after the hideous suspense of the past days, was almost
too much for the three white people. "We're free, we're going back
home!" cried Jim exultantly, as he caught Lucille in his arms. And she
surrendered her lips to his, while the tears streamed down her checks.
Old Parrish, at the instrument board, looked up, smiling and
chuckling. Even Cain, understanding that they were not to be hacked to
bits with knives, gurgled and grinned all over his black face.

"How long will it take us to get back?" Jim asked Parrish after a
while.

"I--I'm not quite sure, my boy," the old man replied. "You see--I
haven't quite familiarized myself with the machine as yet."

"But we'll get back all right?" asked Jim.

"Well, we--we're headed in the right direction," answered Parrish.
"You see, my boy, it's rather an intricate table of logarithmic
calculations that that scoundrel has pasted on this board. The great
danger appears to be that of coming within the orbit of the giant
planet Jupiter. Of course, I'm trying to keep within the orbit of the
Earth, but there is a danger of being deflected onto Pallas, Ceres, or
one of the smaller asteroids, and finding ourselves upon a rock in
space."

Jim and Lucille looked at Parrish in consternation. "But you don't
have to leave the Earth, do you?" Jim asked.

"Unfortunately, it's pretty hard sticking to the Earth, my lad," said
Parrish. "You see, Earth has moved a good many million miles through
space since the time of Atlantis."

But both Jim and Lucille noticed that Parrish was already speaking of
Atlantis as if it was in the past. They drew a hopeful augury from
that. And then there was nothing to do but resign themselves to that
universal greyness--and to hope.

       *       *       *       *       *

They noticed that Cain seemed to be watching Parrish's movements with
unusual interest. The Neanderthal man seemed fascinated by the play of
the dials, the whir of the wheels and gyroscopes.

"Are you setting a course, dad?" asked Lucille presently. "I mean, do
you know just where we are?"

"To tell you the truth, my dear," answered her father, "I don't. I'm
relying on some markings that Tode made on the chart--certain
combinations of figures. God only knows where they'll take us to. But
I'm hoping that by following them we shall find ourselves back on Long
Island in the year 1930.

"No, that rascal could hardly have written down those figures to no
purpose. They seem to me to comprise a course, both going and
returning. But the calculations are very intricate, especially in the
_time_ dimension. I've nearly reached the last row now. Then, we shall
have arrived, or--we sha'n't."

Jim and Lucille sat down again. There was nothing that they could do.
But somehow their hopes of reaching Long Island in the year of grace
1930 had grown exceedingly slim. Everything depended upon whether or
not Tode had meant those figures to represent the course back to the
starting point or not.

A desperate hope--that was all that remained to them. They watched
Parrish as his eyes wandered along the rows of figures, while his
fingers moved the micrometer screws. And then he looked up.

"We're reaching the end of our course," he said. "We're going to land
somewhere. God knows where it will be. We must hope--that's all that's
left us."

His hands dropped from the dials. He pressed a lever. The blur of
nights and days began to slow. A column of vivid violet light shot
from the funnel.

"Grip tight!" shouted Parrish.

Thump, thump! The Atom Smasher was vibrating violently. A jar threw
Jim against Lucille. It was coming to a standstill. Trees appeared.
Jim uttered a shout. He stepped across to Parrish and wrung his hand.
He put his arms about Lucille and kissed her.

They were back at the Vanishing Place, and all their sufferings seemed
to be of the past....


