fore end--where there were eyes hidden behind bristling hair-like
growths--and another set of feet at its tail end. It progressed sedately
by reaching forward with its fore-part, securing a foothold, and then
arching its middle portion like a cat arching its back, to bring its
hind part forward. Then it reached forward again. It was of a dark olive
color from one end to the other. Its manner of walking was insane but
somehow sedate.

Moran heard muffled noises in his helmet-phone as the others tried to
speak. Carol's voice came anxiously;

"_What's the matter? What do you see?_"

Moran said with savage precision;

"We're looking at an inch-worm, grown up like the beetles only more so.
It's not an inch-worm any longer. It's a yard-worm." Then he said
harshly to the men with him; "It's not a hunting creature on worlds
where it's smaller. It's not likely to have turned deadly here. Come
on!"

He went forward over the singularly bouncy ground. The others followed.
It was to be noted that Hallet the engineer, avoided the huge harmless
creature more widely than most.

       *       *       *       *       *

They reached the mound which was the ship. Moran unlimbered his torch.
He said sardonically;

"This ship won't do anybody any good. It's old-style. That thick belt
around its middle was dropped a hundred years ago, and more." There was
an abrupt thickening of the cylindrical hull at the middle. There was an
equally abrupt thinning, again, toward the landing-fins. The sharpness
of the change was blurred over by the revolting ground-stuff growing
everywhere. "We're going to find that this wreck has been here a century
at least!"

Without orders, he turned on the torch. A four-foot flame of pure
blue-white leaped out. He touched its tip to the fungoid soil. Steam
leaped up. He used the flame like a gigantic scalpel, cutting a square a
yard deep in the whitish stuff, and then cutting it across and across to
destroy it. Thick fumes arose, and quiverings and shakings began. Black
creatures in their labyrinths of tunnels began to panic. Off to the
right the blanket-like surface ripped and they poured out. They scuttled
crazily here and there. Some took to wing. By instinct the other
men--the armed ones--moved back from the smoke. They wore space-helmets
but they felt that there should be an intolerable smell.

Moran slashed and slashed angrily with the big flame, cutting a way to
the metal hull that had fallen here before his grandfather was born.
Sometimes the flame cut across things that writhed, and he was sickened.
But above all he raged because he was to be marooned here. He could not
altogether blame the others. They couldn't land at any colonized world
with him on board without his being detected as an extra member of the
crew. His fate would then be sealed. But they also would be
investigated. Official queries would go across this whole sector of the
galaxy, naming five persons of such-and-such description and
such-and-such fingerprints, voyaging in a space-yacht of such-and-such
size and registration. The world they came from would claim them as
fugitives. They would be returned to it. They'd be executed.

Then Carol's voice came in his helmet-phone. She cried out;

"_Look out! It's coming! Kill it! Kill it--._"

He heard blast-rifles firing. He heard Burleigh pant commands. He was on
his way out of the hollow he'd carved when he heard Harper cry out
horribly.

He got clear of the newly burned-away stuff. There was still much smoke
and stream. But he saw Harper. More, he saw the thing that had Harper.

It occurred to him instantly that if Harper died, there would not be too
many people on the _Nadine_. They need not maroon him. In fact, they
wouldn't dare.

A ship that came in to port with two few on board would be investigated
as thoroughly as one that had too many. Perhaps more thoroughly. So if
Harper were killed, Moran would be needed to take his place. He'd go on
from here in the _Nadine_, necessarily accepted as a member of her crew.

Then he rushed, the flame-torch making a roaring sound.


II.

They went back to the _Nadine_ for weapons more adequate for
encountering the local fauna when it was over. Blast-rifles were not
effective against such creatures as these. Torches were contact weapons
but they killed. Blast-rifles did not. And Harper needed to pull himself
together again, too. Also, neither Moran nor any of the others wanted to
go back to the still un-entered wreck while the skinny, somehow
disgusting legs of the thing still kicked spasmodically--quite
separate--on the whitish ground-stuff. Moran had disliked such creatures
in miniature form on other worlds. Enlarged like this.

It seemed insane that such creatures, even in miniature, should
painstakingly be brought across light-years of space to the new worlds
men settled on. But it had been found to be necessary. The ecological
system in which human beings belonged had turned out to be infinitely
complicated. It had turned out, in fact, to be the ecological system of
Earth, and unless all parts of the complex were present, the total was
subtly or glaringly wrong. So mankind distastefully ferried pests as
well as useful creatures to its new worlds as they were made ready for
settlement. Mosquitos throve on the inhabited globes of the Rim Stars.
Roaches twitched nervous antennae on the settled planets of the
Coal-sack. Dogs on Antares had fleas, and scratched their bites, and
humanity spread through the galaxy with an attendant train of insects
and annoyances. If they left their pests behind, the total system of
checks and balances which make life practical would get lopsided. It
would not maintain itself. The vagaries that could result were admirably
illustrated in and on the landscape outside the _Nadine_. Something had
been left out of the seeding of this planet. The element--which might be
a bacterium or a virus or almost anything at all--the element that kept
creatures at the size called "normal" was either missing or inoperable
here. The results were not desirable.

       *       *       *       *       *

Harper drank thirstily. Carol had watched from the control-room. She was
still pale. She looked strangely at Moran.

"You're sure it didn't get through your suit?" Burleigh asked
insistently of Harper.

Moran said sourly;

"The creatures have changed size. There's no proof they've changed
anything else. Beetles live in tunnels they make in fungus growths. The
beetles and the tunnels are larger, but that's all. Inchworms travel as
they always did. They move yards instead of inches, but that's all.
Centipedes--"

"It was--" said Carol unsteadily. "It was thirty feet long!"

"Centipedes," repeated Moran, "catch prey with their legs. They always
did. Some of them trail poison from their feet. We can play a blowtorch
over Harper's suit and any poison will be burned away. You can't burn a
space-suit!"

"We certainly can't leave Moran here!" said Burleigh uneasily.

"He kept Harper from being killed!" said Carol. "Your blast-rifles
weren't any good. The--creatures are hard to kill."

"Very hard to kill," agreed Moran. "But I'm not supposed to kill them.
I'm supposed to live with them! I wonder how we can make them understand
they're not supposed to kill me either?"

"I'll admit," said Burleigh, "that if you'd let Harper get killed, we'd
have been forced to let you take his identity and not be marooned, to
avoid questions at the space-port on Loris. Not many men would have done
what you did."

"Oh, I'm a hero," said Moran. "Noble Moran, that's me! What the hell
would you want me to do? I didn't think! I won't do it again. I
promise!"

The last statement was almost true. Moran felt a squeamish horror at the
memory of what he'd been through over by the wrecked ship. He'd come
running out of the excavation he'd made. He had for weapon a four-foot
blue-white flame, and there was a monstrous creature running directly
toward him, with Harper lifted off the ground and clutched in two
gigantic, spidery legs. It was no less than thirty feet long, but it was
a centipede. It travelled swiftly on grisly, skinny, pipe-thin legs. It
loomed over Moran as he reached the surface and he automatically thrust
the flame at it. The result was shocking. But the nervous systems of
insects are primitive. It is questionable that they feel pain. It is
certain that separated parts of them act as if they had independent
life. Legs--horrible things--sheared off in the flame of the torch, but
the grisly furry thing rushed on until Moran slashed across its body
with the blue-white fire. Then it collapsed. But Harper was still held
firmly and half the monster struggled mindlessly to run on while
another part was dead. Moran fought it almost hysterically, slicing off
legs and wanting to be sick when their stumps continued to move as if
purposefully, and the legs themselves kicked and writhed rhythmically.
But he bored in and cut at the body and ultimately dragged Harper clear.

Afterward, sickened, he completed cutting it to bits with the torch. But
each part continued nauseatingly to move. He went back with the others
to the _Nadine_. The blast-rifles had been almost completely without
effect upon the creature because of its insensitive nervous system.

       *       *       *       *       *

"I think," said Burleigh, "that it is only fair for us to lift from here
and find a better part of this world to land Moran in."

"Why not another planet?" asked Carol.

"It could take weeks," said Burleigh harassedly. "We left Coryus three
days ago. We ought to land on Loris before too long. There'd be
questions asked if we turned up weeks late! We can't afford that! The
space-port police would suspect us of all sorts of things. They might
decide to check back on us where we came from. We can't take the time to
hunt another planet!"

"Then your best bet," said Moran caustically, "is to find out where we
are. You may be so far from Loris that you can't make port without
raising questions anyhow. But you might be almost on course. I don't
know! But let's see if that wreck can tell us. I'll go by myself if you
like."

He went into the airlock, where his suit and the others had been sprayed
with a corrosive solution while the outside air was pumped out and new
air from inside the yacht admitted. He got into the suit. Harper joined
him.

"I'm going with you," he said shortly. "Two will be safer than
one,--both with torches."

"Too, too true!" said Moran sardonically.

He bundled the other suits out of the airlock and into the ship. He
checked his torch. He closed the inner lock door and started the pump.
Harper said;

"I'm not going to try to thank you--."

"Because," Moran snapped, "you wouldn't have been on this planet to be
in danger if I hadn't tried to capture the yacht. I know it!"

"That wasn't what I meant to say!" protested Harper.

Moran snarled at him. The lock-pump stopped and the ready-for exit light
glowed. They pushed open the outer door and emerged. Again there was the
discordant, almost intolerable din. It made no sense. The cries and
calls and stridulations they now knew to be those of insects had no
significance. The unseen huge creatures made them without purpose.
Insects do not challenge each other like birds or make mating-calls like
animals. They make noises because it is their nature. The noises have no
meaning. The two men started toward the wreck to which Moran had partly
burned a passageway. There were clickings from underfoot all around
them. Moran said abruptly;

"Those clicks come from the beetles in their tunnels underfoot. They're
practically a foot long. How big do you suppose bugs grow here,--and
why?"

       *       *       *       *       *

Harper did not answer. He carried a flame-torch like the one Moran had
used before. They went unsteadily over the elastic, yielding stuff
underfoot. Harper halted, to look behind. Carol's voice came in the
helmet-phones.

"_We're watching out for you. We'll try to warn you if--anything shows
up._"

"Better watch me!" snapped Moran. "If I should kill Harper after all,
you might have to pass me for him presently!"

He heard a small, inarticulate sound, as if Carol protested. Then he
heard an angry shrill whine. He'd turned aside from the direct line to
the wreck. Something black, the size of a fair-sized dog, faced him
belligerently. Multiple lensed eyes, five inches across, seemed to
regard him in a peculiarly daunting fashion. The creature had a narrow,
unearthly, triangular face, with mandibles that worked from side to side
instead of up and down like an animal's jaws. The head was utterly
unlike any animal such as breed and raise their young and will fight for
them. There was a small thorax, from which six spiny, glistening legs
sprang. There was a bulbous abdomen.

"This," said Moran coldly, "is an ant. I've stepped on them for no
reason, and killed them. I've probably killed many times as many without
knowing it. But this could kill me."

The almost yard-long enormity standing two and a half feet high, was in
the act of carrying away a section of one of the legs of the giant
