had never before this night been able to find out where it was.]

"You stay here," I told Tina and Larry; "I'll go up there. I'll get
him now once and for all."

       *       *       *       *       *

I reached the Power House roof. The storm tore at me. It was beginning
to rain. I was near the outer edge of the roof, and ten feet away
stood the oval tower. I saw windows twenty feet up, with dim lights in
them. Mingled with the storm was the hiss of the transmitter in the
top of the tower, and the roar of Tugh's magnified voice. He had
evidently been there only a brief time. From where I crouched on the
roof, I could see overhead, along the top edge of the dam looming
above me. The red Robot rays were everywhere in the city, but none as
yet showed along the dam's upper roadway.

I got into the tower and mounted its small stairs. Creeping cautiously
to the entrance of the control room, I saw a fairly large, dimly
lighted oval apartment. Great banks of levers stood around it; tables
of control apparatus; rows of dials, illumined by tiny lights like
staring eyes. There was another gruesome heap of garments here on the
floor; a grinning white skull leered at me.

This was the main control room of the Power House. Across it, near an
open window, Tugh sat with his back to me, bent over a table with the
grid of a microphone before him. I raised my cylinder; then lowered
it, for I had only a partial view of him: a huge transformer stood
like a barrier between us.

       *       *       *       *       *

Noiselessly I stepped over the threshold, and to one side within the
room. The place was a buzz and hiss of sound topped by Tugh's
broadcast voice and the roar of the storm outside--yet he was
instantly aware of me! His voice in the microphone abruptly stopped;
he rose and with an incredibly swift motion whirled and flung at me a
heavy metal weight which had been lying on the table by his hand. The
missile struck my outstretched weapon just as I was aiming it to fire,
and the cylinder, undischarged, was knocked from my hand and went
spinning across the floor several feet away from me.

Tugh, like an uncoiling spring, still with one continuous motion, made
a leap sidewise to where his own weapon was lying on a bench, and I
saw he would reach it before I could retrieve mine.

I flung my heavy battery box but missed him. And as I rushed at him he
caught up his cylinder and fired it full at me! But no flash came:
only a click. He had exhausted its charge when he killed the Power
House guards. With a curse he flung it at my face, and my arm took its
blow just as I struck him. We fell gripping each other, and rolled on
the floor.

I was aware that Larry and Tina had followed me up. Larry shouted,
"Look out for him, George!"

I have described Larry's hand-to-hand encounter with the cripple; mine
was much the same; I was a child in his grip. But with his weapon
useless, and Larry rushing into the room, Tugh must have felt that for
all his strength and fighting skill he would be worsted in this
encounter. He blocked a jab of my fist, flung me headlong away and
sprang to his feet just as Larry leaped at him.

I stood erect, to see that he had sent Larry crashing to the floor. I
heard his sardonic laugh as he hurled a metal stool at Tina, who was
trying to throw something at him. Then, turning, he sprang through the
open window casement and disappeared.

       *       *       *       *       *

It was twenty feet down to the roof. We reached the window to see Tugh
picking himself up unhurt. Then, with his awkward gait but at amazing
speed, he ran across the roof to a small entrance in the face of the
dam where an interior staircase gave access to the roadway on top.

He was escaping us. The electrical gate was open to him. It was only a
few hundred feet along the dam roadway to that gate; and beyond it the
roadway was open into the city, where now we could see the distant
flashing lights of the Robots advancing along the dam.

Larry and I would have rushed to the roof to follow Tugh, but Tina
checked us. She said:

"No--he has too great a start. He's on top by now, and it's only a
short distance to the gate. There's a better way here: I can electrify
the gate again--trap him inside."[5]

[Footnote 5: There was a similar gate and wall-barrier at the Jersey
entrance to the dam, and both gates operated together. The nearby
Jersey section was, is still, an agricultural district save for a few
landing stages for the great airliners. The robots had spread into
Jersey; but since few humans were there, with only Robot
agriculturists working the section, the unimportant Jersey events have
not figured in my narrative.]

Tina found the gate controls. But they would not operate!

Those precious lost seconds, with Tugh running along the top of the
dam and his Robots advancing to join him!

"Tina, hurry!" I cried. Larry and I bent anxiously over her, but the
levers meant nothing to us. There were lost seconds while she
desperately fumbled, and Larry pleaded:

"Tina, dear, what's the matter?"

"He must have ripped out a wire to make sure of getting away. I--I
must find it. Everything seems all right."

A minute gone. Surely Tugh would have reached the gate by now. Or,
worse, the Robots would have come through, and would assail us here.

"Tina!" pleaded Larry, "don't get excited. Take it calmly: you can
find the trouble."

       *       *       *       *       *

I rushed to the window. I could see the upper half of the cross wall
gate-barrier. It jutted above the top edge of the dam from the point
of vision. On the Manhattan side I saw the oncoming Robot lights. And
then suddenly I made out a light on this side of the barrier; it
marked Tugh; it must have been a beam signal he was carrying. It moved
slowly, retarded by distance, but it was almost to the gate; and then
it reached there.

"He's gone through!" I called. Then I saw him on the land side. He had
escaped us and joined the Robots. The lights showed them all coming
for the gate.

And then Tina abruptly found the loosened wire.

"I have it!" she exclaimed.

She stood up, tugging with all her strength at the great switch-lever.
I saw, up there on the top of the dam, a surge of sparks as the
current hissed into the wall-barrier; saw the barrier glow a moment
and then subside. And presently the lights of the balked Robots, Tugh
with them, retreated back into the wrecked and blood-stained city.

"We did it!" exclaimed Larry. "We're impregnable here. Tina, now the
air-power, for help may be on its way. And then call some other city.
Can you do that? They must have sent us help by now."

       *       *       *       *       *

In a moment the air-power went on, and the city lighting system. Then
Tina was at the great transmitter. As she closed the circuits, London
was frantically calling us. In the midst of the chaos of electrical
sounds which now filled the control room, came the audible voice of
the London operator.

"I could not get you because your circuit was broken," it said. "Our
air-vessel _Micrad_; bearing the large projector of the Robot-deranger,
landed on the ocean surface two hundred miles from New York harbor. It
was forced down when your district air-power failed."

Tina said hurriedly, "Our air-power is on now. Is the _Micrad_
coming?"

"Wait. Hold connection. I will call them." And after a moment's pause
the London voice came again: "The _Micrad_ is aloft again, and should
be over New York in thirty minutes. You are safe enough now."

As the voice clicked off Tina's emotion suddenly overcame her. "Safe
enough! And our city red with human blood!"

A wild thought abruptly swept me. Mary Atwood was back there in the
cavern, alone, waiting for me to return! Subconsciously, in the rush
of these tumultuous events, my mind had always been on her; she was
secure enough, no doubt, locked in that room. But now Tugh was back in
the city, and realizing that his cause was lost he would return to
her!

I hastily told Larry and Tina.

"But he cannot open the door to get into her," said Larry.

But Migul could open the door. Where was Migul now? It set me
shuddering.

       *       *       *       *       *

We decided to rush back by the underground route. The Power House
could remain unattended for a time. We got down into the tunnel and
made the trip without incident. We ran to the limit of Tina's
strength, and then for a distance I carried her. We were all three
panting and exhausted when we came to the corridors under the palace.
I think I have never had so shuddering an experience as that trip. I
tried to convince myself that nothing could have happened to Mary,
that all this haste was unnecessary, but the wild thought persisted:
Where was Migul?

A group of officials stood in one of the palace's lower corridors. As
they came hastily up to Tina, I suddenly had a contempt for these men
who governed a city in which neither they nor anyone else did any
work. In this time of bloodshed, all these inmates of the palace had
stayed safely within its walls, knowing that it was well fortified and
that within a few hours help would doubtless come.

"The _Micrad_ is coming with the long-range deranger," Tina told them
briefly. After a moment they hastened away upstairs and I heard one of
them shouting:

"The revolt is over! Within an hour we will have all the accursed
Robots inert. The _Micrad_ can sweep all the city with her ray!"

The death of Alent, the guard in the tunnel to the Robot cavern, had
been discovered by the palace officials, and another guard was there
now in his place. Migul had not passed him, this guard told us. But
there had been an interim when the gate was open. Had Migul returned
here and gone back to Mary?

We reached the cavern of machinery. It was dim and deserted, as
before. We came to the door of Mary's room. It was standing half open!

       *       *       *       *       *

Mary was gone! The couch was overturned, with its coving and pillows
strewn about. The room showed every evidence of a desperate struggle.
On the floor the great ten-foot length of Migul lay prone on its back.
A small door-porte in its metal side was open; the panel hung awry on
hinges half ripped away. From the aperture a coil and grid dangled
half out in the midst of a tangled skein of wires.

We bent over the Robot. It was not quite inert. Within its metal shell
there was a humming and a faint, broken rasping. The staring
eye-sockets showed wavering beams of red; the grid of tiny wires back
of the parted lips vibrated with a faint jangle.

I bent lower. "Migul, can you hear me?" I asked.

Would it respond? My heart sent a fervent prayer that this mechanical
thing--the product of man's inventive genius through a thousand
years--would have a last grasp of energy to answer my appeal.

"Migul, can you--"

It spoke. "I hear you." They were thin, jangled tones, crackling and
hissing with interference.

"What happened, Migul? Where is the girl?" I asked.

"Tugh--did this--to me. He took the girl."

"Where? Migul, where did he take her? Do you know?"

"Yes. I--have it recorded that he said--they were going to the
Time-cage--overhead in the laboratory. He said--they--he and the girl
were leaving forever!"


CHAPTER XXII

_The Chase to the End of the World_

The giant mechanism, fashioned in the guise of a man, lay dying. Yet
not that, for it never had had life. It lay deranged; out of order;
its intricate cycle was still operating, but faintly, laboriously.
Jangling out of tune.

Every moment its internal energy was lessening. It seemed to want to
talk. The beams of its eyes rolled wildly. It said:

"Tugh--did this--to me. I came back here frightened because I knew
that Tugh still controlled me. You--hear me...."

There was a muffled, rumbling blur, then its voice clicked on again.

"When Tugh came I opened the door to him, even though the girl tried
to stop me.... And I was humble before Tugh.... But he was angry
because I had released you. He--deranged me. I tried to fight him, and
he ripped open my side porte...."

I thought the mechanism had gone inert. From within it was complete
silence. Larry murmured, "Good Lord, this is gruesome!"

Then the faint, rasping voice started again.

"Deranged me.... And about Tugh, he--" A blur. Then again, "Tugh--he
is--Tugh, he is--"

It went into a dull repetition of the three words, ending in a rumble
which died into complete silence. The red radiance from the
eye-sockets faded and vanished.

The thing we had called Migul seemed gone. There was only this metal
shell, cast to represent a giant human figure, lying here with its
operating mechanisms out of order--smashed.

       *       *       *       *       *

I stood up. "That's the end of it. Mary Atwood's gone--"

"With Tugh in the Time-cage!" Larry exclaimed. "Tina, can't we--"

"Follow them?" Tina interrupted. "Come on! No--you two wait here. I
will go upstairs and verify if the Time-cage is gone."

She came back in a moment. The laboratory overhead was fortunately
deserted of Robots: Larry and I had not thought of that.

"The cage is gone!" Tina exclaimed. "Migul told us the truth!"

We hastened back through the tunnel, past the guard, up into the
palace and into the garden. My heart pounded in my throat for fear
that Tina's Time-cage would have vanished. But it stood, dimly glowing
under the foliage where she had left it.

A young man rushed up to us and said, "Princess Tina, look there!"

A great row of colored lights sailed slowly past overhead. The
_Micrad_ was here, circling over the city. The storm had abated; it
had rained only for a brief time.[6] The crazy winds were subsiding.
The _Micrad_ was using its deranging ray: we could hear the thrum of
it. It sent out vibrations which threw the internal mechanisms of the
Robots out of adjustment, and they were dropping in their tracks all
over the city.

[Footnote 6: It was afterward found that many of the Robots, heedless
of the rain as they ran about the city intent upon their murderous
work, had exploded by getting too wet.]

       *       *       *       *       *

It chanced, as momentarily we stood there at the entrance to the
Time-cage while the great airliner swept by, that the top of the
nearby laboratory was visible through the trees. We saw a white
search-beam from the _Micrad_ come down and disclosed a group of
Robots on the laboratory roof. Then the spreading beam of the
deranging ray struck them, and they stood an instant transfixed,
stricken, with wildly flailing arms. Then one toppled and fell. Then
another. Two rushed together, locked in each other's grip, desperately
fighting because of some crazy, deranged thought-impulse. They swayed
and tore at each other until both wilted and sank inert. Another
tottered with jerky steps to the edge of the roof and plunged
headlong, crashing with a great metal clatter to the stone paving of
the ground....

The young man who had joined us dashed into the palace. We heard his
shouts:

"The revolt is over! The revolt is over!"

This had been a massacre similar to Tugh's vengeance upon the New York
City of 1935; just as senseless. Both, from the beginning, were
equally hopeless of ultimate success. Tugh could not conquer this
Time-world, so now he had left it, taking Mary Atwood with him....

We hastened into the Time-cage. Larry and I braced ourselves for the
shock as Tina slid the door closed and hurried to the controls.
