
_Qu._ 5. Do not Bodies and Light act mutually upon one another; that is
to say, Bodies upon Light in emitting, reflecting, refracting and
inflecting it, and Light upon Bodies for heating them, and putting their
parts into a vibrating motion wherein heat consists?

_Qu._ 6. Do not black Bodies conceive heat more easily from Light than
those of other Colours do, by reason that the Light falling on them is
not reflected outwards, but enters the Bodies, and is often reflected
and refracted within them, until it be stifled and lost?

_Qu._ 7. Is not the strength and vigor of the action between Light and
sulphureous Bodies observed above, one reason why sulphureous Bodies
take fire more readily, and burn more vehemently than other Bodies do?

_Qu._ 8. Do not all fix'd Bodies, when heated beyond a certain degree,
emit Light and shine; and is not this Emission perform'd by the
vibrating motions of their parts? And do not all Bodies which abound
with terrestrial parts, and especially with sulphureous ones, emit Light
as often as those parts are sufficiently agitated; whether that
agitation be made by Heat, or by Friction, or Percussion, or
Putrefaction, or by any vital Motion, or any other Cause? As for
instance; Sea-Water in a raging Storm; Quick-silver agitated in _vacuo_;
the Back of a Cat, or Neck of a Horse, obliquely struck or rubbed in a
dark place; Wood, Flesh and Fish while they putrefy; Vapours arising
from putrefy'd Waters, usually call'd _Ignes Fatui_; Stacks of moist Hay
or Corn growing hot by fermentation; Glow-worms and the Eyes of some
Animals by vital Motions; the vulgar _Phosphorus_ agitated by the
attrition of any Body, or by the acid Particles of the Air; Amber and
some Diamonds by striking, pressing or rubbing them; Scrapings of Steel
struck off with a Flint; Iron hammer'd very nimbly till it become so hot
as to kindle Sulphur thrown upon it; the Axletrees of Chariots taking
fire by the rapid rotation of the Wheels; and some Liquors mix'd with
one another whose Particles come together with an Impetus, as Oil of
Vitriol distilled from its weight of Nitre, and then mix'd with twice
its weight of Oil of Anniseeds. So also a Globe of Glass about 8 or 10
Inches in diameter, being put into a Frame where it may be swiftly
turn'd round its Axis, will in turning shine where it rubs against the
palm of ones Hand apply'd to it: And if at the same time a piece of
white Paper or white Cloth, or the end of ones Finger be held at the
distance of about a quarter of an Inch or half an Inch from that part of
the Glass where it is most in motion, the electrick Vapour which is
excited by the friction of the Glass against the Hand, will by dashing
against the white Paper, Cloth or Finger, be put into such an agitation
as to emit Light, and make the white Paper, Cloth or Finger, appear
lucid like a Glowworm; and in rushing out of the Glass will sometimes
push against the finger so as to be felt. And the same things have been
found by rubbing a long and large Cylinder or Glass or Amber with a
Paper held in ones hand, and continuing the friction till the Glass grew
warm.

_Qu._ 9. Is not Fire a Body heated so hot as to emit Light copiously?
For what else is a red hot Iron than Fire? And what else is a burning
Coal than red hot Wood?

_Qu._ 10. Is not Flame a Vapour, Fume or Exhalation heated red hot, that
is, so hot as to shine? For Bodies do not flame without emitting a
copious Fume, and this Fume burns in the Flame. The _Ignis Fatuus_ is a
Vapour shining without heat, and is there not the same difference
between this Vapour and Flame, as between rotten Wood shining without
heat and burning Coals of Fire? In distilling hot Spirits, if the Head
of the Still be taken off, the Vapour which ascends out of the Still
will take fire at the Flame of a Candle, and turn into Flame, and the
Flame will run along the Vapour from the Candle to the Still. Some
Bodies heated by Motion, or Fermentation, if the heat grow intense, fume
copiously, and if the heat be great enough the Fumes will shine and
become Flame. Metals in fusion do not flame for want of a copious Fume,
except Spelter, which fumes copiously, and thereby flames. All flaming
Bodies, as Oil, Tallow, Wax, Wood, fossil Coals, Pitch, Sulphur, by
flaming waste and vanish into burning Smoke, which Smoke, if the Flame
be put out, is very thick and visible, and sometimes smells strongly,
but in the Flame loses its smell by burning, and according to the nature
of the Smoke the Flame is of several Colours, as that of Sulphur blue,
that of Copper open'd with sublimate green, that of Tallow yellow, that
of Camphire white. Smoke passing through Flame cannot but grow red hot,
and red hot Smoke can have no other appearance than that of Flame. When
Gun-powder takes fire, it goes away into Flaming Smoke. For the Charcoal
and Sulphur easily take fire, and set fire to the Nitre, and the Spirit
of the Nitre being thereby rarified into Vapour, rushes out with
Explosion much after the manner that the Vapour of Water rushes out of
an AEolipile; the Sulphur also being volatile is converted into Vapour,
and augments the Explosion. And the acid Vapour of the Sulphur (namely
that which distils under a Bell into Oil of Sulphur,) entring violently
into the fix'd Body of the Nitre, sets loose the Spirit of the Nitre,
and excites a great Fermentation, whereby the Heat is farther augmented,
and the fix'd Body of the Nitre is also rarified into Fume, and the
Explosion is thereby made more vehement and quick. For if Salt of Tartar
be mix'd with Gun-powder, and that Mixture be warm'd till it takes fire,
the Explosion will be more violent and quick than that of Gun-powder
alone; which cannot proceed from any other cause than the action of the
Vapour of the Gun-powder upon the Salt of Tartar, whereby that Salt is
rarified. The Explosion of Gun-powder arises therefore from the violent
action whereby all the Mixture being quickly and vehemently heated, is
rarified and converted into Fume and Vapour: which Vapour, by the
violence of that action, becoming so hot as to shine, appears in the
form of Flame.

_Qu._ 11. Do not great Bodies conserve their heat the longest, their
parts heating one another, and may not great dense and fix'd Bodies,
when heated beyond a certain degree, emit Light so copiously, as by the
Emission and Re-action of its Light, and the Reflexions and Refractions
of its Rays within its Pores to grow still hotter, till it comes to a
certain period of heat, such as is that of the Sun? And are not the Sun
and fix'd Stars great Earths vehemently hot, whose heat is conserved by
the greatness of the Bodies, and the mutual Action and Reaction between
them, and the Light which they emit, and whose parts are kept from
fuming away, not only by their fixity, but also by the vast weight and
density of the Atmospheres incumbent upon them; and very strongly
compressing them, and condensing the Vapours and Exhalations which arise
from them? For if Water be made warm in any pellucid Vessel emptied of
Air, that Water in the _Vacuum_ will bubble and boil as vehemently as it
would in the open Air in a Vessel set upon the Fire till it conceives a
much greater heat. For the weight of the incumbent Atmosphere keeps down
the Vapours, and hinders the Water from boiling, until it grow much
hotter than is requisite to make it boil _in vacuo_. Also a mixture of
Tin and Lead being put upon a red hot Iron _in vacuo_ emits a Fume and
Flame, but the same Mixture in the open Air, by reason of the incumbent
Atmosphere, does not so much as emit any Fume which can be perceived by
Sight. In like manner the great weight of the Atmosphere which lies upon
the Globe of the Sun may hinder Bodies there from rising up and going
away from the Sun in the form of Vapours and Fumes, unless by means of a
far greater heat than that which on the Surface of our Earth would very
easily turn them into Vapours and Fumes. And the same great weight may
condense those Vapours and Exhalations as soon as they shall at any time
begin to ascend from the Sun, and make them presently fall back again
into him, and by that action increase his Heat much after the manner
that in our Earth the Air increases the Heat of a culinary Fire. And the
same weight may hinder the Globe of the Sun from being diminish'd,
unless by the Emission of Light, and a very small quantity of Vapours
and Exhalations.

_Qu._ 12. Do not the Rays of Light in falling upon the bottom of the Eye
excite Vibrations in the _Tunica Retina_? Which Vibrations, being
propagated along the solid Fibres of the optick Nerves into the Brain,
cause the Sense of seeing. For because dense Bodies conserve their Heat
a long time, and the densest Bodies conserve their Heat the longest, the
Vibrations of their parts are of a lasting nature, and therefore may be
propagated along solid Fibres of uniform dense Matter to a great
distance, for conveying into the Brain the impressions made upon all the
Organs of Sense. For that Motion which can continue long in one and the
same part of a Body, can be propagated a long way from one part to
another, supposing the Body homogeneal, so that the Motion may not be
reflected, refracted, interrupted or disorder'd by any unevenness of the
Body.

_Qu._ 13. Do not several sorts of Rays make Vibrations of several
bignesses, which according to their bignesses excite Sensations of
several Colours, much after the manner that the Vibrations of the Air,
according to their several bignesses excite Sensations of several
Sounds? And particularly do not the most refrangible Rays excite the
shortest Vibrations for making a Sensation of deep violet, the least
refrangible the largest for making a Sensation of deep red, and the
several intermediate sorts of Rays, Vibrations of several intermediate
bignesses to make Sensations of the several intermediate Colours?

_Qu._ 14. May not the harmony and discord of Colours arise from the
proportions of the Vibrations propagated through the Fibres of the
optick Nerves into the Brain, as the harmony and discord of Sounds arise
from the proportions of the Vibrations of the Air? For some Colours, if
they be view'd together, are agreeable to one another, as those of Gold
and Indigo, and others disagree.

_Qu._ 15. Are not the Species of Objects seen with both Eyes united
where the optick Nerves meet before they come into the Brain, the Fibres
on the right side of both Nerves uniting there, and after union going
thence into the Brain in the Nerve which is on the right side of the
Head, and the Fibres on the left side of both Nerves uniting in the same
place, and after union going into the Brain in the Nerve which is on the
left side of the Head, and these two Nerves meeting in the Brain in such
a manner that their Fibres make but one entire Species or Picture, half
of which on the right side of the Sensorium comes from the right side of
both Eyes through the right side of both optick Nerves to the place
where the Nerves meet, and from thence on the right side of the Head
into the Brain, and the other half on the left side of the Sensorium
comes in like manner from the left side of both Eyes. For the optick
Nerves of such Animals as look the same way with both Eyes (as of Men,
Dogs, Sheep, Oxen, &c.) meet before they come into the Brain, but the
optick Nerves of such Animals as do not look the same way with both Eyes
(as of Fishes, and of the Chameleon,) do not meet, if I am rightly
inform'd.

_Qu._ 16. When a Man in the dark presses either corner of his Eye with
his Finger, and turns his Eye away from his Finger, he will see a Circle
of Colours like those in the Feather of a Peacock's Tail. If the Eye and
the Finger remain quiet these Colours vanish in a second Minute of Time,
but if the Finger be moved with a quavering Motion they appear again. Do
not these Colours arise from such Motions excited in the bottom of the
Eye by the Pressure and Motion of the Finger, as, at other times are
excited there by Light for causing Vision? And do not the Motions once
excited continue about a Second of Time before they cease? And when a
Man by a stroke upon his Eye sees a flash of Light, are not the like
Motions excited in the _Retina_ by the stroke? And when a Coal of Fire
moved nimbly in the circumference of a Circle, makes the whole
circumference appear like a Circle of Fire; is it not because the
Motions excited in the bottom of the Eye by the Rays of Light are of a
lasting nature, and continue till the Coal of Fire in going round
returns to its former place? And considering the lastingness of the
Motions excited in the bottom of the Eye by Light, are they not of a
vibrating nature?

_Qu._ 17. If a stone be thrown into stagnating Water, the Waves excited
thereby continue some time to arise in the place where the Stone fell
into the Water, and are propagated from thence in concentrick Circles
upon the Surface of the Water to great distances. And the Vibrations or
Tremors excited in the Air by percussion, continue a little time to move
from the place of percussion in concentrick Spheres to great distances.
And in like manner, when a Ray of Light falls upon the Surface of any
pellucid Body, and is there refracted or reflected, may not Waves of
Vibrations, or Tremors, be thereby excited in the refracting or
reflecting Medium at the point of Incidence, and continue to arise
there, and to be propagated from thence as long as they continue to
arise and be propagated, when they are excited in the bottom of the Eye
by the Pressure or Motion of the Finger, or by the Light which comes
from the Coal of Fire in the Experiments above-mention'd? and are not
these Vibrations propagated from the point of Incidence to great
distances? And do they not overtake the Rays of Light, and by overtaking
them successively, do they not put them into the Fits of easy Reflexion
and easy Transmission described above? For if the Rays endeavour to
recede from the densest part of the Vibration, they may be alternately
accelerated and retarded by the Vibrations overtaking them.

_Qu._ 18. If in two large tall cylindrical Vessels of Glass inverted,
two little Thermometers be suspended so as not to touch the Vessels, and
the Air be drawn out of one of these Vessels, and these Vessels thus
prepared be carried out of a cold place into a warm one; the Thermometer
_in vacuo_ will grow warm as much, and almost as soon as the Thermometer
which is not _in vacuo_. And when the Vessels are carried back into the
cold place, the Thermometer _in vacuo_ will grow cold almost as soon as
the other Thermometer. Is not the Heat of the warm Room convey'd through
the _Vacuum_ by the Vibrations of a much subtiler Medium than Air, which
after the Air was drawn out remained in the _Vacuum_? And is not this
Medium the same with that Medium by which Light is refracted and
reflected, and by whose Vibrations Light communicates Heat to Bodies,
and is put into Fits of easy Reflexion and easy Transmission? And do not
the Vibrations of this Medium in hot Bodies contribute to the
intenseness and duration of their Heat? And do not hot Bodies
communicate their Heat to contiguous cold ones, by the Vibrations of
this Medium propagated from them into the cold ones? And is not this
Medium exceedingly more rare and subtile than the Air, and exceedingly
more elastick and active? And doth it not readily pervade all Bodies?
And is it not (by its elastick force) expanded through all the Heavens?

_Qu._ 19. Doth not the Refraction of Light proceed from the different
density of this AEthereal Medium in different places, the Light receding
always from the denser parts of the Medium? And is not the density
thereof greater in free and open Spaces void of Air and other grosser
Bodies, than within the Pores of Water, Glass, Crystal, Gems, and other
compact Bodies? For when Light passes through Glass or Crystal, and
falling very obliquely upon the farther Surface thereof is totally
reflected, the total Reflexion ought to proceed rather from the density
and vigour of the Medium without and beyond the Glass, than from the
rarity and weakness thereof.

_Qu._ 20. Doth not this AEthereal Medium in passing out of Water, Glass,
Crystal, and other compact and dense Bodies into empty Spaces, grow
denser and denser by degrees, and by that means refract the Rays of
Light not in a point, but by bending them gradually in curve Lines? And
doth not the gradual condensation of this Medium extend to some distance
from the Bodies, and thereby cause the Inflexions of the Rays of Light,
which pass by the edges of dense Bodies, at some distance from the
Bodies?

_Qu._ 21. Is not this Medium much rarer within the dense Bodies of the
Sun, Stars, Planets and Comets, than in the empty celestial Spaces
between them? And in passing from them to great distances, doth it not
grow denser and denser perpetually, and thereby cause the gravity of
those great Bodies towards one another, and of their parts towards the
Bodies; every Body endeavouring to go from the denser parts of the
Medium towards the rarer? For if this Medium be rarer within the Sun's
Body than at its Surface, and rarer there than at the hundredth part of
an Inch from its Body, and rarer there than at the fiftieth part of an
Inch from its Body, and rarer there than at the Orb of _Saturn_; I see
no reason why the Increase of density should stop any where, and not
rather be continued through all distances from the Sun to _Saturn_, and
beyond. And though this Increase of density may at great distances be
exceeding slow, yet if the elastick force of this Medium be exceeding
great, it may suffice to impel Bodies from the denser parts of the
Medium towards the rarer, with all that power which we call Gravity. And
that the elastick force of this Medium is exceeding great, may be
gather'd from the swiftness of its Vibrations. Sounds move about 1140
_English_ Feet in a second Minute of Time, and in seven or eight Minutes
of Time they move about one hundred _English_ Miles. Light moves from
the Sun to us in about seven or eight Minutes of Time, which distance is
about 70,000,000 _English_ Miles, supposing the horizontal Parallax of
the Sun to be about 12''. And the Vibrations or Pulses of this Medium,
that they may cause the alternate Fits of easy Transmission and easy
Reflexion, must be swifter than Light, and by consequence above 700,000
times swifter than Sounds. And therefore the elastick force of this
Medium, in proportion to its density, must be above 700000 x 700000
(that is, above 490,000,000,000) times greater than the elastick force
of the Air is in proportion to its density. For the Velocities of the
Pulses of elastick Mediums are in a subduplicate _Ratio_ of the
Elasticities and the Rarities of the Mediums taken together.

As Attraction is stronger in small Magnets than in great ones in
proportion to their Bulk, and Gravity is greater in the Surfaces of
small Planets than in those of great ones in proportion to their bulk,
and small Bodies are agitated much more by electric attraction than
great ones; so the smallness of the Rays of Light may contribute very
much to the power of the Agent by which they are refracted. And so if
any one should suppose that _AEther_ (like our Air) may contain Particles
which endeavour to recede from one another (for I do not know what this
_AEther_ is) and that its Particles are exceedingly smaller than those of
Air, or even than those of Light: The exceeding smallness of its
Particles may contribute to the greatness of the force by which those
Particles may recede from one another, and thereby make that Medium
exceedingly more rare and elastick than Air, and by consequence
exceedingly less able to resist the motions of Projectiles, and
exceedingly more able to press upon gross Bodies, by endeavouring to
expand it self.

_Qu._ 22. May not Planets and Comets, and all gross Bodies, perform
their Motions more freely, and with less resistance in this AEthereal
Medium than in any Fluid, which fills all Space adequately without
leaving any Pores, and by consequence is much denser than Quick-silver
or Gold? And may not its resistance be so small, as to be
inconsiderable? For instance; If this _AEther_ (for so I will call it)
should be supposed 700000 times more elastick than our Air, and above
700000 times more rare; its resistance would be above 600,000,000 times
less than that of Water. And so small a resistance would scarce make any
sensible alteration in the Motions of the Planets in ten thousand
Years. If any one would ask how a Medium can be so rare, let him tell me
