This plant is well known to be dioecious. My son William found the two sexes
growing in about equal numbers in the Isle of Wight, and sent me specimens,
together with observations on them. Each sex consists of two sub-forms. The two
forms of the male differ in their pistils: in some plants it is quite small,
without any distinct stigma; in others the pistil is much more developed, with
the papillae on the stigmatic surfaces moderately large. The ovules in both
kinds of males are in an aborted condition. On my mentioning this case to
Professor Caspary, he examined several male plants in the botanic gardens at
Konigsberg, where there were no females, and sent me the drawings in Figure
7.13.

In the English plants the petals are not so greatly reduced as represented in
this drawing. My son observed that those males which had their pistils
moderately well-developed bore slightly larger flowers, and, what is very
remarkable, their pollen-grains exceeded by a little in diameter those of the
males with greatly reduced pistils. This fact is opposed to the belief that the
present species was once heterostyled; for in this case it might have been
expected that the shorter-styled plants would have had larger pollen-grains.

In the female plants the stamens are in an extremely rudimentary condition, much
more so than the pistils in the males. The pistil varies considerably in length
in the female plants, so that they may be divided into two sub-forms according
to the length of this organ. Both the petals and sepals are decidedly smaller in
the females than in the males; and the sepals do not turn downwards, as do those
of the male flowers when mature. All the flowers on the same male or same female
bush, though subject to some variability, belong to the same sub-form; and as my
son never experienced any difficulty in deciding under which class a plant ought
to be included, he believes that the two sub-forms of the same sex do not
graduate into one another. I can form no satisfactory theory how the four forms
of this plant originated.

Rhamnus lanceolatus.

This plant exists in the United States, as I am informed by Professor Asa Gray,
under two hermaphrodite forms. In the one, which may be called the short-styled,
the flowers are sub-solitary, and include a pistil about two-thirds or only half
as long as that in the other form; it has also shorter stigmas. The stamens are
of equal length in the two forms; but the anthers of the short-styled contain
rather less pollen, as far as I could judge from a few dried flowers. My son
compared the pollen-grains from the two forms, and those from the long-styled
flowers were to those from the short-styled, on an average from ten
measurements, as 10 to 9 in diameter; so that the two hermaphrodite forms of
this species resemble in this respect the two male forms of R. catharticus. The
long-styled form is not so common as the short-styled. The latter is said by Asa
Gray to be the more fruitful of the two, as might have been expected from its
appearing to produce less pollen, and from the grains being of smaller size; it
is therefore the more highly feminine of the two. The long-styled form produces
a greater number of flowers, which are clustered together instead of being sub-
solitary; they yield some fruit, but as just stated are less fruitful than the
other form, so that this form appears to be the more masculine of the two. On
the supposition that we have here an hermaphrodite plant becoming dioecious,
there are two points deserving notice; firstly, the greater length of the pistil
in the incipient male form; and we have met with a nearly similar case in the
male and hermaphrodite forms of Euonymus compared with the females. Secondly,
the larger size of the pollen-grains in the more masculine flowers, which
perhaps may be attributed to their having retained their normal size; whilst
those in the incipient female flowers have been reduced. The long-styled form of
R. lanceolatus seems to correspond with the males of R. catharticus which have a
longer pistil and larger pollen-grains. Light will perhaps be thrown on the
nature of the forms in this genus, as soon as the power of both kinds of pollen
on both stigmas is ascertained. Several other species of Rhamnus are said to be
dioecious or sub-dioecious. (7/10. Lecoq 'Geogr. Bot.' tome 5 1856 pages 420-
26.) On the other hand, R. frangula is an ordinary hermaphrodite, for my son
found a large number of bushes all bearing an equal profusion of fruit.

Epigaea repens (ERICACEAE).

This plant appears to be in nearly the same state as Rhamnus catharticus. It is
described by Asa Gray as existing under four forms. (7/11. 'American Journal of
Science' July 1876. Also 'The American Naturalist' 1876 page 490.) (1.) With
long style, perfect stigma, and short abortive stamens. (2.) Shorter style, but
with stigma equally perfect, short abortive stamens. These two female forms
amounted to 20 per cent of the specimens received from one locality in Maine;
but all the fruiting specimens belonged to the first form. (3.) Style long, as
in Number 1, but with stigma imperfect, stamens perfect. (4.) Style shorter than
in the last, stigma imperfect, stamens perfect. These two latter forms are
evidently males. Therefore, as Asa Gray remarks, "the flowers may be classified
into two kinds, each with two modifications; the two main kinds characterised by
the nature and perfection of the stigma, along with more or less abortion of the
stamens; their modifications, by the length of the style." Mr. Meehan has
described the extreme variability of the corolla and calyx in this plant, and
shows that it is dioecious. (7/12. "Variations in Epigaea repens" 'Proc. Acad.
Nat. Soc. of Philadelphia' May 1868 page 153.) It is much to be wished that the
pollen-grains in the two male forms should be compared, and their fertilising
power tried on the two female forms.

Ilex aquifolium (AQUIFOLIACEAE).

In the several works which I have consulted, one author alone says that the
holly is dioecious. (7/13. Vaucher 'Hist. Phys. des Plantes d'Europe' 1841 tome
2 page 11.) During several years I have examined many plants, but have never
found one that was really hermaphrodite. I mention this genus because the
stamens in the female flowers, although quite destitute of pollen, are but
slightly and sometimes not at all shorter than the perfect stamens in the male
flowers. In the latter the ovary is small and the pistil is almost aborted. The
filaments of the perfect stamens adhere for a greater length to the petals than
in the female flowers. The corolla of the latter is rather smaller than that of
the male. The male trees produce a greater number of flowers than the females.
Asa Gray informs me that I. opaca, which represents in the United States our
common holly, appears (judging from dried flowers) to be in a similar state; and
so it is, according to Vaucher, with several other but not with all the species
of the genus.

GYNO-DIOECIOUS PLANTS.

The plants hitherto described either show a tendency to become dioecious, or
apparently have become so within a recent period. But the species now to be
considered consist of hermaphrodites and females without males, and rarely show
any tendency to be dioecious, as far as can be judged from their present
condition and from the absence of species having separated sexes within the same
groups. Species belonging to the present class, which I have called gyno-
dioecious, are found in various widely distinct families; but are much more
common in the Labiatae (as has long been noticed by botanists) than in any other
group. Such cases have been noticed by myself in Thymus serpyllum and vulgaris,
Satureia hortensis, Origanum vulgare, and Mentha hirsuta; and by others in
Nepeta glechoma, Mentha vulgaris and aquatica, and Prunella vulgaris. In these
two latter species the female form, according to H. Muller, is infrequent. To
these must be added Dracocephalum Moldavicum, Melissa officinalis and
clinopodium, and Hyssopus officinalis. (7/14. H. Muller 'Die Befruchtung der
Blumen' 1873 and 'Nature' 1873 page 161. Vaucher 'Plantes d'Europe' tome 3 page
611. For Dracocephalum Schimper as quoted by Braun 'Annals and Magazine of
Natural History' 2nd series volume 18 1856 page 380. Lecoq 'Geographie Bot. de
l'Europe' tome 8 pages 33, 38, 44, etc. Both Vaucher and Lecoq were mistaken in
thinking that several of the plants named in the text are dioecious. They appear
to have assumed that the hermaphrodite form was a male; perhaps they were
deceived by the pistil not becoming fully developed and of proper length until
some time after the anthers have dehisced.) In the two last-named plants the
female form likewise appears to be rare, for I raised many seedlings of both,
and all were hermaphrodites. It has already been remarked in the Introduction
that andro-dioecious species, as they may be called, or those which consist of
hermaphrodites and males, are extremely rare, or hardly exist.

Thymus serpyllum.

The hermaphrodite plants present nothing particular in the state of their
reproductive organs; and so it is in all the following cases. The females of the
present species produce rather fewer flowers and have somewhat smaller corollas
than the hermaphrodites; so that near Torquay, where this plant abounds, I
could, after a little practice, distinguish the two forms whilst walking quickly
past them. According to Vaucher, the smaller size of the corolla is common to
the females of most or all of the above-mentioned Labiatae. The pistil of the
female, though somewhat variable in length, is generally shorter, with the
margins of the stigma broader and formed of more lax tissue, than that of the
hermaphrodite. The stamens in the female vary excessively in length; they are
generally enclosed within the tube of the corolla, and their anthers do not
contain any sound pollen; but after long search I found a single plant with the
stamens moderately exserted, and their anthers contained a very few full-sized
grains, together with a multitude of minute empty ones. In some females the
stamens are extremely short, and their minute anthers, though divided into the
two normal cells or loculi, contained not a trace of pollen: in others again the
anthers did not exceed in diameter the filaments which supported them, and were
not divided into two loculi. Judging from what I have myself seen and from the
descriptions of others, all the plants in Britain, Germany, and near Mentone,
are in the state just described; and I have never found a single flower with an
aborted pistil. It is, therefore, remarkable that, according to Delpino, this
plant near Florence is generally trimorphic, consisting of males with aborted
pistils, females with aborted stamens, and hermaphrodites. (7/15. 'Sull' Opera,
la Distribuzione dei Sessi nelle Piante, etc' 1867 page 7. With respect to
Germany H. Muller 'Die Befruchtung etc.' page 327.)

I found it very difficult to judge of the proportional number of the two forms
at Torquay. They often grow mingled together, but with large patches consisting
of one form alone. At first I thought that the two were nearly equal in number;
but on examining every plant which grew close to the edge of a little
overhanging dry cliff, about 200 yards in length, I found only 12 females; all
the rest, some hundreds in number, being hermaphrodites. Again, on an extensive
gently sloping bank, which was so thickly covered with this plant that, viewed
from the distance of half a mile it appeared of a pink colour, I could not
discover a single female. Therefore the hermaphrodites must greatly exceed in
number the females, at least in the localities examined by me. A very dry
station apparently favours the presence of the female form. With some of the
other above-named Labiatae the nature of the soil or climate likewise seems to
determine the presence of one or both forms; thus with Nepeta glechoma, Mr. Hart
found in 1873 that all the plants which he examined near Kilkenny in Ireland
were females; whilst all near Bath were hermaphrodites, and near Hertford both
forms were present, but with a preponderance of hermaphrodites. (7/16. 'Nature'
June 1873 page 162.) It would, however, be a mistake to suppose that the nature
of the conditions determines the form independently of inheritance; for I sowed
in the same small bed seeds of T. serpyllum, gathered at Torquay from the female
alone, and these produced an abundance of both forms. There is every reason to
believe, from large patches consisting of the same form, that the same
individual plant, however much it may spread, always retains the same form. In
two distant gardens I found masses of the lemon-thyme (T. citriodorus, a var. of
T. serpyllum, which I was informed had grown there during many years, and every
flower was female.

With respect to the fertility of the two forms, I marked at Torquay a large
hermaphrodite and a large female plant of nearly equal sizes, and when the seeds
were ripe I gathered all the heads. The two heaps were of very nearly equal
bulk; but the heads from the female plant numbered 160, and their seeds weighed
8.7 grains; whilst those from the hermaphrodite plant numbered 200, and their
seeds weighed only 4.9 grains; so that the seeds from the female plant were to
those from the hermaphrodite as 100 to 56 in weight. If the relative weight of
the seeds from an equal number of flower-heads from the two forms be compared,
the ratio is as 100 for the female to 45 for the hermaphrodite form.

Thymus vulgaris.

(FIGURE 7.15. Thymus vulgaris (magnified).
Left: Hermaphrodite.
Right: Two females.)

The common garden thyme resembles in almost every respect T. serpyllum. The same
slight differences between the stigmas of the two forms could be perceived. In
the females the stamens are not generally quite so much reduced as in the same
form of T. serpyllum. In some specimens sent me from Mentone by Mr. Moggridge,
together with the sketches in Figure 7.15, the anthers of the female, though
small, were well formed, but they contained very little pollen, and not a single
sound grain could be detected. Eighteen seedlings were raised from purchased
seed, sown in the same small bed; and these consisted of seven hermaphrodites
and eleven females. They were left freely exposed to the visits of bees, and no
doubt every female flower was fertilised; for on placing under the microscope a
large number of stigmas from female plants, not one could be found to which
pollen-grains of thyme did not adhere. The seeds were carefully collected from
the eleven female plants, and they weighed 98.7 grains; and those from the seven
hermaphrodites 36.5 grains. This gives for an equal number of plants the ratio
of 100 to 58; and we here see, as in the last case, how much more fertile the
females are than the hermaphrodites. These two lots of seeds were sown
separately in two adjoining beds, and the seedlings from both the hermaphrodite
and female parent-plants consisted of both forms.

Satureia hortensis.

Eleven seedlings were raised in separate pots in a hotbed and afterwards kept in
the greenhouse. They consisted of ten females and of a single hermaphrodite.
Whether or not the conditions to which they had been subjected caused the great
excess of females I do not know. In the females the pistil is rather longer than
that of the hermaphrodite, and the stamens are mere rudiments, with minute
colourless anthers destitute of pollen. The windows of the greenhouse were left
open, and the flowers were incessantly visited by humble and hive bees. Although
the ten females did not produce a single grain of pollen, yet they were all
thoroughly well fertilised by the one hermaphrodite plant, and this is an
interesting fact. It should be added that no other plant of this species grew in
my garden. The seeds were collected from the finest female plant, and they
weighed 78 grains; whilst those from the hermaphrodite, which was a rather
larger plant than the female, weighed only 33.2 grains; that is, in the ratio of
100 to 43. The female form, therefore, is very much more fertile than the
hermaphrodite, as in the two last cases; but the hermaphrodite was necessarily
self-fertilised, and this probably diminished its fertility.

We may now consider the probable means by which so many of the Labiatae have
been separated into two forms, and the advantages thus gained. H. Muller
supposes that originally some individuals varied so as to produce more
conspicuous flowers; and that insects habitually visited these first, and then
dusted with their pollen visited and fertilised the less conspicuous flowers.
(7/17. 'Die Befruchtung der Blumen' pages 319, 326.) The production of pollen by
the latter plants would thus be rendered superfluous, and it would be
advantageous to the species that their stamens should abort, so as to save
useless expenditure. They would thus be converted into females. But another view
may be suggested: as the production of a large supply of seeds evidently is of
high importance to many plants, and as we have seen in the three foregoing cases
that the females produce many more seeds than the hermaphrodites, increased
fertility seems to me the more probable cause of the formation and separation of
the two forms. From the data above given it follows that ten plants of Thymus
serpyllum, if half consisted of hermaphrodites and half of females, would yield
seeds compared with ten hermaphrodite plants in the ratio of 100 to 72. Under
similar circumstances the ratio with Satureia hortensis (subject to the doubt
from the self-fertilisation of the hermaphrodite) would be as 100 to 60. Whether
the two forms originated in certain individuals varying and producing more seed
than usual, and consequently producing less pollen; or in the stamens of certain
individuals tending from some unknown cause to abort, and consequently producing
more seed, it is impossible to decide; but in either case, if the tendency to
the increased production of seed were steadily favoured, the result would be the
complete abortion of the male organs. I shall presently discuss the cause of the
smaller size of the female corolla.

[Scabiosa arvensis (DIPSACEAE).

It has been shown by H. Muller that this species exists in Germany under an
hermaphrodite and female form. (7/18. 'Die Befruchtung der Blumen' page 368. The
two forms occur not only in Germany, but in England and France. Lecoq
'Geographie Bot.' 1857 tome 6 pages 473, 477, says that male plants as well as
hermaphrodites and females coexist; it is, however, possible that he may have
been deceived by the flowers being so strongly proterandrous. From what Lecoq
says, S. succisa likewise appears to occur under two forms in France.) In my
neighbourhood (Kent) the female plants do not nearly equal in number the
hermaphrodites. The stamens of the females vary much in their degree of
abortion; in some plants they are quite short and produce no pollen; in others
they reach to the mouth of the corolla, but their anthers are not half the
proper size, never dehisce, and contain but few pollen-grains, these being
colourless and of small diameter. The hermaphrodite flowers are strongly
proterandrous, and H. Muller shows that, whilst all the stigmas on the same
flower-head are mature at nearly the same time, the stamens dehisce one after
the other; so that there is a great excess of pollen, which serves to fertilise
the female plants. As the production of pollen by one set of plants is thus
rendered superfluous, their male organs have become more or less completely
aborted. Should it be hereafter proved that the female plants yield, as is
probable, more seeds than the hermaphrodites, I should be inclined to extend the
same view to this plant as to the Labiatae. I have also observed the existence
of two forms in our endemic S. succisa, and in the exotic S. atro-purpurea. In
the latter plant, differently to what occurs in S. arvensis, the female flowers,
especially the larger circumferential ones, are smaller than those of the
hermaphrodite form. According to Lecoq, the female flower-heads of S. succisa
are likewise smaller than those of what he calls the male plants, but which are
probably hermaphrodites.

Echium vulgare (BORAGINEAE).

The ordinary hermaphrodite form appears to be proterandrous, and nothing more
need be said about it. The female differs in having a much smaller corolla and
shorter pistil, but a well-developed stigma. The stamens are short; the anthers
do not contain any sound pollen-grains, but in their place yellow incoherent
cells which do not swell in water. Some plants were in an intermediate
condition; that is, had one or two or three stamens of proper length with
perfect anthers, the other stamens being rudimentary. In one such plant half of
one anther contained green perfect pollen-grains, and the other half yellowish-
green imperfect grains. Both forms produced seed, but I neglected to observe
whether in equal numbers. As I thought that the state of the anthers might be
due to some fungoid growth, I examined them both in the bud and mature state,
but could find no trace of mycelium. In 1862 many female plants were found; and
in 1864, 32 plants were collected in two localities, exactly half of which were
hermaphrodites, fourteen were females, and two in an intermediate condition. In
1866, 15 plants were collected in another locality, and these consisted of four
hermaphrodites and eleven females. I may add that this season was a wet one,
which shows that the abortion of the stamens can hardly be due to the dryness of
the sites where the plants grew, as I at one time thought probable. Seeds from
an hermaphrodite were sown in my garden, and of the 23 seedlings raised, one
belonged to the intermediate form, all the others being hermaphrodites, though
two or three of them had unusually short stamens. I have consulted several
botanical works, but have found no record of this plant varying in the manner
here described.

Plantago lanceolata (PLANTAGINEAE).

Delpino states that this plant presents in Italy three forms, which graduate
from an anemophilous into an entomophilous condition. According to H. Muller,
there are only two forms in Germany, neither of which show any special
adaptation for insect fertilisation, and both appear to be hermaphrodites.
(7/19. 'Die Befruchtung' etc. page 342.) But I have found in two localities in
England female and hermaphrodite forms existing together; and the same fact has
been noticed by others. (7/20. Mr. C.W. Crocker 'The Gardener's Chronicle' 1864
page 294. Mr. W. Marshall writes to me to the same effect from Ely.) The females
are less frequent than the hermaphrodites; their stamens are short, and their
anthers, which are of a brighter green whilst young than those of the other
form, dehisce properly, yet contain either no pollen, or a small amount of
imperfect grains of variable size. All the flower-heads on a plant belong to the
same form. It is well known that this species is strongly proterogynous, and I
found that the protruding stigmas of both the hermaphrodite and female flowers
were penetrated by pollen-tubes, whilst their own anthers were immature and had
not escaped out of the bud. Plantago media does not present two forms; but it
appears from Asa Gray's description, that such is the case with four of the
North American species. (7/21. 'Manual of the Botany of the Northern United
States' 2nd edition 1856 page 269. See also 'American Journal of Science'
November 1862 page 419 and 'Proceedings of the American Academy of Science'
October 14, 1862 page 53.) The corolla does not properly expand in the short-
stamened form of these plants.

Cnicus, Serratula, Eriophorum.

In the Compositae, Cnicus palustris and acaulis are said by Sir J.E. Smith to
exist as hermaphrodites and females, the former being the more frequent. With
Serratula tinctoria a regular gradation may be followed from the hermaphrodite
to the female form; in one of the latter plants the stamens were so tall that
the anthers embraced the style as in the hermaphrodites, but they contained only
a few grains of pollen, and these in an aborted condition; in another female, on
the other hand, the anthers were much more reduced in size than is usual.
Lastly, Dr. Dickie has shown that with Eriophorum angustifolium (Cyperaceae)
hermaphrodite and female forms exist in Scotland and the Arctic regions, both of
which yield seed. (7/22. Sir J.E. Smith 'Transactions of the Linnean Society'
volume 13 page 599. Dr. Dickie 'Journal of the Linnean Society Botany' volume 9
1865 page 161.)]

It is a curious fact that in all the foregoing polygamous, dioecious, and gyno-
dioecious plants in which any difference has been observed in the size of the
corolla in the two or three forms, it is rather larger in the females, which
have their stamens more or less or quite rudimentary, than in the hermaphrodites
or males. This holds good with Euonymus, Rhamnus catharticus, Ilex, Fragaria,
all or at least most of the before-named Labiatae, Scabiosa atro-purpurea, and
Echium vulgare. So it is, according to Von Mohl, with Cardamine amara, Geranium
sylvaticum, Myosotis, and Salvia. On the other hand, as Von Mohl remarks, when a
plant produces hermaphrodite flowers and others which are males owing to the
more or less complete abortion of the female organs, the corollas of the males
are not at all increased in size, or only exceptionally and in a slight degree,
as in Acer. (7/23. 'Botanische Zeitung' 1863 page 326.) It seems therefore
probable that the decreased size of the female corollas in the foregoing cases
is due to a tendency to abortion spreading from the stamens to the petals. We
see how intimately these organs are related in double flowers, in which the
stamens are readily converted into petals. Indeed some botanists believe that
petals do not consist of leaves directly metamorphosed, but of metamorphosed
stamens. That the lessened size of the corolla in the above case is in some
manner an indirect result of the modification of the reproductive organs is
supported by the fact that in Rhamnus catharticus not only the petals but the
green and inconspicuous sepals of the female have been reduced in size; and in
