away, head down, tail straight, the big bull charged over the ground
like an avalanche. Roseanne lifted herself in time to see Hugo take two
quick steps, draw back his fist, and hit the bull between the horns. It
was a diabolical thing. The bull was thrown back upon itself. Its neck
snapped loudly. Its feet crumpled; it dropped dead. Twenty feet to one
side was a stone wall. Hugo picked up a hoof and dragged the carcass to
the base of the wall. With his hand he made an indenture in the rocks,
and over the face of the hollow he splashed the bull's blood. Then he
approached Roseanne. The whole episode had occupied less than a minute.

She had hunched her shoulders together, and her face was pale. She
articulated with difficulty. "The bull"--her hands twitched--"broke in
here--and you hit him."

"Just in time, Roseanne."

"You killed him. Then--why did you drag him over there?"

"Because," Hugo answered slowly, "I thought it would be better to make
it seem as if he charged the wall and broke his neck that way."

Her frigidity was worse than any hysteria. "It isn't natural to be able
to do things like that. It isn't human."

He swallowed; those words in that stifled intonation were very familiar.
"I know it. I'm very strong."

Roseanne looked down at the grass. "Wipe your hand, will you?"

He rubbed it in the earth. "You mustn't be frightened."

"No?" She laughed a little. "What must I be, then? I'm alive, I'm
crawling with terror. Don't touch me!" She screamed and drew back.

"I can explain it."

"You can explain everything! But not that."

"It was an idiotic, wild, unfair thing to have happen at this time," he
said. "My life's like that." He looked beyond her. "I began wanting to
do tremendous things. The more I tried, the more discouraged I became.
You see, I was strong. There have been other things figuratively like
the bull. But the things themselves get littler and more preposterous,
because my ambition and my nerve grows smaller." He lowered his head.
"Some day--I shan't want to do anything at all any more. Continuous and
unwonted defeat might infuriate some men to a great effort. It's tiring
me." He raised his eyes sadly to hers. "Roseanne--!"

She gathered her legs under herself and ran. Hugo made no attempt to
follow her. He merely watched. Twice she tripped and once she fell. At
the stone wall she looked back at him. It was not necessary to be able
to see her expression. She went on across the fields--a skinny, flapping
thing--at last a mere spot of moving colour.

Hugo turned and stared at the brown mound of the bull. After a moment he
walked over and stood above it. Its tongue hung out and its mouth
grinned. It lay there dead, and yet to Hugo it still had life: the
indestructibility of a ghost and the immortality of a symbol. He sat
beside it until sundown.

At twilight he entered the barn and tended the cows. The doors of the
house were closed. He went without supper. Cane returned jubilantly
later in the evening. He called Hugo from the back porch.

"Telegram for you."

Hugo read the wire. His father was sick and failing rapidly. "I want my
wages," he said. Then he went back to the barn. His trifling belongings
were already wrapped in a bundle. Cane reluctantly counted out the
money. Hugo felt nauseated and feverish. He put the money in his pocket,
the bundle under his arm; he opened the gate, and his feet found the
soft earth of the road in the darkness.




XX


Hugo had three hours to wait for a Chicago train. His wages purchased
his ticket and left him in possession of twenty dollars. His clothing
was nondescript; he had no baggage. He did not go outside the Grand
Central Terminal, but sat patiently in the smoking-room, waiting for the
time to pass. A guard came up to him and asked to see his ticket. Hugo
did not remonstrate and produced it mechanically; he would undoubtedly
be mistaken for a tramp amid the sleek travellers and commuters.

When the train started, his fit of perplexed lethargy had not abated.
His hands and feet were cold and his heart beat slowly. Life had
accustomed him to frustration and to disappointment, yet it was
agonizing to assimilate this new cudgeling at the hands of fate. The old
green house in the Connecticut hills had been a refuge; Roseanne had
been a refuge. They were, both of them, peaceful and whimsical and they
had seemed innocent of the capacity for great anguish. Every man dreams
of the season-changed countryside as an escape; every man dreams of a
woman on whose broad breast he may rest, beneath whose tumbling hair and
moth-like hands he may discover forgetfulness and freedom. Some men are
successful in a quest for those anodynes. Hugo could understand the
sharp contours of one fact: because he was himself, such a quest would
always end in failure. No woman lived who could assuage him; his fires
would not yield to any temporal powers.

He was barren of desire to investigate deeper into the philosophy of
himself. All people turned aside by fate fall into the same morass.
Except in his strength, Hugo was pitifully like all people: wounds could
easily be opened in his sensitiveness; his moral courage could be taxed
to the fringe of dilemma; he looked upon his fellow men sometimes with
awe at the variety of high places they attained in spite of the heavy
handicap of being human--he looked upon them again with repugnance--and
very rarely, as he grew older, did such inspections of his kind include
a study of the difference between them and him made by his singular
gift. When that thought entered his mind, it gave rise to peculiar
speculations.

He approached thirty, he thought, and still the world had not re-echoed
with his name; the trumps, banners, and cavalcade of his glory had been
only shadows in the sky, dust at sunset that made evanescent and
intangible colours. Again, he thought, the very perfection of his
prowess was responsible for its inapplicability; if he but had an
Achilles' heel so that his might could taste the occasional tonic of
inadequacy, then he could meet the challenge of possible failure with
successful effort. More frequently he condemned his mind and spirit for
not being great enough to conceive a mission for his thews. Then he
would fall into a reverie, trying to invent a creation that would be as
magnificent as the destructions he could so easily envision.

In such a painful and painstaking mood he was carried over the
Alleghenies and out on the Western plains. He changed trains at Chicago
without having slept, and all he could remember of the journey was a
protracted sorrow, a stabbing consciousness of Roseanne, dulled by his
last picture of her, and a hopeless guessing of what she thought about
him now.

Hugo's mother met him at the station. She was unaltered, everything was
unaltered. The last few instants in the vestibule of the train had been
a series of quick remembrances; the whole countryside was like a
long-deserted house to which he had returned. The mountains took on a
familiar aspect, then the houses, then the dingy red station. Lastly his
mother, upright and uncompromisingly grim, dressed in her perpetual
mourning of black silk. Her recognition of Hugo produced only the
slightest flurry and immediately she became mundane.

"Whatever made you come in those clothes?"

"I was working outdoors, mother. I got right on a train. How is father?"

"Sinking slowly."

"I'm glad I'm in time."

"It's God's will." She gazed at him. "You've changed a little, son."

"I'm older." He felt diffident. A vast gulf had risen between this
vigorous, religious woman and himself.

She opened a new topic. "Whatever in the world made you send us all that
money?"

Hugo smiled. "Why--I didn't need it, mother. And I thought it would make
you and father happy."

"Perhaps. Perhaps. It has done some good. I've sent four missionaries
out in the field and I am thinking of sending two more. I had a new
addition put on the church, for the drunkards and the fallen. And we put
a bathroom in the house. Your father wanted two, but I wouldn't hear of
it."

"Have you got a car?"

"Car? I couldn't use one of those inventions of Satan. Your father made
me hire this one to meet you. There's Anna Blake's house. She married
that fellow she was flirting with when you went away. And there's our
house. It was painted last month."

Now all the years had dropped away and Hugo was a child again, an
adolescent again. The car stopped.

"You can go right up. He's in the front room. I'll get lunch."

Hugo's father was lying on the bed watching the door. A little wizened
old man with a big head and thin yellow hands. Illness had made his eyes
rheumy, but they lighted up when his son entered, and he half raised
himself.

"Hello, father."

"Hugo! You've come back."

"Yes, father."

"I've waited for you. Sit down here on the bed. Move me over a little.
Now close the door. Is it cold out? I was afraid you might not get here.
I was afraid you might get sick on the train. Old people are like that,
Hugo." He shaded his eyes. "You aren't a very big man, son. Somehow I
always remembered you as big. But--I suppose"--his voice thinned--"I
suppose you don't want to talk about yourself."

"Anything you want to hear, father."

"I can't believe you came back." He ruminated. "There were a thousand
things I wanted to ask you, son--but they've all gone from my mind. I'm
not so easy in your presence as I was when you were a little shaver."

Hugo knew what those questions would be. Here, on his death-bed, his
father was still a scientist. His soul flinched from giving its account.
He saw suddenly that he could never tell his father the truth; pity,
kindredship, kindness, moved him. "I know what you wanted to ask,
father. Am I still strong?" It took courage to suggest that. But he was
rewarded. The old man sighed ecstatically. "That's it, Hugo, my son."

"Then--father, I am. I grew constantly stronger when I left you. In
college I was strong. At sea I was strong. In the war. First I wanted to
be mighty in games and I was. Then I wanted to do services. And I did,
because I could."

The head nodded on its feeble neck. "You found things to do? I--I hoped
you would. But I always worried about you. Every day, son, every day for
all these years, I picked up the papers and looked at them with
misgivings. 'Suppose,' I said to myself, 'suppose my boy lost his temper
last night. Suppose someone wronged him and he undertook to avenge
himself.' I trusted you, Hugo. I could not quite trust--the other thing.
I've even blamed myself and hated myself." He smiled. "But it's all
right--all right. So I am glad. Then, tell me--what--what--"

"What have I done?"

"Do you mind? It's been so long and you were so far away."

"Well--" Hugo swept his memory back over his career--"so many things,
father. It's hard to recite one's own--"

"I know. But I'm your father, and my ears ache to hear."

"I saved a man pinned under a wagon. I saved a man from a shark. I
pulled open a safe in which a man was smothering. Many things like that.
Then--there was the war."

"I know. I know. When you wrote that you had gone to war, I was
frightened--and happy. Try as I might, I could not think of a great
constructive cause for you to enter. I had to satisfy myself by thinking
that you could find such a cause. Then the war came. And you wrote that
you were in it. I was happy. I am old, Hugo, and perhaps my nationalism
and my patriotism are dead. Sides in a war did not seem to matter. But
peace mattered to me, and I thought--I hoped that you could hasten
peace. Four years, Hugo. Your letters said nothing. Four years. And then
it stopped. And I understood. War is property fighting property, not
David fighting Goliath. The greatest David would be unavailing now. Even
you could do little enough."

"Perhaps not so little, father."

"There were things, then?"

Hugo could not disappoint his father with the whole formidable truth.
"Yes." He lied with a steady gaze. "I stopped the war."

"You!"

"After four years I perceived the truth of what you have just said. War
is a mistake. It is not sides that matter. The object of war is to make
peace. On a dark night, father, I went alone into the enemy lines. For
one hundred miles that night I upset every gun, I wrecked every
ammunition train, I blew up every dump--every arsenal, that is. Alone I
did it. The next day they asked for peace. Remember the false armistice?
Somehow it leaked out that there would be victory and surrender the
next night--because of me. Only the truth about me was never known. And
a day later--it came."

The weak old man was transported. He raised himself up on his elbows.
"You did that! Then all my work was not in vain. My dream and my prayer
were justified! Oh, Hugo, you can never know how glad I am you came and
told me this. How glad."

He repeated his expression of joy until his tongue was weary; then he
fell back. Hugo sat with shining eyes during the silence that followed.
His father at length groped for a glass of water. Strength returned to
him. "I could ask for no more, son. And yet we are petulant, insatiable
creatures. What is doing now? The world is wicked. Yet it tries
half-heartedly to rebuild itself. One great deed is not enough--or are
you tired?"

Hugo smiled. "Am I ever tired, father? Am I vulnerable?"

"I had forgotten. It is so hard for the finite mind to think beyond
itself. Not tired. Not vulnerable. No. There was Samson--the cat." He
was embarrassed. "I hurt you?"

"No, father." He repeated it. Every gentle fall of the word "father"
from his lips and every mention of "son" by his father was rare
privilege, unfamiliar elixir to the old man. His new lie took its cue
from Abednego Danner's expressions. "My work goes on. Now it is with
America. I expect to go to Washington soon to right the wrongs of
politics and government. Vicious and selfish men I shall force from
their high places. I shall secure the idealistic and the courageous." It
was a theory he had never considered, a possible practice born of
necessity. "The pressure I shall bring against them will be physical and
mental. Here a man will be driven from his house mysteriously. There a
man will slip into the limbo. Yonder an inconspicuous person will
suddenly be braced by a new courage; his enemies will be gone and his
work will progress unhampered. I shall be an invisible agent of
right--right as best I can see it. You understand, father?"

Abednego smiled like a happy child. "I do, son. To be you must be
splendid."

"The most splendid thing on earth! And I have you to thank, you and your
genius to tender gratitude to. I am merely the agent. It is you that
created and the whole world that benefits."

Abednego's face was serene--not smug, but transfigured. "I yearned as
you now perform. It is strange that one cloistered mortal can become
inspired with the toil and lament of the universe. Yet there is a danger
of false pride in that, too. I am apt to fall into the pit because my
cup is so full here at the last. And the greatest problem of all is not
