essentially analytic, and that, for example, the general
projective geometry constructed in this way is in substance
nothing more than the algebra of linear transformations.

                                                --SEGRE, CORRADI.

                         _Rivista di Matematica, Vol. I (1891),
                         p. 59. [J. W. Young.]_


=2032.= Those who can, in common algebra, find a square root
of -1, will be at no loss to find a fourth dimension in space in
which ABC may become ABCD: or, if they cannot find it, they have
but to imagine it, and call it an _impossible_ dimension, subject
to all the laws of the three we find possible. And just as
[sq root]-1 in common algebra, gives all its _significant_
combinations _true_, so would it be with any number of dimensions
of space which the speculator might choose to call into
_impossible_ existence.--DE MORGAN, A.

                         _Trigonometry and Double Algebra
                         (London, 1849), Part 2, chap. 3._


=2033.= The doctrine of non-Euclidean spaces and of hyperspaces
in general possesses the highest intellectual interest, and it
requires a far-sighted man to foretell that it can never have any
practical importance.--SMITH, W. B.

                         _Introductory Modern Geometry (New York,
                         1893), p. 274._


=2034.= According to his frequently expressed view, Gauss considered
the three dimensions of space as specific peculiarities of the
human soul; people, which are unable to comprehend this, he
designated in his humorous mood by the name Boeotians. We could
imagine ourselves, he said, as beings which are conscious of but
two dimensions; higher beings might look at us in a like manner,
and continuing jokingly, he said that he had laid aside certain
problems which, when in a higher state of being, he hoped to
investigate geometrically.--SARTORIUS, W. V. WALTERSHAUSEN.

                         _Gauss zum Gedaechtniss (Leipzig, 1856),
                         p. 81._


=2035.= _There is many a rational logos_, and the mathematician
has high delight in the contemplation of _in_consistent _systems_
of _consistent relationships_. There are, for example, a
Euclidean geometry and more than one species of non-Euclidean. As
theories of a given space, these are not compatible. If our
universe be, as Plato thought, and nature-science takes for
granted, a space-conditioned, geometrised affair, one of these
geometries may be, none of them may be, not all of them can be,
valid in it. But in the vaster world of thought, all of them are
valid, there they co-exist, and interlace among themselves and
others, as differing component strains of a higher, strictly
supernatural, hypercosmic, harmony.--KEYSER, C. J.

                         _The Universe and Beyond; Hibbert
                         Journal, Vol. 3 (1904-1905), p. 313._


=2036.= The introduction into geometrical work of conceptions
such as the infinite, the imaginary, and the relations of
hyperspace, none of which can be directly imagined, has a
psychological significance well worthy of examination. It gives a
deep insight into the resources and working of the human mind. We
arrive at the borderland of mathematics and psychology.

                                                    --MERZ, J. T.

                         _History of European Thought in the
                         Nineteenth Century (Edinburgh and
                         London, 1903), p. 716._


=2037.= Among the splendid generalizations effected by modern
mathematics, there is none more brilliant or more inspiring or
more fruitful, and none more commensurate with the limitless
immensity of being itself, than that which produced the great
concept designated ... hyperspace or multidimensional space.

                                                  --KEYSER, C. J.

                         _Mathematical Emancipations; Monist,
                         Vol. 16 (1906), p. 65._


=2038.= The great generalization [of hyperspace] has made it
possible to enrich, quicken and beautify analysis with the terse,
sensuous, artistic, stimulating language of geometry. On the
other hand, the hyperspaces are in themselves immeasurably
interesting and inexhaustibly rich fields of research. Not only
does the geometrician find light in them for the illumination of
otherwise dark and undiscovered properties of ordinary spaces of
intuition, but he also discovers there wondrous structures quite
unknown to ordinary space.... It is by creation of hyperspaces
that the rational spirit secures release from limitation. In them
it lives ever joyously, sustained by an unfailing sense of
infinite freedom.--KEYSER, C. J.

                         _Mathematical Emancipations; Monist,
                         Vol. 16 (1906), p. 83._


=2039.= Mathematicians who busy themselves a great deal with the
formal theory of four-dimensional space, seem to acquire a capacity
for imagining this form as easily as the three-dimensional form
with which we are all familiar.--OSTWALD, W.

                         _Natural Philosophy [Seltzer], (New
                         York, 1910), p. 77._


=2040.=

        Fuchs. Was soll ich nun aber denn studieren?

        Meph.  Ihr koennt es mit _analytischer Geometrie_ probieren.
               Da wird der Raum euch wohl dressiert,
               In Coordinaten eingeschnuert,
               Dass ihr nicht etwa auf gut Glueck
               Von der Figur gewinnt ein Stueck.
               Dann lehret man euch manchen Tag,
               Dass, was ihr sonst auf einen Schlag
               Construiertet im Raume frei,
               Eine Gleichung dazu noetig sei.
               Zwar war dem Menschen zu seiner Erbauung
               Die dreidimensionale Raumanschauung,
               Dass er sieht, was um ihn passiert,
               Und die Figuren sich construiert--
               Der Analytiker tritt herein
               Und beweist, das koennte auch anders sein.
               Gleichungen, die auf dem Papiere stehn,
               Die muesst' man auch koennen im Raume sehn;
               Und koennte man's nicht construieren,
               Da muesste man's anders definieren.
               Denn was man formt nach Zahlengesetzen
               Muesst' uns auch geometrisch erletzen.
               Drum in den unendlich fernen beiden
               Imaginaeren Punkten muessen sich schneiden
               Alle Kreise fein saeuberlich,
               Auch Parallelen, die treffen sich,
               Und im Raume kann man daneben
               Allerlei Kruemmungsmasse erleben.
               Die Formeln sind alle wahr und schoen,
               Warum sollen sie nicht zu deuten gehn?
               Da preisen's die Schueler aller Orten,
               Dass das Gerade ist krumm geworden.
               _Nicht-Euklidisch_ nennt's die Geometrie,
               Spotted ihrer selbst, und weiss nicht wie.

        Fuchs. Kann euch nicht eben ganz verstehn.

        Meph.  Das soll den Philosophen auch so gehn.
               Doch wenn ihr lernt alles reducieren
               Und gehoerig transformieren,
               Bis die Formeln den Sinn verlieren,
               Dann versteht ihr mathematish zu spekulieren.
                                               --LASSWITZ, KURD.

                         _Der Faust-Tragoedie (-n)ter Teil;
                         Zeitschrift fuer den math-naturw.
                         Unterricht, Bd. 14 (1888), p. 316._

        [Fuchs. To what study then should I myself apply?

         Meph.  Begin with _analytical geometry_.
                There all space is properly trained,
                By coordinates well restrained,
                That no one by some lucky assay
                Carry some part of the figure away.
                Next thou'll be taught to realize,
                Constructions won't help thee to geometrize,
                And the result of a free construction
                Requires an equation for proper deduction.
                Three-dimensional space relation
                Exists for human edification,
                That he may see what about him transpires,
                And construct such figures as he requires.
                Enters the analyst. Forthwith you see
                That all this might otherwise be.
                Equations, written with pencil or pen,
                Must be visible in space, and when
                Difficulties in construction arise,
                We need only define it otherwise.
                For, what is formed after laws arithmetic
                Must also yield some delight geometric.
                Therefore we must not object
                That all circles intersect
                In the circular points at infinity.
                And all parallels, they declare,
                If produced must meet somewhere.
                So in space, it can't be denied,
                Any old curvature may abide.
                The formulas are all fine and true,
                Then why should they not have a meaning too?
                Pupils everywhere praise their fate
                That that now is crooked which once was straight.
                Non-Euclidean, in fine derision,
                Is what it's called by the geometrician.

         Fuchs. I do not fully follow thee.

         Meph.  No better does philosophy.
                To master mathematical speculation,
                Carefully learn to reduce your equation
                By an adequate transformation
                Till the formulas are devoid of interpretation.]




  CHAPTER XXI

  PARADOXES AND CURIOSITIES


=2101.= The pseudomath is a person who handles mathematics as a
monkey handles the razor. The creature tried to shave himself as
he had seen his master do; but, not having any notion of the
angle at which the razor was to be held, he cut his own throat.
He never tried it a second time, poor animal! but the pseudomath
keeps on in his work, proclaims himself clean shaved, and all the
rest of the world hairy.

The graphomath is a person who, having no mathematics, attempts
to describe a mathematician. Novelists perform in this way: even
Walter Scott now and then burns his fingers. His dreaming
calculator, Davy Ramsay, swears "by the bones of the immortal
Napier." Scott thought that the philomaths worshipped relics: so
they do in one sense.--DE MORGAN, A.

                         _Budget of Paradoxes (London, 1872), p.
                         473._


=2102.= Proof requires a person who can give and a person who can
receive....

        A blind man said, As to the Sun,
        I'll take my Bible oath there's none;
        For if there had been one to show
        They would have shown it long ago.
        How came he such a goose to be?
        Did he not know he couldn't see?
                             Not he.
                                             --DE MORGAN, A.

                         _Budget of Paradoxes (London, 1872), p.
                         262._


=2103.= Mathematical research, with all its wealth of hidden
treasure, is all too apt to yield nothing to our research: for it
is haunted by certain _ignes fatui_--delusive phantoms, that
float before us, and seem so fair, and are _all but_ in our
grasp, so nearly that it never seems to need more than _one_ step
further, and the prize shall be ours! Alas for him who has been
turned aside from real research by one of these spectres--who
has found a music in its mocking laughter--and who wastes his
life and energy in the desperate chase!--DODGSON, C. L.

                         _A new Theory of Parallels (London,
                         1895), Introduction._


=2104.= As lightning clears the air of impalpable vapours, so an
incisive paradox frees the human intelligence from the lethargic
influence of latent and unsuspected assumptions. Paradox is the
slayer of Prejudice.--SYLVESTER, J. J.

                         _On a Lady's Fan etc. Collected
                         Mathematical Papers, Vol. 3, p. 36._


=2105.= When a paradoxer parades capital letters and diagrams
which are as good as Newton's to all who know nothing about it,
some persons wonder why science does not rise and triturate the
whole thing. This is why: all who are fit to read the refutation
are satisfied already, and can, if they please, detect the
paradoxer for themselves. Those who are not fit to do this would
not know the difference between the true answer and the new
capitals and diagrams on which the delighted paradoxer would
declare that he had crumbled the philosophers, and not they him.

                                                  --DE MORGAN, A.

                         _A Budget of Paradoxes (London, 1872),
                         p. 484._


=2106.= Demonstrative reason never raises the cry of _Church in
Danger!_ and it cannot have any Dictionary of heresies except a
Budget of Paradoxes. Mistaken claimants are left to Time and his
extinguisher, with the approbation of all non-claimants: there is
no need of a succession of exposures. Time gets through the job
in his own workmanlike manner.--DE MORGAN, A.

                         _A Budget of Paradoxes (London, 1872),
                         p. 485._


=2107.= D'Israeli speaks of the "six follies of science,"--the
quadrature, the duplication, the perpetual motion, the philosopher's
stone, magic, and astrology. He might as well have added the
trisection, to make the mystic number seven; but had he done so,
he would still have been very lenient; only seven follies in all
science, from mathematics to chemistry! Science might have said
to such a judge--as convicts used to say who got seven years,
expecting it for life, "Thank you, my Lord, and may you sit there
until they are over,"--may the Curiosities of Literature outlive
the Follies of Science!--DE MORGAN, A.

                         _A Budget of Paradoxes (London, 1872),
                         p. 71._


=2108.= Montucla says, speaking of France, that he finds three
notions prevalent among cyclometers: 1. That there is a large
reward offered for success; 2. That the longitude problem depends
on that success; 3. That the solution is the great end and object
of geometry. The same three notions are equally prevalent among
the same class in England. No reward has ever been offered by the
government of either country. The longitude problem in no way
depends upon perfect solution; existing approximations are
sufficient to a point of accuracy far beyond what can be wanted.
And geometry, content with what exists, has long passed on to
other matters. Sometimes a cyclometer persuades a skipper who has
made land in the wrong place that the astronomers are at fault,
for using a wrong measure of the circle; and the skipper thinks
it a very comfortable solution! And this is the utmost that the
problem has to do with longitude.--DE MORGAN, A.

                         _A Budget of Paradoxes (London, 1872),
                         p. 96._


=2109.= Gregory St. Vincent is the greatest of circle-squarers,
and his investigations led him into many truths: he found the
property of the arc of the hyperbola which led to Napier's
logarithms being called hyperbolic. Montucla says of him, with
sly truth, that no one ever squared the circle with so much
genius, or, excepting his principal object, with so much success.

                                                  --DE MORGAN, A.

                         _A Budget of Paradoxes (London, 1872),
                         p. 70._


=2110.= When I reached geometry, and became acquainted with the
proposition the proof of which has been sought for centuries, I
felt irresistibly impelled to try my powers at its discovery. You
will consider me foolish if I confess that I am still earnestly
of the opinion to have succeeded in my attempt.--BOLZANO, BERNARD.

                         _Selbstbiographie (Wien, 1875), p. 19._


=2111.= The Theory of Parallels.

It is known that to complete the theory it is only necessary to
demonstrate the following proposition, which Euclid assumed as an
axiom:

Prop. If the sum of the interior angles ECF and DBC which two
straight lines EC and DB make with a third line CP is less than
two right angles, the lines, if sufficiently produced, will
intersect.

[Illustration: A geometrical drawing of parallel lines and
intersecting lines to accompany proof.]

Proof. Construct PCA equal to the supplement PBD of CBD, and ECF,
FCG, etc. each equal to ACE, so that ACF = 2.ACE, ACG = 3.ACE,
etc. Then however small the angle ACE may be, there exists some
number n such that n.ACE = ACH will be equal to or greater than
ACP.

Again, take BI, IL, etc. each equal to CB, and draw IK, LM, etc.
parallel to BD, then the figures ACBD, DBIK, KILM, etc. are
congruent, and ACIK = 2.ABCD, ACLM = 3.ACBD, etc.

Take ACNO = n.ACBD, n having the same value as in the expression
ACH = n.ACE, then ACNO is certainly less than ACP, since ACNO
must be increased by ONP to be equal to ACP. It follows that ACNO
is also less than ACH, and by taking the nth part of each of
these, that ACBD is less than ACE.

But if ACE is greater than ACBD, CE and BD must intersect, for
otherwise ACE would be a part of ACBD.

                         _Journal fuer Mathematik, Bd. 2 (1834),
                         p. 198._


=2112.= Are you sure that it is impossible to trisect the angle
by _Euclid_? I have not to lament a single hour thrown away on
the attempt, but fancy that it is rather a tact, a feeling, than
a proof, which makes us think that the thing cannot be done. But
would _Gauss's_ inscription of the regular polygon of seventeen
sides have seemed, a century ago, much less an impossible thing,
by line and circle?--HAMILTON, W. R.

                         _Letter to De Morgan (1852)._


=2113.= One of the most curious of these cases [geometrical
paradoxers] was that of a student, I am not sure but a graduate,
of the University of Virginia, who claimed that geometers were in
error in assuming that a line had no thickness. He published
a school geometry based on his views, which received the
endorsement of a well-known New York school official and, on the
basis of this, was actually endorsed, or came very near being
endorsed, as a text-book in the public schools of New York.

                                                --NEWCOMB, SIMON.

                         _The Reminiscences of an Astronomer
                         (Boston and New York, 1903), p. 388._


=2114.= What distinguishes the straight line and circle more
than anything else, and properly separates them for the purpose
of elementary geometry? Their self-similarity. Every inch of
a straight line coincides with every other inch, and off a
circle with every other off the same circle. Where, then, did
Euclid fail? In not introducing the third curve, which has the
same property--the _screw_. The right line, the circle, the
screw--the representations of translation, rotation, and the two
combined--ought to have been the instruments of geometry. With
a screw we should never have heard of the impossibility of
trisecting an angle, squaring the circle, etc.--DE MORGAN, A.

                         _Quoted in Graves' Life of Sir W. R.
                         Hamilton, Vol. 3 (New York, 1889), p.
                         342._


=2115.=

        Mad Mathesis alone was unconfined,
        Too mad for mere material chains to bind,
        Now to pure space lifts her ecstatic stare,
        Now, running round the circle, finds it square.
                                          --POPE, ALEXANDER.

                         _The Dunciad, Bk. 4, lines 31-34._


=2116.=

        Or is't a tart idea, to procure
        An edge, and keep the practic soul in ure,
        Like that dear Chymic dust, or puzzling quadrature?
                                          --QUARLES, PHILIP.

                         _Quoted by De Morgan: Budget of
                         Paradoxes (London, 1872), p. 436._


=2117.=

        Quale e'l geometra che tutto s' affige
        Per misurar lo cerchio, e non ritruova,
        Pensando qual principio ond' egli indige.
                                                    --DANTE.

                         _Paradise, canto 33, lines 122-125._

        [As doth the expert geometer appear
         Who seeks to square the circle, and whose skill
         Finds not the law with which his course to steer.[12]]

                         _Quoted in Frankland's Story of Euclid
                         (London, 1902), p. 101._

    [12]  For another rendition of these same lines see
          1858.


=2118.=

        In _Mathematicks_ he was greater
        Than _Tycho Brahe_, or _Erra Pater_:
        For he, by _Geometrick_ scale,
        Could take the size of _Pots of Ale_;
        Resolve by Signs and Tangents streight,
        If _Bread_ or _Butter_ wanted weight;
        And wisely tell what hour o' th' day
        The Clock doth strike, by _Algebra_.
                                           --BUTLER, SAMUEL.

                         _Hudibras, Part 1, canto 1, lines_
                         119-126.


=2119.= I have often been surprised that Mathematics, the
quintessence of truth, should have found admirers so few and so
languid. Frequent considerations and minute scrutiny have at
length unravelled the cause; viz. that though Reason is feasted,
Imagination is starved; whilst Reason is luxuriating in its
proper Paradise, Imagination is wearily travelling on a dreary
desert.--COLERIDGE, SAMUEL.

                         _A Mathematical Problem._


=2120.= At last we entered the palace, and proceeded into the
chamber of presence where I saw the king seated on his throne,
attended on each side by persons of prime quality. Before the
throne, was a large table filled with globes and spheres, and
mathematical instruments of all kinds. His majesty took not the
least notice of us, although our entrance was not without
sufficient noise, by the concourse of all persons belonging to
the court. But he was then deep in a problem, and we attended an
hour, before he could solve it. There stood by him, on each side,
a young page with flaps in their hands, and when they saw he was
at leisure, one of them gently struck his mouth, and the other
his right ear; at which he started like one awaked on the sudden,
and looking toward me and the company I was in, recollected the
occasion of our coming, whereof he had been informed before. He
spake some words, whereupon immediately a young man with a flap
came to my side, and flapt me gently on the right ear, but I made
signs, as well as I could, that I had no occasion for such an
instrument; which, as I afterwards found, gave his majesty, and
the whole court, a very mean opinion of my understanding. The
king, as far as I could conjecture, asked me several questions,
and I addressed myself to him in all the languages I had. When it
was found, that I could neither understand nor be understood, I
was conducted by his order to an apartment in his palace, (this
prince being distinguished above all his predecessors, for his
hospitality to strangers) where two servants were appointed to
attend me. My dinner was brought, and four persons of quality,
did me the honour to dine with me. We had two courses of three
dishes each. In the first course, there was a shoulder of mutton
cut into an equilateral triangle, a piece of beef into a
rhomboides, and a pudding into a cycloid. The second course, was,
two ducks trussed up in the form of fiddles; sausages and
puddings, resembling flutes and haut-boys, and a breast of veal
in the shape of a harp. The servants cut our bread into cones,
cylinders, parallelograms, and several other mathematical
figures.--SWIFT, JONATHAN.

                         _Gulliver's Travels; A Voyage to Laputa;
                         Chap. 2._


=2121.= Those to whom the king had entrusted me, observing how
ill I was clad, ordered a taylor to come next morning, and take
measure for a suit of cloaths. This operator did his office
after a different manner, from those of his trade in Europe. He
first took my altitude by a quadrant, and then, with rule and
compasses, described the dimensions and outlines of my whole
body, all which he entered upon paper; and in six days, brought
my cloaths very ill made, and quite out of shape, by happening to
mistake a figure in the calculation. But my comfort was, that I
observed such accidents very frequent, and little regarded.

                                               --SWIFT, JONATHAN.

                         _Gulliver's Travels; A Voyage to Laputa,
                         Chap. 2._


=2122.= The knowledge I had in mathematics, gave me great
assistance in acquiring their phraseology, which depended much
upon that science, and music; and in the latter I was not
unskilled. Their ideas are perpetually conversant in lines and
figures. If they would, for example, praise the beauty of a
woman, or any other animal, they describe it by rhombs, circles,
parallelograms, ellipses, and other geometrical terms, or by
words of art drawn from music, needless here to repeat. I
observed in the king's kitchen all sorts of mathematical and
musical instruments, after the figures of which, they cut up the
joints that were served to his majesty's table.--SWIFT, JONATHAN.

                         _Gulliver's Travels; A Voyage to Laputa,
                         Chap. 2._


=2123.= I was at the mathematical school, where the master taught
his pupils, after a method, scarce imaginable to us in Europe.
The propositions, and demonstrations, were fairly written on a
thin wafer, with ink composed of a cephalic tincture. This, the
student was to swallow upon a fasting stomach, and for three days
following, eat nothing but bread and water. As the wafer
digested, the tincture mounted to his brain, bearing the
proposition along with it. But the success has not hitherto been
answerable, partly by some error in the _quantum_ or composition,
and partly by the perverseness of lads; to whom this bolus is so
nauseous, that they generally steal aside, and discharge it
upwards, before it can operate; neither have they been yet
persuaded to use so long an abstinence as the prescription
requires.--SWIFT, JONATHAN.

                         _Gulliver's Travels; A Voyage to Laputa,
                         Chap. 5._


=2124.= It is worth observing that some of those who disparage
some branch of study in which they are deficient, will often
affect more contempt for it than they really feel. And not
unfrequently they will take pains to have it thought that they
are themselves well versed in it, or that they easily might be,
if they thought it worth while;--in short, that it is not from
hanging too high that the grapes are called sour.

Thus, Swift, in the person of Gulliver, represents himself, while
deriding the extravagant passion for Mathematics among the
Laputians, as being a good mathematician. Yet he betrays his
utter ignorance, by speaking "of a pudding in the _form of a
cycloid_:" evidently taking the cycloid for a _figure_, instead
of a _line_. This may help to explain the difficulty he is said
to have had in obtaining his Degree.--WHATELY, R.

                         _Annotations to Bacon's Essays, Essay
                         L._


=2125.= It is natural to think that an abstract science cannot be
of much importance in the affairs of human life, because it has
omitted from its consideration everything of real interest. It
will be remembered that Swift, in his description of Gulliver's
voyage to Laputa, is of two minds on this point. He describes the
mathematicians of that country as silly and useless dreamers,
whose attention has to be awakened by flappers. Also, the
mathematical tailor measures his height by a quadrant, and
deduces his other dimensions by a rule and compasses, producing a
suit of very ill-fitting clothes. On the other hand, the
mathematicians of Laputa, by their marvellous invention of the
magnetic island floating in the air, ruled the country and
maintained their ascendency over their subjects. Swift, indeed,
lived at a time peculiarly unsuited for gibes at contemporary
mathematicians. Newton's _Principia_ had just been written, one
of the great forces which have transformed the modern world.
Swift might just as well have laughed at an earthquake.

                                               --WHITEHEAD, A. N.

                         _An Introduction to Mathematics (New
                         York, 1911), p. 10._


=2126.= [Illustration: A geometrical drawing including square and
four triangles to demonstrate a graphical proof of the theorem of
Pythagoras as described in the poem.]

        Here I am as you may see
        a squared + b squared - ab
        When two Triangles on me stand
        Square of hypothen^e is plann'd
        But if I stand on them instead,
        The squares of both the sides are read.
                                               --AIRY, G. B.

                         _Quoted in Graves' Life of Sir W. R.
                         Hamilton, Vol. 3 (New York, 1889), p.
                         502._


=2127.= [pi] = 3.141 592 653 589 793 238 462 643 383 279 ...

         3  1    4  1    5       9
        Now I, even I, would celebrate
         2    6     5     3    5
        In rhymes inapt, the great
           8         9         7        9
        Immortal Syracusan, rivaled nevermore,
         3   2  3      8      4
        Who in his wondrous lore,
           6    2    6
        Passed on before,
          4   3   3      8     3   2    7        9
        Left men his guidance how to circles mensurate.
                                                --ORR, A. C.

                         _Literary Digest, Vol. 32 (1906), p.
                         84._


=2128.= I take from a biographical dictionary the first five
names of poets, with their ages at death. They are

                    Aagard,  died at 48.
                    Abeille,  "   "  76.
                    Abulola,  "   "  84.
                    Abunowas, "   "  48.
                    Accords,  "   "  45.

These five ages have the following characters in common:--

1. The difference of the two digits composing the number divided
by _three_, leaves a remainder of _one_.

2. The first digit raised to the power indicated by the second,
and then divided by _three_, leaves a remainder of _one_.

3. The sum of the prime factors of each age, including _one_ as a
prime factor, is divisible by _three_.--PEIRCE, C. S.

                         _A Theory of Probable Inference; Studies
                         in Logic (Boston, 1883), p. 163._


=2129.= In view of the fact that the offered prize [for the
solution of the problem of Fermat's Greater Theorem] is about
$25,000 and that lack of marginal space in his copy of Diophantus
was the reason given by Fermat for not communicating his proof,
one might be tempted to wish that one could send credit for a
dime back through the ages to Fermat and thus secure this coveted
prize, if it actually existed. This might, however, result more
seriously than one would at first suppose; for if Fermat had
