Thence to the Temple of Sarpedion, where he collected the other,
somewhat-lesser-hallowed trio of the Great One's vital organs. Then,
and belatedly, to home and to bed.

A little later, while the new-made Lord of the Marches was sleeping
soundly, the king's messengers rode furiously abroad, spreading the
word that ten days hence, at the fourth period after noon, in Lompoar's
Amphitheater, Great Sarpedion would be sacrificed to Llosir, Lomarr's
new and Ultra-powerful god.

       *       *       *       *       *

The city of Lompoar, Lomarr's capital, lying on the south bank of the
Lotar some fifty miles inland from the delta, nestled against the
rugged breast of the Coast Range. Just outside the town's limit and
some hundreds of feet above its principal streets there was a gigantic
half-bowl, carved out of the solid rock by an eddy of some bye-gone
age.

This was the Amphitheater, and on the very lip of the stupendous cliff
descending vertically to the river so far below, Llosir stood proudly
on his platform of smooth, clean granite.

"'Tis not enough like a god, methinks." King Phagon, dressed now in
cloth-of-gold, eyed the gleaming copper statue very dubiously. "'Tis
too much like a man, by far."

"'Tis exactly as I saw him, sire," Tedric replied, firmly. Nor was he,
consciously, lying: by this time he believed the lie himself. "Llosir
is a man-god, remember, not a beast-god, and 'tis better so. But the
time I set is here. With your permission, sire, I begin."

Both men looked around the great bowl. Near by, but not too near, stood
the priestess and half a dozen white-clad fifteen-year-old girls; one
of whom carried a beaten-gold pitcher full of perfumed oil, another a
flaring open lamp wrought of the same material. Slightly to one side
were Rhoann--looking, if the truth must be told, as though she did not
particularly enjoy her present position on the side-lines--her mother
the queen, the rest of the royal family, and ranks of courtiers. And
finally, much farther back, at a very respectful distance from their
strange new god, arranged in dozens of more or less concentric, roughly
hemispherical rows, stood everybody who had had time to get there.
More were arriving constantly, of course, but the flood had become a
trickle; the narrow way, worming upward from the city along the cliffs
stark side, was almost bare of traffic.

"Begin, Lord Tedric," said the king.

Tedric bent over, heaved the heavy iron pan containing the offerings up
onto the platform, and turned. "The oil, Priestess Lady Trycie, and the
flame."

The acolyte handed the pitcher to Trycie, who handed it to Tedric,
who poured its contents over the twin hearts, twin livers, and twin
brains. Then the lamp; and as the yard-high flames leaped upward the
armored pseudo-priest stepped backward and raised his eyes boldly to
the impassive face of the image of his god. Then he spoke--not softly,
but in parade-ground tones audible to everyone present.

"Take, Lord Llosir, all the strength and all the power and all the
force that Sarpedion ever had. Use them, we beg, for good and not for
ill."

He picked up the blazing pan and strode toward the lip of the
precipice; high-mounting, smoky flames curling backward around his
armored figure. "And now, in token of Sarpedion's utter and complete
extinction, I consign these, the last vestiges of his being, to the
rushing depths of oblivion." He hurled the pan and its fiercely flaming
contents out over the terrific brink.

This act, according to Tedric's plan, was to end the program--but
it didn't. Long before the fiery mass struck water his attention
was seized by a long, low-pitched, moaning gasp from a multitude of
throats; a sound the like of which he had never before even imagined.

He whirled--and saw, shimmering in a cage-like structure of shimmering
bars, a form of seeming flesh so exactly like the copper image in every
detail of shape that it might well have come from the same mold!

"Lord Llosir--in the _flesh_!" Tedric exclaimed, and went to one knee.

So did the king and his family, and a few of the bravest of the
courtiers. Most of the latter, however, and the girl acolytes and the
thronging thousands of spectators, threw themselves flat on the hard
ground. They threw themselves flat, but they did not look away or close
their eyes or cover their faces with their hands. On the contrary, each
one stared with all the power of his optic nerves.

The god's mouth opened, his lips moved; and, although no one could
hear any sound, everyone felt words resounding throughout the deepest
recesses of his being.

"I have taken all the strength, all the power, all the force, all of
everything that made Sarpedion what he was," the god began. In part
his pseudo-voice was the resonant clang of a brazen bell; in part the
diapason harmonies of an impossibly vast organ. "I will use them
for good, not for ill. I am glad, Tedric, that you did not defile my
hearth--for this is a hearth, remember, and in no sense an altar--in
making this, the first and the _only_ sacrifice ever to be made to me.
You, Trycie, are the first of my priestesses?"

The girl, shaking visibly, gulped three times before she could speak.
"Yea, my--my--Lord Llosir," she managed finally. "Th--that is--if--if I
please you, Lord Sir."

"You please me, Trycie of Lomarr. Nor will your duties be onerous;
being only to see to it that your maidens keep my hearth clean and my
statue bright."

"To you, my Lord--Llo--Llosir, sir, all thanks. Wilt keep...." Trycie
raised her downcast eyes and stopped short in mid-sentence; her mouth
dropping ludicrously open and her eyes becoming two round O's of
astonishment. The air above the yawning abyss was as empty as it had
ever been; the flesh-and-blood god had disappeared as instantaneously
as he had come!

Tedric's heavy voice silenced the murmured wave of excitement sweeping
the bowl.

"That is all!" he bellowed. "I did not expect the Lord Llosir to appear
in the flesh at this time; I know not when or ever he will deign to
appear to us again. But this I know--whether or not he ever so deigns,
or when, you all know now that our great Lord Llosir lives. Is it not
so?"

"'Tis so! Long live Lord Llosir!" Tumultuous yelling filled the
amphitheater.

"'Tis well. In leaving this holy place all will file between me and
the shrine. First our king, then the Lady Priestess Trycie and her
maids, then the Family, then the Court, then the rest. All men as they
pass will raise sword-arms in salute, all women will bow heads. Will
be naught of offerings or of tribute or of fractions; Lord Llosir is a
_god_, not a huckstering, thieving, murdering trickster. King Phagon,
sire, wilt lead?"

Unhelmed now, Tedric stood rigidly at attention before the image of
his god. The king did not march straight past him, but stopped short.
Taking off his ornate head-piece and lifting his right arm high, he
said:

"To you, Lord Llosir, my sincere thanks for what hast done for me, for
my family, and for my nation. While 'tis not seemly that Lomarr's king
should beg, I ask that you abandon us not."

Then Trycie and her girls. "We engage, Lord Sir," the Lady Priestess
said, at a whispered word from Tedric, "to keep your hearth
scrupulously clean; your statue shining bright."

Then the queen, followed by the Lady Rhoann--who, although she bowed
her head meekly enough, was shooting envious glances at her sister, so
far ahead and so evidently the cynosure of so many eyes.

The rest of the Family--the Court--the thronging spectators--and, last
of all, Tedric himself. Helmet tucked under left arm, he raised his
brawny right arm high, executed a stiff "left face," and march proudly
at the rear of the long procession.

And as the people made their way down the steep and rugged path, as
they debouched through the city of Lompoar, as they traversed the
highways and byways back to the towns and townlets and farms from which
they had come, it was very evident that Llosir had established himself
as no other god had ever been established throughout the long history
of that world.

Great Llosir had appeared in person. Everyone there had seen him with
his own eyes. Everyone there had heard his voice; a voice of a quality
impossible for any mortal being, human or otherwise, to produce; a
voice heard, not with the ears, which would have been ordinary enough,
but by virtue of some hitherto completely unknown and still completely
