wondered. He'd barely brushed her sleeve, in passing.

He stood before the door labelled "Manuscript Laboratory: Dr. Philip
Hartridge," and pushed the button. The door opened, but two husky
guards with pistols in hand blocked his entrance.

"Your name, please, and your business?"

Herbert fought a tendency to stammer. His foot still hurt him, he had
developed a headache, and he felt bewildered.

"I just want--My name is Herbert Carre and I want to see Dr. Hartridge.
Why, we've known each other for years!"

"Identification, please?"

They examined his identity card and his Bureau papers, and nodded. Then
one returned his pistol to its holster and approached him.

"Just as a formality, if you please. Dr. Hartridge apologizes for
this." He ran his hands over Herbert's shabby blouse and trousers, then
stepped back.

"That's all, Mr. Carre," he said. "You can go in." They preceded him
into the reception room, advanced to the rear wall and pushed a series
of buttons in a complex pattern. A double door, made of metal instead
of the innocent oak it had seemed to be, slowly swung open.

Philip Hartridge rose from his desk and extended his hand.

"Awfully good to see you, Carre," he said. "It must have been nearly
ten years. Sorry you've never come over to see us sooner. We're very
proud of Script-Lab. How are things?"

"Not bad," said Herbert. "I'm still feeling overwhelmed by the
elaborate protective system you have here. What explains the
body-guards? I didn't suppose this laboratory was classified."

Hartridge leaned back in his chair. "It's not classified. Those men are
here to protect me from possible violence."

"Violence? Great Gamma, do you mean personal threats?"

"Yes. Only last week, my 'coptor exploded a few minutes after I started
the motor. By a lucky chance, I had gone back to the house to get my
brief-case. But someone had certainly tried to kill me."

"Why on earth, Hartridge, should some one--"

"It might be one of several people," he said. "But I think it's
my brother Ben. He would, of course, like to have my share of the
money our father left us. But I'll take care he doesn't get it." He
grinned, and patted his hip. "It's rather more likely to be the other
way around. But we won't waste time in trivialities, Carre. Ludwig
called me. I know you want to see our set-up here. Come in and see the
machines."

They walked through another set of double doors and into the Laboratory.

The noise was deafening. Twenty enormous machines sat in the room. Each
was contained in a dull plastic case, and the control panels were a
maze of dials, buttons, and red and green indicator lights. An electric
typewriter was connected to and operated by each machine, and through
each typewriter ran an endless roll of paper, which emerged to be cut
off into eleven-inch lengths by automatic knives.

"How do you stand the noise?" asked Carre. "Why don't you use Silent
Typers?"

"Oh, the machines don't mind the noise. Silent Typers would be an
unnecessary expense, and as a matter of fact, I've come to like the
sound. It's soothing, after a time."

Carre strolled slowly, rather mournfully, from one monster to another,
glancing at the emerging manuscripts.

"The rate of output," said Hartridge, "is not less than a hundred words
a minute, and they never have to stop to look up their facts, or to
struggle with a balky plot. Can you do as well?"

"I wish I could," said Carre. "I know so little about electronics. Do
the machines use much current?"

"No, that's another of their virtues, they're very economical. The
tubes are so efficient that all twenty machines are run from this one
source, right here--Don't touch it! It's not ordinary house current,
you know. We start with eight thousand volts,--it saves on metal and
transformers."

Herbert found it hard to think against the clatter of the typewriters.
"I'm ashamed to admit," he said, "that I feel a kind of envy, they
seem to compose with such ease."

Hartridge laughed. "No trouble at all! I tell you, my pretty
typewriters are going to put you out of business. You can see for
yourself, Carre, that there's no need for you human writers. We are
doing a perfect job here, and we could supply all the material--novels,
stories, fact articles, biographies--that the country could read. AFE
has been using more and more of our scripts, as you probably know."

