Make people see Venus maybe not quite as good as heaven but at least as
wonderful as Eden!"

This was where Wilkerson and Molock and Rita Morgan and yours truly,
Sam Crane got into the act. Rita, who was the apple of Cooper's eye,
got the assignment of taking the three dimensional movies in full color
and full sound that would make Venus attractive. Of course, on the
sound side we had Cooper's permission to dub out the screams of any
Venusian getting swallowed by a forty-foot boa constrictor. Wilkerson,
Molock, and I were included to fly the ship and help Rita.

In other words, it was our job to dig up the raw material that the
publicity department could use to sell a bill of goods to suckers back
on Earth who could be flim-flammed into making the big hop to Venus.

In getting these pictures of Eden in the Sky, we had hunted up the
tamest of all tame Venusians, Shad Brisbee. We knew him, he knew us.
To my mind, the fact that he knew us was not to our advantage. In
some ways, I would have preferred taking our pictures among some of
the wilder tribes, who didn't know us. But Know-All George Cooper had
decided that the tame Shad Brisbee was just the lad for us. He had
loaded the ship with trade goods and had told us where to go. All of
this might have worked out fine, if we had not damaged the drive and
had to make a forced landing right in the middle of Shad Brisbee's
tribal dancing ground.

You may not know it, but these Venusians are funny about dancing. They
don't go in for cultural amusements, there isn't a ball park or a
library on the planet, a pin ball machine, a golf course, or anything
else that might make life more cultivated. But every Venusian has his
private dancing ground and every tribe has a big one. For amusement,
the Venusians dance. They dance in the morning and in the afternoon.
They dance to celebrate the beginning of a spell of wet weather and
the end of it. The male Venusians dance as their squaws go out in the
morning to gather fruits and vegetables, they dance in the afternoon
when the squaws come home. At night, the squaws join in and everybody,
big and little, old and young, dances.

They hold elaborate contests to determine who is the best tribal
dancer. He's the chief, the big shot, the boss. They hold contests
between tribes, everybody gets drunk, everybody dances. Personally,
I'll say one thing for the Venusians, it always seemed to me that
dancing contests were a better way to settle personal and tribal
problems than war, but the Venusians are just benighted, ignorant
natives with no knowledge of the finer things of life. This doesn't
mean they can't and won't fight--they fight alligators and flying
snakes and blue tigers--but they just don't fight each other. Any
personal or private quarrels they settle by dancing it out.

I've heard learned professors from Earth lecture on the vast
satisfaction to be derived from expressing the kinesthetic sense, the
rapture that goes with movements of the body, the sweet pure flame
of mood expressed by body movement and gesture. All of this may mean
something, to the professors. So far as I'm concerned, the Venusians
just like to dance.

If you want to start a ruckus--and but good--just suggest to one of the
males that things would be a lot better around the home place if he
spent more of his time working and less dancing. If you want to start a
real fracas, just come between a Venusian and his dancing. Hell hath no
fury--

I know, this is not the way it is written up in the books. The authors
usually speak of the "quaint" Venusian dancing customs, but this is the
way it is.

Shad Brisbee might be a tame Venusian to the publicity department, but
when we landed right in the middle of his tribe's dancing ground, you
could guarantee he would revert to the wild state.

With Wilkerson stamping the ground ahead of us, we moved toward the
ship.

_Whuuuuuup!_

An arrow eight feet long came out of the jungle behind us, passed
between us, whammed into the open lock of the ship ahead of us.

It beat us to our destination, but it didn't beat us much. I don't know
who led the way but it was my opinion that Wilkerson damned near beat
that arrow into the ship. Jumping into the ship, we slammed the lock.

"Whew!" Wilkerson said, mopping sweat from his face.

"Just an arrow," Molock said. "Heck, they're nothing. Shad Brisbee and
his boys will never get anywhere with arrows. And they haven't got any
weapons except spears, clubs, knives." He sounded very comfortable
about the situation.

"But we haven't even got a gun, except for your spring pistol!"
Wilkerson said. For several minutes, he spoke freely and movingly
about George Cooper. It had been Cooper's idea that we go unarmed.
"Treat these natives with friendliness and they'll treat you with
friendliness. No guns!" Cooper had decreed.

"Wait until I get that damned Cooper on the radio!" Wilkerson said,
stalking into the control cabin.

"There won't be anything to this," Molock said. "Cooper will send out a
couple of ships and blow these idiots to hell and gone. Or scare 'em to
death. Let's go into the galley and have a beer."

       *       *       *       *       *

We were starting on our second can of beer when Wilkerson stumbled into
the galley. He had a glazed look in his eyes and he was waving his
hands and sort of frothing at the mouth. Snatching up the can of beer
Molock had just opened, he drained it.

"When will the ships be here?" Molock asked.

