This was accomplished with no small amount of labor, and it was nearly
noon before the big ship was moved into the open. It was shoved along to
a little clearing in front of the shed, where no trees would interfere
with its possible upward movement.

Everyone was bustling about. The professor was busiest of all. He went
from one machine to another; from this apparatus to that, testing here,
turning wheels there, adjusting valves and seeing that all was in
readiness for the generating of the powerful gas.

As the airship was half round on the bottom and as it rested in a sort
of semi-circular cradle; it brought the entrance some distance above the
ground. To make it easier to get in and out while preparations for the
trial were going on, Bill and Tom had made an improvised pair of steps,
which were tied to the side of the ship with ropes.

Up and down these the professor, the boys and Andy went, taking in tools
and materials, and removing considerable refuse which had accumulated
during the building of the craft.

Finally all was in readiness for starting the making of the gas. The
ship was not wholly complete and no supplies or provisions for the long
voyage had been taken aboard. The _Flying Mermaid_ was about a ton
lighter than it would be when fully fitted out, but to make up for this
the professor had left in the ship a lot of tools and surplus machinery
so that the craft held as much weight as it would under normal
conditions. If the gas lifted it now it would at any other time.

"Start the generator," said Mr. Henderson, to Mark. "We'll soon see
whether we are going to succeed or fail."

The boy turned a number of levers and wheels. The machine which made the
powerful vapor was soon in operation. The professor had already added
enough of the secret compound to the tank containing the other
ingredients, and the big pump was sucking in air to be transformed into
the lifting gas.

The boys and the professor were in the engine room. Andy Sudds, with
Bill and Tom, had taken their places in the living room, to more evenly
balance the ship, since the things in it were not yet all in their
proper places. As for Washington he was busy running from the shed to
the ship with various tools and bits of machinery the professor desired.

The gas was being generated rapidly. Throughout the ship there resounded
a hissing noise that told it was being forced through the pipe into the
aluminum shell above the ship proper.

"I wonder how soon it will begin to lift us," said Mark.

"It will take about half an hour," replied Mr. Henderson. "You see we
have first to fill the holder completely, since there is no gas in it.
After this we will keep some on hand, so that it will only need the
addition of a small quantity to enable the ship to rise."

He was busy watching the pointer on a dial which indicated the pressure
of the gas, and the lifting force. The boys were kept busy making
adjustments to the machinery and oiling bearings.

Suddenly, throughout the length of the craft there was felt a curious
trembling. It was as though the screw of a powerful steamer was
revolving in the water.

"What is it?" asked Jack.

"I hope it is the lifting power of the gas making itself felt," the
professor answered. "Perhaps the _Flying Mermaid_ is getting ready to
try her wings."

The trembling became more pronounced. The gas was being generated faster
than ever. The whole ship was trembling. Tom and Bill came from the
room, where they were stationed, to inquire the meaning, but were
reassured by the professor.

"Don't be alarmed if you find yourselves up in the air pretty soon," he
remarked with a smile. "Remember the _Electric Monarch_, and the flights
she took. We may not go as high as we did in her, but it will answer the
same purpose."

The gas was hissing through the big tube as it rushed into the overhead
holder. The gage indicated a heavy pressure. The ship began to tremble
more violently and to sway slightly from side to side.

"I think we shall rise presently," said Mr. Henderson. His voice showed
the pride he felt at the seeming success with which his invention was
about to meet.

Suddenly, with a little jerk, as though some one with a giant hand had
plucked the _Flying Mermaid_ from the earth, the ship gave a little
bound into the air, and was floating free.

"Here we go!" cried Mr. Henderson. "The ship is a success. Now we're off
for the hole in the earth!"

The _Flying Mermaid_ was indeed rising in the air. True it did not go up
so swiftly as had the _Monarch_, but then it was a much heavier and
stronger vessel, and flying was only one of its accomplishments.

"It's a success! It's a success!" shouted Mark, capering about in his
excitement.

"Now we'll see what the centre of the earth looks like," went on Jack.
"I can hardly wait for the time to come when we are to start on the
voyage."

At that instant, when the ship was but a few feet from the ground, but
slowly rising, the boys and the professor heard a shouting below them.

"What's that?" asked the scientist. "Is any one hurt?"

Mark ran to a small window, something like a port hole in an ocean
steamer, and looked out.

"Quick!" he shouted. "Stop the ship! Washington will be killed!"

In fact from the agonized yells which proceeded from somewhere under the
craft it seemed that the accident was in process of happening.

"Save me! Save me!" cried the colored man. "I'm goin' to fall! Catch me,
some one!"

"What is it?" asked the professor, making ready to shut off the power
and let the ship settle back to earth, from which it had moved about
fifty feet.

"It's Washington," explained Mark. "He evidently tried to walk up the
steps just as the boat mounted skyward. He rolled down and managed to
grab the end of the rope which was left over after the steps were tied.
Now he's swinging down there."

"Are you going to lower the ship?" asked Jack.

"Of course!" exclaimed the professor. "I only hope he hangs on until his
feet touch the earth."

"Keep a tight hold!" shouted Mark, from out of the small window.

"That's th' truest thing yo' ever said!" exclaimed Washington. "You bet
I'm goin' to hold on, and I'm comin' up too," which he proceeded to do,
hand over hand, like a sailor.

The boys and the professor watched the colored man's upward progress.
The ship had hardly begun to settle as, in the excitement, not enough
gas had been let out. Closer and closer came Washington, until he was
able to grasp the edge of the opening, to which the steps were fastened.

"I thought you weren't coming with us," observed the professor, when he
saw that his helper was safe.

"I changed my mind," said the colored man. "It's jest luck. Seems like
th' ship done wanted me t' go 'long, an' I'm goin'. I'll take my chances
on bein' buried alive. I ain't never seen th' centre of th' earth, an' I
want's to 'fore I die. I'm goin' 'long, Perfessor!"




                               CHAPTER IV

                           WHAT DID MARK SEE?


"Well, I'm glad you've decided at last," the professor remarked. "Now
come inside and we'll see how the ship works."

Once over his fright, Washington made himself at home on the craft he
had helped build. He went from one room to another and observed the
engine.

"She certainly am workin'" he observed with pride. "Are we still goin'
up, Perfessor?"

"Still mounting," replied Mr. Henderson. "We are now three hundred feet
above the earth," he added as he glanced at a registering gage.

The great air pump was set going and soon from the after tube, a big
stream of the compressed vapor rushed. It acted on the ship instantly
and sent the craft ahead at a rapid rate. By elevating or depressing the
tube the craft could be sent obliquely up or down. Then, by forcing the
air from the forward tube, the _Mermaid_ was reversed and scudded
backward.

But it was more with the ship's ability to rise and descend that
Professor Henderson was concerned, since on that depended their safety.
So various tests were made, in generating the gas and using the negative
gravity apparatus.

All worked to perfection. Obeying the slightest turn of the wheels and
levers the _Mermaid_ rose or fell. She stood still, suspended herself in
the air, or rushed backward and forward.

Of course the machinery was new and did not operate as smoothly as it
would later, but the professor and his friends were very well satisfied.

"Now we'll try something new," said the scientist to the two boys as
they stood beside him in the tower. "I only hope this part succeeds, and
we shall soon be off on our voyage."

He turned several levers. There was a hissing sound as the gas rushed
from the container, and the ship began to settle down.

"What's th' matter? Are we goin' t' hit th' earth?" yelled Washington,
rushing from the engine room.

"Keep quiet," ordered the professor. "We are only going down, that's
all."

"But good land! Perfesser!" exclaimed the colored man. "The ocean's
right under us! You forgot you sailed away from the island! We'll be
drowned suah!"

"Leave it to me," said Mr. Henderson. "The _Flying Mermaid_ is going to
take a bath!"

"As long as it swims it will be all right," observed Mark in a low tone
to Jack. "I'm glad I can take care of myself in the water."

Before Jack could reply the _Mermaid_ seemed to take a sudden dive
through the air. The next instant she struck the water with a splash
that sent the waves rolling all about. The craft rocked violently to and
fro on the surface of the sea. For a while there were anxious hearts
aboard, for there was no certainty but that the ship might not sink to
the bottom.

But the old professor had not calculated and builded in vain. After
rocking about like a vessel newly launched, the strange craft rode
safely and upright on the water. It set down far enough to bring the
propelling tubes well under, but not so far but that the conning tower
was well out and there was a small deck available.

"Now to see if we can conquer the water as we did the air!" cried the
professor. "Mark, start the air pump. Jack, you steer, for I want to
watch the machinery under the additional strain."

From the rear tube rushed such a volume of air that the ocean near it
bubbled and foamed. The ship trembled from stem to stern, and then,
after hanging for an instant as if undecided what to do, it began to
move forward as easily as though it had never sailed any other element
than the sea.

"She fits her name!" the professor cried. "She is indeed the _Flying
Mermaid_, for she sails the ocean as easily as she navigates in the
clouds!"

For a mile or two the craft was sent ahead over the waves. Then it was
reversed and run backwards. Satisfied that his long months of work had
not gone for naught, the professor after trying several experiments,
decided to try and raise the ship while in motion.

With Jack and Mark to look after the air pumps, while Washington, Tom
and Bill busied themselves in the engine room, Mr. Henderson began to
generate the gas and start the negative gravity apparatus. All the while
the craft was forging ahead.

There was again the hissing sound that told of the aluminum holder being
filled. For a few minutes there seemed to be no change, the _Mermaid_
plowing forward.

Then like a bird rising from the waves, or like a flying fish leaping
from the sea to escape some pursuing monster of the deep, the new ship
shot up diagonally from the surface and winged its way into the upper
regions of the air.

"Success! Success!" cried the professor. "This proves all I wanted to
know. Now we are ready for our great trip!"

Great were the rejoicings in the camp that night. It was like living
over again the days when they were aboard the diving _Porpoise_ or the
flying _Monarch_. To the recollections were added the anticipations of
what was before them in the trip to the interior of the earth.

Busy days followed, for there was still much to be done to the _Flying
Mermaid_. The machinery, which was only partly completed, had to be
finished. Besides this the professor was working on some apparatus, the
use of which he did not disclose to any one. It was stored aboard the
ship at the last minute.

Plenty of provisions had to be taken aboard, and many supplies needed to
work the _Mermaid_ and insure that it would go to the end of the voyage.
The materials for generating the gas and negative gravity, spare parts,
records for the automatic piano and other things were stored away.

Some guns and ammunition were taken along as were a few revolvers, since
old Andy had said it was best to prepare for any thing in the shape of
enemies or wild beasts that might be met with in the interior regions.

It was decided to make the start by sailing along the surface of the sea
for several days, as in the event of any weakness in the machinery being
discovered there would be less danger. If, at the end of four days, no
trouble developed, the professor said he would send the _Mermaid_ into
the air and make the rest of the voyage through the sky.

The night before the start was to be made the professor, with the boys,
Washington and the other helpers, went about through the various shops
and buildings, locking them up securely. For they could not tell how
long they would be away, and they had to leave behind much valuable
material.

As there were several things that needed attention they divided the work
up. Mark had finished his share and was walking back toward the living
cabin where they were all quartered, when, down at the shore, near where
the boat was moored, he fancied he saw, in the gathering darkness, a
moving figure.

"I wonder who that can be," he thought. "All the others are near the
machine shop, for I just left them there. Perhaps it's some one trying
to spy out how the _Mermaid_ is built."

Knowing the professor wanted his secret well guarded, Mark walked softly
toward the little dock that served as a place whence the _Mermaid_ could
be easily boarded. As he approached he saw the figure moving. Something
struck the boy as peculiar.

Though the object had some of the characteristics of a man it did not
walk like a human being, but shuffled along more like a huge ape or
monkey. It seemed bent over, as if it stooped toward the ground.

"Who are you?" called Mark suddenly.

For an instant the figure halted and then hurried on faster than before,
with a curious, shuffling walk. It was approaching the ship.

Somehow it struck Mark as if it was an uncanny being; an inhabitant of
some other world. Then he laughed at his half-fear, and started on a run
toward the dock.

"If it's some tramp trying to find a place to sleep he'd better not go
aboard the ship, he might do some damage," the boy thought.

He could hardly see the figure now as it had passed into the shadow cast
by the boat. He was about to summon the professor to make an
investigation, when Washington started going the search light which was
placed just over the door of the living cabin. It was kept there as a
sort of beacon light, as, near the island was a dangerous ledge of
rocks.

Then, in the blinding white glare from the big lantern as Washington
accidentally swung it toward the _Mermaid_, Mark beheld a strange sight.

The figure he had been watching stood out in bold relief. Though it was
shaped like a human being it was not like any person the boy had ever
seen. It seemed covered with a skin twice too large for it; a skin,
which, in spite of the clothes that concealed it, hung in folds about
the arms and legs, dropping pendent like from the neck like a big
garment, and flapping in the wind.

For an instant Mark was so startled he cried out, and the professor and
the others ran to see what was the matter.

