nothing more for three hours.

He was jolted back to life by a young officer tugging urgently at his
arm.  "Commander Brunner.  Commander."

He rose suddenly and, between the still pronounced effect of the drug
and the liquid-shock state of his nerves, felt certain that something
terrible had happened.

"What?  What is it?"  The victory of so few hours before seemed not at
all a sure memory.  "Have the bastards broken through?"

The officer, himself as taut and fatigued as a violin-string on which
some mad symphony had been played, had no trouble interpreting his
words.  "No, Commander.  It's your wife."

These words did not at first make any impression on him, since he was
sure there was some mistake.  If the man had told him that the stars
had all turned black, his mind could have accepted it more easily.  But
slowly his eyes narrowed upon the serious face of the adjutant.

"Where?"  He had not the courage to ask in what condition.  And
besides, it could not possibly.....

"At the former headquarters of the Alliance High Command."  These words
not seeming to make an impression, he added, "On Rembrandt.  Our envoy
went to negotiate terms of surrender."

"Ara Heidi Brunner?"  He pronounced the words slowly, with rising and
uncontrollable emotion.  "You're sure?"

"Yes, sir.  She asked for you specifically, if you would be allowed---"

"I've got to go to her!"  He rose and started for the door, but lost
his balance and stumbled down on one knee.  He pushed away the
adjutant, who was leaning over him.

"It's the sleeping pill.  Tell the doctor I need a stimulant, and find
out about a landing craft."  He waved his arm vaguely.

"Colonel Liebenstein has said to meet him aboard the Kythera in half an
hour.  They will be sending a party to the capitol at that time."

"Have we a functioning shuttle?"  The deja-vu was almost too powerful.

"Yes, Commander."

"Go.  Go."  The young man left the room as he strained to right himself
and recover some semblance of calm.  Realizing the latter was
impossible, and that the stimulant would make it worse, being so far
beyond any choice.....  He sat helpless on the edge of the bed, and
gave himself up to the Sea which had dashed him so mercilessly, yet now
was bearing him, heedless, toward all his desire.  "If only she is all
right!"  His head dipped again beneath the drowning swells, and he
struggled for breath.

A medic entered with a syringe and a distracted, irritated look on his
face.  "Are you sure this is a good idea?"  Brunner said nothing,
rolled up the sleeve and pointed to his upper arm.  Shortly afterward
the adjutant returned.  No longer shunning his help, he leaned heavily
against him, and after the first mad adrenalin rush, made his way as in
a three-legged race to the shuttledock.

"Can you fly a shuttle?" he asked as they entered.  But seeing a pilot
already at the helm, he asked instead, "Can you be spared from your
duties?"

"Yes, sir.  If you wish---"

"I do."  A complex series of emotions, such as only real life can
provide, made him not want to be parted from this lad, so very little
more than a boy.

The shuttle made its way to the Kythera, from which her summons had
come.  Upon arrival he and the boy boarded the larger landing craft,
which then made for the soft and flowing hues of Dutch Rembrandt.
Brunner's last rational thought of that voyage was that planets had
been misnamed, since van Gogh at its distance was all of gold and black.


*


The vessel touched down before the vast, geodesic Headquarters
building, after first passing through the airlock of the encircling
dome.  It took some time before the soldiers in the broad entranceway
could be made to understand what was wanted of them in relation to the
strange, grizzled and begrimed Captain.  The detachment to escort the
prisoners they expected, and Liebenstein's name they knew.....  Finally
after several attempts on the com-line, during which a voice on the
other side could be heard to utter clearly, "There must be some
mistake," a sympathetic looking officer of indistinguishable rank
emerged form an elevator and said:

"Group Commander Brunner?  Please come with me."

He followed lifeless, along with the boy.  They went up in the sealed
capsule, and then across and then, for some reason, down again.  The
motioned stopped.  Two doors slid apart.

They walked down a short hallway, and entered a room.  There were three
people in it.  A military policeman, a Belgian officer, and a woman
with dark hair.

That the woman was his wife he slowly realized, because she came up and
embraced him gently.  But his mind was so uncertain, and his body so
weak that he wondered if he were awake, or it was all a trick, or.....
She looked up at him with shining eyes, kissed his unmoving lips, and
said:          "Olaf, are you all right?"

"Who is the man?" he said, as to a stranger.  And at this some kind of
life began to revive inside him.  But it was not love.  An ember caught
to flame and, smoldering, began to rise.

The man in question rose, looking apologetic and unsure.  He came
nearer and offered his hand, which Brunner left dangling.  Then with a
heavy accent and sudden coldness he said.  "I am the man who brought
your wife here.  I am General....." and his mouth produced some name.

WHILE A BELGIAN OFFICER WAS RAPING YOUR WIFE.  RAPING YOU WHILE A
BELGIAN OFFICER WAS RAPING YOUR WIFE.  RAPING YOUR WIFE, was all that
his mind and last instinct understood.

Something savage took hold of him.  He struck the man with such a
sudden, vicious blow that even in his weakened state it nearly broke
both jaw and hand, as the general staggered and fell back.

The MP came towards him and his wife caught his arm, which was raised
to strike again.  "Olaf, what are you doing?" she pleaded.  But he
could not perceive what was happening and shook free of her grasp, and
with starvation violence moved toward his foe again.  But the MP stood
between them.

His wife turned his numb and again lifeless form toward her, and with
tears in her eyes, said words that almost made it through to his mind.

"Olaf, please.  He never touched me."

And then in a simple, childlike sob he said her name.

"Ara?"

"Yes, it's me.  It's me, it's all right."

And again she embraced him, instinctively and with all the love she
could muster massaging his back, the taut muscles of his neck.  He
stepped back after a time and held her arms, confused.

"Then why....."

"To be a governess for his children, and to keep me from the prison
colonies."

"To protect you?  Why?"

"Because I'm pregnant."

"I thought you said he never....."  It was all too much.  He looked
hard at her figure, perhaps a little fuller, tried to reckon the
months.  All useless.  He did not understand.  He did not understand.
Then it was his eyes that pleaded, and he felt himself beginning to
pass out.

"Ara?"  His last hope.  "What is happening?"

"I had the child, Olaf.  A son.  YOUR SON."

At this he let out a piteous groan, as the lance pierced his heart.
And he stumbled, then collapsed into a corner, weeping uncontrollably,
oblivious of his wife's caressing hands.



II


The next two days he spent in a hospital on Rembrandt, then moved with
his wife and baby son, to temporary quarters aboard the largely
undamaged Kythera.  With the vessels of his former destroyer group
either crippled, destroyed outright, or reassigned to new contingents,
his next command remained uncertain.

He was offered, if he wanted it, a two month leave of absence.  But in
his present state, and with the uncertainty of war all around him---his
own sense of duty, and the desire to find the safest haven for his
young family---he simply could not decide.  Also, with the issue still
very much in doubt, and the slow realization that he was good at what
he did, he did not know if he wished to trust the future to strangers:
if his place was not, after all, on the bridge of a Coalition
destroyer.

He could not decide, and only asked for more time.

That night aboard the cruiser, the first they had spent together after
the long separation, it was understood between them without any word or
sign, that they should not yet try to make love.  Instead they lay
quietly in the bed, with the newborn in the crib beside them, talking,
kissing, and gently touching in the subdued light and near darkness of
the room.  They spoke in the way that couples do, who have not yet
taken their troth for granted, understanding with fewer words what the
other meant, but still trying to read the deeper meaning of what was
said, and to reaffirm their own commitment by expressions of special
tenderness and love.

"But tell me the truth," he continued.  "That he never touched you I
can believe.  It shows in his eyes.  But why does a conquering General
in the midst of an war, a widower, take a beautiful young woman from a
detention center?  Only to protect her, and to be a governess for his
children?  Forgive me, Ara, but no one is that noble."

"Yes.  I think deep down he always hoped that I would fall in love with
him, with his children, and become his wife or mistress."  Her fingers
gently reassured his throbbing chest.  Then, as if embarrassed and
needing to change the subject, she added.  "But really, I'm not as
attractive as all that.  It is only in your eyes that I'm beautiful."

"Then the rest of the world is blind.....  But how could he think to
keep you forever, or that you would abandon your own home, your own
family?"  From these words she understood that he had accepted her
faithfulness, and as far as this was possible, dismissed jealousy,
which would only wound them both.

"You have to remember how it must have seemed to them at the time.  Our
colonies had been taken, along with the Dutch.  And shortly afterward,
Schiller was destroyed. . .and the Coalition thrown into confusion.
The blindness of the conqueror, I suppose.  They had known nothing but
victory, didn't seem to realize the men that they had killed, and the
lives they had torn apart---"

"I'm glad I hit him.  BASTARDS.  I wish they could have seen their
handiwork at Dracus."

She rose on her elbow and looked down at him, trying to understand the
change.  He would never have said (or done) such a thing a year ago.
He turned toward her, with the changed eyes and soul of all innocent
young, thrust into war and forced to grow up too quickly.  Then all at
once her eyes clouded with pain, as she seemed to realize that she too
had been unaware of the suffering caused by such men.  And her own
anguish and grief, that she had had to discipline for so long, for her
unborn child's sake, spilled over.  She hid herself against him.

"He was always telling me that the Coalition was finished, that you
were probably dead....."

And he felt too what she must have endured, and the veil was lifted
between them.  They had both suffered, both changed, though their love
for each other had not.  Or if it had, had only deepened and grown
stronger.          But with the almost masculine resolve that he knew so
well in her, she still her tears and pushed forward, determined to
finish the thought---to face the hard truth.

"But I never lost hope.  I knew you would find me.  Somehow I knew."
But she could not maintain this control any longer.  Nor did she wish
to.  She set her face to his chest and wept silently as he comforted
her.

"My beautiful Ara.  Forgive me.  I was so wrapped up in my own loss, I
had forgotten how it must have been for you."

She became quieter, shook her head against him  "I was all right.  And
with the baby inside me. . .I wasn't alone somehow.  But I was so
terribly worried for all of us.  I knew how hard you would take our
separation, not knowing."

He released a breath, felt once more his own dependence.  "How can you
love me?" he said mournfully.  "I am such a weak and timid fool."

She put a finger to his lips.

"Do you know what Colonel Liebenstein told me on Rembrandt?"          He
shook his head, eyes closed.

"He told me that he was recommending you for a Medal of Valor---that
you held together a destroyer group consisting of twelve ships, in
which nine were knocked out or severely damaged. . .and held your
position against an attacking forced nearly twice your strength, for
thirty-six hours without relief or reinforcement.  Do you know what
else he told me?"  He could only release a troubled breath, that seemed
to have been caged inside him for years.  "He said that you defended
Dracus with equal tenacity, and landing, kept your head when more
experienced men couldn't.  He said that you've been sick and hurting
throughout, but all the while have been an exemplary officer."  He felt
hot tears flow down both sides of his face.  "It's true, isn't it?"

"Yes.....  But I wish I didn't cry so much.  It makes me feel weak, and
I think that in your eyes----"  Again the finger touched his lips.

"Stop, Olaf."  She kissed him, then snuggled close.  "It takes so much
more courage to admit your feelings than to deny them.  Why do you
think I fell in love with you?"

He turned toward her as he had longed to do from the first night of
their separation, and buried his face in the soft hair about her neck.

"Dear God, I love you."  And in that moment he could not bear to hear
his son cry, because he knew that he was nothing more, and never would
be, than the helpless creature beside them.

As his wife rose to nurse the child he recovered himself, and like Ara,
continued the thought.

SUCH IS THE LOT OF HUMANITY.  And who nourished and protected them, the
children who had grown?  Was there a God, or was Man truly alone in his
walk through the world of flesh?  In all that he had lived through
these past months, he could not begin to answer that question.  There
had to be something---he had only his own experience to go
by---because.....  As close as he had come to death and despair, they
had never been able to completely overwhelm him.  But had he, and Ara,
survived because of something outside, or inside?  And was that
something God?  Was God internal, some invisible undercurrent of Life
and Nature, or external, some being or beings who watched it all from
without?  And where to find the answers?  If there was an answer.

He remembered the words to Johann Schiller's 'Ode to Joy,' set to
angelic chorus by Beethoven.  "For surely, beyond the stars there
dwells a loving father.  Seek Him there, beyond the stars."  And this
seemed particularly relevant and true, until he remembered that
Schiller had been unmade by the hands of men.

And he remembered the horror of Dracus, which had made him see, and
feel, all others.

And these continual barriers to faith and serenity were just what was
so maddening.  How could one believe in anything after knowing the rape
of war?  Or disbelieve after finding his wife (and himself) still alive
against such odds?  No matter how much of life one experienced, no
matter how much knowledge he acquired or how 'wise' he became---he
wondered seriously if such a word held any real meaning---there was
always one more piece of information to take in, one more tragedy to
rationalize, and try to find some reason for.  And until this new,
confounded fact was taken in and digested, it upset and unraveled all
the others, and would not let a man with half a conscience rest.

Through this long chain of reasoning, and especially this last thought,
he finally unearthed what was bothering him, and poisoning the
recuperative peace that he should have been experiencing.  He started
to rebel against what he found there, but knew he would be unable.

What was troubling him was simply this.  In the earlier days of his
acquaintance with Col. Joyce, and for reasons known only to himself,
the Russian had confided probably more than he should have about Soviet
intentions during the war.  Perhaps it was the need to express and
justify his thoughts to a younger man not yet so cynical, so certain
and so weary of life.  In any event he had told him, and Brunner now
knew why they had insisted that the Coalition strike Dutch Larkspur
first, and why they were now being instructed to withdraw.

The new orders had arrived that very day.  They were to return to the
fringes of Cerberus, there to re-form with heavy Russian
reinforcements, for the inevitable assault on the Athena colonies---the
campaign to liberate and reclaim his home.

That was all fine, and how it should be.  Incredibly tempting, except
that in the meantime they were to leave Rembrandt and Van Gogh in the
hands of the Soviets.  And he could no longer pretend ignorance as to
what would happen next:  one more SSR possession, one less home for the
Dutch.  And one more subjugated people, for those who would not, or
could not leave.  It was 1946 all over again.

DAMN IT!

He had seen too much suffering and loss, been spared from final
annihilation too many times to feel no responsibility, or to take such
news easily.  It was so unfair.  What remained of the Dutch forces,
along with their Swedish allies, had been contacted and told of the
colonies' liberation. They were on their way, with deepest gratitude,
to re-occupy their homes, and rebuild their lives.

And what would they find upon arrival?  The Soviets firmly entrenched,
regretfully explaining that for strategic purposes they must maintain,
for the time being, a provisional government and strong military
presence there.  But not to worry, they would say, so soon as the
conflict was ended and peace assured, all would again be set right.

THE BLOOD LEECHES, FEEDING OF THE MISERY OF OTHERS TO EXPAND THEIR
DOMAIN.  But what could he possibly do about it?  He was only one man,
and had his own family to think of first.....  No.  Though the excuse
to turn his back was ready-made, he knew he could not yield.  For this
was what his ancestors had done under Hitler:  in the name of loving
and protecting their own, disregarding the lives and humanity of all
who opposed them.  It was WRONG, the seed and heart of all betrayal.

He watched his wife with the baby at her breast, knew there were other
wives and children, other husbands like himself.  All had lives, and
all deserved to live them freely.

He resolved then and there to request a larger command, to speak to
Liebenstein, and take it from there.  He refused to allow the anguish
and death of the battle just three days prior. . .to amount to nothing
more than another senseless tragedy.  His comrades had fought too long
and too hard, and too many died. . .for that.  And the fire that burned
suddenly, inexorably inside him, consumed all doubt.


*



