First Cause I pronounce you two, and you two, husband and wife. But we
must remember that the dull vision of mortal man cannot pierce the veil
of futurity, which is as crystal to the all-beholding eye of the First
Cause. Though you love each other truly, unforeseen things may come
between you to mar the perfection of your happiness. Therefore a time is
granted you during which you may discover whether or not your unions are
perfect."

A pause ensued, then Tarnan went on:

"Martin Crane, Margaret Spencer, Richard Seaton, and Dorothy Vaneman,
you are before us to take the final vows which shall bind your bodies
together for life and your spirits together for eternity. Have you
considered the gravity of this step sufficiently to enter into this
marriage without reservation?"

"I have," solemnly replied the four, in unison.

"Exchange the jeweled rings. Do you, Richard Seaton and Dorothy Vaneman;
and you, Martin Crane and Margaret Spencer; individually swear, here in
the presence of the First Cause and that of the Supreme Justices of
Kondal, that you will be true and loyal, each helping his chosen one in
all things, great and small; that never throughout eternity, in thought
or in action, will either your body or your mind or your conscious
spirit stray from the path of fairness and truth and honor?"

"I do."

"I pronounce you married with the eternal marriage. Just as the faidon
which you each now wear--the eternal jewel which no force of man,
however applied, has yet been able to change or deform in any
particular; and which continues to give off its inward light without
change throughout eternity--shall endure through endless cycles of time
after the metal of the ring which holds it shall have crumbled in decay:
even so shall your spirits, formerly two, now one and indissoluble,
progress in ever-ascending evolution throughout eternity after the base
material which is your bodies shall have returned to the senseless dust
from whence it arose."

       *       *       *       *       *

The Karbix lowered his arms and the bridal party walked to the door
through a double rank of uplifted weapons. From the chapel they were led
to another room, where the contracting parties signed their names in a
register. The Kofedix then brought forward two marriage
certificates--heavy square plates of a brilliant purple metal,
beautifully engraved in parallel columns of English and Kondalian
script, and heavily bordered with precious stones. The principals and
witnesses signed below each column, the signatures being deeply engraved
by the royal engraver. Leaving the registry, they were escorted to the
dining hall, where a truly royal repast was served. Between courses the
highest nobles of the nation welcomed the visitors and wished them
happiness in short but earnest addresses. After the last course had been
disposed of, the Karbix rose at a sign from the Karfedix and spoke, his
voice again agitated by the emotion which had puzzled his hearers during
the marriage service.

"All Kondal is with us here in spirit, trying to aid us in our poor
attempts to convey our welcome to these our guests, of whose friendship
no greater warrant could be given than their willingness to grant us the
privilege of their marriage. Not only have they given us a boon that
will make their names revered throughout the nation as long as Kondal
shall exist, but they have also been the means of showing us plainly
that the First Cause is upon our side, that our age-old institution of
honor is in truth the only foundation upon which can be built a race
fitted to survive. At the same time they have been the means of showing
us that our hated foe, entirely without honor, building his race upon a
foundation of bloodthirsty savagery alone, is building wrongly and must
perish utterly from the face of Osnome."

His hearers listened, impressed by his earnestness, but plainly not
understanding his meaning.

"You do not understand?" he went on, with a deep light shining in his
eyes. "It is inevitable that two peoples inhabiting worlds so widely
separated as are our two should be possessed of widely-varying knowledge
and abilities, and these strangers have already made it possible for us
to construct engines of destruction which shall obliterate Mardonale
completely...." A fierce shout of joy interrupted the speaker and the
nobles sprang to their feet, saluting the visitors with upraised
weapons. As soon as they had reseated themselves, the Karbix continued:

"That is the boon. The vindication of our system of evolution is easily
explained. The strangers landed first upon Mardonale. Had Nalboon met
them in honor, he would have gained the boon. But he, with the savagery
characteristic of his evolution, attempted to kill his guests and steal
their treasures, with what results you already know. We, on our part, in
exchange for the few and trifling services we have been able to render
them, have received even more than Nalboon would have obtained, had his
plans not been nullified by their vastly superior state of evolution."

The orator seated himself and there was a deafening clamor of cheering
as the nobles formed themselves into an escort of honor and conducted
the two couples to their apartments.

Alone in their room, Dorothy turned to her husband with tears shining in
her beautiful eyes.

"Dick, sweetheart, wasn't that the most wonderful thing that anybody
ever heard of? Using the word in all its real meaning, it was
indescribably grand, and that old man is simply superb. It makes me
ashamed of myself to think that I was ever afraid or nervous here."

"It sure was all of that, Dottie mine, little bride of an hour. The
whole thing gets right down to where a fellow lives--I've got a lump in
my throat right now so big that it hurts me to think. Earthly marriages
are piffling in comparison with that ceremony. It's no wonder they're
happy, after taking those vows--especially as they don't have to take
them until after they are sure of themselves.

"But we're sure already, sweetheart," as he embraced her with all the
feeling of his nature. "Those vows are not a bit stronger than the ones
we have already exchanged--bodily and mentally and spiritually we are
one, now and forever."




CHAPTER XVII

Bird, Beast, or Fish?


"These jewels rather puzzle me, Dick. What are they?" asked Martin, as
the four assembled, waiting for the first meal. As he spoke he held up
his third finger, upon which gleamed the royal jewel of Osnome in its
splendid Belcher mounting of arenak as transparent as the jewel itself
and having the same intense blue color. "I know the name, 'faidon,' but
that's all I seem to know."

"That's about all that anybody knows about them. It is a
naturally-occurring, hundred-faceted crystal, just as you see it
there--deep blue, perfectly transparent, intensely refractive, and
constantly emitting that strong, blue light. It is so hard that it
cannot be worked, cut, or ground. No amount of the hardest known
abrasive will even roughen its surface. No blow, however great, will
break it--it merely forces its way into the material of the hammer,
however hard the hammer may be. No extremity of either heat or cold
affects it in any degree, it is the same when in the most powerful
electric arc as it is when immersed in liquid helium."

"How about acids?"

"That is what I am asking myself. Osnomians aren't much force at
chemistry. I'm going to try to get hold of another one, and see if I
can't analyze it, just for fun. I can't seem to convince myself that a
real atomic structure could be that large."

"No, it is rather large for an atom," and turning to the two girls, "How
do you like your solitaires?"

"They're perfectly beautiful, and the Tiffany mounting is exquisite,"
replied Dorothy, enthusiastically, "but they're so awfully big! They're
as big as ten-carat diamonds, I do believe."

"Just about," replied Seaton, "but at that, they're the smallest Dunark
could find. They have been kicking around for years, he says--so small
that nobody wanted them. They wear big ones on their bracelets, you
know. You sure will make a hit in Washington, Dottie. People will think
you're wearing a bottle-stopper until they see it shining in the dark,
then they'll think it's an automobile headlight. But after a few
jewelers have seen these stones, one of them will be offering us five
million dollars apiece for them, trying to buy them for some dizzy old
dame who wants to put out the eyes of some of her social rivals. Yes?
No?"

"That's about right, Dick," replied Crane, and his face wore a
thoughtful look. "We can't keep it secret that we have a new jewel,
since all four of us will be wearing them continuously, and anyone who
knows jewels at all will recognize these as infinitely superior to any
known Earthly jewel. In fact, they may get some of us into trouble, as
fabulously valuable jewels usually do."

"That's true, too. So we'll let it out casually that they're as common
as mud up here--that we're just wearing them for sentiment, which is
true, and that we're thinking of bringing back a shipload to sell for
parking lights."

"That would probably keep anyone from trying to murder our wives for
their rings, at least."

"Have you read your marriage certificate, Dick?" asked Margaret.

"Not yet. Let's look at it, Dottie."

She produced the massive, heavily-jeweled document, and the auburn head
and the brown one were very close to each other as they read together
the English side of the certificate. Their vows were there, word for
word, with their own signatures beneath them, all deeply engraved into
the metal. Seaton smiled as he saw the legal form engraved below their
signatures, and read aloud:

     "I, the Head of the Church and the Commander-in-Chief of the armed
     forces of Kondal, upon the planet Osnome, certify that I have this
     day, in the city of Kondalek, of said nation and planet, joined in
     indissoluble bonds of matrimony, Richard Ballinger Seaton, Doctor
     of Philosophy, and Dorothy Lee Vaneman; Doctor of Music; both of
     the city of Washington, District of Columbia, United States of
     America, upon the planet Earth, in strict compliance with the
     marriage laws, both of Kondal and of the United States of America.

     TARNAN."

     Witnesses:
       ROBAN, Emperor of Kondal.
       TURAL, Empress of Kondal.
       DUNARK, Crown Prince of Kondal.
       SITAR, Crown Princess of Kondal.
       MARC C. DUQUESNE, Ph. D., Washington, D. C.

"That is SOME document," remarked Seaton. "Probably a lawyer could find
fault with his phraseology, but I'll bet that this thing would hold in
any court in the world. Think you'll get married again when we get back,
Mart?"

Both girls protested, and Crane answered:

"No, I think not. Our ceremony would be rather an anticlimax after this
one, and this one will undoubtedly prove legal. I intend to register
this just as it is, and get a ruling from the courts. But it is time for
breakfast. Pardon me--I should have said 'darprat,' for it certainly is
not breakfast-time by Washington clocks. My watch says that it is
eleven-thirty P. M."

"This system of time is funny," remarked Dorothy. "I just can't get used
to having no night, and...."

"And it's such a long time between eats, as the famous governor said
about the drinks," broke in Seaton.

"How did you know what I was going to say, Dick?"

"Husbandly intuition," he grinned, "aided and abetted by a normal
appetite that rebels at seventeen hours between supper and breakfast,
and nine hours between the other meals. Well, it's time to eat--let's
go!"

       *       *       *       *       *

After eating, the men hurried to the Skylark. During the sleeping-period
the vessel had been banded with the copper repellers: the machine guns
and instruments, including the wonderful Osnomian wireless system, had
been installed; and, except for the power-bars, she was ready for a
voyage. The Kondalian vessel was complete, even to the cushions, but was
without instruments.

After a brief conversation with the officer in charge, Dunark turned to
Seaton.

"Didn't you find that your springs couldn't stand up under the
acceleration?"

"Yes, they flattened out dead."

"The Kolanix Felan, in charge of the work, thought so, and substituted
our compound-compensated type, made of real spring metal, for them.
They'll hold you through any acceleration you can live through."

"Thanks, that's fine. What's next, instruments?"

"Yes. I have sent a crew of men to gather up what copper they can
find--you know that we use practically no metallic copper, as platinum,
gold, and silver are so much better for ordinary purposes--and another
to erect a copper-smelter near one of the mines which supply the city
with the copper sulphate used upon our tables. While they are at work I
think I will work on the instruments, if you two will be kind enough to
help me."

Seaton and Crane offered to supply him with instruments from their
reserve stock, but the Kofedix refused to accept them, saying that he
would rather have their help in making them, so that he would thoroughly
understand their functions. The electric furnaces were rapidly made
ready and they set to work; Crane taking great delight in working that
hitherto rare and very refractory metal, iridium, of which all the
Kondalian instruments were to be made.

"They have a lot of our rare metals here, Dick."

"They sure have. I'd like to set up a laboratory and live here a few
years--I'd learn something about my specialty or burst. They use gold
and silver where we use copper, and platinum and its alloys where we use
iron and soft steel. All their weapons are made of iridium, and all
their most highly-tempered tools, such as their knives, razors, and so
on, are made of opaque arenak. I suppose you've noticed the edge on your
razor?"

"How could I help it? It is hard to realize that a metal can be so hard
that it requires forty years on a diamond-dust abrasive machine to hone
a razor--or that once honed, it shaves generation after generation of
men without losing in any degree its keenness."

"I can't understand it, either--I only know that it's so. They have all
our heavy metals in great abundance, and a lot more that we don't know
anything about on Earth, but they apparently haven't any light metals at
all. It must be that Osnome was thrown off the parent sun late, so that
the light metals were all gone?"

"Something like that, possibly."

The extraordinary skill of the Kofedix made the manufacture of the
instruments a short task, and after Crane had replaced the few broken
instruments of the Skylark from their reserve stock, they turned their
attention to the supply of copper that had been gathered. They found it
enough for only two bars.

"Is this all we have?" asked Dunark, sharply.

"It is, your Highness," replied the Kolanix. "That is every scrap of
metallic copper in the city."

"Oh, well, that'll be enough to last until we can smelt the rest," said
Seaton. "With one bar apiece we're ready for anything Mardonale can
start. Let 'em come!"

The bars were placed in the containers and both vessels were tried out,
each making a perfect performance. Upon the following kokam, immediately
after the first meal, the full party from the Earth boarded the Skylark
and accompanied the Kofedix to the copper smelter. Dunark himself
directed the work of preparing the charges and the molds, though he was
continually being interrupted by wireless messages in code and by
messengers bearing tidings too important to trust into the air.

"I hope you will excuse all of these delays," said Dunark, after the
twentieth interruption, "but...."

"That's all right, Dunark. We know that you're a busy man."

"I can tell you about it, but I wouldn't want to tell many people. With
the salt you gave us, I am preparing a power-plant that will enable us
to blow Mardonale into...."

He broke off as a wireless call for help sounded. All listened intently,
learning that a freight-plane was being pursued by a karlon a few
hundred miles away.

"Now's the time for you to study one, Dunark!" Seaton exclaimed. "Get
your gang of scientists out here while we go get him and drag him in!"

       *       *       *       *       *

As Dunark sent the message, the Skylark's people hurried aboard, and
Seaton drove the vessel toward the calls for help. With its great speed
it reached the monster before the plane was overtaken. Focusing the
attractor upon the enormous metallic beak of the karlon, Seaton threw on
the power and the beast halted in midair as it was jerked backward and
