feathering along the trunk of elms, etc.

=Dentate.= With teeth pointing outwards.

=Disk.= Central part of a head of flowers; fleshy expansion of the
receptacle of a flower; any rounded, flat surface.

=Drupe.= A stone fruit; soft externally with a stone at the center, as
the cherry and peach.

=Erose.= Eroded, as if gnawed.

=Exserted.= Protruding, projecting out of.

=Falcate.= Scythe-shaped.

=Fertile.= Flowers containing the pistil, capable of producing fruit.
Anthers in such blossoms, if any, are generally abortive.

=Fibrovascular.= Bundle or tissue, formed of wood fibers, ducts, etc.

=Filament.= Part of stamen supporting anther.

=Fungus.= A division of cryptogamous plants, including mushrooms, etc.

=Furcation.= Branching.

=Glabrous.= Smooth without hairiness or roughness.

=Glandular.= Bearing glands or appendages having the appearance of
glands.

=Glaucous.= Covered with a bloom: bluish hoary.

=Globose= or =globous.= Spherical or nearly so.

=Habit.= The general appearance of a plant.

=Habitat.= The place where a plant naturally grows, as in swamps, in
water, upon dry hillsides, etc.

=Hybrid.= A cross between two species.

=Imbricated.= Overlapping.

=Inflorescence.= Mode of disposition of flowers; sometimes applied to
the flower-cluster itself.

=Involucre.= Bracts subtending a flower or a cluster of flowers.

=Keeled.= Having a central dorsal ridge like the keel of a boat.

=Key.= A winged fruit; a samara.

=Lacerate.= Irregularly cleft, as if torn.

=Lanceolate.= Lance-shaped, broadest above the base, gradually narrowing
to the apex.

=Leaf.= Consisting when botanically complete of a blade, usually flat, a
footstalk and two appendages at base of the footstalk; often consisting
of blade only.

=Leaf, compound.= Having two to many distinct blades on a common
leafstalk or rachis. These blades may be sessile or have leafstalks of
their own.

=Leaf, pinnately compound.= With the leaflets arranged along the sides
of the rachis.

=Leaf, palmately compound.= With leaflets all standing on summit of
petiole.

=Leaf-cushions.= Organs resembling persistent decurrent footstalks, upon
which leaves of spruces, etc., stand; sterigmata.

=Leaf-scar.= The scar left on the twig where the petiole was attached.

=Lenticel.= Externally appearing upon the bark as spots, warts, and
perpendicular or transverse lines.

=Linear.= Long and narrow with sides nearly parallel.

=Monopetalous.= Having petals more or less united.

=Mucronate.= Abruptly tipped with a small, sharp point.

=Nerved.= Having prominent unbranched ribs or veins.

=Obcordate.= Inversely heart-shaped.

=Obovate.= Ovate with the broader end towards the apex.

=Obtuse.= Blunt or rounded at the end.

=Orbicular.= Having a circular or nearly circular outline.

=Ovary.= The part of the pistil containing the ovules.

=Ovoid.= A solid with an oval or ovate outline.

=Ovuliferous.= Bearing ovules.

=Panicle.= General term for any loose and irregular flower-cluster,
commonly of the racemose type, with pedicellate flowers.

=Pedicel.= The stalk of a single flower in the ultimate divisions of an
inflorescence.

=Peduncle.= The stem of a solitary flower or of a cluster.

=Perfect.= Having both pistils and stamens.

=Perianth.= The floral envelope consisting of calyx, corolla, or both.

=Persistent.= Not falling for a long time.

=Petal.= A division of the corolla.

=Petiole.= The stalk of a leaf.

=Petiolule.= The stalk of a leaflet in a compound leaf.

=Pistil.= The seed-bearing organ of the flower.

=Pistillate.= Provided with pistils; usually applied to flowers without
stamens.

=Pollen.= The fertilizing grains contained in the anthers.

=Puberulent.= Minutely pubescent.

=Pubescent.= Covered with short soft or downy hairs.

=Raceme.= A simple cluster of pediceled flowers upon a common axis.

=Rachis.= The main axis of a compound leaf, of a raceme or of a spike.

=Ramification.= Branching.

=Range.= The geographical extent and limits of a species.

=Reflexed.= Turned backward.

=Reticulated.= Netted; in the form of a network.

=Revolute.= Rolled backward from the margin or apex.

=Samara.= Key fruit; winged fruit, like that of the ash or maple.

=Scarf-bark.= The thin, outermost layer which often peels off.

=Segment.= One of the divisions into which a plane organ, such as a
leaf, may be divided.

=Sepal.= A calyx leaf.

=Serrate.= With teeth inclining forward.

=Serrulate.= With small teeth inclining forward.

=Sessile.= Not stalked, as when the leaf blade or flower rests directly
upon the twig.

=Simple leaf.= Not compound, having one blade not jointed with its stem.

=Sinuate.= Strongly wavy-margined.

=Sinus.= Interval between two lobes or divisions of a leaf; sometimes
sharp-angular, sometimes rounded.

=Spatulate.= Gradually narrowed downward from a rounded summit.

=Spike.= A cluster of sessile or nearly sessile lateral flowers on an
elongated axis.

=Spray.= The smaller branches and ultimate branchlets of a tree taken as
a whole.

=Stamens.= The pollen-bearing organs of a flower, each stamen consisting
of a filament (stem) and anther which contains the pollen.

=Staminate.= Having stamens.

=Sterile.= Variously applied: to flowers with stamens only; to stamens
without anthers; to anthers without pollen; to ovaries not producing
seed, etc.

=Stigma.= Part of pistil which receives the pollen.

=Stipels.= Appendages to a leaflet, analogous to the stipules of a leaf.

=Stipules.= Appendages of a leaf, usually at the point of insertion.

=Striate.= Streaked, or very finely ridged lengthwise.

=Style.= Part of pistil uniting ovary with stigma; often wanting.

=Sucker.= A shoot of subterranean origin.

=Suture.= The line of union between parts which have grown together;
most often used with reference to the line along which an ovary opens.

=Terete.= Cylindrical.

=Ternate.= In threes.

=Tomentose.= Densely pubescent or woolly.

=Truncate.= As if cut off at the end.

=Umbel.= An inflorescence in which the flower stems spring from the same
point like the rays of an umbrella.

=Verticillate.= Arranged in a circle round an axis; whorled.

=Villose= or =villous.= With long, soft hairs.

=Whorl.= Arranged in a circle about an axis.




INDEX.


  A

  Abele. (Populus alba, L.) 39, 40

  Abies balsamea, Mill. _Fir balsam_ 20-22

  =Abietacae.= (=Pinoideae=) 1-22
    Larix 1-4
    Pinus 4-12
    Picea 12-18
    Tsuga 19, 20
    Abies 20-22

  Acacia, (Robinia Pseudacacia, L.) 131, 132
          (Robinia viscosa, Vent.) 132
          Three-thorned. (Gleditsia triacanthos, L.) 129, 130

  =Aceraceae.= (Maple family). 140-153
    Acer barbatum, Michx. _Rock, Sugar, Hard maple, Sugar tree_ 144-146
       barbatum, var. nigrum, Sarg. _Black maple_ 146, 147
       dasycarpum, Ehrh. _Silver, Soft, White, River maple_ 142-144
       Negundo, L. _Box elder, Ash-leaved maple_ 151-153
       nigrum, Michx. _Black maple_ 146,147
       Pennsylvanicum, L. _Striped maple, Moosewood, Whistlewood_ 149-151
       platanoides _Norway maple_ 146
       rubrum, L. _Red, Swamp, Soft, White maple_ 140-142
       saccharinum, L. _Silver, Soft, White, River maple_ 142-144
       saccharinum, Wang. _Rocky Sugar, Hard maple, Sugar tree_ 144-146
       saccharinum, var. nigrum, T. and G. _Black maple_ 146, 147
       Saccharum, Marsh. _Rock, Sugar, Hard maple, Sugar tree_ 144-146
       Saccharum, Marsh., var. barbatum, Trelease 172
       Saccharum, Marsh., var. nigrum, Britton. _Black maple_ 146, 147, 172
       spicatum, Lam. _Mountain maple_ 148, 149
    Negundo aceroides, Moench. _Box elder, Ash-leaved maple_ 151-153
            Negundo, Karst, _Box elder, Ash-leaved maple_ 151-153

  Ailanthus family. (=Simarubaceae=) 133

  Ailanthus, Tree of Heaven, Chinese sumac (Ailanthus glanulosus,
              Desf.) 133

  Alder, European. (Alnus glutinosa, Medic.) 70

  Alnus glutinosa, Medic, _European alder_ 70
  Amelanchier Canadensis, Medic. _Shadbush, June-berry_, 116, 117
  American elm (Ulmus Americana, L.) 95-97
           holly. (Hex opaca, Alt.) 138-146

  =Anacardiaceae.=  (Sumac family) 134-137
    Rhus copallina.      _Dwarf sumac_, 137
         glabra.         _Smooth sumac_, 137
         hirta, Sudw.    _Staghorn sumac_, 134, 135
         toxicodendron.  _Poison ivy_, 137
         typhina, L.     _Staghorn sumac_, 134, 135
         venenata, DC.   _Dogwood, Poison sumac. Poison elder_, 136, 137
         vernix, L. _Dogwood, Poison sumac. Poison elder_, 136, 137

  Apple family. (=Pomaceae=) 112-121
    Apple tree. (Pyrus malus, L.) 1
  =Aquifoliaceae.= (Holly family) 138-140
    Ilex opaca, Ait. _American holly_ 138, 140

  Ash, Black, Swamp, Basket, Hoop, Brown ash. (Fraxinus nigra,
         Marsh.) 167-168
       European mountain ash. (Pyrus aucuparia) 113, 115
       Green ash.  (Fraxinus Pennsylvanica, var. lanceolata,
                     Sarg.) 166, 172
       Mountain ash. (Pyrus Americana, DC.) 112, 113
       Mountain ash. (Pyrus sambucifolia, Cham. & Schlecht.) 113-115
       Red, Brown, River ash. (Fraxinus pubescens. Lam.) 164,165
       White ash.  (Fraxinus Americana, L.) 162-164

  Ash-leaved maple. (Acer negundo, L.) 151-153

  Aspen, Large-toothed. (Populusgrandidentata, Michx.) 31, 32
                        (Populus tremuloides, Michx.) 29, 30


  B

  Balm of Gilead. (Populus balsamifera, L.) 36, 37
                  (Populus candicans, Alt.). 37-39, 171

  Balsam.         (Abies balsamea, Mill.) 20-22
                  (Populus balsamifera, L.) 36, 37

  Basket ash.    (Fraxinus nigra, Marsh.) 167, 168

