attach this thing?"

Mantelish showed him.

The Commissioner thanked him. He directed a fine spray of the solvent
into the black box and watched the fungus melt. "Happen to notice where
Trigger and Lyad went?" he asked.

"Eh?" said Mantelish. He reflected. "I saw them walking down toward camp
talking together as I came in," he called. "Should I go get them?"

"Don't bother," Holati said. "They'll be back."

They came walking back into the ship around half an hour later. Both
faces looked rather white and strained.

"Lyad has something she wants to tell you, Holati," Trigger said.
"Where's Mantelish?"

"In his lab. Taking a nap, I believe."

"That's good. We don't want him here for this. Go ahead, Lyad. Just the
important stuff. You can give us the details after we've left."

Three hours later, the ship was well away from Luscious, traveling
subspace, traveling fast. Trigger walked up into the control section.

"Mantelish is still asleep," she said. They'd fed the professor a doped
drink to get him aboard without detailed explanation and argument about
how much of the lab should be loaded on the ship first. "Shall I get
Lyad out of her cabin for the rest of the story or wait till he wakes
up?"

"Better wait," said the Commissioner. "He'll come out of it in about an
hour, and he might as well hear it with us. Looks like navigating's
going to be a little rough for a spell anyway."

Trigger nodded and sat down in the control next to his. After a while
he glanced over at her.

"How did you get her to talk?" he asked.

"We went back into the woods a bit. I tied her over a stump and broke
two sticks across the first seat of Tranest. Got the idea from Mihul
sort of," Trigger added vaguely. "When I picked up a third stick, Lyad
got awfully anxious to keep things at just a fast conversational level.
We kept it there."

"Hm," said the Commissioner. "You don't feel she did any lying this
time?"

"I doubt it. I tapped her one now and then, just to make sure she didn't
slow down enough to do much thinking. Besides I'd got the whole business
down on a pocket recorder, and Lyad knew it. If she makes one more goof
till this deal is over, the recording gets released to the Hub's news
viewer outfits, yowls and all. She'd sooner lose Tranest than risk
having that happen. She'll be good."

"Yeah, probably," he said thoughtfully. "About that substation--would
you feel more comfortable if we went after the bunch round the Devagas
dome first and got us an escort for the trip?"

"Sure," Trigger said. "But that would just about kill any chances of
doing anything personally, wouldn't it?"

"I'm afraid so. Scout Intelligence will go along pretty far with me. But
they couldn't go that far. We might be able to contact Quillan
individually though. He's a topnotch man in a fighter."

"It doesn't seem to me," Trigger said, "that we ought to run any risk of
being spotted till we know exactly what this thing is like."

"Well," said the Commissioner, "I'm with you there. We shouldn't."

"What about Mantelish and Lyad? You can't let them know either."

The Commissioner motioned with his head. "The rest cubicle back of the
cabins. If we see a chance to do anything, we'll pop them both into
Rest. I can dream up something to make that look plausible afterwards, I
think."

Trigger was silent a moment. Lyad had told them she'd dispatched the
Aurora to stand guard over a subspace station where the missing king
plasmoid presently was housed, until both she and the combat squadron
from Tranest could arrive there. The exact location of that station had
been the most valuable of the bits of information she had extracted so
painstakingly from Balmordan. The coordinates were centered on the
Commissioner's course screen at the moment.

"How about that Tranest squadron?" Trigger asked. "Think Lyad might have
risked a lie, and they could get out here in time to interfere?"

"No," said the Commissioner. "She had to have some idea of where to send
them before starting them out of the Hub. They'll be doing fine if they
make it to the substation in another two weeks. Now the Aurora--if they
started for Luscious right after Lyad called them last night, at best
they can't get there any sooner than we can get to the substation. I
figure that at four days. If they turn right around then, and start
back--"

Trigger laughed. "You can bet on that!" she said. The Commissioner had
used his ship's guns to brand the substation's coordinates in
twenty-mile figures into a mountain plateau above Plasmoid Creek. They'd
left much more detailed information in camp, but there was a chance it
would be overlooked in too hurried a search.

"Then they'll show up at the substation again four or five days behind
us," the Commissioner said. "So they're no problem. But our own outfit's
fastest ships can cut across from the Devagas dome in less than three
days after their search party messages from Luscious to tell them why
we've stopped transmitting and where we've gone. Or the Psychology ship
might get to Luscious before the search party does and start
transmitting about the coordinates."

"In any case," said Trigger, "it's our own boys who are likely to be the
problem."

"Yes. I'd say we _should_ have two days, give or take a few hours, after
we get to the station to see if we can do anything useful and get it
done. Of course, somebody might come wandering into Luscious right now
and start wondering about those coordinate figures, or drop in at our
camp and discover we're gone. But that's not very likely, after all."

"Couldn't be helped anyway," Trigger said.

"No. If we knock ourselves out on this job, somebody besides Lyad's
Tranest squadron and the Devagas has to know just where the station is."
He shook his head. "That Lyad! I figured she'd know how to run the
transmitters, so I gave her the chance. But I never imagined she'd be a
good enough engineer to get inside them and mess them up without killing
herself."

"Lyad has her points," Trigger said. "Too bad she grew up a rat. You had
a playback attachment stuck in there then?"

"Naturally."

"Full of the fungus, I suppose?"

"Full of it," said the Commissioner. "Well, Lyad still lost on that
maneuver. Much less comfortably than she might have, too."

"I think she'd agree with you there," Trigger said.

Lyad's first assignment after Professor Mantelish came out of the dope
was to snap him back into trance and explain to him how he had once more
been put under hypno control and used for her felonious ends by the
First Lady of Tranest. They let him work off his rage while he was still
under partial control. Then the Ermetyne woke him up.

He stared at her coldly.

"You are a deceitful woman, Lyad Ermetyne!" he declared. "I don't wish
to see you about my labs again! At any time. Under any pretext. Is that
understood?"

"Yes, Professor," Lyad said. "And I'm sorry that I believed it necessary
to--"

Mantelish snorted. "Sorry! Necessary! Just to be certain it doesn't
happen again, I shall make up a batch of antihypno pills. If I can
remember the prescription."

"I happen," the Ermetyne ventured, "to know a very good prescription for
the purpose, Professor. If you will permit me!"

Mantelish stood up. "I'll accept no prescriptions from you!" he said
icily. He looked at Trigger as he turned to walk out of the cabin. "Or
drinks from you either, Trigger Argee!" he growled. "Who in the great
spiraling galaxy is there left to trust!"

"Sorry, Professor," Trigger said meekly.

In half an hour or so, he calmed down enough to join the others in the
lounge, to get the final story on Gess Fayle and the missing king
plasmoid from the Ermetyne.

Doctor Gess Fayle, Lyad reported, had died very shortly after leaving
the Manon System. And with him had died every man on board the
U-League's transport ship. It might be simplest, she went on, to relate
the first series of events from the plasmoid's point of view.

"Point of view?" Professor Mantelish interrupted. "The plasmoid has
awareness then?"

"Oh, yes. That one does."

"Self-awareness?"

"Definitely."

"Oho! But then--"

"Professor," Trigger interrupted politely in turn, "may I get you a
drink?"

He glared at her, growled, then grinned. "I'll shut up," he said. Lyad
went on.

Doctor Fayle had resumed experimentation with the 112-113 unit almost as
soon as he was alone with it; and one of the first things he did was to
detach the small 113 section from the main one. The point Doctor Fayle
hadn't adequately considered when he took this step was that 113's
function appeared to be that of a restraining, limiting or counteracting
device on its vastly larger partner. The Old Galactics obviously had
been aware of dangerous potentialities in their more advanced creations,
and had used this means of regulating them. That the method was reliable
was indicated by the fact that, in the thirty thousand years since the
Old Galactics had vanished, plasmoid 112 had remained restricted to the
operations required for the maintenance of Harvest Moon.

But it hadn't liked being restricted.

And it had been very much aware of the possibilities offered by the new
life-forms which lately had intruded on Harvest Moon.

The instant it found itself free, it attempted to take control of the
human minds in its environment.

"Mind-level control?" Mantelish exclaimed, looking startled. "Not
unheard-of, of course. And we'd been considering.... But of _human_
minds?"

Lyad nodded. "It can contact human minds," she said, "though, perhaps
rather fortunately, it can project that particular field effect only
within a quite limited radius. A little less, the Devagas found later,
than five miles."

Mantelish shook his head, frowning. He turned toward the Commissioner.
"Holati," he said emphatically, "I believe that thing could be
dangerous!"

For a moment, they all looked at him. Then the Commissioner cleared his
throat. "It's a possibility, Mantelish," he admitted. "We will give it
thought later."

"What," Trigger asked Lyad, "killed the people on the ship?"

"The attempt to control them," Lyad said. Doctor Fayle apparently had
died as he was leaving the laboratory with the 113 unit. The other men
died wherever they were. The ship, running subspace and pilotless,
plowed headlong into the next gravitic twister and broke up.

A Devagas ship's detectors picked up the wreckage three days later.
Balmordan was on board the Devagas ship and in charge.

The Devagas, at that time, were at least as plasmoid-hungry as anybody
else, and knew they were not likely to see their hunger gratified for
several decades. The wreck of a U-League ship in the Manon area
decidedly was worth investigating.

If the big plasmoid hadn't been capable of learning from its mistakes,
the Devagas investigating party also would have died. Since it could and
did learn, they lived. The searchers discovered human remains and the
crushed remnants of the 113 unit in a collapsed section of the ship.
Then they discovered the big plasmoid--alive in subspace, undamaged and
very conscious of the difficulties it now faced.

It had already initiated its first attempt to solve the difficulties. It
was incapable of outward motion and could not change its own structure,
but it was no longer alone. It had constructed a small work-plasmoid
with visual and manipulating organs, as indifferent to exposure to
subspace as its designer. When the boarding party encountered the twain,
the working plasmoid apparently was attempting to perform some operation
on the frozen and shriveled brain of one of the human cadavers.

Balmordan was a scientist of no mean stature among the Devagas. He did
not understand immediately what he saw, but he realized the probable
importance of understanding it. He had the plasmoids and their lifeless
human research object transferred to the Devagas ship and settled down
to observe what they did.

Released, the working plasmoid went back immediately to its task. It
completed it. Then Balmordan and, presumably, the plasmoids waited.
Nothing happened.

Finally, Balmordan investigated the dead brain. Installed in it he found
what appeared to be near-microscopic energy receivers of plasmoid
material. There was nothing to indicate what type of energy they were
to--or could--receive.

Devagas scientists, when they happened to be of the hierarchy, always
had enjoyed one great advantage over most of their colleagues in the
Federation. They had no difficulty in obtaining human volunteers to act
as subjects for experimental work. Balmordan appointed three of his
least valuable crew members as volunteers for the plasmoid's
experiments.

The first of the three died almost immediately. The plasmoid, it turned
out, lacked understanding of, among other things, the use and need of
anesthetics. Balmordan accordingly assisted obligingly in the second
operation. He was delighted when it became apparent that his assistance
was being willingly and comprehendingly accepted. This subject did not
die immediately. But he did not regain consciousness after the plasmoid
devices had been installed; and some hours later he did die, in
convulsions.

Number Three was more fortunate. He regained consciousness. He
complained of headaches and, after he had slept, of nightmares. The next
day he went into shock for a period of several hours. When he came out
of it, he reported tremblingly that the big plasmoid was talking to him,
though he could not understand what it said.

There were two more test operations, both successful. In all three
cases, the headaches and nightmares stopped in about a week. The first
subject in the series was beginning to understand the plasmoid.
Balmordan listened to his reports. He had his three surviving volunteers
given very extensive physical and psychological tests. They seemed to be
in fine condition.

Balmordan now had the operation performed on himself. When he woke up,
he disposed of his three predecessors. Then he devoted his full
attention to learning what the plasmoid was trying to say. In about
three weeks it became clear....

The plasmoid had established contact with human beings because it
needed their help. It needed a base like Harvest Moon from which to
operate and on which to provide for its requirements. It did not have
the understanding to permit it to construct such a base.

So it made the Devagas a proposition. It would work for them, somewhat
as it had worked for the Old Galactics, if--unlike the Old
Galactics--they would work for it.

Balmordan, newly become a person of foremost importance, transmitted the
offer to the hierarchy in the Hub. With no hesitation it was accepted,
but Balmordan was warned not to bring his monster into the Hub area. If
it was discovered on a Devagas world, the hierarchy would be faced with
the choice between another war with the Federation and submission to
more severely restrictive Federation controls. It didn't care for either
alternative; it had lost three wars with the Federated worlds in the
past and each time had been reduced in strength.

They contacted Vishni's Independent Fleet. Vishni's area was not too far
from Balmordan's ship position, and the Devagas had had previous
dealings with him and his men. This time they hired the I-Fleet to
become the plasmoid's temporary caretaker. Within a few weeks it was
parked on Luscious, where it devoted itself to the minor creative
experimentation which presently was to puzzle Professor Mantelish.

The Devagas meanwhile toiled prodigiously to complete the constructions
which were to be a central feature in the new alliance. On a base very
far removed from the Hub, on a base securely anchored and concealed
among the gravitic swirlings and shiftings of a subspace turbulence
area, virtually indetectable, the monster could make a very valuable
partner. If it was discovered, the partnership could be disowned. So
could the fact that they had constructed the substation for it--in
itself a grave breach of Federation treaties.

They built the substation. They built the armed subterranean observer's
dome three days' travel away from it. The plasmoid was installed in its
new quarters. It then requested the use of the Vishni Fleet people for
further experimentation.

The hierarchy was glad to grant the request. It would have had to get
rid of those too well informed hirelings in any case.

Having received its experimental material, the plasmoid requested the
Devagas to stay away from the substation for a while.




27


The Devagas, said Lyad, while not too happy with their ally's
increasingly independent attitude, were more anxious than ever to see
the alliance progress to the working stage. As an indication of its
potential usefulness, the monster had provided them with a variety of
