
Fig.  89.

Fig.  89 represents a standard resistance for making Clerk cell
comparisons by the silver voltameter method.  The framework on which
the coils are wound consists of a base and top of slate.  The pillars
are of flint glass tube surrounding brass bolts, and cemented to the
latter by raw shellac.  Grooves are cut in the glass sleeves to hold
the wires well apart.  These grooves were cut by means of a file
working with kerosene lubrication.  A screw stirrer is provided, and
the whole apparatus is immersed in kerosene in the glass box of a
storage cell.  The apparatus is aged to begin with by heating to a
temperature a good deal higher than any temperature it is expected to
reach in actual work.  After this the rigidity of the frame is
intended to prevent any further straining of the wire.  The apparatus
as figured is not intended to be cooled to 0 deg. C, so that it is put in
as large a box as possible to gain the advantage of having a large
volume of liquid.  The top and bottom slates measure seven inches by
seven inches, and the distance between them is seven inches.  The
inner coil is wound on first, and the loop which constitutes the end
of the winding is brought up to a suitable position for adjustment.
The insulation of the heavy copper connectors is by means of ebonite.

Sec. 120.  Platinum Iridium.

Platinum 90 per cent, iridium 10 per cent.  This material was prepared
in some quantity at the cost of the French Government, and distributed
for test about 1886.  Klemencic got some of it as representing
Austria, and found it behaved very like the platinum silver alloy just
discussed.  The temperature coefficient is, however, higher than for
platinum silver (0.00126 as against 0.00027).  The mechanical
properties of the alloy are, however, much better than those of the
silver alloy; and in view of the experience with B.  A.  standards
above quoted, it remains an open question whether, on the whole, it
would not be the better material for standards, in spite of its
higher price.  Improvements in absolute measurements of resistance,
however, may render primary standards superfluous.

Sec. 121.  Manganin.

Discovered by Weston--at all events as to its application to
resistance coils.  A glance at the diagram will exhibit its unique
properties, on account of which it has been adopted by the
Physikalisch Technischen Reichsanstalt for resistance standards.  The
composition of the alloy is copper 84 per cent, manganese 12 per cent,
nickel 4 per cent, and it is described as of a steel-gray colour.
Unfortunately it is apt to oxidise in the air, or rather the manganese
it contains does so, so that it wants a very perfect protection
against the atmosphere.

Like German silver, manganin changes in resistance on winding, and
coils made of it require to be artificially aged by heating to 150 deg.
for five hours before final adjustment.  The annealing cannot be
carried out in air, owing to the tendency to oxidation.  The method
adopted by St.  Lindeck (at all events up to 1892) is to treat the
coil with thick alcoholic shellac varnish till the insulation is
thoroughly saturated, and then to bake the coil as described.  The
baking not only anneals the wire, but reduces the shellac to a hard
and highly insulating mass.

Whether stresses of sufficient magnitude to produce serious mechanical
effects can be set up by unequal expansion of wire and shellac during
heating and cooling is not yet known, but so far as tested (and it
must be presumed that the Reichsanstalt tests are thorough) no
difficulty seems to have been met with.  In course of time, however,
probably the best shellac coating will crack, and then adieu to the
permanency of the coil!  This might, of course, be obviated by keeping
the coil in kerosene, which has no action on shellac, but which
decomposes somewhat itself.

The method of treatment above described suffices to render coils of
manganin constant for at least a year (in 1892 the tests had only been
made for this time) within a few thousands per cent.  Manganin can be
obtained in sheets, and from this material standards of 10-2, 10-3,
and 10-4 ohms are made by soldering strips between stout copper bars,
and these are adjusted by gradually increasing their resistance by
boring small holes through them. The solder employed is said to be
"silver."

Mr. Griffiths (Phil.  Trans.  vol.  clxxxiv.  [1893], A, p.  390) has
had some experience with manganin carrying comparatively heavy
currents, under which circumstances its resistance when immersed in
water was found to rise in spite of the varnish which coated it.
Other experiments in which the manganin wire was immersed in paraffin
oil did not exhibit this effect, though stronger currents were passed.

On the whole, manganin appears to be the best material for coil boxes
and "secondary" resistance standards.  Whether it is fit to rank with
the platinum alloys as regards permanency must be treated as an open
question.

Sec. 122.  Other Alloys.

The following tables, taken from the work of Feussner and St.
Lindeck, Zeitschrift fuer Instrumenten Kunde, 1889, vol.  ix.  p.
233, together with the following notes, will suffice.

Sec. 123.  Nickelin.

This is only German silver with a little less zinc, a little more
nickel, and traces of cobalt and manganese.  It behaves like German
silver, but is an improvement on the latter in that all the faults of
German silver appear upon a reduced scale in nickelin.

Sec. 124.  Patent Nickel.

Practically a copper nickel alloy, used to some extent by Siemens
and Halske.  It stands pretty well in the same relation to nickelin as
the latter does to German silver.  After annealing as for manganin it
can be made into serviceable standards which do not change more than a
few thousandths per cent.  I have not come across a statement of its
thermo-voltage against copper.

Sec. 125.  Constantin.

Another nickel copper alloy containing 50 per cent of each
constituent.  It appears to be a serviceable substance, having a
temperature coefficient of 0.003 per cent per degree only, but an
exceedingly high thermo-voltage, viz.  40 micro-volts per degree
against copper.

         1        2     3       4        5         6     7       8
       German  Nickelin made    Rheo-    Patent Nickel   Manga-  Nickel
       Silver  by Obermaier     tane                     nese    Manga-
               Dia-     Dia-             Dia-   Dia-     Copper  nese
               meter    meter            meter  meter            Copper
               1.0mm    0.1mm            0.6mm  1.0mm


Copper 60.16    61.63    54.57  53.28     74.41  74.71    70      73

Zinc   25.37    19.67    20.44  16.89     0.23   0.52     ...     ...

Tin    ...      ...      ...    ...       trace  ...      ...

Nickel 14.03    18.46    24.48  25.31     25.10  24.14    ...     3

Iron   0.30     0.24     0.64   4.46      0.42   0.70     ...     ...

Cobalt trace    0.19     ...    ...       trace  trace    ...     ...

Mang-  trace    0.18    0.27    0.37      0.13   0.17     30      24
anese.

     99.86     100.37  100.40  100.31    100.24 100.24  ...      ...

Specific
resistance
     30.0     33.2     44.8    52.5      34.2    32.8    100.6   47.7

Temperature
coefficient
     0.00036 0.00030 0.00033 0.00041 0.00019  0.00021  0.00004  0.00003

The specific resistance is in microhms, i.e. 10-6 ohms per cubic
centimetre, and the temperature coefficient in degrees centigrade.


126.  Nickel Manganese Copper.

I can find no other reference with regard to this alloy mentioned by
Lindeck.  Nicholls, however (Silliman's Journal [3], 39, 171, 1890),
gives some particulars of alloys of copper and ferromanganese.  The
following table is taken from Wiedemann's Beiblatter (abstract of
Nicholl's paper, 1890, p.  811).  All these alloys appear to require
annealing at a red heat before their resistances are anything like
constant.

Let x be percentage of copper, then 100--x is percentage of
"ferromanganese."

Values of x.  100   99.26  91 .88  86.98  80.4  70.65

Specific
resistance
with respect
to copper
(?  pure)       1  1.19    11.28   20.4   27.5  45.1

Temperature
coefficient
per degree
x 10^6(hard) 3202  2167    138     16      22   -24

Ditto (soft) ...   ...     184     80      66    21

If nickel is added, alloys of much the same character are obtained,
some with negative temperature coefficients--for instance, one
containing 52.51 per cent copper, 31.27 per cent ferromanganese, and
16.22 nickel.

A detailed account of several alloys will be found in a paper by
Griffiths (Phil.  Trans.  1894, p.  390), but as the constants were
determined to a higher order of accuracy than the composition of the
material--or, at all events, to a higher degree  of accuracy than
that to which the materials can be reproduced--there is no advantage
in quoting them here.

CHAPTER IV

ELECTROPLATING AND ALLIED ARTS

Sec. 127.  Electroplating.

This is an art which is usually deemed worthy of a treatise to itself,
but for ordinary laboratory purposes it is a very simple matter--so
simple, indeed, that the multiplicity of receipts as given in
treatises are rather a source of embarrassment than otherwise.

The fundamental principles of the art are:-

(1) Dirty work cannot be electroplated.

(2) Electroplated surfaces may be rougher, but will not be smoother
than the original unplated surface.

(3) The art of electroplating being in advance of the science, it is
necessary to be careful as to carrying out instructions in detail.
This particularly applies to the conditions which determine whether a
metallic deposit shall come down in a reguline or in a crystalline
manner.

Sec. 128.  The Dipping Bath.

An acid dipping bath is one of the most useful adjuncts to the
laboratory, not only for cleansing metals for electroplating, but for
cleaning up apparatus made out of bits of brass tube and sheet, and
particularly for quickly cleaning binding screws, etc, where it is
necessary to ensure good electrical contact.

The cheapest and most satisfactory way in the end is to make up two or
three rather large baths to begin with.  The glass boxes of storage
batteries do very nicely for the purpose, and being generally ground
pretty flat at the top, they may be covered by sheets of patent plate
glass, and thus preserved from the action of the air.

First Bath. A 30 or 40 per cent solution of commercial caustic soda.
Objects may be cleansed from grease in this bath by heating them as
hot as is consistent with individual circumstances, and plunging them
into it.

It is a considerable advantage to begin by removing grease from
articles subsequently to be dipped in an acid bath, both because it
saves time and acid, and because more uniform results are obtainable
when this is done than when it is omitted.  It is a great advantage to
have the caustic soda solution hot.  This is always done in factories
where nickel-plating is carried on, but it is inconvenient in the
laboratory.  The articles after dipping in the alkali are swilled with
water, and may even be scrubbed with a brush, so as to remove greasy
matters that have been softened but not entirely removed.

Acid Bath. A convenient bath for laboratory purposes is made by
mixing two volumes of strong commercial nitric acid with one of strong
sulphuric acid in a cell measuring, say, 12 X 10 X 15 inches.

Copper or brass articles are dipped in this bath for a few seconds,
then rinsed with water, then dipped again for a second or two, or
until they appear equally white all over, and then withdrawn as
rapidly as possible and plunged into a large quantity of clean water.
Care must be taken to transfer the articles from the bath to the water
as quickly as possible, for if time be allowed for gas to be evolved,
the surfaces become mat instead of bright.

In order to save acid it is advisable to make up a third bath, using
those odds and ends of acids which gradually accumulate in the
laboratory.  Sulphuric acid from the balance cases, for instance,
mixed with its own volume of commercial nitric acid, does very well.

The objects to be dipped receive a preliminary cleansing by a dip in
this bath, the strong bath being reserved for the final dip.  Sheet
brass and drawn tube, as it comes from the makers, possesses a really
fine surface, though this is generally obscured by grease and oxide.
Work executed in these materials, cleaned in alkali, and dipped in
really strong acid, will be found to present a much better appearance
than work which has been filed, unless the latter be afterwards
elaborately polished.

On no account must paraffin be allowed to get into any of the baths.
When the final bath gets weak it must be relegated to a subordinate
position and a new bath set up.  A weak acid bath leaves an ugly
mottled surface on brass work.

Sec. 129.  A metallic surface which it is intended to electroplate must,
as has been mentioned, be scrupulously clean.  If the metal is not too
valuable or delicate, cleaning by dipping is easy and effectual.  The
following notes will be found to apply to special cases which often
occur.

(1) Silver Surfaces intended to be gilt. These are first washed
clean with soap and hot water, and polished with whitening.  They are
then dipped for a moment in a boiling solution of potassium cyanide.
A 20 per cent solution of common commercial cyanide does well, but the
exact strength is quite immaterial.  The cyanide is washed away in a
large volume of soft water, and the articles are kept under water till
they are scratch-brushed.

Mat surfaces are readily produced on standard silver by dipping in hot
strong sulphuric acid.  The appearance of new silver coins, which is
familiar to everybody, is obtained by this process.

(2) Finely turned and finished Brass Work. If it is intended to
nickel-plate such work, and if it is desirable to obtain brightly
polished nickel surfaces, the work must be perfectly polished to begin
with.  Full details as to polishing may be found in workshop books or
treatises on watch-making.  It will suffice here to say that the brass
work is first smoothed by the application of successive grades of
emery and oil, or by very fine "dead" smooth files covered with chalk.
Polishing is carried out by means of rotten stone and oil applied on
leather.

In polishing turned work care must be taken to move the file, emery,
or rotten stone to and fro over the work with great regularity, or the
surface will end by looking scratchy and irregular.  The first process
of cleaning is, of course, to remove grease, and this is accomplished
best by dipping in a bath of strong hot caustic soda solution, and
less perfectly by heating the work and dipping it in the cold caustic
soda bath.

During this process a certain amount of chemical action often occurs
leading to the brass surface exhibiting some discoloration.  The best
way of remedying this is to dip the brass into a hot bath of cyanide
of potassium solution.  If it is inconvenient to employ hot baths or
to heat the brass work, good results may be obtained by rubbing the
articles over with a large rough cork plentifully lubricated with a
strong solution of an alkali.

If the surfaces are very soiled or dirty, a paste of alkali and fine
slaked lime may be applied on a cork rubber, and this in my experience
has always been most effective and satisfactory in every way, except
that it is difficult to get into crevices.  If the alkali stains the
work, a little cyanide of potassium may be rubbed over the surface in
a similar manner.

Brass work treated by either of these methods is to be washed in clean
water till the alkali is entirely removed, and may then be
nickel-plated without any preliminary scratch-brushing.  The treatment
in hot baths of alkali and cyanide is the method generally employed in
American factories as a preliminary to the nickelling of small brass
work for sewing machines, etc.

(3) Copper either for use as the kathode in electrolysis calibration
experiments or otherwise is most conveniently prepared by dipping in
the acid bath, rinsing quickly in cold water, scratch-brushing under
cold water, and transferring at once to the plating bath.  In the case
where the copper plates require to be weighed they are dipped into
very hot distilled water after scratch-brushing, and then dried at
once by means of a clean glass cloth.

(4) Aluminium (which, however, does not readily lend itself to plating
operations [Footnote: This difficulty has now been overcome.  See
note, section 138.] ) is best treated by alkali rubbed on with a cork,
