or sugar, or acid; and, as their stimulus is moderate, are properly given
alone as food in inflammatory diseases; and mixed with milk constitute the
food of thousands. Other vegetables possess various degrees and various
kinds of stimulus; and to these we are beholden for the greater part of our
Materia Medica, which produce nausea, sickness, vomiting, catharsis,
intoxication, inflammation, and even death, if unskilfully administered.

The acrid or intoxicating, and other kinds of vegetable juices, such as
produce sickness, or evacuate the bowels, or such even as are only
disagreeable to the palate, appear to be a part of the defence of those
vegetables, which possess them, from the assaults of larger animals or of
insects. As mentioned in the Botanic Garden, Part II. Cant. I. line 161,
note. This appears in a forcible manner from the perusal of some travels,
which have been published of those unfortunate people, who have suffered
shipwreck on uncultivated countries, and have with difficulty found food to
subsist, in otherwise not inhospitable climates.

4. As these acrid and intoxicating juices generally reside in the mucilage,
and not in the starch of many roots, and seeds, according to the
observation of M. Parmentier, the wholesome or nutritive parts of some
vegetables may be thus separated from the medicinal parts of them. Thus if
the root of white briony be rasped into cold water, by means of a
bread-grater made of a tinned iron plate, and agitated in it, the acrid
juice of the root along with the mucilage will be dissolved, or swim, in
the water; while a starch perfectly wholesome and nutritious will subside,
and may be used as food in times of scarcity.

M. Parmentier further observes, that potatoes contain too much mucilage in
proportion to their starch, which prevents them from being converted into
good bread. But that if the starch be collected from ten pounds of raw
potatoes by grating them into cold water, and agitating them, as above
mentioned; and if the starch thus procured be mixed with other ten pounds
of boiled potatoes, and properly subjected to fermentation like wheat
flour, that it will make as good bread as the finest wheat.

Good bread may also be made by mixing wheat-flour with boiled potatoes.
Eighteen pounds of wheat flour are said to make twenty-two pounds and a
half of bread. Eighteen pounds of wheat-flour mixed with nine pounds of
boiled potatoes, are said to make twenty-nine pounds and a half of bread.
This difference of weight must arise from the difference of the previous
dryness of the two materials. The potatoes might probably make better
flour, if they were boiled in steam, in a close vessel, made some degrees
hotter than common boiling water.

Other vegetable matters may be deprived of their too great acrimony by
boiling in water, as the great variety of the cabbage, the young tops of
white briony, water-cresses, asparagus, with innumerable roots, and some
fruits. Other plants have their acrid juices or bitter particles diminished
by covering them from the light by what is termed blanching them, as the
stems and leaves of cellery, endive, sea-kale. The former method either
extracts or decomposes the acrid particles, and the latter prevents them
from being formed. See Botanic Garden, Vol. I. additional note XXXIV. on
the Etiolation of vegetables.

5. The art of cookery, by exposing vegetable and animal substances to heat,
has contributed to increase the quantity of the food of mankind by other
means besides that of destroying their acrimony. One of these is by
converting the acerb juices of some fruits into sugar, as in the baking of
unripe pears, and the bruising of unripe apples; in both which situations
the life of the vegetable is destroyed, and the conversion of the harsh
juice into a sweet one must be performed by a chemical process; and not by
a vegetable one only, as the germination of barley in making malt has
generally been supposed.

Some circumstances, which seem to injure the life of several fruits, seem
to forward the saccharine process of their juices. Thus if some kinds of
pears are gathered a week before they would ripen on the tree, and are laid
on a heap and covered, their juice becomes sweet many days sooner. The
taking off a circular piece of the bark from a branch of a pear-tree causes
the fruit of that branch to ripen sooner by a fortnight, as I have more
than once observed. The wounds made in apples by insects occasion those
apples to ripen sooner; caprification, or the piercing of figs, in the
island of Malta, is said to ripen them sooner; and I am well informed, that
when bunches of grapes in this country have acquired their expected size,
that if the stalk of each bunch be cut half through, that they will sooner
ripen.

The germinating barley in the malt-house I believe acquires little
sweetness, till the life of the seed is destroyed, and the saccharine
process then continued or advanced by the heat in drying it. Thus in animal
digestion, the sugar produced in the stomach is absorbed by the lacteals as
fast as it is made, otherwise it ferments, and produces flatulency; so in
the germination of barley in the malt-house, so long as the new plant
lives, the sugar, I suppose, is absorbed as fast as it is made; but that,
which we use in making beer, is the sugar produced by a chemical process
after the death of the young plant, or which is made more expeditiously,
than the plant can absorb it.

It is probably this saccharine process, which obtains in new hay-stacks too
hastily, and which by immediately running into fermentation produces so
much heat as to set them on fire. The greatest part of the grain, or seeds,
or roots, used in the distilleries, as wheat, canary seed, potatoes, are
not I believe previously subjected to germination, but are in part by a
chemical process converted into sugar, and immediately subjected to vinous
fermentation; and it is probable a process may sometime be discovered of
producing sugar from starch or meal; and of separating it from them for
domestic purposes by alcohol, which dissolves sugar but not mucilage; or by
other means.

Another method of increasing the nutriment of mankind by cookery, is by
dissolving cartilages and bones, and tendons, and probably some vegetables,
in steam or water at a much higher degree of heat than that of boiling.
This is to be done in a close vessel, which is called Papin's digester; in
which, it is said, that water may be made red-hot, and will then dissolve
all animal substances; and might thus add to our quantity of food in times
of scarcity. This vessel should be made of iron, and should have an oval
opening at top, with an oval lid of iron larger than the aperture; this lid
should be slipped in endways, when the vessel is filled, and then turned,
and raised by a screw above it into contact with the under edges of the
aperture. There should also be a small tube or hole covered with a weighted
valve to prevent the danger of bursting the digester.

Where the powers of digestion are weakened, broths made by boiling animal
and vegetable substances in water afford a nutriment; though I suppose not
so great as the flesh and vegetables would afford, if taken in their solid
form, and mixed with saliva in the act of mastication. The aliment thus
prepared should be boiled but a short time, nor should be suffered to
continue in our common kitchen-utensils afterwards, as they are lined with
a mixture of half lead and half tin, and are therefore unwholesome, though
the copper is completely covered. And those soups, which have any acid or
wine boiled in them, unless they be made in silver, or in china, or in
those pot-vessels, which are not glazed by the addition of lead, are truly
poisonous; as the acid, as lemon-juice or vinegar, when made hot, erodes or
dissolves the lead and tin lining of the copper-vessels, and the leaden
glaze of the porcelain ones. Hence, where silver cannot be had, iron
vessels are preferable to tinned copper ones; or those made of tinned
iron-plates in the common tin-shops, which are said to be covered with pure
or block tin.

6. Another circumstance, which facilitates the nourishment of mankind, is
the mechanic art of grinding farinaceous seeds into powder between
mill-stones; which may be called the artificial teeth of society. It is
probable, that some soft kinds of wood, especially when they have undergone
a kind of fermentation, and become of looser texture, might be thus used as
food in times of famine.

Nor is it improbable, that hay, which has been kept in stacks, so as to
undergo the saccharine process, may be so managed by grinding and by
fermentation with yeast like bread, as to serve in part for the sustenance
of mankind in times of great scarcity. Dr. Priestley gave to a cow for some
time a strong infusion of hay in large quantity for her drink, and found
that she produced during this treatment above double the quantity of milk.
Hence if bread cannot be made from ground hay, there is great reason to
suspect, that a nutritive beverage may be thus prepared either in its
saccharine state, or fermented into a kind of beer.

In times of great scarcity there are other vegetables, which though not in
common use, would most probably afford wholesome nourishment, either by
boiling them, or drying and grinding them, or by both those processes in
succession. Of these are perhaps the tops and the bark of all those
vegetables, which are armed with thorns or prickles, as gooseberry trees,
holly, gorse, and perhaps hawthorn. The inner bark of the elm tree makes a
kind of gruel. And the roots of fern, and probably of very many other
roots, as of grass and of clover taken up in winter, might yield
nourishment either by boiling or baking, and separating the fibres from the
pulp by beating them; or by getting only the starch from those, which
possess an acrid mucilage, as the white briony.

7. However the arts of cookery and of grinding may increase or facilitate
the nourishment of mankind, the great source of it is from agriculture. In
the savage state, where men live solely by hunting, I was informed by Dr.
Franklin, that there was seldom more than one family existed in a circle of
five miles diameter; which in a state of pasturage would support some
hundred people, and in a state of agriculture many thousands. The art of
feeding mankind on so small a grain as wheat, which seems to have been
discovered in Egypt by the immortal name of Ceres, shewed greater ingenuity
than feeding them with the large roots of potatoes, which seem to have been
a discovery of ill-fated Mexico.

This greater production of food by agriculture than by pasturage, shews
that a nation nourished by animal food will be less numerous than if
nourished by vegetable; and the former will therefore be liable, if they
are engaged in war, to be conquered by the latter, as Abel was slain by
Cain. This is perhaps the only valid argument against inclosing open arable
fields. The great production of human nourishment by agriculture and
pasturage evinces the advantage of society over the savage state; as the
number of mankind becomes increased a thousand fold by the arts of
agriculture and pasturage; and their happiness is probably under good
governments improved in as great a proportion, as they become liberated
from the hourly fear of beasts of prey, from the daily fear of famine, and
of the occasional incursions of their cannibal neighbours.

But pasturage cannot exist without property both in the soil, and the herds
which it nurtures; and for the invention of arts, and production of tools
necessary to agriculture, some must think, and others labour; and as the
efforts of some will be crowned with greater success than that of others,
an inequality of the ranks of society must succeed; but this inequality of
mankind in the present state of the world is too great for the purposes of
producing the greatest quantity of human nourishment, and the greatest sum
of human happiness; there should be no slavery at one end of the chain of
society, and no despotism at the other.--By the future improvements of
human reason such governments may possibly hereafter be established, as may
a hundred-fold increase the numbers of mankind, and a thousand-fold their
happiness.

IV. 1. Water must be considered as a part of our nutriment, because so much
of it enters the composition of our solids as well as of our fluids; and
because vegetables are now believed to draw almost the whole of their
nourishment from this source. As in them the water is decomposed, as it is
perspired by them in the sunshine, the oxygen gas increases the quantity
and the purity of the atmosphere in their vicinity, and the hydrogen seems
to be retained, and to form the nutritive juices, and consequent secretions
of rosin, gum, wax, honey, oil, and other vegetable productions. See
Botanic Garden, Part I. Cant. IV. line 25, note. It has however other uses
in the system, besides that of a nourishing material, as it dilutes our
fluids, and lubricates our solids; and on all these accounts a daily supply
of it is required.

2. River-water is in general purer than spring-water; as the neutral salts
washed down from the earth decompose each other, except perhaps the marine
salt; and the earths, with which spring-water frequently abounds, is
precipitated; yet it is not improbable, that the calcareous earth dissolved
in the water of many springs may contribute to our nourishment, as the
water from springs, which contain earth, is said to conduce to enrich those
lands, which are flooded with it, more than river water.

3. Many arguments seem to shew, that calcareous earth contributes to the
nourishment of animals and vegetables. First because calcareous earth
constitutes a considerable part of them, and must therefore either be
received from without, or formed by them, or both, as milk, when taken as
food by a lactescent woman, is decomposed in the stomach by the process of
digestion, and again in part converted into milk by the pectoral glands.
Secondly, because from the analogy of all organic life, whatever has
composed a part of a vegetable or animal may again after its chemical
solution become a part of another vegetable or animal, such is the general
transmigration of matter. And thirdly, because the great use of lime in
agriculture on almost all kinds of soil and situation cannot be
satisfactorily explained from its chemical properties alone. Though these
may also in certain soils and situations have considerable effect.

The chemical uses of lime in agriculture may be, 1. from its destroying in
a short time the cohesion of dead vegetable fibres, and thus reducing them
to earth, which otherwise is effected by a slow process either by the
consumption of insects or by a gradual putrefaction. Thus I am informed
that a mixture of lime with oak bark, after the tanner has extracted from
it whatever is soluble in water, will in two or three months reduce it to a
fine black earth, which, if only laid in heaps, would require as many years
to effect by its own spontaneous fermentation or putrefaction. This effect
of lime must be particularly advantageous to newly inclosed commons when
first broken up.

Secondly, lime for many months continues to attract moisture from the air
or earth, which it deprives I suppose of carbonic acid, and then suffers it
to exhale again, as is seen on the plastered walls of new houses. On this
account it must be advantageous when mixed with dry or sandy soils, as it
attracts moisture from the air above or the earth beneath, and this
moisture is then absorbed by the lymphatics of the roots of vegetables.
Thirdly, by mixing lime with clays it is believed to make them less
cohesive, and thus to admit of their being more easily penetrated by
vegetable fibres. A mixture of lime with clays destroys their
superabundancy of acid, if such exists, and by uniting with it converts it
into gypsum or alabaster. And lastly, fresh lime destroys worms, snails,
and other insects, with which it happens to come in contact.

Yet do not all these chemical properties seem to account for the great uses
of lime in almost all soils and situations, as it contributes so much to
the melioration of the crops, as well as to their increase in quantity.
Wheat from land well limed is believed by farmers, millers, and bakers, to
be, as they suppose, thinner skinned; that is, it turns out more and better
flour; which I suppose is owing to its containing more starch and less
mucilage. In respect to grass-ground I am informed, that if a spadeful of
lime be thrown on a tussock, which horses or cattle have refused to touch
for years, they will for many succeeding seasons eat it quite close to the
ground.

One property of lime is not perhaps yet well understood, I mean its
producing so much heat, when it is mixed with water; which may be owing to
the elementary fluid of heat consolidated in the lime. It is the steam
occasioned by this heat, when water is sprinkled upon lime, if the water be
not in too great quantity or too cold, which breaks the lime into such fine
powder as almost to become fluid, which cannot be effected perhaps by any
other means, and which I suppose must give great preference to lime in
agriculture, and to the solutions of calcareous earth in water, over chalk
or powdered limestone, when spread upon the land.

4. It was formerly believed that waters replete with calcareous earth, such
as incrust the inside of tea-kettles, or are laid to petrify moss, were
liable to produce or to increase the stone in the bladder. This mistaken
idea has lately been exploded by the improved chemistry, as no calcareous
earth, or a very minute quantity, was found in the calculi analysed by
Scheel and Bergman. The waters of Matlock and of Carlsbad, both which cover
the moss, which they pass through, with a calcareous crust, are so far from
increasing the stone of the bladder or kidnies, that those of Carlsbad are
celebrated for giving relief to those labouring under these diseases.
Philos. Trans. Those of Matlock are drank in great quantities without any
suspicion of injury; and I well know a person who for above ten years has
drank about two pints a day of cold water from a spring, which very much
incrusts the vessels, it is boiled in, with calcareous earth, and affords a
copious calcareous sediment with a solution of salt of tartar, and who
enjoys a state of uninterrupted health.

V. 1. As animal bodies consist much both of oxygen and azote, which make up
the composition of atmospheric air, these should be counted amongst
nutritious substances. Besides that by the experiments of Dr. Priestley it
appears, that the oxygen gains admittance into the blood through the moist
membranes of the lungs; and seems to be of much more immediate consequence
to the preservation of our lives than the other kinds of nutriment above
specified.

As the basis of fixed air, or carbonic acid gas, is carbone, which also
constitutes a great part both of vegetable and animal bodies; this air
should likewise be reckoned amongst nutritive substances. Add to this, that
when this carbonic acid air is swallowed, as it escapes from beer or cyder,
or when water is charged with it as detruded from limestone by vitriolic
acid, it affords an agreeable sensation both to the palate and stomach, and
is therefore probably nutritive.

The immense quantity of carbone and of oxygen which constitute so great a
part of the limestone countries is almost beyond conception, and, as it has
been formed by animals, may again become a part of them, as well as the
calcareous matter with which they are united. Whence it may be conceived,
that the waters, which abound with limestone in solution, may supply
nutriment both to animals and to vegetables, as mentioned above.

VI. 1. The manner, in which nutritious particles are substituted in the
place of those, which are mechanically abraded, or chemically decomposed,
or which vanish by animal absorption, must be owing to animal appetency, as
described in Sect. XXXVII. 3. and is probably similar to the process of
inflammation, which produces new vessels and new fluids; or to that which
constitutes the growth of the body to maturity. Thus the granulations of
new flesh to repair the injuries of wounds are visible to the eye; as well
as the callous matter, which cements broken bones; the calcareous matter,
which repairs injured snail-shells; and the threads, which are formed by
silk-worms and spiders; which are all secreted in a softer state, and
harden by exsiccation, or by the contact of the air, or by absorption of
their more fluid parts.

Whether the materials, which thus supply the waste of the system, can be
given any other way than by the stomach, so as to preserve the body for a
length of time, is worth our inquiry; as cases sometimes occur, in which
food cannot be introduced into the stomach, as in obstructions of the
oesophagus, inflammations of the throat, or in hydrophobia; and other cases
are not unfrequent in which the power of digestion is nearly or totally
destroyed, as in anorexia epileptica, and in many fevers.

In the former of these circumstances liquid nutriment may sometimes be got
into the stomach through a flexible catheter; as described in Class III. 1.
1. 15. In the latter many kinds of mild aliment, as milk or broth, have
frequently been injected as clysters, together with a small quantity of
opium, as ten drops of the tincture, three or four times a day; to which
also might be added very small quantities of vinous spirit. But these, as
far as I have observed, will not long sustain a person, who cannot take any
sustenance by the stomach.

2. Another mode of applying nutritive fluids might be by extensive
fomentations, or by immerging the whole body in a bath of broth, or of warm
milk, which might at the same time be coagulated by rennet, or the acid of
the calf's stomach; broth or whey might thus probably be introduced, in
part at least, into the circulation, as a solution of nitre is said to have
been absorbed in a pediluvium, which was afterwards discovered by the
manner in which paper dipped frequently in the urine of the patient and
dried, burnt and sparkled like touch-paper. Great quantity of water is also
known to be absorbed by those, who have bathed in the warm bath after
exercise and abstinence from liquids. Cleopatra was said to travel with
4000 milch-asses in her train, and to bathe every morning in their milk,
which she probably might use as a cosmetic rather than a nutritive.

3. The transfusion of blood from another animal into the vein of one, who
could take no sustenance by the throat, or digest none by the stomach,
might long continue to support him; and perhaps other nutriment, as milk or
mucilage, might be this way introduced into the system, but we have not yet
sufficient experiments on this subject. See Sect. XXXII. 4. and Class I. 2.
3. 25. and Sup. I. 14. 2.

VII. Various kinds of condiments, or sauces, have been taken along with
vegetable or animal food, and have been thought by some to strengthen the
process of digestion and consequent process of nutrition. Of these wine, or
other fermented liquors, vinegar, salt, spices, and mustard, have been in
most common use, and I believe to the injury of thousands. As the stomach
by their violent stimulus at length loses its natural degree of
irritability, and indigestion is the consequence; which is attended with
flatulency and emaciation. Where any of these have been taken so long as to
induce a habit, they must either be continued, but not increased; or the
use of them should be gradually and cautiously diminished or discontinued,
as directed in Sect. XII. 7. 8.

III. CATALOGUE OF THE NUTRIENTIA.

    I. 1. Venison, beef, mutton, hare, goose, duck, woodcock, snipe,
    moor-game.

    2. Oysters, lobsters, crabs, shrimps, mushrooms, eel, tench, barbolt,
    smelt, turbot, sole, turtle.

    3. Lamb, veal, sucking-pig.

    4. Turkey, partridge, pheasant, fowl, eggs.

    5. Pike, perch, gudgeon, trout, grayling.

    II. Milk, cream, butter, buttermilk, whey, cheese.

    III. Wheat, barley, oats, peas, potatoes, turnips, carrots, cabbage,
    asparagus, artichoke, spinach, beet, apple, pear, plum, apricot,
    nectarine, peach, strawberry, grape, orange, melon, cucumber, dried
    figs, raisins, sugar, honey. With a great variety of other roots,
    seeds, leaves, and fruits.

    IV. Water, river-water, spring-water, calcareous earth.

    V. Air, oxygene, azote, carbonic acid gas.

    VI. Nutritive baths and clysters, transfusion of blood.

    VII. Condiments.

       *       *       *       *       *

ART. II.

INCITANTIA.

I. 1. Those things, which increase the exertions of all the irritative
motions, are termed incitantia. As alcohol, or the spirituous part of
fermented liquors, opium, and many drugs, which are still esteemed poisons,
their proper doses not being ascertained. To these should be added the
exhilarating passions of the mind, as joy, love: and externally the
application of heat, electricity, aether, essential oils, friction, and
exercise.

2. These promote both the secretions and absorptions, increase the natural
heat, and remove those pains, which originate from the defect of irritative
motions, termed nervous pains; and prevent the convulsions consequent to
them. When given internally they induce costiveness, and deep coloured
urine; and by a greater dose intoxication, and its consequences.

II. OBSERVATIONS ON THE INCITANTIA.

I. 1. Opium and alcohol increase all the secretions and absorptions. The
increase of the secretion of sensorial power appears from the violent
exertions of drunken people; the secretion of sweat is more certainly
excited by opium or wine than by any other medicine; and the increase of
general heat, which these drugs produce, is an evidence of their effect in
promoting all the secretions; since an increase of secretion is always
attended with increase of heat in the part, as in hepatic and other
inflammations.

2. But as they at the same time promote absorption; those fluids, which are
secreted into receptacles, as the urine, bile, intestinal and pulmonary
mucus, have again their thinner parts absorbed; and hence, though the
quantity of secreted fluid was increased, yet as the absorption was also
increased, the excretion from these receptacles is lessened; at the same
time that it is deeper coloured or of thicker consistence, as the urine,
alvine feces, and pulmonary mucus. Whereas the perspiration being secreted
on the surface of the body is visible in its increased quantity, before it
can be reabsorbed; whence arises that erroneous opinion, that opium
increases the cutaneous secretion, and lessens all the others.

3. It must however be noted, that after evacuations opium seems to promote
the absorptions more than the secretions; if you except that of the
sensorial power in the brain, which probably suffers no absorption. Hence
its efficacy in restraining haemorrhages, after the vessels are emptied, by
promoting venous absorption.

4. In ulcers the matter is thickened by the exhibition of opium from the
increased absorption of the thinner parts of it; but it is probable, that
the whole secretion, including the part which is absorbed, is increased;
and hence new fibres are secreted along with the matter, and the ulcer
fills with new granulations of flesh. But as no ulcer can heal, till it
ceases to discharge; that is, till the absorption becomes as great as the
excretion; those medicines, which promote absorption only, are more
advantageous for the healing an ulcer after it is filled with new flesh; as
the Peruvian bark internally; with bandages and solutions of lead
externally.

5. There are many pains which originate from a want of due motion in the
part, as those occasioned by cold; and all those pains which are attended
with cold extremities, and are generally termed nervous. These are relieved
by whatever excites the part into its proper actions, and hence by opium
and alcohol; which are the most universal stimulants we are acquainted
with. In these cases the effect of opium is produced, as soon as the body
becomes generally warm; and a degree of intoxication or sleep follows the
cessation of the pain.

These nervous pains (as they are called) frequently return at certain
periods of time, and are also frequently succeeded by convulsions; in these
cases if opium removes the pain, the convulsions do not come on. For this
purpose it is best to exhibit it gradually, as a grain every hour, or half
hour, till it intoxicates. Here it must be noted, that a much less quantity
will prevent the periods of these cold pains, than is necessary to relieve
them after their access. As a grain and half of opium given an hour before
the expected paroxysm will prevent the cold fit of an intermittent fever,
but will not soon remove it, when it is already formed. For in the former
case the usual or healthy associations or catenations of motion favour the
effect of the medicine; in the latter case these associations or
catenations are disordered, or interrupted, and new ones are formed, which
so far counteract the effect of the medicine.

When opium has been required in large doses to ease or prevent convulsions,
some have advised the patient to omit the use of wine, as a greater
quantity of opium might then be exhibited; and as opium seems to increase
absorption more, and secretion less, than vinous spirit; it may in some
cases be useful to exchange one for the other; as in diseases attended with
too great evacuation, as diarrhoea, and dysentery, opium may be preferable;
on the contrary in tetanus, or locked-jaw, where inflammation of the system
might be of service, wine may be preferable to opium; see Class III. 1. 1.
13. I have generally observed, that a mixture of spirit of wine and warm
water, given alternately with the doses of opium, has soonest and most
certainly produced that degree of intoxication, which was necessary to
relieve the patient in the epilepsia dolorifica.

6. There is likewise some relief given by opium to inflammatory pains, or
those from excess of motion in the affected part; but with this difference,
that this relief from the pains, and the sleep, which it occasions, does
not occur till some hours after the exhibition of the opium. This requires
to be explained; after the stimulus of opium or of alcohol ceases, as after
common drunkenness, a consequent torpor comes on; and the whole habit
becomes less irritable by the natural stimuli. Hence the head-achs,
sickness, and languor, on the next day after intoxication, with cold skin,
and general debility. Now in pains from excess of motion, called
inflammatory pains, when opium is given, the pain is not relieved, till the
debility comes on after the stimulus ceases to act; for then after the
greater stimulus of the opium has exhausted much of the sensorial power;
the less stimulus, which before caused the pain, does not now excite the
part into unnatural action.

In these cases the stimulus of the opium first increases the pain; and it
sometimes happens, that so great a torpor follows, as to produce the death
or mortification of the affected part; whence the danger of giving opium in
inflammatory diseases, especially in inflammation of the bowels; but in
general the pain returns with its former violence, when the torpor above
mentioned ceases. Hence these pains attended with inflammation are best
relieved by copious venesection, other evacuations, and the class of
medicines called torpentia.

7. These pains from excess of motion are attended with increased heat of
the whole, or of the affected part, and a strong quick pulse; the pains
from defect of motion are attended with cold extremities, and a weak pulse;
which is also generally more frequent than natural, but not always so.

8. Opium and alcohol are the only two drugs, we are much acquainted with,
which intoxicate; and by this circumstance are easily distinguished from
the secernentia and sorbentia. Camphor, and cicuta, and nicotiana, are
thought to induce a kind of intoxication; and there are many other drugs of
this class, whose effects are less known, or their doses not ascertained;
as atropa belladonna, hyocyamus, stramonium, prunus laurocerasus,
menispermum, cynoglossum, some fungi, and the water distilled from black
cherry-stones; the last of which was once much in use for the convulsions
of children, and was said to have good effect; but is now improvidently
left out of our pharmacopias. I have known one leaf of the laurocerasus,
shred and made into tea, given every morning for a week with no ill
consequence to a weak hysteric lady, but rather perhaps with advantage.

9. The pernicious effects of a continued use of much vinous spirit is daily
seen and lamented by physicians; not only early debility, like premature
age, but a dreadful catalogue of diseases is induced by this kind of
intemperance; as dropsy, gout, leprosy, epilepsy, insanity, as described in
Botanic Garden, Part II. Canto III. line 357. The stronger or less diluted
the spirit is taken, the sooner it seems to destroy, as in dram-drinkers;
but still sooner, when kernels of apricots, or bitter almonds, or
laurel-leaf, are infused in the spirit, which is termed ratafia; as then
two poisons are swallowed at the same time. And vinegar, as it contains
much vinous spirit, is probably a noxious part of our diet. And the
distilled vinegar, which is commonly sold in the shops, is truly poisonous,
as it is generally distilled by means of a pewter or leaden alembic-head or
worm-tube, and abounds with lead; which any one may detect by mixing with
it a solution of liver of sulphur. Opium, when taken as a luxury, not as a
medicine, is as pernicious as alcohol; as Baron de Tott relates in his
account of the opium-eaters in Turkey.

10. It must be observed, that a frequent repetition of the use of this
class of medicines so habituates the body to their stimulus, that their
dose may gradually be increased to an astonishing quantity, such as
otherwise would instantly destroy life; as is frequently seen in those, who
accustom themselves to the daily use of alcohol and opium; and it would
seem, that these unfortunate people become diseased as soon as they omit
their usual potations; and that the consequent gout, dropsy, palsy, or
pimpled face, occur from the debility occasioned from the want of
accustomed stimulus, or to some change in the contractile fibres, which
requires the continuance or increase of it. Whence the cautions necessary
to be observed are mentioned in Sect. XII. 7. 8.

11. It is probable, that some of the articles in the subsequent catalogue
do not induce intoxication, though they have been esteemed to do so; as
tobacco, hemlock, nux vomica, stavisagria; and on this account should
rather belong to other arrangements, as to the secernentia, or sorbentia,
or invertentia.

II. 1. Externally the application of heat, as the warm bath, by its
stimulus on the skin excites the excretory ducts of the perspirative
glands, and the mouths of the lymphatics, which open on its surface, into
greater action; and in consequence many other irritative motions, which are
associated with them. To this increased action is added pleasurable
sensation, which adds further activity to the system; and thus many kinds
of pain receive relief from this additional atmosphere of heat.

The use of a warm bath of about 96 or 98 degrees of heat, for half an hour
once a day for three or four months, I have known of great service to weak
people, and is perhaps the least noxious of all unnatural stimuli; which
however, like all other great excitement, may be carried to excess, as
complained of by the ancients. The unmeaning application of the words
relaxation and bracing to warm and cold baths has much prevented the use of
this grateful stimulus; and the misuse of the term warm-bath, when applied
to baths colder than the body, as to those of Buxton and Matlock, and to
artificial baths of less than 90 degrees of heat, which ought to be termed
cold ones, has contributed to mislead the unwary in their application.

The stimulus of wine, or spice, or salt, increases the heat of the system
by increasing all or some of the secretions; and hence the strength is
diminished afterwards by the loss of fluids, as well as by the increased
action of the fibres. But the stimulus of the warm-bath supplies heat
rather than produces it; and rather fills the system by increased
absorption, than empties it by increased secretion; and may hence be
employed with advantage in almost all cases of debility with cold
extremities, perhaps even in anasarca, and at the approach of death in
fevers. In these cases a bath much beneath 98 degrees, as of 80 or 85,
might do injury, as being a cold-bath compared with the heat of the body,
though such a bath is generally called a warm one.

The activity of the system thus produced by a bath of 98 degrees of heat,
or upwards, does not seem to render the patients liable to take cold, when
they come out of it; for the system is less inclined to become torpid than
before, as the warmth thus acquired by communication, rather than by
increased action, continues long without any consequent chillness. Which
accords with the observation of Dr. Fordyce, mentioned in Sup. I. 5. 1. who
says, that those who are confined some time in an atmosphere of 120 or 130
degrees of heat, do not feel cold or look pale on coming into a temperature
of 30 or 40 degrees; which would produce great paleness and sensation of
coldness in those, who had been some time confined in an atmosphere of only
86 or 90 degrees of heat. Treatise on Simple Fever, p. 168.

Hence heat, where it can be confined on a torpid part along with moisture,
as on a scrophulous tumour, will contribute to produce suppuration or
resolution. This is done by applying a warm poultice, which should be
frequently repeated; or a plaster of resin, wax, or fat; or by covering the
part with oiled silk; both which last prevent the perspirable matter from
escaping as well as the heat of the part, as these substances repel
moisture, and are bad conductors of heat. Another great use of the stimulus
of heat is by applying it to torpid ulcers, which are generally termed
scrophulous or scorbutic, and are much easier inclined to heal, when
covered with several folds of flannel.

Mr. ---- had for many months been afflicted with an ulcer in perinaeo,
which communicated with the urethra, through which a part of his urine was
daily evacuated with considerable pain; and was reduced to a great degree
of debility. He used a hot-bath of 96 or 98 degrees of heat every day for
half an hour during about six months. By this agreeable stimulus repeated
thus at uniform times not only the ulcer healed, contrary to the
expectation of his friends, but he acquired greater health and strength,
than he had for some years previously experienced.

Mrs. ---- was affected with transient pains, which were called nervous
spasms, and with great fear of diseases, which she did not labour under,
with cold extremities, and general debility. She used a hot-bath every
other day of 96 degrees of heat for about four months, and recovered a good
state of health, with greater strength and courage, than she had possessed
for many months before.

Mr. Z. a gentleman about 65 years of age, who had lived rather
intemperately in respect to vinous potation, and had for many years had
annual visits of the gout, which now became irregular, and he appeared to
be losing his strength, and beginning to feel the effects of age. He used a
bath, as hot as was agreeable to his sensations, twice a week for about a
year and half, and greatly recovered his health and strength with less
frequent and less violent returns of regular gout, and is now near 80 years
of age.

When Dr. Franklin, the American philosopher, was in England many years ago,
I recommended to him the use of a warm-bath twice a week to prevent the too
speedy access of old age, which he then thought that he felt the approach
of, and I have been informed, that he continued the use of it till near his
death, which was at an advanced age.

All these patients were advised not to keep themselves warmer than their
usual habits, after they came out of the bath, whether they went into bed
or not; as the design was not to promote perspiration, which weakens all
constitutions, and seldom is of service to any. Thus a flannel shirt,
particularly if it be worn in warm weather, occasions weakness by
stimulating the skin by its points into too great action, and producing
heat in consequence; and occasions emaciation by increasing the discharge
of perspirable matter; and in both these respects differs from the effect
of warm bathing, which communicates heat to the system at the same time
that it stimulates it, and causes absorption more than exhalation.

2. The effect of the passage of an electric shock through a paralytic limb
in causing it to contract, besides the late experiments of Galvani and
Volta on frogs, intitle it to be classed amongst universal stimulants.
Electric shocks frequently repeated daily for a week or two remove
chronical pains, as the pleurodyne chronica, Class I. 2. 4. 14. and other
chronic pains, which are termed rheumatic, probably by promoting the
absorption of some extravasated material. Scrophulous tumours are sometimes
absorbed, and sometimes brought to suppurate by passing electric shocks
through them daily for two or three weeks.

[Illustration]

Miss ----, a young lady about eight years of age, had a swelling about the
size of a pigeon's egg on her neck a little below her ear, which long
continued in an indolent state. Thirty or forty small electric shocks were
passed through it once or twice a day for two or three weeks, and it then
suppurated and healed without difficulty. For this operation the coated jar
of the electric machine had on its top an electrometer, which measured the
shocks by the approach of a brass knob, which communicated with the
external coating to another, which communicated with the internal one, and
their distance was adjusted by a screw. So that the shocks were so small as
not to alarm the child, and the accumulated electricity was frequently
discharged, as the wheel continued turning. The tumour was inclosed between
two other brass knobs, which were fixed on wires, which passed through
glass tubes, the tubes were cemented in two grooves on a board, so that at
one end they were nearer each other than at the other, and the knobs were
pushed out so far as exactly to include the tumour, as described in the
annexed plate, which is about half the size of the original apparatus.

Inflammations of the eyes without fever are frequently cured by taking a
stream of very small electric sparks from them, or giving the electric
sparks to them, once or twice a day for a week or two; that is, the new
vessels, which constitute inflammation in these inirritable constitutions,
are absorbed by the activity of the absorbents induced by the stimulus of
the electric aura. For this operation the easiest method is to fix a
pointed wire to a stick of sealing wax, or to an insulating handle of
glass, one end of this wire communicates with the prime conductor, and the
point is approached near the inflamed eye in every direction.

III. Externally the application of ether, and of essential oils, as of
cloves or cinnamon, seem to possess a general stimulating effect. As they
instantly relieve tooth-ach, and hiccough, when these pains are not in
violent degree; and camphor in large doses is said to produce intoxication;
this effect however I have not been witness to, and have reason to doubt.

The manner in which ether and the essential oil operate on the system when
applied externally, is a curious question, as pain is so immediately
relieved by them, that they must seem to penetrate by the great fluidity or
expansive property of a part of them, as of their odoriferous exhalation or
vapour, and that they thus stimulate the torpid part, and not by their
being taken up by the absorbent vessels, and carried thither by the long
course of circulation; nor is it probable, that these pains are relieved by
the sympathy of the torpid membrane with the external skin, which is thus
stimulated into action; as it does not succeed, unless it is applied over
the pained part. Thus there appears to be three different modes by which
extraneous bodies may be introduced into the system, besides that of
absorption. 1st. By ethereal transition, as heat and electricity; 2d. by
chemical attraction, as oxygen; and 3d. by expansive vapour, as ether and
essential oils.

IV. The perpetual necessity of the mixture of oxygen gas with the blood in
the lungs evinces, that it must act as a stimulus to the sanguiferous
system, as the motions of the heart and arteries presently cease, when
animals are immersed in airs which possess no oxygen. It may also
subsequently answer another important purpose, as it probably affords the
material for the production of the sensorial power; which is supposed to be
secreted in the brain or medullary part of the nerves; and that the
perpetual demand of this fluid in respiration is occasioned by the
sensorial power, which is supposed to be produced from it, being too subtle
to be long confined in any part of the system.

Another proof of the stimulant quality of oxygen appears from the increased
acrimony, which the matter of a common abscess possesses, after it has been
exposed to the air of the atmosphere, but not before; and probably all
other contagious matters owe their fever-producing property to having been
converted into acids by their union with oxygen.

As oxygen penetrates the fine moist membranes of the air-vessels of the
lungs, and unites with the blood by a chemical attraction, as is seen to
happen, when blood is drawn into a bason, the lower surface of the
crassamentum is of a very dark red so long as it is covered from the air by
the upper surface, but becomes florid in a short time on its being exposed
to the atmosphere; the manner of its introduction into the system is not
probably by animal absorption but by chemical attraction, in which
circumstance it differs from the fluids before mentioned both of heat and
electricity, and of ether and essential oils.

As oxygen has the property of passing through moist animal membranes, as
first discovered by the great Dr. Priestley, it is probable it might be of
use in vibices, and petechiae in fevers, and in other bruises; if the skin
over those parts was kept moist by warm water, and covered with oxygen gas
by means of an inverted glass, or even by exposing the parts thus moistened
to the atmosphere, as the dark coloured extravasated blood might thus
become florid, and by its increase of stimulus facilitate its reabsorption.

Two weak patients, to whom I gave oxygen gas in as pure a state as it can
easily be procured from Exeter manganese, and in the quantity of about four
gallons a day, seemed to feel refreshed, and stronger, and to look better
immediately after respiring it, and gained strength in a short time. Two
others, one of whom laboured under confirmed hydrothorax, and the other
under a permanent and uniform difficulty of respiration, were not
refreshed, or in any way served by the use of oxygen in the above quantity
of four gallons a day for a fortnight, which I ascribed to the
inirritability of the diseased lungs. For other cases the reader is
referred to the publications of Dr. Beddoes; Confederations on the Use of
Factitious Airs, sold by Johnson, London.

Its effects would probably have been greater in respect to the quantity
breathed, if it had been given in a dilute state, mixed with 10 or 20 times
its quantity of atmospheric air, as otherwise much of it returns by
expiration without being deprived of its quality, as may be seen by the
person breathing on the flame of a candle, which it enlarges. See the
Treatise of Dr. Beddoes above mentioned.

V. Those passions, which are attended with pleasurable sensation, excite
the system into increased action in consequence of that sensation, as joy,
and love, as is seen by the flush of the skin. Those passions, which are
attended with disagreeable sensation, produce torpor in general by the
expence of sensorial power occasioned by inactive pain; unless volition be
excited in consequence of the painful sensation; and in that case an
increased activity of the system occurs; thus paleness and coldness are the
consequence of fear, but warmth and redness are the consequence of anger.

VI. Besides the exertions of the system occasioned by increased stimuli,
and consequent irritation, and by the passions of the mind above described,
the increased actions occasioned by exercise belong to this article. These
may be divided into the actions of the body in consequence of volition,
which is generally termed labour; or secondly, in consequence of agreeable
sensation, which is termed play or sport; thirdly, the exercise occasioned
by agitation, as in a carriage or on horseback; fourthly, that of friction,
as with a brush or hand, so much used in the baths of Turkey; and lastly,
the exercise of swinging.

The first of these modes of exercise is frequently carried to great excess
even amongst our own labourers, and more so under the lash of slavery; so
that the body becomes emaciated and sinks under either the present
hardships, or by a premature old age. The second mode of exercise is seen
in the play of all young animals, as kittens, and puppies, and children;
and is so necessary to their health as well as to their pleasure, that
those children, which are too much confined from it, not only become
pale-faced and bloated, with tumid bellies, and consequent worms, but are
liable to get habits of unnatural actions, as twitching of their limbs, or
of some parts of their countenance; together with an ill-humoured or
discontented mind.

Agitation in a carriage or on horseback, as it requires some little
voluntary exertion to preserve the body perpendicular, but much less
voluntary exertion than in walking, seems the best adapted to invalids; who
by these means obtain exercise principally by the strength of the horse,
and do not therefore too much exhaust their own sensorial power. The use of
friction with a brush or hand, for half an hour or longer morning and
evening, is still better adapted to those, who are reduced to extreme
debility; and none of their own sensorial power is thus expended, and
affords somewhat like the warm-bath activity without self-exertion, and is
used as a luxury after warm bathing in many parts of Asia.

Another kind of exercise is that of swinging, which requires some exertion
to keep the body perpendicular, or pointing towards the center of the
swing, but is at the same time attended with a degree of vertigo; and is
described in Class II. 1. 6. 7. IV. 2. 1. 10. Sup. I. 3. and 15.

The necessity of much exercise has perhaps been more insisted upon by
physicians, than nature seems to demand. Few animals exercise themselves so
as to induce visible sweat, unless urged to it by mankind, or by fear, or
hunger. And numbers of people in our market towns, of ladies particularly,
with small fortunes, live to old age in health, without any kind of
exercise of body, or much activity of mind.

In summer weak people cannot continue too long in the air, if it can be
done without fatigue; and in winter they should go out several times in a
day for a few minutes, using the cold air like a cold-bath, to invigorate
and render them more hardy.

III. CATALOGUE OF THE INCITANTIA.

