known such ecstasies as de Gobignon never would. He had heard and heeded
the words of the Prophet, may God commend and salute him. He had served
Baibars al-Bunduqdari and been taught by Sheikh Saadi and Imam Fayum
al-Burz. He had fought for Manfred von Hohenstaufen and had loved Sophia
Karaiannides. And soon he would stand face-to-face with God in paradise.

"I do not challenge your honor," he said.

The Frenchman was already moving into a combat stance, a slight crouch,
an exploratory circling of the tip of his sword.

"But even so I fight for my honor," Simon said.

"It is right that you should know whom you are fighting," Daoud said,
raising his saif. "I am Emir Daoud ibn Abdallah of the Bhari Mamelukes."

"Mameluke," said de Gobignon softly. "I have heard that word."

"You shall learn what it means," said Daoud. He did not want to kill de
Gobignon, but he would if he had to, because the young man deserved
nothing less than the best fight of which he was capable.

They moved slowly around each other. Under that purple and gold surcoat
the Frenchman was wearing mail armor from his toes to his fingertips. A
tight-laced hood of mail left only his face bare, and his helmet with
its nasal bar covered part of his face.

In this kind of toe-to-toe fight the greater speed of a lightly armored
fighter was not much advantage. The weight of the mail might slow de
Gobignon down a bit, but fatigue would do the same for Daoud.

The scimitar de Gobignon wielded, that souvenir stolen from some Islamic
warrior, looked to be at least as good a blade as the one Daoud was
using.

The count sprang and slashed at Daoud's arm. Daoud stepped back easily
and parried the blow.

_He can cut my hand off and that would end the fight. And I might even
survive the loss of a hand to be taken prisoner into the bargain. I must
not let that happen._

With a shout Daoud drove the point of his saif straight at de Gobignon's
face. Christians used swords for chopping, not stabbing. With a
backhanded slash de Gobignon knocked the point aside. He punched with
his mailed free hand at Daoud's chest armor.

Daoud felt the force of the blow, but he saw de Gobignon wince. A mailed
fist could hurt flesh, but when it struck metal the fist would suffer.

Daoud slashed at de Gobignon's sword arm just above the elbow.

_Let us see if that mail can withstand my sword._

De Gobignon winced again, but the saif rebounded without cutting through
the chain links, and Daoud felt a jolt in his gauntleted hand.

_The sword is good, but so is the mail. I cannot cut it or stab through
it._

De Gobignon rushed him suddenly, swinging wildly, lips drawn back from
clenched teeth. Daoud danced away, a part of his mind pleased that he
could move so quickly when he had to, tired as he was. De Gobignon's
wild swings from side to side left his chest exposed. He was relying
entirely on his armor, Daoud saw, to protect him.

Daoud jabbed de Gobignon under the armpit, so hard that he felt the
flexible metal of his saif bend. Again the blade failed to penetrate the
tightly woven chain mail, but de Gobignon gave a gasp of pain and cut
his attack short. Daoud was gratified.

He glimpsed a familiar face in the circle of onlookers, a meaty,
weather-beaten face with a broken nose. Sordello. Had he been guarding
the Tartars on the field today?

De Gobignon attacked again, swinging his scimitar furiously at Daoud's
head. He ended the motion with his arm across his face. Daoud gripped
his own sword with both hands, and on de Gobignon's backswing raised it
over his head and brought it down with all his strength on the
Frenchman's wrist. The count's arm was moving into the blow, which gave
it even more force.

The scimitar flew from de Gobignon's hand. Daoud threw his body against
de Gobignon's and locked his foot behind his opponent's ankle. His long,
thin frame top-heavy in his mail, de Gobignon fell over backward. Daoud
stepped forward instantly. Groans and cries of horror were already going
up from the Frenchmen in the ring around them.

Daoud planted his leather-booted foot on de Gobignon's chest hard enough
to knock the wind out of him. He jabbed his saif straight at one of de
Gobignon's few vulnerable places, his right eye, stopping the point a
finger's breadth from the pupil.

Daoud and de Gobignon remained frozen that way.

_And now, O God, tell me: What will I do with him?_

A year ago he would have joyfully driven the point of the saif into
Simon de Gobignon's brain. Even now, he reminded himself that to kill de
Gobignon would relieve Islam of a most dangerous enemy. Daoud would have
won the battle for Manfred today, and Manfred would still be alive were
it not for de Gobignon's unexpected charge. For that alone, the young
count deserved to die.

De Gobignon lay motionless, his face full of anger and defiance.

_But what a waste. I will kill him, the other Franks will kill me, and
both of us will be dead. All loss. No gain._

The sun hurt his eyes. It was low in the west, almost touching the hills
that bounded the valley of Benevento.

_Even if I spare him, the Franks will not let me live. For what I have
been, for what I have done to them, they will burn me, as de Verceuil
said, or worse. Could I trade Simon's life for a decent death for
myself?_

He opened his mouth to speak.

A crushing blow to his chest jolted his body, throwing him back. He
heard the clang of metal punching through his chest armor. An instant
later a thunderbolt of pain struck just beneath his ribs and spread
through his body. He cried out in agony.

Somewhere nearby a woman's voice screamed.

He sank to his knees, dazed.

_What happened to me?_

He still had his sword in his hand. In his blurred vision he saw de
Gobignon, his mouth open in surprise, sitting up, crawling toward him.
Warningly, he raised his saif, but the terrible pain in the middle of
his body drained the strength from his hand, and the sword fell from his
fingers to the ground.

_God help me. I have been arrow-shot. I am going to die._

Fear worse than he had ever felt turned his body to ice. So total was
its power over him that the fear became a greater enemy than death
itself, and he gathered his forces to put it down. After a moment of
struggle, though he still quaked inwardly, he began to take command of
himself.

De Gobignon was looking down at him, and his face was full of shock and
grief.

Someone else was standing over him. He saw a pair of leather leggings
tucked into heavy boots, archer's dress. His head fell back, and he was
looking up at Sordello. The bravo squatted down, bringing his face close
to Daoud's.

"I am glad to see you still alive, Messer David," he said in a soft,
grating voice. "So I can tell you that this repays you for teaching me
about paradise."

The pain felt as if rats had burrowed into his chest and were eating
their way out. He wanted to scream, but he managed to smile.

"Thank you, Sordello. You are sending me to the true paradise."

There was justice in it. He had forced Sordello to undergo the
Hashishiyya initiation. He had always felt that an evil thing to do. Now
he was repaid. Just as Sordello said.

_But when I die, God will welcome me._

A hand clamped on Sordello's shoulder and jerked him away.

"You filthy, stinking, cowardly bastard! You killed the best man on this
field."

Daoud could not see Sordello, but he could picture the expression that
went with the injured tone.

"Your Signory! I save your life and you call me a bastard? The point of
his sword right at your eyeball?"

"He was not going to kill me. I could see it in his face."

There was a wild, almost frightened note in Sordello's laughter. "Can
Your Signory read men's thoughts? I warrant you, if you had till the Day
of Judgment, you could not guess what this archfiend is thinking. You
have no idea what he has done."

Daoud almost managed to laugh. The fool Sordello, as usual speaking and
acting before he thought. One word more, and he would indeed hang
himself.

"Tell the count, Sordello. Tell him what I have done."

_God, I will forgive You for making me suffer so, if You will let me see
Sordello's face just now._

And God granted Daoud's wish. Sordello crouched again over Daoud, his
color maroon, his bloodshot eyes popping. It was wonderful, and Daoud
breathed a prayer of thanks.

After a moment Sordello got control of himself enough to speak. "You
know what you have done. You killed the Tartars."

He straightened up. "Your Signory, do you not know that John and Philip
are dead? And it was this man's servant, Giancarlo, who shot them from
ambush with a crossbow on the battlefield. I shot this David of
Trebizond not only to save your life, but to avenge the Tartars."

"Killed?" De Gobignon turned away, beating his mailed fist against his
leg. "God, God, God! Two years I've kept them alive and Anjou _loses_
them!"

The count was silent for a long moment. His back remained turned, but
his shoulders heaved. He seemed to be sobbing. Daoud glanced at
Sordello, whose eyes glowed with triumphant hatred.

_So, Lorenzo finished the Tartars. At last. I pray only that it is not
too late._

He felt, not elation, but a quiet satisfaction. He thanked God for
letting him hear this news before he died.

"Did you get Giancarlo?" de Gobignon asked in a quiet, choked voice.

"No, Your Signory. The battle came between us."

Daoud thought, _Thank you, O God, for that_.

"Go away, Sordello," said de Gobignon in that same subdued tone. "Go
where I cannot see you. I will deal with you later."

"Your Signory, this man is capable of the most unbelievable treachery.
He will tell you monstrous lies. In the moments of life he has left to
him, God alone knows what evil he may do. I urge you, kill him at once.
It is the wisest thing. Here, here is my dagger. Cut his throat. Avenge
John and Philip--and yourself. Or, let me do it for you. Do not soil
your hands."

_He is terrified of what I might say about him._

In his dimming vision Daoud saw Sordello lunge at him, holding a long
dagger. Suddenly he vanished. A moment later Daoud heard a crash.

"I told you," de Gobignon said. "Get out of my sight."

For a short time Daoud could see no one. He heard movements and
murmurings around him. Then he felt a hand slide under his head and lift
it up. A fresh wave of pain swept through his body, shocking him with
its force. He thought he had already felt the worst. He cried aloud.

_Soma. In the hour when I need it most, I had almost forgotten it._

He pictured the mind-created drug collecting in his head and coursing in
a stream of glowing silver down his throat and branching out to all
parts of his body. Cooling, soothing. Building a wall around the place
down low on the right side of his chest where the crossbow bolt had
driven into him. A silver globe formed around the pain, and he was able
to think and speak. He felt that his head was lying on something soft.

Kneeling on his left side, de Gobignon said, "I am sorry I hurt you. I
folded my cloak and put it under you to try to make you more
comfortable."

"Thank you. I feel better now."

"Are you really a--Muslim? Can you talk, or is it too painful?"

"I can talk."

"I would be glad to know who and what you really are."

"And I will gladly tell you." Daoud began to feel death creeping through
his limbs. The pain was sealed off, but he sensed the lower cavities of
his body filling up with blood. The crossbow bolt should have gone right
through him, but the rear half of his breastplate must have stopped it.

Fear began to rise in him again. Fear, and a desolating sorrow. Never to
see Sophia again. Never to do even the simplest things, get up and walk,
see, breathe. It was more than he could bear.

He fought to find his balance.

_I cannot save myself from dying. But I can decide how I will use these
last moments of life._

He wanted to tell this man, who had been his greatest enemy all along,
how he had tricked him and how close he had come to thwarting their
grand design of an alliance of Christians and Tartars to destroy Islam.
It would make up, in a small way, for all today's defeats. For himself,
that was all he wanted now. Very soon now, he would go up to paradise.

But Sophia and Lorenzo, Ugolini and Tilia, would have to struggle on in
this world after he was gone. He must protect them.

"Tell me," Simon prompted.

"My father was the Sire Geoffrey Langmuir of Ascalon," he began. "My
mother was Lady Evelyn." He told de Gobignon of his capture by the army
of Egypt, his rearing as a Mameluke in a barracks on the Nile. He tried
to explain what a Mameluke was, and what code he lived by. He told of
his acceptance of Islam, his first battles.

As he spoke, his eyes wandered, and he saw the red sun half hidden by
the wooded western hills. He felt the air growing colder, and he
shivered. The chill was not in the air alone. His arms and legs were
numb, as if they were freezing.

"Give me your cloak, Valery," de Gobignon said, and in a moment a red
cloak was being spread over him.

"You were at Mansura, where my father fought," de Gobignon said.

"It was a great victory for Islam," said Daoud. "I saw only a little
fighting. I was very young." He told how Baibars had entrusted him with
more and more important tasks, even with the killing of Qutuz. And how
at last, having trained and shaped him over the years, Baibars sent him
against the powers of Europe.

"Cardinal Ugolini took a Muslim agent into his house? Introduced you to
the Holy Father? _The pope himself?_ By God's breath--"

He must be careful, and protect his onetime protector. And others. "It
was King Manfred who sent me to Ugolini." Daoud managed to laugh. "Do
you think poor Cardinal Ugolini would be mad enough to present me to the
pope if he had known that I was a Muslim--a Mameluke?"

"I suppose not," said the count. Daoud focused his wandering eyes on the
pale face with its sharp features that hovered over him. De Gobignon's
mouth was open, working. He was afraid of what Daoud might answer.

"And Sophia? How much did she know about you?"

"She knew nothing. She knows nothing even now. She was more useful to us
that way."

Sophia was probably still in Benevento, waiting for him. Charles's army
must be moving on Benevento to occupy it. There would be murder and rape
and looting there this night. If de Gobignon still believed in Sophia
and loved her, he would try to protect her.

There was pain in de Gobignon's eyes. "Useful to you?"

"Yes. We let her encourage you. We let her fall in love with you." He
watched de Gobignon's color grow warmer, pinker, as he absorbed what
Daoud was saying. "Each time she saw you, Ugolini would question her
afterward, as if worried about her virtue. You told her more than you
realized. She told Ugolini more than she realized."

"Did _you_ question her?" De Gobignon fixed his eyes on Daoud's.

"I spoke very little with her. I did not want her to suspect me."

_Forgive me, Sophia, for denying our love. I do it to save your life._

"Where can I find Sophia?"

"Perhaps you can help her. She is in Benevento. She came with her
uncle." Daoud managed a smile. "He thought Manfred was going to force
the pope to reinstate him."

"Where in Benevento?"

"On a narrow street that runs south from the Roman arch. A house that
has a statue of an angel conquering a dragon over the door. The only
three-story building on the street. She is on the top floor. Get there
before Charles's men do."

"You do care about Sophia."

"She is an innocent woman. I do not want her to be hurt on my account."

"What about the others--your servant Giancarlo, Tilia Caballo?"

"They thought I was a merchant from Trebizond serving Manfred as an
agent."

"And Sordello? He seems to know more about you than he ever told me. It
is he who killed you. If he deserves to be punished, tell me."

The sky had deepened from blue to indigo. Somewhere nearby a girl was
sobbing. Daoud wondered if it was she who had screamed earlier, when the
bolt from the crossbow first hit him. What was a girl doing on this
battlefield?

_Does Sordello deserve to be punished? De Gobignon tried to use him
against me, and I had more powerful means to turn Sordello against de
Gobignon. But then the sword turned in my hand. That is not Sordello's
fault. Let de Gobignon think him innocent._

"We let him think he was spying on us. Actually, he told you only what
we wanted him to tell you. You saw his rage when he realized how I
tricked him."

With sudden anxiety, he remembered the locket. He reached out with a
hand that had no strength and put it on de Gobignon's arm.

"I must tell you one thing. When you go looking for Sophia, do not take
Sordello with you."

A man's soft voice overhead said, "Simon. We have been waiting till most
of the men moved away. Tell Rachel no one will hurt her if she speaks to
David. She wants to say good-bye to him."

Daoud looked up and saw the Franciscan who interpreted for the Tartars.
He let his head fall to the side, to see where de Gobignon was looking.
Rachel. Older, more woman than girl now. It had been well over a year
since he last saw her.

"It is safe to come forward, Rachel," de Gobignon said. "We understand
that whatever happened, you could not help it."

Rachel rushed across the intervening space and threw herself on her
knees at Daoud's right side, reaching out with tentative hands to touch
him. Daoud saw that she was afraid that even laying a hand on him would
cause him pain.

"You cannot hurt me, Rachel."

She stroked his face, running her hand over his beard. "Oh, Messer
David!" Her voice was husky with grief.

"My name is Daoud, Rachel. I am a Muslim. I have wronged you greatly. I
beg your forgiveness. Perhaps this is how God punished me for the sin I
committed against you."

"You wanted to help me. I know you did." She sobbed, and he felt the
weight of her head on the chest armor that had failed him.

"Your servant Giancarlo--Rachel calls him Lorenzo--helped Rachel escape
from Anjou's camp," Friar Mathieu said. "He left us. He saw Simon's army
coming and wanted to warn you. We left the cart and wandered around the
edge of the battle looking for refuge. We saw your banner here, Simon.
You must protect this girl."

Daoud reached out to de Gobignon. "Find Sophia."

Friar Mathieu knelt next to Rachel, who moved aside to make room for
him.

Daoud said, "Father, when I am too weak to talk, put your fingers under
the collar of my tunic. You will find a small leather packet tied around
my neck. Take it off and give it to Rachel." He moved his head slightly
to see Rachel better. "It is a talisman made by the Sufis, Rachel. It is
called a tawidh. If it would not offend your faith, I would like you to
have it as a remembrance of me."

Rachel laid her hand on Daoud's and repeated the unfamiliar word.
"Tawidh. I will treasure it always, and give it to my children."

Friar Mathieu said, "I heard what you told Simon about your past. You
were baptized a Christian, Daoud. In God's eyes you are still a
Christian. You must confess that you have sinned, and you must renounce
Islam before you die, or you will not be saved. Your Christian mother
and father are waiting for you in heaven. Come, I can give you
absolution."

Daoud shook his head, smiling. How kind this man was, but how sadly
misguided.

"Saved? Of course I am saved. When a warrior dies fighting in defense of
the faith, God welcomes him with open arms into paradise. I do ask your
blessing. You are a holy man. And I ask your forgiveness for throwing
you down those stairs."

"That was you!" De Gobignon's eyes widened.

"Of course. I wish I could tell you all the things I have done, good and
bad. I have had a life of many miracles."

De Gobignon's face hardened. "You killed Alain."

Daoud hoped the realization would not turn de Gobignon against him.
Sophia's life might depend on the count's forgiving him.

"Have I not admitted that I waged secret war on you in Orvieto? Yes, I
killed your friend. I later was sorry I had done it, but he could have
exposed me. I hurt Friar Mathieu. But I could not kill--a priest. All
the things that thwarted you in Orvieto--they were my doing."

"I hate you for those things. For Alain especially."

"The princes of Europe and the Tartars would put countless men, women,
and children to the sword. They still may do it. That is what I came
here to fight against. To save my people."

De Gobignon shook his head. "How can you feel they are your people? You
were not born a Muslim."

"Nor was Muhammad. May God commend and salute him. My faith is the faith
of the homeless, the uprooted, the exiled. The Prophet said, _Islam
began in exile and it will end in exile_."

Friar Mathieu's bearded face and anxious blue eyes seemed to float over
Daoud. "You lie there, defeated, dying. Charles has conquered Manfred.
Does this not mean that your faith has failed you?"

"Whatever God's purpose has been for me, I have accomplished it. God may
destroy unworthy bearers of the truth, but the truth He will not
destroy."

"Do you think yourself unworthy?"

"I hope I have not been. I have tried to be a good slave to God. That is
what the word Mameluke means--slave."

_I have wandered in the desert and now I am going to the watering
place._

He wanted to say more, but there was no strength in his breath. The
silver globe was cracking like an egg, and a black, irresistible tide of
pain was pouring out.

"Take the tawidh from around my neck, Father," he whispered.

He felt fingers at his collar, and after a moment the thong slid free.

_Make me to die submissive unto Thee and join me to the righteous. I
bear witness that there is no god but God and I bear witness that
Muhammad is His servant and Messenger. Amin!_

He could not hold the pain back. He could escape it only in sleep. He
could not see Friar Mathieu or Simon de Gobignon or Rachel. His eyes
were closing. He would dream of Sophia.

       *       *       *       *       *

Rachel clutched the leather capsule desperately, as if by holding it
tightly enough she could keep Daoud alive. She felt her sorrow crushing
her as if it were a great stone pillar pressing down from the sky. She
touched his cheek with her fingertips, and his face felt still as stone,
and she knew the life had gone out of him.

She sat back and tied the Muslim amulet around her neck, as she had seen
it tied around his. Then she dug the fingers of both hands into the silk
of her gown, near the collar, and pulled at it until it tore.

She put her hands over her face and let darkness sweep over her mind as
sobs shook her and her tears fell.




LXX


Terror filled the little room like a pool of icy water. Soon, Sophia
thought, terror would drown them.

The worst for her was not knowing whether Daoud was alive or dead.

_Before dawn I had him here in this bed. Now after sunset I have no idea
where he is._

Sophia lay back on the bed, while Tilia sat on cushions laid over
Sophia's traveling chest. Ugolini sat in an armchair reading--trying to
read, Sophia suspected--a leather-bound book by the light of a candle in
a brass holder standing on the arm of the chair. Only the yellow gleam
of the candle and the reddish light of a low fire on the hearth
illuminated the room. From the shadows along the wall, the icon of Saint
Simon stared at her.

She wondered whether she should have spoken to Daoud of what she had
come to suspect. Her time of the month, regular as the moon itself since
she was a girl, was over six weeks late. It seemed the brew of myrrh,
juniper berries, and powdered rhubarb Tilia had concocted for her, and
which she had drunk faithfully every morning for six months, might have
finally done its work.

She wanted Daoud to know, though she was not sure whether he would be
pleased. He had never said that he had any children. She wanted to be
sure she was truly carrying his child before she told him. Tilia had
advised her to wait until at least twelve weeks had gone by without an
issue of blood.

But now it hurt her that she had not told him. It would have been
another parting gift she could have given him.

Darkness had fallen. The foreboding quiet of Benevento was broken by
shouts in the distance, growing louder as they came closer.

She heard a scream from the street. A woman's voice, shrill with fear.
She shut her eyes and shuddered. Another scream, this time a man's voice
and full of agony.

Sophia's body grew colder. She looked at Ugolini and saw that he was
trembling.

It was not just terror that was making her cold. The fire was burning
too low. She got up and laid two more split logs on it.

Back on the bed, she reached into the neck of her gown and pulled on the
long silver chain, drawing out the locket Daoud had given her. She
twisted the screw and opened it and stared for a moment at the engraved,
interlocking arabesque pattern.

Then Daoud's face superimposed itself, and the pattern disappeared. It
was not a picture of him; it _was_ Daoud, as if she were seeing him
through an open window. It was magic, and it frightened her. She had
never before encountered magic. His face was alive, though it did not
move. His blue eyes seemed to look right at her. She never quite caught
him blinking, but it seemed as if he might have, just a moment ago. He
appeared about to speak to her. Just as the fresh logs on the fire made
the room warmer, so her terror subsided at the sight of him.

"What is that?" Tilia asked.

"A keepsake Daoud gave me." She closed the hammered silver case and slid
it back inside the top of her gown.

"We cannot just sit here," Tilia said. "We are like mice waiting for the
cat to come and eat us."

"I don't like depending on someone else to save me any more than you,
Tilia," Sophia said, "but all we can do is wait. Someone will come for
us. Daoud or Lorenzo. Someone."

"We should have left long ago, when the men-at-arms ran away," said
Ugolini. "Then we would have had horses." He looked reproachfully at
Sophia. Sophia felt he had a right to. She had persuaded them to stay
here. How could she have been so sure that the news that the battle was
lost, which had thrown the men-at-arms into a panic, was merely a
baseless rumor? It was her faith in Daoud, she thought, her certainty
that no matter what happened on the battlefield he would come for her
and take her to safety.

"Adelberto, you cannot ride very well," said Tilia. "And I cannot ride
a horse at all. You may be sure those poltroons would not have carried
us on litters. We could not have left then."

"You could ride if your life depended on it," said Sophia. "You may
still have to."

"My life depends on _never_ getting on a horse," said Tilia. "I would
