Please mention NEWSSTAND GROUP--MEN'S LIST, when answering
advertisements

       *       *       *       *       *


Win $3,500.00

Prizes from $1800.00 to $4245.00 each have been won through our unique
advertising plan. In our last, an old man of 69, out of work, won over
$5000.00. A boy, only 15, won $900.00. In next 3 or 4 months thousands
of dollars will be awarded to fortunate persons who solve our puzzles
and win our prizes.


FIND THE TWIN FLYERS

Watch out! These twelve pictures of a famous woman flyer all look
alike--BUT--two, and only two, are exactly alike. Find these twin
flyers! Some pictures are different in the collar, helmet, goggles, or
tie. Remember, only two of the twelve are exactly alike. Find them, and
send the numbers of the twin flyers on a post card or letter today. If
correct, your answer will qualify you for this opportunity.


=$7160.00 IN PRIZES GIVEN THIS TIME=

Over 25 prizes, and duplicate prizes in case of ties. It's up to the
winner whether he or she chooses $2875.00 in cash or a new Waco
airplane, a big automobile, or a new home. A gorgeous prize list! ANYONE
WHO ANSWERS THIS PUZZLE CORRECTLY MAY RECEIVE PRIZES OR CASH.


=$625.00 ADDITIONAL FOR PROMPTNESS=

Be prompt! It pays. Find the real twin flyers, and I will send
Certificate which will be good for $625.00 if you are prompt and win
first prize. Imagine, a first prize of $3500.00!

NO MORE PUZZLES TO SOLVE. Any man, woman, boy, or girl in the
U.S.A.--anyone at all, except residents of Chicago, Illinois, and former
major prize winners. 25 of the people who take up this offer are going
to win these wonderful prizes. Be one of them. Send the numbers of the
twin flyers. Send no money, but be prompt.

=J. D. SNYDER, Dept. 36, 54 W. Illinois St., Chicago, Ill.=

       *       *       *       *       *


TRAIN FOR AVIATION AT HOME

Hundreds of men are already training for big-pay Aviation jobs through
Lt. Hinton's practical home-study course. This thorough training is just
the foundation you need to enter Aviation in any of its many branches,
for the course covers Terms and Definitions, Principles of Flight,
Rigging, Repairing, Construction, Instruments, Aerology, Engines,
Ignition, Carburetion, Airports; _Aviation from A to Z_. After
graduation Hinton's Employment Department puts you in touch with real
jobs, or, if you want to be a pilot, Hinton arranges special flying
rates at an accredited Air College near your home. Hinton-trained men
are in demand and they are making good. His Big Free Book explains
everything. Send for your copy at once!

[Illustration]

  =SEND FOR FREE BOOK=
  =MAIL NOW!=

  WALTER HINTON, President, 316-D
  Aviation Institute of U.S.A.
  1115 Conn. Ave., Washington, D.C.

  Name .......................... Age .........
                                 (Must be 18)
  Address .....................................

  City ...................... State ...........

       *       *       *       *       *


$8 often made in one day by many of our sales Agents

[Illustrations]

Sell finest line new guaranteed hosiery you ever saw, for men, women,
children. Written guarantee to wear and satisfy or replaced. 126 styles,
colors. Finest silks. All at lowest prices.


NEW FORD CAR

We offer our agents a =new Ford Car= when earned under our plan. Your
commission daily. Credit given. Extra bonus. We deliver or you
deliver--suit yourself.


FINE SILK HOSE

Our new plan gives you =fine silk hosiery= for your own use. I want men
and women to act as Local Sales Agents. Spare time is satisfactory.
Write quick. A post card will do.

  =WILKNIT HOSIERY CO.=
  =No. 2807 Greenfield, Ohio=

       *       *       *       *       *


NEW SCIENTIFIC WONDER

="X-RAY" CURIO=

[Illustration: Reg. U.S. Pat. Off.]

=PRICE 10c 3-25c no stamps=

BIG FUN

=BOYS= You apparently see thru Clothes, Wood, Stone, any object. See
Bones in Flesh. FREE Pkg. radio picture films, takes pictures without
camera. You'll like 'em. (1 pkg. with each 25c order.)

=MARVEL MFG. CO. Dept. 86, NEW HAVEN, CONN.=

       *       *       *       *       *


TRAVEL--for 'UNCLE SAM'

=RAILWAY POSTAL CLERKS=

=MAIL CARRIERS--POSTOFFICE CLERKS GENERAL CLERKS--CUSTOMS INSPECTORS=

$1700 to $3400 a Year for Life

No "layoffs" because of strikes, poor business, etc.--sure pay--rapid
advancement. Many other U.S. Government Jobs. City and country residents
stand same chance. Common sense education usually sufficient.


STEADY WORK

Cut coupon and mail it before turning the page

=MEN--BOYS 18 to 45=

=Use Coupon Before You Lose It=

       *       *       *       *       *

COUPON

FRANKLIN INSTITUTE, Dept. E267, Rochester, N.Y.

Rush to me, free of charge. (1) A full description of the positions
checked below. (2) 32-page book with list of positions obtainable. (3)
Tell me how to get the positions checked.

  [ ] Railway Postal Clerk ($1900 to $2700)
  [ ] Postoffice Clerk ($1700 to $2300)
  [ ] City Mail Carrier ($1700 to $2100)
  [ ] General Clerk ($1200 to $2100)
  [ ] Customs Inspector ($2100 up)
  [ ] Rural Mail Carrier ($2100 to $3300)

  Name ........................................

  Address .....................................

       *       *       *       *       *

Please mention NEWSSTAND GROUP--MEN'S LIST, when answering
advertisements

       *       *       *       *       *


Get Strong QUICKLY

Giant Chest Expander

ONLY $2.00

Here's an opportunity for everyone to develop big muscles and obtain
great strength by using this heavy-tensioned PROGRESSIVE EXERCISER,
adjustable from 20 to 200 lbs. resistance. Complete instructions with
each exerciser.

Get rid of those aches and pains, indigestion, constipation, headaches,
etc. Build up your body and look like a real He-man.


SEND NO MONEY!

Simply pay the postman $2.00, plus a few cents postage, for five-cabled
exerciser or $4.00 plus a few cents postage, for ten-cabled exerciser.
_Money back in five days if dissatisfied._

  Progressive Exerciser Co.
  Dept. 5002, Langdon Building
  Duane Street and Broadway
  New York City

[Illustration]

       *       *       *       *       *


LAW

STUDY AT HOME

Become a lawyer. Legally trained men win high positions and big success
in business and public life. Be independent. Greater opportunities now
than ever before. Big corporations are headed by men with legal
training. Earn

=$5,000 to $10,000 Annually=

We guide you step by step. You can train at home during spare time.
Degree of LL. B. conferred. LaSalle students found among practicing
attorneys of every state. We furnish all text material, including
fourteen-volume Law Library. Low cost, easy terms. Get our valuable
64-page "Law Guide" and "Evidence" books FREE. Send for them NOW.

  LaSalle Extension University, Dept. 275-L, Chicago
  The World's Largest Business Training Institution

       *       *       *       *       *

HOW SHARP IS YOUR RAZOR?

Did you have trouble shaving this morning? If your razor blade scraped
and pulled you will appreciate this remarkable new discovery.... Gold
Nugget Strop Dressing ... can be used satisfactorily on all stropping
devices ... puts keen cutting edge on any razor blade.... Easy to apply
... results assured. Makes you feel like singing when you shave. $1
postpaid.

  NO-HONE COMPANY
  3124 California St.
  Omaha, Nebraska

       *       *       *       *       *


PATENTS

Time counts in applying for patents. Don't risk delay in protecting your
ideas. Send sketch or model for instructions or write for FREE book.
"How to Obtain a Patent" and "Record of Invention" form. No charge for
information on how to proceed. Communications strictly confidential.
Prompt, careful, efficient service. Clarence A. O'Brien, Registered
Patent Attorney, 1876 Security Savings and Comm'l Bank Building
(directly across street from Patent Office) Washington, D.C.

       *       *       *       *       *


STOP Tobacco

No human being can escape the harmful effects of tobacco. Don't try to
quit without assistance. Let our simple inexpensive remedy help you. A
complete treatment costs but $2.00. Every penny promptly refunded if you
do not get desired results.

Ours is a harmless preparation, carefully compounded to overcome the
condition, that will make quitting of tobacco pleasant, and easy. It
comes with a money back guarantee.

  =Anti-Tobacco League=
  P.O. Box H-2
  OMAHA, NEBR.

       *       *       *       *       *


SONG WRITERS!

[Illustration]

SUBSTANTIAL ADVANCE ROYALTIES are paid on work found acceptable for
publication. Anyone wishing to write _either the words_ or music for
songs may submit work for free examination and advice. _Past experience
unnecessary_. New demand created by "Talking Pictures" fully described
in our free book. Write for it Today.

  NEWCOMER ASSOCIATES
  723 Earle Building, New York

       *       *       *       *       *


Learn to PAINT SIGNS and SHOW CARDS

We quickly teach you by mail, or at school. In spare time. Enormous
demand. Big future. Interesting work. Oldest and foremost school.


EARN $50 TO $200 WEEKLY

Otto Wiegand, Md., home-study graduate, made $12,000 from his business
in one year. John Vassoe, N.Y., gets $25 for a show card. Crawford,
B.C., writes: "Earned $200 while taking course." Write for complete
information.

  DETROIT SCHOOL OF LETTERING
  Est. 1889
  180 Stimson Ave.
  DETROIT, MICH.

       *       *       *       *       *


STOP WORRYING about Money

[Illustration: _Here's a New, Easy Way to Make_ $15 a Day]

YES--here's a wonderful opportunity to start right in making $15 in a
day. You can have plenty of money to pay your bills, to spend for new
clothes, furniture, radio, pleasure trips, or whatever you want. No more
pinching pennies or counting the nickels and dimes. No more saying "We
can't afford it." That's the biggest mistake any man or woman ever made.
=And I'll prove it.=


Van Allen Makes $100 a Week

Just send me your name and address and I'll give you some facts that
will open your eyes. I'll show you how L. C. Van Allen, of Illinois,
quit a $23-a-week job, took hold of my proposition, and made better than
$100 a week! Then there's Gustav Karnath, of Minnesota, who cleared
$20.35 the first five hours, and Mrs. B. L. Hodges, of New York, who
says she never fails to make a profit of $18 to $20 a day. I have
letters from men and women everywhere that tell about profits of $10,
$15, $20 and as high as $25 and $30 in a single day.


Start Right In

You don't need any experience or capital to make big money my way. No
course of training is necessary. You simply act as my Representative in
your locality and look after my business there. All you have to do is
call on your friends and my established customers and take care of their
orders for my fast selling line of Groceries, Toilet Articles and other
Household Necessities. I have thousands of customers in every section of
every State. They must order from you because I never sell through
stores. Last year my Representatives made nearly two million dollars.
When I get the coupon from you I send full details by return mail. You
can quickly be making money just like I said. I will also supply you
with Groceries and other Household Necessities at lowest, wholesale
prices.


SEND NO MONEY

If you want ready cash--a chance to make $15 or more a day starting at
once--and Groceries at wholesale--just send me your name and address on
the coupon. It costs you nothing to investigate. Keep your present job
and start in spare time if you want to. Oscar Stuart, of W. Virginia,
reports $18 profit in 2-1/2 hours' spare time. So you see there's
everything to gain. Simply mail the coupon. _I_ will give you full
details of my plan without cost or obligation to you. I'll give you the
big opportunity you've been waiting for. So don't lose a moment. Mail
the coupon NOW.


FREE!

[Illustration: New Ford Tudor Sedan]

NOT a contest. I offer a brand-new car free to producers as an extra
reward or bonus--in addition to their large cash profits. Mail coupon
for particulars.

       *       *       *       *       *

MAIL THIS NOW!

  =ALBERT MILLS, Pres., American Products Co.,=
  =5441 Monmouth Ave., Cincinnati, Ohio.=

Send me, without cost or obligation, all the facts about your new
proposition that offers a wonderful opportunity to make quick profits of
$15 or more a day and Groceries at wholesale.

  Name ........................................

  Address .....................................

  .............................................
  (C) A. P. Co.        (Print or Write Plainly)

       *       *       *       *       *

Please mention NEWSSTAND GROUP--MEN'S LIST, when answering
advertisements

       *       *       *       *       *


What's Wrong With This Picture?

See If You Can Find the Mistakes in This Picture

[Illustration]

We will spend over $167,000.00 this year for the purpose of conducting
free prize offers to advertise and expand our business. Thousands of
persons are going to receive valuable prizes or cash awards and
compensations this year through our offers. The sky is the limit! Anyone
living in the United States outside of Chicago, except employees of this
company, members of their families, or our previous auto or first prize
winners, or members of their families, may enter an answer to this
puzzle.


$7,346 In Prizes Given in This One Offer

Seven Big New 6-Cylinder Sedans and Other Valuable Prizes

Try your skill--it costs you nothing. Study the picture shown here, but
look carefully. The artist has purposely made many mistakes. Can you
find four or more of them? These mistakes can be found in various
objects is the picture--that's all the hint we can give you. If you
think you can find four or more mistakes, answer at once. Just mark the
mistakes in pencil on the picture, or tell me what they are in a letter
or on a post card. Only four mistakes are required for a perfect answer.
