apparatus employed by Mr Meusnier and me for the combustion of hydrogen
gas, which is described in the experiment for recomposition of water,
Part I. Chap. VIII. and need not be here repeated, will answer the
purpose; when pure gasses are procured, this apparatus will require no
alterations, except that the capacity of the vessels may then be
diminished. See Pl. IV. Fig. 5.

The combustion, when once begun, continues for a considerable time, but
weakens gradually, in proportion as the quantity of azotic gas remaining
from the combustion increases, till at last the azotic gas is in such
over proportion that the combustion can no longer be supported, and the
flame goes out. This spontaneous extinction must be prevented, because,
as the hydrogen gas is pressed upon in its reservoir, by an inch and a
half of water, whilst the oxygen gas suffers a pressure only of three
lines, a mixture of the two would take place in the balloon, which would
at last be forced by the superior pressure into the reservoir of oxygen
gas. Wherefore the combustion must be stopped, by shutting the
stop-cock of the tube dDd whenever the flame grows very feeble; for
which purpose it must be attentively watched.

There is another apparatus for combustion, which, though we cannot with
it perform experiments with the same scrupulous exactness as with the
preceding instruments, gives very striking results that are extremely
proper to be shewn in courses of philosophical chemistry. It consists of
a worm EF, Pl. IX. Fig. 5. contained in a metallic cooller ABCD. To the
upper part of this worm E, the chimney GH is fixed, which is composed of
two tubes, the inner of which is a continuation of the worm, and the
outer one is a case of tin-plate, which surrounds it at about an inch
distance, and the interval is filled up with sand. At the inferior
extremity K of the inner tube, a glass tube is fixed, to which we adopt
the Argand lamp LM for burning alkohol, &c.

Things being thus disposed, and the lamp being filled with a determinate
quantity of alkohol, it is set on fire; the water which is formed during
the combustion rises in the chimney KE, and being condensed in the worm,
runs out at its extremity F into the bottle P. The double tube of the
chimney, filled with sand in the interstice, is to prevent the tube from
cooling in its upper part, and condensing the water; otherwise, it
would fall back in the tube, and we should not be able to ascertain its
quantity, and besides it might fall in drops upon the wick, and
extinguish the flame. The intention of this construction, is to keep the
chimney always hot, and the worm always cool, that the water may be
preserved in the state of vapour whilst rising, and may be condensed
immediately upon getting into the descending part of the apparatus. By
this instrument, which was contrived by Mr Meusnier, and which is
described by me in the Memoirs of the Academy for 1784, p. 593. we may,
with attention to keep the worm always cold, collect nearly seventeen
ounces of water from the combustion of sixteen ounces of alkohol.


SECT. VIII.

_Of the Oxydation of Metals._

The term _oxydation_ or _calcination_ is chiefly used to signify the
process by which metals exposed to a certain degree of heat are
converted into oxyds, by absorbing oxygen from the air. This combination
takes place in consequence of oxygen possessing a greater affinity to
metals, at a certain temperature, than to caloric, which becomes
disengaged in its free state; but, as this disengagement, when made in
common air, is slow and progressive, it is scarcely evident to the
senses. It is quite otherwise, however, when oxydation takes place in
oxygen gas; for, being produced with much greater rapidity, it is
generally accompanied with heat and light, so as evidently to show that
metallic substances are real combustible bodies.

All the metals have not the same degree of affinity to oxygen. Gold,
silver, and platina, for instance, are incapable of taking it away from
its combination with caloric, even in the greatest known heat; whereas
the other metals absorb it in a larger or smaller quantity, until the
affinities of the metal to oxygen, and of the latter to caloric, are in
exact equilibrium. Indeed, this state of equilibrium of affinities may
be assumed as a general law of nature in all combinations.

In all operations of this nature, the oxydation of metals is accelerated
by giving free access to the air; it is sometimes much assisted by
joining the action of a bellows, which directs a stream of air over the
surface of the metal. This process becomes greatly more rapid if a
stream of oxygen gas be used, which is readily done by means of the
gazometer formerly described. The metal, in this case, throws out a
brilliant flame, and the oxydation is very quickly accomplished; but
this method can only be used in very confined experiments, on account of
the expence of procuring oxygen gas. In the essay of ores, and in all
the common operations of the laboratory, the calcination or oxydation of
metals is usually performed in a dish of baked clay, Pl. IV. Fig. 6.
commonly called a _roasting test_, placed in a strong furnace. The
substances to be oxydated are frequently stirred, on purpose to present
fresh surfaces to the air.

Whenever this operation is performed upon a metal which is not volatile,
and from which nothing flies off into the surrounding air during the
process, the metal acquires additional weight; but the cause of this
increased weight during oxydation could never have been discovered by
means of experiments performed in free air; and it is only since these
operations have been performed in close vessels, and in determinate
quantities of air, that any just conjectures have been formed concerning
the cause of this phenomenon. The first method for this purpose is due
to Dr Priestley, who exposes the metal to be calcined in a porcelain cup
N, Pl. IV. Fig. 11. placed upon the stand IK, under a jar A, in the
bason BCDE, full of water; the water is made to rise up to GH, by
sucking out the air with a syphon, and the focus of a burning glass is
made to fall upon the metal. In a few minutes the oxydation takes
place, a part of the oxygen contained in the air combines with the
metal, and a proportional diminution of the volume of air is produced;
what remains is nothing more than azotic gas, still however mixed with a
small quantity of oxygen gas. I have given an account of a series of
experiments made with this apparatus in my Physical and Chemical Essays,
first published in 1773. Mercury may be used instead of water in this
experiment, whereby the results are rendered still more conclusive.

Another process for this purpose was invented by Mr Boyle, and of which
I gave an account in the Memoirs of the Academy for 1774, p. 351. The
metal is introduced into a retort, Pl. III. Fig. 20. the beak of which
is hermetically sealed; the metal is then oxydated by means of heat
applied with great precaution. The weight of the vessel, and its
contained substances, is not at all changed by this process, until the
extremity of the neck of the retort is broken; but, when that is done,
the external air rushes in with a hissing noise. This operation is
attended with danger, unless a part of the air is driven out of the
retort, by means of heat, before it is hermetically sealed, as otherwise
the retort would be apt to burst by the dilation of the air when placed
in the furnace. The quantity of air driven out may be received under a
jar in the pneumato-chemical apparatus, by which its quantity, and that
of the air remaining in the retort, is ascertained. I have not
multiplied my experiments upon oxydation of metals so much as I could
have wished; neither have I obtained satisfactory results with any metal
except tin. It is much to be wished that some person would undertake a
series of experiments upon oxydation of metals in the several gasses;
the subject is important, and would fully repay any trouble which this
kind of experiment might occasion.

As all the oxyds of mercury are capable of revivifying without addition,
and restore the oxygen gas they had before absorbed, this seemed to be
the most proper metal for becoming the subject of conclusive experiments
upon oxydation. I formerly endeavoured to accomplish the oxydation of
mercury in close vessels, by filling a retort, containing a small
quantity of mercury, with oxygen gas, and adapting a bladder half full
of the same gas to its beak; See Pl. IV. Fig. 12. Afterwards, by heating
the mercury in the retort for a very long time, I succeeded in oxydating
a very small portion, so as to form a little red oxyd floating upon the
surface of the running mercury; but the quantity was so small, that the
smallest error committed in the determination of the quantities of
oxygen gas before and after the operation must have thrown very great
uncertainty upon the results of the experiment. I was, besides,
dissatisfied with this process, and not without cause, lest any air
might have escaped through the pores of the bladder, more especially as
it becomes shrivelled by the heat of the furnace, unless covered over
with cloths kept constantly wet.

This experiment is performed with more certainty in the apparatus
described in the Memoirs of the Academy for 1775, p. 580. This consists
of a retort, A, Pl. IV. Fig. 2. having a crooked glass tube BCDE of ten
or twelve lines internal diameter, melted on to its beak, and which is
engaged under the bell glass FG, standing with its mouth downwards, in a
bason filled with water or mercury. The retort is placed upon the bars
of the furnace MMNN, Pl. IV. Fig. 2. or in a sand bath, and by means of
this apparatus we may, in the course of several days, oxydate a small
quantity of mercury in common air; the red oxyd floats upon the surface,
from which it may be collected and revivified, so as to compare the
quantity of oxygen gas obtained in revivification with the absorption
which took place during oxydation. This kind of experiment can only be
performed upon a small scale, so that no very certain conclusions can be
drawn from them[61].

The combustion of iron in oxygen gas being a true oxydation of that
metal, ought to be mentioned in this place. The apparatus employed by Mr
Ingenhousz for this operation is represented in Pl. IV. Fig. 17.; but,
having already described it sufficiently in Chap. III. I shall refer the
reader to what is said of it in that place. Iron may likewise be
oxydated by combustion in vessels filled with oxygen gas, in the way
already directed for phosphorus and charcoal. This apparatus is
represented Pl. IV. Fig. 3. and described in the fifth chapter of the
first part of this work. We learn from Mr Ingenhousz, that all the
metals, except gold, silver, and mercury, may be burnt or oxydated in
the same manner, by reducing them into very fine wire, or very thin
plates cut into narrow slips; these are twisted round with iron-wire,
which communicates the property of burning to the other metals.

Mercury is even difficultly oxydated in free air. In chemical
laboratories, this process is usually carried on in a matrass A, Pl. IV.
Fig. having a very flat body, and a very long neck BC, which vessel is
commonly called _Boyle's bell_. A quantity of mercury is introduced
sufficient to cover the bottom, and it is placed in a sand-bath, which
keeps up a constant heat approaching to that of boiling mercury. By
continuing this operation with five or six similar matrasses during
several months, and renewing the mercury from time to time, a few
ounces of red oxyd are at last obtained. The great slowness and
inconvenience of this apparatus arises from the air not being
sufficiently renewed; but if, on the other hand, too free a circulation
were given to the external air, it would carry off the mercury in
solution in the state of vapour, so that in a few days none would remain
in the vessel.

As, of all the experiments upon the oxydation of metals, those with
mercury are the most conclusive, it were much to be wished that a simple
apparatus could be contrived by which this oxydation and its results
might be demonstrated in public courses of chemistry. This might, in my
opinion, be accomplished by methods similar to those I have already
described for the combustion of charcoal and the oils; but, from other
pursuits, I have not been able hitherto to resume this kind of
experiment.

The oxyd of mercury revives without addition, by being heated to a
slightly red heat. In this degree of temperature, oxygen has greater
affinity to caloric than to mercury, and forms oxygen gas. This is
always mixed with a small portion of azotic gas, which indicates that
the mercury absorbs a small portion of this latter gas during oxydation.
It almost always contains a little carbonic acid gas, which must
undoubtedly be attributed to the foulnesses of the oxyd; these are
charred by the heat, and convert a part of the oxygen gas into carbonic
acid.

If chemists were reduced to the necessity of procuring all the oxygen
gas employed in their experiments from mercury oxydated by heat without
addition, or, as it is called, _calcined_ or _precipitated_ per se, the
excessive dearness of that preparation would render experiments, even
upon a moderate scale, quite impracticable. But mercury may likewise be
oxydated by means of nitric acid; and in this way we procure a red oxyd,
even more pure than that produced by calcination. I have sometimes
prepared this oxyd by dissolving mercury in nitric acid, evaporating to
dryness, and calcining the salt, either in a retort, or in capsules
formed of pieces of broken matrasses and retorts, in the manner formerly
described; but I have never succeeded in making it equally beautiful
with what is sold by the druggists, and which is, I believe, brought
from Holland. In choosing this, we ought to prefer what is in solid
lumps composed of soft adhering scales, as when in powder it is
sometimes adulterated with red oxyd of lead.

To obtain oxygen gas from the red oxyd of mercury, I usually employ a
porcelain retort, having a long glass tube adapted to its beak, which is
engaged under jars in the water pneumato-chemical apparatus, and I
place a bottle in the water, at the end of the tube, for receiving the
mercury, in proportion as it revives and distils over. As the oxygen gas
never appears till the retort becomes red, it seems to prove the
principle established by Mr Berthollet, that an obscure heat can never
form oxygen gas, and that light is one of its constituent elements. We
must reject the first portion of gas which comes over, as being mixed
with common air, from what was contained in the retort at the beginning
of the experiment; but, even with this precaution, the oxygen gas
procured is usually contaminated with a tenth part of azotic gas, and
with a very small portion of carbonic acid gas. This latter is readily
got rid of, by making the gas pass through a solution of caustic alkali;
but we know of no method for separating the azotic gas; its proportions
may however be ascertained, by leaving a known quantity of the oxygen
gas contaminated with it for a fortnight, in contact with sulphuret of
soda or potash, which absorbs the oxygen gas so as to convert the
sulphur into sulphuric acid, and leaves the azotic gas remaining pure.

We may likewise procure oxygen gas from black oxyd of manganese or
nitrat of potash, by exposing them to a red heat in the apparatus
already described for operating upon red oxyd of mercury; only, as it
requires such a heat as is at least capable of softening glass, we must
employ retorts of stone or of porcelain. But the purest and best oxygen
gas is what is disengaged from oxygenated muriat of potash by simple
heat. This operation is performed in a glass retort, and the gas
obtained is perfectly pure, provided that the first portions, which are
mixed with the common air of the vessels, be rejected.

FOOTNOTES:

[61] See an account of this experiment, Part. I. Chap. iii.--A.




CHAP. IX.

_Of Deflagration._


I have already shown, Part I. Chap. IX. that oxygen does not always part
with the whole of the caloric it contained in the state of gas when it
enters into combination with other bodies. It carries almost the whole
of its caloric alongst with it in entering into the combinations which
form nitric acid and oxygenated muriatic acid; so that in nitrats, and
more especially in oxygenated muriats, the oxygen is, in a certain
degree, in the state of oxygen gas, condensed, and reduced to the
smallest volume it is capable of occupying.

In these combinations, the caloric exerts a constant action upon the
oxygen to bring it back to the state of gas; hence the oxygen adheres
but very slightly, and the smallest additional force is capable of
setting it free; and, when such force is applied, it often recovers the
state of gas instantaneously. This rapid passage from the solid to the
aeriform state is called detonation, or fulmination, because it is
usually accompanied with noise and explosion. Deflagrations are commonly
produced by means of combinations of charcoal either with nitre or
oxygenated muriat of potash; sometimes, to assist the inflammation,
sulphur is added; and, upon the just proportion of these ingredients,
and the proper manipulation of the mixture, depends the art of making
gun-powder.

As oxygen is changed, by deflagration with charcoal, into carbonic acid,
instead of oxygen gas, carbonic acid gas is disengaged, at least when
the mixture has been made in just proportions. In deflagration with
nitre, azotic gas is likewise disengaged, because azote is one of the
constituent elements of nitric acid.

The sudden and instantaneous disengagement and expansion of these gasses
is not, however, sufficient for explaining all the phenomena of
deflagration; because, if this were the sole operating power, gun powder
would always be so much the stronger in proportion as the quantity of
gas disengaged in a given time was the more considerable, which does not
always accord with experiment. I have tried some kinds which produced
almost double the effect of ordinary gun powder, although they gave out
a sixth part less of gas during deflagration. It would appear that the
quantity of caloric disengaged at the moment of detonation contributes
considerably to the expansive effects produced; for, although caloric
penetrates freely through the pores of every body in nature, it can only
do so progressively, and in a given time; hence, when the quantity
disengaged at once is too large to get through the pores of the
surrounding bodies, it must necessarily act in the same way with
ordinary elastic fluids, and overturn every thing that opposes its
passage. This must, at least in part, take place when gun-powder is set
on fire in a cannon; as, although the metal is permeable to caloric, the
quantity disengaged at once is too large to find its way through the
pores of the metal, it must therefore make an effort to escape on every
side; and, as the resistance all around, excepting towards the muzzle,
is too great to be overcome, this effort is employed for expelling the
bullet.

The caloric produces a second effect, by means of the repulsive force
exerted between its particles; it causes the gasses, disengaged at the
moment of deflagration, to expand with a degree of force proportioned to
the temperature produced.

It is very probable that water is decomposed during the deflagration of
gun-powder, and that part of the oxygen furnished to the nascent
carbonic acid gas is produced from it. If so, a considerable quantity of
hydrogen gas must be disengaged in the instant of deflagration, which
expands, and contributes to the force of the explosion. It may readily
be conceived how greatly this circumstance must increase the effect of
powder, if we consider that a pint of hydrogen gas weighs only one
grain and two thirds; hence a very small quantity in weight must occupy
a very large space, and it must exert a prodigious expansive force in
passing from the liquid to the aeriform state of existence.

In the last place, as a portion of undecomposed water is reduced to
vapour during the deflagration of gun-powder, and as water, in the state
of gas, occupies seventeen or eighteen hundred times more space than in
its liquid state, this circumstance must likewise contribute largely to
the explosive force of the powder.

I have already made a considerable series of experiments upon the nature
of the elastic fluids disengaged during the deflagration of nitre with
charcoal and sulphur; and have made some, likewise, with the oxygenated
muriat of potash. This method of investigation leads to tollerably
accurate conclusions with respect to the constituent elements of these
salts. Some of the principal results of these experiments, and of the
consequences drawn from them respecting the analysis of nitric acid, are
reported in the collection of memoirs presented to the Academy by
foreign philosophers, vol. xi. p. 625. Since then I have procured more
convenient instruments, and I intend to repeat these experiments upon a
larger scale, by which I shall procure more accurate precision in their
results; the following, however, is the process I have hitherto
employed. I would very earnestly advise such as intend to repeat some of
these experiments, to be very much upon their guard in operating upon
any mixture which contains nitre, charcoal, and sulphur, and more
especially with those in which oxygenated muriat of potash is mixed with
these two materials.

I make use of pistol barrels, about six inches long, and of five or six
lines diameter, having the touch-hole spiked up with an iron nail
strongly driven in, and broken in the hole, and a little tin-smith's
solder run in to prevent any possible issue for the air. These are
charged with a mixture of known quantities of nitre and charcoal, or any
other mixture capable of deflagration, reduced to an impalpable powder,
and formed into a paste with a moderate quantity of water. Every portion
of the materials introduced must be rammed down with a rammer nearly of
the same caliber with the barrel, four or five lines at the muzzle must
be left empty, and about two inches of quick match are added at the end
of the charge. The only difficulty in this experiment, especially when
sulphur is contained in the mixture, is to discover the proper degree of
moistening; for, if the paste be too much wetted, it will not take fire,
and if too dry, the deflagration is apt to become too rapid, and even
dangerous.

When the experiment is not intended to be rigorously exact, we set fire
to the match, and, when it is just about to communicate with the charge,
we plunge the pistol below a large bell-glass full of water, in the
pneumato chemical apparatus. The deflagration begins, and continues in
the water, and gas is disengaged with less or more rapidity, in
proportion as the mixture is more or less dry. So long as the
deflagration continues, the muzzle of the pistol must be kept somewhat
inclined downwards, to prevent the water from getting into its barrel.
In this manner I have sometimes collected the gas produced from the
deflagration of an ounce and half, or two ounces, of nitre.

In this manner of operating it is impossible to determine the quantity
of carbonic acid gas disengaged, because a part of it is absorbed by the
water while passing through it; but, when the carbonic acid is absorbed,
the azotic gas remains; and, if it be agitated for a few minutes in
caustic alkaline solution, we obtain it pure, and can easily determine
its volume and weight. We may even, in this way, acquire a tollerably
exact knowledge of the quantity of carbonic acid by repeating the
experiment a great many times, and varying the proportions of charcoal,
till we find the exact quantity requisite to deflagrate the whole nitre
employed. Hence, by means of the weight of charcoal employed, we
determine the weight of oxygen necessary for saturation, and deduce the
quantity of oxygen contained in a given weight of nitre.

I have used another process, by which the results of this experiment are
considerably more accurate, which consists in receiving the disengaged
gasses in bell-glasses filled with mercury. The mercurial apparatus I
employ is large enough to contain jars of from twelve to fifteen pints
in capacity, which are not very readily managed when full of mercury,
and even require to be filled by a particular method. When the jar is
placed in the cistern of mercury, a glass syphon is introduced,
connected with a small air-pump, by means of which the air is exhausted,
and the mercury rises so as to fill the jar. After this, the gas of the
deflagration is made to pass into the jar in the same manner as directed
when water is employed.

I must again repeat, that this species of experiment requires to be
performed with the greatest possible precautions. I have sometimes seen,
when the disengagement of gas proceeded with too great rapidity, jars
filled with more than an hundred and fifty pounds of mercury driven off
by the force of the explosion, and broken to pieces, while the mercury
was scattered about in great quantities.

When the experiment has succeeded, and the gas is collected under the
jar, its quantity in general, and the nature and quantities of the
several species of gasses of which the mixture is composed, are
accurately ascertained by the methods already pointed out in the second
chapter of this part of my work. I have been prevented from putting the
last hand to the experiments I had begun upon deflagration, from their
connection with the objects I am at present engaged in; and I am in
hopes they will throw considerable light upon the operations belonging
to the manufacture of gun-powder.




CHAP. X.

_Of the Instruments necessary for Operating upon Bodies in very high
Temperatures._


SECT. I.

_Of Fusion._

We have already seen, that, by aqueous solution, in which the particles
of bodies are separated from each other, neither the solvent nor the
body held in solution are at all decomposed; so that, whenever the cause
of separation ceases, the particles reunite, and the saline substance
recovers precisely the same appearance and properties it possessed
before solution. Real solutions are produced by fire, or by introducing
and accumulating a great quantity of caloric between the particles of
bodies; and this species of solution in caloric is usually called
