the cockroach (Blatta). hence the name Blattaria; frequented by
moths, hence moth mullein." (Britton and Brown's "Flora.") Are
the latter frequent visitors? Surely there is nothing here to a
moth's liking. New England women used to pack this plant among
woolen garments in summer to keep out the tiny clothes moths. The
flower, whose two long stamens and pistil protrude as from the
great mullein's blossom, and whose filaments are tufted with
violet wool footholds - unnecessary provisions for moths, which
rarely alight on any flower, but suck with their wings in motion
- are cross-fertilized by pollen-collecting bees and flies as
described in the account of the great mullein.

"Of beautiful weeds quite a long list might be made without
including any of the so-called wild flowers," says John
Burroughs. "A favorite of mine is the little moth mullein that
blooms along the highway, and about the fields, and maybe upon
the edge of the lawn." Even in winter, when the slender stem, set
with round brown seed-vessels, rises above the snow, the plant is
pleasing to the human eye, as it is to that of hungry birds.


BUTTER-AND-EGGS; YELLOW TOAD-FLAX; EGGS-AND-BACON; FLAXWEED;
BRIDEWEED
  (Linaria Linaria; L. vulgaris of Gray) Figwort family

Flowers - Light canary yellow and orange, 1 in. long or over,
irregular, borne in terminal, leafy-bracted spikes. Corolla
spurred at the base, 2-lipped, the upper lip erect, 2-lobed; the
lower lip spreading, 3-lobed, its base an orange-colored palate
closing the throat; 4 stamens in pairs within; 1 pistil. Stem: 1
to 3 ft. tall, slender, leafy. Leaves: Pale, grass-like.
Preferred Habitat - Wasteland, roadsides, banks, fields.
Flowering Season - June-October.
Distribution - Nebraska and Manitoba, eastward to Virginia and
Nova Scotia. Europe and Asia.

An immigrant from Europe, this plebeian perennial, meekly content
with waste places, is rapidly inheriting the earth. Its beautiful
spikes of butter-colored cornucopias, apparently holding the yolk
of a diminutive Spanish egg, emit a cheesy odor, suggesting a
close dairy. Perhaps half the charm of the plant consists in the
pale bluish-green grass-like leaves with a bloom on the surface,
which are put forth so abundantly from the sterile shoots. (See
blue toad-flax.)

Guided by the orange palate pathfinder to where the curious,
puzzling flower opens, the big velvety bumblebee alights, his
weight depressing the lower lip until a comfortable entrance
through the gaping mouth is offered him. In he goes, and his long
tongue readily reaches the nectar in the deep spur, while his
back brushes off pollen from the stamens in his way overhead.
Then he backs out, and the gaping mouth springs shut after him -
for the linaria is akin to the snapdragon in the garden. As its
stamens are of two lengths, the flower is able to fertilize
itself in stormy weather, insects failing to transfer its pollen.
To drain ten of these spurs a minute is no difficult task for the
bumblebee. But how slowly, painfully, the little lightweight
hive-bees and leaf-cutters squeeze in between the tight lips. An
occasional butterfly inserts its long, thin tongue, and, without
transferring a grain of pollen for the flower, robs it of sweets
clearly intended for the bumblebee alone. Even when ants - the
worst pilferers extant - succeed in entering, they cannot reach
the nectar, owing to the hairy stockade bordering the groove
where it runs. Beetles, out for pollen, also occasionally steal
an entrance, if nothing more. Grazing cattle let the plant alone
to ripen seed in peace, for it secretes disagreeable juices in
its cells - juices that were once mixed with milk by farmers'
wives to poison flies.


DOWNY FALSE FOXGLOVE
(Dasystoma flava; Gerardia flava of Gray)  Figwort family

Flowers - Pale yellow, 1 1/2 to 2 in. long; in showy, terminal,
leafy-bracted racemes. Calyx bell-shaped, 5-toothed; corolla
funnel form, the 5 lobes spreading, smooth outside, woolly
within; 4 stamens in pairs, woolly; 1 pistil. Stem: Grayish,
downy, erect, usually simple, 2 to 4 ft. tall. Leaves: Opposite,
lower ones oblong in outline, more or less irregularly lobed and
toothed; upper ones small, entire.
Preferred Habitat - Gravelly or sandy soil, dry thickets, open
woods.
Flowering Season - July-August
Distribution - "Eastern Massachusetts to Ontario and Wisconsin,
south to southern New York, Georgia, and Mississippi." (Britton
and Brown.)

In the vegetable kingdom, as in the spiritual, all degrees of
backsliding sinners may be found, each branded with a mark of
infamy according to its deserts. We have seen how the dodder vine
lost both leaf and roots after it consented to live wholly by
theft of its hardworking host's juices through suckers that
penetrate to the vitals; how the Indian pipe's blanched face
tells the story of guilt perpetrated under cover of darkness, in
the soil below; how the broom-rape and beech-drops lost their
honest green color; and, finally, the foxgloves show us plants
with their faces so newly turned toward the path of perdition,
their larceny so petty, that only the expert in criminal botany
cases condemns them. Like its cousins the gerardias (q.v.), the
downy false foxglove is only a partial parasite, attaching its
roots by disks or suckers to the roots of white oak or witch
hazel (q.v.); not only that, but, quite as frequently, groping
blindly in the dark, it fastens suckers on its own roots,
actually thieving from itself! It is this piratical tendency
which makes transplanting of foxgloves into our gardens so very
difficult; even when lifted with plenty of their beloved
vegetable mould. The term false foxglove, it should be explained,
is by no means one of reproach for dishonesty; it was applied
simply to distinguish this group of plants from the true
foxgloves cultivated, not wild, here, which yield digitalis to
the doctors.

But if these foxgloves live at others' expense, there are
creatures which in turn prey upon them. Caterpillars of a peacock
butterfly, known as the buckeye (Junonia coenia), with eye-like
spots on its tawny, reddish-gray wings, divide their unwelcome
attentions between various species of plantain, the snapdragon in
the garden, gerardias, and foxgloves.

The SMOOTH FALSE FOXGLOVE (D. Virginica; G. quercifolia of Gray)
- which delights in rich woods, moist or dry, bears similar, but
slightly larger, blossoms on a smooth, usually branched, and
taller stem, whose lower leaves especially are much cleft
(pinnatifid). This species is commoner South and West, blooming
from July to September. All the foxgloves elevate their sticky
stigmas to the mouth of their tubes, that the pollen-dusted
bumblebee may leave some of the vitalizing dust brought from
another flower on its surface before she turns upside down and
enters in this unusual fashion to receive a fresh supply on her
way to the nectar in the base of the tube. Her pressure against
the pointed anther-tips causes the light, dry pollen to sift out;
on the removal of her pressure the gaping chinks close to save it
from small bees and flies. It falls out, therefore, only when the
bee is in the right position to receive it for export to another
foxglove's stigma. Hairy footholds on anthers and filaments are
provided lest the bee fall while reversed and sifting out the
pollen.

The FERN-LEAVED or LOUSEWORT FALSE FOXGLOVE (D. pedicularia; G.
pedicularia of Gray) - a very leafy species found in dry woods
and thickets from the Mississippi and Ontario eastward to the
Atlantic, north and south, has all its leaves once or twice
pinnatifid, the lobes much cut and toothed. It is a rather
sticky, hairy, slender, and much branched plant, growing from one
to four feet tall; the broad, trumpet-shaped, yellow flower,
which is sticky outside, measures an inch or an inch and a half
long, and is sometimes almost as wide across. "The most abundant
visitor, and the one for which the flower is most perfectly
adapted," says Professor Robertson, "is Bombus Americanorum. This
bee always turns head downwards on entering the flower. When it
enters, or backs out, the basal joints of its legs strike the
tips of the anther-cells, when the pollen falls out. I had often
wondered why this bee turned upside down to enter the flower....
I discovered that the form of the flower requires it. The
modification which requires the bees to reverse is associated
with the peculiar mode of pollen discharge. Smaller bumblebees
and some other bees which never or rarely try to suck hang under
the anthers and work out the pollen by striking the trigger-like
awns. They reverse of their own accord, since they are so small
they are not compelled to do so on account of the form of the
flower. The tube is large...so that most bumblebee workers could
easily reach the nectar if the tube were not curved in the
opposite direction from that of most flowers, and if the anthers
did not obstruct the entrance." Sometimes small bees, despairing
of getting into the tube through the mouth, suck at holes in the
flower's sides, because legitimate feasting was made too
difficult for the poor little things. The ruby-throated
hummingbird, hovering a second above the tube, drains it with
none of the clown-like performances exacted from the bumblebee.
Pilfering ants find death as speedy on the sticky surfaces here
as on any catchfly.


GREATER BLADDERWORT; HOODED WATER-MILFOIL; POP-WEED
  (Utricularia vulgaris)  Bladderwort family

Flowers - Yellow, about 1/2 in. across, 3 to 20 on short pedicels
in a raceme at the top of a stout, naked scape 3 to 14 in. high.
Calyx deeply 2-lobed; corolla 2-lipped, the upper lip erect, the
lower lip larger, its palate prominent, the lip slightly 3-lobed,
and spurred at the base; 2 stamens; 1 pistil; the stigma
2-lipped. Leaves: Very finely divided into threadlike segments,
bearing little air bladders.
Preferred Habitat - Floating free in ponds and slow streams, or
rooting in mud.
Flowering Season - June-August.
Distribution - Throughout nearly the whole of North America,
Cuba, and Mexico. Europe and Asia.

Here is an extraordinary little plant indeed, which, by its
amazing cleverness, now overruns the globe - one of the higher
order of intelligence so closely akin to the animals that the
gulf which separates such from them seems not very wide after
all. In studying the water-crowfoots (q.v.) and other aquatic
plants, we learned why submerged leaves must be so finely cut;
but what mean the little bladders tipped with bristles among the
pop-weed's threadlike foliage? Formerly these were regarded as
mere floats - a thoughtless theory, for branches without bladders
might have been observed floating perfectly. It is now known they
are traps for capturing tiny aquatic creatures: nearly every
bladder you examine under a microscope contains either minute
crustaceans or larvae, worms, or lower organisms, some perhaps
still alive, but most of them more or less advanced toward
putrefaction - a stage hastened, it is thought, by a secretion
within the bladders; for the plant cannot digest fresh food; it
can only absorb, through certain processes within the bladder's
walls, the fluid products of decay. The little insectivorous
sundew (q.v.), on the contrary, not only digests, but afterward
absorbs, animal matter. Tiny aquatic creatures, ever seeking
shelter from larger ones ready to devour them, enter the pop-weed
bladders by bending inward the free edge of the valve, which,
being strongly elastic, snaps shut again behind them instantly.
"Abandon hope, all ye who enter here," might be written above the
entrance. No victim ever escapes from that prison. Scientists are
not agreed that the bristles draw creatures into the bladder.
Whatever touches the sensitive valves is at once drawn in. "To
show how closely the edge fits," says Charles Darwin, "I may
mention that my son found a daphnia which had inserted one of its
antennae into the slit, and it was thus held fast during a whole
day. On three or four occasions I have seen long narrow larvae,
both dead and alive, wedged between the corner of the valve and
collar, with half their bodies within the bladder and half out.
Professor Cohn of Germany tells of immersing a plant of this
bladderwort one evening in clear water swarming with tiny
crustaceans, and by the next morning most of the bladders
contained them, entrapped and swimming around in their prisons.

So much for what is going on below the surface of the water: what
above it? Several flowers on the showy spike attract numerous
insects. One alighting on the lower lip must thrust his tongue
beneath the upper one to reach the nectar in the spur, passing on
its way the irritable stigma, which receives any pollen he has
brought in. Instantly it is touched, the stigma folds up to be
out of the way of the tongue when it is withdrawn from the spur
now laden with fresh pollen. It is thus that self-fertilization
is escaped. Many vigorous seeds follow in each capsule. This
marvelous piece of mechanism is what Thoreau termed "a
dirty-conditioned flower, like a sluttish woman with a gaudy
yellow bonnet"!

Not through its seeds alone, however, has the little plant
succeeded in firmly establishing itself. In early autumn the
stems terminate in large buds which, falling off, lie dormant all
winter at the bottom of the pond. In spring they root and put
forth leaves bearing bladders, which at this stage of existence
are filled with water to help anchor the plant. As flowering
season approaches, the bladders undergo an internal change to fit
them for a change of function; they now fill with air, when the
buoyed plant rises toward the surface to send up its flowering
scape, while the bladders proceed with their nefarious practices
to nourish it more abundantly while its system is heavily taxed.

The HORNED BLADDERWORT (U. cornuta), found in sandy swamps, along
the borders of ponds, marshy lake margins, and in bogs from
Newfoundland to Florida, westward to Minnesota and Texas, bears
from one to six deliciously fragrant yellow flowers on its
leafless scape from June to August. It is "perhaps the most
fragrant flower we have," says John Burroughs. "In a warm moist
atmosphere its odor is almost too strong.... Its perfume is sweet
and spicy in an eminent degree." The low scape, rooting in the
mud, has some root-like stems and branches, sometimes with a few
entire leaves and bladders. Its benefactors, bumblebees and
butterflies, with their highly developed aesthetic taste, are
attracted from afar by this pleasing flower, whose acute, curved
spur filled with nectar may not be drained by small fry, to whom
the hairy throat is an additional discouragement.


SWEET WILD HONEYSUCKLE, or WOODBINE; ITALIAN OR PERFOLIATE
HONEYSUCKLE
  (Lonicera Caprifoliuin; L. grata of Gray)  Honeysuckle family

Flowers - White within, the tube pinkish, soon fading yellow, 1
to 1 1/2 in. long, very fragrant; borne in terminal whorls seated
in the united pair of upper leaves. Calyx small, 5-toothed;
corolla slender, tubular, 2-lipped; upper lip 4-lobed; lower lip
narrow, curved downward; 5 stamens and 1 style far protruding.
Stem: Climbing high, smooth. Leaves: Upper pairs united around
the stem into an oval disk or shallow cup; lower leaves opposite,
but not united oval, entire. Fruit: Red berries, clustered.
Preferred Habitat - Thickets, wayside hedges, rocky woodlands.
Flowering Season - May-June.
Distribution - New England and Michigan to the Southern States.

"Escaped from cultivation and naturalized." How does it happen
that this vine, a native of Europe, is now so common in the
Eastern United States as to be called the American woodbine? Had
Columbus been a botanist and wandered about our continent in
search of flowers, he would have found very few that were
familiar to him at home, except such as were common both to
Europe and Asia also. Where the Aleutian Islands jut far out into
the Pacific, and the strongest of ocean currents flows our way,
must once have been a substantial highroad for beasts, birds, and
vegetables, if not for men as well; but in the wide, briny
Atlantic no European seed could live long enough to germinate
after drifting across to our shores, if, indeed, it ever reached
here. Once the American colonies came to be peopled, with
homesick Europeans, who sent home for everything portable they
had loved there, enormous numbers of trees, shrubs, plants, and
seeds were respectably carried across in ships; the seeds of
others stole a passage, as they do this day, among the hay used
in packing. This was the chance for expansion they had been
waiting for for ages. While many cultivated species found it
practically impossible to escape from the vigilance of gardeners
here, others, with a better plan for disseminating seed, quickly
ran wild. Now some of the commonest plants we have are of
European origin. This honeysuckle, by bearing red berries to
attract migrating birds in autumn, soon escaped the confines of
gardens. Its undigested seeds, dropped in the woodland far from
the parent vine, germinated quite as readily as in Europe, and
pursued in peace their natural mode of existence, until here too
we now have banks

     "Quite over-canopied with luscious woodbine."

The HAIRY HONEYSUCKLE, or ROUGH WOODBINE (L. hirsuta), with a
more northerly and westerly range, bears clusters of flowers that
are yellow on the outside, and orange within the tube, the
terminal clusters slightly elevated above a united pair of dull
green leaves that are softly hairy underneath. The slender flower
tube is sticky outside to protect it from pilfering ants, and the
hairs at the base of the stamens serve to hide the nectar from
unbidden guests. Berries, bright orange. Flowering season,
June-July.

The deliciously fragrant CHINESE or JAPANESE HONEYSUCKLE (L.
Japonica), as commonly grown on garden trellises and fences here
as the morning-glory, has freely escaped from cultivation from
New York southward to West Virginia and North Carolina. Everyone
must be familiar with the pairs of slender, tubular, two-lipped,
white or pinkish flowers, quickly turning yellow, which are borne
in the leaf axils along the sprays. The smooth, dark green,
opposite leaves, pale beneath, cling almost the entire year
through. The stem, in winding, follows the course taken by the
hands of a clock. Were the berries red instead of black, they
would, doubtless, have attracted more birds to disperse their
seeds, and the vine would have traveled as fast in its wild state
as the Italian honeysuckle has done. It blooms from June to
August, and sparingly again in autumn.
When daylight begins to fade, these long, slender-tubed buds
expand to welcome their chosen benefactors, the sphinx moths,
wooing them with fragrance so especially strong and sweet at this
time that, long after dark, guests may be guided from afar by it
alone, and entertaining them with copious draughts of deeply
hidden nectar, which their long tongues alone may drain. Poised
above the blossoms, they sip without pause of their whirring
wings, and it is not strange that many people mistake them in the
half light for hummingbirds. Indeed, they are often called
hummingbird moths. Darting away suddenly and swift as thought,
they have also earned the name of hawk moths. Because the
caterpillars have a curious trick of raising the fore part of
their bodies and remaining motionless so long (like an Egyptian
sphinx), the commoner name seems most appropriate. A sphinx moth
at rest curls up its exceedingly long tongue like .a watch-
spring: in action only the hummingbird can penetrate to such
depths; hence that honeysuckle which prefers to woo the tiny
bird, whose decided preference is for red, is the TRUMPET or
CORAL HONEYSUCKLE; whereas the other twiners developed deep,
tubular flowers that are white or yellow, so that the moths may
see them in the dark, when red blossoms are engulfed in the
prevailing blackness. Moreover, the latter bloom at a season when
the crepuscular and nocturnal moths are most abundant. Rough
rounded pollen grains, carried on the hairs and scales on the
under side of the moth's body from his head to his abdomen,
including antennae, tongue, legs, and wings, cannot but be rubbed
off on the protruding sticky stigma of the next honeysuckle tube
entered; hence cross-fertilization is regularly effected by moths
alone. The next day such interlopers as bees, flies, butterflies,
and even the outwitted hummingbird, may take whatever nectar or
pollen remains. If the previous evening has been calm and fine,
they will find little or none; but if the night has been wild and
stormy, keeping the moths under cover, the tubes will brim with
sweets. After fertilization the corolla turns yellow to let
visitors know the mutual benefit association has gone out of
business.


BUSH HONEYSUCKLE; GRAVEL-WEED
  (Diervilla Diervilla; D. trifida of Gray)  Honeysuckle family

Flowers - Yellow, small, fragrant, 1 to 5 (usually 3) together on
a peduncle from upper leaf-axils. Calyx tube slender, elongated;
corolla narrowly funnel-form, about 3/4 in. long, its 5 lobes
spreading, 3 of them somewhat united; 5 stamens; 1 pistil
projecting. Stem: A smooth, branching shrub 2 to 4 ft. high.
Leaves. Opposite, oval, and taper-pointed, finely saw-edged.
Fruit: Slender, beaked pods crowned with the 5 calyx lobes.
Preferred Habitat - Dry or rocky soil, woodlands, hills.
Flowering Season - May-August.
Distribution - British Possessions southward to Michigan and
North Carolina.

The coral honeysuckle determined to woo the hummingbird by
wearing his favorite color; the twining white and yellow
honeysuckles of our porches chose for their benefactors the
sphinx moths, attracting them by delicious fragrance and deeply
hidden nectar in slender tubes that are visible even in the dark;
whereas the small-flowered bush honeysuckles still cater to the
bees which, in all probability, once sufficed for the entire
family. For them a conspicuous landing place has been provided in
the more highly colored lower lobe of this flower, from which the
visitor cannot fail to find the pocket full of nectar that swells
the base of the tube but when he alights, pollen laden from
another blossom, he must pay toll by leaving some of the
vitalizing dust on the projecting stigma before he feasts and
dusts himself afresh. After they have been plundered, and
consequently fertilized, all the honeysuckles change color, this
one taking on a deeper yellow to let the bees know the larder is
empty, that they may waste no precious time, but confine their
visits where they are needed. "Many flowers adapted to bees show
butterflies, hawk moths and hummingbirds as intruders," says
Professor Robertson; "and this is important, since it enables us
to understand how bee-flowers might become modified to suit them"
- just as certain of the honeysuckles have done. Once the
Oriental pink weigelias, grown in nearly every American garden,
were thought to belong to the Diervilla clan, from which
later-day systematists have banished them.

The EARLY FLY or TWIN HONEYSUCKLE (Lonicera ciliata), found in
moist, cool woods from Pennsylvania and Michigan far northward,
sends forth pairs of funnel-form, honey-yellow flowers, about
three-quarters of an inch long, with five, regular lobes, on a
slender footstalk from the leaf axils in May. It is a straggling,
shrubby bush from three to five feet tall. The opposite leaves
are thin, oval, bright green on both sides, the edges hairy. Two
little ovoid, light red berries follow the flowers.

Another species, a shrubby SWAMP FLY-HONEYSUCKLE (L.
oblongifolia), found in wet ground and bogs throughout a similar
range, blooming about two weeks later, coats the under side of
its young leaves with fine hairs to prevent their pores from
clogging with vapors arising from its moist retreats. The little
pale yellow flowers, also growing in pairs on a footstalk from
the leaf axils, have their tubular corollas strongly cleft into
two lips. Reddish markings within serve as pathfinders for the
bumblebee, who finds so much nectar at the base that a tiny
bulging pocket had to be provided to hold it. Sometimes the two
flowers join below like Siamese twins, in which case the pair of
crimson berries become more or less united.

                         "So we grew together,
      Like to a double cherry, seeming parted."


One occasionally finds the pink and white twin-flowered TARTARIAN
BUSH HONEYSUCKLE (L. Tartarica) escaped from cultivation in the
Eastern States through the agency of birds which feast upon its
little round, red, translucent berries.


COMMON DANDELION; BLOWBALL; LION'S-TOOTH; PEASANT'S CLOCK
  (Taraxacum Taraxacum; T. Densleonis of Gray)  Chicory family

Flower-head - Solitary, golden yellow, to 2 in. across,
containing 150 to 200 perfect ray florets on a flat receptacle at
the top of a hollow, milky scape 2 to 18 in. tall. Leaves: From a
very deep, thick, bitter root; oblong to spatulate in outline,
irregularly jagged.
Preferred Habitat - Lawns, fields, grassy waste places.
Flowering Season - Every month in the year.
Distribution - Around the civilized world.

     "Dear common flower that grow'st beside the way,
        Fringing the dusty road with harmless gold.
      . . . .
      Gold such as thine ne'er drew the Spanish prow
        Through the primeval hush of Indian seas,
      Nor wrinkled the lean brow
        Of age, to rob the lover's heart of ease.
      'Tis the spring's largess, which she scatters now
        To rich and poor alike, with lavish hand
        Though most hearts never understand
      To take it at God's value, but pass by
      The offered wealth with unrewarded eye."

Let the triumphant Anglo-Saxon with dreams of expansion that
include the round earth, the student of sociology who wishes an
insight into cooperative methods as opposed to individualism, the
young man anxious to learn how to get on, parents with children
to be equipped for the struggle for existence, business men and
employers of labor, all sit down beside the dandelion and take
its lesson to heart. How has it managed without navies and armies
- for it is no imperialist - to land its peaceful legions on
every part of the civilized world and take possession of the
soil? How can this neglected wayside composite weed triumph over
the most gorgeous hothouse individual on which the horticulturist
expends all the science at his command; to flourish where others
give up the struggle defeated; to send its vigorous offspring
abroad prepared for similar conquest of adverse conditions
wherever met to attract myriads of customers to its department
store, and by consummate executive ability to make every visitor
unwittingly contribute to its success? Any one who doubts the
dandelion's fitness to survive, should humble himself by spending
days and weeks on his knees, trying to eradicate the plant from
even one small lawn with a knife, only to find the turf starred
with golden blossoms, or, worse still from his point of view,
hoary with seed balloons, the following spring.

Deep, very deep, the stocky bitter root penetrates where heat and
drought affect it not, nor nibbling rabbits, moles, grubs of
insects, and other burrowers break through and steal. Cut off the
upper portion only with your knife, and not one, but several,
plants will likely sprout from what remains; and, however late in
the season, will economize stem and leaf to produce flowers and
seeds, cuddled close within the tuft, that set all your pains at
naught. "Never say die" is the dandelion's motto. An exceedingly
bitter medicine is extracted from the root of this dandelion,
formerly known as T. officinale. Likewise are the leaves bitter.
Although they appear so early in the spring, they must be
especially tempting to grazing cattle and predaceous insects, the
rosettes remain untouched, while other succulent, agreeable
plants are devoured wholesale. Only Italians and other thrifty
Old-World immigrants, who go about then with sack and knife
collecting the fresh young tufts, give the plants pause but even
they leave the roots intact. When boiled like spinach or eaten
with French salad dressing, the bitter juices are extracted from
the leaves or disguised - mean tactics by an enemy outside the
dandelion's calculation. All nations know the plant by some
equivalent for the name dent de lion = lion's tooth, which the
jagged edges of the leaves suggest.

Presently a hollow scape arises to display the flower above the
surrounding grass. Bridge builders and constructing engineers
know how yielding and economical, yet how invincibly strong, is
the hollow tube. March winds may buffet and bend the dandelion's
stem without harm. How children delight to split this slippery
tube, and run it in and out of their mouths until curls form! At
the top of the scape is a double involucre of narrow, green,
leaf-like scales similar to what all composites have. Half the
involucre bends downward to protect the flower from crawling
pilferers, half stands erect to play the role for the community
of florets within that the calyx does for individual blossoms.
When it is time to close the dandelion shop, business being ended
for the day, this upper-half of the involucre protects it like
the heavy shutters merchants put up at their windows.

Seated on a fleshy receptacle, not one flower, but often two
hundred minute, perfect florets generously cooperate. "In union
there is strength" is another motto adopted, not only by the
chicory clan, but by the entire horde of composites. Each floret
of itself could hope for no attention from busy insects; united,
how gorgeously attractive these disks of overlapping rays are!
Doubtless each tiny flower was once a five-petaled blossom, for
in the five teeth at the top and the five lines are indications
that once distinct parts have been welded together to form a more
showy and suitable corolla. Each floret insures cross-pollination
from insects crawling over the head, much as the minute yellow
tubes in the center of a daisy do (q.v.). Quantities of small
bees, wasps, flies, butterflies, and beetles - over a hundred
species of insects - come seeking the nectar that wells up in
each little tube, and the abundant pollen, which are greatly
appreciated in early spring, when food is so scarce. In rainy
weather and at night, when its benefactors are not flying, the
canny dandelion closes completely to protect its precious
attractions. Because the plant, which is likely to bloom every
month in the year, may not always certainly reckon on being
pollinated by insects, each neglected floret will curl the two
spreading, sticky branches of its style so far backward that they
come in contact with any pollen that has been carried out of the
tube by the sweeping brushes on their tips. Occasional
self-fertilization is surely better than setting no seed at all
when insects fail. Not a chance does the dandelion lose to "get
on."

After flowering, it again looks like a bud, lowering its head to
mature seed unobserved. Presently rising on a gradually
lengthened scape to elevate it where there is no interruption for
the passing breeze from surrounding rivals, the transformed head,
now globular, white, airy, is even more exquisite, set as it is
with scores of tiny parachutes ready to sail away. A child's
breath puffing out the time of day, a vireo plucking at the
fluffy ball for lining to put in its nest, the summer breeze, the
scythe, rake, and mowing machines, sudden gusts of winds sweeping
the country before thunderstorms - these are among the agents
that set the flying vagabonds free. In the hay used for packing
they travel to foreign lands in ships, and, once landed, readily
adapt themselves to conditions as they find them. After soaking
in the briny ocean for twenty-eight days - long enough for a
current to carry them a thousand miles along the coast - they are
still able to germinate.

The DWARF DANDELION, CYNTHIA, or VIRGINIA GOATSBEARD (Adepogon
Virginicum; formerly Krigia Virginica) - with from two to six
long-peduncled, flat, deep yellow or reddish-orange flower heads,
about an inch and a half across, on the summit of its stem from
May to October, elects to grow in moist meadows, woodlands, and
shady rocky places. How it glorifies them! From a tuffet of
spatulate, wavy-toothed or entire leaves, the smooth, shining,
branching stem arises bearing a single oblong, clasping leaf
below the middle. Particularly beautiful is its silvery
seed-ball, the pappus consisting of about a dozen hairlike
bristles inside a ring of small oblong scales, on which the seed
sails away. Range, from Massachusetts to Manitoba, south to
Georgia and Kansas.

A charming little plant, the CAROLINA DWARF DANDELION or KRIGIA
(A. Carolinianum), once confounded with the above, sends up
several unbranched scapes from the same tuffet. It blooms in dry,
sandy soil from April to August, from Maine and Minnesota to the
Gulf States.

Like a small edition of Lowell's "dear common flower" is the TALL
DANDELION, or AUTUMNAL HAWKBIT (Leontodon autumnale), its
slender, wiry, branching scape six inches to two feet high,
terminated by several flower-heads, each on a separate peduncle,
which is usually a little thickened and scaly just below it. Only
forty to seventy five-toothed ray florets spread in a flat golden
disk from an oblong involucre. They close in rainy weather and at
night. From June to November, in spite of its common name, it
blooms in fields and along roadsides, its brownish seed-plumes
rapidly following; but these are produced at the frightfully
extravagant cost of over two hundred thousand grains of pollen to
each head, it is estimated. The Greek generic name, meaning
lion's tooth, refers to the shape of the lobes of the narrowly
oblong leaves in a tuft at the base. Range, from New Jersey and
Ohio far northward. Naturalized from Europe and Asia.


FIELD SOW-THISTLE; MILK THISTLE
  (Sonchus arvensis)  Chicory family

Flower-heads - Bright yellow, very showy, to 2 in. across,
several or numerous, on rough peduncles in a spreading cluster.
Involucre nearly 1 in. high; the scales narrow, rough. Stem: 2 to
4 ft. high, leafy below, naked, and paniculately branched above,
from deep roots and creeping rootstocks. Leaves: Long, narrow,
spiny, but not sharp-toothed; deeply cut, mostly clasping at
base.
Preferred Habitat - Meadows, fields, roadsides, saltwater
marshes.
Flowering Season - July-October.
Distribution - Newfoundland to Minnesota and Utah, south to New
Jersey.

It cannot be long, at their present rate of increase, before this
and its sister immigrant become very common weeds throughout our
entire area, as they are in Europe and Asia.

The ANNUAL SOW-THISTLE or HARE'S LETTUCE (S. oleraceus), its
smaller, pale yellow flower-heads, with smooth involucres more
closely grouped, now occupies our fields and waste places with
the assurance of a native. Honeybees chiefly, but many other
bees, wasps, brilliant little flower-flies (Syrphidae), and
butterflies among other winged visitors which alight on the
flowers, from May to November, are responsible for the copious,
soft, fine, white-plumed seeds that the winds waft away to fresh
colonizing ground. The leaves clasp the stem by deep ear-like or
arrow-shaped lobes, or the large lower ones are on petioles,
