how the Air, in the upper parts of the Atmosphere, can be above an
hundred thousand thousand times rarer than Gold. Let him also tell me,
how an electrick Body can by Friction emit an Exhalation so rare and
subtile, and yet so potent, as by its Emission to cause no sensible
Diminution of the weight of the electrick Body, and to be expanded
through a Sphere, whose Diameter is above two Feet, and yet to be able
to agitate and carry up Leaf Copper, or Leaf Gold, at the distance of
above a Foot from the electrick Body? And how the Effluvia of a Magnet
can be so rare and subtile, as to pass through a Plate of Glass without
any Resistance or Diminution of their Force, and yet so potent as to
turn a magnetick Needle beyond the Glass?

_Qu._ 23. Is not Vision perform'd chiefly by the Vibrations of this
Medium, excited in the bottom of the Eye by the Rays of Light, and
propagated through the solid, pellucid and uniform Capillamenta of the
optick Nerves into the place of Sensation? And is not Hearing perform'd
by the Vibrations either of this or some other Medium, excited in the
auditory Nerves by the Tremors of the Air, and propagated through the
solid, pellucid and uniform Capillamenta of those Nerves into the place
of Sensation? And so of the other Senses.

_Qu._ 24. Is not Animal Motion perform'd by the Vibrations of this
Medium, excited in the Brain by the power of the Will, and propagated
from thence through the solid, pellucid and uniform Capillamenta of the
Nerves into the Muscles, for contracting and dilating them? I suppose
that the Capillamenta of the Nerves are each of them solid and uniform,
that the vibrating Motion of the AEthereal Medium may be propagated along
them from one end to the other uniformly, and without interruption: For
Obstructions in the Nerves create Palsies. And that they may be
sufficiently uniform, I suppose them to be pellucid when view'd singly,
tho' the Reflexions in their cylindrical Surfaces may make the whole
Nerve (composed of many Capillamenta) appear opake and white. For
opacity arises from reflecting Surfaces, such as may disturb and
interrupt the Motions of this Medium.

[Sidenote: _See the following Scheme, p. 356._]

_Qu._ 25. Are there not other original Properties of the Rays of Light,
besides those already described? An instance of another original
Property we have in the Refraction of Island Crystal, described first by
_Erasmus Bartholine_, and afterwards more exactly by _Hugenius_, in his
Book _De la Lumiere_. This Crystal is a pellucid fissile Stone, clear as
Water or Crystal of the Rock, and without Colour; enduring a red Heat
without losing its transparency, and in a very strong Heat calcining
without Fusion. Steep'd a Day or two in Water, it loses its natural
Polish. Being rubb'd on Cloth, it attracts pieces of Straws and other
light things, like Ambar or Glass; and with _Aqua fortis_ it makes an
Ebullition. It seems to be a sort of Talk, and is found in form of an
oblique Parallelopiped, with six parallelogram Sides and eight solid
Angles. The obtuse Angles of the Parallelograms are each of them 101
Degrees and 52 Minutes; the acute ones 78 Degrees and 8 Minutes. Two of
the solid Angles opposite to one another, as C and E, are compassed each
of them with three of these obtuse Angles, and each of the other six
with one obtuse and two acute ones. It cleaves easily in planes parallel
to any of its Sides, and not in any other Planes. It cleaves with a
glossy polite Surface not perfectly plane, but with some little
unevenness. It is easily scratch'd, and by reason of its softness it
takes a Polish very difficultly. It polishes better upon polish'd
Looking-glass than upon Metal, and perhaps better upon Pitch, Leather or
Parchment. Afterwards it must be rubb'd with a little Oil or white of an
Egg, to fill up its Scratches; whereby it will become very transparent
and polite. But for several Experiments, it is not necessary to polish
it. If a piece of this crystalline Stone be laid upon a Book, every
Letter of the Book seen through it will appear double, by means of a
double Refraction. And if any beam of Light falls either
perpendicularly, or in any oblique Angle upon any Surface of this
Crystal, it becomes divided into two beams by means of the same double
Refraction. Which beams are of the same Colour with the incident beam of
Light, and seem equal to one another in the quantity of their Light, or
very nearly equal. One of these Refractions is perform'd by the usual
Rule of Opticks, the Sine of Incidence out of Air into this Crystal
being to the Sine of Refraction, as five to three. The other
Refraction, which may be called the unusual Refraction, is perform'd by
the following Rule.

[Illustration: FIG. 4.]

Let ADBC represent the refracting Surface of the Crystal, C the biggest
solid Angle at that Surface, GEHF the opposite Surface, and CK a
perpendicular on that Surface. This perpendicular makes with the edge of
the Crystal CF, an Angle of 19 Degr. 3'. Join KF, and in it take KL, so
that the Angle KCL be 6 Degr. 40'. and the Angle LCF 12 Degr. 23'. And
if ST represent any beam of Light incident at T in any Angle upon the
refracting Surface ADBC, let TV be the refracted beam determin'd by the
given Portion of the Sines 5 to 3, according to the usual Rule of
Opticks. Draw VX parallel and equal to KL. Draw it the same way from V
in which L lieth from K; and joining TX, this line TX shall be the other
refracted beam carried from T to X, by the unusual Refraction.

If therefore the incident beam ST be perpendicular to the refracting
Surface, the two beams TV and TX, into which it shall become divided,
shall be parallel to the lines CK and CL; one of those beams going
through the Crystal perpendicularly, as it ought to do by the usual Laws
of Opticks, and the other TX by an unusual Refraction diverging from the
perpendicular, and making with it an Angle VTX of about 6-2/3 Degrees,
as is found by Experience. And hence, the Plane VTX, and such like
Planes which are parallel to the Plane CFK, may be called the Planes of
perpendicular Refraction. And the Coast towards which the lines KL and
VX are drawn, may be call'd the Coast of unusual Refraction.

In like manner Crystal of the Rock has a double Refraction: But the
difference of the two Refractions is not so great and manifest as in
Island Crystal.

When the beam ST incident on Island Crystal is divided into two beams TV
and TX, and these two beams arrive at the farther Surface of the Glass;
the beam TV, which was refracted at the first Surface after the usual
manner, shall be again refracted entirely after the usual manner at the
second Surface; and the beam TX, which was refracted after the unusual
manner in the first Surface, shall be again refracted entirely after the
unusual manner in the second Surface; so that both these beams shall
emerge out of the second Surface in lines parallel to the first incident
beam ST.

And if two pieces of Island Crystal be placed one after another, in such
manner that all the Surfaces of the latter be parallel to all the
corresponding Surfaces of the former: The Rays which are refracted after
the usual manner in the first Surface of the first Crystal, shall be
refracted after the usual manner in all the following Surfaces; and the
Rays which are refracted after the unusual manner in the first Surface,
shall be refracted after the unusual manner in all the following
Surfaces. And the same thing happens, though the Surfaces of the
Crystals be any ways inclined to one another, provided that their Planes
of perpendicular Refraction be parallel to one another.

And therefore there is an original difference in the Rays of Light, by
means of which some Rays are in this Experiment constantly refracted
after the usual manner, and others constantly after the unusual manner:
For if the difference be not original, but arises from new Modifications
impress'd on the Rays at their first Refraction, it would be alter'd by
new Modifications in the three following Refractions; whereas it suffers
no alteration, but is constant, and has the same effect upon the Rays in
all the Refractions. The unusual Refraction is therefore perform'd by an
original property of the Rays. And it remains to be enquired, whether
the Rays have not more original Properties than are yet discover'd.

_Qu._ 26. Have not the Rays of Light several sides, endued with several
original Properties? For if the Planes of perpendicular Refraction of
the second Crystal be at right Angles with the Planes of perpendicular
Refraction of the first Crystal, the Rays which are refracted after the
usual manner in passing through the first Crystal, will be all of them
refracted after the unusual manner in passing through the second
Crystal; and the Rays which are refracted after the unusual manner in
passing through the first Crystal, will be all of them refracted after
the usual manner in passing through the second Crystal. And therefore
there are not two sorts of Rays differing in their nature from one
another, one of which is constantly and in all Positions refracted after
the usual manner, and the other constantly and in all Positions after
the unusual manner. The difference between the two sorts of Rays in the
Experiment mention'd in the 25th Question, was only in the Positions of
the Sides of the Rays to the Planes of perpendicular Refraction. For one
and the same Ray is here refracted sometimes after the usual, and
sometimes after the unusual manner, according to the Position which its
Sides have to the Crystals. If the Sides of the Ray are posited the same
way to both Crystals, it is refracted after the same manner in them
both: But if that side of the Ray which looks towards the Coast of the
unusual Refraction of the first Crystal, be 90 Degrees from that side of
the same Ray which looks toward the Coast of the unusual Refraction of
the second Crystal, (which may be effected by varying the Position of
the second Crystal to the first, and by consequence to the Rays of
Light,) the Ray shall be refracted after several manners in the several
Crystals. There is nothing more required to determine whether the Rays
of Light which fall upon the second Crystal shall be refracted after
the usual or after the unusual manner, but to turn about this Crystal,
so that the Coast of this Crystal's unusual Refraction may be on this or
on that side of the Ray. And therefore every Ray may be consider'd as
having four Sides or Quarters, two of which opposite to one another
incline the Ray to be refracted after the unusual manner, as often as
either of them are turn'd towards the Coast of unusual Refraction; and
the other two, whenever either of them are turn'd towards the Coast of
unusual Refraction, do not incline it to be otherwise refracted than
after the usual manner. The two first may therefore be call'd the Sides
of unusual Refraction. And since these Dispositions were in the Rays
before their Incidence on the second, third, and fourth Surfaces of the
two Crystals, and suffered no alteration (so far as appears,) by the
Refraction of the Rays in their passage through those Surfaces, and the
Rays were refracted by the same Laws in all the four Surfaces; it
appears that those Dispositions were in the Rays originally, and
suffer'd no alteration by the first Refraction, and that by means of
those Dispositions the Rays were refracted at their Incidence on the
first Surface of the first Crystal, some of them after the usual, and
some of them after the unusual manner, accordingly as their Sides of
unusual Refraction were then turn'd towards the Coast of the unusual
Refraction of that Crystal, or sideways from it.

Every Ray of Light has therefore two opposite Sides, originally endued
with a Property on which the unusual Refraction depends, and the other
two opposite Sides not endued with that Property. And it remains to be
enquired, whether there are not more Properties of Light by which the
Sides of the Rays differ, and are distinguished from one another.

In explaining the difference of the Sides of the Rays above mention'd, I
have supposed that the Rays fall perpendicularly on the first Crystal.
But if they fall obliquely on it, the Success is the same. Those Rays
which are refracted after the usual manner in the first Crystal, will be
refracted after the unusual manner in the second Crystal, supposing the
Planes of perpendicular Refraction to be at right Angles with one
another, as above; and on the contrary.

If the Planes of the perpendicular Refraction of the two Crystals be
neither parallel nor perpendicular to one another, but contain an acute
Angle: The two beams of Light which emerge out of the first Crystal,
will be each of them divided into two more at their Incidence on the
second Crystal. For in this case the Rays in each of the two beams will
some of them have their Sides of unusual Refraction, and some of them
their other Sides turn'd towards the Coast of the unusual Refraction of
the second Crystal.

_Qu._ 27. Are not all Hypotheses erroneous which have hitherto been
invented for explaining the Phaenomena of Light, by new Modifications of
the Rays? For those Phaenomena depend not upon new Modifications, as has
been supposed, but upon the original and unchangeable Properties of the
Rays.

_Qu._ 28. Are not all Hypotheses erroneous, in which Light is supposed
to consist in Pression or Motion, propagated through a fluid Medium? For
in all these Hypotheses the Phaenomena of Light have been hitherto
explain'd by supposing that they arise from new Modifications of the
Rays; which is an erroneous Supposition.

If Light consisted only in Pression propagated without actual Motion, it
would not be able to agitate and heat the Bodies which refract and
reflect it. If it consisted in Motion propagated to all distances in an
instant, it would require an infinite force every moment, in every
shining Particle, to generate that Motion. And if it consisted in
Pression or Motion, propagated either in an instant or in time, it would
bend into the Shadow. For Pression or Motion cannot be propagated in a
Fluid in right Lines, beyond an Obstacle which stops part of the Motion,
but will bend and spread every way into the quiescent Medium which lies
beyond the Obstacle. Gravity tends downwards, but the Pressure of Water
arising from Gravity tends every way with equal Force, and is propagated
as readily, and with as much force sideways as downwards, and through
crooked passages as through strait ones. The Waves on the Surface of
stagnating Water, passing by the sides of a broad Obstacle which stops
part of them, bend afterwards and dilate themselves gradually into the
quiet Water behind the Obstacle. The Waves, Pulses or Vibrations of the
Air, wherein Sounds consist, bend manifestly, though not so much as the
Waves of Water. For a Bell or a Cannon may be heard beyond a Hill which
intercepts the sight of the sounding Body, and Sounds are propagated as
readily through crooked Pipes as through streight ones. But Light is
never known to follow crooked Passages nor to bend into the Shadow. For
the fix'd Stars by the Interposition of any of the Planets cease to be
seen. And so do the Parts of the Sun by the Interposition of the Moon,
_Mercury_ or _Venus_. The Rays which pass very near to the edges of any
Body, are bent a little by the action of the Body, as we shew'd above;
but this bending is not towards but from the Shadow, and is perform'd
only in the passage of the Ray by the Body, and at a very small distance
from it. So soon as the Ray is past the Body, it goes right on.

[Sidenote: _Mais pour dire comment cela se fait, je n'ay rien trove
jusqu' ici qui me satisfasse._ C. H. de la lumiere, c. 5, p. 91.]

To explain the unusual Refraction of Island Crystal by Pression or
Motion propagated, has not hitherto been attempted (to my knowledge)
except by _Huygens_, who for that end supposed two several vibrating
Mediums within that Crystal. But when he tried the Refractions in two
successive pieces of that Crystal, and found them such as is mention'd
above; he confessed himself at a loss for explaining them. For Pressions
or Motions, propagated from a shining Body through an uniform Medium,
must be on all sides alike; whereas by those Experiments it appears,
that the Rays of Light have different Properties in their different
Sides. He suspected that the Pulses of _AEther_ in passing through the
first Crystal might receive certain new Modifications, which might
determine them to be propagated in this or that Medium within the
second Crystal, according to the Position of that Crystal. But what
Modifications those might be he could not say, nor think of any thing
satisfactory in that Point. And if he had known that the unusual
Refraction depends not on new Modifications, but on the original and
unchangeable Dispositions of the Rays, he would have found it as
difficult to explain how those Dispositions which he supposed to be
impress'd on the Rays by the first Crystal, could be in them before
their Incidence on that Crystal, and in general, how all Rays emitted by
shining Bodies, can have those Dispositions in them from the beginning.
To me, at least, this seems inexplicable, if Light be nothing else than
Pression or Motion propagated through _AEther_.

And it is as difficult to explain by these Hypotheses, how Rays can be
alternately in Fits of easy Reflexion and easy Transmission; unless
perhaps one might suppose that there are in all Space two AEthereal
vibrating Mediums, and that the Vibrations of one of them constitute
Light, and the Vibrations of the other are swifter, and as often as they
overtake the Vibrations of the first, put them into those Fits. But how
two _AEthers_ can be diffused through all Space, one of which acts upon
the other, and by consequence is re-acted upon, without retarding,
shattering, dispersing and confounding one anothers Motions, is
inconceivable. And against filling the Heavens with fluid Mediums,
unless they be exceeding rare, a great Objection arises from the regular
and very lasting Motions of the Planets and Comets in all manner of
Courses through the Heavens. For thence it is manifest, that the Heavens
are void of all sensible Resistance, and by consequence of all sensible
Matter.

For the resisting Power of fluid Mediums arises partly from the
Attrition of the Parts of the Medium, and partly from the _Vis inertiae_
of the Matter. That part of the Resistance of a spherical Body which
arises from the Attrition of the Parts of the Medium is very nearly as
the Diameter, or, at the most, as the _Factum_ of the Diameter, and the
Velocity of the spherical Body together. And that part of the Resistance
which arises from the _Vis inertiae_ of the Matter, is as the Square of
that _Factum_. And by this difference the two sorts of Resistance may be
distinguish'd from one another in any Medium; and these being
distinguish'd, it will be found that almost all the Resistance of Bodies
of a competent Magnitude moving in Air, Water, Quick-silver, and such
like Fluids with a competent Velocity, arises from the _Vis inertiae_ of
the Parts of the Fluid.

Now that part of the resisting Power of any Medium which arises from the
Tenacity, Friction or Attrition of the Parts of the Medium, may be
diminish'd by dividing the Matter into smaller Parts, and making the
Parts more smooth and slippery: But that part of the Resistance which
arises from the _Vis inertiae_, is proportional to the Density of the
Matter, and cannot be diminish'd by dividing the Matter into smaller
Parts, nor by any other means than by decreasing the Density of the
Medium. And for these Reasons the Density of fluid Mediums is very
nearly proportional to their Resistance. Liquors which differ not much
in Density, as Water, Spirit of Wine, Spirit of Turpentine, hot Oil,
differ not much in Resistance. Water is thirteen or fourteen times
lighter than Quick-silver and by consequence thirteen or fourteen times
rarer, and its Resistance is less than that of Quick-silver in the same
Proportion, or thereabouts, as I have found by Experiments made with
Pendulums. The open Air in which we breathe is eight or nine hundred
times lighter than Water, and by consequence eight or nine hundred times
