the strawberry the flowers are largest in the males, mid-sized in the
hermaphrodites, and smallest in the females. These latter cases,--the
variability in the size of the corolla in some of the above species, for
instance in the common thyme,--together with the fact that it never differs
greatly in size in the two forms--make me doubt much whether natural selection
has come into play;--that is whether, in accordance with H. Muller's belief, the
advantage derived from the polleniferous flowers being visited first by insects
has been sufficient to lead to a gradual reduction of the corolla of the female.
We should bear in mind that as the hermaphrodite is the normal form, its corolla
has probably retained its original size. (7/24. It does not appear to me that
Kerner's view 'Die Schutzmittel des Pollens' 1873 page 56, can be accepted in
the present cases, namely that the larger corolla in the hermaphrodites and
males serves to protect their pollen from rain. In the genus Thymus, for
instance, the aborted anthers of the female are much better protected than the
perfect ones of the hermaphrodite.) An objection to the above view should not be
passed over; namely, that the abortion of the stamens in the females ought to
have added through the law of compensation to the size of the corolla; and this
perhaps would have occurred, had not the expenditure saved by the abortion of
the stamens been directed to the female reproductive organs, so as to give to
this form increased fertility.


CHAPTER VIII.
CLEISTOGAMIC FLOWERS.

General character of cleistogamic flowers.
List of the genera producing such flowers, and their distribution in the
vegetable series.
Viola, description of the cleistogamic flowers in the several species; their
fertility compared with that of the perfect flowers.
Oxalis acetosella.
O. sensitiva, three forms of cleistogamic flowers.
Vandellia.
Ononis.
Impatiens.
Drosera.
Miscellaneous observations on various other cleistogamic plants.
Anemophilous species producing cleistogamic flowers.
Leersia, perfect flowers rarely developed.
Summary and concluding remarks on the origin of cleistogamic flowers.
The chief conclusions which may be drawn from the observations in this volume.

It was known even before the time of Linnaeus that certain plants produced two
kinds of flowers, ordinary open, and minute closed ones; and this fact formerly
gave rise to warm controversies about the sexuality of plants. These closed
flowers have been appropriately named cleistogamic by Dr. Kuhn. (8/1.
'Botanische Zeitung' 1867 page 65.) They are remarkable from their small size
and from never opening, so that they resemble buds; their petals are rudimentary
or quite aborted; their stamens are often reduced in number, with the anthers of
very small size, containing few pollen-grains, which have remarkably thin
transparent coats, and generally emit their tubes whilst still enclosed within
the anther-cells; and, lastly, the pistil is much reduced in size, with the
stigma in some cases hardly at all developed. These flowers do not secrete
nectar or emit any odour; from their small size, as well as from the corolla
being rudimentary, they are singularly inconspicuous. Consequently insects do
not visit them; nor if they did, could they find an entrance. Such flowers are
therefore invariably self-fertilised; yet they produce an abundance of seed. In
several cases the young capsules bury themselves beneath the ground, and the
seeds are there matured. These flowers are developed before, or after, or
simultaneously with the perfect ones. Their development seems to be largely
governed by the conditions to which the plants are exposed, for during certain
seasons or in certain localities only cleistogamic or only perfect flowers are
produced.

Dr. Kuhn, in the article above referred to, gives a list of 44 genera including
species which bear flowers of this kind. To this list I have added some genera,
and the authorities are appended in a footnote. I have omitted three names, from
reasons likewise given in the footnote. But it is by no means easy to decide in
all cases whether certain flowers ought to be ranked as cleistogamic. For
instance, Mr. Bentham informs me that in the South of France some of the flowers
on the vine do not fully open and yet set fruit; and I hear from two experienced
gardeners that this is the case with the vine in our hothouses; but as the
flowers do not appear to be completely closed it would be imprudent to consider
them as cleistogamic. The flowers of some aquatic and marsh plants, for instance
of Ranunculus aquatalis, Alisma natans, Subularia, Illecebrum, Menyanthes, and
Euryale, remain closely shut as long as they are submerged, and in this
condition fertilise themselves. (8/2. Delpino 'Sull' Opera, la Distribuzione dei
Sessi nelle Piante' etc. 1867 page 30. Subularia, however, sometimes has its
flowers fully expanded beneath the water, see Sir J.E. Smith 'English Flora'
volume 3 1825 page 157. For the behaviour of Menyanthes in Russia see Gillibert
in 'Act. Acad. St. Petersb.' 1777 part 2 page 45.--On Euryale 'Gardener's
Chronicle' 1877 page 280.) They behave in this manner, apparently as a
protection to their pollen, and produce open flowers when exposed to the air; so
that these cases seem rather different from those of true cleistogamic flowers,
and have not been included in the list. Again, the flowers of some plants which
are produced very early or very late in the season do not properly expand; and
these might perhaps be considered as incipiently cleistogamic; but as they do
not present any of the remarkable peculiarities proper to the class, and as I
have not found any full record of such cases, they are not entered in the list.
When, however, it is believed on fairly good evidence that the flowers on a
plant in its native country do not open at any hour of the day or night, and yet
set seeds capable of germination, these may fairly be considered as
cleistogamic, notwithstanding that they present no peculiarities of structure. I
will now give as complete a list of the genera containing cleistogamic species
as I have been able to collect.

TABLE 8.38. List of genera including cleistogamic species (chiefly after Kuhn).
(8/3. I have omitted Trifolium and Arachis from the list, because Von Mohl says
'Botanische Zeitung' 1863 page 312, that the flower-stems merely draw the
flowers beneath the ground, and that these do not appear to be properly
cleistogamic. Correa de Mello 'Journal of the Linnean Society Botany' volume 11
1870 page 254, observed plants of Arachis in Brazil, and could never find such
flowers. Plantago has been omitted because as far as I can discover it produces
hermaphrodite and female flower-heads, but not cleistogamic flowers.
Krascheninikowia (vel Stellaria) has been omitted because it seems very doubtful
from Maximowicz' description whether the lower flowers which have no petals or
very small ones, and barren stamens or none, are cleistogamic; the upper
hermaphrodite flowers are said never to produce fruit, and therefore probably
act as males. Moreover in Stellaria graminea, as Babington remarks 'British
Botany' 1851 page 51, "shorter and longer petals accompany an imperfection of
the stamens or germen."

I have added to the list the following cases:
Several Acanthaceae, for which see J. Scott in 'Journal of Botany' London new
series volume 1 1872 page 161.
With respect to salvia see Dr. Ascherson in 'Botanische Zeitung' 1871 page 555.
For Oxybaphus and Nyctaginia see Asa Gray in 'American Naturalist' November 1873
page 692.
From Dr. Torrey's account of Hottonia inflata 'Bulletin of the Torrey Botanical
Club' volume 2 June 1871, it is manifest that this plant produces true
cleistogamic flowers.
For Pavonia see Bouche in 'Sitzungsberichte d. Gesellsch. Natur. Freunde'
October 20, 1874 page 90.
I have added Thelymitra, as from the account given by Mr. Fitzgerald in his
magnificent work on 'Australian Orchids' it appears that the flowers of this
plant in its native home never open, but they do not appear to be reduced in
size. Nor is this the case with the flowers of certain species of Epidendron,
Cattleya, etc. see second edition of my 'Fertilisation of Orchids' page 147,
which without expanding produce capsules. It is therefore doubtful whether these
Orchideae ought to have been included in the list. From what Duval-Jouve says
about Cryptostachys in 'Bulletin of the Soc. Bot. de France' tome 10 1863 page
195, this plant appears to produce cleistogamic flowers.
the other additions to the list are noticed in my text.)

DICOTYLEDONS.

BORAGINEAE:
Eritrichium.

CONVOLVULACEAE:
Cuscuta.

SCROPHULARINEAE:
Scrophularia.
Linaria.
Vandellia.

ACANTHACEAE:
Cryphiacanthus.
Eranthemum.
Daedalacanthus.
Dipteracanthus.
Aechmanthera.
Ruellia.

LABIATAE:
Lamium.
Salvia.

NYCTAGINEAE:
Oxybaphus.
Nyctaginia.

ASCLEPIADAE:
Stapelia.

CAMPANULACEAE:
Specularia.
Campanula.

PRIMULACEAE:
Hottonia.

COMPOSITAE:
Anandria.

CRUCIFERAE:
Heterocarpaea.

VIOLACEAE:
Viola.

CISTINEAE:
Helianthemum.
Lechea.

MALVEACEAE:
Pavonia.

MALPIGHIACEAE:
Gaudichaudia.
Aspicarpa.
Camarea.
Janusia.

POLYGALEAE:
Polygala.

BALSAMINEAE:
Impatiens.

GERANIACAEA:
Oxalis.

LEGUMINOSAE:
Ononis.
Parochaetus.
Chapmannia.
Stylosanthus.
Lespedeza.
Vicia.
Lathyrus.
Martinsia vel Neurocarpum.
Amphicarpaea.
Glycine.
Galactia.
Voandzeia.

DROSERACEAE:
Drosera.

MONOCOTYLEDONS.

JUNCEAE:
Juncus.

GRAMINEAE:
Leersia.
Hordeum.
Cryptostachys.

COMMELINEAE:
Commelina.

PONTEDERACEAE:
Monochoria.

ORCHIDEAE:
Schomburgkia.
Cattleya.
Epidendron.
Thelymitra.

The first point that strikes us in considering this list of 55 genera, is that
they are very widely distributed in the vegetable series. They are more common
in the family of the Leguminosae than in any other, and next in order in that of
the Acanthaceae and Malpighiaceae. A large number, but not all the species, of
certain genera, as of Oxalis and Viola, bear cleistogamic as well as ordinary
flowers. A second point which deserves notice is that a considerable proportion
of the genera produce more or less irregular flowers; this is the case with
about 32 out of the 55 genera, but to this subject I shall recur.

I formerly made many observations on cleistogamic flowers, but only a few of
them are worth giving, since the appearance of an admirable paper by Hugo Von
Mohl, whose examination was in some respects much more complete than mine. (8/4.
'Botanische Zeitung' 1863 page 309-28.) His paper includes also an interesting
history of our knowledge on the subject.

Viola canina.

The calyx of the cleistogamic flowers differs in no respect from that of the
perfect ones. The petals are reduced to five minute scales; the lower one, which
represents the lower lip, is considerably larger than the others, but with no
trace of the spur-like nectary; its margins are smooth, whilst those of the
other four scale-like petals are papillose. D. Muller of Upsala says that in the
specimens which he observed the petals were completely aborted. (8/5. Ibid. 1857
page 730. This paper contains the first full and satisfactory account of any
cleistogamic flower.) The stamens are very small, and only the two lower ones
are provided with anthers, which do not cohere together as in the perfect
flowers. The anthers are minute, with the two cells or loculi remarkably
distinct; they contain very little pollen in comparison with those of the
perfect flowers. The connective expands into a membranous hood-like shield which
projects above the anther-cells. These two lower stamens have no vestige of the
curious appendages which secrete nectar in the perfect flowers. The three other
stamens are destitute of anthers and have broader filaments, with their terminal
membranous expansions flatter or not so hood-like as those of the two
antheriferous stamens. The pollen-grains have remarkably thin transparent coats;
when exposed to the air they shrivel up quickly; when placed in water they
swell, and are then 8-10/7000 of an inch in diameter, and therefore of smaller
size than the ordinary pollen-grains similarly treated, which have a diameter of
13-14/7000 of an inch. In the cleistogamic flowers, the pollen-grains, as far as
I could see, never naturally fall out of the anther-cells, but emit their tubes
through a pore at the upper end. I was able to trace the tubes from the grains
some way down the stigma. The pistil is very short, with the style hooked, so
that its extremity, which is a little enlarged or funnel-shaped and represents
the stigma, is directed downwards, being covered by the two membranous
expansions of the antheriferous stamens. It is remarkable that there is an open
passage from the enlarged funnel-shaped extremity to within the ovarium; this
was evident, as slight pressure caused a bubble of air, which had been drawn in
by some accident, to travel freely from one end to the other: a similar passage
was observed by Michalet in V. alba. The pistil therefore differs considerably
from that of the perfect flower; for in the latter it is much longer, and
straight with the exception of the rectangularly bent stigma; nor is it
perforated by an open passage.

The ordinary or perfect flowers have been said by some authors never to produce
capsules; but this is an error, though only a small proportion of them do so.
This appears to depend in some cases on their anthers not containing even a
trace of pollen, but more generally on bees not visiting the flowers. I twice
covered with a net a group of flowers, and marked with threads twelve of them
which had not as yet expanded. This precaution is necessary, for though as a
general rule the perfect flowers appear considerably before the cleistogamic
ones, yet occasionally some of the latter are produced early in the season, and
their capsules might readily be mistaken for those produced by the perfect
flowers. Not one of the twelve marked perfect flowers yielded a capsule, whilst
others under the net which had been artificially fertilised produced five
capsules; and these contained exactly the same average number of seeds as some
capsules from flowers outside the net which had been fertilised by bees. I have
repeatedly seen Bombus hortorum, lapidarius, and a third species, as well as
hive-bees, sucking the flowers of this violet: I marked six which were thus
visited, and four of them produced fine capsules; the two others were gnawed off
by some animal. I watched Bombus hortorum for some time, and whenever it came to
a flower which did not stand in a convenient position to be sucked, it bit a
hole through the spur-like nectary. Such ill-placed flowers would not yield any
seed or leave descendants; and the plants bearing them would thus tend to be
eliminated through natural selection.

The seeds produced by the cleistogamic and perfect flowers do not differ in
appearance or number. On two occasions I fertilised several perfect flowers with
pollen from other individuals, and afterwards marked some cleistogamic flowers
on the same plants; and the result was that 14 capsules produced by the perfect
flowers contained on an average 9.85 seeds; and 17 capsules from the
cleistogamic ones contained 9.64 seeds,--an amount of difference of no
significance. It is remarkable how much more quickly the capsules from the
cleistogamic flowers are developed than those from the perfect ones; for
instance, several perfect flowers were cross-fertilised on April 14th, 1863, and
a month afterwards (May 15th) eight young cleistogamic flowers were marked with
threads; and when the two sets of capsules thus produced were compared on June
3rd, there was scarcely any difference between them in size.

Viola odorata (WHITE-FLOWERED, SINGLE, CULTIVATED VARIETY).

The petals are represented by mere scales as in the last species; but
differently from in the last, all five stamens are provided with diminutive
anthers. Small bundles of pollen-tubes were traced from the five anthers into
the somewhat distant stigma. The capsules produced by these flowers bury
themselves in the soil, if it be loose enough, and there mature themselves.
(8/6. Vaucher says 'Hist. Phys. des Plantes d'Europe' tome 3 1844 page 309, that
V. hirta and collina likewise bury their capsules. See also Lecoq 'Geograph.
Bot.' tome 5 1856 page 180.) Lecoq says that it is only these latter capsules
which possess elastic valves; but I think this must be a misprint, as such
valves would obviously be of no use to the buried capsules, but would serve to
scatter the seeds of the sub-aerial ones, as in the other species of Viola. It
is remarkable that this plant, according to Delpino, does not produce
cleistogamic flowers in one part of Liguria, whilst the perfect flowers are
there abundantly fertile (8/7. 'Sull' Opera, la Distribuzione dei Sessi nelle
Piante' etc. 1867 page 30.); on the other hand, cleistogamic flowers are
produced by it near Turin. Another fact is worth giving as an instance of
correlated development: I found on a purple variety, after it had produced its
perfect double flowers, and whilst the white single variety was bearing its
cleistogamic flowers, many bud-like bodies which from their position on the
plant were certainly of a cleistogamic nature. They consisted, as could be seen
on bisecting them, of a dense mass of minute scales closely folded over one
another, exactly like a cabbage-head in miniature. I could not detect any
stamens, and in the place of the ovarium there was a little central column. The
doubleness of the perfect flowers had thus spread to the cleistogamic ones,
which therefore were rendered quite sterile.

Viola hirta.

The five stamens of the cleistogamic flowers are provided, as in the last case,
with small anthers, from all of which pollen-tubes proceed to the stigma. The
petals are not quite so much reduced as in V. canina, and the short pistil
instead of being hooked is merely bent into a rectangle. Of several perfect
flowers which I saw visited by hive-and humble-bees, six were marked, but they
produced only two capsules, some of the others having been accidentally injured.
M. Monnier was therefore mistaken in this case as in that of V. odorata, in
supposing that the perfect flowers always withered away and aborted. He states
that the peduncles of the cleistogamic flowers curve downwards and bury the
ovaries beneath the soil. (8/8. These statements are taken from Professor
Oliver's excellent article in the 'Natural History Review' July 1862 page 238.
With respect to the supposed sterility of the perfect flowers in this genus see
also Timbal-Lagrave 'Botanische Zeitung' 1854 page 772.) I may here add that
Fritz Muller, as I hear from his brother, has found in the highlands of Southern
Brazil a white-flowered species of violet which bears subterranean cleistogamic
flowers.

Viola nana.

Mr. Scott sent me seeds of this Indian species from the Sikkim Terai, from which
I raised many plants, and from these other seedlings during several successive
generations. They produced an abundance of cleistogamic flowers during the whole
of each summer, but never a perfect one. When Mr. Scott wrote to me his plants
