bought on credit a dime's worth of paper even during the year of
his death, 1665, and if this bill had been drawing compound
interest at the rate of six per cent, since that time, the bill
would now amount to more than seven times as much as the prize.

                                                  --MILLER, G. A.

                         _Some Thoughts on Modern Mathematical
                         Research; Science, Vol. 35 (1912), p.
                         881._


=2130.= _If the Indians hadn't spent the $24._ In 1626 Peter
Minuit, first governor of New Netherland, purchased Manhattan
Island from the Indians for about $24. The rate of interest on
money is higher in new countries, and gradually decreases as
wealth accumulates. Within the present generation the legal rate
in the state has fallen from 7% to 6%. Assume for simplicity a
uniform rate of 7% from 1626 to the present, and suppose that the
Indians had put their $24 at interest at that rate (banking
facilities in New York being always taken for granted!) and had
added the interest to the principal yearly. What would be the
amount now, after 280 years? 24 x (1.07)^{280} = more than
4,042,000,000.

The latest tax assessment available at the time of writing gives
the realty for the borough of Manhattan as $3,820,754.181. This
is estimated to be 78% of the actual value, making the actual
value a little more than $4,898,400,000.

The amount of the Indians' money would therefore be more than the
present assessed valuation but less than the actual valuation.

                                                   --WHITE, W. F.

                         _A Scrap-book of Elementary Mathematics
                         (Chicago, 1908), pp. 47-48._


=2131.= See Mystery to Mathematics fly!--POPE, ALEXANDER.

                         _The Dunciad, Bk. 4, line 647._


=2132.= The Pythagoreans and Platonists were carried further by
this love of simplicity. Pythagoras, by his skill in mathematics,
discovered that there can be no more than five regular solid
figures, terminated by plane surfaces which are all similar and
equal; to wit, the tetrahedron, the cube, the octahedron, the
dodecahedron, and the eicosihedron. As nature works in the most
simple and regular way, he thought that all elementary bodies
must have one or other of those regular figures; and that the
discovery of the properties and relations of the regular solids
must be a key to open the mysteries of nature.

This notion of the Pythagoreans and Platonists has undoubtedly
great beauty and simplicity. Accordingly it prevailed, at least
to the time of Euclid. He was a Platonic philosopher, and is said
to have wrote all the books of his Elements, in order to discover
the properties and relations of the five regular solids. The
ancient tradition of the intention of Euclid in writing his
elements, is countenanced by the work itself. For the last book
of the elements treats of the regular solids, and all the
preceding are subservient to the last.--REID, THOMAS.

                         _Essays on the Powers of the Human Mind
                         (Edinburgh, 1812), Vol. 2, p. 400._


=2133.= In the Timaeus [of Plato] it is asserted that the
particles of the various elements have the forms of these [the
regular] solids. Fire has the Pyramid; Earth has the Cube; Water
the Octahedron; Air the Icosahedron; and the Dodecahedron is the
plan of the Universe itself. It was natural that when Plato had
learnt that other mathematical properties had a bearing upon
the constitution of the Universe, he should suppose that
the singular property of space, which the existence of this
limited and varied class of solids implied, should have some
corresponding property in the Universe, which exists in space.

                                                    --WHEWELL, W.

                         _History of the Inductive Sciences, 3rd
                         Edition, Additions to Bk. 2._


=2134.= The orbit of the earth is a circle: round the sphere to
which this circle belongs, describe a dodecahedron; the sphere
including this will give the orbit of Mars. Round Mars describe a
tetrahedron; the circle including this will be the orbit of
Jupiter. Describe a cube round Jupiter's orbit; the circle
including this will be the orbit of Saturn. Now inscribe in the
earth's orbit an icosahedron; the circle inscribed in it will be
the orbit of Venus. Inscribe an octahedron in the orbit of Venus;
the circle inscribed in it will be Mercury's orbit. This is the
reason of the number of the planets.--KEPLER.

                         _Mysterium Cosmographicum [Whewell]._


=2135.= It will not be thought surprising that Plato expected
that Astronomy, when further advanced, would be able to render an
account of many things for which she has not accounted even to
this day. Thus, in the passage in the seventh Book of the
_Republic_, he says that the philosopher requires a reason for
the proportion of the day to the month, and the month to the
year, deeper and more substantial than mere observation can give.
Yet Astronomy has not yet shown us any reason why the proportion
of the times of the earth's rotation on its axis, the moon's
revolution round the earth, and the earth's revolution round the
sun, might not have been made by the Creator quite different from
what they are. But in asking Mathematical Astronomy for reasons
which she cannot give, Plato was only doing what a great
astronomical discoverer, Kepler, did at a later period. One of
the questions which Kepler especially wished to have answered
was, why there are five planets, and why at such particular
distances from the sun? And it is still more curious that he
thought he had found the reason of these things, in the relation
of those five regular solids which Plato was desirous of
introducing into the philosophy of the universe.... Kepler
regards the law which thus determines the number and magnitude of
the planetary orbits by means of the five regular solids as a
discovery no less remarkable and certain than the Three Laws
which give his name its imperishable place in the history of
astronomy.--WHEWELL, W.

                         _History of the Inductive Sciences, 3rd
                         Edition, Additions to Bk. 3._


=2136.= Pythagorean philosophers ... maintained that of two
combatants, he would conquer, the sum of the numbers expressed by
the characters of whose names exceeded the sum of those expressed
by the other. It was upon this principle that they explained the
relative prowess and fate of the heroes in Homer, [Greek:
Patroklos], [Greek: Hektor] and [Greek: Achilleus], the sum of
the numbers in whose names are 861, 1225, and 1276 respectively.

                                               --PEACOCK, GEORGE.

                         _Encyclopedia of Pure Mathematics
                         (London, 1847); Article "Arithmetic,"
                         sect. 38._


=2137.= Round numbers are always false.--JOHNSON, SAMUEL.

                         _Johnsoniana; Apothegms, Sentiment,
                         etc._


=2138.= Numero deus impare gaudet [God in number odd rejoices.]

                                                        --VIRGIL.

                         _Eclogue, 8, 77._


=2139.= Why is it that we entertain the belief that for every
purpose odd numbers are the most effectual?--PLINY.

                         _Natural History, Bk. 28, chap. 5._


=2140.=

        "Then here goes another," says he, "to make sure,
         Fore there's luck in odd numbers," says Rory O'Moore.
                                                  --LOVER, S.

                         _Rory O'Moore._


=2141.= This is the third time; I hope, good luck lies in odd
numbers.... They say, there is divinity in odd numbers, either in
nativity, chance, or death.--SHAKESPEARE.

                         _The Merry Wives of Windsor, Act 5,
                         scene 1._


=2142.= To add to golden numbers, golden numbers.--DECKER, THOMAS.

                         _Patient Grissell, Act 1, scene 1._


=2143.=

        I've read that things inanimate have moved,
        And, as with living souls, have been inform'd,
        By magic numbers and persuasive sound.
                                        --CONGREVE, RICHARD.

                         _The Morning Bride, Act 1, scene 1._


=2144.= ... the Yancos on the Amazon, whose name for three is

                     Poettarrarorincoaroac,

of a length sufficiently formidable to justify the remark of La
Condamine: Heureusement pour ceux qui ont a faire avec eux, leur
Arithmetique ne va pas plus loin.--PEACOCK, GEORGE.

                         _Encyclopedia of Pure Mathematics
                         (London, 1847); Article "Arithmetic,"
                         sect. 32._


=2145.= There are three principal sins, avarice, luxury, and
pride; three sorts of satisfaction for sin, fasting, almsgiving,
and prayer; three persons offended by sin, God, the sinner
himself, and his neighbour; three witnesses in heaven, _Pater_,
_verbum_, and _spiritus sanctus_; three degrees of penitence,
contrition, confession, and satisfaction, which Dante has
represented as the three steps of the ladder that lead to
purgatory, the first marble, the second black and rugged stone,
and the third red porphyry. There are three sacred orders
in the church militant, _sub-diaconati_, _diaconiti_, and
_presbyterati_; there are three parts, not without mystery, of
the most sacred body made by the priest in the mass; and three
times he says _Agnus Dei_, and three times, _Sanctus_; and if we
well consider all the devout acts of Christian worship, they are
found in a ternary combination; if we wish rightly to partake of
the holy communion, we must three times express our contrition,
_Domine non sum dignus_; but who can say more of the ternary
number in a shorter compass, than what the prophet says, _tu
signaculum sanctae trinitatis_. There are three Furies in the
infernal regions; three Fates, Atropos, Lachesis, and Clotho.
There are three theological virtues: _Fides_, _spes_, and
_charitas_. _Tria sunt pericula mundi: Equum currere; navigare,
et sub tyranno vivere._ There are three enemies of the soul: the
Devil, the world, and the flesh. There are three things which are
of no esteem: the strength of a porter, the advice of a poor man,
and the beauty of a beautiful woman. There are three vows of the
Minorite Friars: poverty, obedience, and chastity. There are
three terms in a continued proportion. There are three ways in
which we may commit sin: _corde_, _ore_, _ope_. Three principal
things in Paradise: glory, riches, and justice. There are three
things which are especially displeasing to God: an avaricious
rich man, a proud poor man, and a luxurious old man. And all
things, in short, are founded in three; that is, in number, in
weight, and in measure.

 --PACIOLI, _Author of the first printed treatise on arithmetic._

                         _Quoted in Encyclopedia of Pure
                         Mathematics (London, 1847); Article
                         "Arithmetic," sect. 90._


=2146.= Ah! why, ye Gods, should two and two make four?

                                               --POPE, ALEXANDER.

                         _The Dunciad, Bk. 2, line 285._


=2147.=

        By him who stampt _The Four_ upon the mind,--
        _The Four_, the fount of nature's endless stream.
                                 --_Ascribed to_ PYTHAGORAS.

                         _Quoted in Whewell's History of the
                         Inductive Sciences, Bk. 4, chap. 3._


=2148.=

        Along the skiey arch the goddess trode,
        And sought Harmonia's august abode;
        The universal plan, the mystic Four,
        Defines the figure of the palace floor.
        Solid and square the ancient fabric stands,
        Raised by the labors of unnumbered hands.
                                                   --NONNUS.

                         _Dionysiac, 41, 275-280. [Whewell]._


=2149.= The number seventy-seven figures the abolition of all
sins by baptism.... The number ten signifies justice and
beatitude, resulting from the creature, which makes seven with
the Trinity, which is three: therefore it is that God's
commandments are ten in number. The number eleven denotes sin,
because it _transgresses_ ten.... This number seventy-seven is
the product of eleven, figuring sin, multiplied by seven, and not
by ten, for seven is the number of the creature. Three represents
the soul, which is in some sort an image of Divinity; and four
represents the body, on account of its four qualities....

                                                 --ST. AUGUSTINE.

                         _Sermon 41, art. 23._


=2150.= Heliodorus says that the Nile is nothing else than the
year, founding his opinion on the fact that the numbers expressed
by the letters [Greek: Neilos], Nile, are in Greek arithmetic,
[Nu] = 50; [Epsilon] = 5; [Iota] = 10; [Lambda] = 30; [Omicron] =
70; [Sigma] = 200; and these figures make up together 365, the
number of days in the year.

                         _Littell's Living Age, Vol. 117, p.
                         380._


=2151.= In treating 666, Bungus [Petri Bungi Bergomatis Numerorum
mysteria, Bergamo, 1591] a good Catholic, could not compliment
the Pope with it, but he fixes it on Martin Luther with a little
forcing. If from A to I represent 1-9, from K to S 10-90, and
from T to Z 100-500, we see--

               M A  R  T  I  N    L  U   T  E  R A
              30 1 80 100 9 40   20 200 100 5 80 1

which gives 666. Again in Hebrew, _Lulter_ [Hebraized form of
Luther] does the same:--

             [resh]  [tav]  [lamed]  [yod]  [lamed]
              200     400     30       6      30
                                             --DE MORGAN, A.

                         _Budget of Paradoxes (London, 1872), p. 37._


=2152.= Stifel, the most acute and original of the early
mathematicians of Germany, ... relates ... that whilst a monk at
Esslingen in 1520, and when infected by the writings of Luther,
he was reading in the library of his convent the 13th Chapter of
_Revelations_, it struck his mind that the _Beast_ must signify
the Pope, Leo X.; He then proceeded in pious hope to make the
calculation of the sum of the numeral letters in _Leo decimus_,
which he found to be M, D, C, L, V, I; the sum which these formed
was too great by M, and too little by X; but he bethought him
again, that he has seen the name written Leo X., and that there
were ten letters in _Leo decimus_, from either of which he could
obtain the deficient number, and by interpreting the M to mean
_mysterium_, he found the number required, a discovery which gave
him such unspeakable comfort, that he believed that his
interpretation must have been an immediate inspiration of God.

                                               --PEACOCK, GEORGE.

                         _Encyclopedia of Pure Mathematics
                         (London, 1847); Article "Arithmetic,"
                         sect. 89._


=2153.= Perhaps the best anagram ever made is that by Dr. Burney
on Horatio Nelson, so happily transformed into the Latin sentence
so truthful of the great admiral, _Honor est a Nilo_. Reading
this, one is almost persuaded that the hit contained in it has a
meaning provided by providence or fate.

This is also amusingly illustrated in the case of the Frenchman
Andre Pujom, who, using j as i, found in his name the anagram,
Pendu a Riom. Riom being the seat of justice for the province of
Auvergne, the poor fellow, impelled by a sort of infatuation,
actually committed a capital offence in that province, and was
hanged at Riom, that the anagram might be fulfilled.

                         _New American Cyclopedia, Vol. 1;
                         Article "Anagram."_


=2154.= The most remarkable pseudonym [of transposed names
adopted by authors] is the name of "Voltaire," which the
celebrated philosopher assumed instead of his family name,
"Francois Marie Arouet," and which is now generally allowed to be
an anagram of "Arouet, l. j.," that is, Arouet the younger.

                         _Encyclopedia Britannica, 11th Edition;
                         Article "Anagram."_


=2155.= Perhaps the most beautiful anagram that has ever been
composed is by Jablonsky, a former rector of the school at Lissa.
The occasion was the following: When while a young man king
Stanislaus of Poland returned from a journey, the whole house of
Lescinsky assembled to welcome the family heir. On this occasion
Jablonsky arranged for a school program, the closing number of
which consisted of a ballet by thirteen pupils impersonating
youthful heroes. Each of them carried a shield on which appeared
in gold one of the letters of the words _Domus Lescinia_. At the
end of the first dance the children were so arranged that the
letters on their shields spelled the words _Domus Lescinia_. At
the end of the second dance they read: _ades incolumis_ (sound
thou art here). After the third: _omnis es lucida_ (wholly
brilliant art thou); after the fourth: _lucida sis omen_ (bright
be the omen). Then: _mane sidus loci_ (remain our country's
star); and again: _sis columna Dei_ (be a column of God); and
finally: _I! scande solium_ (Proceed, ascend the throne). This
last was the more beautiful since it proved a true prophecy.

Even more artificial are the anagrams which transform one verse
into another. Thus an Italian scholar beheld in a dream the line
from Horace: _Grata superveniet, quae non sperabitur, hora_. This
a friend changed to the anagram: _Est ventura Rhosina parataque
nubere pigro._ This induced the scholar, though an old man, to
marry an unknown lady by the name of Rosina.--HEIS, EDUARD.

                         _Algebraische Aufgaben (Koeln, 1898), p.
                         331._


=2156.= The following verses read the same whether read forward
or backward:--

        Aspice! nam raro mittit timor arma, nec ipsa
          Si se mente reget, non tegeret Nemesis;[13]

also,

                Sator Arepo tenet opera rotas.
                                             --HEIS, EDUARD.

                         _Algebraische Aufgaben (Koeln, 1898), p.
                         328._

    [13]  The beginning of a poem which Johannes a Lasco
          wrote on the count Karl von Suedermanland.


=2157.= There is a certain spiral of a peculiar form on which a
point may have been approaching for centuries the center, and
have nearly reached it, before we discover that its rate of
approach is accelerated. The first thought of the observer, on
seeing the acceleration, would be to say that it would reach the
center sooner than he had before supposed. But as the point comes
near the center it suddenly, although still moving under the same
simple law as from the beginning, makes a very short turn upon
its path and flies off rapidly almost in a straight line, out to
an infinite distance. This illustrates that apparent breach of
continuity which we sometimes find in a natural law; that
apparently sudden change of character which we sometimes see in
man.--HILL, THOMAS.

                         _Uses of Mathesis; Bibliotheca Sacra,
                         Vol. 32, p. 521._


=2158.= One of the most remarkable of Babbage's illustrations of
miracles has never had the consideration in the popular mind
which it deserves; the illustration drawn from the existence of
isolated points fulfilling the equation of a curve.... There are
definitions of curves which describe not only the positions
of every point in a certain curve, but also of one or more
perfectly isolated points; and if we should attempt to get by
induction the definition, from the observation of the points on
the curve, we might fail altogether to include these isolated
points; which, nevertheless, although standing alone, as
miracles to the observer of the course of the points in the
curve, are nevertheless rigorously included in the law of the
curve.--HILL, THOMAS.

                         _Uses of Mathesis; Bibliotheca Sacra,
                         Vol. 32, p. 516._


=2159.= Pure mathematics is the magician's real wand.--NOVALIS.

                         _Schriften, Zweiter Teil (Berlin, 1901),
                         p. 223._


=2160.= Miracles, considered as antinatural facts, are
amathematical, but there are no miracles in this sense, and those
so called may be comprehended by means of mathematics, for to
mathematics nothing is miraculous.--NOVALIS.

                         _Schriften, Zweiter Teil (Berlin, 1911),
                         p. 222._




  INDEX

  =Black-faced numbers refer to authors=

  Abbreviations:--m. = mathematics, math. = mathematical,
                 math'n. = mathematician.


  Abbott, =1001=.

  Abstract method, Development of, 729.

  Abstract nature of m., Reason for, 638.

  Abstract reasoning, Objection to, 1941.

  Abstractness, math., Compared with logical, 1304.

  Adams, Henry, M. and history, =1599=.
    Math'ns practice freedom, =208=, =805=.

  Adams, John, Method in m., =226=.

  Aeneid, Euler's knowledge of, 859.

  Aeschylus. On number, 1606.

  Aim in teaching m., 501-508, 517, 844.

  Airy, Pythagorean theorem, =2126=.

  Akenside, =1532=.

  Alexander, 901, 902.

  Algebra, Chapter XVII.
    Definitions of, 110, 1714, 1715.
    Problems in, 320, 530, 1738.
    Of use to grown men, 425.
    And geometry, 525-527, 1610, 1707.
    Advantages of, 1701, 1703, 1705.
    Laws of, 1708-1710.
    As an art, 1711.
    Review of, 1713.
    Designations of, 1717.
    Origin of, 1736.
    Burlesque on modern, 1741.
    Hume on, 1863.

  Algebraic notation, value of, 1213, 1214.

  Algebraic treatises, How to read, 601.

  Amusements in m., 904, 905.

  Anagrams, On De Morgan, 947.
    On Domus Lescinia, 2155.
    On Flamsteed, 968.
    On Macaulay, 996.
    On Nelson, 2153.
    On Newton, 1028.
    On Voltaire, 2154.

  Analysis, Invigorates the faculty of resolution, 416.
    Relation of geometry to, 1931.

  Analytical geometry, 1889, 1890, 1893.
    Method of, 310.
    Importance of, 949.
    Burlesque on, 2040.

  Ancient geometry,
    Characteristics of, 712, 714.
    Compared with modern, 1711-1716.
    Method of, 1425, 1873-1875.

  Ancients, M. among the, 321.

  Anecdotes, Chapters, IX, X.

  Anger, M. destroys predisposition to, 458.

  Angling like m., 739.

  Anglo-Danes, Aptitude for m., 836.

  Anglo-Saxons, Aptitude for m., 837.
    Newton as representative of, 1014.

  Anonymous, Song of the screw, 1894.

  Appolonius, 712, 714.

  Approximate m., Why not sufficient, 1518.

  Aptitude for m., 509, 510, 520, 836-838, 976, 1617.

  Arabic notation, 1614.

  Arago, M. the enemy of scientific romances, =267=.
    Euler, "analysis incarnate," =961=.
    Euler as a computer, =962=.
    On Kepler's discovery, =982=.
    Newton's efforts superhuman, =1006=.
    On probabilities, =1591=.
    Geometry as an instrument, 1868.

  Arbuthnot, M. frees from prejudice, credulity and
      superstition, =449=.
    M. the friend of religion, =458=.
    M. compared to music, =1112=.
    On math, reasoning, =1503=.

  Archimedes, His machines, 903, 904.
    Estimate of math, appliances, 904-906, 908.
    Wordsworth on, 906.
    Schiller on, 907.
    And engineering, 908.
    Death of, 909.
    His tomb, 910.
    Compared with Newton, 911.
    Character of his work, 912, 913.
    Applied m., 1312.

  Architecture and m., 276.

  Archytas, 904.
    And Plato, 1427.

  Aristippus the Cyrenaic, 845.

  Aristotle, 914.
    On relation of m. to esthetics, =318=.

  Arithmetic, Chapter XVI.
    Definitions of, 106, 110, 1611, 1612, 1714.
    Emerson on advantage of study of, 408.
    Problems in, 528.
    A master-key, 1571.
    Based on concept of time, 1613.
    Method of teaching, 1618.
    Purpose of teaching, 454, 1624.
    As logic, 1624, 1625.
    The queen of m., 1642.
    Higher, 1755.
    Hume on, 1863.

  Arithmetical theorems, 1639.

  Art, M. as a fine, Chapter XI

  Arts, M. and the, 1568-1570, 1573.

  Astronomy and m., 1554, 1559, 1562-1567.

  "Auge et impera.," 631.

  Authority in science, 1528.

  Axioms, 518, 2015.
    In geometry, 1812, 2004, 2006.
    Def. in disguise, 2005.
    Euclid's, 2007-2010, 2014.
    Nature of, 2012.
    Proofs of, 2013.
    And the idea of space, 2004.


  Babbage, 923.

  Bacon, Lord,
    Classification of m., =106=.
    M. makes men subtile, =248=.
    View of m., 316, 915, 916.
    M. held in high esteem by ancients, =321=.
    On the generalizing power of m., =327=.
    On the value of math, studies, =410=.
    M. develops concentration of mind, =411=.
    M. cures distraction of mind, =412=.
    M. essential to study of nature, =436=.
    His view of m., =915=, =916=.
    His knowledge of m., 917, 918.
    M. and logic, =1310=.
    Growth of m., =1511=.

  Bacon, Roger, Neglect of m. works injury to all science,
      =310=.
    On the value of m., =1547=.

  Bain, Importance of m. in education, =442=.
    On the charm of the study of m., =453=.
    M. and science teaching, =522=.
    Teaching of arithmetic, =1618=.

  Ball, R. S., =2010=.

  Ball, W. W. R., On Babbage, =923=.
    On Demoivre's death, =944=.
    De Morgan and the actuary, =945=.
    Gauss as astronomer, =971=.
    Laplace's "It is easy to see." =986=.
    Lagrange, Laplace and Gauss contrasted, =993=.
    Newton's interest in chemistry and theology, =1015=.
    On Newton's method of work, =1026=.
    On Newton's discovery of the calculus, =1027=.
    Gauss's estimate of Newton, =1029=.
    M. and philosophy, =1417=.
    Advance in physics, =1530=.
    Plato on geometry, 1804.
    Notation of the calculus, =1904=.

  Barnett, M. the type of perfect reasoning, =307=.

  Barrow, On the method of m., =213=, =227=.
    Eulogy of m., =330=.
    M. as a discipline of the mind, =402=.
    M. and eloquence, =830=.
    Philosophy and m., =1430=.
    Uses of m., =1572=.
    On surd numbers, =1728=.
    Euclid's definition of proportion, =1835=.

  Beattie, =1431=.

  Beauty of m., 453, 824, 1208.
    Consists in simplicity, 242, 315.
    Sylvester on, 1101.
    Russell on, 1104.
    Young on, 1110.
    Kummer on, 1111.
    White on, 1119.
    And truth, 1114.
    Boltzmann on, 1116.

  Beltrami, On reading of the masters, =614=.

  Berkeley, On geometry as logic, =428=.
    On math. symbols, =1214=.
