"Because, leastways, in th' Thomahlia, there's always a dhrop av royalty
in th' red-headed. Me bonnie top-knot has made me a fortune. Ye see,
'tis th' mark av th' royal Bars themselves; no ithers have it."

Watson said: "If you have come from Dr. Holcomb, then you must have a
message from him to me."

"Ye've said it; you an' me, an' a few Rhamdas, an' mebbe th' wee queen
is goin' t' take a flight in th' June Bug. We're goin' afther th' ould
doc; an' ye kin bet there'll be as pretty a scrap as ever ye looked
on. An' afther thot's all over, we're goin' t' take anither kind of a
flight--into good old Frisco."

Chick instantly asked Pat if he knew where San Francisco might be.

"Faith, 'tis only th' ould doc knows, laddie. But when we git there,
'tis Pat MacPherson that's a goin' for Toddy Maloney."

"I don't know that name."

"Bedad, I do. Him it was thot give me th' dhrink."

"What drink?"

Th' dhrink thot done it. Twas a new kind av cocktail. Ye see, I'd jist
got back from Melbourne, an' I was takin' in th' lights that noight,
aisy like, whin I come t' Toddy's place. I orders a dhrink av whuskey.

"'Whist, Pat,' says he, 'ye don't want whuskey; 'twill make ye dhrunk.
Why don't ye take somethin' green, like th' Irish?'

"'Green," says I. ''Tis a foine colour. I dinna fear anything thot comes
fra' a bottle. Pass'er oot!'

"An' thot he did. 'Twas 'creme de menthay' on th' bottle. 'An',' says
he, ''Twon't make ye dhrunk.' But he was a liar, beggin' yer pardin.

"For by an' by Oi see his head a growin' larger an' larger, until Oi
couldn't see annything but a few loights on th' cailing, an' a few
people on th' edges, loike. An' afther thot Oi wint oot, an' walked
till Oi come to a hill. An' there was a moon, an' a ould hoose standin'
still, which th' moon was not. So Oi stood still to watch it, but bein'
tired an' weary an' not havin' got rid o' me sea-legs, Oi sat me doon
on th' steps av th' hoose for a bit av a rest, an' t' watch th' moon,
thinkin' mebbe she'd stand still by an' by.

"Well, sor, Oi hadn't been there more'n three 'r four minits, whin th'
door opened, an' oot steps a little ould lady, aboot th' littlest an'
ouldest Oi iver see in 'Frisco.

"'Good avenin', Mother Machree,' says Oi, touchin' me hat.

"'Mother Machree!' says she, an' gives me a sharp look. Also she sniffs.
'Ye poor man,' says she. 'Ye'll catch yer death o' cold, out here. Ye
better coom in an' lie on me sofy.'

"Now, sor, how was Oi to ken, bein' a sailor an' ingorant? She was only
a ould lady, an' withered. How was Oi to ken thot she was th' ould Witch
o' Endor?"

Watson's memory was at work on what he knew of the house at Chatterton
Place, especially regarding its occupants at the beginning of the Blind
Spot mystery. The Bar's old remark caught his attention.

"The Witch of Endor?"

"Aye; thot she were. Whin Oi woke up, there was nary a hoose at all, nor
th' ould lady, nor Toddy Maloney's, nor 'Frisco. 'Twas a strange place I
was, sor; a church loike St. Peter's, only bigger, th' same bein' harrd
to belaive. An' th' columns looked loike waterspoots, an' th' sky above
was full av clouds, the same bein' jest aboot ready to break into hell
an' tempest. But ye've been there yerself, sor.

"Well, here was a man beside me, dressed in a kilt. An' he spakes a
strange language, although Oi could undershtand; and' he says, says he:

"'My lord,' was what he says.

"'My lord!' says Oi. 'Oi dinna ken what ye mane at all, at all.'

"'Are ye not a Bar?' says he.

"'Thot Oi am not!' says Oi, spakin' good English, so's to be sure he'd
understand. 'Oi'm Pat MacPherson.'

"But he couldn' ken. Thin we left th' temple an' wint out into the
street. An' a great crowd of people came aroun' an' began shoutin'. By
an' by we wint into anither buildin'.

"'For why sh'd iverybody look at me whin we crossed th' street jest
noo?' I asked.

"'Tis y'r clothes,' says he.

"Now, Oi don't enjoy pooblicity, sor; wherefore th' wily Scotch in me
told me what to do, an' th' Irish part of me did it. I stood him on his
head, an' took his clothes off an' put them on meself. An' then no one
noticed me. Thot is, until Oi took me hat off."

"You mean, that shako?"

"Yis; th' blaemd heavy thing--'tis made o' blue feathers. Well, whin it
got so hot it made me scalp sweat, Oi took it off; an' then they called
me--'My lord' an' 'your worship,' jest loike Oi were a king.

"'Pray God,' says Oi, 'that me head dinna get bald.'

"Well, sor, Oi had a toime that was fit for th' Irish. Oi did iverything
'cept git drunk; there was nothin' to git drunk with. But afther a while
I ran across anither, wit' jest as red hair as I had. He was a foine
man, av coorse, an' all surrounded by blue guards. He took me into a
room himself an' begin askin' questions.

"An' I lied, sor. Av coorse, 'twas lucky thot Oi had me Scotch larnin'
an' caution to guide me; but whin Oi spoke, Oi wisely let th' Irishman
do all th' talkin'. An' th' great Bar liked me.

"'Verily,' says he, most solemnly, 'thou art of th' royal Bars!' An' he
made me a high officer, he did."

"Was he the Bar Senestro?" asked Watson.

"Nay; 'twas a far better man--Senestro's brother, that died not long
after. When Oi saw th' Senestro, Oi had sinse enough to kape me mouth
shut. An' now Oi'm a high Bar--next to th' Senestro hisself! What's
more, sor, there's no one alive kens th' truth but yerself an' th' ould
doctor."

It was a queer story, but in the light of all that had gone before,
wonderfully convincing. Watson began to see light breaking through the
darkness. "Now there are two," the old lady at 288 Chatterton Place
had said to Jerome, when the detective came looking for the vanished
professor. Had she referred to Holcomb and MacPherson? Two had gone
through the Blind Spot, and two had come out--the Rhamda Avec and the
Nervina. "Now there are two," she had said.

"Tell me a little more about Holcomb, Pat!"

"'Tis a short story. Oi can't tell ye much, owin' to orders from the
old gent hisself. He came shortly after th' death of the first Bar,
Senestro's brother. Seems there was some rumpus aboot th' old Rhamda
Avec, which same Oi always kept away from--him as was goin' to prove th'
spirits! Annyhow, we was guardin' th' temple awaitin' th' spook as was
promised. An' thot's how we got th' ould doc.

"But th' Rhamdas niver saw him. Th' Senestro double-crossed 'em, an'
slipped th' doctor oop to th' Palace av Light."

"The Palace of--what?"

"The Palace av light, sor. Tis th' home av th' Jarados. 'twas held
always holy by th' Thomahlians; no man dared go within miles av it;
since the Jarados was here, t'ousands of years ago, no one at all has
been inside av it.

"But the Senestro knew that th' doctor was th' real Jarados, at least he
t'ought so; an' he wasna afraid o' him. He's na coward, th' Senestro.
He put th' doctor in th' Jarados' home! Only th' Prophecy worries him at
all."

At last Watson was touching firm ground. Things were beginning to link
up--the Senestro, the professor, the Prophecy of the Jarados.

"Well, sor, we Bars have kept th' ould doctor prisoner there iver since
he come, wit' none save me to give him a wee bit word av comfort. But it
dinna hurt th' old gent. Whin he finds all them balls an' rainbows an'
eddicated secrets, he forgets iverything else; he's contint wit 'his
discovery. 'Tis th' wise head th' doctor has; an' Oi make no doobt he's
th' real Jarados."

The red-haired man went on to say that the professor knew of Chick's
coming from the beginning. He immediately called in MacPherson and gave
him some orders, or rather directions, which the Irishman could not
understand. He knew only that he was to go to the Temple of the Leaf and
there touch certain objects in a certain way; also, he was to arrange to
get near Chick, and give him a word of cheer.

"But it dinna work as he said it, sor; he had expected to catch th'
Senestro. Instead, 'twas th' dog got th' Bar. A foine pup, sor; she
saved yer loife."

"Where's the dog now?"

"She's on th' Spot av Life, sor. She willna leave it. Tis a strange
thing to see how she clings to it. Th' Rhamdas only come near enough to
feed her."

Thus Chick learned that, as soon as he got well, he and MacPherson were
to seek the doctor, and help him to get away with the secrets he had
found, the truths behind the mystery of the Spot.

"An' 'tis a glorious fight there'll be, lad. Th' Senestro's a game wan;
he'll not give up, an' he'll not let go th' doctor till he has to."

This was not unwelcome news to Chick. A battle was to his liking.
It reminded him of the automatic pistol which he still had in his
pocket--the gun he had not thought to use in his desperate struggle with
the Bar Senestro.

"Pat," said he, with a sudden inspriation, "when you came through, did
you have a firearm?"

MacPherson reached into his pocket and silently produced a thirty-two
calibre pistol, of another make than Chick's but using the same
ammunition. From another pocket he drew out a package carefully bound
with thread. He unrolled the contents. It was an old clay pipe!

"Oi came through," he stated plaintively, "wit' two guns; an' nary a bit
av powder for ayther!"

Chick smiled. He searched his own pockets. First he handed over his
extra magazine full of cartridges, and then a full package of smoking
tobacco.

"Wirra, wirra!" shouted MacPherson. "Faith, an' there's powder for
both!" His hands shook as he hurried to cram the old pipe full of
tobacco. The cartridges could wait. He struck a light and gave a deep
sigh of content as he began to puff.




XLIII

THE HOME OF THE JARADOS


Chick had been grievously hurt in the contest with the Senestro, but
thanks to the Rhamdas he came round rapidly. It was a matter of less
than a week.

Things were coming to a climax; Chick needed no lynx's eye to see
that the die had been cast between the Bars and the Rhamdas. Soon the
Senestro must make a bold move, or else release the professor.

Chick had not long to wait. It came one evening. Once again he found
himself in the June Bug, accompanied by the Geos, the Jan Lucar,
and--the little Aradna herself. Their departure was swift and secret.

This time Watson was not worried over height, or any other sensation of
flight. The doctor's safety alone was of moment. He said to the Rhamda:

"Are we alone? Where is the Bar MacPherson?"

"He is somewhere near; we are not alone, my lord. Several other machines
are flying nearby also; they carry many of the Rhamdas and the crimson
guard of the queen. The MacPherson will arrive first. We are going
straight to the Palace of Light, my lord."

"Are we to storm the place?" thinking of the fight MacPherson had
predicted.

"Yes, my lord. Many shall die; but it cannot be helped. We must free the
Jarados, although we commit sacrilege."

"But--the Senestro?"

"That depends, my lord. We know not just what may be done." He gave no
explanation.

They had climbed to a tremendous height. The indicator showed that they
were bearing east. The darkness was modified only by the faint glow from
that star-dusted sky. Looking down, Chick could see nothing whatever.
His companions kept silence; only the Aradna, sitting forward by the
side of Jan Lucar showed any perturbation. They climbed higher and
higher still, until it seemed that they must leave the Thomahlia
altogether. Always the course was eastward. At last the Jan said to the
Geos:

"We are now over the Region of Carbon, sir. Shall I risk the light? His
lordship might like to see."

"Follow your own judgment."

"Oh," exclaimed the Aradna; "do it by all means! There is nothing so
wonderful as that!"

The Jan touched a small lever. Instantly a shaft of light cut down
through the blackness. Far, far below it ended in a patch on the ground.
Watson eagerly followed its movements as it searched from side to side,
seeking he knew not what. And then--

There was a flash of inverted lightning, a flame of white fire, a
blinding, stabbing scintillation of a million coruscations. Watson
clapped a hand to his eyes, to cut off the sight. It was stunning.

"What is it?" he cried.

"Carbon," answered the Geos, calmly.

"Carbon! You mean--diamond?"

"Yes, my lord. So it interests you? I did not know. Later you shall see
it under more favourable conditions." Then, to the Jan: "Enough."

Once again they were in darkness. For some minutes silence was again the
rule. Watson watched the red dot moving across the indicator, noting its
approach to a three cornered figure on one edge. Suddenly there appeared
another dot; then another, and another. Some came from below, others
from above; presently there were a score moving in close formation.

"They are all here," said the Jan to the Geos.

The other nodded, and explained to Chick: "It's the Rhamdas and the
Crimson guards. The MacPherson is just ahead. We shall arrive in three
minutes."

And after a pause he stated that the ensuing combat would mark the
first spilling of blood between the Bars and the Rhamdas. At a pinch the
Senestro might even kill the Jarados, to gain his ends. "His wish is his
only law, my lord."

The red dots began to descend toward the three-cornered figure. One
minute passed, and another; then one more, and the June Bug landed.

With scarcely a sound the Lucar brought the craft to a full stop. In a
moment he was assisting the Aradna to alight. As for the Geos, he took
from the machine two objects, which he held out to the Aradna and to
Chick.

"Put these on. The rest of us fight as we are."

They were cloaks, made of a soft, light, malleable glass, or something
like it. Watson asked what they were for.

"For a purpose known only to the Jarados, my lord. There are only two of
these robes. With them he left directions which indicated plainly they
are for your lordship and the Aradna."

Wondering, Chick helped the Aradna don her garment and then slipped
into his own. Nevertheless, he pinned more faith in the automatic in his
pocket. He did not make use of the hood which was intended to cover his
head.

"Pardon me," spoke the queen. She reached over and extended the hood
till it protected his skull. "Please wear it that way, for my sake.
Nothing must happen to you now!"

Chick obeyed with only an inward demur. What puzzled him most was the
isolation. Seemingly they were quite alone; there was nothing, no one,
to oppose them.

But he had merely taken something for granted. He, being from the earth,
had assumed that strife meant noise. It was only when the Aradna caught
him by the arm, and whispered for him to listen, that he understood.

It was like a breeze, that sound. To be more precise, it was like the
heavy passage of breath, almost uninterrupted, coming from all about
them. And presently Chick caught a queer odour.

"What is it?" he breathed in the Aradna's ear.

"It is death," she answered. "Cannot you hear them--the deherers?"

She did not explain; but Watson knew that he was in the midst of
a battle which was fought with noiseless and terribly efficient
weapons--so efficient that there were no wounded to give voice to pain.
Before he could ask a question a familiar voice sounded out of the
darkness at his side.

"Where is the Geos?"

"Here, Bar MacPherson," answered the Rhamda.

"Good! It is well you came, sir. We were discovered a few minutes ago;
already we have lost many men. Just give us the lights, so that we
can get at them! It is a waste of men, with the advantage all on their
side."

Then, lapsing into English for Chick's benefit: "'Tis welcome ye are!
Ivery mon helps, how."

"What are these sounds? You say they are fighting?"

"'Tis the deherers ye hear, lad. They fight with silent guns. Don't let
'em hit ye, or ye'll be a pink pool in the twinklin' of yer eyelid. 'Tis
no joke.

"Are they more powerful than firearms?"

"I dinna say, lad. But they're th' devil's own weapon for fightin'."

Chick did not answer--he had heard a low command from the Geos. Next
instant the space before them was illuminated by clear white light, in
the form of a circle--bright as day. In the centre shimmered an object
like a mist of blue flame, a nimbus of dazzling, actinic lightning.
There was no sign of man or life, no suggestion of sound--nothing but
the nimbus, and the brilliant space about it. The whole phenomenon
measured perhaps three hundred feet across.

They were in darkness. Chick took a step forward, but he was held back
by MacPherson.

"Nay, lad; would ye be dyin' so soon? 'Tis fearful quick. See--"

He did not finish. A red line of soldiers had rushed straight out of the
blackness into the circle of light. It seemed that they were charging
the nimbus. They were stooping now, discharging their queer weapons;
about three hundred of them--an inspiring sight. They charged in
determined silence.

Then--Watson blinked. The line disappeared; the thing was like a
miracle. It took time for Chick to realise that he was looking upon
the "pink death" MacPherson had warned him against--the work of the
deherers, whatever the word meant. For where had been a column of
gallant guards there was now only a broad stream of pink liquid
trickling over the ground. It was annihilation itself--too quick to
be horrible--inexorable and instantaneous. Chick involuntarily placed
himself in front of the Aradna.

"The blue thing in the middle," observed the Irishman, coolly, "is th'
Palace av Light; 'tis held by th' Senestro jest now. An' all we got to
do is get th' ould doc out."

"But I see no building!"

"'Tis there jest the same. Ye'll see it whin th' doctor gits time off
his rainbows. 'Tis absent-minded he gets when he's on a problem, which
same is mostly always, sor. We stay roight here till he gets ready to
drop on th' Senestro."

Watson waited. He knew enough now to cling to the shadow, there with
MacPherson, the Geos, and the Aradna. In the centre of the great
light-circle the nimbus of blue stood out like a vibrating haze, while
all about, in the darkness, could be heard the weird sound made by the
passage of life.

"When will the Jarados act?" inquired the Geos of the Irishman. But he
got no reply. MacPherson spoke to Watson: "Get yer gun ready, lad; get
yer gun ready! Look--'tis th' ould boy himself, now! I wonder what the
Senestro thinks of that?"

For the nimbus had suddenly dissolved, and in its place there appeared
one of the quaintest, yet most beautiful buildings that Watson had ever
seen. It was a three-cornered structure, low-set, and of unspeakably
dazzling magnificence; a building carved and chiselled from solid
carbon. Chick momentarily forgot the doctor.

In front of it stood a line of Blue Guards, headed by the Senestro.
Their confusion showed that something altogether unexpected had
happened. They were ducking here and there, seemingly bewildered by the
sudden vanishing of that protecting blue dazzle. The Senestro was trying
to restore order; and in a moment he succeeded. He led the way toward a
low, triangular platform, at the entrance--a single white door--to the
palace.

Pat MacPherson's automatic flashed and barked. Next instant Watson
was in action. The Bar next to the Senestro staggered, then collapsed
against his chieftain. Another rolled against his feet, causing him
to stumble; an act that probably saved his life, for the platform in a
second was covered with writhing, bleeding, dying Bars.

The Senestro managed to reach the doorway. MacPherson cursed.

"Come on!" he yelled to Watson. "Well git him alive!" Watson remembered
little of that rush. There stood the great Bar at the doorway,
