When Bradley went on guard at midnight, September 14th, his thoughts
were largely occupied with rejoicing that the night was almost spent
without serious mishap and that the morrow would doubtless see them all
safely returned to Fort Dinosaur.  The hopefulness of his mood was
tinged with sorrow by recollection of the two members of his party who
lay back there in the savage wilderness and for whom there would never
again be a homecoming.

No premonition of impending ill cast gloom over his anticipations for
the coming day, for Bradley was a man who, while taking every
precaution against possible danger, permitted no gloomy forebodings to
weigh down his spirit.  When danger threatened, he was prepared; but he
was not forever courting disaster, and so it was that when about one
o'clock in the morning of the fifteenth, he heard the dismal flapping
of giant wings overhead, he was neither surprised nor frightened but
idly prepared for an attack he had known might reasonably be expected.

The sound seemed to come from the south, and presently, low above the
trees in that direction, the man made out a dim, shadowy form circling
slowly about.  Bradley was a brave man, yet so keen was the feeling of
revulsion engendered by the sight and sound of that grim, uncanny shape
that he distinctly felt the gooseflesh rise over the surface of his
body, and it was with difficulty that he refrained from following an
instinctive urge to fire upon the nocturnal intruder.  Better, far
better would it have been had he given in to the insistent demand of
his subconscious mentor; but his almost fanatical obsession to save
ammunition proved now his undoing, for while his attention was riveted
upon the thing circling before him and while his ears were filled with
the beating of its wings, there swooped silently out of the black night
behind him another weird and ghostly shape.  With its huge wings partly
closed for the dive and its white robe fluttering in its wake, the
apparition swooped down upon the Englishman.

So great was the force of the impact when the thing struck Bradley
between the shoulders that the man was half stunned.  His rifle flew
from his grasp; he felt clawlike talons of great strength seize him
beneath his arms and sweep him off his feet; and then the thing rose
swiftly with him, so swiftly that his cap was blown from his head by
the rush of air as he was borne rapidly upward into the inky sky and
the cry of warning to his companions was forced back into his lungs.

The creature wheeled immediately toward the east and was at once joined
by its fellow, who circled them once and then fell in behind them.
Bradley now realized the strategy that the pair had used to capture him
and at once concluded that he was in the power of reasoning beings
closely related to the human race if not actually of it.

Past experience suggested that the great wings were a part of some
ingenious mechanical device, for the limitations of the human mind,
which is always loath to accept aught beyond its own little experience,
would not permit him to entertain the idea that the creatures might be
naturally winged and at the same time of human origin.  From his
position Bradley could not see the wings of his captor, nor in the
darkness had he been able to examine those of the second creature
closely when it circled before him.  He listened for the puff of a
motor or some other telltale sound that would prove the correctness of
his theory.  However, he was rewarded with nothing more than the
constant flap-flap.

Presently, far below and ahead, he saw the waters of the inland sea,
and a moment later he was borne over them.  Then his captor did that
which proved beyond doubt to Bradley that he was in the hands of human
beings who had devised an almost perfect scheme of duplicating,
mechanically, the wings of a bird--the thing spoke to its companion and
in a language that Bradley partially understood, since he recognized
words that he had learned from the savage races of Caspak.  From this
he judged that they were human, and being human, he knew that they
could have no natural wings--for who had ever seen a human being so
adorned!  Therefore their wings must be mechanical.  Thus Bradley
reasoned--thus most of us reason; not by what might be possible; but by
what has fallen within the range of our experience.

What he heard them say was to the effect that having covered half the
distance the burden would now be transferred from one to the other.
Bradley wondered how the exchange was to be accomplished.  He knew that
those giant wings would not permit the creatures to approach one
another closely enough to effect the transfer in this manner; but he
was soon to discover that they had other means of doing it.

He felt the thing that carried him rise to a greater altitude, and
below he glimpsed momentarily the second white-robed figure; then the
creature above sounded a low call, it was answered from below, and
instantly Bradley felt the clutching talons release him; gasping for
breath, he hurtled downward through space.

For a terrifying instant, pregnant with horror, Bradley fell; then
something swooped for him from behind, another pair of talons clutched
him beneath the arms, his downward rush was checked, within another
hundred feet, and close to the surface of the sea he was again borne
upward.  As a hawk dives for a songbird on the wing, so this great,
human bird dived for Bradley.  It was a harrowing experience, but soon
over, and once again the captive was being carried swiftly toward the
east and what fate he could not even guess.

It was immediately following his transfer in mid-air that Bradley made
out the shadowy form of a large island far ahead, and not long after,
he realized that this must be the intended destination of his captors.
Nor was he mistaken.  Three quarters of an hour from the time of his
seizure his captors dropped gently to earth in the strangest city that
human eye had ever rested upon.  Just a brief glimpse of his immediate
surroundings vouchsafed Bradley before he was whisked into the interior
of one of the buildings; but in that momentary glance he saw strange
piles of stone and wood and mud fashioned into buildings of all
conceivable sizes and shapes, sometimes piled high on top of one
another, sometimes standing alone in an open court-way, but usually
crowded and jammed together, so that there were no streets or alleys
between them other than a few which ended almost as soon as they began.
The principal doorways appeared to be in the roofs, and it was through
one of these that Bradley was inducted into the dark interior of a
low-ceiled room.  Here he was pushed roughly into a corner where he
tripped over a thick mat, and there his captors left him.  He heard
them moving about in the darkness for a moment, and several times he
saw their large luminous eyes glowing in the dark.  Finally, these
disappeared and silence reigned, broken only by the breathing of the
creature which indicated to the Englishman that they were sleeping
somewhere in the same apartment.

It was now evident that the mat upon the floor was intended for
sleeping purposes and that the rough shove that had sent him to it had
been a rude invitation to repose.  After taking stock of himself and
finding that he still had his pistol and ammunition, some matches, a
little tobacco, a canteen full of water and a razor, Bradley made
himself comfortable upon the mat and was soon asleep, knowing that an
attempted escape in the darkness without knowledge of his surroundings
would be predoomed to failure.

When he awoke, it was broad daylight, and the sight that met his eyes
made him rub them again and again to assure himself that they were
really open and that he was not dreaming.  A broad shaft of morning
light poured through the open doorway in the ceiling of the room which
was about thirty feet square, or roughly square, being irregular in
shape, one side curving outward, another being indented by what might
have been the corner of another building jutting into it, another
alcoved by three sides of an octagon, while the fourth was serpentine
in contour.  Two windows let in more daylight, while two doors
evidently gave ingress to other rooms.  The walls were partially ceiled
with thin strips of wood, nicely fitted and finished, partially
plastered and the rest covered with a fine, woven cloth.  Figures of
reptiles and beasts were painted without regard to any uniform scheme
here and there upon the walls.  A striking feature of the decorations
consisted of several engaged columns set into the walls at no regular
intervals, the capitals of each supporting a human skull the cranium of
which touched the ceiling, as though the latter was supported by these
grim reminders either of departed relatives or of some hideous tribal
rite--Bradley could not but wonder which.

Yet it was none of these things that filled him with greatest
wonder--no, it was the figures of the two creatures that had captured
him and brought him hither.  At one end of the room a stout pole about
two inches in diameter ran horizontally from wall to wall some six or
seven feet from the floor, its ends securely set in two of the columns.
Hanging by their knees from this perch, their heads downward and their
bodies wrapped in their huge wings, slept the creatures of the night
before--like two great, horrid bats they hung, asleep.

As Bradley gazed upon them in wide-eyed astonishment, he saw plainly
that all his intelligence, all his acquired knowledge through years of
observation and experience were set at naught by the simple evidence of
the fact that stood out glaringly before his eyes--the creatures' wings
were not mechanical devices but as natural appendages, growing from
their shoulderblades, as were their arms and legs.  He saw, too, that
except for their wings the pair bore a strong resemblance to human
beings, though fashioned in a most grotesque mold.

As he sat gazing at them, one of the two awoke, separated his wings to
release his arms that had been folded across his breast, placed his
hands upon the floor, dropped his feet and stood erect.  For a moment
he stretched his great wings slowly, solemnly blinking his large round
eyes.  Then his gaze fell upon Bradley.  The thin lips drew back
tightly against yellow teeth in a grimace that was nothing but hideous.
It could not have been termed a smile, and what emotion it registered
the Englishman was at a loss to guess.  No expression whatever altered
the steady gaze of those large, round eyes; there was no color upon the
pasty, sunken cheeks.  A death's head grimaced as though a man long
dead raised his parchment-covered skull from an old grave.

The creature stood about the height of an average man but appeared much
taller from the fact that the joints of his long wings rose fully a
foot above his hairless head.  The bare arms were long and sinewy,
ending in strong, bony hands with clawlike fingers--almost talonlike in
their suggestiveness.  The white robe was separated in front, revealing
skinny legs and the further fact that the thing wore but the single
garment, which was of fine, woven cloth.  From crown to sole the
portions of the body exposed were entirely hairless, and as he noted
this, Bradley also noted for the first time the cause of much of the
seeming expressionlessness of the creature's countenance--it had
neither eye-brows or lashes.  The ears were small and rested flat
against the skull, which was noticeably round, though the face was
quite flat.  The creature had small feet, beautifully arched and plump,
but so out of keeping with every other physical attribute it possessed
as to appear ridiculous.

After eyeing Bradley for a moment the thing approached him.  "Where
from?" it asked.

"England," replied Bradley, as briefly.

"Where is England and what?" pursued the questioner.

"It is a country far from here," answered the Englishman.

"Are your people cor-sva-jo or cos-ata-lu?"

"I do not understand you," said Bradley; "and now suppose you answer a
few questions.  Who are you?  What country is this?  Why did you bring
me here?"

Again the sepulchral grimace.  "We are Wieroos--Luata is our father.
Caspak is ours.  This, our country, is called Oo-oh.  We brought you
here for (literally) Him Who Speaks for Luata to gaze upon and
question.  He would know from whence you came and why; but principally
if you be cos-ata-lu."

"And if I am not cos--whatever you call the bloomin' beast--what of it?"

The Wieroo raised his wings in a very human shrug and waved his bony
claws toward the human skulls supporting the ceiling.  His gesture was
eloquent; but he embellished it by remarking, "And possibly if you are."

"I'm hungry," snapped Bradley.

The Wieroo motioned him to one of the doors which he threw open,
permitting Bradley to pass out onto another roof on a level lower than
that upon which they had landed earlier in the morning.  By daylight
the city appeared even more remarkable than in the moonlight, though
less weird and unreal.  The houses of all shapes and sizes were piled
about as a child might pile blocks of various forms and colors.  He saw
now that there were what might be called streets or alleys, but they
ran in baffling turns and twists, nor ever reached a destination,
always ending in a dead wall where some Wieroo had built a house across
them.

Upon each house was a slender column supporting a human skull.
Sometimes the columns were at one corner of the roof, sometimes at
another, or again they rose from the center or near the center, and the
columns were of varying heights, from that of a man to those which rose
twenty feet above their roofs.  The skulls were, as a rule,
painted--blue or white, or in combinations of both colors.  The most
effective were painted blue with the teeth white and the eye-sockets
rimmed with white.

There were other skulls--thousands of them--tens, hundreds of
thousands.  They rimmed the eaves of every house, they were set in the
plaster of the outer walls and at no great distance from where Bradley
stood rose a round tower built entirely of human skulls.  And the city
extended in every direction as far as the Englishman could see.

All about him Wieroos were moving across the roofs or winging through
the air.  The sad sound of their flapping wings rose and fell like a
solemn dirge.  Most of them were appareled all in white, like his
captors; but others had markings of red or blue or yellow slashed
across the front of their robes.

His guide pointed toward a doorway in an alley below them.  "Go there
and eat," he commanded, "and then come back.  You cannot escape.  If
any question you, say that you belong to Fosh-bal-soj.  There is the
way."  And this time he pointed to the top of a ladder which protruded
above the eaves of the roof near-by.  Then he turned and reentered the
house.

Bradley looked about him.  No, he could not escape--that seemed
evident.  The city appeared interminable, and beyond the city, if not a
savage wilderness filled with wild beasts, there was the broad inland
sea infested with horrid monsters.  No wonder his captor felt safe in
turning him loose in Oo-oh--he wondered if that was the name of the
country or the city and if there were other cities like this upon the
island.

Slowly he descended the ladder to the seemingly deserted alley which
was paved with what appeared to be large, round cobblestones.  He
looked again at the smooth, worn pavement, and a rueful grin crossed
his features--the alley was paved with skulls.  "The City of Human
Skulls," mused Bradley.  "They must have been collectin' 'em since
Adam," he thought, and then he crossed and entered the building through
the doorway that had been pointed out to him.

Inside he found a large room in which were many Wieroos seated before
pedestals the tops of which were hollowed out so that they resembled
the ordinary bird drinking- and bathing-fonts so commonly seen on
suburban lawns.  A seat protruded from each of the four sides of the
pedestals--just a flat board with a support running from its outer end
diagonally to the base of the pedestal.

As Bradley entered, some of the Wieroos espied him, and a dismal wail
arose.  Whether it was a greeting or a threat, Bradley did not know.
Suddenly from a dark alcove another Wieroo rushed out toward him.  "Who
are you?" he cried.  "What do you want?"

"Fosh-bal-soj sent me here to eat," replied Bradley.

"Do you belong to Fosh-bal-soj?" asked the other.

"That appears to be what he thinks," answered the Englishman.

"Are you cos-ata-lu?" demanded the Wieroo.

"Give me something to eat or I'll be all of that," replied Bradley.

The Wieroo looked puzzled.  "Sit here, jaal-lu," he snapped, and
Bradley sat down unconscious of the fact that he had been insulted by
being called a hyena-man, an appellation of contempt in Caspak.

The Wieroo had seated him at a pedestal by himself, and as he sat
waiting for what was next to transpire, he looked about him at the
Wieroo in his immediate vicinity.  He saw that in each font was a
quantity of food, and that each Wieroo was armed with a wooden skewer,
sharpened at one end; with which they carried solid portions of food to
their mouths.  At the other end of the skewer was fastened a small
clam-shell.  This was used to scoop up the smaller and softer portions
of the repast into which all four of the occupants of each table dipped
impartially.  The Wieroo leaned far over their food, scooping it up
rapidly and with much noise, and so great was their haste that a part
of each mouthful always fell back into the common dish; and when they
choked, by reason of the rapidity with which they attempted to bolt
their food, they often lost it all.  Bradley was glad that he had a
pedestal all to himself.

Soon the keeper of the place returned with a wooden bowl filled with
food.  This he dumped into Bradley's "trough," as he already thought of
it.  The Englishman was glad that he could not see into the dark alcove
or know what were all the ingredients that constituted the mess before
him, for he was very hungry.

After the first mouthful he cared even less to investigate the
antecedents of the dish, for he found it peculiarly palatable.  It
seemed to consist of a combination of meat, fruits, vegetables, small
fish and other undistinguishable articles of food all seasoned to
produce a gastronomic effect that was at once baffling and delicious.

When he had finished, his trough was empty, and then he commenced to
wonder who was to settle for his meal.  As he waited for the proprietor
to return, he fell to examining the dish from which he had eaten and
the pedestal upon which it rested.  The font was of stone worn smooth
by long-continued use, the four outer edges hollowed and polished by
the contact of the countless Wieroo bodies that had leaned against them
for how long a period of time Bradley could not even guess.  Everything
about the place carried the impression of hoary age.  The carved
pedestals were black with use, the wooden seats were worn hollow, the
floor of stone slabs was polished by the contact of possibly millions
of naked feet and worn away in the aisles between the pedestals so that
the latter rested upon little mounds of stone several inches above the
general level of the floor.

Finally, seeing that no one came to collect, Bradley arose and started
for the doorway.  He had covered half the distance when he heard the
voice of mine host calling to him:  "Come back, jaal-lu," screamed the
Wieroo; and Bradley did as he was bid.  As he approached the creature
which stood now behind a large, flat-topped pedestal beside the alcove,
he saw lying upon the smooth surface something that almost elicited a
gasp of astonishment from him--a simple, common thing it was, or would
have been almost anywhere in the world but Caspak--a square bit of
paper!

And on it, in a fine hand, written compactly, were many strange
hieroglyphics!  These remarkable creatures, then, had a written as well
as a spoken language and besides the art of weaving cloth possessed
that of paper-making.  Could it be that such grotesque beings
represented the high culture of the human race within the boundaries of
Caspak?  Had natural selection produced during the countless ages of
Caspakian life a winged monstrosity that represented the earthly
pinnacle of man's evolution?

Bradley had noted something of the obvious indications of a gradual
evolution from ape to spearman as exemplified by the several
overlapping races of Alalus, club-men and hatchet-men that formed the
connecting links between the two extremes with which he, had come in
contact.  He had heard of the Krolus and the Galus--reputed to be still
higher in the plane of evolution--and now he had indisputable evidence
of a race possessing refinements of civilization eons in advance of the
spear-men.  The conjectures awakened by even a momentary consideration
of the possibilities involved became at once as wildly bizarre as the
insane imaginings of a drug addict.

As these thoughts flashed through his mind, the Wieroo held out a pen
of bone fixed to a wooden holder and at the same time made a sign that
Bradley was to write upon the paper.  It was difficult to judge from
the expressionless features of the Wieroo what was passing in the
creature's mind, but Bradley could not but feel that the thing cast a
supercilious glance upon him as much as to say, "Of course you do not
know how to write, you poor, low creature; but you can make your mark."

Bradley seized the pen and in a clear, bold hand wrote:  "John Bradley,
England."  The Wieroo showed evidences of consternation as it seized
the piece of paper and examined the writing with every mark of
incredulity and surprise.  Of course it could make nothing of the
strange characters; but it evidently accepted them as proof that
Bradley possessed knowledge of a written language of his own, for
following the Englishman's entry it made a few characters of its own.

"You will come here again just before Lua hides his face behind the
great cliff," announced the creature, "unless before that you are
summoned by Him Who Speaks for Luata, in which case you will not have
to eat any more."

"Reassuring cuss," thought Bradley as he turned and left the building.

Outside were several Wieroos that had been eating at the pedestals
within.  They immediately surrounded him, asking all sorts of
questions, plucking at his garments, his ammunition-belt and his
pistol.  Their demeanor was entirely different from what it had been
within the eating-place and Bradley was to learn that a house of food
was sanctuary for him, since the stern laws of the Wieroos forbade
altercations within such walls.  Now they were rough and threatening,
as with wings half spread they hovered about him in menacing attitudes,
barring his way to the ladder leading to the roof from whence he had
descended; but the Englishman was not one to brook interference for
long.  He attempted at first to push his way past them, and then when
one seized his arm and jerked him roughly back, Bradley swung upon the
creature and with a heavy blow to the jaw felled it.

Instantly pandemonium reigned.  Loud wails arose, great wings opened
and closed with a loud, beating noise and many clawlike hands reached
forth to clutch him.  Bradley struck to right and left.  He dared not
use his pistol for fear that once they discovered its power he would be
overcome by weight of numbers and relieved of possession of what he
