an arched form. The movements of a stem, 1.2 inch in height, consisting of
three internodes, the lower one almost wholly subterranean, and the upper
one bearing a short,
[page 34]
narrow leaf, is shown during 24 h., in Fig. 24. No glass filament was
employed, but a mark was placed beneath the apex of the leaf. The actual
length of the longer of the two ellipses described by the stem was about
.14 of an inch. On the previous day the chief line of movement was nearly
at right angles to that shown in the present figure, and it was more
simple.

Cassia tora* (Leguminosae).--A seedling was placed before a

Fig. 25. Cassia tora: conjoint circumnutation of cotyledons and hypocotyl,
traced on vertical glass, from 7.10 A.M. Sept. 25th to 7.30 A.M. 26th.
Figure here given reduced to one-half of original scale.

* Seeds of this plant, which grew near the sea-side, were sent to us by
Fritz Müller from S. Brazil. The seedlings did not flourish or flower well
with us; they were sent to Kew, and were pronounced not to be
distinguishable from C. tora.
[page 35]

north-east window; it bent very little towards it, as the hypocotyl which
was left free was rather old, and therefore not highly heliotropic. A
filament had been fixed to the midrib of one of the cotyledons, and the
movement of the whole seedling was traced during two days. The
circumnutation of the hypocotyl is quite insignificant compared with that
of the cotyledons. These rise up vertically at night and come into close
contact; so that they may be said to sleep. This seedling was so old that a
very small true leaf had been developed, which at night was completely
hidden by the closed cotyledons. On Sept. 24th, between 8 A.M. and 5 P.M.,
the cotyledons moved five times up and five times down; they therefore
described five irregular ellipses in the course of the 9 h. The great
nocturnal rise commenced about 4.30 P.M.

On the following morning (Sept. 25th) the movement of the same cotyledon
was again traced in the same manner during 24 h.; and a copy of the tracing
is here given (Fig. 25). The morning was cold, and the window had been
accidentally left open for a short time, which must have chilled the plant;
and this probably prevented it from moving quite as freely as on the
previous day; for it rose only four and sank only four times during the
day, one of the oscillations being very small. At 7.10 A.M., when the first
dot was made, the cotyledons were not fully open or awake; they continued
to open till about 9 A.M., by which time they had sunk a little beneath the
horizon: by 9.30 A.M. they had risen, and then they oscillated up and down;
but the upward and downward lines never quite coincided. At about 4.30 P.M.
the great nocturnal rise commenced. At 7 A.M. on the following morning
(Sept. 26th) they occupied nearly the same level as on the previous
morning, as shown in the diagram: they then began to open or sink in the
usual manner. The diagram leads to the belief that the great periodical
daily rise and fall does not differ essentially, excepting in amplitude,
from the oscillations during the middle of the day.

Lotus Jacoboeus (Leguminosae).--The cotyledons of this plant, after the few
first days of their life, rise so as to stand almost, though rarely quite,
vertically at night. They continue to act in this manner for a long time
even after the development of some of the true leaves. With seedlings, 3
inches in height, and bearing five or six leaves, they rose at night about
45o. They continued to act thus for about an additional fortnight.
Subsequently they remained horizontal at night, though still green
[page 36]
and at last dropped off. Their rising at night so as to stand almost
vertically appears to depend largely on temperature; for when the seedlings
were kept in a cool house, though they still continued to grow, the
cotyledons did not become vertical at night. It is remarkable that the
cotyledons do not generally rise at night to any conspicuous extent during
the first four or five days after germination; but the period was extremely
variable with seedlings kept under the same conditions; and many were
observed. Glass filaments with minute triangles of paper were fixed to the
cotyledons (1 ½ mm. in breadth) of two seedlings, only 24 h. old, and the
hypocotyl was secured to a stick; their movements greatly magnified were
traced, and they certainly circumnutated the whole time on a small scale,
but they did not exhibit any distinct nocturnal and diurnal movement. The
hypocotyls, when left free, circumnutated over a large space.

Another and much older seedling, bearing a half-developed leaf, had its
movements traced in a similar manner during the three first days and nights
of June; but seedlings at this age appear to be very sensitive to a
deficiency of light; they were observed under a rather dim skylight, at a
temperature of between 16o to 17 1/2o C.' and apparently, in consequence of
these conditions, the great daily movement of the cotyledons ceased on the
third day. During the first two days they began rising in the early
afternoon in a nearly straight line, until between 6 and 7 P.M., when they
stood vertically. During the latter part of the night, or more probably in
the early morning, they began to fall or open, so that by 6.45 A.M. they
stood fully expanded and horizontal. They continued to fall slowly for some
time, and during the second day described a single small ellipse, between 9
A.M. and 2 P.M., in addition to the great diurnal movement. The course
pursued during the whole 24 h. was far less complex than in the foregoing
case of Cassia. On the third morning they fell very much, and then
circumnutated on a small scale round the same spot; by 8.20 P.M. they
showed no tendency to rise at night. Nor did the cotyledons of any of the
many other seedlings in the same pot rise; and so it was on the following
night of June 5th. The pot was then taken back into the hot-house, where it
was exposed to the sun, and on the succeeding night all the cotyledons rose
again to a high angle, but did not stand quite vertically. On each of the
above days the line representing the great nocturnal
[page 37]
rise did not coincide with that of the great diurnal fall, so that narrow
ellipses were described, as is the usual rule with circumnutating organs.
The cotyledons are provided with a pulvinus, and its development will
hereafter be described.

Mimosa pudica (Leguminosae).--The cotyledons rise up vertically at night,
so as to close together. Two seedlings were observed in the greenhouse
(temp. 16o to 17o C. or 63o to 65o F.). Their hypocotyls were secured to
sticks, and glass filaments bearing little triangles of paper were affixed
to the cotyledons of both. Their movements were traced on a vertical glass
during 24 h. on November 13th. The pot had stood for some time in the same
position, and they were chiefly illuminated through the glass-roof. The
cotyledons of one of these seedlings moved downward in the morning till
11.30 A.M., and then rose, moving rapidly in the evening until they stood
vertically, so that in this case there was simply a single great daily fall
and rise. The other seedling behaved rather differently, for it fell in the
morning until 11.30 A.M., and then rose, but after 12.10 P.M. again fell;
and the great evening rise did not begin until 1.22 P.M. On the following
morning this cotyledon had fallen greatly from its vertical position by
8.15 A.M. Two other seedlings (one seven and the other eight days old) had
been previously observed under unfavourable circumstances, for they had
been brought into a room and placed before a north-east window, where the
temperature was between only 56o and 57o F. They had, moreover, to be
protected from lateral light, and perhaps were not sufficiently
illuminated. Under these circumstances the cotyledons moved simply
downwards from 7 A.M. till 2 P.M., after which hour and during a large part
of the night they continued to rise. Between 7 and 8 A.M. on the following
morning they fell again; but on this second and likewise on the third day
the movements became irregular, and between 3 and 10.30 P.M. they
circumnutated to a small extent about the same spot; but they did not rise
at night. Nevertheless, on the following night they rose as usual.

Cytisus fragrans (Leguminosae).--Only a few observations were made on this
plant. The hypocotyl circumnutated to a considerable extent, but in a
simple manner--namely, for two hours in one direction, and then much more
slowly back again in a zigzag course, almost parallel to the first line,
and beyond the starting-point. It moved in the same direction all night,
but next morning began to return. The cotyledons continually
[page 38]
move both up and down and laterally; but they do not rise up at night in a
conspicuous manner.

Lupinus luteus (Leguminosae).--Seedlings of this plant were observed
because the cotyledons are so thick (about .08 of an inch) that it seemed
unlikely that they would move. Our observations were not very successful,
as the seedlings are strongly heliotropic, and their circumnutation could
not be accurately observed near a north-east window, although they had been
kept during the previous day in the same position. A seedling was then
placed in darkness with the hypocotyl secured to a stick; both cotyledons
rose a little at first, and then fell during the rest of the day; in the
evening between 5 and 6 P.M. they moved very slowly; during the night one
continued to fall and the other rose, though only a little. The tracing was
not much magnified, and as the lines were plainly zigzag, the cotyledons
must have moved a little laterally, that is, they must have circumnutated.

The hypocotyl is rather thick, about .12 of inch; nevertheless it
circumnutated in a complex course, though to a small extent. The movement
of an old seedling with two true leaves partially developed, was observed
in the dark. As the movement was magnified about 100 times it is not
trustworthy and is not given; but there could be no doubt that the
hypocotyl moved in all directions during the day, changing its course 19
times. The extreme actual distance from side to side through which the
upper part of the hypocotyl passed in the course of 14 ½ hours was only
1/60 of an inch; it sometimes travelled at the rate of 1/50 of an inch in
an hour.

Cucurbita ovifera (Cucurbitaceae).--Radicle: a seed which had

Fig. 26. Cucurbita ovifera: course followed by a radicle in bending
geotropically downwards, traced on a horizontal glass, between 11.25 A.M.
and 10.25 P.M.; the direction during the night is indicated by the broken
line. Movement of bead magnified 14 times.

germinated on damp sand was fixed so that the slightly curved radicle,
which was only .07 inch in length, stood almost vertically
[page 39]
upwards, in which position geotropism would act at first with little power.
A filament was attached near to its base, and projected at about an angle
of 45o above the horizon. The general course followed during the 11 hours
of observation and during the following night is shown in the accompanying
diagram (Fig. 26), and was plainly due to geotropism; but it was also clear
that the radicle circumnutated. By the next morning the tip had curved so
much downwards that the filament, instead of projecting at 45o above the
horizon, was nearly horizontal. Another germinating seed was turned upside
down and covered with damp sand; and a filament was fastened to the radicle
so as to project at an angle of about 50o above the horizon; this radicle
was .35 of an inch in length and a little curved. The course pursued was
mainly governed, as in the last case, by geotropism, but the line traced
during 12 hours and magnified as before was more strongly zigzag, again
showing circumnutation.

Four radicles were allowed to grow downwards over plates of smoked glass,
inclined at 70o to the horizon, under the

Fig. 27. Cucurbita ovifera: tracks left by tips of radicles in growing
downwards over smoked glass-plates, inclined at 70o to the horizon.

Fig. 28. Cucurbita ovifera: circumnutation of arched hypocotyl at a very
early age, traced in darkness on a horizontal glass, from 8 A.M. to 10.20
A.M. on the following day. The movement of the bead magnified 20 times,
here reduced to one-half of original scale.

same conditions as in the cases of Aesculus, Phaseolus, and Vicia.
Facsimiles are here given (Fig. 27) of two of these tracks; and a third
short one was almost as plainly serpentine as that at A. It was also
manifest by a greater or less amount of soot having been swept off the
glasses, that the tips had
[page 40]
pressed alternately with greater and less force on them. There must,
therefore, have been movement in at least two planes at right angles to one
another. These radicles were so delicate that they rarely had the power to
sweep the glasses quite clean. One of them had developed some lateral or
secondary rootlets, which projected a few degrees beneath the horizon; and
it is an important fact that three of them left distinctly serpentine
tracks on the smoked surface, showing beyond doubt that they had
circumnutated like the main or primary radicle. But the tracks were so
slight that they could not be traced and copied after the smoked surface
had been varnished.

Fig. 29. Cucurbita ovifera: circumnutation of straight and vertical
hypocotyl, with filament fastened transversely across its upper end, traced
in darkness on a horizontal glass, from 8.30 A.M. to 8.30 P.M. The movement
of the terminal bead originally magnified about 18 times, here only 4 ½
times.

Hypocotyl.--A seed lying on damp sand was firmly fixed by two crossed wires
and by its own growing radicle. The cotyledons were still enclosed within
the seed-coats; and the short hypocotyl, between the summit of the radicle
and the cotyledons, was as yet only slightly arched. A filament (.85 of
inch in length) was attached at an angle of 35o above the horizon to the
side of the arch adjoining the cotyledons. This part would ultimately form
the upper end of the hypocotyl, after it had grown straight and vertical.
Had the seed been properly planted, the hypocotyl at this stage of growth
would have been deeply buried beneath the surface. The course followed by
the bead of the filament is shown in Fig. 28. The chief lines of movement
from left to right in the figure were parallel to the plane of the two
united cotyledons and of the flattened seed; and this movement would aid in
dragging them out of the seed-coats, which are held down by a special
structure hereafter to be described. The movement at right angles to the
above lines was due to the arched hypocotyl becoming more arched as it
increased in height. The foregoing observations apply to the leg of the
arch next to the cotyledons, but
[page 41]
the other leg adjoining the radicle likewise circumnutated at an equally
early age.

The movement of the same hypocotyl after it had become straight and
vertical, but with the cotyledons only partially expanded, is shown in Fig.
29. The course pursued during 12 h. apparently represents four and a half
ellipses or ovals, with the longer axis of the first at nearly right angles
to that of the others. The longer axes of all were oblique to a line
joining the opposite cotyledons. The actual extreme distance from side to
side over which the summit of the tall hypocotyl passed in the course of 12
h. was .28 of an inch. The original figure was traced on a large scale, and
from the obliquity of the line of view the outer parts of the diagram are
much exaggerated.

Cotyledons.--On two occasions the movements of the cotyledons were traced
on a vertical glass, and as the ascending and descending lines did not
quite coincide, very narrow ellipses were formed; they therefore
circumnutated. Whilst young they rise vertically up at night, but their
tips always remain reflexed; on the following morning they sink down again.
With a seedling kept in complete darkness they moved in the same manner,
for they sank from 8.45 A.M. to 4.30 P.M.; they then began to rise and
remained close together until 10 P.M., when they were last observed. At 7
A.M. on the following morning they were as much expanded as at any hour on
the previous day. The cotyledons of another young seedling, exposed to the
light, were fully open for the first time on a certain day, but were found
completely closed at 7 A.M. on the following morning. They soon began to
expand again, and continued doing so till about 5 P.M.; they then began to
rise, and by 10.30 P.M. stood vertically and were almost closed. At 7 A.M.
on the third morning they were nearly vertical, and again expanded during
the day; on the fourth morning they were not closed, yet they opened a
little in the course of the day and rose a little on the following night.
By this time a minute true leaf had become developed. Another seedling,
still older, bearing a well-developed leaf, had a sharp rigid filament
affixed to one of its cotyledons (85 mm. in length), which recorded its own
movements on a revolving drum with smoked paper. The observations were made
in the hot-house, where the plant had lived, so that there was no change in
temperature or light. The record commenced at 11 A.M. on February 18th; and
from this hour till 3 P.M. the
[page 42]
cotyledon fell; it then rose rapidly till 9 P.M., then very gradually till
3 A.M. February 19th, after which hour it sank gradually till 4.30 P.M.;
but the downward movement was interrupted by one slight rise or oscillation
about 1.30 P.M. After 4.30 P.M. (19th) the cotyledon rose till 1 A.M. (in
the night of February 20th) and then sank very gradually till 9.30 A.M.,
when our observations ceased. The amount of movement was greater on the
18th than on the 19th or on the morning of the 20th.

Cucurbita aurantia.--An arched hypocotyl was found buried a little beneath
the surface of the soil; and in order to prevent it straightening itself
quickly, when relieved from the surrounding pressure of the soil, the two
legs of the arch were tied together. The seed was then lightly covered with
loose damp earth. A filament with a bead at the end was affixed to the
basal leg, the movements of which were observed during two days in the
usual manner. On the first day the arch moved in a zigzag line towards the
side of the basal leg. On the next day, by which time the dependent
cotyledons had been dragged above the surface of the soil, the tied arch
changed its course greatly nine times in the course of 14 ½ h. It swept a
large, extremely irregular, circular figure, returning at night to nearly
the same spot whence it had started early in the morning. The line was so
strongly zigzag that it apparently represented five ellipses, with their
longer axes pointing in various directions. With respect to the periodical
movements of the cotyledons, those of several young seedlings formed
together at 4 P.M. an angle of about 60o, and at 10 P.M. their lower parts
stood vertically and were in contact; their tips, however, as is usual in
the genus, were permanently reflexed. These cotyledons, at 7 A.M. on the
following morning, were again well expanded.

Lagenaria vulgaris (var. miniature Bottle-gourd) (Cucurbitaceae).--A
seedling opened its cotyledons, the movements of which were alone observed,
slightly on June 27th and closed them at night: next day, at noon (28th),
they included an angle of 53o, and at 10 P.M. they were in close contact,
so that each had risen 26 1/2o. At noon, on the 29th, they included an
angle of 118o, and at 10 P.M. an angle of 54o, so each had risen 32o. On the
following day they were still more open, and the nocturnal rise was
greater, but the angles were not measured. Two other seedlings were
observed, and behaved during three days in a closely similar manner. The
cotyledons, therefore,
[page 43]
open more and more on each succeeding day, and rise each night about 30o;
consequently during the first two nights of their life they stand
vertically and come into contact.

Fig. 30. Lagenaria vulgaris: circumnutation of a cotyledon, 1 ½ inch in
length, apex only 4 3/4 inches from the vertical glass, on which its
movements were traced from 7.35 A.M. July 11th to 9.5 A.M. on the 14th.
Figure here given reduced to one-third of original scale.

In order to ascertain more accurately the nature of these movements, the
hypocotyl of a seedling, with its cotyledons well expanded, was secured to
a little stick, and a filament with triangles of paper was affixed to one
of the cotyledons. The observations were made under a rather dim skylight,
and the temperature during the whole time was between 17 1/2o to 18o C. (63o
to 65o F.). Had the temperature been higher and the light brighter, the
movements would probably have been greater. On July 11th (see Fig. 30), the
cotyledon fell from 7.35 A.M. till 10 A.M.; it then rose (rapidly after 4
P.M.) till it stood quite vertically at 8.40 P.M. During the early morning
of the next day (12th) it fell, and continued to fall till 8 A.M., after
which hour it rose, then fell, and again rose, so that by 10.35 P.M. it
stood much higher than it did in the morning, but was not vertical as on
the preceding night. During the following early morning and whole day
(13th) it fell and circumnutated, but had not risen when observed late in
the evening; and this was probably due to the deficiency of heat or light,
or of both. We thus see that the cotyledons became more widely open at noon
on each succeeding day; and that they rose considerably each night, though
not acquiring a vertical position, except during the first two nights.

Cucumis dudaim (Cucurbitaceae).--Two seedlings had opened
[page 44]
their cotyledons for the first time during the day,--one to the extent of
90o and the other rather more; they remained in nearly the same position
until 10.40 P.M.; but by 7 A.M. on the following morning the one which had
been previously open to the extent of 90o had its cotyledons vertical and
completely shut; the other seedling had them nearly shut. Later in the
morning they opened in the ordinary manner. It appears therefore that the
cotyledons of this plant close and open at somewhat different periods from
those of the foregoing species of the allied genera of Cucurbita and
Lagenaria.

Fig. 31. Opuntia basilaris: conjoint circumnutation of hypocotyl and
cotyledon; filament fixed longitudinally to cotyledon, and movement traced
during 66 h. on horizontal glass. Movement of the terminal bead magnified
about 30 times, here reduced to one-third scale. Seedling kept in
hot-house, feebly illuminated from above.

Opuntia basilaris (Cacteae).--A seedling was carefully observed, because,
considering its appearance and the nature of the mature plant, it seemed
very unlikely that either the hypocotyl or cotyledons would circumnutate to
an appreciable extent. The cotyledons were well developed, being .9 of an
inch in length, .22 in breadth, and .15 in thickness. The almost
cylindrical hypocotyl, now bearing a minute spinous bud on its summit, was
only .45 of an inch in height, and .19 in diameter. The tracing (Fig. 31)
shows the combined movement of the hypocotyl and of one of the cotyledons,
from 4.45 P.M. on May 28th to 11 A.M. on the 31st. On the 29th a nearly
perfect ellipse was completed. On the 30th the hypocotyl moved, from some
unknown cause, in the same general direction in a zigzag line; but between
4.30 and 10 P.M. almost completed a second small ellipse. The cotyledons
move only a little up and down: thus at 10.15 P.M. they stood only 10o
higher than at noon. The chief seat of movement therefore, at least when
the cotyledons are rather old as in the present case, lies in the
hypocotyl. The ellipse described on the 29th had its longer axis directed
at nearly right angles to a line joining the two cotyledons. The actual
amount of movement of the bead at the end of the
[page 45]
filament was, as far as could be ascertained, about .14 of an inch.

Fig. 32. Helianthus annuus: circumnutation of hypocotyl, with filament
fixed across its summit, traced on a horizontal glass in darkness, from
8.45 A.M. to 10.45 P.M., and for an hour on following morning. Movement of
bead magnified 21 times, here reduced to one-half of original scale.

Helianthus annuus (Compositae).--The upper part of the hypocotyl moved
during the day-time in the course shown in the annexed figure (Fig. 32). As
the line runs in various directions, crossing itself several times, the
movement may be considered as one of circumnutation. The extreme actual
distance travelled was at least .1 of an inch. The movements of the
cotyledons of two seedlings were observed; one facing a north-east window,
and the other so feebly illuminated from above us as to be almost in
darkness. They continued to sink till about noon, when they began to rise;
but between 5 and 7 or 8 P.M. they either sank a little, or moved
laterally, and then again began to rise. At 7 A.M. on the following morning
those on the plant before the north-east window had opened so little that
they stood at an angle of 73o above the horizon, and were not observed any
longer. Those on the seedling which had been kept in almost complete
darkness, sank during the whole day, without rising about mid-day, but rose
during the night. On the third and fourth days they continued sinking
without any alternate ascending movement; and this, no doubt, was due to
the absence of light.

Primula Sinensis (Primulaceae).--A seedling was placed with the two
cotyledons parallel to a north-east window on a day when the light was
nearly uniform, and a filament was affixed to one of them.  From
observations subsequently made on another seedling with the stem secured to
a stick, the greater part of the movement shown in the annexed figure (Fig.
33), must have been that of the hypocotyl, though the cotyledons certainly
move up and down to a certain extent both during the day and night. The
movements of the same seedling were traced
[page 46]
on the following day with nearly the same result; and there can be no doubt
about the circumnutation of the hypocotyl.

Fig. 33. Primula Sinensis: conjoint circumnutation of hypocotyl and
cotyledon, traced on vertical glass, from 8.40 A.M. to 10.45 P.M. Movements
of bead magnified about 26 times.

Cyclamen Persicum (Primulaceae).--This plant is generally supposed to
produce only a single cotyledon, but Dr. H. Gressner* has shown that a
second one is developed after a long interval of time. The hypocotyl is
converted into a globular corm, even before the first cotyledon has broken
through the ground with its blade closely enfolded and with its petiole in
the form of an arch, like the arched hypocotyl or epicotyl of any ordinary
dicotyledonous plant. A glass filament was affixed to a cotyledon, .55 of
an inch in height, the petiole of which had straightened itself and stood
nearly vertical, but with the blade not as yet fully expanded. Its
movements were traced during 24 ½ h. on a horizontal glass, magnified 50
times; and in this interval it described two irregular small circles; it
therefore circumnutates, though on an extremely small scale.

Fig. 34. Stapelia sarpedon: circumnutation of hypocotyl, illuminated from
above, traced on horizontal glass, from 6.45 A.M. June 26th to 8.45 A.M.
28th. Temp. 23-24o C. Movement of bead magnified 21 times.

Stapelia sarpedon (Asclepiadeae).--This plant, when mature, resembles a
cactus. The flattened hypocotyl is fleshy, enlarged in the upper part, and
bears two rudimentary cotyledons. It breaks through the ground in an arched
form, with the rudimentary cotyledons closed or in contact. A filament was
affixed almost

* 'Bot. Zeitung,' 1874, p. 837.
[page 47]

vertically to the hypocotyl of a seedling half an inch high; and its
movements were traced during 50 h. on a horizontal glass (Fig. 34). From
some unknown cause it bowed itself to one side, and as this was effected by
a zigzag course, it probably circumnutated; but with hardly any other
seedling observed by us was this movement so obscurely shown.

Ipomoea caerulea vel Pharbitis nil (Convolvulaceae).--Seedlings of this
plant were observed because it is a twiner, the upper internodes of which
circumnutate conspicuously; but like other twining plants, the first few
internodes which rise above the ground are stiff enough to support
themselves, and therefore do not circumnutate in any plainly recognisable
manner.* In this particular instance the fifth internode (including the
hypocotyl) was the first which plainly circumnutated and twined round a
stick. We therefore wished to learn whether circumnutation could be
observed in the hypocotyl if carefully observed in our usual manner. Two
seedlings were kept in the dark with filaments fixed to the upper part of
their hypocotyls; but from circumstances not worth explaining their
movements were traced for only a short time. One moved thrice forwards and
twice backwards in nearly opposite directions, in the course of 3 h. 15 m.;
and the other twice forwards and twice backwards in 2 h. 22 m. The
hypocotyl therefore circumnutated at a remarkably rapid rate. It may here
be added that a filament was affixed transversely to the summit of the
second internode above the cotyledons of a little plant 3 ½ inches in
height; and its movements were traced on a horizontal glass. It
circumnutated, and the actual distance travelled from side to side was a
quarter of an inch, which was too small an amount to be perceived without
the aid of marks.

The movements of the cotyledons are interesting from their complexity and
rapidity, and in some other respects. The hypocotyl (2 inches high) of a
vigorous seedling was secured to a stick, and a filament with triangles of
paper was affixed to one of the cotyledons. The plant was kept all day in
the hot-house, and at 4.20 P.M. (June 20th) was placed under a skylight in
the house, and observed occasionally during the evening and night. It fell
in a slightly zigzag line to a moderate extent from 4.20 P.M. till 10.15
P.M. When looked at shortly after midnight (12.30 P.M.) it had risen a very
little, and considerably by

* 'Movements and Habits of Climbing Plants,' p. 33, 1875.
[page 48]

3.45 A.M. When again looked at, at 6.10 A.M. (21st), it had fallen largely.
A new tracing was now begun (see Fig. 35), and soon afterwards, at 6.42
A.M., the cotyledon had risen a little. During the forenoon it was observed
about every hour; but between 12.30 and 6 P.M. every half-hour. If the
observations had been made at these short intervals during the whole day,
the figure would have been too intricate to have been copied. As it was,
the cotyledon moved up and down in the course of 16 h. 20 m. (i.e. between
6.10 A.M. and 10.30 P.M.) thirteen times.

Fig 35. Ipomoea caerulea: circumnutation of cotyledon, traced on vertical
glass, from 6.10 A.M. June 21st to 6.45 A.M. 22nd. Cotyledon with petiole
1.6 inch in length, apex of blade 4.1 inch from the vertical glass; so
movement not greatly magnified; temp. 20o C.

The cotyledons of this seedling sank downwards during both evenings and the
early part of the night, but rose during the latter part. As this is an
unusual movement, the cotyledons of twelve other seedlings were observed;
they stood almost or quite horizontally at mid-day, and at 10 P.M. were all
declined at various angles. The most usual angle was between 30o and 35o;
but three stood at about 50o and one at even 70o beneath the horizon. The
blades of all these cotyledons had attained almost their full size, viz.
from 1 to 1 ½ inches in length, measured along their midribs. It is a
remarkable fact that whilst young--that is, when less than half an inch in
length, measured in the same manner--they do not sink
[page 49]
downwards in the evening. Therefore their weight, which is considerable
when almost fully developed, probably came into play in originally
determining the downward movement. The periodicity of this movement is much
influenced by the degree of light to which the seedlings have been exposed
during the day; for three kept in an obscure place began to sink about
noon, instead of late in the evening; and those of another seedling were
almost paralysed by having been similarly kept during two whole days. The
cotyledons of several other species of Ipomoea likewise sink downwards late
in the evening.

Cerinthe major (Boragineae).--The circumnutation of the hypocotyl of a
young seedling with the cotyledons hardly

Fig. 36. Cerinthe major: circumnutation of hypocotyl, with filament fixed
across its summit, illuminated from above, traced on horizontal glass, from
9.26 A.M. to 9.53 P.M. on Oct. 25th. Movement of the bead magnified 30
times, here reduced to one-third of original scale.

expanded, is shown in the annexed figure (Fig. 36), which apparently
represents four or five irregular ellipses, described in the course of a
little over 12 hours. Two older seedlings were similarly observed,
excepting that one of them was kept in the dark; their hypocotyls also
circumnutated, but in a more simple manner. The cotyledons on a seedling
exposed to the light fell from the early morning until a little after noon,
and then continued to rise until 10.30 P.M. or later. The cotyledons of
this same seedling acted in the same general manner during the two
following days. It had previously been tried in the dark, and after being
thus kept for only 1 h. 40 m. the cotyledons began at 4.30 P.M. to sink,
instead of continuing to rise till late at night.
[page 50]

Nolana prostrata (Nolaneae).--The movements were not traced, but a pot with
seedlings, which had been kept in the dark for an hour, was placed under
the microscope, with the micrometer eye-piece so adjusted that each
division equalled 1/500th of an inch. The apex of one of the cotyledons
crossed rather obliquely four divisions in 13 minutes; it was also sinking,
as shown by getting out of focus. The seedlings were again placed in
darkness for another hour, and the apex now crossed two divisions in 6 m.
18 s.; that is, at very nearly the same rate as before. After another
interval of an hour in darkness, it crossed two divisions in 4 m. 15 s.,
therefore at a quicker rate. In the afternoon, after a longer interval in
the dark, the apex was motionless, but after a time it recommenced moving,
though slowly; perhaps the room was too cold. Judging from previous cases,
there can hardly be a doubt that this seedling was circumnutating.

Fig. 37. Solanum lycopersicum: circumnutation of hypocotyl, with filament
fixed across its summit, traced on horizontal glass, from 10 A.M. to 5 P.M.
Oct. 24th. Illuminated obliquely from above. Movement of bead magnified
about 35 times, here reduced to one-third of original scale.

Solanum lycopersicum (Solaneae).--The movements of the hypocotyls of two
seedling tomatoes were observed during seven hours, and there could be no
doubt that both circumnutated. They were illuminated from above, but by an
accident a little light entered on one side, and in the accompanying figure
(Fig. 37) it may be seen that the hypocotyl moved to this side (the upper
one in the figure), making small loops and zigzagging in its course. The
movements of the cotyledons were also traced both on vertical and
horizontal glasses; their angles with the horizon were likewise measured at
various hours. They fell from 8.30 A.M. (October 17th) to about noon; then
moved laterally in a zigzag line, and at about 4 P.M. began to rise; they
continued to do so until 10.30 P.M., by which hour they stood vertically
and were asleep. At what hour of the night or early morning they began to
fall was not ascertained. Owing to the lateral movement shortly after
mid-day, the descending and ascending lines did not coincide, and irregular
ellipses were described during each 24 h. The regular periodicity of these
movements is destroyed, as we shall hereafter see, if the seedlings are
kept in the dark.
[page 51]

Solanum palinacanthum.--Several arched hypocotyls rising nearly .2 of an
inch above the ground, but with the cotyledons still buried beneath the
surface, were observed, and the tracings showed that they circumnutated.
Moreover, in several cases little open circular spaces or cracks in the
argillaceous sand which surrounded the arched hypocotyls were visible, and
these appeared to have been made by the hypocotyls having bent first to one
and then to another side whilst growing upwards. In two instances the
vertical arches were observed to move to a considerable distance backwards
from the point where the cotyledons lay buried; this movement, which has
been noticed in some other cases, and which seems to aid in extracting the
cotyledons from the buried seed-coats, is due to the commencement of the
straightening of the hypocotyl. In order to prevent this latter movement,
the two legs of an arch, the

Fig. 38. Solanum palinacanthum: circumnutation of an arched hypocotyl, just
emerging from the ground, with the two legs tied together, traced in
darkness on a horizontal glass, from 9.20 A.M. Dec. 17th to 8.30 A.M. 19th.
Movement of bead magnified 13 times; but the filament, which was affixed
obliquely to the crown of the arch, was of unusual length.

summit of which was on a level with the surface of the soil, were tied
together; the earth having been previously removed to a little depth all
round. The movement of the arch during 47 hours under these unnatural
circumstances is exhibited in the annexed figure.

The cotyledons of some seedlings in the hot-house were horizontal about
noon on December 13th; and at 10 P.M. had risen to an angle of 27o above
the horizon; at 7 A.M. on the following
[page 52]
morning, before it was light, they had risen to 59o above the horizon; in
the afternoon of the same day they were found again horizontal.

Beta vulgaris (Chenopodeae).--The seedlings are excessively sensitive to
light, so that although on the first day they were uncovered only during
two or three minutes at each observation, they all moved steadily towards
the side of the room whence the light proceeded, and the tracings consisted
only of slightly zigzag lines directed towards the light. On the next day
the plants were placed in a completely darkened room, and at each
observation were illuminated as much as possible from vertically above by a
small wax taper. The annexed figure (Fig. 39) shows the movement of the
hypocotyl during 9 h. under these circumstances. A second seedling was
similarly observed at the same time, and the tracing had the same peculiar
character, due to the hypocotyl often moving and returning in nearly
parallel lines. The movement of a third hypocotyl differed greatly.

Fig. 39. Beta vulgaris: circumnutation of hypocotyl, with filament fixed
obliquely across its summit, traced in darkness on horizontal glass, from
8.25 A.M. to 5.30 P.M. Nov. 4th. Movement of bead magnified 23 times, here
reduced to one-third of original scale.

We endeavoured to trace the movements of the cotyledons, and for this
purpose some seedlings were kept in the dark, but they moved in an abnormal
manner; they continued rising from 8.45 A.M. to 2 P.M., then moved
laterally, and from 3 to 6 P.M. descended; whereas cotyledons which have
been exposed all the day to the light rise in the evening so as to stand
vertically at night; but this statement applies only to young seedlings.
For instance, six seedlings in the greenhouse had their cotyledons
partially open for the first time on the morning of November 15th, and at
8.45 P.M. all were completely closed, so that they might properly be said
to be asleep. Again, on the morning of November 27th, the cotyledons of
four other seedlings, which were surrounded by a collar of brown paper so
that they received light only from above, were open to the extent of 39o;
at 10 P.M. they were completely closed; next morning (November 28th) at
6.45 A.M. whilst it was still dark, two of them
[page 53]
were partially open and all opened in the course of the morning; but at
10.20 P.M. all four (not to mention nine others which had been open in the
morning and six others on another occasion) were again completely closed.
On the morning of the 29th they were open, but at night only one of the
four was closed, and this only partially; the three others had their
cotyledons much more raised than during the day. On the night of the 30th
