
OTIS BROTHERS & CO.

NO. 309 BROADWAY, NEW YORK.

       *       *       *       *       *

Do your own Printing

WITH A NOVELTY JOB PRINTING PRESS

The only Low-Priced Press ever invented, that will do good printing.
Printing can be done as well and as rapidly on this press as on the best
that printers use; and for printing offices where artificial power is
not used, or for business men, apothecaries, grocers, country traders,
and others who desire to do their own printing, it is entirely without a
rival. The Best Holiday Gift for Boys. Price of Presses--$15, $30,
$32, and $50. Send for full descriptive illustrated circulars, with
testimonials from all parts of the country, and specimens of plain and
color printing done on the press, & specimen sheets of types, borders,
cuts, rules, etc., to

BENJ. O. WOODS, Proprietor,

351 Federal st., Boston, Mass.

[Illustration]

       *       *       *       *       *

IRON STEAMERS, HULLS, & LIGHTERS.

Estimates & Specifications furnished on application. HENRY J. DAVISON,
77 Liberty st., New York, Agent for Pusey, Jones & Co. 21 tf

       *       *       *       *       *

HAIR, WOOL, AND COTTON DUCK FELT, for sale by the Square foot,or boilers
covered by Contract. RUSSIAN FELT, of every description, a SPECIALTY, by
HENRY J. DAVISON

77 Liberty st., N.Y.

       *       *       *       *       *

WAGON AXLES, COMMON, CONCORD, IRON HUB, and SOLID COLLAR, of superior
quality & finish. Also, Manufacturers of Machinery, Pat. Steam and Belt
Forge Hammers, Power Shears, Car Axles, Windlass Necks Truss Shapes,
Crowbars, Boiler Fronts, Cast Iron Jack Screws, Patent Swage Blocks,
Tire Benders. Forgings & Castings. Address, for Price List, LYMAN
KINSLEY & CO., Cambridgeport, Mass.

       *       *       *       *       *

TO THE WORKING CLASS.--We are now prepared to furnish all classes with
constant employment at home, the whole of the time or for the spare
moments. Business new, light and profitable. Persons of either sex
easily earn from 5oc. to $5 per evening, and a proportional sum by
devoting their whole time to the business. Boys and girls earn nearly as
much as men. That all who see this notice may send their address, and
test the business, we make this unparalleled offer: To such as are not
well satisfied, we will send $1 to pay for the trouble of writing. Full
particulars, a valuable sample, which will do to commence work on, and a
copy of _The People's Literary Companion_--one of the largest and best
family newspapers published--all sent free by mail. Reader, if you want
permanent, profitable work, address E.C. ALLEN & CO., Augusta, Maine.

       *       *       *       *       *

INVENTORS, AGENTS, MERCHANTS, and all Dealers in Patents or Patented
Goods, should subscribe for the PATENT STAR, devoted to their Interests.
Terms 5oc. per year. Send stamp for sample to

BENT, GOODNOW & CO., Boston, Mass.

       *       *       *       *       *

WROUCHT IRON BEAMS & GIRDERS

The Union Iron Mills, Pittsburgh, Pa. The attention of Engineers and
Architects is called to our improved Wrought-iron Beams and Girders
(patented), in which the compound welds between the stem and flanges,
which have proved so objectionable in the old mode of manufacturing,
are entirely avoided, we are prepared to furnish all sizes at terms
as favorable as can be obtained elsewhere. For descriptive lithograph
address the Union Iron Mills. Pittsburgh, Pa.

       *       *       *       *       *

ASHCROFT'S LOW-WATER DETECTOR will insure your Boiler against explosion.
JOHN ASHCROFT, 50 John st.. New York. 16 tf

       *       *       *       *       *

POWER LOOMS.

Impreved Drop Box. Spooling, Winding, Beaming, Dyeing, and Sizing
Machines Self-Actmg, Wool-Scouring Machines, Hydra Extractors Also,
Shafting, Pulleys, and Sen-Oiling Adjusable Han...ers [Transcribers
note: word illegible], manuf'd by THOS. WOOD, 2106 Wood st., Philad'a.
Pa

       *       *       *       *       *

WOODBURY'S PATENT

Planing and Matching

and Molding Machmes, Gray & Wood's Planers, Self-oiling Saw Arbors, and
other wood working machinery.

  S. A. WOODS,         / 91 Liberty street, N. Y.;
  Send for Circulars.  \ 67 Sudbury street, Boston.

       *       *       *       *       *

BOILER FELTING SAVES TWENTY-FIVE PER CENT OF FUEL.

JOHN ASHCROFT,

50 John st. New York.

16 tf

       *       *       *       *       *

WATCH SWINDLES.--Humbug Music

Boxes. Bogus Money. Four columns of "Ventilations" in the "STAR SPANGLED
BANNER."

       *       *       *       *       *

BUERK'S WATCHMAN'S TIME DETECTOR.--Important for all large Corporation
and Manufacturing concerns--capable of controlling with the utmost
accuracy the motion of a watchman or patrolman, as the same reaches
different stations of his beat, Send for a Circular.

J.E.BUEBK,

P.O.Box 1,057, Boston, Mass.

N.B.--This detector is covered by two U. S. patents. Parties using or
selling these instruments without authority from me will be dealt with
according to law.

       *       *       *       *       *

LATHE CHUCKS--HORTON'S PATENT--from 4 to 36 inches. Also for car wheels.
Address

E. HORTON & SON, Windsor Locks, Conn.

       *       *       *       *       *

CATALOGUES 10 CENTS EACH, SENT BY MAIL.

_MATHEMATICAL INSTRUMENTS_, 112 pages. _OPTICAL INSTRUMENTS_, 72 pages.
_MAGIC LANTERNS and STEREOPTICONS_, 100pp. _PHILOSOPHICAL INSTRUMENTS_,
84 pages. JAMES W. QUEEN & CO., 924 Chestnut st..Philadelphia Pa

       *       *       *       *       *

COTTON AND WOOL

SHODDY PICKERS

Of the most approved English pattern, built by RICHABD KITSON

Lowell, Mass.

       *       *       *       *       *

Excelsior Lubricator

For Cylinders of Engines. The most durable and best oil cup,
manufactured by B. E. LEHMAN, Lehigh Valley Brass Works. Bethlehem, Pa.
Send for desc'ive circular

       *       *       *       *       *

MODELS, PATTERNS, EXPERIMENTAL,

and other machinery. Models for the Patent Office built to order by
HOLSKE MACHINE CO., Nos. 528, 530 and 532 Water st., near Jefferson.
Refer to SCIENTIFIC AMERICAN office. 14 tf

       *       *       *       *       *

MACHINERY FOR SALE--

Consisting of steam engines, boilers, machinists' tools, planers from
two to five feet wide, lathes from 11/2 to 7-ft. swing, and one boring,
turning, and slotting mill, of 8-ft. swing, trip hammer, blacksmith's
tools, fire proof safes, portable mills, fan blowers, water wheels,
pulleys, shafting, belting, platform scales, etc., etc.; all at prices
that will insure a rapid sale. Send for schedule. Engines, water wheels,
and machinery made to order.

GEOBGE T. McLAUTHLIN & CO.,

120 Fulton st., Boston, Mass.

       *       *       *       *       *

M. N. FORNEY, Mechanical Engineer, 64 B'dway (Room 48), N.Y. Designs,
Plans, Estimates and Working Drawings of Machinery. etc., promptly and
accurately made. Instruction given in Mechanical Drawing to a limited
number of pupils.

       *       *       *       *       *

NEW SCROLL SAW (Moyer's Pat.), with--out Post or Gate; uniform Tension;
no jarring or noise; executes better and faster than any other. Send for
a circular.

HAMPSON & COPELAND,

42 Cortlandt st., New York.

       *       *       *       *       *

PERFECTLY RELIABLE.--Established 1863. Satisfaction Guaranteed. "Star
Spangled Banner." 75 cents a year.

       *       *       *       *       *

THE WOODWARD STEAM-PUMP MANUFACTUBING COMPANY, Manufacturers of the
Woodward Pat. Improved Safety Steam Pump and Fire Engine, Steam, Water,
and Gas Fittings of all kinds. Also, Dealers in Wrought-iron Pipe,
Boiler Tubes, etc. Hotels, Churches, Factories, & Public Buildings,
Heated by Steam, Low Pressure. Woodward Building, 76 and 78 Center st.,
cor. of Worth st. (formerly of 77 Beekman st.), N.Y. All parties are
hereby cautioned against infringing the Pat. Bight of the above Pump. G.
M. WOODWABD, Pres't.

       *       *       *       *       *

CAMDEN

Tool and Tube Works,

Camden, N. J. Manufacturers of Wrought Iron Tube. Brass Work and
Fittings, and all the most improved TOOLS for Screwing, Cutting, and
Fitting Pipe. Screwing Machines for Pipe, of five different sizes. Pipe
Tongs, Common and Adjustable; Pipe Cutters, Pipe Vises, Taps, Bearners,
Drills, Screwing Stocks, and Solid Dies. Peace's Patent Screwing Stocks,
with dies. No. I Screws 3/4, 3/8, 1/2, 3/4, Pipe. Price complete, $10. No. 2
Screws, 1, 11/4, 11/2, 2 Pipe, $20. No. 3 both screws and cuts off, 21/2, 3,
31/2, 4, $65.

       *       *       *       *       *

TODD & RAFFERTY, Manufacturers and DEALERS IN MACHINERY.

Works, Paterson, N. J.; Warerooms, 10 Barclay St., N. Y Boilers, Steam
Pumps, Machinists' Tools. Also, Flax, Hemp, Rope, and Oakum Machinery,
Snow's and Judson's Governors, Wright's pat. Variable Cut-off & other
engines.

       *       *       *       *       *

To Electro-Platers.

BATTERIES, CHEMICALS, AND MATERIALS, in sets or single, with books
of instruction, manufactured and sold by THOMAS HALL, Manufacturing
Electrician, 19 Bromfleld st., Boston, Mass. Illustrated catalogue sent
free on application.

       *       *       *       *       *

PORTABLE STEAM ENGINES, combining the maximum of efficiency, durability
and economy, with the minimum of weight and price. They are widely and
favorably known, more than 750 being in use. All warranted satisfactory
or no sale. Descriptive circulars sent on application. Address

J C HOADLEY & CO Lawrence, Mass

       *       *       *       *       *

BLIND-SLAT TENON MACHINE.--We have recently patented one of the above
Machines, which we GUARANTEE SUPERIOR to any machine of the kind in
use. Shall be pleased to furnish cuts and prices of this and any other
Wood-working Machinery. Address STEPTOE, McFABLAN & CO., Cincinnati,
Ohio.

       *       *       *       *       *

FOR CUTS AND PRICES of Machinists' Tools, address STEPTOE, McFARLAN &
CO.,

Cincinnati, Ohio,

       *       *       *       *       *

STEAM AND WATER GAGES, STEAM Whistles, Gage Cocks, and Engineers'
Supplies. 16 tf

JOHN ASHCROFT, 50 John St., New York.

       *       *       *       *       *

H. BOARDMAN, Lancaster, Pa.--Superior Patent Cork-cutting Machinery,
Hard-laid Twine Cord, and Rope Machinery, with Pat. Stop & Condenser

       *       *       *       *       *

WOODWORTH PLANERS a SPECIALTY--From new patterns of the most approved
style and workmanship. Wood-working Machinery generally. Nos. 24 and 26
Central, corner Union street, Worcester, Mass. Warerooms. 42 Cortlandt
street, New York.

WITHERBY, RUGG & RICHARDSON.

       *       *       *       *       *

SILICATE OF SODA, IN ITS VARIOUS forms, manufactured as a specialty, by
Philadelphia Quartz Co., 783 South 2d St., Philadelpnia, Pa.

       *       *       *       *       *

11-2 by 2 FEET IS THE superb new plate "Evangeline," given free to all
