The next morning he asked for, and received, command of a light cruiser
whose Captain had been severely wounded, along with such escort as
could be assembled from the decimated ranks of other destroyer groups
such as his own.  He then went to speak to Col. Liebenstein, who upon
the death of Gen. Tarkanean had become Fleet Commander.  He found the
man seated at his desk.

The Colonel, a decent man but with many concerns, heard what he had to
say, listening darkly and looking up at him with an ever deeper frown
of discontent.  But whether this frown was directed at the Soviets, the
result of his own feelings of regret, or anger at the willful young
Captain, it became harder and harder to discern.  Brunner grew more
reluctant to lay out his full intentions before him, and finally
stopped altogether.  Liebenstein looked hard at him for what seemed a
long time, then spoke.

"What, exactly, are you proposing we do?"  The younger man's intent,
suffering eyes did have a way of making one feel uncomfortable.

"Resist them.  Delay, object.  For Christ's sake, the Dutch will be
here in ninety-six---"

"NO."

Brunner lowered his face, red with rage and shame.  "But how can we
just....."  He could not finish for the lump in his throat.
Liebenstein became angry.

"I said, NO.  And if you disobey me in this, or follow up with any
scheme of your own, your next command will be of a cell-block.  Do you
understand?"

"Yes, sir."  Brunner saluted brusquely, and started to leave.  The
Colonel called him back.

"You have something more you want to say to me?  You are still one of
my officers; I won't have it festering inside."

"Yes, Colonel."  His hesitated, his voice shaking with emotion.  "I
have to write nearly two hundred letters to next of kin.  When I
contact the families of the deceased. . .what the hell am I supposed to
say they died for?"  Without waiting for an answer he stalked out of
the room, leaving a shadow behind him.

Liebenstein could not help feeling rueful, though he tried to justify
his position, musing darkly that the same qualities of stubborn
righteousness that inspired men to follow such a leader, often led to
the destruction of all.  But still there was a shadow in the room.


*


The first thing that Brunner did upon assuming command of the Icarus
(he found the name somehow appropriate) was to transfer and surround
himself with as many of his former comrades as he could.  A bond had
been formed between them in those thirty-six hours that could never be
broken, and he wanted them there if.....  He also knew they would
remain loyal, and understand his purpose.

He asked his wife to remain about the Kythera until the issue was
resolved, but she refused.  And it was no use trying to dissuade her
once she set her mind to something.  Again the qualities he prized
about all others showed through in her---loyalty, and courage in time
of need.

For there comes a time in every man's life when he must put it all on
the line, and take a dangerous chance.  Brunner had felt himself
fighting for so long, without knowing why, that even the reunion with
his wife, and the unexpected birth of his son, had not been enough to
pacify his need to KNOW.  In fact, they had intensified it.

He had brought a new life into the world, and the responsibility he
felt both for that act, and for the fusing of his life with Ara's, set
against a background of war and death, all but overwhelmed him.
Without knowing if mortal life were ultimately just, or inherently
sinister and cruel, they crushed him utterly.

Upon coming to the morning after the Dracus landing, one thought only
would take shape in his mind, and hammered at him relentlessly.  "What
kind of a world is this?  What kind of a world?"

And now he had to answer that question not only for himself, but for
his son as well.  And thoughts of death's separation from Ara, who was
years younger, and infinitely healthier than himself, unhinged him with
equal strength.  Did he have the right.....  WAS THERE ANYTHING BEYOND
THE CRADLE AND THE GRAVE?  
For him, now, it was all reduced to the same ancient question, which
for the sake of his soul he could not put off any longer.  WAS THERE
GOD?  And of equal and inseparable importance, the manifestations of
which he saw clearly before him:  COULD ONE MAN MAKE A DIFFERENCE?
Could he stand up for what he believed, resist what he knew to be evil,
and still survive?

To find these answers was to him worth risking all.  He had not forced
the issue, nor was it due to some flaw in his character that he saw it
as it was.  It had come to him of itself, inevitable, and now he would
find out.  A part of him wished that he could somehow send away his
wife and son.  But she would not hear of it, and that, too, was
probably as it should be.  Better no life than half life.  The child
remained on Kythera.



*                        *                        *



The withdrawal had begun.  The Soviet ships remained at a distant
semi-circle beyond Rembrandt, broken into two groups with a wide
corridor between.  Through this channel passed slowly, as if in solemn
changing of the guard, the scorched and battle-marked Coalition fleet.

This much Liebenstein had insisted upon, meaning for the Russians to
get a good hard look at those who had truly fought and won the battle.
The young Captain's words were not wholly without effect, though the
Colonel, as a proud man must when his mind is swayed by another and he
is forced to act, told himself that the sentiments behind the move were
his own.  In fact, he had all but put Brunner from his mind.  It was
only from oversight that he allowed his contingent to be the last to
pass through.

Only they did not pass through.

Seeing the tardy vessels in his rear viewscreen, the Colonel thought at
first there must be some mistake, or mechanical problem, and so was not
overly concerned.  Until looking back in horror and sudden
understanding, he recognized the call letters of the light cruiser, and
remembered under whose command.....  And saw the accompanying
destroyers fanning out to either side of it---BLOCKING THE SOVIETS'
PATH.

And there they stayed, facing down two battleships and escort, twenty
times their own strength.

"HUMBOLT," he ejaculated to his communications officer.  "Get me the
bridge of the Icarus. . .quickly!"  The com officer did as he was told,
hailing the vessel several times.  "WELL?"  After a moment.

"Sorry, sir.  There's nothing wrong with the equipment.....  She just
won't respond."  The colonel was livid.

"Then get me number one. . .number TWO destroyer.  ANY of them!"

"Still trying.....  No response, sir."

The reason there was no response was that the destroyers had shut down
all but channeled communications between themselves and their immediate
Commander.  And the voice and com-screen of the Icarus were otherwise
engaged.  Its outgoing signal, however, was neither coded, nor directed
toward the Soviet battleship only.  The whole of both fleets were free
to listen, and to judge.

Brunner stood in the sunken middle of the flying bridge---his wife
stood beside him---gazing with surprising composure into the angry
features on the screen before him:  Colonel Joyce, the man with the
power to end his life.

"Colonel.  Thank you for speaking with me.  I don't believe you've met
my---"  The voice that cut him off was cold and cruel.

"What the hell do you think you're doing, Brunner?"

"I am experiencing difficulty with my ship's retreat mechanism:  she
doesn't seem to be able to leave the colonies just yet."

"And how long do you think that will last?"  A threat more than a
question.  The two understood one another perfectly.

"I'd say, roughly of course, about forty-eight hours.  Just about the
time the Dutch return to---"

"Now listen to me, you pathetic little worm.  If you don't get out of
the way, and I mean RIGHT now, I'll blow you and your little band of
heroes to bloody shrapnel.  Don't think I won't!"

Brunner's voice shook with subdued passion, but not fear.

"I don't think you won't.  I know it.  Because to do that you'd have to
brutally attack, and murder your own allies.  And have to explain to
the Coalition, the Japanese, and everybody else, how you had no choice
but to desecrate our victory, and steal the home planets---"  Joyce
tried to interrupt, but he would not let him.  "And it's NOT going to
happen."  Again the other tried---  "You want me?  Then come and TAKE
me!"

"I'll give you thirty seconds."  Joyce turned to his gunnery officer,
who nodded his understanding.  "Starting now."

Brunner waited till the count was down to six.  His voice was the ice
of Infinity.

"Get the fuck out of here."

"BRUNNER!"  A single shot was fired, impacting upon, and with a round
and outward glow lighting up the forward shields of the Icarus.  In the
ensuing concussion his wife was thrown down with a start, and small
fires broke out on the bridge.

This was too much for Liebenstein.  He started to send a signal to
Joyce, but saw that the human miracle was taking place without him.
Where before there had been ten destroyers in the breach, now there
were fourteen, one so badly damaged that it could barely thread its way
through the staggered ranks of the Soviets.

The renegade ships were German.

Then, without any order being given, first one Coalition vessel and
then another began to break formation and move back to defend their
comrades.  Brunner had his answer, though he was too strangled by tears
to take it in.  Liebenstein's battleship at last joined the others, and
turned to face the Enemy.

No more shots were fired.  The Dutch returned to their homes.



........................................................................
......................









THE ABYSS


The final star gate was completed, and by all the signs, not a day too
soon.  Swift-moving Soviet reconnaissance vessels moved with increased
frequency and boldness just out of firing range, marking the numbers
and combat readiness of the Third Fleet, and even, if they knew what to
look for, the progress of the Gate itself.  Nothing else trackable
moved within the vicinity; but Hayes' knew this meant nothing.  The
Russian anti-detection screens, as demonstrated by earlier encounters,
were vastly improved, and their four Supercarriers (by the latest
intelligence) were capable of full e-light warp from well outside the
arc of his surveillance.  And at that speed.....

The Dreadnought remained still while her troubled mites hurried back
inside the womb, hopeful of escape.  As if literally animal young, they
seemed to sense for the first time in their half-wakened minds the
presence of a shark, or some other dreadful creature, that shared those
depths with them, wishing them harm, and more powerful even than the
mother, who from time of first consciousness had been the very symbol
and embodiment of strength.  Now into their dark hole she would crawl,
and emerge again far, far away.

*

The last chute was raised, and the goliath moved slowly forward,
gathering speed, eradicating the trivial miles which separated her from
the Gate, and from the possible undoing of the civilized world.  Earth!
 The hexagon was now clearly visible as it loomed larger and nearer,
surrounded once more by the dwarfed engineering vessels which had
shaped it, and with its might, burned out the hollow darkness beyond.
What would become of these, since the frame had been mined, with orders
to destroy it upon the passage of the Dreadnought, none could say.

Hayes leaned forward in martial attitude against the rail before the
screen, his lower jaw locking tight, then releasing, like a vise-grips.
 Frank stood at his short distance from him, churning with emotion.
They were drawing closer.  As so many times before they would pass
through.  But this time, on the other side would be.....

A succession of brilliant white lasers leapt out of nowhere and
converged upon the cold blue Frame, which in turn glowed sullenly from
within, convulsed, blew outward and came apart.  The Gate was
shattered, and would no longer serve.

"Reverse thrust!" someone shouted.  The engineering vessels, of their
own volition, had begun to scatter in all directions.  Two seemed
partially crippled, and one moved not at all.

Hayes let out a sound more bestial than human, after which he bawled,
"Where did those shots come from!"  A technician turned towards him as
if to answer, but his face was deathly white.

Hayes strode toward him with his arm raised, as for a blow.  "OUT with
it!"

"From the Dreadnought, sir."

"From WHERE on the Dreadnought!"

The man hesitated, and Hayes really did strike him.  He wiped the blood
from his mouth, and with his eyes to the floor said numbly,

"Auxiliary Laser Deployment."

As if cued by these words, the young officer that Hayes had berated on
the eve of the Schiller conquest rose and came forward.

"I did it, you dirty old son of a bitch.  You're not going to destroy
MY home."  He whirled to address his stupefied compatriots, who had
turned from their stations to face him.  "It's all been a lie!  Stone
didn't order any of this, and Plant didn't kill him.  It was THAT
bastard," pointing, "and Hesse that---"

He never finished the sentence.  Hayes, purple with rage and every vein
of his forehead bulging, struck him a savage blow across the head with
a conduit wrench, the first object that came to hand.  The man fell
limply forward, not quite unconscious, emitting a weak grown of pain.

At that moment two MP's rushed into the room, and Hayes ordered them to
lift him by the arms and turn him around.  The pistol that he always
carried at his hip he raised and held at arm's length.  It was clear
that he meant to shoot the man.

"Stop it!" cried Frank suddenly, rushing between them.  "You can't just
kill a man without a trial. . .for doing what he thought was right."
It was equally clear that Frank himself was unsure of the truth, and
had been unnerved by the youth's allegations.

"Who the HELL do you think you are?" bellowed the other.  "Giving ME
orders!  Stand aside or I'll kill you both."

This was too much for the MP's.  Who was their rightful commander?
What was happening?  They looked at each other in confusion, continued
to hold the gunnery officer, though less firmly.  Indecision reigned
upon the bridge.

It was at this moment that Chaos played her final trick.

"Admiral," spoke an officer, who had turned back to face his station.
"Two enormous Carriers have just come out of warp.  Super-Soviet
configuration.  Bearing 00, 666.

"It's the Russians, sir."


*


"It's the Russians, sir."

"Now look what you've done!" cried Hayes in his fury, unable to realize
that all Frank had DONE was to keep him from killing a man untried.
"Get him out of here."

The MP's looked again at each other, then at Frank, not knowing who was
meant or what should be done.  The latter inclined his head swiftly,
and they took the young officer away.  As they left it, Calder entered
the enclosure.

Hayes whirled in fuming circles, ordering the chutes to be lowered and
the attack-ships discharged.  The officers at their stations either
carried out his instructions or turned to Frank, who with a gesture of
weary despair raised his arms as if to say, "What else can we do?"

"We've got to move away from the gate, General," came the timid voice
of the deployment officer.

"Then do it, ass!  Take us back and to port."  And Hayes rattled off
some meaningless coordinates.  Like a gored lion he stalked back and
forth, out of control, breathing too deeply and at intervals releasing
desperate, maddened execrations.  Another hesitant voice.

"They've.....  They've begun to discharge and form ranks."

"Of COURSE they have!  They didn't come here to talk!"

In his earlier, false-confident musing, Hayes had said that it would
take twice the Fleet's strength to overmatch him.  And that was exactly
what he now confronted---two Soviet Supercarriers, each nearly equal in
girth and firepower to the Dreadnought queen, and each bearing a
greater number of swarming killer bees.

The Russians did not attack immediately, but remained at some distance,
waiting perhaps for all their vessels to be deployed, or to be sure
that Hayes was alone and the fight would go their way.  Nor did the
Americans make the first move, intimidated and dismayed by the sudden
change in their fortunes, staring across the void at the ever widening
fence of the opposing Armada.

An army used to winning, rarely knows how to face defeat.

The Dreadnought had drawn back and away from the remains of the broken
Gate, so that now it lay ahead of them and far to the left.  The
out-ships as well, low on fuel and tentative, spread outward so that
two almost parallel walls were formed, filled with eyes.  The would-be
combatants faced each other across the margin that they themselves
created:  the empty distance of war's chasm, that unholy no-man's land
wherein, once entered, frightened men kill frightened men until one
side has had enough.

"Shall I try to contact them?" asked the young com officer pitifully.
But at that moment the Russians started forward.

But at that moment something else occurred as well.  A patch of silvery
sheen became visible at a distance to the Commonwealth right, almost at
a direct line between the armies from the broken and still
dark-smoldering gate upon their left.  The advancing Soviet forces came
to a halt, confused.  But Hayes became suddenly calm, and a vengeful
smile played about the corners of his mouth.  But he must play this new
