"By what route?"

"Why, by Silet and Timissao."

The Targa again shook his head.

"They will look for you on that road also," he said. "It is a good
road, the road with the wells. They know that you are familiar with
it. The Tuareg would not fail to wait at the wells."

"Well, then?"

"Well," said Cegheir-ben-Cheikh, "you must not rejoin the road from
Timissao to Timbuctoo until you are four hundred miles from here
toward Iferouane, or better still, at the spring of Telemsi. That is
the boundary between the Tuareg of Ahaggar and the Awellimiden
Tuareg."

The little voice of Tanit-Zerga broke in:

"It was the Awellimiden Tuareg who massacred my people and carried me
into slavery. I do not want to pass through the country of the
Awellimiden."

"Be still, miserable little fly," said Cegheir-ben-Cheikh.

Then addressing me, he continued:

"I have said what I have said. The little one is not wrong. The
Awellimiden are a savage people. But they are afraid of the French.
Many of them trade with the stations north of the Niger. On the other
hand, they are at war with the people of Ahaggar, who will not follow
you into their country. What I have said, is said. You must rejoin
the Timbuctoo road near where it enters the borders of the
Awellimiden. Their country is wooded and rich in springs. If you reach
the springs at Telemsi, you will finish your journey beneath a canopy
of blossoming mimosa. On the other hand, the road from here to Telemsi
is shorter than by way of Timissao. It is quite straight."

"Yes, it is direct," I said, "but, in following it, you have to cross
the Tanezruft."

Cegheir-ben-Cheikh waved his hand impatiently.

"Cegheir-ben-Cheikh knows that," he said. "He knows what the Tanezruft
is. He who has traveled over all the Sahara knows that he would
shudder at crossing the Tanezruft and the Tassili from the south. He
knows that the camels that wander into that country either die or
become wild, for no one will risk his life to go look for them. It is
the terror that hangs over that region that may save you. For you have
to choose: you must run the risk of dying of thirst on the tracks of
the Tanezruft or have your throat cut along some other route.

"You can stay here," he added.

"My choice is made, Cegheir-ben-Cheikh," I announced.

"Good!" he replied, again opening out the roll of paper. "This trail
begins at the second barrier of earth, to which I will lead you. It
ends at Iferouane. I have marked the wells, but do not trust to them
too much, for many of them are dry. Be careful not to stray from the
route. If you lose it, it is death.... Now mount the camel with the
little one. Two make less noise than four."

We went a long way in silence. Cegheir-ben-Cheikh walked ahead and his
camel followed meekly. We crossed, first, a dark passage, then, a deep
gorge, then another passage.... The entrance to each was hidden by a
thick tangle of rocks and briars.

Suddenly a burning breath touched our faces. A dull reddish light
filtered in through the end of the passage. The desert lay before us.

Cegheir-ben-Cheikh had stopped.

"Get down," he said.

A spring gurgled out of the rock. The Targa went to it and filled a
copper cup with the water.

"Drink," he said, holding it out to each of us in turn. We obeyed.

"Drink again," he ordered. "You will save just so much of the contents
of your water skins. Now try not to be thirsty before sunset."

He looked over the saddle girths.

"That's all right," he murmured. "Now go. In two hours the dawn will
be here. You must be out of sight."

I was filled with emotion at this last moment; I went to the Targa and
took his hand.

"Cegheir-ben-Cheikh," I asked in a low voice, "why are you doing
this?"

He stepped back and I saw his dark eyes gleam.

"Why?" he said.

"Yes, why?"

He replied with dignity:

"The Prophet permits every just man, once in his lifetime, to let pity
take the place of duty. Cegheir-ben-Cheikh is turning this permission
to the advantage of one who saved his life."

"And you are not afraid," I asked, "that I will disclose the secret of
Antinea if I return among Frenchmen?" He shook his head.

"I am not afraid of that," he said, and his voice was full of irony.
"It is not to your interest that Frenchmen should know how the Captain
met his death."

I was horrified at this logical reply.

"Perhaps I am doing wrong," the Targa went on, "in not killing the
little one.... But she loves you. She will not talk. Now go. Day is
coming."

I tried to press the hand of this strange rescuer, but he again drew
back.

"Do not thank me. What I am doing, I do to acquire merit in the eyes
of God. You may be sure that I shall never do it again neither for you
nor for anyone else."

And, as I made a gesture to reassure him on that point, "Do not
protest," he said in a tone the mockery of which still sounds in my
ears. "Do not protest. What I am doing is of value to me, but not to
you."

I looked at him uncomprehendingly.

"Not to you, Sidi Lieutenant, not to you," his grave voice continued.
"For you will come back; and when that day comes, do not count on the
help of Cegheir-ben-Cheikh."

"I will come back?" I asked, shuddering.

"You will come back," the Targa replied.

He was standing erect, a black statue against the wall of gray rock.

"You will come back," he repeated with emphasis. "You are fleeing now,
but you are mistaken if you think that you will look at the world with
the same eyes as before. Henceforth, one idea, will follow you
everywhere you go; and in one year, five, perhaps ten years, you will
pass again through the corridor through which you have just come."

"Be still, Cegheir-ben-Cheikh," said the trembling voice of
Tanit-Zerga.

"Be still yourself, miserable little fly," said Cegheir-ben-Cheikh.

He sneered.

"The little one is afraid because she knows that I tell the truth. She
knows the story of Lieutenant Ghiberti."

"Lieutenant Ghiberti?" I said, the sweat standing out on my forehead.

"He was an Italian officer whom I met between Rhat and Rhadames eight
years ago. He did not believe that love of Antinea could make him
forget all else that life contained. He tried to escape, and he
succeeded. I do not know how, for I did not help him. He went back to
his country. But hear what happened: two years later, to the very day,
when I was leaving the look-out, I discovered a miserable tattered
creature, half dead from hunger and fatigue, searching in vain for the
entrance to the northern barrier. It was Lieutenant Ghiberti, come
back. He fills niche Number 39 in the red marble hall."

The Targa smiled slightly.

"That is the story of Lieutenant Ghiberti which you wished to hear.
But enough of this. Mount your camel."

I obeyed without saying a word. Tanit-Zerga, seated behind me, put
her little arms around me. Cegheir-ben-Cheikh was still holding the
bridle.

"One word more," he said, pointing to a black spot against the violet
sky of the southern horizon. "You see the _gour_ there; that is your
way. It is eighteen miles from here. You should reach it by sunrise.
Then consult your map. The next point is marked. If you do not stray
from the line, you should be at the springs of Telemsi in eight days."

The camel's neck was stretched toward the dark wind coming from the
south.

The Targa released the bridle with a sweep of his hand.

"Now go."

"Thank you," I called to him, turning back in the saddle. "Thank you,
Cegheir-ben-Cheikh, and farewell."

I heard his voice replying in the distance:

"_Au revoir_, Lieutenant de Saint Avit."




XIX

THE TANEZRUFT


During the first hour of our flight, the great mehari of
Cegheir-ben-Cheikh carried us at a mad pace. We covered at least five
leagues. With fixed eyes, I guided the beast toward the _gour_ which
the Targa had pointed out, its ridge becoming higher and higher
against the paling sky.

The speed caused a little breeze to whistle in our ears. Great tufts
of _retem_, like fleshless skeletons, were tossed to right and left.

I heard the voice of Tanit-Zerga whispering:

"Stop the camel."

At first I did not understand.

"Stop him," she repeated.

Her hand pulled sharply at my right arm.

I obeyed. The camel slackened his pace with very bad grace.

"Listen," she said.

At first I heard nothing. Then a very slight noise, a dry rustling
behind us.

"Stop the camel," Tanit-Zerga commanded. "It is not worth while to
make him kneel."

A little gray creature bounded on the camel. The mehari set out again
at his best speed.

"Let him go," said Tanit-Zerga. "Gale has jumped on."

I felt a tuft of bristly hair under my arm. The mongoose had followed
our footsteps and rejoined us. I heard the quick panting of the brave
little creature becoming gradually slower and slower.

"I am happy," murmured Tanit-Zerga.

Cegheir-ben-Cheikh had not been mistaken. We reached the _gour_ as the
sun rose. I looked back. The Atakor was nothing more than a monstrous
chaos amid the night mists which trailed the dawn. It was no longer
possible to pick out from among the nameless peaks, the one on which
Antinea was still weaving her passionate plots.

You know what the Tanezruft is, the "plain of plains," abandoned,
uninhabitable, the country of hunger and thirst. We were then starting
on the part of the desert which Duveyrier calls the Tassili of the
south, and which figures on the maps of the Minister of Public Works
under this attractive title: "Rocky plateau, without water, without
vegetation, inhospitable for man and beast."

Nothing, unless parts of the Kalahari, is more frightful than this
rocky desert. Oh, Cegheir-ben-Cheikh did not exaggerate in saying that
no one would dream of following us into that country.

Great patches of oblivion still refused to clear away. Memories chased
each other incoherently about my head. A sentence came back to me
textually: "It seemed to Dick that he had never, since the beginning
of original darkness, done anything at all save jolt through the air."
I gave a little laugh. "In the last few hours," I thought, "I have
been heaping up literary situations. A while ago, a hundred feet above
the ground, I was Fabrice of _La Chartreuse de Parme_ beside his
Italian dungeon. Now, here on my camel, I am Dick of _The Light That
Failed_, crossing the desert to meet his companions in arms." I
chuckled again; then shuddered. I thought of the preceding night, of
the Orestes of _Andromaque_ who agreed to sacrifice Pyrrhus. A
literary situation indeed....

Cegheir-ben-Cheikh had reckoned eight days to get to the wooded
country of the Awellimiden, forerunners of the grassy steppes of the
Soudan. He knew well the worth of his beast. Tanit-Zerga had suddenly
given him a name, _El Mellen_, the white one, for the magnificent
mehari had an almost spotless coat. Once he went two days without
eating, merely picking up here and there a branch of an acacia tree
whose hideous white spines, four inches long, filled me with fear for
our friend's oesophagus. The wells marked out by Cegheir-ben-Cheikh
were indeed at the indicated spots, but we found nothing in them but a
burning yellow mud. It was enough for the camel, enough so that at the
end of the fifth day, thanks to prodigious self-control, we had used
up only one of our two water skins. Then we believed ourselves safe.

Near one of these muddy puddles, I succeeded that day in shooting down
a little straight-horned desert gazelle. Tanit-Zerga skinned the beast
and we regaled ourselves with a delicious haunch. Meantime, little
Gale, who never ceased prying about the cracks in the rocks during our
mid-day halts in the heat, discovered an _ourane_, a sand crocodile,
five feet long, and made short work of breaking his neck. She ate so
much she could not budge. It cost us a pint of water to help her
digestion. We gave it with good grace, for we were happy. Tanit-Zerga
did not say so, but her joy at knowing that I was thinking no more of
the woman in the gold diadem and the emeralds was apparent. And
really, during those days, I hardly thought of her. I thought only of
the torrid heat to be avoided, of the water skins which, if you wished
to drink fresh water, had to be left for an hour in a cleft in the
