of it."

"It's on--you're welcome to it," and, as the Terrestrials turned away,
the whole projector base was illuminated by a flare of intense, though
subdued light. For several minutes Dunark stared into the visiplate,
savage satisfaction in every line of his fierce green face as he
surveyed the havoc wrought by those eighteen enormous charges of
incredible explosive.

"A nice job of clean-up, Dick," the Osnomian prince reported, turning
away from the visiplate. "It made a sun of it--the original sun is now
quite a splendid double star. Everything was volatized, clear out, far
beyond their outermost screen."

"It had to be done, of course--it was either them or else all the rest
of the Universe," Season said, jerkily. "However, even that fact doesn't
make it go down easy. Well, we're done with this projector. From now on
it's strictly up to us and _Skylark Three_. Let's beat it over there and
see if they've got her done yet--they were due to finish up today, you
know."

       *       *       *       *       *

It was a silent group who embarked in the little airboat. Half way to
their destination, however, Seaton came out of his blue mood with a
yell.

"Mart, I've got it! We can give the _Lark_ a lot more acceleration than
they are getting--and won't need the assistance of all the minds of
Norlamin, either."

"How?"

"By using one of the very heavy metals for fuel. The intensity of the
power liberated is a function of atomic weight, or atomic number, and
density; but the fact of liberation depends upon atomic configuration--a
fact which you and I figured out long ago. However, our figuring didn't
go far enough--it couldn't: we didn't know anything then. Copper happens
to be the most efficient of the few metals which can be decomposed at
all under ordinary excitation--that is, by using an ordinary coil, such
as we and the Fenachrone both use. But by using special exciters,
sending out all the orders of rays necessary to initiate the disruptive
processes, we can use any metal we want to. Osnome has unlimited
quantities of the heaviest metals, including radium and uranium. Of
course we can't use radium and live--but we can and will use uranium,
and that will give us something like four times the acceleration
possible with copper. Dunark, what say you snap over there and smelt us
a cubic mile of uranium? No--hold it--I'll put a flock of forces on the
job. They'll do it quicker, and I'll make 'em deliver the goods. They'll
deliver 'em fast, too, believe us--we'll see to that with a ten-ton bar.
The uranium bars'll be ready to load tomorrow, and we'll have enough
power to chase those birds all the rest of our lives!"

Returning to the projector, Seaton actuated the complex system of forces
required for the smelting and transportation of the enormous amount of
metal necessary, and as the three men again boarded their aerial
conveyance, the power-bar in the projector behind them flared into
violet incandescence under the load already put upon it by the new
uranium mine in distant Osnome.

The _Skylark_ lay stretched out over two miles of country, exactly as
they had last seen her, but now, instead of being water-white, the
ten-thousand-foot cruiser of the void was one jointless, seamless
structure of sparkling, transparent, purple inoson. Entering one of the
open doors, they stepped into an elevator and were whisked upward into
the control room, in which a dozen of the aged, white-bearded students
of Norlamin were grouped about a banked and tiered mass of keyboards,
which Seaton knew must be the operating mechanism of the extraordinarily
complete fifth-order projector he had been promised.

"Ah, youngsters, you are just in time. Everything is complete and we are
just about to begin loading."

"Sorry, Rovol, but we'll have to make a couple of changes--have to
rebuild the exciter or build another one," and Seaton rapidly related
what they had learned, and what they had decided to do.

"Of course, uranium is a much more efficient source of power," agreed
Rovol, "and you are to be congratulated for thinking of it. It perhaps
would not have occurred to one of us, since the heavy metals of that
highly efficient group are very rare here. Building a new exciter for
uranium is a simple task, and the converters for the corona-loss will,
of course, require no change, since their action depends only upon the
frequency of the emitted losses, not upon their magnitude."

"Hadn't you suspected that some of the Fenachrone might be going to lead
us a life-long chase?" asked Dunark curiously.

"We have not given the matter a thought, my son," the Chief of the Five
made answer. "As your years increase, you will learn not to anticipate
trouble and worry. Had we thought and worried over the matter before the
time had arrived, you will note that it would have been pain wasted, for
our young friend Seaton has avoided that difficulty in a truly scholarly
fashion."

"All set, then, Rovol?" asked Seaton, when the forces flying from the
projector had built the compound exciter which would make possible the
disruption of the atoms of uranium. "The metal, enough of it to fill all
the spare space in the hull, will be here tomorrow. You might give Crane
and me the method of operating this projector, which I see is vastly
more complex even than the one in the Area of Experiment."

"It is the most complete thing ever seen upon Norlamin," replied Rovol
with a smile. "Each of us installed everything in it that he could
conceive of ever being of the slightest use, and since our combined
knowledge covers a large field, the projector is accordingly quite
comprehensive."

Multiple headsets were donned, and from each of the Norlaminian brains
there poured into the minds of the two Terrestrials a complete and
minute knowledge of every possible application of the stupendous
force-control banked in all its massed intricacy before them.

"Well, that's some outfit!" exulted Seaton in pleased astonishment as
the instructions were concluded. "It can do anything but lay an egg--and
I'm not a darn bit sure that we couldn't make it do that! Well, let's
call the girls and show them around this thing that's going to be their
home for quite a while."

While they were waiting, Dunark led Seaton aside.

"Dick, will you need me on this trip?" he asked. "Of course I knew there
was something on your mind when you didn't send me home when you let
Urvan, Carfon and the others go back."

"No, we're going it alone--unless you want to come along. I did want you
to stick around until I got to a good chance to talk to you alone--now
will be a good a time as any. You and I have traded brains, and besides,
we've been through quite a lot of grief together, here and there--I want
to apologize to you for not passing along to you all this stuff I've
been getting here. In fact, I really wish I didn't have to have it
myself. Get me?"

"Got you? I'm 'way ahead of you! Don't want it, not any part of
it--that's why I've stayed away from any chance of learning any of it,
and the one reason why I am going back home instead of going with you. I
have just brains enough to realize that neither I nor any other man of
my race should have it. By the time we grow up to it naturally we shall
be able to handle it, but not until then."

The two brain brothers grasped hands strongly, and Dunark continued in a
lighter vein: "It takes all kinds of people to make a world, you
know--and all kinds of races, except the Fenachrone, to make a Universe.
With Mardonale gone, the evolution of Osnome shall progress rapidly, and
while we may not reach the Ultimate Goal, I have learned enough from you
already to speed up our progress considerably."

"Well, that's that. Had to get it off my chest, although I knew you'd
get the idea all right. Here are the girls--Sitar too. We'll show 'em
around."

       *       *       *       *       *

Seaton's first thought was for the very brain of the ship--the precious
lens of neutronium in its thin envelope of the eternal jewel--without
which the beam of fifth-order rays could not be directed. He found it a
quarter of a mile back from the needle-sharp prow, exactly in the
longitudinal axis of the hull, protected from any possible damage by
bulkhead after massive bulkhead of impregnable inoson. Satisfied upon
that point, he went in search of the others, who were exploring their
vast new space-ship.

Huge as she was, there was no waste space--her design was as compact as
that of a fine radio set. The living quarters were grouped closely about
the central compartment, which housed the power plants, the many ray
generators and projectors, and the myriads of controls of the marvelous
mechanism for the projection and direction of fifth-order rays. Several
large compartments were devoted to the machinery which automatically
serviced the vessel--refrigerators, heaters, generators and purifiers
for water and air, and the numberless other mechanisms which would make
the cruiser a comfortable and secure home, as well as an invincible
battleship, in the heatless, lightless, airless, matterless waste of
illimitable, inter-galactic space. Many compartments were for the
storage of food-supplies, and these were even then being filled by
forces under the able direction of the first of Chemistry.

"All the comforts of home, even to the labels," Seaton grinned, as he
read "Dole No. 1" upon cans of pineapple which had never been within
thousands of light-years of the Hawaiian Islands, and saw quarter after
quarter of fresh meat going into the freezer room from a planet upon
which no animal other than man had existed for many thousands of years.
Nearly all of the remaining millions of cubic feet of space were for the
storage of uranium for power, a few rooms already having been filled
with ingot inoson for repairs. Between the many bulkheads that divided
the ship into numberless airtight sections, and between the many
concentric skins of purple metal that rendered the vessel space-worthy
and sound, even though slabs many feet thick were to be shown off in any
direction--in every nook and cranny could be stored the metal to keep
those voracious generators full-fed, no matter how long or how severe
the demand for power. Every room was connected through a series of
tubular tunnels, along which force-propelled cars or elevators slid
smoothly--tubes whose walls fell together into air-tight seals at any
point, in case of a rupture.

As they made their way back to the great control-room room of the
vessel, they saw something that because of its small size and clear
transparency they had not previously seen. Below that room, not too near
the outer skin, in a specially-built spherical launching space, there
was _Skylark Two_, completely equipped and ready for an interstellar
journey on her own account!

"Why, hello, little stranger!" Margaret called. "Rovol, that was a kind
thought on your part. Home wouldn't quite be home without our old
_Skylark_, would it, Martin?"

"A practical thought, as well as a kind one," Crane responded. "We
undoubtedly will have occasion to visit places altogether too small for
the really enormous bulk of this vessel."

"Yes, and whoever heard of a sea-going ship without a small boat?" put
in irrepressible Dorothy. "She's just too perfectly kippy for words,
sitting up there, isn't she?"




CHAPTER XV

The Extra-Galactic Duel


Loaded until her outer skin almost bulged with tightly packed bars of
uranium and equipped to meet any emergency of which the combined efforts
of the mightiest intellects of Norlamin could foresee even the slightest
possibility, _Skylark Three_ lay quiescent. Quiescent, but surcharged
with power, she seemed to Seaton's tense mind to share his own eagerness
to be off; seemed to be motionlessly straining at her neutral controls
in a futile endeavor to leave that unnatural and unpleasant environment
of atmosphere and of material substance, to soar outward into absolute
zero of temperature and pressure, into the pure and undefiled ether
which was her natural and familiar medium.

The five human beings were grouped near an open door of their cruiser;
before them were the ancient scientists, who for so many days had been
laboring with them in their attempt to crush the monstrous race which
was threatening the Universe. With the elders were the Terrestrials'
many friends from the Country of Youth, and surrounding the immense
vessel in a throng covering an area to be measured only in square miles
were massed myriads of Norlaminians. From their tasks everywhere had
come the mental laborers; the Country of Youth had been left
depopulated; even those who, their lifework done, had betaken themselves
to the placid Nirvana of the Country of Age, returned briefly to the
Country of Study to speed upon its way that stupendous Ship of Peace.

The majestic Fodan, Chief of the Five, was concluding his address:

"And may the Unknowable Force direct your minor forces to a successful
conclusion of your task. If, upon the other hand, it should by some
unforeseen chance be graven upon the Sphere that you are to pass in this
supreme venture, you may pass in all tranquillity, for the massed
intellect of our entire race is here supporting me in my solemn
affirmation that the Fenachrone shall not be allowed to prevail. In the
name of all Norlamin, I bid you farewell."

[Illustration: Very slowly at first, the unimaginable mass of the vessel
floated lightly upward.]

Crane spoke briefly in reply and the little group of Earthly wanderers
stepped into the elevator. As they sped upward toward the control room,
door after door shot into place behind them, establishing a manifold
seal. Seaton's hand played over the controls and the great cruiser of
the void tilted slowly upward until its narrow prow pointed almost
directly into the zenith. Then, very slowly at first, the unimaginable
mass of the vessel floated lightly upward, with a slowly increasing
velocity. Faster and faster she flew--out beyond measurable atmosphere,
out beyond the outermost limits of the green system. Finally, in
interstellar space, Seaton threw out super-powered detector and
repelling screens, anchored himself at the driving console with a force,
set the power control at "molecular" so that the propulsive force
affected alike every molecule of the vessel and its contents, and, all
sense of weight and acceleration lost, he threw in the plunger switch
which released every iota of the theoretically possible power of the
driving mass of uranium.

Staring intently into the visiplate, he corrected their course from time
to time by minute fractions of a second of arc; then, satisfied at last,
he set the automatic forces which would guide them, temporarily out of
their course, around any obstacles, such as the uncounted thousands of
solar systems lying in or near their path. He then removed the
restraining forces from his body and legs, and with a small pencil of
force wafted himself over to Crane and the two women.

"Well, bunch," he stated, matter-of-fact, "we're on our way. We'll be
this way for some time, so we might as well get used to it. Any little
thing you want to talk over?"

"How long will it take us to catch 'em?" asked Dorothy "Traveling this
way isn't half as much fun as it is when you let us have some weight to
hold us down."

"Hard to tell exactly, Dottie. If we had precisely four times their
acceleration and had started from the same place, we would of course
overtake them in just the number of days they had the start of us, since
the distance covered at any constant positive acceleration is
proportional to the square of the time elapsed. However, there are
several complicating factors in the actual situation. We started out not
only twenty-nine days behind them, but also a matter of five hundred
thousand light-years of distance. It will take us quite a while to get
to their starting-point. I can't tell even that very close, as we will
probably have to reduce this acceleration before we get out of the
Galaxy, in order to give detectors and repellers time to act on stars
and other loose impediments. Powerful as those screens are and fast as
they work, there is a limit to the velocity we can use here in this
crowded Galaxy. Outside it, in free space, of course we can open her up
again. Then, too, our acceleration is not exactly four times theirs,
only three point nine one eight six. On the other hand, we don't have to
catch them to go to work on them. We can operate very nicely at five
thousand light-centuries. So there you are--it'll probably be somewhere
between thirty-nine and forty-one days, but it may be a day or so more
or less."

"How do you know they are using copper?" asked Margaret. "Maybe their
scientists stored up some uranium and know how to use it."

"Nope, that's out like a light. First, Mart and I saw only copper bars
in their ship. Second, copper is the most efficient metal found in
quantity upon their planet. Third, even if they had uranium or any metal
of its class, they couldn't use it without a complete knowledge of, and
ability to handle, the fourth and fifth orders of rays."

"It is your opinion, then, that destroying this last Fenachrone vessel
is to prove as simple a matter as did the destruction of the others?"
Crane queried, pointedly.

"Hm-m-m. Never thought about it from that angle at all, Mart.... You're
still the ground-and-lofty thinker of the outfit, ain't you? Now that
you mention it, though, we may find that the Last of the Mohicans ain't
entirely toothless, at that. But say, Mart, how come I'm as wild and
cock-eyed as I ever was? Rovol's a slow and thoughtful old codger, and
with his accumulation of knowledge it looks like I'd be the same way."
