I. Papaver somniferum; poppy, opium.

    Alcohol, wine, beer, cyder.

    Prunus lauro-cerasus; laurel, distilled water from the leaves.

    Prunus cerasus; black cherry, distilled water from the kernels.

    Nicotiana tabacum; tobacco? the essential oil, decoction of the leaf.

    Atropa belladona; deadly nightshade, the berries.

    Datura stramoneum; thorn-apple, the fruit boiled in milk.

    Hyoscyamus reticulatus; henbane, the seeds and leaves.

    Cynoglossum; hounds tongue.

    Menispermum, cocculus; Indian berry.

    Amygdalus amarus; bitter almond.

    Cicuta; hemlock. Conium maculatum?

    Strychnos nux vomica?

    Delphinium stavisagria?

II. Externally, heat, electricity.

III. Ether, essential oils.

IV. Oxygen gas.

V. Passions of love, joy, anger.

VI. Labour, play, agitation, friction.

       *       *       *       *       *


ART. III.

SECERNENTIA.

I. Those things which increase the irritative motions, which constitute
secretion, are termed secernentia; which are as various as the glands,
which they stimulate into action.

1. Diaphoretics, as aromatic vegetables, essential oils, ether, volatile
alcali, neutral salts, antimonial preparations, external heat, exercise,
friction, cold water for a time with subsequent warmth, blisters, electric
fluid.

2. Sialagogues, as mercury internally, and pyrethrum externally.

3. Expectorants, as squill, onions, gum ammoniac, seneka root, mucilage:
some of these increase the pulmonary perspiration, and perhaps the
pulmonary mucus.

4. Diuretics, as neutral salts, fixed alcali, balsams, resins, asparagus,
cantharides.

5. Cathartics of the mild kind, as sena, jalap, neutral salts, manna. They
increase the secretions of bile, pancreatic juice, and intestinal mucus.

6. The mucus of the bladder is increased by cantharides, and perhaps by oil
of turpentine.

7. The mucus of the rectum by aloe internally, by clysters and
suppositories externally.

8. The mucus of the cellular membrane is increased by blisters and
sinapisms.

9. The mucus of the nostrils is increased by errhines of the milder kind,
as marum, common snuff.

10. The secretion of tears is increased by volatile salts, the vapour of
onions, by grief, and joy.

11. All those medicines increase the heat of the body, and remove those
pains, which originate from a defect of motion in the vessels, which
perform secretion; as pepper produces a glow on the skin, and balsam of
Peru is said to relieve the flatulent cholic. But these medicines differ
from the preceding class, as they neither induce costiveness nor deep
coloured urine in their usual dose, nor intoxication in any dose.

12. Yet if any of these are used unnecessarily, it is obvious, like the
incitantia, that they must contribute to shorten our lives by sooner
rendering peculiar parts of the system disobedient to their natural
stimuli. Of those in daily use the great excess of common salt is probably
the most pernicious, as it enters all our cookery, and is probably one
cause of scrophula, and of sea-scurvy, when joined with other causes of
debility. See Botanic Garden, Part II. Canto IV. line 221. Spices taken to
excess by stimulating the stomach, and the vessels of the skin by
association, into unnecessary action, contribute to weaken these parts of
the system, but are probably less noxious than the general use of so much
salt.

II. OBSERVATIONS ON THE SECERNENTIA.

I. 1. Some of the medicines of this class produce absorption in some
degree, though their principal effect is exerted on the secerning part of
our system. We shall have occasion to observe a similar circumstance in the
next class of medicines termed Sorbentia; as of these some exert their
effects in a smaller degree on the secerning system. Nor will this surprise
any one, who has observed, that all natural objects are presented to us in
a state of combination; and that hence the materials, which produce these
different effects, are frequently found mingled in the same vegetable. Thus
the pure aromatics increase the action of the vessels, which secrete the
perspirable matter; and the pure astringents increase the action of the
vessels, which absorb the mucus from the lungs, and other cavities of the
body; hence it must happen, that nutmeg, which possesses both these
qualities, should have the double effect above mentioned.

Other drugs have this double effect, and belong either to the class of
Secernentia or Sorbentia, according to the dose in which they are
exhibited. Thus a small dose of alum increases absorption, and induces
costiveness; and a large one increases the secretions into the intestinal
canal, and becomes cathartic. And this accounts for the constipation of the
belly left after the purgative quality of rhubarb ceases, for it increases
absorption in a smaller dose, and secretion in a greater. Hence when a part
of the larger dose is carried out of the habit by stools, the small
quantity which remains induces costiveness. Hence rhubarb exhibited in
small doses, as 2 or 3 grains twice a day, strengthens the system by
increasing the action of the absorbent vessels, and of the intestinal
canal.

2. Diaphoretics. The perspiration is a secretion from the blood in its
passage through the capillary vessels, as other secretions are produced in
the termination of the arteries in the various glands. After this secretion
the blood loses its florid colour, which it regains in its passage through
the lungs; which evinces that something besides water is secreted on the
skins of animals.

No statical experiments can ascertain the quantity of our perspiration; as
a continued absorption of the moisture of the atmosphere exists at the same
time both by the cutaneous and pulmonary lymphatics.

3. Every gland is capable of being excited into greater exertions by an
appropriated stimulus applied either by its mixture with the blood
immediately to the secerning vessel, or applied externally to its excretory
duct. Thus mercury internally promotes an increased salivation, and
pyrethrum externally applied to the excretory ducts of the salival glands.
Aloes stimulate the rectum internally mixed with the circulating blood; and
sea-salt by injection externally. Now as the capillaries, which secrete the
perspirable matter, lie near the surface of the body, the application of
external heat acts immediately on their excretory ducts, and promotes
perspiration; internally those drugs which possess a fragrant essential
oil, or spiritus rector, produce this effect, as the aromatic vegetables,
of which the number is very great.

4. It must be remembered, that a due quantity of some aqueous vehicle must
be given to support this evacuation; otherwise a burning heat without much
visible sweat must be the consequence. When the skin acquires a degree of
heat much above 108, as appears by Dr. Alexander's experiments, no visible
sweat is produced; which is owing to the great heat of the skin evaporating
it as hastily, as it is secreted; and, where the sweat is secreted in
abundance, its evaporation cannot carry off the exuberant heat, like the
vapour of boiling water; because a great part of it is wiped off, or
absorbed by the bed-clothes; or the air about the patient is not changed
sufficiently often, as it becomes saturated with the perspirable matter.
And hence it is probable, that the waste of perspirable matter is as great,
or greater, when the skin is hot and dry, as when it stands in drops on the
skin; as appears from the inextinguishable thirst.

Hence Dr. Alexander found, that when the heat of the body was greater than
108, nothing produced sweats but repeated draughts of cold water; and of
warm fluids, when the heat was much below that degree. And that cold water
which procured sweats instantaneously when the heat was above 108, stopped
them as certainly when it was below that heat; and that flannels, wrung out
of warm water and wrapped round the legs and thighs, were then most
certainly productive of sweats.

5. The diaphoretics are all said to succeed much better, if given early in
the morning, about an hour before sun-rise, than at any other time; which
is owing to the great excitability of every part of the system after the
sensorial power has been accumulated during sleep. In those, who have
hectic fever, or the febricula, or nocturnal fever of debility, the morning
sweats are owing to the decline of the fever-fit, as explained in Sect.
XXXII. 9. In some of these patients the sweat does not occur till they
awake; because then the system is still more excitable than during sleep,
because the assistance of the voluntary power in respiration facilitates
the general circulation. See Class I. 2. 1. 3.

6. It must be observed, that the skin is very dry and hard to the touch,
where the absorbents, which open on its surface, do not act; as in some
dropsies, and other diseases attended with great thirst. This dryness, and
shrivelled appearance, and roughness, are owing to the mouths of the
absorbents being empty of their accustomed fluid, and is distinguishable
from the dryness of the skin above mentioned in the hot fits of fever, by
its not being attended with heat.

As the heat of the skin in the usual temperature of the air always evinces
an increased perspiration, whether visible or not, the heat being produced
along with the increase of secretion; it follows, that a defect of
perspiration can only exist, when the skin is cold.

7. Volatile alcali is a very powerful diaphoretic, and particularly if
exhibited in wine-whey; 20 drops of spirit of hartshorn every half hour in
half a pint of wine-whey, if the patient be kept in a moderately warm bed,
will in a few hours elicit most profuse sweats.

Neutral salts promote invisible perspiration, when the skin is not warmed
much externally, as is evinced from the great thirst, which succeeds a meal
of salt provisions, as of red herrings. When these are sufficiently diluted
with water, and the skin kept warm, copious sweats without inflaming the
habit, are the consequence. Half an ounce of vinegar saturated with
volatile alcali, taken every hour or two hours, well answers this purpose;
and is preferable perhaps in general to all others, where sweating is
advantageous. Boerhaave mentions one cured of a fever by eating
red-herrings or anchovies, which, with repeated draughts of warm water or
tea, would I suppose produce copious perspiration.

Antimonial preparations have also been of late much used with great
advantage as diaphoretics. For the history and use of these preparations I
shall refer the reader to the late writers on the Materia Medica, only
observing that the stomach becomes so soon habituated to its stimulus, that
the second dose may be considerably increased, if the first had no
operation.

Where it is advisable to procure copious sweats, the emetics, as
ipecacuanha, joined with opiates, as in Dover's powder, produce this effect
with greater certainty than the above.

8. We must not dismiss this subject without observing, that perspiration is
designed to keep the skin flexile, as the tears are intended to clean and
lubricate the eye; and that neither of these fluids can be considered as
excretions in their natural state, but as secretions. See Class I. 1. 2. 3.
And that therefore the principal use of diaphoretic medicines is to warm
the skin, and thence in consequence to produce the natural degree of
insensible perspiration in languid habits.

9. When the skin of the extremities is cold, which is always a sign of
present debility, the digestion becomes frequently impaired by association,
and cardialgia or heartburn is induced from the vinous or acetous
fermentation of the aliment. In this disease diaphoretics, which have been
called cordials, by their action on the stomach restore its exertion, and
that of the cutaneous capillaries by their association with it, and the
skin becomes warm, and the digestion more vigorous.

10. But a blister acts with more permanent and certain effect by
stimulating a part of the skin, and thence affecting the whole of it, and
of the stomach by association, and thence removes the most obstinate
heartburns and vomitings. From this the principal use of blisters is
understood, which is to invigorate the exertions of the arterial and
lymphatic vessels of the skin, producing an increase of insensible
perspiration, and of cutaneous absorption; and to increase the action of
the stomach, and the consequent power of digestion; and thence by sympathy
to excite all the other irritative motions: hence they relieve pains of the
cold kind, which originate from defect of motion; not from their
introducing a greater pain, as some have imagined, but by stimulating the
torpid vessels into their usual action; and thence increasing the action
and consequent warmth of the whole skin, and of all the parts which are
associated with it.

II. 1. _Sialagogues._ The preparations of mercury consist of a solution or
corrosion of that metal by some acid; and, when the dose is known, it is
probable that they are all equally efficacious. As their principal use is
in the cure of the venereal disease, they will be mentioned in the
catalogue amongst the sorbentia. Where salivation is intended, it is much
forwarded by a warm room and warm clothes; and prevented by exposing the
patient to his usual habits of cool air and dress, as the mercury is then
more liable to go off by the bowels.

2. Any acrid drug, as pyrethrum, held in the mouth acts as a sialagogue
externally by stimulating the excretory ducts of the salivary glands; and
the siliqua hirsuta applied externally to the parotid gland, and even hard
substances in the ear, are said to have the same effect. Mastich chewed in
the mouth emulges the salivary glands.

3. The unwise custom of chewing and smoking tobacco for many hours in a day
not only injures the salivary glands, producing dryness in the mouth when
this drug is not used, but I suspect that it also produces schirrhus of the
pancreas. The use of tobacco in this immoderate degree injures the power of
digestion, by occasioning the patient to spit out that saliva, which he
ought to swallow; and hence produces that flatulency, which the vulgar
unfortunately take it to prevent. The mucus, which is brought from the
fauces by hawking, should be spit out, as well as that coughed up from the
lungs; but that which comes spontaneously into the mouth from the salivary
glands, should be swallowed mixed with our food or alone for the purposes
of digestion. See Class I. 2. 2. 7.

III. 1. Expectorants are supposed to increase the secretion of mucus in the
branches of the windpipe, or to increase the perspiration of the lungs
secreted at the terminations of the bronchial artery.

2. If any thing promotes expectoration toward the end of peripneumonies,
when the inflammation is reduced by bleeding and gentle cathartics, small
repeated blisters about the chest, with tepid aqueous and mucilaginous or
oily liquids, are more advantageous than the medicines generally enumerated
under this head; the blisters by stimulating into action the vessels of the
skin produce by association a greater activity of those of the mucous
membrane, which lines the branches of the windpipe, and air-cells of the
lungs; and thus after evacuation they promote the absorption of the mucus
and consequent healing of the inflamed membrane, while the diluting liquids
prevent this mucus from becoming too viscid for this purpose, or facilitate
its expuition.

Blisters, one at a time, on the sides or back, or on the sternum, are also
useful towards the end of peripneumonies, by preventing the evening access
of cold fit, and thence preventing the hot fit by their stimulus on the
skin; in the same manner as five drops of laudanum by its stimulus on the
stomach. For the increased actions of the vessels of the skin or stomach
excite a greater quantity of the sensorial power of association, and thus
prevent the torpor of the other parts of the system; which, when patients
are debilitated, is so liable to return in the evening.

3. Warm bathing is of great service towards the end of peripneumony to
promote expectoration, especially in those children who drink too little
aqueous fluids, as it gently increases the action of the pulmonary
capillaries by their content with the cutaneous ones, and supplies the
system with aqueous fluid, and thus dilutes the secreted mucus.

Some have recommended oil externally around the chest, as well as
internally, to promote expectoration; and upon the nose, when its mucous
membrane is inflamed, as in common catarrh.

IV. 1. Diuretics. If the skin be kept warm, most of these medicines promote
sweat instead of urine; and if their dose is enlarged, most of them become
cathartic. Hence the neutral salts are used in general for all these
purposes. Those indeed, which are composed of the vegetable acid, are most
generally used as sudorifics; those with the nitrous acid as diuretics; and
those with the vitriolic acid as cathartics: while those united with the
marine acid enter our common nutriment, as a more general stimulus. All
these increase the acrimony of the urine, hence it is retained a less time
in the bladder; and in consequence less of it is reabsorbed into the
system, and the apparent quantity is greater, as more is evacuated from the
bladder; but it is not certain from thence, that a greater quantity is
secreted by the kidnies. Hence nitre, and other neutral salts, are
erroneously given in the gonorrhoea; as they augment the pain of making
water by their stimulus on the excoriated or inflamed urethra. They are
also erroneously given in catarrhs or coughs, where the discharge is too
thin and saline, as they increase the frequency of coughing.

2. Balsam of Copaiva is thought to promote urine more than the other native
balsams; and common resin is said to act as a powerful diuretic in horses.
These are also much recommended in gleets, and in fluor albus, perhaps more
than they deserve; they give a violet smell to the urine, and hence
probably increase the secretion of it.

Calcined egg-shells are said to promote urine, perhaps from the phosphoric
acid they contain.

3. Cold air and cold water will increase the quantity of urine by
decreasing the absorption from the bladder; and neutral and alcalious salts
and cantharides by stimulating the neck of the bladder to discharge the
urine as soon as secreted; and alcohol as gin and rum at the beginning of
intoxication, if the body be kept cool, occasion much urine by inverting
the urinary lymphatics, and thence pouring a fluid into the bladder, which
never passed the kidnies. But it is probable, that those medicines, which
give a scent to the urine as the balsams and resins, but particularly
asparagus and garlic, are the only drugs, which truly increase the
secretion of the kidnies. Alcohol however, used as above mentioned, and
perhaps great doses of tincture of cantharides, may be considered as
drastic diuretics, as they pour a fluid into the bladder by the retrograde
action of the lymphatics, which are in great abundance spread about the
neck of it. See Sect. XXIX. 3.

V. Mild cathartics. The ancients believed that some purges evacuated the
bile, and hence were termed Cholagogues; others the lymph, and were termed
Hydragogues; and that in most each cathartic selected a peculiar humour,
which it discharged. The moderns have too hastily rejected this system; the
subject well deserves further observation.

Calomel given in the dose from ten to twenty grains, so as to induce
purging without the assistance of other drugs, appears to me to
particularly increase the secretion of bile, and to evacuate it; aloe seems
to increase the secretion of the intestinal mucus; and it is probable that
the pancreas and spleen may be peculiarly stimulated into action by some
other of this tribe of medicines; whilst others of them may simply
stimulate the intestinal canal to evacuate its contents, as the bile of
animals. It must be remarked, that all these cathartic medicines are
supposed to be exhibited in their usual doses, otherwise they become
drastic purges, and are treated of in the Class of Invertentia.

VI. The mucus of the bladder is seen in the urine, when cantharides have
been used, either internally or externally, in such doses as to induce the
strangury. Spirit of turpentine is said to have the same effect. I have
given above a dram of it twice a day floating on a glass of water in
chronic lumbago without this effect, and the patient gradually recovered.

VII. Aloe given internally seems to act chiefly on the rectum and, spincter
ani, producing tenesmus and piles. Externally in clysters or suppositories,
common salt seems to act on that bowel with greater certainty. But where
the thread-worm or ascarides exist, 60 or 100 grains of aloes reduced to
powder and boiled in a pint of gruel, and used as a clyster twice a week
for three months, has frequently destroyed them.

VIII. The external application of cantharides by stimulating the excretory
ducts of the capillary glands produces a great secretion of subcutaneous
mucus with pain and inflammation; which mucaginous fluid, not being able to
permeate the cuticle, raises it up; a similar secretion and elevation of
the cuticle is produced by actual fire; and by caustic materials, as by the
application of the juice of the root of white briony, or bruised
mustard-seed. Experiments are wanting to introduce some acrid application
into practice instead of cantharides, which might not induce the strangury.

Mustard-seed alone is too acrid, and if it be suffered to lie on the skin
many minutes is liable to produce a slough and consequent ulcer, and should
therefore be mixed with flour when applied to cold extremities. Volatile
alkali properly diluted might stimulate the skin without inducing
strangury.

IX. The mild errhines are such as moderately stimulate the membrane of the
nostrils, so as to increase the secretion of nasal mucus; as is seen in
those, who are habituated to take snuff. The stronger errhines are
mentioned in Art. V. 2. 3.

X. The secretion of tears is increased either by applying acrid substances
to the eye; or acrid vapours, which stimulate the excretory duct of the
lacrymal gland; or by applying them to the nostrils, and stimulating the
excretory duct of the lacrymal sack, as treated of in the Section on
Instinct.

Or the secretion of tears is increased by the association of the motions of
the excretory duct of the lacrymal sack with ideas of tender pleasure, or
of hopeless distress, as explained in Sect. XVI. 8. 2. and 3.

XI. The secretion of sensorial power in the brain is probably increased by
opium or wine, because when taken in certain quantity an immediate increase
of strength and activity succeeds for a time, with consequent debility if
the quantity taken be so great as to intoxicate in the least degree. The
necessity of perpetual respiration shews, that the oxygen of the atmosphere
supplies the source of the spirit of animation; which is constantly
expended, and is probably too fine to be long contained in the nerves after
its production in the brain. Whence it is probable, that the respiration of
oxygen gas mixed with common air may increase the secretion of sensorial
power; as indeed would appear from its exhilarating effect on most
patients.

III. CATALOGUE OF THE SECERNENTIA.

I. Diaphoretics.

    1. Amomum zinziber, ginger. Caryophyllus aromaticus, cloves. Piper
    indicum, pepper. Capsicum. Cardamomum. Pimento, myrtus pimenta. Canella
    alba. Serpentaria virginiana, aristolochia serpentaria, guaiacum.
    Sassafras, laurus sassafras. Opium. Wine.

    2. Essential oils of cinnamon, laurus cinnamomum. Nutmeg, myristica
    moschata. Cloves, caryophyllus aromaticus. Mint, mentha. Camphor,
    laurus camphora. Ether.

    3. Volatile salts, as of ammoniac and of hartshorn. Sal cornu cervi.

    4. Neutral salts, as those with vegetable acid; or with marine acid, as
    common salt. Halex. Red-herring, anchovy.

    5. Preparations of antimony, as emetic tartar, antimonium tartarizatum,
    wine of antimony. James's powder.

    6. External applications. Blisters. Warm bath. Warm air. Exercise.
    Friction.

    7. Cold water with subsequent warmth.

II. Sialagogues. Preparations of mercury, hydrargyrus. Pyrethrum, anthemis
pyrethrum, tobacco, cloves, pepper, cowhage, stizolobium siliqua hirsuta.
Mastich, pistacia lentiscus.

III. Expectorants:

    1. Squill, scilla maritima, garlic, leek, onion, allium, asafoetida,
    ferula asafoetida, gum ammoniac, benzoin, tar, pix liquida, balsam of
    Tolu.

    2. Root of seneka, polygala seneka, of elicampane, inula helenium.

    3. Marsh-mallow, althaea, coltsfoot, tussilago farfara, gum arabic,
    mimosa nilotica, gum tragacanth, astragalus tragacantha. Decoction of
    barley, hordeum distichon. Expressed oils. Spermaceti, soap. Extract of
    liquorice, glycyrrhiza glabra. Sugar. Honey.

    4. Externally blisters. Oil. Warm bath.

IV. Mild diuretics.

    1. Nitre, kali acetatum, other neutral salts.

    2. Fixed alkali, soap, calcined egg-shells.

    3. Turpentine. Balsam of Copaiva. Resin. Olibanum.

    4. Asparagus, garlic, wild daucus. Parsley, apium. Fennel faeniculum,
    pareira brava, Cissampelos?

    5. Externally cold air, cold water.

    6. Alcohol. Tincture of cantharides. Opium.

V. Mild cathartics.

    1. Sweet subacid fruits. Prunes, prunus domestica. Cassia sistula.
    Tamarinds, crystals of tartar, unrefined sugar. Manna. Honey.

    2. Whey of milk, bile of animals.

    3. Neutral salts, as Glauber's salt, vitriolated tartar, sea-water,
    magnesia alba, soap.

    4. Gum guaiacum. Balsam of Peru. Oleum ricini, castor-oil, oil of
    almonds, oil of olives, sulphur.

    5. Senna, cassia senna, jalap, aloe, rhubarb, rheum palmatum.

    6. Calomel. Emetic tartar, antimonium tartarizatum.

VI. Secretion of mucus of the bladder is increased by cantharides, by
spirit of turpentine?

VII. Secretion of mucus of the rectum is increased by aloe internally, by
various clysters and suppositories externally.

VIII. Secretion of subcutaneous mucus is increased by blisters of
cantharides, by application of a thin slice of the fresh root of white
briony, by sinapisms, by root of horse-radish, cochlearia armoracia.
Volatile alcali.

IX. Mild errhines. Marjoram. Origanum. Marum, tobacco.

X. Secretion of tears is increased by vapour of sliced onion, of volatile
alcali. By pity, or ideas of hopeless distress.

XI. Secretion of sensorial power in the brain is probably increased by
opium, by wine, and perhaps by oxygen gas added to the common air in
respiration.

       *       *       *       *       *

ART. IV.

SORBENTIA.

I. Those things which increase the irritative motions, which constitute
absorption, are termed sorbentia; and are as various as the absorbent
vessels, which they stimulate into action.

1. Cutaneous absorption is increased by austere acids, as of vitriol; hence
they are believed to check colliquative sweats, and to check the eruption
of small-pox, and contribute to the cure of the itch, and tinea; hence they
thicken the saliva in the mouth, as lemon-juice, crab-juice, sloes.

2. Absorption from the mucous membrane is increased by opium, and Peruvian
bark, internally; and by blue vitriol externally. Hence the expectoration
in coughs, and the mucous discharge from the urethra, are thickened and
lessened.

3. Absorption from the cellular membrane is promoted by bitter vegetables,
and by emetics, and cathartics. Hence matter is thickened and lessened in
ulcers by opium and Peruvian bark; and serum is absorbed in anasarca by the
operation of emetics and cathartics.

4. Venous absorption is increased by acrid vegetables; as water-cress,
cellery, horse-radish, mustard. Hence their use in sea-scurvy, the vibices
of which are owing to a defect of venous absorption; and by external
stimulants, as vinegar, and by electricity, and perhaps by oxygen.

5. Intestinal absorption is increased by astringent vegetables, as rhubarb,
galls; and by earthy salts, as alum; and by argillaceous and calcareous
earth.

6. Hepatic absorption is increased by metallic salts, hence calomel and sal
martis are so efficacious in jaundice, worms, chlorosis, dropsy.

7. Venereal virus in ulcers is absorbed by the stimulus of mercury; hence
they heal by the use of this medicine.

8. Venesection, hunger, thirst, and violent evacuations, increase all
absorptions; hence sweating produces costiveness.

9. Externally bitter astringent vegetables, earthy and metallic salts, and
bandages, promote the absorption of the parts on which they are applied.

10. All these in their usual doses do not increase the natural heat; but
they induce costiveness, and deep coloured urine with earthy sediment.

In greater doses they invert the motions of the stomach and lacteals; and
hence vomit or purge, as carduus benedictus, rhubarb. They promote
perspiration, if the skin be kept warm; as camomile tea, and testaceous
powders, have been used as sudorifics.

The preparations of antimony vomit, purge, or sweat, either according to
the quantity exhibited, or as a part of what is given is evacuated. Thus a
quarter of a grain of emetic tartar (if well prepared) will promote a
diaphoresis, if the skin be kept warm; half a grain will procure a stool or
two first, and sweating afterwards; and a grain will generally vomit, and
then purge, and lastly sweat the patient. In less quantity it is probable,
that this medicine acts like other metallic salts, as steel, zinc, or
copper in small doses; that is, that it strengthens the system by its
stimulus. As camomile or rhubarb in different doses vomit, or purge, or act
as stimulants so as to strengthen the system.

II. OBSERVATIONS ON THE SORBENTIA.

I. 1. As there is great difference in the apparent structure of the various
glands, and of the fluids which they select from the blood, these glands
must possess different kinds of irritability, and are therefore stimulated
into stronger or unnatural actions by different articles of the materia
medica, as shewn in the secernentia. Now as the absorbent vessels are
likewise glands, and drink up or select different fluids, as chyle, water,
mucus, with a part of every different secretion, as a part of the bile, a
part of the saliva, a part of the urine, &c. it appears, that these
absorbent vessels must likewise possess different kinds of irritability,
and in consequence must require different articles of the materia medica to
excite them into unusual action. This part of the subject has been so
little attended to, that the candid reader will find in this article a
great deal to excuse.

It was observed, that some of the secernentia did in a less degree increase
absorption, from the combination of different properties in the same
vegetable body; for the same reason some of the class of sorbentia produce
secretion in a less degree, as those bitters which have also an aroma in
their composition; these are known from their increasing the heat of the
system above its usual degree.

It must also be noted, that the actions of every part of the absorbent
system are so associated with each other, that the drugs which stimulate
one branch increase the action of the whole; and the torpor or quiescence
of one branch weakens the exertions of the whole; or when one branch is
excited into stronger action, some other branch has its actions weakened or
inverted. Yet though peculiar branches of the absorbent system are
stimulated into action by peculiar substances, there are other substances
which seem to stimulate the whole system, and that without immediately
increasing any of the secretions; as those bitters which possess no
aromatic scent, at the head of which stands the famed Peruvian bark, or
cinchona.

2. Cutaneous absorption. I have heard of some experiments, in which the
body was kept cold, and was thought to absorb more moisture from the
atmosphere than at any other time. This however cannot be determined by
statical experiments; as the capillary vessels, which secrete the
perspirable matter, must at the same time have been benumbed by the cold;
and from their inaction there could not have been the usual waste of the
weight of the body; and as all other muscular exertions are best performed,
when the body possesses its usual degree of warmth, it is conclusive, that
the absorbent system should likewise do its office best, when it is not
benumbed by external cold.

The austere acids, as of vitriol, lemon-juice, juice of crabs and sloes,
strengthen digestion, and prevent that propensity to sweat so usual to weak
convalescents, and diminish the colliquative sweats in hectic fevers; all
which are owing to their increasing the action of the external and internal
cutaneous absorption. Hence vitriolic acid is given in the small-pox to
prevent the too hasty or too copious eruption, which it effects, by
increasing the cutaneous absorption. Vinegar, from the quantity of alcohol
which it contains, exerts a contrary effect to that here described, and
belongs to the incitantia; as an ounce of it promotes sweat, and a flushing
of the skin; at the same time externally it acts as a venous absorbent, as
the lips become pale by moistening them with it. And it is said, when taken
internally in great and continued quantity, to induce paleness of the skin,
and softness of the bones.

The sweet vegetable acids, as of several ripe fruits, are among the
torpentia; as they are less stimulating than the general food of this
climate, and are hence used in inflammatory diseases.

Where the quantity of fluids in the system is much lessened, as in hectic
fever, which has been of some continuance, or in spurious peripneumony, a
grain of opium given at night will sometimes prevent the appearance of
sweats; which is owing to the stimulus of opium increasing the actions of
the cutaneous absorbents, more than those of the secerning vessels of the
skin. Whence the secretion of perspirable matter is not decreased, but its
appearance on the skin is prevented by its more facile absorption.

3. There is one kind of itch, which seldom appears between the fingers, is
the least infectious, and most difficult to eradicate, and which has its
cure much facilitated by the internal use of acid of vitriol. This disease
consists of small ulcers in the skin, which are healed by whatever
increases the cutaneous absorption. The external application of sulphur,
mercury, and acrid vegetables, acts on the same principle; for the
animalcula, which are seen in these pustules, are the effect, not the
cause, of them; as all other stagnating animal fluids, as the semen itself,
abounds with similar microscopic animals.

4. Young children have sometimes an eruption upon the head called Tinea,
which discharges an acrimonius ichor inflaming the parts, on which it
falls. This eruption I have seen submit to the internal use of vitriolic
acid, when only wheat-flour was applied externally. This kind of eruption
is likewise frequently cured by testaceous powders; two materials so widely
different in their chemical properties, but agreeing in their power of
promoting cutaneous absorption.

II. Absorption from the mucous membrane is increased by applying to its
surface the austere acids, as of vitriol, lemon-juice, crab-juice, sloes.
When these are taken into the mouth, they immediately thicken, and at the
same time lessen the quantity of the saliva; which last circumstance cannot
be owing to their coagulating the saliva, but to their increasing the
absorption of the thinner parts of it. So alum applied to the tip of the
tongue does not stop in its action there, but independent of its diffusion
it induces cohesion and corrugation over the whole mouth. (Cullen's Mat.
Med. Art. Astringentia.) Which is owing to the association of the motions
of the parts or branches of the absorbent system with each other.

Absorption from the mucous membrane is increased by opium taken internally
in small doses more than by any other medicine, as is seen in its
thickening the expectoration in coughs, and the discharge from the nostrils
in catarrh, and perhaps the discharge from the urethra in gonorrhoea. The
bark seems next in power for all these purposes.

Externally slight solutions of blue vitriol, as two or three grains to an
ounce of water, applied to ulcers of the mouth, or to chancres on the glans
penis, more powerfully induces them to heal than any other material.

Where the lungs or urethra are inflamed to a considerable degree, and the
absorption is so great, that the mucus is already too thick, and adheres to
the membrane from its viscidity, opiates and bitter vegetable and austere
acids are improper; and mucilaginous diluents should be used in their stead
with venesection and torpentia.

III. 1. Absorption from the cellular membrane, and from all the other
cavities of the body, is too slowly performed in some constitutions; hence
the bloated pale complexion; and when this occurs in its greatest degree,
it becomes an universal dropsy. These habits are liable to intermittent
fevers, hysteric paroxysms, cold extremities, indigestion, and all the
symptoms of debility.

The absorbent system is more subject to torpor or quiescence than the
secerning system, both from the coldness of the fluids which are applied to
it, as the moisture of the atmosphere, and from the coldness of the fluids
which we drink; and also from its being stimulated only by intervals, as
when we take our food; whereas the secerning system is perpetually excited
into action by the warm circulating blood; as explained in Sect. XXXII.

2. The Peruvian bark, camomile flowers, and other bitter drugs, by
stimulating this cellular branch of the absorbent system prevents it from
becoming quiescent; hence the cold paroxysms of those agues, which arise
from the torpor of the cellular lymphatics, are prevented, and the hot fits
in consequence. The patient thence preserves his natural heat, regains his
healthy colour, and his accustomed strength.

Where the cold paroxysm of an ague originates in the absorbents of the
liver, spleen, or other internal viscus, the addition of steel to vegetable
bitters, and especially after the use of one dose of calomel, much advances
the cure.

And where it originates in any part of the secerning system, as is probably
the case in some kinds of agues, the addition of opium in the dose of a
grain and half, given about an hour before the access of the paroxysm, or
mixed with chalybeate and bitter medicines, ensures the cure. Or the same
may be effected by wine given instead of opium before the paroxysm, so as
nearly to intoxicate.

These three kinds of agues are thus distinguished; the first is not
attended with any tumid or indurated viscus, which the people call an ague
cake, and which is evident to the touch. The second is accompanied with a
tumid viscus; and the last has generally, I believe, the quartan type, and
is attended with some degree of arterial debility.

3. This class of absorbent medicines are said to decrease irritability.
After any part of our system has been torpid or quiescent, by whatever
cause that was produced, it becomes afterwards capable of being excited
into greater motion by small stimuli; hence the hot fit of fever succeeds
the cold one. As these medicines prevent torpor or quiescence of parts of
the system, as cold hands or feet, which perpetually happen to weak
constitutions, the subsequent increase of irritability of these parts is
likewise prevented.

4. These absorbent medicines, including both the bitters, and metallic
salts, and opiates, are of great use in the dropsy by their promoting
universal absorption; but here evacuations are likewise to be produced, as
will be treated of in the Invertentia.

5. The matter in ulcers is thickened, and thence rendered less corrosive,
the saline part of it being reabsorbed by the use of bitter medicines;
hence the bark is used with advantage in the cure of ulcers.

6. Bitter medicines strengthen digestion by promoting the absorption of
chyle; hence the introduction of hop into the potation used at our meals,
which as a medicine may be taken advantageously, but, like other
unnecessary stimuli, must be injurious as an article of our daily diet.

The hop may perhaps in some degree contribute to the production of gravel
in the kidnies, as our intemperate wine-drinkers are more subject to the
gout, and ale-drinkers to the gravel; in the formation of both which
diseases, there can be no doubt, but that the alcohol is the principal, if
not the only agent.

7. Vomits greatly increase the absorption from the cellular membrane, as
squill, and foxglove. The squill should be given in the dose of a grain of
the dried root every hour, till it operates upwards and downwards. Four
ounces of the fresh leaves of the foxglove should be boiled from two pounds
of water to one, and half an ounce of the decoction taken every two hours
for four or more doses. This medicine by stimulating into inverted action
the absorbents of the stomach, increases the direct action of the cellular
lymphatics.

Another more convenient way of ascertaining the dose of foxglove is by
making a saturated tincture of it in proof spirit; which has the twofold
advantage of being invariable in its original strength, and of keeping a
long time as a shop-medicine without losing any of its virtue. Put two
ounces of the leaves of purple foxglove, digitalis purpurea, nicely dried,
and coarsely powdered, into a mixture of four ounces of rectified spirit of
wine and four ounces of water; let the mixture stand by the fire-side
twenty-four hours frequently shaking the bottle, and thus making a
saturated tincture of digitalis; which must be poured from the sediment or
passed through filtering paper.

As the size of a drop is greater or less according to the size of the rim
of the phial from which it is dropped, a part of this saturated tincture is
then directed to be put into a two-ounce phial, for the purpose of
ascertaining the size of the drop. Thirty drops of this tincture is
directed to be put into an ounce of mint-water for a draught to be taken
twice or thrice a day, till it reduces the anasarca of the limbs, or
removes the difficulty of breathing in hydrothorax, or till it induces
sickness. And if these do not occur in two or three days, the dose must be
gradually increased to forty or sixty drops, or further.

From the great stimulus of this medicine the stomach is rendered torpid
with consequent sickness, which continues many hours and even days, owing
to the great exhaustion of its sensorial power of irritation; and the
action of the heart and arteries becomes feeble from the deficient
excitement of the sensorial power of association; and lastly, the
absorbents of the cellular membrane act more violently in consequence of
the accumulation of the sensorial power of association in the torpid heart
and arteries, as explained in Suppl. I. 12.

A circumstance curiously similar to this occurs to some people on smoking
tobacco for a short time, who have not been accustomed to it. A degree of
sickness is presently induced, and the pulsations of the heart and arteries
become feeble for a short time, as in the approach to fainting, owing to
the direct sympathy between these and the stomach, that is from defect of
the excitement of the power of association. Then there succeeds a tingling,
and heat, and sometimes sweat, owing to the increased action of the
capillaries, or perspirative and mucous glands; which is occasioned by the
accumulation of the sensorial power of association by the weaker action of
the heart and arteries, which now increases the action of the capillaries.

8. Another method of increasing absorption from the cellular membrane is by
warm air, or by warm steam. If the swelled legs of a dropsical patient are
inclosed in a box, the air of which is made warm by a lamp or two, copious
sweats are soon produced by the increased action of the capillary glands,
which are seen to stand on the skin, as it cannot readily exhale in so
small a quantity of air, which is only changed so fast as may be necessary
to permit the lamps to burn. At the same time the lymphatics of the
cellular membrane are stimulated by the heat into greater action, as
appears by the speedy reduction of the tumid legs.

It would be well worth trying an experiment upon a person labouring under a
general anasarca by putting him into a room filled with air heated to 120
or 130 degrees, which would probably excite a great general diaphoresis,
and a general cellular absorption both from the lungs and every other part.
And that air of so great heat may be borne for many minutes without great
inconvenience was shewn by the experiments made in heated rooms by Dr.
Fordyce and others. Philos. Trans.

Another experiment of using warmth in anasarca, or in other diseases, might
be by immersing the patient in warm air, or in warm steam, received into an
