it was some conjunction of the planets; whether perchance it was a
comet, or a "new" or "temporary" star; or whether it was a supernatural
light, like the pillar of fire that guided the children of Israel in the
wilderness. But that verse has not been given. The twelve or twenty
additional words, which could have cleared up the matter, have been
withheld, and there can be no doubt as to the reason. The "star,"
whatever its physical nature, was of no importance, except as a guide to
the birthplace of the infant Jesus. Information about it would have
drawn attention from the object of the narrative; it would have given to
a mere sign-post the importance which belonged only to "the Word made
flesh."

We are often told that the Bible should be studied precisely as any
other book is studied. Yet before we can criticize any book, we must
first ascertain what was the purpose that the author had in writing it.
The history of England, for instance, has been written by many persons
and from many points of view. One man has traced the succession of the
dynasties, the relationships of the successive royal families, and the
effect of the administrations of the various kings. Another has chiefly
considered the development of representative government and of
parliamentary institutions. A third has concerned himself more with the
different races that, by their fusion, have formed the nation as it is
to-day. A fourth has dealt with the social condition of the people, the
increase of comfort and luxury. To a fifth the true history of England
is the story of its expansion, the foundation and growth of its colonial
empire. While to a sixth, its religious history is the one that claims
most attention, and the struggles with Rome, the rise and decay of
Puritanism, and the development of modern thought will fill his pages.
Each of these six will select just those facts, and those facts only,
that are relevant to his subject. The introduction of irrelevant facts
would be felt to mark the ignorant or unskilful workman. The master of
his craft will keep in the background the details that have no bearing
on his main purpose, and to those which have but a slight bearing he
will give only such notice as their importance in this connection
warrants.

The purpose of the Bible is to reveal God to us, and to teach us of our
relationship to Him. It was not intended to gratify that natural and
laudable curiosity which has been the foundation of the physical
sciences. Our own efforts, our own intelligence can help us here, and
the Scriptures have not been given us in order to save us the trouble of
exerting them.

There is no reason for surprise, then, that the information given us
concerning the star is, astronomically, so imperfect. We are, indeed,
told but two facts concerning it. First that its appearance, in some way
or other, informed the wise men, not of the birth of _a_ king of the
Jews, but of _the_ King of the Jews, for Whose coming not Israel only,
but more or less consciously the whole civilized world, was waiting.
Next, having come to Judaea in consequence of this information, the
"star" pointed out to them the actual spot where the new-born King was
to be found. "It went before them till it came and stood over where the
young Child was." It may also be inferred from Matt. ii. 10 that in some
way or other the wise men had for a time lost sight of the star, so that
the two facts mentioned of it relate to two separate appearances. The
first appearance induced them to leave the East, and set out for Judaea;
the second pointed out to them the place at Bethlehem where the object
of their search was to be found. Nothing is told us respecting the star
except its work as a guide.

Some three centuries ago the ingenious and devout Kepler supposed that
he could identify the Star with a conjunction of the planets Jupiter and
Saturn, in the constellation Pisces. This conjunction took place in the
month of May, B.C. 7, not very long before the birth of our Lord is
supposed to have taken place.

But the late Prof. C. Pritchard has shown, first, that a similar and
closer conjunction occurred 59 years earlier, and should therefore have
brought a Magian deputation to Judaea then. Next, that the two planets
never approached each other nearer than twice the apparent diameter of
the moon, so that they would have appeared, not as one star, but as two.
And thirdly, if the planets had seemed to stand over Bethlehem as the
wise men left Jerusalem, they most assuredly would not have appeared to
do so when they arrived at the little city. Ingenious as the suggestion
was, it may be dismissed as unworthy of serious consideration.

Another suggestion shows upon what slight foundations a well-rounded
legend may be built. In the year 1572 a wonderful "new star" appeared in
the constellation Cassiopeia. At its brightest it outshone Venus, and,
though it gradually declined in splendour, it remained visible for some
sixteen months. There have been other instances of outbursts of bright
short-lived stars; and brief notices, in the annals of the years 1265
and 952 may have referred to such objects, but more probably these were
comets. The guess was hazarded that these objects might be one and the
same; that the star in Cassiopeia might be a "variable" star, bursting
into brilliancy about every 315 or 316 years; that it was the star that
announced the birth of our Lord, and that it would reappear towards the
end of the nineteenth century to announce His second coming.

One thing more was lacking to make the legend complete, and this was
supplied by the planet Venus, which shines with extraordinary
brilliance when in particular parts of her orbit. On one of these
occasions, when she was seen as a morning star in the east, some hazy
recollection of the legend just noticed caused a number of people to
hail her as none other than the star of Bethlehem at its predicted
return.

There is no reason to suppose that the star of 1572 had ever appeared
before that date, or will ever appear again. But in any case we are
perfectly sure that it could not have been the star of Bethlehem. For
Cassiopeia is a northern constellation, and the wise men, when they set
out from Jerusalem to Bethlehem must have had Cassiopeia and all her
stars behind them.

The fact that the "star" went before them and stood over where the young
Child lay, gives the impression that it was some light, like the
Shekinah glory resting on the Ark in the tabernacle, or the pillar of
fire which led the children of Israel through the wilderness. But this
view raises the questions as to the form in which it first appeared to
the wise men when they were still in the East, and how they came to call
it a star, when they must have recognized how very unstarlike it was.
Whilst, if what they saw when in the East was really a star, it seems
most difficult to understand how it can have appeared to go before them
and to stand over the place where the young Child lay.

I have somewhere come across a legend which may possibly afford the
clue, but I have not been able to find that the legend rests upon any
authority. It is that the star had been lost in the daylight by the time
that the wise men reached Jerusalem. It was therefore an evening star
during their journey thither. But it is said that when they reached
Bethlehem, apparently nearly at midday, one of them went to the well of
the inn, in order to draw water. Looking down into the well, he saw the
star, reflected from the surface of the water. This would of course be
an intimation to them that the star was directly overhead, and its
re-observation, under such unusual circumstances, would be a sufficient
assurance that they had reached the right spot. Inquiry in the inn would
lead to a knowledge of the visit of the shepherds, and of the angelic
message which had told them where to find the Babe born in the city of
David, "a Saviour, Which is Christ the Lord."

If this story be true, the "Star of Bethlehem" was probably a "new
star," like that of 1572. Its first appearance would then have caused
the Magi to set out on their journey, though it does not appear how they
knew what it signified, unless we suppose that they were informed of it
in a dream, just as they were afterwards warned of God not to return to
Herod. Whilst they were travelling the course of the year would bring
the star, which shone straight before them in the west after sunset
every evening, nearer and nearer to the sun. We may suppose that, like
other new stars, it gradually faded, so that by the time the wise men
had reached Jerusalem they had lost sight of it altogether. Having thus
lost it, they would probably not think of looking for it by daylight,
for it is no easy thing to detect by daylight even Venus at her greatest
brilliancy, unless one knows exactly where to look. The difficulty does
not lie in any want of brightness, but in picking up and holding
steadily so minute a point of light in the broad expanse of the gleaming
sky. This difficulty would be overcome for them, according to this
story, by the well, which acted like a tube to direct them exactly to
the star, and like a telescope, to lessen the sky glare. It would be
also necessary to suppose that the star was flashing out again with
renewed brilliancy. Such a brief recovery of light has not been unknown
in the case of some of our "new" or "temporary" stars.

I give the above story for what it is worth, but I attach no importance
to it myself. Some, however, may feel that it removes what they had felt
as a difficulty in the narrative,--namely, to understand how the star
could "stand over where the young Child lay." It would also explain,
what seems to be implied in the narrative, how it happened that the Magi
alone, and not the Jews in general, perceived the star at its second
appearance.

For myself, the narrative appears to me astronomically too incomplete
for any astronomical conclusions to be drawn from it. The reticence of
the narrative on all points, except those directly relating to our Lord
Himself, is an illustration of the truth that the Scriptures were not
written to instruct us in astronomy, or in any of the physical sciences,
but that we might have eternal life.

     "AND THIS IS LIFE ETERNAL, THAT THEY MIGHT KNOW THEE THE ONLY
     TRUE GOD, AND JESUS CHRIST, WHOM THOU HAST SENT."




     A TABLE OF SCRIPTURAL REFERENCES


     +-------+---------------+-----------------------+
     | Page. |   Book.       | Chap. and Verse.      |
     +-------+---------------+-----------------------+
     |  9    | I. Kings      | v. 29-34              |
     | 10    | Wisdom        | vii. 17-22 (R.V.)     |
     | 11    | Psalm         | viii. 3, 4            |
     | 15    | Eccl.         | i. 9                  |
     | 17    | Gen.          | i. 1                  |
     |  "    | I. Chron.     | xvi. 26               |
     |  "    | Deut.         | vi. 4                 |
     |  "    | Mark          | xii. 29               |
     |  "    | Neh.          | ix. 6                 |
     | 19    | Heb.          | xi. 23                |
     | 20    | II. Pet.      | iii. 8                |
     | 22    | Psalm         | cxi. 2-4 (R.V.)       |
     |  "    | Gen.          | ii. 3                 |
     | 23    | Exod.         | xx. 10, 11            |
     |  "    |  "            | xxxi. 16, 17          |
     |  "    | Gen.          | i. 14                 |
     | 25    |  "            | i. 1                  |
     | 32    | Exod.         | xv. 4, 5              |
     | 35    | Gen.          | i. 6-8                |
     |  "    |  "            | i. 14                 |
     | 36    |  "            | i. 20                 |
     |  "    | Job           | xxxvii. 18 (R.V.)     |
     |  "    | Num.          | xvii. 39              |
     |  "    | Isaiah        | xl. 19                |
     | 37    | Jer.          | x. 9                  |
     |  "    | Psalm         | cxxxvi. 6             |
     | 38    | Heb.          | i. 3                  |
     | 39    | II. Sam.      | xxii. 8               |
     |  "    | Job           | xxvi. 11              |
     |  "    |  "            | xxvi. 7               |
     |  "    | I. Sam.       | ii. 8                 |
     | 40    | Psalm         | lxxv. 3               |
     |  "    |   "           | civ. 2                |
     |  "    | Isaiah        | xl. 22                |
     |  "    | Amos          | ix. 6                 |
     |  "    | Num.          | xxxiv. 4              |
     |  "    | II. Sam.      | xv. 30                |
     | 41    | Psalm         | cxlviii. 4            |
     |  "    | Song of Three |                       |
     |       |   Children    | 38                    |
     |  "    | Amos          | v. 8                  |
     |  "    |  "            | ix. 6                 |
     |  "    | Eccl.         | i. 7                  |
     |  "    | Isaiah        | lv. 10 (R.V.)         |
     | 42    |   "           | lv. 11                |
     |  "    | Job           | xxxvi. 26-28          |
     |       |               |   (R.V.)              |
     |  "    | Judges        | v. 4                  |
     |  "    | Psalm         | lxxvii. 17            |
     |  "    |   "           | cxlvii. 8             |
     |  "    | Prov.         | xvi. 15               |
     |  "    | Eccl.         | xii. 2                |
     |  "    | Isaiah        | v. 6                  |
     |  "    | Jude          | 12                    |
     |  "    | Nahum         | i. 3                  |
     |  "    | Isaiah        | xviii. 4              |
     | 43    | Eccl.         | xi. 3                 |
     |  "    | Job           | xxvi. 8               |
     |  "    |  "            | xxxviii. 34-37        |
     | 44    |  "            | xxxviii. 19-29        |
     |       |               |   (R.V.)              |
     |  "    | Psalm         | xviii. 6-17 (R.V.)    |
     | 45    | Jer.          | x. 13 (R.V.)          |
     |  "    | Psalm         | cxxxv. 7              |
     | 46    | Job           | xxxvii. 16            |
     | 49    |  "            | xxxvi. 29             |
     |  "    | Gen.          | vii. 11               |
     | 50    | II. Kings     | vii. 1, 2             |
     |  "    | Mal.          | iii. 10               |
     |  "    | Hos.          | vi. 4                 |
     |  "    | Dan.          | viii. 8               |
     |  "    | Ezek.         | xxxvii. 9             |
     | 51    | Jer.          | xlix. 36              |
     |  "    | Eccl.         | i. 6                  |
     |  "    | Isaiah        | xi. 12                |
     |  "    |   "           | xl. 22                |
     |  "    | Prov.         | viii. 27              |
     | 52    | Job           | xxii. 14 (R.V.        |
     |       |               |   margin)             |
     |  "    |  "            | xxvi. 10 (R.V.)       |
     |  "    | Gen.          | i. 9                  |
     |  "    | Psalm         | xxiv. 2               |
     |  "    |   "           | cxxxvi. 6             |
     | 53    | Ezek.         | xxxi. 4               |
     |  "    | Gen.          | vii. 11               |
     |  "    |  "            | viii. 2               |
     |  "    | Job           | xxxviii. 16           |
     |  "    | Prov.         | iii. 20               |
     |  "    | Jer.          | v. 22                 |
     | 54    | Job           | xxxviii. 8            |
     |  "    | Prov.         | viii. 27, 29          |
     | 55    | Josh.         | x. 13                 |
     |  "    | Psalm         | xix. 1-6 (R.V.)       |
     | 56    | I. Kings      | xxii. 19              |
     | 57    | Jer.          | xxxiii. 22            |
     |  "    | Deut.         | iv. 15, 19            |
     | 58    | Job           | xxxviii. 7            |
     |  "    | Judges        | v. 20                 |
     |  "    | II. Kings     | vi. 14-17             |
     | 60    | Job           | xxxviii. 52 (R.V.)    |
     |  "    | Psalm         | cxi. 2                |
     |  "    | Rev.          | ii. 26, 28            |
     | 61    | Isaiah        | xiv. 12-14            |
     |  "    | Rev.          | xxii. 16              |
     | 62    | Jer.          | xxxi. 36              |
     |  "    | Isaiah        | xl. 26-31 (R.V.)      |
     | 63    | Gen.          | i. 14-19              |
     | 64    | Deut.         | xxxiii. 14 (R.V.)     |
     |  "    | I. John       | i. 5                  |
     |  "    | Psalm         | xxvii. 1              |
     |  "    | Isaiah        | lx. 19                |
     |  "    | John          | i. 9                  |
     |  "    | Psalm         | lxxxiv. 11            |
     |  "    | Mal.          | iv. 2                 |
     | 65    | James         | i. 17                 |
     |  "    | Psalm         | cxxxix. 12            |
     |  "    | Deut.         | iv. 19                |
     |  "    |  "            | xvii. 2, 3            |
     | 66    | II. Kings     | xxiii. 11             |
     |  "    | Ezek.         | viii. 11              |
     |  "    |  "            | viii. 16              |
     |  "    | Job           | xxxi. 26              |
     |  "    | Cant.         | vi. 10                |
     | 67    | Judges        | viii. 13              |
     | 67    | Judges        | xiv. 18               |
     |  "    | Jer.          | xliii. 13             |
     | 68    | Isaiah        | xix. 18               |
     |  "    | Cant.         | vi. 10                |
     | 69    | Psalm         | lxxii. 5              |
     |  "    |   "           | lxxii. 17             |
     | 70    |   "           | lxxxix. 36            |
     |  "    |   "           | l. 1                  |
     |  "    |   "           | cxiii. 3              |
     |  "    |   "           | xix. 6                |
     |  "    | Eccl.         | i. 3                  |
     | 71    | Job           | xxxviii. 12-14        |
     |  "    |   "           | xxxviii. 14 (R.V.)    |
     |  "    | Eccl.         | i. 5                  |
     | 72    | Job           | xxvi. 7               |
     |  "    | Psalm         | xix. 6                |
     |  "    | II. Kings     | iv. 19                |
     |  "    | Psalm         | cxxi. 6               |
     |  "    | Isaiah        | xlix. 10              |
     |  "    | Rev.          | vii. 16               |
     |  "    | Deut.         | xxxiii. 14            |
     | 73    | James         | i. 17                 |
     |  "    | Job           | xxxviii. 33           |
     |  "    | Wisdom        | vii. 18               |
     | 78    | Rom.          | i. 20-23              |
     | 79    | John          | ix. 4                 |
     | 80    | Psalm         | lxxxi. 3              |
     |  "    | Prov.         | vii. 20               |
     | 82    | Isaiah        | lx. 20                |
     | 83    | Num.          | x. 10                 |
     |  "    | Psalm         | lxxxi. 3              |
     |  "    | Isaiah        | iii. 18               |
     | 84    | Gen.          | xxxvii. 9             |
     |  "    | Jer.          | viii. 2               |
     |  "    | Psalm         | civ. 19               |
     |  "    |   "           | lxxxix. 36, 37        |
     |  "    |   "           | cxxxvi. 9             |
     |  "    | Jer.          | xxxi. 35              |
     |  "    | Eccl.         | xii. 2                |
     |  "    | Isaiah        | xiii. 10              |
     |  "    | Ezek.         | xxxii. 7              |
     |  "    | Joel          | ii. 10, 31            |
     |  "    |  "            | iii. 15               |
     |  "    | Hab.          | iii. 11               |
     |  "    | Exod.         | ii. 2                 |
     | 85    | Deut.         | xxxiii. 13, 14        |
     |  "    | II. Kings     | xv. 13                |
     |  "    | Dan.          | iv. 29                |
     |  "    | Ezra          | vi. 15                |
     |  "    | Neh.          | i. 1                  |
     |  "    | I. Kings      | vi. 1, 37, 38         |
     |  "    |   "           | viii. 2               |
     |  "    | Cant.         | vi. 10                |
     |  "    | Isaiah        | lxxiv. 23             |
     | 86    |   "           | xxx. 26               |
     |  "    | Rev.          | xix. 6-8              |
     |  "    | Gen.          | xxxvii. 9             |
     | 87    |   "           | xxxvii. 10            |
     |  "    | Job           | xxxi. 26-28 (R.V.)    |
     | 88    | Deut.         | iv. 12, 15, 16, 19    |
     |  "    | Judges        | viii. 21              |
     |  "    | Isaiah        | iii. 18               |
     |  "    | II. Kings     | xxiii. 13             |
     | 89    | Gen.          | xiv. 5                |
     |  "    | I. Sam.       | xxxi. 10              |
     |  "    | II. Kings     | xxiii. 13             |
     | 89    | Jer.          | vii. 18               |
     | 90    |   "           | xliv. 17, 18          |
     | 91    | Isaiah        | xxx. 26               |
     |  "    |   "           | lx. 20                |
     | 92    | Psalm         | cxxi. 6               |
     |  "    |   "           | civ. 19-24 (R.V.)     |
     | 96    | Gen.          | xv. 5                 |
     | 97    | Psalm         | cxlvii. 4             |
     |  "    | Isaiah        | xl. 22                |
     | 98    | I. Cor.       | xv. 41                |
     | 99    | Prov.         | xxv. 3                |
     |  "    | Job           | xi. 7, 8              |
     |  "    |   "           | xxii. 12              |
     |  "    | Jer.          | xxxi. 37              |
     | 100   | Psalm         | ciii. 11, 12          |
     | 107   | Joel          | ii. 30                |
     |  "    | Gen.          | iii. 24               |
     |  "    | Heb.          | i. 7                  |
     |  "    | I. Chron.     | xxi. 16               |
     | 108   | Jude          | 13                    |
     | 113   | Acts          | xix. 35 (R.V.)        |
     | 116   | Rev.          | vi. 13                |
     |  "    | Isaiah        | xxxiv. 4              |
     |  "    | Rev.          | viii. 10              |
     |  "    | Jude          | 13                    |
     | 117   | Job           | iii. 9 (margin)       |
     |  "    |   "           | xli. 18               |
     |  "    |   "           | xxxvii. 22 (R.V.)     |
     | 119   | Jer.          | x. 2                  |
     | 122   | Wisdom        | vii. 18               |
     | 123   | Amos          | i. 1                  |
     |  "    | Zech.         | xiv. 5                |
     |  "    | Gen.          | i. 14                 |
     | 124   | Joel          | ii. 10                |
     |  "    |    "          | ii. 30, 31            |
     |  "    | Acts          | ii. 19, 20            |
     |  "    | Rev.          | vi. 12                |
     |  "    | Amos          | viii. 9               |
     | 125   | Micah         | iii. 6                |
     |  "    | Isaiah        | xiii. 10              |
     |  "    | Jer.          | xv. 9                 |
     |  "    | Ezek.         | xxxii. 7, 8           |
