

Anyone Who Answers This Puzzle Correctly May Receive Prizes or Cash!

Man, woman, boy, or girl--it doesn't matter who or what you are. Seven
of the people who take up this offer are going to win wonderful
automobiles. You can be among them. Answer today! Duplicate prizes
awarded in case of ties.


=Additional $500.00 for Promptness= $500.00 extra will be awarded in
addition to first prize if you are prompt. If your answer is judged to
be perfect, I will tell you without delay about winning the prizes.
Hurry now! Address your answer to G. W. ALDERTON, Advertising Manager,
Dept. 143, 510 North Dearborn St., Chicago, Ill.

       *       *       *       *       *


AGENTS--Represent THE Carlton LINE--_America's Best Paying Proposition_!

SAMPLES FREE


SELL FROM A MILLION DOLLAR STOCK


Shirts, Neckwear and Underwear.

No substitutions. 4 Hour Shipping Service. Highest Commissions Bonuses.
Profit Sharing. Biggest Company. Mail Coupon.


  CARLTON MILLS, 114 FIFTH AVE., N.Y.C.
  _Send me your Famous Sample Outfit_

  Name ........................................

  Address .....................................

  100-G


  CARLTON MILLS INC.
  114 FIFTH AVE.
  NEW YORK
  =Dept. 186-6=

MAIL COUPON

$1000 LIFE Insurance Policy Free

       *       *       *       *       *


BE A JAZZ MUSIC MASTER

Play Piano By Ear

[Illustration: Niagara School Free Book]

Play popular song hits perfectly. Name the tune, play it by ear. No
teacher--self-instruction. No tedious ding-dong daily practice--just 20
brief, entertaining lessons, easily mastered.


At Home in Your Spare Time

Send for FREE BOOK. Learn many styles of bass and syncopation--trick
endings. If 10c (coin or stamps) is enclosed, you also receive wonderful
booklet "_How to Entertain at Piano_"--and many new tricks, stunts, etc.

  _Niagara School of Music_
  Dept. 350 Niagara Falls, N.Y.

Send for this Free Book

       *       *       *       *       *


Learn How to BOX

=$2.98= brings you the famous boxing course by mail of Jimmy DeForest,
=World's Greatest Trainer=, the system that trained Dempsey and great
champions. Covers everything in scientific boxing from fundamentals to
ring generalship. Twenty weeks makes you a finished DeForest trained
boxer. Hundreds of DeForest trained men are making good in the ring
today. Complete course sent in one mailing. Send $2.98 or C.O.D order
paying postman $2.98 plus actual postage.

[Illustration]

  =Jimmy DeForest Boxing Course=
  =347 Madison Ave., Box 42, New York City=

       *       *       *       *       *


Radium Is Restoring Health to Thousands

No medicine, drugs or dieting. Just a light, small, comfortable
inexpensive Radio-Active Pad, worn on the back by day and over the
stomach at night. Sold on trial. You can be sure it is helping you
before you buy it. Over 150,000 sold on this plan. Thousands have
written us that it healed them of Neuritis, Rheumatism, High Blood
Pressure, Constipation, Nervous Prostration, Heart, Lungs, Liver, Kidney
and Bladder trouble, etc. No matter what you have tried, or what your
trouble may be, try Degnen's Radio-Active Solar Pad at our risk. Write
today for Trial offer and descriptive literature. Radium Appliance Co.,
2833 Bradbury Bldg., Los Angeles, Cal.

       *       *       *       *       *


HYPNOTIZE

[Illustration]


25 Lessons in Hypnotism, Mind Reading and Magnetic Healing. Tells how
experts hypnotize at a glance, make others obey their commands. How to
overcome bad habits, how to give a home performance, get on the stage,
etc. Helpful to every man and woman, executives, salesmen, doctors,
mothers, etc. Simple, easy. Learn at home. Only $1.10, including the
"Hypnotic Eye," a new aid for amateurs. Send stamps or M.O. (or pay
C.O.D. plus postage). Guaranteed. =Educator Press, 19 Park Row, New
York. Dept. H-41=

       *       *       *       *       *


AVIATION Information FREE

Send us your name and address for full information regarding the
Aviation and Airplane business. Find out about the many great
opportunities now open and how we prepare you at home, during spare
time, to qualify. Our new book, _Opportunities in the Airplane industry_
also sent free if you answer at once.

  AMERICAN SCHOOL OF AVIATION
  Dept. 1182 3601 Michigan Ave. CHICAGO

       *       *       *       *       *


Charming--Captivating--Irresistible

  DESIR D'AMOUR
  [Love's Desire]

[Illustration]

This exotic perfume goes straight to the heart like Cupid's arrows. Its
strength and mystic aroma thrills and delights young and old. Triple
strength full size vial 98 cents prepaid or $1.32 C.O.D. plus shipping
charges. Directions free. One bottle GRATIS if you order three vials.
MAGNUS WORKS, Box 12, Varick Sta., New York, N.Y., Dept. NSG-2.

       *       *       *       *       *

Please mention NEWSSTAND GROUP--MEN'S LIST, when answering
advertisements

       *       *       *       *       *


[Illustration: On your feet--_In a good Paying Business_]

We start you in the shoe and hosiery business. Inexperienced workers
earn Big Money yearly. Direct-to-Wearer plan. Just show Tanners Famous
Line of Footwear.

    We tell how and where to sell. Perfect fit through Patented
    System. Collect your pay daily. We furnish $40.00 Sample Outfit
    of actual shoes and hosiery. 83 styles.

=Send for free book "Getting Ahead" and full particulars.= No
obligation.

  TANNERS SHOE CO.
  892 C Street, Boston, Mass.

       *       *       *       *       *


=Play the Hawaiian Guitar like the Hawaiians!=

=Only 4 Motions= used in playing this fascinating instrument Our native
Hawaiian instructors teach you to master them quickly. Pictures show
how. Everything explained clearly.

[Illustration]


Play in Half Hour

After you get the four easy motions you play harmonious chords with very
little practice. No previous musical knowledge needed.


Easy Lessons

Even if you don't know one note from another, the 52 printed lessons and
clear pictures make it easy to learn quickly. Pay as you play.


GIVEN _when you enroll_--a sweet toned HAWAIIAN GUITAR, Carrying Case
and Playing Outfit--Value $18 to $20

_No extras--everything included_

=WRITE AT ONCE= for attractive offer and easy terms. You have
everything to gain. A postcard will do. =ACT!=


OTHER COURSES

Tenor Banjo, Violin, Tiple, Tenor Guitar, Ukulele, Banjo Ukulele. Under
well known instructors.

  FIRST HAWAIIAN CONSERVATORY of MUSIC, Inc.
  9th Floor, Woolworth Bldg, Dept. 269 New York, N.Y.

_Approved as a Correspondence School Under the Laws of the State of New
York--Member National Home Study Council_

       *       *       *       *       *


SELL ROSECLIFF SHIRTS

_Make Steady Money_


YOUR OWN SHIRTS and TIES

Showing Samples

Men's Shirts Ties, Underwear brings you big cash commissions. One Year
Guarantee. No substitutions. Free silk initials. More exclusive
Rosecliff features establish leadership. Write for your FREE Outfit NOW!

  ROSECLIFF SHIRT CORP.
  Dept. J-2
  1237 Broadway, N.Y.

_Outfit Free_

       *       *       *       *       *


GOV'T. POSITIONS

  $35 TO $75 WEEKLY
  MEN--WOMEN
  AGE 18 to 55

  ( ) By. Mail Clerk
  ( ) P. O. Laborer
  ( ) R. F. D. Carrier
  ( ) Special Agent (investigator)
  ( ) City Mail Carrier
  ( ) Meat Inspector
  ( ) P. O. Clerk
  ( ) File Clerk
  ( ) General Clerk
  ( ) Matron
  ( ) Steno-Typist
  ( ) Immigrant Inspector
  ( ) Seamstress
  ( ) Auditor
  ( ) Steno-Secretary
  ( ) U.S. Border Patrol
  ( ) Chauffeur-Carrier
  ( ) Watchman
  ( ) Skilled Laborer
  ( ) Postmaster
  ( ) Typist

INSTRUCTION BUREAU, 112-B, St. Louis, Mo.

Send me FREE particulars How To Qualify for positions marked "X."
Salaries, locations, opportunities, etc. ALL SENT FREE.

  Name ............................................

  Address .........................................

       *       *       *       *       *


[Illustration: FREE! Body Chart]

If you will mail the coupon below, this Anatomical and Physiological
Chart will be mailed to you without one cent of expense. It shows the
location of the Organs, Bones of the Body, Muscles of the Body, Head and
Vertebra Column and tells you how the nerves radiate from your spinal
cord to all organs of the body. This chart should be in every home.


Where Is That PAIN?

It may be in the neck, back, hips, stomach, liver, legs or arms.
Wherever it is, the chart will help to show you the location and cause
of your ailment. For instance, this chart will help you locate vermiform
appendix pains. Hundreds of lives might have been saved if people had
known the location and character of the pain and had received proper
attention.


Stop that Pain

  _By Relieving the Cause with_
  Violet Ray--Vibration
  Ozone--Medical Electricity
  _The Four Greatest Curative Powers Generated by This_
  =Great New Invention!=

[Illustration]

Elco Health Generators at last are ready for you! If you want more
health--greater power to enjoy the pleasures and delights about you, or
if more beauty is your desire--_write_! Ask for the book on these
inventions which has just been prepared. It will be sent to you without
cost. It tells you how Elco Health Generators aid you in leaving the
lethargy and hopelessness of bad health and weakness behind forever.
Re-vitalize yourself. Bring back energy. Be wholly alive. Write today!


   _Elco_
   Electric Health Generators

Here's What Elco Users Say--

    "Wouldn't Take $1000 for my Elco."
    "Has done me more good in 2 weeks than doctors did in three years."
    "Cured my Rheumatism."
    "My Eczema gone."
    "Cured my stomach trouble."
    "Cured my weakness."
    "Now I sleep soundly all night."
    "Thanks to Elco my strength and vigor are back."
    "No more pain." "Colds never bother me now."
    "Chronic Constipation banished."

Free Trial

These great new inventions generate Violet Ray, Vibration, Electricity
and Ozone--combined or separate. They operate on the electric light in
your home or on their own motive power at less than 50 cents per year.
Elco Health Generators are positively the only instruments which can
give you in one outfit Electricity, Violet Ray--Vibration and Ozone--the
four greatest curative agents. Send the coupon below. Get the Free Book
NOW!


MAIL COUPON for FREE BOOK

[Illustration: Health Power Beauty]

Do not put this paper down without sending the coupon. Don't go on as
you are with pains and with almost no life and energy. You owe it to
yourself to be a better man or woman. You were put here to enjoy
life--not just to drag through it. So do not rest another day until you
have put your name on the coupon here. That will bring the whole story
of these great new inventions. Do it today--now.

       *       *       *       *       *

  Lindstrom & Co.
  _Makers of Therapeutic Apparatus since 1892_.
  2322 Indiana Avenue
  Dept. 15-62
  Chicago

Please send me your free book, "Heal--Power--Beauty" and full
information of your 10-day Free Trial Offer.

  _Name_ ........................................

  _Address_ .....................................

       *       *       *       *       *

Please mention NEWSSTAND GROUP--MEN'S LIST, when answering
advertisements

       *       *       *       *       *


Who Wants an Auto FREE?

STUDEBAKER--BUICK--NASH! Your choice! OR $2000.00 CASH

[Illustration: MARK YOUR STAR

MAIL THE CIRCLE]

Thousands of dollars in new autos and grand prizes will positively be
given free to advertise and make new friends for my firm. Choice of
Studebaker or Buick or Nash new 4-door sedan delivered free, or $2000.00
cash. Also Oldsmobile, Pontiac, Chevrolet, Fords, diamonds, other fine
prizes and cash will be given free. No problems to do. No fine writing
required. No words to make. No figures to add. Bank guarantees all
prizes.


Pick Your Lucky Star!

All the stars in the circle are exactly alike except one. That star is
different to all the others and it may be a lucky star for you. Can you
pick it out? If you can, mark the different star and send the circle to
me at once along with your name and address. A prompt answer can start
you on the way to win the great $2000.00 free prize.


BE PROMPT--WIN $650.00 EXTRA

Someone like you who will write me at once can get $650.00 cash fast for
being prompt, so you may thank your lucky stars if you send your answer
right off. No risk. Nothing to buy. Nothing hard to do. Over $7000.00 in
valuable prizes will be given free of cost. Send today and I will show
you just how you can get your free choice of these splendid new sedans
or $2000.00 cash, without cost or obligation of any kind. All win plan!
A reward for everybody! SEND NO MONEY. Answer AT ONCE.

Address GEO. WILSON, DEPT. 27, AUGUSTA, MAINE

       *       *       *       *       *

