surely break my neck."

There were more anguished shrieks from somewhere nearby, and they looked
at each other and the pool of terror rose higher.

Sophia heard hoofbeats and men's voices, loud, in the street outside.
She went to the door that led out to the balcony and pushed it open a
crack. With a clattering of hooves on cobblestones, three mounted men
rode down the street, looking up at buildings. They carried no torches,
but their drawn swords gave off pale glints. There was no way she could
tell who they were or which side they were on.

The man in the lead pointed with his sword at the house where Sophia
was. She leaned farther out, her heart pounding at her ribs, to see the
trio dismount and tie their horses.

She turned away from the doorway to the balcony and pointed silently
downward. Ugolini closed his book with shaking hands. Tilia fingered her
pectoral cross that Daoud had long ago told Sophia contained a poisoned
blade. And Sophia loosened the mouth of the leather bag tied to her belt
that held the tiny crossbow Daoud had given her.

Would she be able to use it? She had shot a longbow for sport a few
times in her life, with indifferent accuracy. But she had never fired
even a normal-size crossbow. Still, if the darts were poisoned, she need
not hit a man in a vital spot to stop him.

Sophia heard Scipio barking in the room below, Tilia and Ugolini's room,
where they had tied him. There was, she knew, no one in the house except
the three of them. The house belonged to a Guelfo merchant who had fled
town when Manfred's army arrived. But she did not hear anyone moving
about downstairs, as they would if they were looting the place. Instead,
heavy footsteps came up the stairs and a voice called, "Madonna Sophia!
Madonna Sophia, are you up there?"

Her heart leapt with relief. It was not yet Daoud, but it must be
someone he had sent. They were rescued.

She was about to explain the good news to the others when the door to
the room swung open. There, grinning triumphantly at her, sword in hand,
stood Sordello.

He strode across the room, the floorboards squeaking under his boots,
and stood facing her. The hound's barking boomed up from below. Her
heart sank. She had never trusted this man. Her flesh crawled whenever
he looked at her.

"Thank God I have found you, Madonna."

Two men followed him in, dressed in the padded body armor and
bowl-shaped helmets of crossbowmen. As he did, they carried shortswords.

"How _did_ you find me, Sordello, and for whom are you fighting?"

His back was to the two men who had followed him. He frowned at her and
shook his head slightly, as if trying to tell her not to say too much.
But the little signal did not allay her suspicion of him, and her fear.

"Why, I am here in the service of Charles d'Anjou, rightful King of
Sicily by decree of the pope," Sordello trumpeted. "And I serve His
Signory, Count Simon de Gobignon." Gloved fists on his hips, he turned
slowly to gaze around the room.

At his words, the pool of fear became a flood of terror that threatened
to sweep her from her feet. She swayed dizzily. This meant the battle
was surely lost.

_Dear God, what has happened to Daoud?_

With a life of their own, her trembling hands pressed against her
stomach.

"And look who we have here," Sordello said. "His magical Eminence, the
vanishing Cardinal Ugolini. And Tilia Caballo, Orvieto's most
distinguished brothel keeper, of whose establishment I have such happy
memories. Are you two now reduced to being Manfred's camp followers?"

Tilia stared with wide-eyed hatred at Sordello. Ugolini's face was as
blank as if he had been clubbed. What Tilia had said earlier about cat
and mouse was apt, thought Sophia. Sordello was tormenting his prey.

_But he could have learned where I am only from Daoud._

If Daoud had told him where to find her, it must be that Sordello was
still secretly Daoud's man, as he had been in Orvieto. That must be what
the frown and the headshake meant.

"You need not glare at me like that, Madama Tilia," Sordello said. "You
are very lucky to be under my protection tonight."

"What will your protection cost us?" Tilia's voice was heavy with scorn.

Sordello spread his hands. "Why, whatever your lives are worth to you.
You have had much practice putting a price on that which is precious."

"The battle--King Manfred?" Sophia pressed him.

Sordello's grin broadened, showing more stumpy, crooked teeth.
"We--Anjou's men--are here in Benevento, are we not? Manfred von
Hohenstaufen is dead. With my own eyes I saw him fall."

Sophia felt sick to her stomach. Blindly, she staggered to the bed and
sat down heavily.

A long, high-pitched wail came from Ugolini. He threw his book to the
floor and rocked back and forth with his face in his hands. Tilia rushed
to him and held him.

_Manfred, dead._

Sophia's cry of grief was as heart-tearing as Ugolini's, but she kept it
inside herself. She had loved Manfred once, and even after that was
over, she had delighted in attending his court and had marveled at the
felicity of his kingdom.

_Gone in a day! What a loss, what a waste!_

"Manfred died in a most chivalrous manner," said Sordello, showing no
sympathy for the anguish he was causing. "He fought to the end, a few
faithful followers beside him, surrounded by enemies. Cardinal de
Verceuil killed him. I think I will write a poem about it."

"De Verceuil!" Ugolini cried. "That pestilence in red robes! If only I
had had him poisoned."

Had Daoud been one of the faithful who fought beside Manfred?

Sophia's throat almost closed with fear as she asked the question. "What
of--David of Trebizond?"

Again that little frown and shake of the head, aimed at her alone. "More
of him later." There must be things he did not want to say in front of
the two Venetians.

But she persisted. "Is he alive? Is he unhurt?"

Sordello nodded gravely, his yellowish eyes holding hers. "He was alive
when I last saw him, Madonna."

She let out a long breath. The ache of fear in her stomach eased. Even
if the battle were lost, Daoud would manage to live through it and get
back to her. Perhaps Sordello was his messenger.

She felt safer on her feet. She pushed herself up and moved slowly
toward the door leading to the balcony outside. Downstairs, Scipio
started barking again.

"Capitano," said one of the archers. "Are we to stand here talking all
night? There is a whole town for the taking here, and we are missing our
chance."

"Hush, Juliano," said Sordello. "You see before you two very important
and wealthy followers of the late King Manfred. What they can offer us
by way of ransom will be far more than the trinkets you could pick up
raiding some merchant's home."

"Ransom?" Tilia spat. "What right does a furfante like you have to
demand ransom of me?"

"Why, Madama, is that not exactly what scoundrels do?" Sordello laughed.

He sat down in the spot Sophia had just vacated on the bed, laying his
glistening sword ostentatiously across his lap. Sophia saw that he
carried a long dagger in a sheath hung on his right side. He surveyed
them all, grinning.

_God, this is torture! If only I could find out what has happened to
Daoud._

"You have three choices, Madama Tilia," Sordello said. "You may leave
here. Outside this house you can take your chances with the victorious
warriors of Charles d'Anjou, who have fallen upon Benevento like
ravening wolves. Can you hear the screams? Or you can stay here under my
protection, and it will not cost you even one denaro. And in the morning
I will present you, all legally and properly, to King Charles, who will
be most grateful to me for the service. He is exceedingly eager to round
up all of Manfred's principal servants. Some he is beheading, some he is
hanging. You, former Eminence, will probably pay at the stake for your
heresy and witchcraft. As for you, Madama Tilia, if a rope stout enough
to hang you cannot be found, you may spend the rest of your life
shedding your excess flesh in a dungeon."

Ugolini sat hugging himself and shuddering. Tilia opened her wide mouth
to speak, seemed to think better of it, closed it again. But red coals
sparkled in her eyes.

_That's better, Tilia. Keep the anger hidden until you can use it._

But Sophia's fear for Daoud grew again at the thought that he might be
Charles's captive, awaiting execution. Why would Sordello tell her
nothing?

"Has David been captured?" she ventured, turning from the doorway to the
balcony.

Sordello smiled at her, just as Scipio downstairs broke into another
burst of furious barks. In the candlelight, Sordello's face turned a
deep orange with sudden anger.

"Find that damned dog and kill it!"

"Wait!" said Tilia. "That is Giancarlo's hound, Scipio. We put him down
in our room to guard our belongings."

"Just what I thought," said Sordello. "That is why I wish him killed."

"But he is a thoroughbred boarhound," Tilia went on, "and since it
appears Giancarlo has lost him, let him be part of our ransom. He is
easily worth several hundred florins."

"I have always loathed that dog," said Sordello. "I would gladly kill it
just to avenge myself on Giancarlo for killing the Tartars."

In the midst of her terror Sophia felt a stab of surprise. "The Tartars?
Dead? Giancarlo killed them?" Did that mean Rachel was free?

"Yes," growled Sordello. "And if I find him, I will personally repay him
by cutting him to bits, starting at his toes. For that and for the many
other injuries he has done me. But Madama Tilia is right. The hound is
doubtless worth too much money to kill. I will take it, then." He
gestured to his two men. "Have these two display their possessions for
you. Do not harm the dog. Or them, for that matter. I want them back
here intact when you are done, so I know I am getting an honest
inventory."

"I do not know whether we can satisfy you," said Tilia. "We did not
bring everything we own with us. If you would help us get to Lucera, we
could make you princely rich."

Sordello leaned back and crossed his legs. "But Lucera is far from here,
and there may not be time for us to collect what you have there. In a
few days King Charles will unleash his locusts and scorpions far and
wide throughout this land--his bailiffs and judges and clerks and tax
collectors and men-at-arms--to lay hold of every speck of gold and chip
of precious stone. For now, please help my men collect what you have
with you. I am sure you have plenty. That cross on your handsome bosom,
for instance. I suspect a man might buy himself a small castle with
that." He reached out, and Tilia stepped back, but into the grip of one
of the archers.

Tears sprang from her eyes and trickled down her painted cheeks. "Please
let me keep it just a little longer. If I must part with it, in the end
I will, but it is very dear to me."

Sordello waved grandly. "For now, then. Go now with these fellows. And
mind you, hold nothing back. They are Venetians. You can't hide anything
valuable from a Venetian."

Indeed, thought Sophia, remembering tales of how the Venetians had
looted her beloved Constantinople years ago. As she watched the
shuffling Ugolini and the dauntless Tilia leave with Sordello's two men,
she felt her knees trembling so hard under her gown that she could
barely stand.

She would be alone with Sordello.

"Be wary of the dog," Sordello called after his archers. "But be careful
not to hurt it."

"Si, capitano." The door closed with a thump.

"And now, Sophia," said Sordello, lifting the sword from his lap and
laying it carefully on the bed, "we settle accounts."

"I do not know what you mean by accounts," said Sophia, making her voice
as cold and forbidding as she could. "But before anything else, the
truth, if you can manage it. I have seen you serving Simon, and I have
seen you serving David, and now you say you are on the side of Charles
d'Anjou. Who do you truly serve?"

Sordello stretched his booted legs and crossed them, leaning back in the
chair. "Myself, Andrea Sordello, of course. Men may command part of me,
but only I own all of me. In the beginning I was to serve Simon,
reporting secretly to Anjou. In Orvieto David was my master. He offered
me--a rich reward. But then he threatened to kill me. I fled Orvieto,
following Simon. After that I was mostly Simon's man. A little bit
David's man. I sent him information from Perugia and Viterbo, and he
sent me money. But first, last, and always, my own man."

"Why are you here, then?" Sophia let her hand rest on the door handle as
if she might rush out on the balcony and call for help. She hoped
Sordello would expect her to do that rather than try to use a weapon on
him.

Sordello stood up, smiling. "Madonna, you are not aware how I have
suffered because of you. Suffered with longing. You owe me much for
that." He strolled over to the fire, picked up a big log from the pile
next to the hearth, and set it on the burning wood.

_Oh, may God shrivel his phallos!_ Sophia felt her stomach burn at the
idea of this repulsive man lusting after her. She turned quickly, facing
the balcony door, so that he could not see her grope in the bag at her
belt for the tiny crossbow and the box of darts Daoud had given her. How
quickly, she asked herself, could she take the crossbow out, get a
poisoned dart from the box without scratching herself, load it, draw the
bow, aim and shoot?

_He could be across the room and tearing the thing out of my hands
before I got all that done._

Helplessness made her tremble.

Having made sure of the location of crossbow and darts, she turned to
him again, gripping the skirt of her gown to hide the shaking of her
hands. "If you find me attractive, I am flattered, of course, but it is
no fault of mine."

"You do not wish to escape from Benevento? You wish to be turned over to
King Charles's judges?"

"I have nothing to fear from them."

He bared his broken teeth. "Do you think they will have trouble finding
something to accuse you of? Not if I tell them what I know." Then he
raised a finger. "It was David of Trebizond who told me where to find
you. And you keep asking about him. I always suspected, when I was
serving David at Cardinal Ugolini's, that there must be something
between you two."

"If there is any spark of mercy in you at all, do not play with me like
this. Tell me if he is alive."

She wanted to seize him by the arm, but she was afraid to get too close
to him.

The light of the one candle in the room cast shadows like black blots on
Sordello's grinning face. "Play with you? Ah, but if there is a spark of
mercy in _you_, then you will play with me. _Then_ I will tell you
everything you want to know. Being alone with you like this, I burn so
with desire, I would do anything, good or evil, to possess you."

Scipio's thunderous barks, bursting out suddenly, made her jump. She
heard male voices cry out, alarmed, then Scipio's rumbling snarls. Then
silence.

Sordello glowered at the floor. "God's beard! I almost hope they did
kill that brute."

To distract him a little longer from herself, Sophia said, "You had
better hope Scipio does not hurt _them_."

"What do I care if they suffer a few bites? The dog is worth more than
they are." He looked up at her. "Do you know anything about journeys to
paradise?"

"I do not know what you are talking about." Was that a name for some
carnal pleasure he wanted to have with her?

"Come away from that balcony door," Sordello said.

"The air is fresher here." From the street she heard swords clanging,
men screaming and cursing, and hooves pounding. There was fighting
nearby.

"Our French friends, quarreling over their loot," said Sordello. "Do you
stand by the balcony door because you fancy being rescued from _me_ by
_them_? They are animals, like that dog downstairs. What I feel for you
is far more profound than the desire to rape some conquered woman. I am
a trovatore, after all. I will prove it to you. Just let me see you
unclothed. Like Mother Eve. I will not touch you. Undress yourself, and
I will tell you what you want to know about the man called David."

She wanted to spit in his face. She was desperate to know what he could
tell her, but even if he did tell her about Daoud, how could she put any
trust in him? If Daoud was alive he would find his way to her, or she to
him. She had nothing to gain by cooperating with Sordello.

"You disgust me!" she cried. "I wish you were not even able to see my
face, let alone the rest of me." And she turned away from him, her hand
dipping into the leather bag.

She heard his heavy footsteps thudding on the wooden floor. And another
outburst of barking from below.

"I wanted you to give yourself to me willingly," Sordello said. "But if
you refuse me, I will take you. And while I am doing it, I will tell you
about the man David."

Terror seized her and shook her as if she were a rag doll. The way that
filthy pig said that--it must mean something bad had happened to Daoud.
She felt paralyzed by fear and grief.

Then, sudden rage made her want to strike out at this man who was
hurting her so. She had the box of darts open now. She must be very
careful of the poisoned tips.

The door to the room crashed open.




LXXI


"Sophia!"

She dropped a loose dart back into the bag and turned.

Simon de Gobignon stood in the doorway, staring at her. The firelight
made his dirt-streaked face glow. His surcoat was ripped, showing the
mail underneath, and she saw dark stains on the purple and gold. He was
splashed with blood, she thought, her stomach churning. His head was
bare, his mail hood thrown back and his mail collar open. He held his
helmet, adorned with the figure of a winged heraldic beast, under his
arm.

At first sight of him she felt a glow of joy. Simon lived. And she was
safe from Sordello. Triumphantly she glanced over at the bravo and felt
even better at the sight of his scarlet color, his clenched jaw, the
swollen veins throbbing in his temples.

Then suddenly it came back to her that Simon was an enemy too.

_It has always been too easy for me to forget that._

She would have to face his questions, his accusations, his pain, his
rage. She felt like a bird in flight suddenly struck by an arrow and
plummeting to earth.

And a worse thought struck her, piercing her heart like a sword. What
was it that Sordello would have told her about Daoud? In God's name,
what terrible thing had happened to him?

Simon's being here meant he, too, must have learned where she was from
Daoud. Where, then, was Daoud?

She saw figures in the shadows outside the door, one white-haired and
white-bearded, the other a small woman wearing a mantle over her head.

Simon took a few steps into the room, his mail clinking. She could tell
by his movements that he was exhausted. She felt a surge of pity for
him, at what he must have done and suffered. She reminded herself he had
been fighting against Manfred and Daoud, on the side of Anjou. Still,
she felt sorry for him.

"What the devil are you doing here?" Simon said, glaring at Sordello,
his voice crackling with anger.

_Why so much hatred_, Sophia wondered.

"You wanted me to be gone, Your Signory, and it seemed most useful for
me to come here. It occurred to me that important followers of the
infidel Manfred might be here. And, indeed, on the floor below you will
find his agents Tilia Caballo and ex-Cardinal Ugolini, being questioned
by my men."

"And you were _questioning_ this lady. Before God, I do not know what
keeps me from running you through." His mailed hand reached across his
waist to grip the hilt of his sword.

"Easy, Simon," said the white-haired man. He came into the room now, and
Sophia recognized Friar Mathieu, the Tartars' Franciscan companion.

She looked past the elderly priest and saw who was with him.

"Rachel!"

In the midst of her fear and sorrow, Sophia felt an instant of
miraculous happiness, as if the sun had come out at midnight.

She rushed across the room holding out her arms, and the girl flew into
them.

"Rachel, what a joy to see you!"

"Oh, Sophia! Sophia!"

Rachel was crying, but not for joy. She was sobbing heartbrokenly. What
had happened to her?

"How do you come to be with Count Simon?" Sophia asked, hoping that
answering would calm Rachel.

But Rachel went on weeping into Sophia's shoulder, and Friar Mathieu
spoke for her. "Rachel and I fell in with Count Simon, and we thought it
safest to stay with him. And he chose to come here."

"It's all right now," Sophia said, patting Rachel's back as she held her
in her arms. "Everything will be all right."

"No, Sophia, no." Rachel, it seemed, could not stop crying. Bewildered,
Sophia looked up. Friar Mathieu and Simon were standing side by side in
the center of the room. Sordello, his face working with barely
controlled fury, had moved to a far corner. His sword still lay on the
bed, Sophia noticed, but his hand was on the hilt of his dagger.

Simon and the Franciscan were looking, not at Rachel, but at Sophia.

"David told you I was here," Sophia said. "He must have."

In an instant, she understood why Daoud had told Simon where to find
her. And why Rachel kept weeping and weeping.

"Is he dead?" she asked.

They answered her with silence.

A wave of dizziness came over her. She reeled, and Rachel was holding
her up. Friar Mathieu took her arm, and they lowered her into the
armchair. She knocked the candle to the floor, putting it out. Now the
only light in the room was the red glow of the fire.

She felt empty inside.

_I am mortally wounded_, she thought. _I feel now only a shock, a
numbness. The pain will come._

The only reason Daoud would tell Simon where to find her had to be that
he was dying and wanted Simon to protect her. Daoud truly must be dead.

Simon's anguished look, as if he were begging for something, confirmed
it. But to be sure, she had to hear it.

"Has David been killed?"

Simon nodded slowly, his eyes huge with pain. "I was with him when he
died. I even know now that he is not David but--Daoud." He hesitated,
pronouncing the unfamiliar name.

_I was with him when he died._

_Daoud!_

She wanted to scream, but she hurt so much inside that she could not
even scream. She could not make a sound.

Daoud was _gone_. She had seen him, she had spoken to him, she had loved
him for the last time.

But she _had_ to see him again. Her cold hand fumbled at her neck,
pulled the locket up from her bosom by its silver chain. She turned the
screw that opened it and stared at the spirals and squares.

Nothing happened. The pattern, to her eyes a jumble of shapes
representing nothing, remained inert.

Even his likeness was gone.

How had he died? She looked up at Simon to ask him.

And then she did scream.

Sordello crouched in the semidark behind Simon, his two-edged dagger,
reflecting red firelight, poised horizontally to slash Simon's
unprotected throat. His eyes glittered. His mouth shaped a slack-lipped
smile, as if he were drunk, baring his gleaming, broken teeth.

Sordello seemed not even to notice her scream. Without a sound, unseen
by the other three, who were all staring at Sophia, he raised his left
arm to seize Simon and his right hand to strike with the dagger.

Sophia's hand dove into the bag at her waist. The loose dart could
scratch her, and a scratch might be enough to kill her, but that did not
matter. Her fingers found the dart. She wrapped her fist around it and
flung herself out of the chair, straight at Simon.

Simon tried to fend her off, but she darted under his hands, twisted
around him, and drove the dart into Sordello's throat. Blood spurted
over her hand.

Sordello seemed neither to see her nor to feel the dart. His eyes stayed
fixed on Simon's neck. He slashed at Simon. But Sophia's lunge had
pushed the two men apart. Sordello's blade scratched Simon's neck just
under his right ear. Then it fell from the bravo's fingers.

Sordello, the dart still hanging from his throat, staggered backward,
his knees buckling. His body folded, and he lay sideways on the floor.

The four living people in the room were as still as the dead one. Then
Simon touched his fingertips to his neck and winced. Sophia saw a
rivulet of blood running down into his mail collar.

Friar Mathieu tore away a piece of the bedsheet and dabbed Simon's wound
with it. He took Simon's hand as if he were a puppet and pressed his
fingers against the rag to hold it in place. Then he knelt over
Sordello's body and whispered in Latin.

Whimpering, Sophia stumbled back to the armchair where she had been
sitting. A sob forced itself up from her chest into her throat. She felt
Rachel's gentle hands helping her to sit down. Another sob came up,
shaking her body. Another followed it, and another. She lost touch with
everything around her for a time, buried in a black pit where neither
sight nor sound nor even thought could penetrate. She was lost in
wordless, mindless grief.

Then, gradually, she began to hear murmurings, voices.

Friar Mathieu said, "She saved your life."

Simon said, "I know. David--Daoud--told me not to take Sordello with me
if I went looking for Sophia. As if he knew this might happen. How could
that be?"

Rachel was sitting on the arm of the chair, gently stroking Sophia's
shoulder.

Friar Mathieu said, "Why would Sordello try to kill you? Because he was
about to rape Sophia when you interrupted? Or because he was afraid you
would punish him for killing--Daoud?"

Amazement jolted Sophia's body. She opened her eyes and stared at Friar
Mathieu.

"_Sordello_ killed Daoud?"

Simon answered her. "I will tell you how he died. I must talk to you. I
have waited more than a year, you know, to see you again."

Sobs still shook her, but she nodded and wiped her face with the sleeve
of her gown. He reached down. She took his arm, and he helped her up.
She saw that he had a bloodstained strip of linen tied around his neck.

"The balcony," she said.

"Good."

As she went to her chest to get her cloak, Sophia looked at the icon of
the saint of the pillar and thought how much, even though it had Simon's
name, the expression looked like Daoud's.

Simon held the door to the balcony for her. The night was cold and
moonless. The bitter smell of burning floated on the freezing air. The
shouts of frenzied soldiers and the agonized screams of men and women
seemed to come from everywhere. Fires blazed in all parts of the town,
their glow and smoke turning the night sky a cloudy reddish-gray. On the
plain to the north, campfires twinkled. Somewhere out there Daoud lay
dead.

She looked up at Simon. Darkness hid his face. The ruddy glow of burning
Benevento haloed his head. In a quiet, even voice he told Sophia how he
came upon Daoud fighting side by side with Manfred, and how he fought
