    Disparted, and between spun out the Air;
    And Earth self balanced on her centre hung.--vii. 192-242.

Milton begins his narrative of the Creation by describing the progress
of the Deity on His great expedition, accompanied by hosts of angels and
surrounded with all the solemn pomp and splendour of Heaven. The
brilliant throng having passed through Heaven's gates, which opened wide
their portals, they beheld in front of them the dark abyss of Chaos--a
tempest-tossed sea of warring elements upturned in wild confusion. At
God's instant command silence and peace reigned over the deep, and
tranquil calm succeeded noisy discord. Then on the wings of Cherubim He
rode far into Chaos, and with His golden compasses decreed the
dimensions of the universe by circumscribing the vast vacuity of space.
Into the elements which hasted to their several places, His Spirit
infused vital warmth and caused the formless mass of matter to assume
the figure of a sphere, and thus the Earth poised on her axis
unsupported, and in darkness shrouded hung suspended in space. The
placing of the golden compasses in the hands of the Creator, with which
He measured out the heavens, is a noble conception on the part of
Milton, and one most appropriate, since the construction of the universe
is based upon the principles of geometrical science.

    'Let there be Light!' said God; and forthwith Light
    Ethereal, first of things, quintessence pure,
    Sprung from the Deep; and from her native east
    To journey through the aery gloom began,
    Sphered in a radiant cloud; for yet the Sun
    Was not; she in a cloudy tabernacle
    Sojourned the while. God saw the light was good;
    And light from darkness by the hemisphere
    Divided; light the day, and darkness night
    He named. Thus was the first day even and morn:
    Nor passed uncelebrated, nor unsung
    By the celestial quires, when orient light
    Exhaling first from darkness they beheld;
    Birthday of Heaven and Earth; with joy and shout
    The hollow universal orb they filled,
    And touched their golden harps, and hymning praised
    God and his works: Creator Him they sung,
    Both when first evening was, and when first morn.--vii. 243-60.

The appearance of Light, which sprung into existence at the fiat of the
Creator, was the next great event witnessed by beholding
angels--birthday of Heaven and Earth, first morning and first evening,
which the celestial choirs celebrated with praise and shouts of joy.
The creation of the firmament was the great work of the second day.

    Again God said, 'Let there be firmament
    Amid the waters, and let it divide
    The waters from the waters!' And God made
    The firmament, expanse of liquid, pure,
    Transparent, elemental air, diffused
    In circuit to the uttermost convex
    Of this great round--partition firm and sure,
    The waters underneath from those above
    Dividing; for as the Earth, so He the World
    Built on circumfluous waters calm, in wide
    Crystalline ocean, and the loud misrule
    Of Chaos far removed, lest fierce extremes
    Contiguous might distemper the whole frame:
    And Heaven he named the Firmament. So even
    And morning chorus sung the second day.--vii. 261-275.

After describing the gathering of the waters off the face of the globe
into seas, causing the dry land to appear, which at the word of God
became clothed with vegetation, rendering the Earth a habitable abode,
Milton proceeds to describe the creation of the heavenly bodies--

    Again the Almighty spake: 'Let there be Lights
    High in the expanse of Heaven, to divide
    The day from night; and let them be for signs,
    For seasons, and for days, and circling years;
    And let them be for lights, as I ordain
    Their office in the firmament of Heaven,
    To give light on the Earth!' and it was so.
    And God made two great Lights, great for their use
    To Man, the greater to have rule by day,
    The less by night, altern; and made the Stars,
    And set them in the firmament of Heaven
    To illuminate the Earth, and rule the day
    In their vicissitude, and rule the night,
    And light from darkness to divide. God saw,
    Surveying his great work, that it was good:
    For, of celestial bodies, first, the Sun,
    A mighty sphere He framed, unlightsome first,
    Though of ethereal mould; then formed the Moon
    Globose, and every magnitude of Stars,
    And sowed with stars the Heaven thick as a field.
    Of light by far the greater part he took,
    Transplanted from her cloudy shrine, and placed
    In the Sun's orb, made porous to receive
    And drink the liquid light; firm to retain
    Her gathered beams, great palace now of Light.
    Hither, as to their fountain, other stars
    Repairing, in their golden urns draw light,
    And hence the morning planet gilds her horns;
    By tincture or reflection they augment
    Their small peculiar, though, from human sight
    So far remote, with diminution seen.
    First in his east the glorious lamp was seen,
    Regent of day, and all the horizon round
    Invested with bright rays, jocund to run
    His longitude through Heaven's high road; the grey
    Dawn, and the Pleiades before him danced,
    Shedding sweet influence. Less bright the Moon,
    But opposite in levelled west was set
    His mirror, with full face borrowing her light
    From him; for other light she needed none
    In that aspect, and still that distance keeps
    Till night; then in the east her turn she shines,
    Revolved on Heaven's great axle, and her reign
    With thousand lesser lights dividual holds,
    With thousand thousand stars that then appeared
    Spangling the hemisphere. Then first adorned
    With their bright luminaries, that set and rose,
    Glad evening and glad morn crowned the fourth day.--vii. 339-86.

The first creation was Light, and Milton, according to Scriptural
testimony, ascribes its origin to the bidding of the Creator. 'God said,
Let there be light; and there was light!' The Sun he describes as a
mighty sphere, but at first non-luminous. There was light, but no sun.
The reason usually given in explanation of this phenomenon is, that the
heavenly bodies were created at the same time as the Earth, but were
rendered invisible by a canopy of vapour and cloud which enveloped the
newly-formed globe; and that afterwards, when it dispersed, they
appeared in the firmament, shining in all their pristine splendour.
Milton does not, however, adhere to this view of things, but says that
light for the first three days sojourned in a cloudy shrine or
tabernacle, and was afterwards transplanted in the Sun, which became a
great palace of light.

He expresses himself in a somewhat similar manner in Book III., which
opens with an address to Light--one of the most beautiful passages in
the poem, in which he alludes to his blindness when expressing his
thoughts and sentiments with regard to this ethereal medium, which
conveys to us the pleasurable sensation of vision--

    Hail, holy Light! offspring of Heaven first-born!
    Or of the Eternal co-eternal beam,
    May I express thee unblamed? since God is light,
    And never but in unapproached light
    Dwelt from eternity--dwelt then in thee,
    Bright effluence of bright essence increate!
    Or hear'st thou rather, pure Ethereal stream,
    Whose fountain who shall tell? Before the Sun,
    Before the Heavens thou wert, and at the voice
    Of God, as with a mantle, didst invest
    The rising world of waters dark and deep,
    Won from the void and formless Infinite.--iii. 1-12.

The Sun having become a lucent orb, Milton poetically describes how the
planets repair to him as to a fountain, and in their golden urns draw
light; and how the morning planet Venus gilds her horns illumined by his
rays. The poet associates joyous ideas with the new-born universe. The
Sun, now the glorious regent of day, begins his journey in the east,
lighting up the horizon with his beams; whilst before him danced the
grey dawn, and the Pleiades shedding sweet influences. There existed an
ancient belief that the Earth was created in the spring, and in April
the Sun is in the zodiacal constellation Taurus, in which are also
situated the Pleiades; they rise a little before the orb, and precede
him in his path through the heavens. The stars of this group have always
been regarded with a peculiar sacredness, and their rays, mingling with
those of the Sun, were believed to shed sweet influences upon the Earth.
The Moon, less bright, with borrowed light, in her turn shines in the
east, and, with the thousand thousand luminaries that spangle the
firmament, reigns over the night.

We learn in Book III. that the archangel Uriel, who was beguiled by
Satan, witnessed the Creation, and described how the heavenly bodies
were brought into existence, he having perceived what we should call the
gaseous elements of matter rolled into whorls and vortices which became
condensed into suns and systems of worlds. This mighty angel says:--

    I saw when, at his word the formless mass,
    This World's material mould, came to a heap:
    Confusion heard his voice, and wild Uproar
    Stood ruled, stood vast Infinitude confined;
    Till at his second bidding darkness fled,
    Light shone, and order from disorder sprung.
    Swift to their several quarters hasted then
    The cumbrous elements, Earth, Flood, Air, Fire;
    And this ethereal quintessence of Heaven
    Flew upward, spirited with various forms,
    That rolled orbicular, and turned to stars
    Numberless, as thou seest, and how they move;
    Each had his place appointed, each his course;
    The rest in circuit walls this Universe.--iii. 708-21.

In his sublime description of the Creation Milton has adhered with
marked fidelity to the Mosaic version, as narrated in the first two
chapters of Genesis, when God, by specific acts in certain stated
periods of time, created the visible universe and all that it contains.

The successive acts of creation are described in words almost identical
with those of Scripture, embellished and adorned with all the wealth of
expression which our language is capable of affording. The several
scenes presented to the imagination, and witnessed by hosts of admiring
angels as each portion of the magnificent work was accomplished, are
full of a grandeur and majesty worthy of the loftiest conceivable effort
of Divine power and might.

The return of the Creator after the completion of His great work is
described by Milton in a manner worthy of the progress of Deity through
the celestial regions. The whole creation rang with jubilant delight,
and the bright throng which witnessed the wonders of His might followed
Him with acclamation, ascending by the glorified path of the Milky Way
up to His high abode--the Heaven of Heavens--

    Here finished He, and all that He had made
    Viewed, and behold! all was entirely good.
    So even and morn accomplished the sixth day:
    Yet not till the Creator from his work
    Desisting, though unwearied, up returned,
    Up to the Heaven of Heavens, His high abode,
    Thence to behold this new created World,
    The addition of his empire, how it showed
    In prospect from His throne, how good, how fair,
    Answering his great idea. Up He rode,
    Followed with acclamation, and the sound
    Symphonious of ten thousand harps, that tuned
    Angelic harmonies: The Earth, the Air
    Resounded (thou remember'st, for thou heard'st)
    The Heavens and all the constellations rung,
    The planets in their stations listening stood,
    While the bright pomp ascended jubilant.
    'Open ye everlasting gates!' they sung;
    'Open ye Heavens! your living doors; let in
    The great Creator, from his work returned
    Magnificent, his six days' work, a World;
    Open, and henceforth oft; for God will deign
    To visit oft the dwellings of just men,
    Delighted; and with frequent intercourse
    Thither will send his winged messengers
    On errands of supernal grace.' So sung
    The glorious train ascending: He through Heaven,
    That opened wide her blazing portals, led
    To God's eternal house direct the way--
    A broad and ample road, whose dust is gold,
    And pavement stars, as stars to thee appear
    Seen in the Galaxy, that Milky Way
    Which nightly as a circling zone thou seest
    Powdered with stars.--vii. 548-81.

Milton, throughout his description of the Creation, sustains with lofty
eloquence his sublime conception of this latest display of almighty
power; and invests with becoming majesty all the acts of the Creator,
who, when He finished His great work, saw that all was entirely good.

Shortly after the creation of the new universe, Satan, having escaped
from Hell, plunged into the abyss of Chaos, and, after a long and
arduous journey upwards, in which he had to fight his way through the
surging elements that raged around him like a tempestuous sea, he
reached the upper confines of this region where less confusion
prevailed, and where a glimmering dawn of light penetrated its darkness
and gloom, indicating that the limit of the empire of Chaos and ancient
Night had been reached by the adventurous fiend. Pursuing his way with
greater ease, he leisurely beholds the sight which is opening to his
eyes--a sight rendered more glorious by his long sojourn in darkness. He
sees:--

    Far off the empyreal Heaven, extended wide
    In circuit, undetermined square or round,
    With opal towers and battlements adorned
    Of living sapphire, once his native seat,
    And, fast by, hanging in a golden chain,
    This pendent World, in bigness as a star
    Of smallest magnitude close by the Moon.--ii. 1047-53.

He gazes upon his native Heaven where once he dwelt, and observes the
pendent world in quest of which he journeyed hither--hung by a golden
chain from the Empyrean and no larger than a star of the smallest
magnitude when close by the Moon. In this passage Milton does not allude
to the Earth, which was invisible, but to the entire starry heavens--the
newly created universe reclaimed from Chaos, which, when contrasted with
the Empyrean, appeared in size no larger than the minutest star when
compared with the full moon. Pursuing his journey, the new universe as
it is approached expands into a globe of vast dimensions; its convex
surface--round which the chaotic elements in stormy aspect
lowered--seemed a boundless continent, dark, desolate, and starless,
except on the side next to the wall of Heaven, which though far-distant
afforded it some illumination by its reflected light. Satan, having
alighted on this convex shell which enclosed the universe, wandered long
over its bleak and dismal surface, until his attention was attracted by
a gleam of light which appeared through an opening at its zenith right
underneath the Empyrean. Thither he directed his steps, and perceived a
structure resembling a staircase, or ladder, which formed the only means
of communication between Heaven and the new creation, and upon which
angels descended and ascended--

                        Far distant he descries,
    Ascending by degrees magnificent
    Up to the wall of Heaven, a structure high;
    At top whereof, but far more rich, appeared
    The work as of a kingly palace gate,
    With frontispiece of diamond and gold
    Embellished; thick with sparkling orient gems
    The portal shone, inimitable on Earth
    By model, or by shading pencil drawn.
    The stairs were such as whereon Jacob saw
    Angels ascending and descending, bands
    Of Guardians bright, when he from Esau fled
    To Padan Aram, in the field of Luz
    Dreaming by night under the open sky,
    And waking cried, '_This is the gate of Heaven._'--iii. 501-15.

