pathetic in the sight of that rifle and the fifty cartridges in their
cardboard carton. Perhaps Tode had pictured himself shooting big game
in Atlantis at some period or other. It was a human weakness that for
an instant lessened Jim's hate and horror of the man. It brought him
to a saner view of the situation. Jim had been on the point of losing
his powers of reason. The sight of the rifle restored them.

       *       *       *       *       *

He turned sharply as he heard a sound in the entrance. Cain was coming
toward him, with many genuflexions, and much stomach wriggling. He
stopped, straightened himself. There was a look of singular
intelligence on the Drilgo's face.

He began chattering, pointing in the direction of Atlantis. Jim could
make nothing of what he was trying to convey.

"Yes, they're there," he said bitterly, "but I don't see how that's
going to help me."

"Oh my poor Lucille!" said Cain unexpectedly.

The words were like a parrot's speech, the intonation so remarkable a
copy of old Parrish's that Jim was flabbergasted. Nevertheless it was
evident that Cain knew he was referring to Lucille.

With a strange, slinking motion he crossed the laboratory and bent
beneath a huge slab of stone, resting on two great hewn rocks. He
emerged, holding in his arms two curious contrivances. He laid them at
Jim's feet.

Jim stared at them, and suddenly understood what they were. They were
two pairs of wings, of the kind the Atlanteans had used when they made
their aerial sortie against the Drilgoes.

Cain picked up one pair and began adjusting it about his body. He made
fluttering movements with his arms.

"You mean that you've learned how to fly, you black imp of Satan?"
shouted Jim.

And Cain, as if understanding, nodded and beamed all over his black
face.

With that Jim's idea was born. If the Drilgoes would follow him, he
would lead them against Atlantis. And, before the assault began, he
would fly to the great Eye that guarded it, and blind it.

       *       *       *       *       *

He thought afterward that it was like a supernatural revelation, this
scheme, that leaped full-fledged into his brain. And Cain had
developed extraordinary executive ability. Outside the cave, through
rifts in the swirls of fog, Jim could see innumerable Drilgoes massing
in the valley, as if they understood Jim's purpose. From Cain's
gesticulations, and the number of times he rubbed his stomach, it was
evident that he counted upon sacking Atlantis and was imagining
innumerable meals of fat captives.

Each flash of lurid light from the volcano disclosed further masses of
Drilgoes, armed with their stone spears, apparently assembling for the
attack. Whether Tode had summoned them before the Atlanteans offered
him the rulership of the city, or whether Jim's own plan had been
communicated to them by some telepathic process, it was impossible to
guess, but there was not the least doubt but that they were prepared
to follow him.

Cain nudged Jim and began strapping the other pair of wings about his
body. Jim saw that the energy was supplied by two tiny, lights burning
in the base, cold fire, stored energy whose strength he did not guess.
For, when Cain took him by the hand, and motioned to him to slide the
knob in the groove, he was hurled skyward like a rocket.

There followed a delirious hour. Tossing and tumbling like a pigeon in
a gale, Jim by degrees acquired mastery over the apparatus. At the end
of the hour he could fly almost as well as Cain, who, like a black
guardian angel kept beside him, reaching out a hand when he
overbalanced, and pulling him out of aerial side-slips.

       *       *       *       *       *

Suddenly Cain motioned toward the volcano, and started toward it in a
rocketlike swoop. Jim understood. The Drilgoes were ready for the
attack upon Atlantis.

Jim dropped to earth, ran back into the cave, and picked up the rifle
and the carton of ammunition. He filled the magazine, and, with the
rifle on his arm, rose into the air again. Cain was circling back,
uttering weird cries of distress at finding his master absent.

"It's all right, Cain," said Jim. "I'm here."

Side by side they flew steadily toward the base of the great cone,
which was pouring out a fan-shaped stream of fire. Rumblings shook the
earth; it was evident that another upheaval was in course of
preparation. The long column of the Drilgoes could be seen, extending
around the flank of the mountain.

Then of a sudden the Eye opened. And across the causeway came the
blue-white Ray, carrying death and destruction.

The Drilgoes, who had learned wisdom, remained concealed out of the
Ray's path, and escaped, but a great dinosaur, fifty or sixty feet in
length, startled by the light, came blundering out of the ferns,
uttered a bellow, and melted into an amorphous mass. Birds dropped
from their roosting places with a sound like that of falling hail.
Black paths were cloven through the midst of the jungle.

Rifle in hand, Jim soared into the air, and shot forward, high above
the causeway toward the glowing Eye.

He had noticed that the blue-white ray appeared in cycles of about two
minutes, and had made his plans accordingly. Two minutes in which to
accomplish his task, or take the chance of a hideous death. Some
thirty seconds carried him right into the glowing heart of the winking
Eye: he hovered and raised his rifle.

Underneath him the breakers thundered: round the Eye a myriad
sea-birds fluttered, dashing themselves against it, falling into the
waves. Huge and high the great city towered into the skies, lit by its
soft incandescence. Jim could see the throngs in the streets, the
traffic. But what was happening in the other side of the Eye?

       *       *       *       *       *

Suddenly he saw the moon in her third quarter sailing through the
skies, and a hideous fear overcame him. Suppose Tode had met with
treachery; suppose that this very night Lucille were doomed to be
sacrificed to the terrible god Cruk!

Suppose that even at that moment her tender flesh were being
sacrificed by the awful hooks!

He drew a bead upon the Eye and fired--and missed. The bullet went
wide. But even if it struck, what guarantee had he that it would
shatter the glass, or whatever substance it was that covered the orb?

He lost position, and knew that the two-minute interval was drawing to
a close. He soared and fired again. The Eye still glowed.

Then of a sudden a blinding ray shot forth from it, so dazzling that
it seemed to sear Jim's eyeballs. The interval was ended.

It shot beneath him, but no more than a few feet, and turning his eyes
shoreward, Jim saw it sweep along the causeway and tear a black path
through the forest. Frantically he soared, and circled around the
temple.

The ray went out. Two minutes more. And now the temporary panic had
passed; Jim's nerves grew steady as a rock. He eased the controls and
floated in toward the glowing orb. Sea-mews, screaming, dashed
themselves against it and fell, wounded and broken, into the breaking
seas below. They fluttered past Jim's face, one impacted against his
chest with a thud that rocked him where he hovered.

But Jim knew that he could not fail. At a distance of fifty feet he
drew a bead upon the centre of the Eye and pressed the trigger.

And instantly the light went out....


CHAPTER X

_The Fight in the Dark_

He dropped down softly to the causeway. Within the city he heard a
sound such as he had never heard before, as if some ancient prophecy
of doom had been fulfilled, a wailing "Aiah! Aiah! Aiah!" that was
caught up from throat to throat and rose upon the wind in a clamor
wild and mournful as that of the sea-birds around the broken Eye. It
was the death-keening of proud Atlantis, Queen of the Atlantic for
fifty thousand years. She was dying in darkness.

For, with the blinding of the Eye, all the soft lights within the city
had gone out. Dense, utter, impenetrable darkness reigned, and even
the gibbous moon, floating overhead, seemed to give no light.

Jim dropped to the causeway and began running in the direction of the
city. But, feeling the drag of his wings, he unbuckled the strap and
flung them away. He might need them, but his one thought was to get to
Lucille, if she were still alive. And he felt that each moment lost
might mean that he would be too late.

Through the blackness he raced forward, hearing that sobbing ululation
within the walls. But behind him he heard another sound, and shuddered
at it, all his hopes suddenly reversed. For that sound was the
shouting of the Drilgoes as they rushed forward to conquest. And now
it seemed a monstrous thing that proud Atlantis should be at the mercy
of these hordes. He had let loose destruction upon the world. But it
was to save Lucille.

That was his consolation. Yet he hardly checked the racing thoughts
within his mind even for a moment, to meditate on what he had done.
Those thoughts were all of Lucille. He must get to her before the
Drilgoes entered. And he ran faster, panting, gasping, till of a
sudden the portals loomed before him, and he saw a crowd of frenzied
Atlanteans struggling to pass through, and a file of soldiers
struggling to keep them back.

       *       *       *       *       *

He could distinguish nothing more than the confused struggle. He
hurled himself into the midst of the crowd and swept it back. He was
within the walls now, and struggling to pass through the mob of people
that was swarming like homeless bees.

He fought them with flailing fists, he clove a pathway through them,
until he found himself in a great shadowy space that he recognized as
the central assembly of the city. More by instinct than design he hit
upon the narrow court that was the elevator. But the court was filled
with another mob of struggling people, and in the darkness there was
no possibility of discovering the secret of raising it.

He blundered about, raging, forcing a path now here, now there. He ran
into blind alleys, into small threading streets about the court, which
led him back into the central place of assembly. It was like a
nightmare, that blind search under the pale three-quarter moon and the
black, star-blotched sky.

Suddenly Jim found himself wedged by the pressure of the crowd into a
sort of recess leading off the elevator court. So strong was the
pressure here that he was unable to move an inch. Wedged bolt upright,
he could only wait and let the frenzied mob stream past him. And
louder above the sound of wailing came the roars of the Drilgoes
swarming along the causeway.

Suddenly something gave behind him--a door, as it seemed, broken off
its hinges by the mob pressure. Jim was hurled backward, and fell
heavily down a flight of stone stairs, bringing up against a stone
balustrade. He got up, unconscious of his bruises, ran to the top of
the flight, and saw the dim square of palest twilight where the door
had been.

But over him he could faintly see the stairs and the balustrade,
winding away to what seemed immeasurable height. That stairway must
lead to the top of the building, and thence there should be some
access to the amphitheatre. Jim turned toward it.

       *       *       *       *       *

Suddenly a tremendous uproar filled the streets, yells, the clicking
grunts of the Drilgoes, the screams of the panic-stricken populace.
The invaders had arrived, and they were sweeping all before them. No
chance of recognition in that darkness. Lucille! Shouting her name,
Jim began to ascend the stairs in leaps of three at a time.

But long before he reached the top he was ascending one by one, with
straining limbs and laboring breath. Red slaughter down below, a very
inferno of sound; above, that shadowy stairway, still extending almost
to the heavens. Step after step, flight beyond flight!

Jim's lungs were bursting, and his heart hammering as if it would
break his chest. One flight more! One more! Another! Suddenly he
realized that his task was ended. In place of the stairs stood a vast
hall, and beyond that another hall, dim in the faint light that
filtered through the glass above.

Jim thought he remembered where he was. Beyond that next hall there
should be the tongue of flooring, crossing the amphitheatre and
joining the platform of the idols. But he stopped suddenly as he
emerged, not upon the tongue, but upon still another stairway.

He had gone astray, and out of his bursting lungs a cry of rage and
despair went up. For a moment he stood still. What use to proceed
further?

And then, amazingly, there came what might have been a sign from
heaven. Down through a small, square opening overhead, no larger than
a ventilator, it came ... a glimmer of violet flame!

And Jim hurled himself like a madman against the stairs, and
surmounted them with two bounds. There were no more. Instead, Jim
found himself looking down into the amphitheatre.

The thick walls had cut off all sound from his ears, save a confused
murmur, but now a hideous uproar assailed them. The whole floor of the
amphitheatre was a mass of moving shadows, of slayers and slain.

The Drilgoes had broken in and trapped the multitudes that had taken
refuge there. Their fearful stone-tipped spears thrust in and out, to
the accompaniment of their savage howls and the screams of the dying.

       *       *       *       *       *

Never has such a shadow-play been seen, perhaps, as that below, where
death stalked in dense darkness, and the slayer did not even see his
victim. Only the thrust of spears, the soft, yielding flesh that they
encountered, the scream, the wrench of stone from tissue, and the
blended howl of triumph and scream of despair.

Yet only for a moment did Jim turn his eyes upon that sight. For he
knew where he was now. He had emerged upon the other side of the
amphitheatre, upon the platform where he had seen the priests and
dignitaries gathered when he was led forward to be sacrificed.

There, in the rear, were the hideous, shadowy gods, looming up out of
the darkness, their outstretched arms interlaced. And there upon the
platform was the Atom Smasher, a little thread of violet light seeping
out of the central tube.

Beside it stood a group of figures, impossible to distinguish in the
darkness, but of a sudden Lucille's scream rang out above the din
below.

With three leaps Jim was at her side. He saw the girl, Tode, and
Parrish, struggling in the grasp of a dozen priests. They were
dragging them toward the idols, and Jim understood what that scene
portended.

In despair at the irruption of the Drilgoes, the priests were seeking
to propitiate their gods by sacrificing the three strangers whom they
held responsible for all their woes.

Jim caught Lucille in his arms, shouting her name. She knew him,
turned toward him. Then one of the priests, armed with a great
stone-headed club--for no metal is permitted within the precincts of
the god Cruk--struck at him furiously.

Jim leaped aside, letting the club descend harmlessly upon the floor.
He shot out his right with all his strength behind it, catching the
priest upon the jaw, and the man crumpled.

       *       *       *       *       *

Whirling the club around his head, he fought back the fanatics, all
the while shouting to Tode to start the Atom Smasher. In such a moment
he only remembered that Tode was a white man, and of his own
generation.

He struck down three of the priests; then he was seized around the
knees from behind, and fell heavily. The club was wrenched from his
hand. In another moment Jim found himself helpless in the grasp of the
Atlanteans.

As he stopped struggling for a moment, to gather his strength for a
supreme effort, he heard a whir overhead, and saw the arms of the
stone gods begin their horrible revolution. The priests had started
the machinery. And high above the din below rang out the wild chant of
the high priest.

Jim saw him now, a figure poised upon a platform behind the arms, his
own arms raised heavenward.

"Aiah! Aiah! Aiah!"

Jim was being dragged forward, with Lucille beside him, old Parrish
following, still making a futile struggle for life, while pitiful
screeches issued from his mouth.

Jim saw the revolving arms descend within a foot of his head. One more
fight--one more, the last.

Suddenly, with loud yells, a band of Drilgoes leaped forward from the
head of the stairs and rushed upon the struggling priests and victims.
And, dark as it was, Jim recognized their leader--Cain.

And Cain knew Lucille. As the priests rallied for a desperate
resistance, Cain hurled his great body through the air, landing
squarely upon the shoulders of the priest nearest the revolving arms,
and knocking him flat.

Then the arms caught priest and Drilgo, and the steel hooks dug deep
into their flesh. A screech of terror, a howl that reverberated
through the amphitheatre, and nothing remained of either but a heap
