_fusion_.

This operation is commonly performed in vessels called crucibles, which
must necessarily be less fusible than the bodies they are intended to
contain. Hence, in all ages, chemists have been extremely solicitous to
procure crucibles of very refractory materials, or such as are capable
of resisting a very high degree of heat. The best are made of very pure
clay or of porcelain earth; whereas such as are made of clay mixed with
calcareous or silicious earth are very fusible. All the crucibles made
in the neighbourhood of Paris are of this kind, and consequently unfit
for most chemical experiments. The Hessian crucibles are tolerably good;
but the best are made of Limoges earth, which seems absolutely
infusible. We have, in France, a great many clays very fit for making
crucibles; such, for instance, is the kind used for making melting pots
at the glass-manufactory of St Gobin.

Crucibles are made of various forms, according to the operations they
are intended to perform. Several of the most common kinds are
represented Pl. VII. Fig. 7. 8. 9. and 10. the one represented at Fig.
9. is almost shut at its mouth.

Though fusion may often take place without changing the nature of the
fused body, this operation is frequently employed as a chemical means of
decomposing and recompounding bodies. In this way all the metals are
extracted from their ores; and, by this process, they are revivified,
moulded, and alloyed with each other. By this process sand and alkali
are combined to form glass, and by it likewise pastes, or coloured
stones, enamels, &c. are formed.

The action of violent fire was much more frequently employed by the
ancient chemists than it is in modern experiments. Since greater
precision has been employed in philosophical researches, the _humid_ has
been preferred to the _dry_ method of process, and fusion is seldom had
recourse to until all the other means of analysis have failed.


SECT. II.

_Of Furnaces._

These are instruments of most universal use in chemistry; and, as the
success of a great number of experiments depends upon their being well
or ill constructed, it is of great importance that a laboratory be well
provided in this respect. A furnace is a kind of hollow cylindrical
tower, sometimes widened above, Pl. XIII. Fig. 1. ABCD, which must have
at least two lateral openings; one in its upper part F, which is the
door of the fire-place, and one below, G, leading to the ash-hole.
Between these the furnace is divided by a horizontal grate, intended
for supporting the fewel, the situation of which is marked in the figure
by the line HI. Though this be the least complicated of all the chemical
furnaces, yet it is applicable to a great number of purposes. By it
lead, tin, bismuth, and, in general, every substance which does not
require a very strong fire, may be melted in crucibles; it will serve
for metallic oxydations, for evaporatory vessels, and for sand-baths, as
in Pl. III. Fig. 1. and 2. To render it proper for these purposes,
several notches, m m m m, Pl. XIII. Fig. 1. are made in its upper
edge, as otherwise any pan which might be placed over the fire would
stop the passage of the air, and prevent the fewel from burning. This
furnace can only produce a moderate degree of heat, because the quantity
of charcoal it is capable of consuming is limited by the quantity of air
which is allowed to pass through the opening G of the ash-hole. Its
power might be considerably augmented by enlarging this opening, but
then the great stream of air which is convenient for some operations
might be hurtful in others; wherefore we must have furnaces of different
forms, constructed for different purposes, in our laboratories: There
ought especially to be several of the kind now described of different
sizes.

The reverberatory furnace, Pl. XIII. Fig. 2. is perhaps more necessary.
This, like the common furnace, is composed of the ash-hole HIKL, the
fire-place KLMN, the laboratory MNOP, and the dome RRSS, with its funnel
or chimney TTVV; and to this last several additional tubes may be
adapted, according to the nature of the different experiments. The
retort A is placed in the division called the laboratory, and supported
by two bars of iron which run across the furnace, and its beak comes out
at a round hole in the side of the furnace, one half of which is cut in
the piece called the laboratory, and the other in the dome. In most of
the ready made reverberatory furnaces which are sold by the potters at
Paris, the openings both above and below are too small: These do not
allow a sufficient volume of air to pass through; hence, as the quantity
of charcoal consumed, or, what is much the same thing, the quantity of
caloric disengaged, is nearly in proportion to the quantity of air which
passes through the furnace, these furnaces do not produce a sufficient
effect in a great number of experiments. To remedy this defect, there
ought to be two openings GG to the ash-hole; one of these is shut up
when only a moderate fire is required; and both are kept open when the
strongest power of the furnace is to be exerted. The opening of the dome
SS ought likewise to be considerably larger than is usually made.

It is of great importance not to employ retorts of too large size in
proportion to the furnace, as a sufficient space ought always to be
allowed for the passage of the air between the sides of the furnace and
the vessel. The retort A in the figure is too small for the size of the
furnace, yet I find it more easy to point out the error than to correct
it. The intention of the dome is to oblige the flame and heat to
surround and strike back or reverberate upon every part of the retort,
whence the furnace gets the name of reverberatory. Without this
circumstance the retort would only be heated in its bottom, the vapours
raised from the contained substance would condense in the upper part,
and a continual cohabitation would take place without any thing passing
over into the receiver, but, by means of the dome, the retort is equally
heated in every part, and the vapours being forced out, can only
condense in the neck of the retort, or in the recipient.

To prevent the bottom of the retort from being either heated or coolled
too suddenly, it is sometimes placed in a small sand-bath of baked clay,
standing upon the cross bars of the furnace. Likewise, in many
operations, the retorts are coated over with lutes, some of which are
intended to preserve them from the too sudden influence of heat or of
cold, while others are for sustaining the glass, or forming a kind of
second retort, which supports the glass one during operations wherein
the strength of the fire might soften it. The former is made of
brick-clay with a little cow's hair beat up alongst with it, into a
paste or mortar, and spread over the glass or stone retorts. The latter
is made of pure clay and pounded stone-ware mixed together, and used in
the same manner. This dries and hardens by the fire, so as to form a
true supplementary retort capable of retaining the materials, if the
glass retort below should crack or soften. But, in experiments which are
intended for collecting gasses, this lute, being porous, is of no manner
of use.

In a great many experiments wherein very violent fire is not required,
the reverberatory furnace may be used as a melting one, by leaving out
the piece called the laboratory, and placing the dome immediately upon
the fire-place, as represented Pl. XIII. Fig. 3. The furnace represented
in Fig. 4. is very convenient for fusions; it is composed of the
fire-place and ash-hole ABD, without a door, and having a hole E, which
receives the muzzle of a pair of bellows strongly luted on, and the dome
ABGH, which ought to be rather lower than is represented in the figure.
This furnace is not capable of producing a very strong heat, but is
sufficient for ordinary operations, and may be readily moved to any part
of the laboratory where it is wanted. Though these particular furnaces
are very convenient, every laboratory must be provided with a forge
furnace, having a good pair of bellows, or, what is more necessary, a
powerful melting furnace. I shall describe the one I use, with the
principles upon which it is constructed.

The air circulates in a furnace in consequence of being heated in its
passage through the burning coals; it dilates, and, becoming lighter
than the surrounding air, is forced to rise upwards by the pressure of
the lateral columns of air, and is replaced by fresh air from all sides,
especially from below. This circulation of air even takes place when
coals are burnt in a common chaffing dish; but we can readily conceive,
that, in a furnace open on all sides, the mass of air which passes, all
other circumstances being equal, cannot be so great as when it is
obliged to pass through a furnace in the shape of a hollow tower, like
most of the chemical furnaces, and consequently, that the combustion
must be more rapid in a furnace of this latter construction. Suppose,
for instance, the furnace ABCDEF open above, and filled with burning
coals, the force with which the air passes through the coals will be in
proportion to the difference between the specific gravity of two columns
equal to AC, the one of cold air without, and the other of heated air
within the furnace. There must be some heated air above the opening AB,
and the superior levity of this ought likewise to be taken into
consideration; but, as this portion is continually coolled and carried
off by the external air, it cannot produce any great effect.

But, if we add to this furnace a large hollow tube GHAB of the same
diameter, which preserves the air which has been heated by the burning
coals from being coolled and dispersed by the surrounding air, the
difference of specific gravity which causes the circulation will then be
between two columns equal to GC. Hence, if GC be three times the length
of AC, the circulation will have treble force. This is upon the
supposition that the air in GHCD is as much heated as what is contained
in ABCD, which is not strictly the case, because the heat must decrease
between AB and GH; but, as the air in GHAB is much warmer than the
external air, it follows, that the addition of the tube must increase
the rapidity of the stream of air, that a larger quantity must pass
through the coals, and consequently that a greater degree of combustion
must take place.

We must not, however, conclude from these principles, that the length of
this tube ought to be indefinitely prolonged; for, since the heat of the
air gradually diminishes in passing from AB to GH, even from the contact
of the sides of the tube, if the tube were prolonged to a certain
degree, we would at last come to a point where the specific gravity of
the included air would be equal to the air without; and, in this case,
as the cool air would no longer tend to rise upwards, it would become a
gravitating mass, resisting the ascension of the air below. Besides, as
this air, which has served for combustion, is necessarily mixed with
carbonic acid gas, which is considerably heavier than common air, if the
tube were made long enough, the air might at last approach so near to
the temperature of the external air as even to gravitate downwards;
hence we must conclude, that the length of the tube added to a furnace
must have some limit beyond which it weakens, instead of strengthening
the force of the fire.

From these reflections it follows, that the first foot of tube added to
a furnace produces more effect than the sixth, and the sixth more than
the tenth; but we have no data to ascertain at what height we ought to
stop. This limit of useful addition is so much the farther in proportion
as the materials of the tube are weaker conductors of heat, because the
air will thereby be so much less coolled; hence baked earth is much to
be preferred to plate iron. It would be even of consequence to make the
tube double, and to fill the interval with rammed charcoal, which is one
of the worst conductors of heat known; by this the refrigeration of the
air will be retarded, and the rapidity of the stream of air consequently
increased; and, by this means, the tube may be made so much the longer.

As the fire-place is the hottest part of a furnace, and the part where
the air is most dilated in its passage, this part ought to be made with
a considerable widening or belly. This is the more necessary, as it is
intended to contain the charcoal and crucible, as well as for the
passage of the air which supports, or rather produces the combustion;
hence we only allow the interstices between the coals for the passage of
the air.

From these principles my melting furnace is constructed, which I believe
is at least equal in power to any hitherto made, though I by no means
pretend that it possesses the greatest possible intensity that can be
produced in chemical furnaces. The augmentation of the volume of air
produced during its passage through a melting furnace not being hitherto
ascertained from experiment, we are still unacquainted with the
proportions which should exist between the inferior and superior
apertures, and the absolute size of which these openings should be made
is still less understood; hence data are wanting by which to proceed
upon principle, and we can only accomplish the end in view by repeated
trials.

This furnace, which, according to the above stated rules, is in form of
an eliptical spheroid, is represented Pl. XIII. Fig. 6. ABCD; it is cut
off at the two ends by two plains, which pass, perpendicular to the
axis, through the foci of the elipse. From this shape it is capable of
containing a considerable quantity of charcoal, while it leaves
sufficient space in the intervals for the passage of the air. That no
obstacle may oppose the free access of external air, it is perfectly
open below, after the model of Mr Macquer's melting furnace, and stands
upon an iron tripod. The grate is made of flat bars set on edge, and
with considerable interstices. To the upper part is added a chimney, or
tube, of baked earth, ABFG, about eighteen feet long, and almost half
the diameter of the furnace. Though this furnace produces a greater heat
than any hitherto employed by chemists, it is still susceptible of being
considerably increased in power by the means already mentioned, the
principal of which is to render the tube as bad a conductor of heat as
possible, by making it double, and filling the interval with rammed
charcoal.

When it is required to know if lead contains any mixture of gold or
silver, it is heated in a strong fire in capsules of calcined bones,
which are called cuppels. The lead is oxydated, becomes vitrified, and
sinks into the substance of the cuppel, while the gold or silver, being
incapable of oxydation, remain pure. As lead will not oxydate without
free access of air, this operation cannot be performed in a crucible
placed in the middle of the burning coals of a furnace, because the
internal air, being mostly already reduced by the combustion into azotic
and carbonic acid gas, is no longer fit for the oxydation of metals. It
was therefore necessary to contrive a particular apparatus, in which the
metal should be at the same time exposed to the influence of violent
heat, and defended from contact with air rendered incombustible by its
passage through burning coals. The furnace intended for answering this
double purpose is called the cuppelling or essay furnace. It is usually
made of a square form, as represented Pl. XIII. Fig. 8. and 10. having
an ash-hole AABB, a fire-place BBCC, a laboratory CCDD, and a dome DDEE.
The muffle or small oven of baked earth GH, Fig. 9. being placed in the
laboratory of the furnace upon cross bars of iron, is adjusted to the
opening GG, and luted with clay softened in water. The cuppels are
placed in this oven or muffle, and charcoal is conveyed into the furnace
through the openings of the dome and fire-place. The external air enters
through the openings of the ash-hole for supporting the combustion, and
escapes by the superior opening or chimney at EE; and air is admitted
through the door of the muffle GG for oxydating the contained metal.

Very little reflection is sufficient to discover the erroneous
principles upon which this furnace is constructed. When the opening GG
is shut, the oxydation is produced slowly, and with difficulty, for want
of air to carry it on; and, when this hole is open, the stream of cold
air which is then admitted fixes the metal, and obstructs the process.
These inconveniencies may be easily remedied, by constructing the muffle
and furnace in such a manner that a stream of fresh external air should
always play upon the surface of the metal, and this air should be made
to pass through a pipe of clay kept continually red hot by the fire of
the furnace. By this means the inside of the muffle will never be
coolled, and processes will be finished in a few minutes, which at
present require a considerable space of time.

Mr Sage remedies these inconveniencies in a different manner; he places
the cuppel containing lead, alloyed with gold or silver, amongst the
charcoal of an ordinary furnace, and covered by a small porcelain
muffle; when the whole is sufficiently heated, he directs the blast of a
common pair of hand-bellows upon the surface of the metal, and completes
the cuppellation in this way with great ease and exactness.


SECT. III.

_Of increasing the Action of Fire, by using Oxygen Gas instead of
Atmospheric Air._

By means of large burning glasses, such as those of Tchirnausen and Mr
de Trudaine, a degree of heat is obtained somewhat greater than has
hitherto been produced in chemical furnaces, or even in the ovens of
furnaces used for baking hard porcelain. But these instruments are
extremely expensive, and do not even produce heat sufficient to melt
crude platina; so that their advantages are by no means sufficient to
compensate for the difficulty of procuring, and even of using them.
Concave mirrors produce somewhat more effect than burning glasses of the
same diameter, as is proved by the experiments of Messrs Macquer and
Beaume with the speculum of the Abbe Bouriot; but, as the direction of
the reflected rays is necessarily from below upwards, the substance to
be operated upon must be placed in the air without any support, which
renders most chemical experiments impossible to be performed with this
instrument.

For these reasons, I first endeavoured to employ oxygen gas for
combustion, by filling large bladders with it, and making it pass
through a tube capable of being shut by a stop-cock; and in this way I
succeeded in causing it to support the combustion of lighted charcoal.
The intensity of the heat produced, even in my first attempt, was so
great as readily to melt a small quantity of crude platina. To the
success of this attempt is owing the idea of the gazometer, described p.
308. _et seq._ which I substituted instead of the bladders; and, as we
can give the oxygen gas any necessary degree of pressure, we can with
this instrument keep up a continued stream, and give it even a very
considerable force.

The only apparatus necessary for experiments of this kind consists of a
small table ABCD, Pl. XII. Fig. 15, with a hole F, through which passes
a tube of copper or silver, ending in a very small opening at G, and
capable of being opened or shut by the stop-cock H. This tube is
continued below the table at l m n o, and is connected with the
interior cavity of the gazometer. When we mean to operate, a hole of a
few lines deep must be made with a chizel in a piece of charcoal, into
which the substance to be treated is laid; the charcoal is set on fire
by means of a candle and blow-pipe, after which it is exposed to a
rapid stream of oxygen gas from the extremity G of the tube FG.

This manner of operating can only be used with such bodies as can be
placed, without inconvenience, in contact with charcoal, such as metals,
simple earths, &c. But, for bodies whose elements have affinity to
charcoal, and which are consequently decomposed by that substance, such
as sulphats, phosphats, and most of the neutral salts, metallic glasses,
enamels, &c. we must use a lamp, and make the stream of oxygen gas pass
through its flame. For this purpose, we use the elbowed blow-pipe ST,
instead of the bent one FG, employed with charcoal. The heat produced in
this second manner is by no means so intense as in the former way, and
is very difficultly made to melt platina. In this manner of operating
with the lamp, the substances are placed in cuppels of calcined bones,
or little cups of porcelain, or even in metallic dishes. If these last
are sufficiently large, they do not melt, because, metals being good
conductors of heat, the caloric spreads rapidly through the whole mass,
so that none of its parts are very much heated.

In the Memoirs of the Academy for 1782, p. 476. and for 1783, p. 573.
the series of experiments I have made with this apparatus may be seen at
large. The following are some of the principal results.

1. Rock cristal, or pure silicious earth, is infusible, but becomes
capable of being softened or fused when mixed with other substances.

2. Lime, magnesia, and barytes, are infusible, either when alone, or
when combined together; but, especially lime, they assist the fusion of
every other body.

3. Argill, or pure base of alum, is completely fusible _per se_ into a
very hard opake vitreous substance, which scratches glass like the
precious stones.

4. All the compound earths and stones are readily fused into a brownish
glass.

5. All the saline substances, even fixed alkali, are volatilized in a
few seconds.

6. Gold, silver, and probably platina, are slowly volatilized without
any particular phenomenon.

7. All other metallic substances, except mercury, become oxydated,
though placed upon charcoal, and burn with different coloured flames,
and at last dissipate altogether.

8. The metallic oxyds likewise all burn with flames. This seems to form
a distinctive character for these substances, and even leads me to
believe, as was suspected by Bergman, that barytes is a metallic oxyd,
though we have not hitherto been able to obtain the metal in its pure or
reguline state.

9. Some of the precious stones, as rubies, are capable of being softened
and soldered together, without injuring their colour, or even
diminishing their weights. The hyacinth, tho' almost equally fixed with
the ruby, loses its colour very readily. The Saxon and Brasilian topaz,
and the Brasilian ruby, lose their colour very quickly, and lose about a
fifth of their weight, leaving a white earth, resembling white quartz,
or unglazed china. The emerald, chrysolite, and garnet, are almost
instantly melted into an opake and coloured glass.

10. The diamond presents a property peculiar to itself; it burns in the
same manner with combustible bodies, and is entirely dissipated.

There is yet another manner of employing oxygen gas for considerably
increasing the force of fire, by using it to blow a furnace. Mr Achard
first conceived this idea; but the process he employed, by which he
thought to dephlogisticate, as it is called, atmospheric air, or to
deprive it of azotic gas, is absolutely unsatisfactory. I propose to
construct a very simple furnace, for this purpose, of very refractory
earth, similar to the one represented Pl. XIII. Fig. 4. but smaller in
all its dimensions. It is to have two openings, as at E, through one of
which the nozle of a pair of bellows is to pass, by which the heat is to
be raised as high as possible with common air; after which, the stream
of common air from the bellows being suddenly stopt, oxygen gas is to be
admitted by a tube, at the other opening, communicating with a gazometer
having the pressure of four or five inches of water. I can in this
manner unite the oxygen gas from several gazometers, so as to make eight
or nine cubical feet of gas pass through the furnace; and in this way I
expect to produce a heat greatly more intense than any hitherto known.
The upper orifice of the furnace must be carefully made of considerable
dimensions, that the caloric produced may have free issue, lest the too
sudden expansion of that highly elastic fluid should produce a dangerous
explosion.

FINIS.




APPENDIX.


No. I.

TABLE _for Converting Lines, or Twelfth Parts of an Inch, and Fractions
of Lines, into Decimal Fractions of the Inch._

Twelfth Parts  Decimal                  Decimal
of a Line.     Fractions.     Lines.    Fractions.

   1            0.00694         1        0.08333
   2            0.01389         2        0.16667
   3            0.02083         3        0.25000
   4            0.02778         4        0.33333
   5            0.03472         5        0.41667
   6            0.04167         6        0.50000
   7            0.04861         7        0.58333
   8            0.05556         8        0.66667
   9            0.06250         9        0.75000
  10            0.06944        10        0.83333
  11            0.07639        11        0.91667
  12            0.08333        12        1.00000


No. II.

TABLE _for Converting the Observed Heighths of Water in the Jars of the
Pneumato-Chemical Apparatus, expressed in Inches and Decimals, into
Corresponding Heighths of Mercury._

Water.   Mercury.     Water.   Mercury.

 .1       .00737      4.       .29480
 .2       .01474      5.       .36851
 .3       .02201      6.       .44221
 .4       .02948      7.       .51591
