_The Return_

I think that there is little I should add. Tugh's last purpose had
been to hurl himself and Mary past the lifetime of our world, wrecking
the cage and flinging them into Eternity together. And Tugh was luring
our cage and us to the same fate. But Mary, to save us, had watched
her opportunity, seized the main control lever and demolished the
vehicle by its instantaneous stopping.

We left the shell of Tugh lying there in the red sunlight of the
empty, dying world, and returned to Tina's palace. We found that the
revolt was over. The city, with help arrived, was striving to emerge
from the bloody chaos. Larry and Tina decided to remain permanently in
her Time. They would take us back; but the cage was too diabolical to
keep in existence.

"I shall send it forward unoccupied," said Tina; "flash it into
Eternity, where Tugh tried to go."

Accompanied by Larry, she carried Mary and me to 1935. With Mary's
father, her only relative, dead, she yielded to my urging. We arrived
in October, 1935. My New York, like Tina's a victim of the exile of
Time, was rapidly being reconstructed.

       *       *       *       *       *

It was night when we stopped and the familiar outlines of Patton Place
were around us.

We stood at the cage doorway.

"Good-by," I said to Larry and Tina. "Good luck to you both!"

The girls kissed each other. Such strangely contrasting types! Over a
thousand years was between them, yet how alike they were,
fundamentally. Both--just girls.

Larry gripped my hand. In times of emotion one is sometimes
inarticulate. "Good-by, George," he said. "We--we've said already all
there is to say, haven't we?"

There were tears in both the girls' eyes. We four had been so close;
we had been through so much together; and now we were parting forever.
All four of us were stricken with surprise at how it affected us. We
stood gazing at one another.

"No!" I burst out. "I haven't said all there is to say. Don't you
destroy that cage! You come back! Guard it as carefully as you can,
and come back. Land here, next year in October; say, night of the
15th. Will you? We'll be here waiting."

"Yes," Tina abruptly agreed.

We stood watching them as they slid the door closed. The cage for a
moment stood quiescent. Then it began faintly humming. It glowed;
faded to a spectre; and was gone.

Mary and I turned away into the New York City of 1935, to begin our
life together.

(_The End_)


TO THE MOON

The prediction that man will fly to the moon within the next 100 years
was made by John Q. Stewart, associate professor of astronomical
physics at Princeton University, in a recent address at the Brooklyn
Institute of Arts and Sciences.

The first obstacle to be overcome is that of developing a speed of
25,000 miles an hour, the professor said, which means production of
fuels more powerful than coal, gasoline, dynamite or any other source
of energy now available. Such remarkable progress has been made in the
speed of passenger carrying vehicles in the last century that
scientists believe that a speed of 1,000 miles per hour will be
reached in 1950 and 50,000 an hour will be surpassed before the year
2030, a century from now.

The one theoretically feasible method of making the journey to the
moon, Stewart believes, is a vehicle propelled on the principle of the
rocket. He visions a ship built in the form of a large metal
sphere--110 feet in diameter, weighing 70,000 metric tons and carrying
a crew of sixty and a dozen scientists. A dozen or more cannon would
protrude slightly from the surface, shooting material the rate of 200
miles a second.

A half hour or so before noon and about three days before a new moon,
Stewart would head his ship toward the sun, expecting it to rise
twelve miles in the first six minutes and to soar out of the earth's
atmosphere at 200 miles per hour.

Two hours and 29 minutes after the take-off the firing from the lower
cannon would be stopped with the ship going upward, the professor
estimates, at 190 miles per minute and having reached a height of
13,200 miles. Seventy hours later, crossing the moon's orbit, Stewart
would fire the forward cannon and the ship would coast around the
moon, becoming the temporary satellite of a satellite.

"The rest would be easy," said Stewart, "owing to the lesser gravity
of the moon. The cannon would be fired to cushion the fall to the moon
as the ship was gradually sucked toward the satellite.

"The moon is airless, waterless and lifeless, days and nights are two
weeks long, temperatures range from that of boiling water at noon down
perhaps to that of liquid air at midnight. The men of the ship would
walk on the moon clad in diving suits. Gravity being only one-sixth
that of the earth, a man would carry several hundred pounds of
apparatus for providing air and for regulating the temperature.

"To leave the moon the ship would fire her rear cannon and coast back
to earth. By firing its forward cannon it would cushion its landing on
the earth, which would have to be made on a desert, because of the
tremendous charges the cannon would fire."




_A Meeting Place for Readers of_ Astounding Stories

[Illustration: The Readers' Corner]


_The Author Explains_

     Dear Editor:

     Am very much puzzled by the several apparent mistakes in two
     of the stories in the April issue of Astounding Stories. In
     "The World Behind the Moon," Mr. Ernst makes an error so
     obvious that it almost makes me believe that it isn't an
     error. Like doing a math problem and finding it so easy that
     you're sure that you have it wrong. Anyway, here is my
     problem; this is taken verbatim from the story: "At two
     thousand miles from the Earth there had still been enough
     hydrogen traces in the ether to give purchase to the
     explosions of their water-motor." Does the author mean to
     say that the explosions of the tubes have to have something
     to push against to have any action? (a) Has it not been
     proven actually and mathematically that the explosions of
     rockets and expanding gases are even more powerful in space?
     The space ship in this story was equipped with both bow and
     stern tubes; why not fire them to slow the ship down instead
     of waiting to run into some resistance?

     (b) Also, when they landed they took some air-guns which
     shot bullets containing a liquid which exploded when heated
     by the passage of the shell through the barrel; then the
     author goes ahead and tells us that the planet was about as
     hot as the tropics. Such heat should explode the bullets,
     but it didn't. Why?

     Mr. Ernst has his heroes do a lot of running around on that
     little planet.

     (c) Since the planet is smaller than the moon, it hasn't
     much gravity and therefore can't retain a very heavy
     atmosphere, or one very thick. Anyone doing all that violent
     exercise would probably die of exhaustion before many
     minutes of it.

     "Four Miles Within" was a good story, but I am unable to
     understand why they did not find a lot of stagnant air. Air
     that had lain stagnant for the time that cavern must have
     been closed would have killed the person who breathed it.
     Also, I would imagine that it wouldn't be safe to handle a
     chunk of radium like the characters in the story did; it's
     liable to burn. However, it probably wasn't pure radium,
     just pitchblende-bearing rocks.

     The rest of the stories were fine. I especially like the
     stories of the Special Patrol Service which S. P. Wright has
     created. Let's have some more stories of Commander John
     Hanson and his crew.

     "The Exile of Time" has started off quite well and I look
     forward to the next installments. Cummings is always good
     for a batch of thrills and some swell adventure, to say
     nothing of the enjoyable way he introduces science into the
     story.

     Wish you would publish this, as I would like to get in touch
     with some other Science-Fiction fans.

     By the way, some of the readers seem to want the mag
     changed, but don't you do a thing to it. All the
     suggestions, if followed, would make "our" mag like the
     other S.-F. mags on the market, and I read Astounding
     Stories because it is DIFFERENT, and I mean every one of
     those capitals!--Ben Smith, Box 444, Billings, Mont.

     Mr. Ernst's Answers:

     (a) No, it has not been actually proved. It has been
     indicated mathematically (by formulae based on conjecture),
     but never actually solved--for the very good reason that it
     is impossible to reproduce spacial conditions in earthly
     laboratories. Know how an explosive force would react in
     space? We don't even know positively what space is, let
     alone how our chemicals and instruments would behave in it.

     The majority theory is that explosive charges would propel a
     rocket or space ship more effectively in the (theoretical)
     emptiness of space, than in our atmosphere. But to my mind
     it is quite possible that an explosion--a violent expansion
     of gases causing rapid increase of pressures--would be
     ineffectual where there are no pressures to be increased.
     Might not the violently expanding gases fly forth from an
     exhaust vent to expand instantly, frictionlessly and
     impotently to the ends of the universe? In my story, "The
     World Behind the Moon," I assumed that would occur. And no
     man living is in a position positively to disprove it.

     And, as a corollary, if a propulsion explosion cannot have
     effect in empty space, as presumed in the story, the space
     ship must enter atmosphere before it can stop by firing its
     bow tubes. Otherwise, with the bow tubes shooting their
     expanding gases futilely into nothingness, you could go into
     "reverse" till the cows came home and the ship would hurtle
     forward just the same.

     (b) Friction of a bullet through a rifle barrel produces a
     temperature considerably higher than "tropical."

     (c) Again, no one knows spacial or planetary conditions. It
     seems reasonable to assume that a planet's mass may have a
     fairly direct bearing on the density of its atmosphere.
     However, Venus, a smaller globe than Earth, is supposed to
     have a denser atmosphere. For all we know to the contrary,
     meteors no larger than pebbles may carry about with them
     microscopic films of "atmospheres" of varying
     densities.--Paul Ernst.


_Hitting Our Stride_

     Dear Editor:

     The more I read Astounding Stories, the more I like it.
     You're just getting your stride this, the second year. But
     why not foresee the demand of your Readers and have a few
     stories by R. F. Starzl? You have other top-notchers such as
     Ray Cummings, Murray Leinster; and Tom Curry is another good
     writer. "Monsters of Mars" would have been better if it were
     boiled down to about two thirds as many pages. It reads
     "stretched."--W. P. O'Toole, Parker, S. Dak.


"_This Missile_"

     Dear Editor:

     Congratulations! Your magazine--excuse me, "our"
     magazine--is going over big!

     However, there are a few things I would like to suggest.
     First, why not take a vote on the quarterly idea? Second,
     give us more stories and illustrations. Increase the price
     if you have to, but keep up the good work and I'm your
     steady buyer. So far I have not missed a copy, and my only
     regret is that I didn't have sense enough to keep the first
     six or seven instead of throwing them away.

     By the way, didn't I notice a rather heated argument going
     on in "The Readers' Corner" about reprints? And what is the
     matter with reprints? Nothing, except that they are
     reprints. That is hardly an argument, but if you value my
     monthly twenty cents please give us at least one reprint to
     a volume, which I see comprises three copies of
     your--pardon, "our" magazine. If the rest of the Readers
     acquiesce I think we ought to have a reprint in the near
     future. If they object, well, the world will roll on.

     Your time is precious, and besides there are more Readers
     waiting to say the same things I have just said, so I will
     close this missile--er, missive.--Eugene Benefiel, The
     Pioneer, Tucson, Arizona.


_From the Antipodes_

     Dear Editor:

     As a regular Reader of your magazine, Astounding Stories, I
     thought I would write and tell you how I appreciate the
     stories contained in it. I am a heavy Reader and have always
     had a soft spot for stories unusual and bizarre. Until I
     happened to see your magazine at a bookshop in Perth, I had
     to be content with occasional Science Fiction stories by
     Wells, Burroughs, and a few others which I picked up in my
     browsing in various bookshops and libraries. Now that I get
     Astounding Stories regularly, I have a monthly feast of good
     things that I read and reread until the next issue arrives.

     You ask us Readers to criticize the magazine. Well, I have
     no complaints worth mentioning, except that some of the
     illustrations do not tally sufficiently with the text of the
     story. Some of the stories, in my opinion, are weak and not
     worth reading. But, as tastes differ, I take everything as
     it is, and say you have a first-class publication.

     Will you thank your Authors for me for the very many hours
     of interesting reading they have given me during the past
     twelve months? Later I intend to get my Astounding Stories
     bound in cloth covers, each twelve months' issue in a
     volume.

     If any Reader sees this letter--of course, should you think
     it worth while to publish it--and can spare the time to
     write to me here in Australia, I would be very grateful.
     Perhaps we could exchange snapshots of various places of
     interest. Every part of America interests me, so a Reader
     need not back out because he thinks his district would not
     be interesting enough.

     Here's hoping Astounding Stories grows and prospers as the
     years go by, so as to give more entertainment to me and my
     fellow-readers. A rather selfish wish, you may think, but
     you will forgive me when I say that I look forward with
     great pleasure to each month's issue.--Claude J. Nanley, 65
     Forrest St., Mt. Lawley, Western Australia.


_Note to Ray Cummings_

     Dear Editor:

     I have just started Ray Cummings' latest story in the April
     issue. Although I wish Cummings would lay off this type of
     story, I am willing to read anything by him. Jack
     Williamson's "The Lake of Light" ranked second in this
     issue. He is another Merritt. "The Ghost World," by S. P.
     Wright, came third. Edmond Hamilton was better than he has
     been of late.

     If anyone wants to read "Through the Dragon Glass," "The
     Girl in the Golden Atom," etc, and writes to me, I will tell
     him where they can be obtained. (This is not an attempt at
     free advertising.) I know several places where it is
     possible to secure works of this kind and will be glad to
     assist anyone who doesn't.

     Cummings brought me to your mag. He is keeping me there. So
     hold on to him. But, please tell him to forget all about
     time and probe the mysteries of the infinitely large and
     small, of interplanetary space, of future civilization and
     future warfare.--Dale Mullen, 611 West Fifth, Topeka,
     Kansas.


