who send 75 cents for the "STAR SPANGLED BANNER," for 1870.

       *       *       *       *       *

_Pevey's Cupola_,

WARRANTED to Melt, with, one tun of Coal, 2000 lbs. of Iron MORE than
any other Cupola now in use.

ABIEL PEVEY,

Patentee and Proprietor, Lowell, Mass. Van Tuyl & Co. No. 273 Cherry
st,. New York, Agents.

       *       *       *       *       *

MERRICK & SONS

Southwark Foundery,

430 Washington Ave., Philadelphia, Pa.,

MANUFACTURE NASMYTH & DAVY

STEAM HAMMERS, CORNISH PUMPING, BLAST, HORIZONTAL, VERTICAL, AND
OSCILLATING ENGINES.

Gas Machinery of all descriptions.

Sugar Refineries fitted up complete, with all modern apparatus.

New York office

62 Broadway.

       *       *       *       *       *

LECOUNT'S PATENT HOLLOW LATHE DOGS AND CLAMPS.--A set of 8 Dogs from 3/8
to 2-in., inclusive, $8. A set of 12 from 3/8 to 4-in., $17.30. Five
sizes Machinists' Clamps, from 2 to 6-in., inclusive, $11. Send for
Circular.

C.W. LECOUNT.

South Norwalk,

Conn.

[Illustration]

[Illustration]

       *       *       *       *       *

MASON'S PAT'T FRICTION CLUTCHES are Manufactured by Volney W. Mason &
Co., Providence, R.I. Agents, R. BROOKS & CO., 123 Ave. D, New York.
TAPLIN RICE & CO. Akron, Ohio 16 tfeow

       *       *       *       *       *

Molding Machinery.

THE MOST VALUABLE MACHINE FOR Planing Irregular and Straight Work in all
branches of Wood-Working, is the Combination Molding and Planing Machine
Co.'s "Variety Molding and Planing Machine." Our improved guards make it
safe to operate; our combination collars save one hundred per cent;
and for planing, molding, and cutting irregular forms, our Machine is
unsurpassed. The right to make and vend these Machines is owned solely
by us, and we will defend Purchasers in case litigation is forced upon
them by any parties pretending to own Patent on any part of our Variety
Machine. COMBINATION MOLDING AND PLANING MACHINE CO., 424 East 23d st.,
or Postoffice Box 3230 New York City. Silas M. Hamilton, Baltimore
Samuel Leggert, New York. 19 tfeow

       *       *       *       *       *

Gear's Variety Moulding Machine,

WARRANTED THE BEST in THE WORLD FOR Moulding and Cutting Irregular
Forms, with Patent Improvements for Combination Cutters, and Patent
Guard to protect operator and material. Secured by six Patents. Deeds of
Right to use furnished with every Machine sold, to protect parties in
using them. Before purchasing Combination Moulding and Planing Machine
Co.'s or Grosvenor's Mongrel Infringing Machines, (which they and their
agents, in behalf of the Singer Sewing Machine Co., and the Central
Pacific R.R. Co., and others to whom they had sold Machines to be used
out of the State of New York, have been made to pay us for using) or
Ball's or Fay's infringing Machines, which users have had to pay us for
right to use. Address for particulars and Machines, Sole Owners and
Lawful Manufacturers for all the United States, except New York

A.S.& J. GEAR & CO.,

NEW HAVEN, CONN., or 91 Liberty Street, New York.

       *       *       *       *       *

MACHINERY.--S.C. HILLS, No.12 Platt st., New York, dealer in all kinds
of Machinery and Machinists' supplies. 2 tf a

       *       *       *       *       *

PLATINUM. H.M. RAYNOR 57 Bond st., N.Y.

       *       *       *       *       *

AGENTS wanted everywhere. Brown's Pat. Double Cone Ventilating Damper
gives the most heat with the least fuel. Send tor Circulars.

O.R. BRIGGS & CO., 184 Washington st., N.Y

       *       *       *       *       *

AMERICAN TINNED SHEET IRON.

Coating uniformly over the entire sheet, by an entirely new and patented
process. All sizes and gages on hand and made to order.

H. W. BUTTERWORTH & SON,

29 and 31 Haydock st., Philadelphia, Pa.

25 eow tt

       *       *       *       *       *

Independent Steam

BOILER SUPPLY, OR _Feed Pump_.

RELIABLE FOR HOT OR COLD WATER.

[Illustration]

Circulars sent free.

COPE & CO.,

No. 118 East 2d st., Cincinnati, Ohio

       *       *       *       *       *

BREECH-LOADING GUN.--

Probably superior to any in the market. Patent for sale. Address

T.L.,

Box 728 Postoffice, Derby, Conn,

       *       *       *       *       *

CIRCULAR SAW MILLS, PLANERS Matchers, etc. Prices Low. S. HEALD & SONS
Barre, Mass., make the Largest and Best Planer to be found for the
money. Send for circulars.

       *       *       *       *       *

SHINGLE AND HEADING MACHINE--Trevor & Co.'s Improved. The Simplest and
Best in use. Also, Shingle, Heading, and Stave Jointers, Stave Cutters,
Equalizers. Heading Turners, Planers, etc. Address TREVOR & CO,
Lockport, N. Y.

       *       *       *       *       *

THE INVENTOR'S AND MECHANIC'S GUIDE.--A valuable book upon Mechanics,
Patents, and New Inventions. Containing the U. S. Patent Laws, Rules and
Directions for doing business at the Patent Office; 112 diagrams of
the best mechanical movements, with descriptions; the Condensing Steam
Engine, with engraving and description; How to Invent; How to Obtain
Patents; Hints upon the Value of Patents; How to sell Patents; Forms for
Assignments; Information upon the Rights of Inventors, Assignees and
Joint Owners; Instructions as to Interferences, Reissues, Extensions
Caveats, together with a great variety of useful information in regard
to patents, new inventions, and scientific subjects, with scientific
tables, and many illustrations 108 pages. This is a most valuable work.
Price only 25 cents. Address MUNN & CO., 37 Park Row, N.Y.

       *       *       *       *       *

BALL, BLACK & CO.

Nos. 565 and 567 BROADWAY,

Offer an Unequaled Assortment of

JURGENSEN, NARDINE, JACOT, SALTZMAH, NICOUD, GERARD, FRODSHAM, PEARDON,
GORDING, RUGENSTEIN, HARRISON, TAYLOR.

ALSO, A FULL LINE OF AMERICAN WATCHES,

At the Lowest Price.

       *       *       *       *       *

ROPER Carloric Engine Co., 49 Cortlandt st. New Style Upright Engines.
Send for Circular.

       *       *       *       *       *

Perpetual Brick Kiln.

SAVES 2-3 IN FUEL. Address WEDEKIND & DUEBERG, 55 N. Calvert st.,
Baltimore, Md.

       *       *       *       *       *

WANTED-To correspond with an extensive manufacturing firm of 1st-class
reliability, to make and sell, on royalty, Dodge's 2-way cock or pump
attachment. Exclusive control of territory given. 100,000 doz wanted in
U.S. Address Hedden & Dodge, Lowville, N.Y.

       *       *       *       *       *

WANTED.--

In an Extensive Agricultural Implement Works in Ohio, an Experienced and
Capable Superintendent. None but a Through Machinist, who can give high
reference as to Character, etc., need apply. Address

Thrashing Machine Works, Drawer 5947, Chicago, Ill.

       *       *       *       *       *

RIGGS' BELMONTYLE OIL

PREVENTS

Rust, Tarnish, etc. Send for circular to

H.B. Riggs,

150 Front Street, Hew York.

       *       *       *       *       *

The Mother's Journal.

THE BEST HOME MAGAZINE IN THE WORLD.

Beautifully illustrated; 600 double-column pages; $2 per year. Specimens
sent free. Now is the time. Address

MOTHERS' JOURNAL, Chicago, 111.

       *       *       *       *       *

DECISION ON STEAM ENGINES.--Wm. A. HARRIS, builder of the Corliss Steam
Engine, was awarded the 1st Premium at the National Fair of the American
Institute, New York,1869, for its superiority in economy in fuel,
regularity in speed, perfect construction, accessibility of all its
parts. Send for a circular. One 80-H.P. Engine, ready for delivery; one
40-H.P. Engine, ready for delivery; three 30-H.P. Engines, ready for
delivery. WM. A. HARRIS Providence R.I. New York Office 49 Murray st.
Send for a circular.

       *       *       *       *       *

Manufacturers' Depot.

SPOKES, HUBS, WHEELS,

And a general assortment of Carriage and Wagon Wood work. The above
goods are of our own manufacture, which enables us to offer better
inducements than any other House in the city.

N.G. OLDS & SON,

51 Murray st., New York.

       *       *       *       *       *

ROOT'S WROUGHT IRON SECTIONAL

Safety Boiler.

Composed of best Wrought Iron Tubes, tested to 500 pounds; no large
sheet iron, shell or thin cast iron to explode. Absolutely safe,
economical, durable, and efficient. Send for pamphlet. Also, Steam
Engines, Steam Pumps, etc.

ROOT STEAM ENGINE CO.,

95 and 97 Liberty St., New York.

       *       *       *       *       *

FOR SALE--A 60-H.P. Root's Sectional Safety Boiler, at Atlantic Sugar
Refinery. Brooklyn. Apply to LABATT & CO., 111 Front st., New York.

       *       *       *       *       *

POWER PLEDGED

Equal to any overshot, with

N.F. BURNHAM'S

New Turbine

Water Wheel.

Illustrated Pamphlet, for 1870, "with Reduced Price List," sent free
by N.F. BURNHAM, "Patentee," York, Pa., or S.N. Hartwell, "Ag't," 98
Liberty st., N.Y.

[Illustration]

       *       *       *       *       *

The Woven Wire Mattress Co.

OF

HARTFORD, CONN.,

Call attention to the fact, that they have established AN AGENCY in
the City of NEW YORK, at 82 E. Ninth St., opposite the store of A. T.
Stewart & Co., for the sale of the

Woven Wire Mattress.

