
I retired.  Our situation was critical.  I related my conversation to
my two companions.

"We know now," said Ned, "that we can expect nothing from this man.
The Nautilus is nearing Long Island.  We will escape, whatever the
weather may be."

But the sky became more and more threatening.  Symptoms of a hurricane
became manifest.  The atmosphere was becoming white and misty.  On the
horizon fine streaks of cirrhous clouds were succeeded by masses of
cumuli.  Other low clouds passed swiftly by.  The swollen sea rose in
huge billows.  The birds disappeared with the exception of the petrels,
those friends of the storm.  The barometer fell sensibly, and indicated
an extreme extension of the vapours.  The mixture of the storm glass
was decomposed under the influence of the electricity that pervaded the
atmosphere.  The tempest burst on the 18th of May, just as the Nautilus
was floating off Long Island, some miles from the port of New York.  I
can describe this strife of the elements! for, instead of fleeing to
the depths of the sea, Captain Nemo, by an unaccountable caprice, would
brave it at the surface.  The wind blew from the south-west at first.
Captain Nemo, during the squalls, had taken his place on the platform.
He had made himself fast, to prevent being washed overboard by the
monstrous waves.  I had hoisted myself up, and made myself fast also,
dividing my admiration between the tempest and this extraordinary man
who was coping with it.  The raging sea was swept by huge cloud-drifts,
which were actually saturated with the waves.  The Nautilus, sometimes
lying on its side, sometimes standing up like a mast, rolled and
pitched terribly.  About five o'clock a torrent of rain fell, that
lulled neither sea nor wind.  The hurri cane blew nearly forty leagues
an hour.  It is under these conditions that it overturns houses, breaks
iron gates, displaces twenty-four pounders.  However, the Nautilus, in
the midst of the tempest, confirmed the words of a clever engineer,
"There is no well-constructed hull that cannot defy the sea." This was
not a resisting rock; it was a steel spindle, obedient and movable,
without rigging or masts, that braved its fury with impunity.  However,
I watched these raging waves attentively.  They measured fifteen feet
in height, and 150 to 175 yards long, and their speed of propagation
was thirty feet per second.  Their bulk and power increased with the
depth of the water.  Such waves as these, at the Hebrides, have
displaced a mass weighing 8,400 lb.  They are they which, in the
tempest of December 23rd, 1864, after destroying the town of Yeddo, in
Japan, broke the same day on the shores of America.  The intensity of
the tempest increased with the night.  The barometer, as in 1860 at
Reunion during a cyclone, fell seven-tenths at the close of day.  I saw
a large vessel pass the horizon struggling painfully.  She was trying
to lie to under half steam, to keep up above the waves.  It was
probably one of the steamers of the line from New York to Liverpool, or
Havre.  It soon disappeared in the gloom.  At ten o'clock in the
evening the sky was on fire.  The atmosphere was streaked with vivid
lightning.  I could not bear the brightness of it; while the captain,
looking at it, seemed to envy the spirit of the tempest.  A terrible
noise filled the air, a complex noise, made up of the howls of the
crushed waves, the roaring of the wind, and the claps of thunder.  The
wind veered suddenly to all points of the horizon; and the cyclone,
rising in the east, returned after passing by the north, west, and
south, in the inverse course pursued by the circular storm of the
southern hemisphere.  Ah, that Gulf Stream!  It deserves its name of
the King of Tempests.  It is that which causes those formidable
cyclones, by the difference of temperature between its air and its
currents.  A shower of fire had succeeded the rain.  The drops of water
were changed to sharp spikes.  One would have thought that Captain Nemo
was courting a death worthy of himself, a death by lightning.  As the
Nautilus, pitching dreadfully, raised its steel spur in the air, it
seemed to act as a conductor, and I saw long sparks burst from it.
Crushed and without strength I crawled to the panel, opened it, and
descended to the saloon.  The storm was then at its height.  It was
impossible to stand upright in the interior of the Nautilus.  Captain
Nemo came down about twelve.  I heard the reservoirs filling by
degrees, and the Nautilus sank slowly beneath the waves.  Through the
open windows in the saloon I saw large fish terrified, passing like
phantoms in the water.  Some were struck before my eyes.  The Nautilus
was still descending.  I thought that at about eight fathoms deep we
should find a calm.  But no! the upper beds were too violently agitated
for that.  We had to seek repose at more than twenty-five fathoms in
the bowels of the deep.  But there, what quiet, what silence, what
peace!  Who could have told that such a hurricane had been let loose on
the surface of that ocean?



CHAPTER XX

FROM LATITUDE 47 deg. 24' TO LONGITUDE 17 deg. 28'

In consequence of the storm, we had been thrown eastward once more.
All hope of escape on the shores of New York or St. Lawrence had faded
away; and poor Ned, in despair, had isolated himself like Captain Nemo.
Conseil and I, however, never left each other.  I said that the
Nautilus had gone aside to the east.  I should have said (to be more
exact) the north-east. For some days, it wandered first on the surface,
and then beneath it, amid those fogs so dreaded by sailors.  What
accidents are due to these thick fogs!  What shocks upon these reefs
when the wind drowns the breaking of the waves!  What collisions
between vessels, in spite of their warning lights, whistles, and alarm
bells!  And the bottoms of these seas look like a field of battle,
where still lie all the conquered of the ocean; some old and already
encrusted, others fresh and reflecting from their iron bands and copper
plates the brilliancy of our lantern.

On the 15th of May we were at the extreme south of the Bank of
Newfoundland.  This bank consists of alluvia, or large heaps of organic
matter, brought either from the Equator by the Gulf Stream, or from the
North Pole by the counter-current of cold water which skirts the
American coast.  There also are heaped up those erratic blocks which
are carried along by the broken ice; and close by, a vast charnel-house
of molluscs, which perish here by millions.  The depth of the sea is
not great at Newfoundland--not more than some hundreds of fathoms; but
towards the south is a depression of 1,500 fathoms.  There the Gulf
Stream widens.  It loses some of its speed and some of its temperature,
but it becomes a sea.

It was on the 17th of May, about 500 miles from Heart's Content, at a
depth of more than 1,400 fathoms, that I saw the electric cable lying
on the bottom.  Conseil, to whom I had not mentioned it, thought at
first that it was a gigantic sea-serpent. But I undeceived the worthy
fellow, and by way of consolation related several particulars in the
laying of this cable.  The first one was laid in the years 1857 and
1858; but, after transmitting about 400 telegrams, would not act any
longer.  In 1863 the engineers constructed an other one, measuring
2,000 miles in length, and weighing 4,500 tons, which was embarked on
the Great Eastern.  This attempt also failed.

On the 25th of May the Nautilus, being at a depth of more than 1,918
fathoms, was on the precise spot where the rupture occurred which
ruined the enterprise.  It was within 638 miles of the coast of
Ireland; and at half-past two in the afternoon they discovered that
communication with Europe had ceased.  The electricians on board
resolved to cut the cable before fishing it up, and at eleven o'clock
at night they had recovered the damaged part.  They made another point
and spliced it, and it was once more submerged.  But some days after it
broke again, and in the depths of the ocean could not be recaptured.
The Americans, however, were not discouraged.  Cyrus Field, the bold
promoter of the enterprise, as he had sunk all his own fortune, set a
new subscription on foot, which was at once answered, and another cable
was constructed on better principles.  The bundles of conducting wires
were each enveloped in gutta-percha, and protected by a wadding of
hemp, contained in a metallic covering.  The Great Eastern sailed on
the 13th of July, 1866.  The operation worked well.  But one incident
occurred.  Several times in unrolling the cable they observed that
nails had recently been forced into it, evidently with the motive of
destroying it.  Captain Anderson, the officers, and engineers consulted
together, and had it posted up that, if the offender was surprised on
board, he would be thrown without further trial into the sea.  From
that time the criminal attempt was never repeated.

On the 23rd of July the Great Eastern was not more than 500 miles from
Newfoundland, when they telegraphed from Ireland the news of the
armistice concluded between Prussia and Austria after Sadowa.  On the
27th, in the midst of heavy fogs, they reached the port of Heart's
Content.  The enterprise was successfully terminated; and for its first
despatch, young America addressed old Europe in these words of wisdom,
so rarely understood:  "Glory to God in the highest, and on earth
peace, goodwill towards men."

I did not expect to find the electric cable in its primitive state,
such as it was on leaving the manufactory.  The long serpent, covered
with the remains of shells, bristling with foraminiferae, was encrusted
with a strong coating which served as a protection against all boring
molluscs.  It lay quietly sheltered from the motions of the sea, and
under a favourable pressure for the transmission of the electric spark
which passes from Europe to America in .32 of a second.  Doubtless this
cable will last for a great length of time, for they find that the
gutta-percha covering is improved by the sea-water. Besides, on this
level, so well chosen, the cable is never so deeply submerged as to
cause it to break.  The Nautilus followed it to the lowest depth, which
was more than 2,212 fathoms, and there it lay without any anchorage;
and then we reached the spot where the accident had taken place in
1863.  The bottom of the ocean then formed a valley about 100 miles
broad, in which Mont Blanc might have been placed without its summit
appearing above the waves.  This valley is closed at the east by a
perpendicular wall more than 2,000 yards high.  We arrived there on the
28th of May, and the Nautilus was then not more than 120 miles from
Ireland.

Was Captain Nemo going to land on the British Isles?  No. To my great
surprise he made for the south, once more coming back towards European
seas.  In rounding the Emerald Isle, for one instant I caught sight of
Cape Clear, and the light which guides the thousands of vessels leaving
Glasgow or Liverpool.  An important question then arose in my mind.
Did the Nautilus dare entangle itself in the Manche?  Ned Land, who had
re-appeared since we had been nearing land, did not cease to question
me.  How could I answer?  Captain Nemo remained invisible.  After
having shown the Canadian a glimpse of American shores, was he going to
show me the coast of France?

But the Nautilus was still going southward.  On the 30th of May, it
passed in sight of Land's End, between the extreme point of England and
the Scilly Isles, which were left to starboard.  If we wished to enter
the Manche, he must go straight to the east.  He did not do so.

During the whole of the 31st of May, the Nautilus described a series of
circles on the water, which greatly interested me.  It seemed to be
seeking a spot it had some trouble in finding.  At noon, Captain Nemo
himself came to work the ship's log.  He spoke no word to me, but
seemed gloomier than ever.  What could sadden him thus?  Was it his
proxim ity to European shores?  Had he some recollections of his
abandoned country?  If not, what did he feel?  Remorse or regret?  For
a long while this thought haunted my mind, and I had a kind of
presentiment that before long chance would betray the captain's secrets.

The next day, the 1st of June, the Nautilus continued the same process.
It was evidently seeking some particular spot in the ocean.  Captain
Nemo took the sun's altitude as he had done the day before.  The sea
was beautiful, the sky clear.  About eight miles to the east, a large
steam vessel could be discerned on the horizon.  No flag fluttered from
its mast, and I could not discover its nationality.  Some minutes
before the sun passed the meridian, Captain Nemo took his sextant, and
watched with great attention.  The perfect rest of the water greatly
helped the operation.  The Nautilus was motionless; it neither rolled
nor pitched.

I was on the platform when the altitude was taken, and the Captain
pronounced these words:  "It is here."

He turned and went below.  Had he seen the vessel which was changing
its course and seemed to be nearing us?  I could not tell.  I returned
to the saloon.  The panels closed, I heard the hissing of the water in
the reservoirs.  The Nautilus began to sink, following a vertical line,
for its screw communicated no motion to it.  Some minutes later it
stopped at a depth of more than 420 fathoms, resting on the ground.
The luminous ceiling was darkened, then the panels were opened, and
through the glass I saw the sea brilliantly illuminated by the rays of
our lantern for at least half a mile round us.

I looked to the port side, and saw nothing but an immensity of quiet
waters.  But to starboard, on the bottom appeared a large protuberance,
which at once attracted my attention.  One would have thought it a ruin
buried under a coating of white shells, much resembling a covering of
snow.  Upon examining the mass attentively, I could recognise the
ever-thickening form of a vessel bare of its masts, which must have
sunk.  It certainly belonged to past times.  This wreck, to be thus
encrusted with the lime of the water, must already be able to count
many years passed at the bottom of the ocean.

What was this vessel?  Why did the Nautilus visit its tomb?  Could it
have been aught but a shipwreck which had drawn it under the water?  I
knew not what to think, when near me in a slow voice I heard Captain
Nemo say:

"At one time this ship was called the Marseillais.  It carried
seventy-four guns, and was launched in 1762.  In 1778, the 13th of
August, commanded by La Poype-Ver trieux, it fought boldly against the
Preston.  In 1779, on the 4th of July, it was at the taking of Grenada,
with the squadron of Admiral Estaing.  In 1781, on the 5th of
September, it took part in the battle of Comte de Grasse, in Chesapeake
Bay.  In 1794, the French Republic changed its name.  On the 16th of
April, in the same year, it joined the squadron of Villaret Joyeuse, at
Brest, being entrusted with the escort of a cargo of corn coming from
America, under the command of Admiral Van Stebel.  On the 11th and 12th
Prairal of the second year, this squadron fell in with an English
vessel.  Sir, to-day is the 13th Prairal, the first of June, 1868.  It
is now seventy-four years ago, day for day on this very spot, in
latitude 47 deg. 24', longitude 17 deg. 28', that this vessel, after
fighting heroically, losing its three masts, with the water in its
hold, and the third of its crew disabled, preferred sinking with its
356 sailors to surrendering; and, nailing its colours to the poop,
disappeared under the waves to the cry of `Long live the Republic!'"

"The Avenger!"  I exclaimed.

"Yes, sir, the Avenger!  A good name!" muttered Captain Nemo, crossing
his arms.



CHAPTER XXI

A HECATOMB

The way of describing this unlooked-for scene, the history of the
patriot ship, told at first so coldly, and the emotion with which this
strange man pronounced the last words, the name of the Avenger, the
significance of which could not escape me, all impressed itself deeply
on my mind.  My eyes did not leave the Captain, who, with his hand
stretched out to sea, was watching with a glowing eye the glorious
wreck.  Perhaps I was never to know who he was, from whence he came, or
where he was going to, but I saw the man move, and apart from the
_savant_.  It was no common misanthropy which had shut Captain Nemo and
his companions within the Nautilus, but a hatred, either monstrous or
sublime, which time could never weaken.  Did this hatred still seek for
vengeance?  The future would soon teach me that.  But the Nautilus was
rising slowly to the surface of the sea, and the form of the Avenger
disappeared by degrees from my sight.  Soon a slight rolling told me
that we were in the open air.  At that moment a dull boom was heard.  I
looked at the Captain.  He did not move.

"Captain?" said I.

He did not answer.  I left him and mounted the platform.  Conseil and
the Canadian were already there.

"Where did that sound come from?"  I asked.

"It was a gunshot," replied Ned Land.

I looked in the direction of the vessel I had already seen.  It was
nearing the Nautilus, and we could see that it was putting on steam.
It was within six miles of us.

"What is that ship, Ned?"

"By its rigging, and the height of its lower masts," said the Canadian,
"I bet she is a ship-of-war. May it reach us; and, if necessary, sink
this cursed Nautilus."

"Friend Ned," replied Conseil, "what harm can it do to the Nautilus?
Can it attack it beneath the waves?  Can its cannonade us at the bottom
of the sea?"

"Tell me, Ned," said I, "can you recognise what country she belongs to?"

The Canadian knitted his eyebrows, dropped his eyelids, and screwed up
the corners of his eyes, and for a few moments fixed a piercing look
upon the vessel.

"No, sir," he replied; "I cannot tell what nation she belongs to, for
she shows no colours.  But I can declare she is a man-of-war, for a
long pennant flutters from her main mast."

For a quarter of an hour we watched the ship which was steaming towards
us.  I could not, however, believe that she could see the Nautilus from
that distance; and still less that she could know what this submarine
engine was.  Soon the Canadian informed me that she was a large,
armoured, two-decker ram.  A thick black smoke was pouring from her two
funnels.  Her closely-furled sails were stopped to her yards.  She
hoisted no flag at her mizzen-peak. The distance prevented us from
distinguishing the colours of her pennant, which floated like a thin
ribbon.  She advanced rapidly.  If Captain Nemo allowed her to
approach, there was a chance of salvation for us.

"Sir," said Ned Land, "if that vessel passes within a mile of us I
shall throw myself into the sea, and I should advise you to do the
same."

I did not reply to the Canadian's suggestion, but continued watching
the ship.  Whether English, French, American, or Russian, she would be
sure to take us in if we could only reach her.  Presently a white smoke
burst from the fore part of the vessel; some seconds after, the water,
agitated by the fall of a heavy body, splashed the stern of the
Nautilus, and shortly afterwards a loud explosion struck my ear.

"What! they are firing at us!"  I exclaimed.

"So please you, sir," said Ned, "they have recognised the unicorn, and
they are firing at us."

"But," I exclaimed, "surely they can see that there are men in the
case?"

"It is, perhaps, because of that," replied Ned Land, looking at me.

A whole flood of light burst upon my mind.  Doubtless they knew now how
to believe the stories of the pretended monster.  No doubt, on board
the Abraham Lincoln, when the Canadian struck it with the harpoon,
Commander Farragut had recognised in the supposed narwhal a submarine
vessel, more dangerous than a supernatural cetacean.  Yes, it must have
been so; and on every sea they were now seeking this engine of
destruction.  Terrible indeed! if, as we supposed, Captain Nemo
employed the Nautilus in works of vengeance.  On the night when we were
imprisoned in that cell, in the midst of the Indian Ocean, had he not
attacked some vessel?  The man buried in the coral cemetery, had he not
been a victim to the shock caused by the Nautilus?  Yes, I repeat it,
it must be so.  One part of the mysterious existence of Captain Nemo
had been unveiled; and, if his identity had not been recognised, at
least, the nations united against him were no longer hunting a
chimerical creature, but a man who had vowed a deadly hatred against
them.  All the formidable past rose before me.  Instead of meeting
friends on board the approaching ship, we could only expect pitiless
enemies.  But the shot rattled about us.  Some of them struck the sea
and ricochetted, losing themselves in the distance.  But none touched
the Nautilus.  The vessel was not more than three miles from us.  In
spite of the serious cannonade, Captain Nemo did not appear on the
platform; but, if one of the conical projectiles had struck the shell
of the Nautilus, it would have been fatal.  The Canadian then said,
"Sir, we must do all we can to get out of this dilemma.  Let us signal
them.  They will then, perhaps, understand that we are honest folks."

Ned Land took his handkerchief to wave in the air; but he had scarcely
displayed it, when he was struck down by an iron hand, and fell, in
spite of his great strength, upon the deck.

"Fool!" exclaimed the Captain, "do you wish to be pierced by the spur
of the Nautilus before it is hurled at this vessel?"

Captain Nemo was terrible to hear; he was still more terrible to see.
His face was deadly pale, with a spasm at his heart.  For an instant it
must have ceased to beat.  His pupils were fearfully contracted.  He
did not speak, he roared, as, with his body thrown forward, he wrung
the Canadian's shoulders.  Then, leaving him, and turning to the ship
of war, whose shot was still raining around him, he exclaimed, with a
powerful voice, "Ah, ship of an accursed nation, you know who I am!  I
do not want your colours to know you by!  Look! and I will show you
mine!"

And on the fore part of the platform Captain Nemo unfurled a black
flag, similar to the one he had placed at the South Pole.  At that
moment a shot struck the shell of the Nautilus obliquely, without
piercing it; and, rebounding near the Captain, was lost in the sea.  He
shrugged his shoulders; and, addressing me, said shortly, "Go down, you
and your companions, go down!"

"Sir," I cried, "are you going to attack this vessel?"

"Sir, I am going to sink it."

"You will not do that?"

"I shall do it," he replied coldly.  "And I advise you not to judge me,
sir.  Fate has shown you what you ought not to have seen.  The attack
has begun; go down."

"What is this vessel?"

"You do not know?  Very well! so much the better!  Its nationality to
you, at least, will be a secret.  Go down!"

We could but obey.  About fifteen of the sailors surrounded the
