
"'Nothing,' she faltered. My head ached and I clasped it in my hand.

"A sudden change came over her. 'I am human--believe me!' she said,
with piteous eagerness. 'Indeed, I do not seem strange to those who
understand. You wonder, because you left me at midnight in Antwerp and
you wake to find me here. If, because I find myself reincarnated,
endowed with senses and capabilities which few at present possess--if
I am so made, why should it seem strange? It is all so natural to me.
If I appear to you--'

"'Appear?'

"'Yes--'

"'Wilhelmina!' I cried; 'can you vanish?'

"'Yes,' she murmured; 'does it seem to you unmaidenly?'

"'Great Heaven!' I groaned.

"'Don't!' she cried, with tears in her voice--'oh, please don't! Help
me to bear it! If you only knew how awful it is to be different from
other girls--how mortifying it is to me to be able to vanish--oh, how
I hate and detest it all!'

"'Don't cry,' I said, looking at her pityingly.

"'Oh, dear me!' she sobbed. 'You shudder at the sight of me because I
can vanish.'

"'I don't!' I cried.

"'Yes, you do! You abhor me--you shrink away! Oh, why did I ever see
you?--why did you ever come into my life?--what have I done in ages
past, that now, reborn, I suffer cruelly--cruelly?'

"'What do you mean?' I whispered. My voice trembled with happiness.

"'I?--nothing; but you think me a fabled monster.'

"'Wilhelmina--my sweet Wilhelmina,' I said, 'I don't think you a
fabled monster. I love you; see--see--I am at your feet; listen to me,
my darling--'

"She turned her blue eyes to mine. I saw tears sparkling on the curved
lashes.

"'Wilhelmina, I love you,' I said again.

"Slowly she raised her hands to my head and held it a moment, looking
at me strangely. Then her face grew nearer to my own, her glittering
hair fell over my shoulders, her lips rested on mine.

"In that long, sweet kiss the beating of her heart answered mine, and
I learned a thousand truths, wonderful, mysterious, splendid; but when
our lips fell apart, the memory of what I learned departed also.

"'It was so very simple and beautiful,' she sighed, 'and I--I never
saw it. But the Mahatmas knew--ah, they knew that my mission could
only be accomplished through love.'

"'And it is,' I whispered, 'for you shall teach me--me, your husband.'

"'And--and you will not be impatient? You will try to believe?'

"'I will believe what you tell me, my sweetheart.'

"'Even about--cats?'

"Before I could reply the farther window opened and a yellow
night-cap, followed by the professor, entered from somewhere without.
Wilhelmina sank back on her sofa, but the professor needed not to be
told, and we both knew he was already busily reading our thoughts.

"For a moment there was dead silence--long enough for the professor to
grasp the full significance of what had passed. Then he uttered a
single exclamation, 'Oh!'

"After a while, however, he looked at me for the first time that
evening, saying, 'Congratulate you, Mr. Kensett, I'm sure,' tied
several knots in the cord of his dressing-gown, lighted a cigar, and
paid no further attention to either of us. Some moments later he
opened the window again and disappeared. I looked across the aisle at
Wilhelmina.

"'You may come over beside me,' she said, shyly.




XXV


"It was nearly ten o'clock and our train was rapidly approaching
Paris. We passed village after village wrapped in mist, station after
station hung with twinkling red and blue and yellow lanterns, then
sped on again with the echo of the switch-bells ringing in our ears.

"When at length the train slowed up and stopped, I opened the window
and looked out upon a long, wet platform, shining under the electric
lights.

"A guard came running by, throwing open the doors of each compartment,
and crying, 'Paris next! Tickets, if you please.'

"I handed him my book of coupons, from which he tore several and
handed it back. Then he lifted his lantern and peered into the
compartment, saying, 'Is monsieur alone?'

"I turned to Wilhelmina.

"'He wants your ticket--give it to me.'

"'What's that?' demanded the guard.

"I looked anxiously at Wilhelmina.

"'If your father has the tickets--' I began, but was interrupted by
the guard, who snapped:

"'Monsieur will give himself the trouble to remember that I do not
understand English.'

"'Keep quiet!' I said, sharply, in French. 'I am not speaking to
you.'

"The guard stared stupidly at me, then, at my luggage, and finally,
entering the car, knelt down and peered under the seats. Presently he
got up, very red in the face, and went out slamming the door. He had
not paid the slightest attention to Wilhelmina, but I distinctly heard
him say, 'Only Englishmen and idiots talk to themselves!'

"'Wilhelmina,' I faltered, 'do you mean to say that that guard could
not see you?'

"She began to look so serious again that I merely added, 'Never mind,
I don't care whether you are invisible or not, dearest.'

"'I am not invisible to you,' she said; 'why should you care?'

"A great noise of bells and whistles drowned our voices, and, amid the
whirring of switch-bells, the hissing of steam, and the cries of
'Paris! All out!' our train glided into the station.

"It was the professor who opened the door of our carriage. There he
stood, calmly adjusting his yellow night-cap and drawing his
dressing-gown closer with the corded tassels.

"'Where have you been?' I asked.

"'On the engine.'

"'_In_ the engine, I suppose you mean,' I said.

"'No, I don't; I mean _on_ the engine--on the pilot. It was very
refreshing. Where are we going now?'

"'Do you know Paris?' asked Wilhelmina, turning to me.

"'Yes. I think your father had better take you to the Hotel Normandie
on the Rue de l'Echelle--'

"'But you must stay there, too!'

"'Of course--if you wish--'

"She laughed nervously.

"'Don't you see that my father and I could not take rooms--now? You
must engage three rooms for yourself.'

"'Why?' I asked, stupidly.

"'Oh, dear--why, because we are invisible.'

"I tried to repress a shudder. The professor gave Wilhelmina his arm,
and, as I studied his ensemble, I thanked Heaven that he was
invisible.

"At the gate of the station I hailed a four-seated cab, and we rattled
away through the stony streets, brilliant with gas-jets, and in a few
moments rolled smoothly across the Avenue de l'Opera, turned into the
Rue de l'Echelle, and stopped. A bright little page, all over buttons,
came out, took my luggage, and preceded us into the hallway.

"I, with Wilhelmina on my arm and the professor shuffling along beside
me, walked over to the desk.

"'Room?' said the clerk. 'We have a very desirable room on the second,
fronting the Rue St. Honore--'

"'But we--that is, I want three rooms--three separate rooms!' I said.

"The clerk scratched his chin. 'Monsieur is expecting friends?'

"'Say yes,' whispered Wilhelmina, with a suspicion of laughter in her
voice.

"'Yes,' I repeated, feebly.

"'Gentlemen, of course?' said the clerk, looking at me narrowly.

"'One lady.'

"'Married, of course?'

"'What's that to you?' I said, sharply. 'What do you mean by speaking
to us--'

"'Us!'

"'I mean to me,' I said, badly rattled; 'give me the rooms and let me
get to bed, will you?'

"'Monsieur will remember,' said the clerk, coldly, 'that this is an
old and respectable hotel.'

"'I know it,' I said, smothering my rage.

"The clerk eyed me suspiciously.

"'Front!' he called, with irritating deliberation. 'Show this
gentleman to apartment ten.'

"'How many rooms are there!' I demanded.

"'Three sleeping-rooms and a parlor.'

"'I will take it,' I said, with composure.

"'On probation,' muttered the clerk, insolently.

"Swallowing the insult, I followed the bell-boy up the stairs, keeping
between him and Wilhelmina, for I dreaded to see him walk through her
as if she were thin air. A trim maid rose to meet us and conducted us
through a hallway into a large apartment. She threw open all the
bedroom-doors and said, 'Will monsieur have the goodness to choose?'

"'Which will you take,' I began, turning to Wilhelmina.

"'I? Monsieur!' cried the startled maid.

"That completely upset me. 'Here,' I muttered, slipping some silver
into her hand; 'now, for the love of Heaven, run away!'

"When she had vanished with a doubtful 'Merci, monsieur!' I handed the
professor the keys and asked him to settle the thing with Wilhelmina.

"Wilhelmina took the corner room, the professor rambled into the next
one, and I said good-night and crept wearily into my own chamber. I
sat down and tried to think. A great feeling of fatigue weighted my
spirits.

"'I can think better with my clothes off,' I said, and slipped the
coat from my shoulders. How tired I was! 'I can think better in bed,'
I muttered, flinging my cravat on the dresser and tossing my
shirt-studs after it. I was certainly very tired. 'Now,' I yawned,
grasping the pillow and drawing it under my head--'now I can think a
bit.' But before my head fell on the pillow sleep closed my eyes.

"I began to dream at once. It seemed as though my eyes were wide open
and the professor was standing beside my bed.

"'Young man,' he said, 'you've won my daughter and you must pay the
piper!'

"'What piper?' I said.

"'The Pied Piper of Hamelin, I don't think,' replied the professor,
vulgarly, and before I could realize what he was doing he had drawn a
reed pipe from his dressing-gown and was playing a strangely annoying
air. Then an awful thing occurred. Cats began to troop into the room,
cats by the hundred--toms and tabbies, gray, yellow, Maltese, Persian,
Manx--all purring and all marching round and round, rubbing against
the furniture, the professor, and even against me. I struggled with
the nightmare.

"'Take them away!' I tried to gasp.

"'Nonsense!' he said; 'here is an old friend.'

"I saw the white tabby cat of the Hotel St. Antoine.

"'An old friend,' he repeated, and played a dismal melody on his
reed.

"I saw Wilhelmina enter the room, lift the white tabby in her arms,
and bring her to my side.

"'Shake hands with him,' she commanded.

"To my horror the tabby deliberately extended a paw and tapped me on
the knuckles.

"'Oh!' I cried, in agony; 'this is a horrible dream! Why, oh, why
can't I wake!'

"'Yes,' she said, dropping the cat, 'it is partly a dream, but some of
it is real. Remember what I say, my darling; you are to go to-morrow
morning and meet the twelve-o'clock train from Antwerp at the Gare du
Nord. Papa and I are coming to Paris on that train. Don't you know
that we are not really here now, you silly boy? Good-night, then. I
shall be very glad to see you.'

"I saw her glide from the room, followed by the professor, playing a
gay quick-step, to which the cats danced two and two.

"'Good-night, sir,' said each cat as it passed my bed; and I dreamed
no more.

"When I awoke, the room, the bed had vanished; I was in the street,
walking rapidly; the sun shone down on the broad, white pavements of
Paris, and the streams of busy life flowed past me on either side. How
swiftly I was walking! Where the devil was I going? Surely I had
business somewhere that needed immediate attention. I tried to
remember when I had awakened, but I could not. I wondered where I had
dressed myself; I had apparently taken great pains with my toilet, for
I was immaculate, monocle and all, even down to a long-stemmed rose
nestling in my button-hole. I knew Paris and recognized the streets
through which I was hurrying. Where could I be going? What was my
hurry? I glanced at my watch and found I had not a moment to lose.
Then, as the bells of the city rang out mid-day, I hastened into the
railroad station on the Rue Lafayette and walked out to the platform.
And as I looked down the glittering track, around the distant curve
shot a locomotive followed by a long line of cars. Nearer and nearer
it came, while the station-gongs sounded and the switch-bells began
ringing all along the track.

"'Antwerp express!' cried the sous-chef de gare, and as the train
slipped along the tiled platform I sprang upon the steps of a
first-class carriage and threw open the door.

"'How do you do, Mr. Kensett?' said Wilhelmina Wyeth, springing
lightly to the platform. 'Really it is very nice of you to come to the
train.' At the same moment a bald, mild-eyed gentleman emerged from
the depths of the same compartment, carrying a large, covered basket.

"'How are you, Kensett?' he said. 'Glad to see you again. Rather warm
in that compartment--no, I will not trust this basket to an
expressman; give Wilhelmina your arm and I'll follow. We go to the
