this in shape to use, you'll never get another line or mention
anywhere!"

"Oh, no?" For the first time in his professional life Banks gloated,
openly and avidly. "From now on, my friend, who is in the saddle? Who is
going to come to whom? Oh, _brother_!"

When the fuming newsmen had gone, Garlock said, "It'll leak, of course."

"Of course," Banks agreed. "'It is rumored ...' 'from a usually reliable
source ...' and so on. Nothing definite, but each one of them will want
to put out the first and biggest."

"That's what I figured. It'll have to break sometime and I thought
easing it out would be best ... but wait a minute...." he thought for
two solid minutes. "But we're going to need a lot of money, and we're
just about broke, aren't we?" This thought was addressed to Frank Macey,
the Galaxians' treasurer.

"Worse than broke--much worse."

"I could loan you a couple of credits, Frank," Belle said, brightly.
"But go ahead, Clee."

"People like to be sidewalk superintendents. Suppose they could watch
the construction of an outpost so far away that nobody ever dreamed of
ever getting there. Could you do anything with that, Jerry?"

"_Could I! Just!_" and Banks, went into a rhapsody.

"That's the first good idea any one of you crackpots has had for five
years," Macey said, suddenly. "But wouldn't transportation of material
and so on present problems?"

"No; just buying it," Garlock said, soberly. "Oh, rather, paying for
it."

"No trouble there...."

"What?" Belle exclaimed. "'No trouble,' it says here in fine print? How
the old skinflint has changed--instead of screaming his head off about
spending money he's actually _offering_ to. Frank, I'll loan you _three_
credits!"

"Hush, honey-chile, the men-folks are talking man-business. Look, Clee.
We'll use the _Pleiades_ at first, while we're building a regular
transport. A hundred passengers per trip, one thousand credits one
way...."

"Wow!" Belle put in. "Our ex-skinflint is now a bare-faced,
legally-protected robber."

"By no means, Belle," Evans said. "How much would that be per mile?"

"Say ten round trips per day. That would be twenty million a day gross
for a small ship not intended for passenger service. When we get ships
built ... and the extras...." The money-man went into a financial revel
of his own.

"Lots of extras," Banks agreed. "And oh, _brother_, what a
public-relations dream of heaven!"

"Maybe I'm dumb," Garlock broke in, "but just what are you going to use
for money to get started?"

"The minute we confirm any part of the story, the credit of the Galaxian
Society will jump from X-O to AA-A1."

"Oh. So Belle and I will have to lose our _Pleiades_ for a while. I
don't like that, but we do need the money ... but we can have her for
this coming week?"

"Of course."

"So maybe we'd better break the story now, instead of letting it leak."

"Can you, after what you just told them?"

"Sure I can." He set his mind and searched. "Bundy, this is Garlock...."

"So what am I supposed to do--burst into tears of joy?"

"Save it. I changed my mind. You can break it as fast and as hard as you
like. I'll play along."

        *           *           *

"Yeah? Why the switch? What's the angle?"

"Strictly commercial. Get it from Banks."

"And you'll--personally--go on my hour with it?"

"Yes. Also, we'll demonstrate--take you to any star-system in the
galaxy. You and all the rest of the newshawks who were here and any
fifty VIP's you want to invite. Tomorrow morning all right with you?"

"You, personally, in the _Pleiades_?" Bundy insisted.

"Better than that. The other two starships, too. You've got
them--particularly those four Primes--clearly in mind?"

"Not exactly, there was so much of it. Spread it on me now, huh?"
Garlock did so. "Thanks, pal, for the scoop. I'll crash it right now,
and follow up with Banks. 'Bye!"

"Think you can deliver on that, Clee?" Banks asked.

"Sure. Both Deggi and Alsyne will need a lot of extra money, fast.
They'll play along."

They did; and that three-starship tour--which visited twenty solar
systems instead of one--was the most sensational thing old Earth had
ever spawned.

Belle and Garlock did not spend that week end on Earth. "We go," they
said, as soon as the _Pleiades_ was empty of pressmen, and they took
James and Lola along. "If we _never_ see another such brawl as this is
going to be," Belle told Banks, who was basking in glory and entreating
them to stay on for the show, "it will be exactly twenty minutes too
soon."

Thus it came about that Earth's first four deep-spacemen were completely
out of reach when unexpected developments began.

        *           *           *

Alonzo P. Ferber was one of the VIP's on Bundy's personally-conducted
tour of the stars. As has been said, he was a very able executive. He
had an extremely keen profit-sense. This new thing smelled--simply
reeked--of money. SSE would _have_ to get in on it.

Ferber was not thin-skinned; where money was concerned it would never
even occur to him to cherish grudges or to retain animosities. Wherefore
SSE's purchasing department suggested to the Galaxian Society that
negotiations be opened concerning licenses, franchises, royalties, and
so on. These suggestions were politely but firmly brushed off. Then
emissaries were sent, of ever-increasing caliber and weight. Next,
Ferber himself tried the tri-di; and finally, he came in person.

Rebuffed, he made such legally-sound threats that Evans and Macey agreed
to a meeting; stating flatly, however, that no commitments could
possibly be made without the knowledge and approval of the Society's
president, Cleander Garlock. Thus, at the meeting, the Galaxians made
only two statements that were even approximately definite. One was that
Garlock would probably return to Earth during the afternoon or evening
of the following Friday; the other that they would take the matter up
with Garlock as soon as they could.

After that meeting Macey was unperturbed, but Evans was a deeply worried
man.

"You see," he explained, "the real crux was not even mentioned."

"No? What is it, then?"

"Operators, Primes, and the practically non-existent laws pertaining to
their ... what? Labor? Skill? Genius? For instance, could Garlock be
forced to do whatever it is that he does? On the other hand, if Ferber
offered Belle Bellamy five million credits a year to 'work' for SSE, is
there anything we could do about it?"

"Oh. I thought all there was to it was that you'd delay 'em for a year
or so and that'd be it."

"Far from it. To date I have listed fifty-eight points for which, as far
as we can learn, there are no precedents," and the lawyer called a
meeting of his staff.

For Belle and Garlock, the week went fast. On Friday afternoon, high
above Earth's Galaxian Field, Garlock said, more than half regretfully,
"No more fun. Back to the desk. Back to the salt-mines."

"I weep for you," Belle snickered. "Sob, sob. Shed him a tear, Lola."

"One tear coming up. Oh, woe; oh, woe...."

"Oh, whoa!" James snorted. "Why the sob-and-moan routine, Clee, from a
guy who's going to be monarch of all he surveys?"

"His conscience aches him," Belle explained. "This monarching business
is tough if you haven't thought about how to monarch, and he hasn't.
Have you, Clee?"

"Not a lick." Garlock smiled slightly. "I been busy."

"You better start to," she advised, darkly. "You aren't busy now and we
have an hour. We better confer--I'll make like a slave-driver."

They 'ported into his room and he set the blocks. His attitude changed
instantly. "Nice act, Belle. What was it all about?"

"That theory of yours. Your predictions are too uncannily accurate to be
guesswork, and the more times you dead-center the bullseye the worse
scared I get. I really want to know, Clee."

"Okay. It isn't complete--I need a lot more data--but I'll show you what
I have. It's fairly strong medicine and it comes in big chunks."

"It would have to--it covers the whole macrocosmic universe, doesn't
it?"

"Yes. I'll start with the striking fact that, on every out-galaxy planet
we visited, the human beings were _Homo sapiens_ to N decimal places.
Fertile with each other and, according to expert testimony, with us. All
planets had humanoid 'guardians,' the Arpalones and Arpales. Some, but
not all, had one or more non-human, more-or-less-intelligent races, such
as the Fumapties, the Lemarts, the Sencors, and so on. These other races
never seemed to fight each other, but both races of Guardians fought any
and all of them, on sight and to the death. What do those facts mean to
you?"

        *           *           *

"Nothing beyond face value. I've thought about them but I haven't been
able to come up with anything."

"I have." He unrolled a sheet of drafting paper covered with diagrams,
symbols, and equations. "But before I go into this stuff, consider the
human body. How many red cells are there in your blood stream?"

"Billions, I suppose."

"And there are billions of human beings on billions of planets; each
having red blood cells identical, as far as we know, with yours and
mine. Also white cells. Also, sometimes, various kinds of pathogenic
micro-organisms, such as staphs, streps, viruses, spiros, and so on.

"Okay. My thought is that the Lemarts, Ozobes, and the like are
analogous to disease-producing organisms. We saw the full range of
effects--from none at all up to death itself."

"But they--the Ozobes and so on--died, too."

        *           *           *

"How long do disease germs live in a human body after they've killed
it?"

"But that horrible Dilipic--the golop. They don't seem to fit."

"Try that on for size as cancer. Also, the Arpalones typed us before
they'd let us land on any planet. Why didn't we blast them out of the
way and land anyway?"

"Why, we didn't want to. It wasn't worth while."

"We couldn't. Psychic block. And if we had, we would have died.
Different blood-types don't mix."

"So you and I are merely two red cells in the bloodstream of a
super-dooper-galactic super-monster? Phooie!" she jeered. "That chestnut
was propounded a thousand years ago. Are you trying to take me for a
ride on _that_ old sawhorse?"

"That's the attitude I had at first. So now we're ready for the chart."
He pointed to a group of symbols. "We start with symbolic logic;
manipulating like so to get this." There was a long mathematical
dissertation; a mind-to-mind, rigorous, point-by-point proof.

"Q. E. D." Garlock concluded.

"I see your math, and if I believed half of it I'd be scared witless.
Those few pieces fit, but they're scattered around in vast areas of
blankness and you're jumping around like the Swiss miss leaping from Alp
to Alp. And how about our own galaxy, the most important piece of all?
It's different, and we're different, mentally. That wrecks your whole
theory."

"No. I told you I need a lot more data. Also, beyond a certain point the
analogy appears to get looser."

"_Appears_ to! It's as loose as a goose!"

"Think a minute. Is it actually loose, or are we getting up into
concepts that no human mind can grasp? That might be the case, you
know."

"Oh.... You're quite a salesman, Clee, but I'm still not buying."

"Our galaxy is a bit of specialized tissue--part of a ganglion, maybe.
Over here, see? I'll have to leave it dangling until we find some more
like it."

"I see. But anyway, you haven't a tenth's worth of real material on that
whole sheet. Feed everything you have there into a computer and it'd
just laugh at you."

"Sure it would. The great advantage of the human brain is its ability to
arrive at valid conclusions from incomplete data. For instance, what
would your computer do with the figures you shot at me the day we
started out? 'Thirty-nine, twenty-two, thirty-nine. Five seven. One
thirty-five.' Yet they're completely informative."

"To anyone interested in that kind of figures, yes."

"Which includes practically all adults. Then take the figure three point
one four one five nine. Compy would still be baffled; but, unlike the
first set, most people would be, too."

"Yes. Perhaps two out of ten would get your message."

"Now take something really new, like the original work on gravitation or
relativity. No possible computer would be of any use. That takes a
_brain_!"

"The brain of a Newton or an Einstein, yes." Belle thought for a minute,
then grinned at him impishly. "Now watch the brain of a Bellamy perform.
Get into high gear, brain.... I wish I knew something about biochemical
embryology; but I read somewhere that ova are sterile, so our galaxy is
an ovum. Therefore our super-galooper is a gal--which incontrovertible
fact accounts for and explains rigorously the long-known truth that
