
Mantelish and Trigger nodded again. More thoughtfully.

"Nevertheless--" Mantelish began suddenly. He checked himself.

"Well, you're right," the Commissioner said. "That stuff down there just
can't be turned loose, that's all! The thing's still only experimenting.
We don't know what it's going to wind up with. So I guess we'll be
trying the guns and the bomb finally, and then see what else we can
do.... Now look, we've got--what is it?--nine or ten hours left. The
first of the boys are pretty sure to come helling in around then. Or
maybe something's happened we don't know about, and they'll be here in
thirty minutes. We can't tell. But I'm in favor of knocking off now and
just grabbing a couple of hours' sleep. Then we'll get our brains
together again. Maybe by then somebody has come up with something like
an idea. What do you say?"

"Where," Mantelish said, "is the ship going to be while we're sleeping?"

"Subspace," said the Commissioner. He saw their expressions. "Don't
worry! I'll put her on a wide orbit and I'll stick out every alarm on
board. I'll also sleep in the control chair. But in case somebody gets
here early, we've got to be around to tell them about that space termite
trick."

       *       *       *       *       *

Trigger hadn't expected she would be able to sleep, not where they were.
But afterwards she couldn't even remember getting stretched out all the
way on the bunk.

She woke up less than an hour later, feeling very uncomfortable.
Repulsive had been talking to her.

She sat up and looked around the dark cabin with frightened eyes. After
a moment, she got out of the bunk and went up the passage toward the
lounge and the control section.

Holati Tate was lying slumped back in his chair, eyes closed, breathing
slowly and evenly. Trigger put out a hand to touch his shoulder and
then drew it back. She glanced up for a moment at the plasmoid station
in the screen, seeming to turn slowly as they went orbiting by it. She
noticed that one of the space flares they'd planted there had gone out,
or else it had been plucked away by a passing twister's touch. She
looked away quickly again, turned and went restlessly back through the
lounge, and up the passage, toward the cabins. She went by the two suits
of space armor at the lock without looking at them. She opened the door
to Mantelish's cabin and looked inside. The professor lay sprawled
across the bunk in his clothes, breathing slowly and regularly.

Trigger closed his door again. Lyad might be wakeful, she thought. She
crossed the passage and unlocked the door to the Ermetyne's cabin. The
lights in the cabin were on, but Lyad also lay there placidly asleep,
her face relaxed and young looking.

Trigger put her fist to her mouth and bit down hard on her knuckles for
a moment. She frowned intensely at nothing. Then she closed and locked
the cabin door, went back up the passage and into the control room. She
sat down before the communicator, glanced up once more at the plasmoid
station in the screen, got up restlessly and went over to the
Commissioner's chair. She stood there, looking down at him. The
Commissioner slept on.

Then Repulsive said it again.

"No!" Trigger whispered fiercely. "I won't! I can't! You can't make me
do it!"

There was a stillness then, In the stillness, it was made very clear
that nobody intended to make her do anything.

And then the stillness just waited.

She cried a little.

So this was it.

"All right," she said.

       *       *       *       *       *

The armor suit's triple light-beam blazed into the wide, low, black,
wet-looking mouth rushing toward her. It was much bigger than she had
thought when looking at it from the ship. Far behind her, the fire
needles of the single gun pit which her passage to the station had
aroused still slashed mindlessly about. They weren't geared to stop
suits, and they hadn't come anywhere near her. But the plasmoids looked
geared to stop suits.

They were swarming in clusters in the black mouth like maggots in a
rotting skull. Part of the swarms had spilled out over the lips of the
mouth, clinging, crawling, rippling swiftly about. Trigger shifted the
flight controls with the fingers of one hand, dropping a little, then
straightening again. She might be coming in too fast. But she had to get
past that mass at the opening.

Then the black mouth suddenly yawned wide before her. Her left hand
pressed the gun handle. Twin blasts stabbed ahead, blinding white,
struck the churning masses, blazed over them. They burned, scattered,
exploded, and rolled back, burning and exploding, in a double wave to
meet her.

"Too fast!" Repulsive said anxiously. "Much too fast!"

She knew it. But she couldn't have forced herself to do it slowly. The
armor suit slammed at a slant into a piled, writhing, burning hardness
of plasmoid bodies, bounced upward. She went over and over, yanking down
all the way on the flight controls. She closed her eyes for a moment.

When she opened them again, the suit hung poised a little above black
uneven flooring, turned back half toward the entrance mouth. A black
ceiling was less than twenty feet above her head.

The plasmoids were there. The suit's light beams played over the massed,
moving ranks: squat bodies and sinuous ones, immensities that scraped
the ceiling, stalked limbs and gaping nutcracker jaws, blurs of motion
her eyes couldn't step down to define into shapes. Some still blazed
with her guns' white fire. The closest were thirty feet away.

They stayed there. They didn't come any closer.

She swung the suit slowly away from the entrance. The ring was closed
all about her. But it wasn't tightening.

Repulsive had thought he could do it.

She asked in her mind, "Which way?"

She got a feeling of direction, turned the suit a little more and
started it gliding forward. The ranks ahead didn't give way, but they
went down. Those that could go down. Some weren't built for it. The suit
bumped up gently against one huge bulk, and a six-inch pale blue eye
looked at her for a moment as she went circling around it. "Eyes for
what?" somebody in the back of her mind wondered briefly. She glanced
into the suit's rear view screen and saw that the ones who had gone down
were getting up again, mixed with the ones who came crowding after her.
Thirty feet away!

Repulsive was doing it.

So far there weren't any guns. If they hit guns, that would be her job
and the suit's. The king plasmoid should be regretting by now that it
had wasted its experimental human material. Though it mightn't have been
really wasted; it might be incorporated in the stuff that came crowding
after her, and kept going down ahead.

Black ceiling, black floor seemed to stretch on endlessly. She kept the
suit moving slowly along. At last the beams picked up low walls ahead,
converging at the point toward which the suit was gliding. At the point
of convergence there seemed to be a narrow passage.

Plasmoid bodies were wedged into it.

       *       *       *       *       *

The suit pulled them out one by one, its steel grippers clamping down
upon things no softer than itself. But it had power to work with and
they didn't, at the moment. Behind the ones it pulled out there were
presently glimpses of the swiftly weaving motion of giant red
worm-shapes sealing up the passage. After a while, they stopped weaving
each time the suit returned and started again as it withdrew, dragging
out another plasmoid body.

Then the suit went gliding over a stilled tangle of red worm bodies. And
there was the sealed end of the passage.

The stuff was still soft. The guns blazed, bit into it, ate it away,
their brilliance washing back over the suit. The sealing gave way before
the suit did. They went through and came out into....

She didn't know what they had come out into. It was like a fog of
darkness, growing thicker as they went sliding forward. The light beams
seemed to be dimming. Then they quietly went out as if they'd switched
themselves off.

In blackness, she fingered the light controls and knew they weren't
switched off.

"Repulsive!" she cried in her mind.

Repulsive couldn't help with the blackness. She got the feeling of
direction. The blackness seemed to be soaking behind her eyes. She held
the speed throttle steady in fingers slippery with sweat, and that was
the only way she could tell they were still moving forward.

After a while, they bumped gently against something that had to be a
wall, it was so big, though at first she wasn't sure it was a wall. They
moved along it for a time, then came to the end of it and were moving in
the right direction again.

They seemed to be in a passage now, a rather narrow one. They touched
walls and ceiling from time to time. She thought they were moving
downward.

There was a picture in front of her. She realized suddenly that she had
been watching it for some time. But it wasn't until this moment that she
became really aware of it.

The beast was big, strong and angry. It bellowed and screamed, shaking
and covered with foam. She couldn't see it too clearly, but she had the
impression of mad, staring eyes and a terrible lust to crush and
destroy.

But something was holding it. Something held it quietly and firmly, for
all its plunging. It reared once more now, a gross, lumbering hugeness,
and came crashing down to its knees. Then it went over on its side.

The suit's beams flashed on. Trigger squeezed her eyes tight shut,
blinded by the light that flashed back from black walls all around. Then
her fingers remembered the right drill and dimmed the lights. She opened
her eyes again and stared for a long moment at the great gray
mummy-shape before one of the black walls.

"Repulsive?" she asked in her mind.

Repulsive didn't answer. The suit hung quietly in the huge black
chamber. She didn't remember having stopped it. She turned it now
slowly. There were eight or nine passages leading out of here, through
walls, ceiling, floor.

"Repulsive!" she cried plaintively.

Silence.

She glanced once more at the king plasmoid against the wall. It stayed
silent too. And it was as if the two silences cancelled each other out.

She remembered the last feeling of moving downward and lifted the suit
toward a passage that came in through the ceiling. She hung before it,
considering. Far up and back in its darkness, a bright light suddenly
blazed, vanished, and blazed again. Something was coming down the
passage, fast....

Her hand started for the gun handle. Then it remembered another drill
and flashed to the suit's communicator. A voice crashed in around her.

"Trigger, Trigger, Trigger!" it sobbed.

"Ape!" she screamed. "You aren't hurt?"




29


Mantelish's garden in the highland south of Ceyce had a certain renown
all over the Hub. It had been donated to the professor twenty-five years
ago by the populace of another Federation world. That populace had
negligently permitted a hideous pestilence of some kind to be imported,
and had been saved in the nick of time by the appropriate
pestilence-killer, hastily developed and forwarded to it by Mantelish.
In return, a lifetime ambition had been fulfilled for him--his own
private botanical garden plus an unlimited fund for stocking and upkeep.

To one side of the big garden house, where Mantelish stayed whenever he
found the time to go puttering around among his specimens, stood a giant
sequoia, generally reputed to be the oldest living thing in the Hub
outside of the Life Banks. It was certainly extremely old, even for a
sequoia. For the last decade there had been considerable talk about the
advisability of removing it before it collapsed and crushed the house
and everyone in it. But it was one of the professor's great favorites,
and so far he had vetoed the suggestion.

Elbows propped on the broad white balustrade of the porch before her
third-story bedroom, Trigger was studying the sequoia's crown with a
pair of field glasses when Pilch arrived. She laid the glasses down and
invited her guest to pull up a chair and help her admire the view.

They admired the view for a little in silence. "It certainly is a
beautiful place!" Pilch said then. She glanced down at Professor
Mantelish, a couple of hundred yards from the house, dressed in a pair
of tanned shorts and busily grubbing away with a spade around some new
sort of shrub he'd just planted, and smiled. "I took the first
opportunity I've had to come see you," she said.

Trigger looked at her and laughed. "I thought you might. You weren't
satisfied with the reports then?"

Pilch said, "Of course not! But it was obvious the emergency was over,
so I was whisked away to something else." She frowned slightly.
"Sometimes," she admitted, "the Service keeps me the least bit busier
than I'd prefer to be. So now it's been six months!"

"I would have come in for another interview if you'd called me," Trigger
said.

"I know," said Pilch. "But that would have made it official. I can keep
this visit off the record." Her eyes met Trigger's for a moment. "And I
have a feeling I will. Also, of course, I'm not pushing for any answers
you mightn't care to give."

"Just push away," Trigger said agreeably.

"Well, we got the Commissioner's call from his ship. A worried man he
was. So it seems now that we've had one of the Old Galactics around for
a while. When did you first find out about it?"

"On the morning after our interview. Right after I got up."

"How?"

Trigger laughed. "I watch my weight. When I noticed I'd turned three and
a half pounds heavier overnight than I'd averaged the past four years, I
knew all right!"

Pilch smiled faintly. "You weren't alarmed at all?"

"No. I guess I'd been prepared just enough by that time. But then, you
know, I forgot all about it again until Lyad and Flam opened that
purse--and he wasn't inside. Then I remembered, and after that I didn't
forget again."

"No. Of course." Pilch's slim fingers tapped the surface of the table
between them. She said then, paying Repulsive the highest compliment
Pilch could give, "It--he--was a good therapist!" After a moment, she
added. "I had a talk with Commissioner Tate an hour or so ago. He's
preparing to leave Maccadon again, I understand."

"That's right. He's been organizing that big exploration trip of
Mantelish's the past couple of months. He'll be in charge of it when
they take off."

"You're not going along?" Pilch asked.

Trigger shook her head. "Not this time. Ape and I--Captain Quillan and
I, that is--"

"I heard," Pilch said. She smiled. "You picked a good one on the second
try!"

"Quillan's all right," Trigger agreed. "If you watch him a little."

"Anyway," said Pilch, "Commissioner Tate seems to be just the least bit
worried about you still."

Trigger put a finger to her temple and made a small circling motion. "A
bit ta-ta?"

"Not exactly that, perhaps. But it seems," said Pilch, "that you've told
him a good deal about the history of the Old Galactics, including what
ended them as a race thirty-two thousand years ago."

Trigger's face clouded a little. "Yes," she said. She sat silent for a
moment. "Well, I got that from Repulsive somewhere along the line," she
said then. "It didn't really come clear until some time after we'd got
back. But it was there in those pictures in the interview."

"The giants stamping on the farm?"

Trigger nodded. "And the fast clock and the slow one. He was trying to
tell it then. The Jesters--that's the giants--they're fast and tough
like us. Apparently," Trigger said thoughtfully, "they're a good deal
like us in a lot of ways. But worse. Much worse! And the Old Galactics
were just slow. They thought slow; they moved slow--they did almost
everything slow. At full gallop, old Repulsive couldn't have kept up
with a healthy snail. Besides, they just liked to grow things and tinker
with things and so on. They didn't go in for fighting, and they never
got to be at all good at it. So they just got wiped out, practically."

"The Jesters were good at fighting, eh?"

Trigger nodded. "Very good. Like us, again."

"Where did they come from?"

"Repulsive thought they were outsiders. He wasn't sure. He and that
other O.G. were on the sidelines, running their protein collecting
station, when the Jesters arrived; and it was all over and they were
gone before he had learned much about it."
