
"Far from it," Crane replied. "Your nature and mine remain unchanged.
Temperament is a basic trait of heredity, and is neither affected nor
acquired by increase of knowledge. You acquired knowledge from Rovol,
Drasnik, and others, as did I--but you are still the flashing genius and
I am still your balance wheel. As for Fenachrone toothlessness: now that
you have considered it, what is your opinion?"

"Hard to say. They didn't know how to control the fifth order rays, or
they wouldn't have run. They've got real brains, though, and they'll
have something like seventy days to work on the problem. While it
doesn't stand to reason that they could find out much in seventy days,
still they may have had a set-up of instruments on their detectors that
would have enabled them to analyze our fields and thus compute the
structure of the secondary projector we used there. If so, it wouldn't
take them long to find out enough to give us plenty of grief--but I
don't really believe that they knew enough. I don't quite know what to
think. They may be easy and they may not; but, easy or hard to get,
we're loaded for bear and I'm plenty sure that we'll pull their corks."

"So am I, really, but we must consider every contingency. We know that
they had at least a detector of fifth-order rays...."

"And if they did have an analytical detector," Seaton interrupted,
"they'll probably slap a ray on us as soon as we stick our nose out of
the Galaxy!"

"They may--and even though I do not believe that there is any
probability of them actually doing it, it will be well to be armed
against the possibility."

"Right, old top--we'll do that little thing!"

       *       *       *       *       *

Uneventful days passed, and true to Seaton's calculations, the awful
acceleration with which they had started out could not be maintained. A
few days before the edge of the Galaxy was reached, it became necessary
to cut off the molecular drive, and to proceed with an acceleration
equal only to that of gravitation at the surface of the Earth. Tired of
weightlessness and its attendant discomforts to everyday life, the
travelers enjoyed the interlude immensely, but it was all too short--too
soon the stars thinned out ahead of "_Three's_" needle prow. As soon as
the way ahead of them was clear, Seaton again put on the maximum power
of his terrific bars and, held securely at the console, set up a long
and involved integral. Ready to transfer the blended and assembled
forces to a plunger, he stayed his hand, thought a moment, and turned to
Crane.

"Want some advice, Mart. I'd thought of setting up three or four courses
of five-ply screen on the board--a detector screen on the outside of
each course, next to it a repeller, then a full-coverage ether-ray
screen, then a zone of force, and a full-coverage fifth-order ray-screen
as a liner. Then, with them all set up on the board, but not out, throw
out a wide detector. That detector would react upon the board at impact
with anything hostile, and automatically throw out the courses it found
necessary."

"That sounds like ample protection, but I am not enough of a
ray-specialist to pass an opinion. Upon what point are you doubtful?"

"About leaving them on the board. The only trouble is that the reaction
isn't absolutely instantaneous. Even fifth-order rays would require a
millionth of a second or so to set the courses. Now if they were using
ether waves, that would be lots of time to block them, but if they
_should_ happen to have fifth-order stuff it'd get here the same time
our own detector-impulse would, and it's just barely conceivable that
they might give us a nasty jolt before the defenses went out. Nope, I'm
developing a cautious streak myself now, when I take time to do it.
We've got lots of uranium, and I'm going to put one course out."

"You cannot put everything out, can you?"

"Not quite, but pretty nearly, I'll leave a hole in the ether screen to
pass visible light--no, I won't either. You folks can see just as well,
even on the direct-vision wall plates, with light heterodyned on the
fifth, so we'll close all ether bands, absolutely. All we'll have to
leave open will be the one extremely narrow band upon which our
projector is operating, and I'll protect that with a detector screen.
Also, I'm going to send out all four courses, instead of only one--then
I'll _know_ we're all right."

"Suppose they find our one band, narrow as it is? Of course, if that
were shut off automatically by the detector, we'd be safe; but would we
not be out of control?"

"Not necessarily--I see you didn't get quite all this stuff over the
educator. The other projector worked that way, on one fixed band out of
the nine thousand odd possible. But this one is an ultra-projector, an
improvement invented at the last minute. Its carrier wave can be shifted
at will from one band of the fifth order to any other one; and I'll bet
a hat that's _one_ thing the Fenachrone haven't got! Any other
suggestions?... all right, let's get busy!"

A single light, quick-acting detector was sent out ahead of four courses
of five-ply screen, then Seaton's fingers again played over the keys,
fabricating a detector screen so tenuous that it would react to nothing
weaker than a copper power bar in full operation and with so nearly
absolute zero resistance that it could be driven at the full velocity of
his ultra-projector. Then, while Crane watched the instruments closely
and while Dorothy and Margaret watched the faces of their husbands with
only mild interest, Seaton drove home the plunger that sent that
prodigious and ever-widening fan ahead of them with a velocity
unthinkable millions of times that of light. For five minutes, until
that far-flung screen had gone as far as it could be thrown by the
utmost power of the uranium bar, the two men stared at the unresponsive
instruments, then Seaton shrugged his shoulders.

"I had a hunch," he remarked with a grin. "They didn't wait for us a
second. 'I don't care for some,' says they, 'I've already had any.'
They're running in a straight line, with full power on, and don't intend
to stop or slow down."

"How do you know?" asked Dorothy. "By the distance? How far away are
they?"

"I know, Red-Top, by what I didn't find out with that screen I just put
out. It didn't reach them, and it went so far that the distance is
absolutely meaningless, even expressed in parsecs. Well, a stern chase
is proverbially a long chase, and I guess this one isn't going to be any
exception."

       *       *       *       *       *

Every eight hours Seaton launched his all-embracing ultra-detector, but
day after day passed and the instruments remained motionless after each
cast of that gigantic net. For several days the Galaxy behind them had
been dwindling from a mass of stars down to a huge bright lens; down to
a small, faint lens; down to a faintly luminous patch. At the previous
cast of the detector it had still been visible as a barely-perceptible
point of light in the highest telescopic power of the visiplate. Now, as
Dorothy and Seaton, alone in the control room, stared into that
visiplate, everything was blank and black; sheer, indescribable
blackness; the utter and absolute absence of everything visible or
tangible.

"This is awful, Dick.... It's just too darn horrible. It simply scares
me pea-green!" she shuddered as she drew herself to him, and he swept
both his mighty arms around her in a soul-satisfying embrace.

"'Sall right, darling. That stuff out there'd scare anybody--I'm scared
purple myself. It isn't in any finite mind to understand anything
infinite or absolute. There's one redeeming feature, though,
cuddle-pup--we're together."

"You chirped it, lover!" Dorothy returned his caresses with all her
old-time fervor and enthusiasm. "I feel lots better now. If it gets to
you that way, too, I know it's perfectly normal--I was beginning to
think maybe I was yellow or something ... but maybe you're kidding me?"
she held him off at arm's length, looking deep into his eyes: then,
reassured, went back-into his arms. "Nope, you feel it, too," and her
glorious auburn head found its natural resting-place in the curve of his
mighty shoulder.

"Yellow!... You?" Seaton pressed his wife closer still! and laughed
aloud. "Maybe--but so is picric acid; so is nitroglycerin; and so is
pure gold."

"Flatterer!" Her low, entrancing chuckle bubbled over. "But you know I
just revel in it. I'll kiss you for that!"

"It _is_ awfully lonesome out here, without even a star to look at," she
went on, after a time, then laughed again. "If the Cranes and Shiro
weren't along, we'd be really 'alone at last,' wouldn't we?"

"I'll say we would! But that reminds me of something. According to my
figures, we might have been able to detect the Fenachrone on the last
test, but we didn't. Think I'll try 'em again before we turn in."

Once more he flung out that tenuous net of force, and as it reached the
extreme limit of its travel, the needle of the micro-ammeter flickered
slightly, barely moving off its zero mark.

"Whee! Whoopee!" he yelled. "Mart, we're on 'em!"

"Close?" demanded Crane, hurrying into the control room upon his beam.

"Anything but. Barely touched 'em--current something less than a
thousandth of a micro-ampere on a million to one step-up. However, it
proves our ideas are O. K."

The next day--_Skylark III_ was running on Eastern Standard Time, of the
Terrestrial United States of America--the two mathematicians covered
sheet after sheet of paper with computations and curves. After checking
and rechecking the figures, Seaton shut off the power, released the
molecular drive, and applied acceleration of twenty-nine point six oh
two feet per second; and five human beings breathed as one a profound
sigh of relief as an almost-normal force of gravitation was restored to
them.

"Why the let-up?" asked Dorothy. "They're an awful long ways off yet,
aren't they? Why not hurry up and catch them?"

"Because we're going infinitely faster than they are now. If we kept up
full acceleration, we'd pass them so fast that we couldn't fight them at
all. This way, we'll still be going a lot faster than they are when we
get close to them, but not enough faster to keep us from maneuvering
relatively to their vessel, if things should go that far. Guess I'll
take another reading on 'em."

"I do not believe that I should," Crane suggested, thoughtfully. "After
all, they may have perfected their instruments, and yet may not have
detected that extremely light touch of our ray last night. If so, why
put them on guard?"

"They're probably on guard, all right, without having to be put
there--but it's a sound idea, anyway. Along the same line I'll release
the fifth-order screens, with the fastest possible detector on guard.
We're just about within reach of a light copper-driven ray right now,
but it's a cinch they can't send anything heavy this far, and if they
think we're overconfident, so much the better."

"There," he continued, after a few minutes at the keyboard. "All set. If
they put a detector on us, I've got a force set to make a noise like a
New York City fire siren. If pressed, I'd reluctantly admit that in my
opinion we're carrying caution to a point ten thousand degrees below the
absolute zero of sanity. I'll bet my shirt that we don't hear a yip out
of them before we touch 'em off. Furthermore...."

       *       *       *       *       *

The rest of his sentence was lost in a crescendo bellow of sound.
Seaton, still at the controls, shut off the noise, studied his meters
carefully, and turned around to Crane with a grin.

"You win the shirt, Mart. I'll give it to you next Wednesday, when my
other one comes back from the laundry. It's a fifth-order detector ray,
coming in beautifully on band forty-seven fifty, right in the middle of
the order."

"Aren't you going to put a ray on 'em?" asked Dorothy in surprise.

"Nope--what's the use? I can read theirs as well as I could one of my
own. Maybe they know that too--if they don't we'll let 'em think we're
coming along, as innocent as Mary's little lamb, so I'll let their ray
stay on us. It's too thin to carry anything, and if they thicken it up
much I've got an axe set to chop it off." Seaton whistled a merry
lilting refrain as his fingers played over the stops and keys.

"Why, Dick, you seem actually pleased about it." Margaret was plainly
ill at ease.

"Sure am. I never did like to drown baby kittens, and it kinda goes
against the grain to stab a guy in the back, when he ain't even looking,
even if he is a Fenachrone. If they can fight back some I'll get mad
enough to blow 'em up happy."

"But suppose they fight back too hard?"

"They can't--the worst that can possibly happen is that we can't lick
them. They certainly can't lick us, because we can outrun 'em. If we
can't get 'em alone, we'll beat it back to Norlamin and bring up
re-enforcements."

"I am not so sure," Crane spoke slowly. "There is, I believe, a
theoretical possibility that sixth-order rays exist. Would an extension
of the methods of detection of fifth-order rays reveal them?"

"_Sixth_? Sweet spirits of niter! Nobody knows anything about them.
However, I've had one surprise already, so maybe your suggestion isn't
as crazy as it sounds. We've got three or four days yet before either
side can send anything except on the sixth, so I'll find out what I can
do."

He flew at the task, and for the next three days could hardly be torn
from it for rest; but

"O. K., Mart," he finally announced. "They exist, all right, and I can
detect 'em. Look here," and he pointed to a tiny receiver, upon which a
small lamp flared in brilliant scarlet light.

"Are they sending them?"

"No, fortunately. They're coming from our bar. See, it shines blue when
I put a grounded shield between it and the bar, and stays blue when I
attach it to their detector ray."

"Can you direct them?"

"Not a chance in the world. That means a lifetime, probably many
lifetimes, of research, unless somebody uses a fairly complete pattern
of them close enough to this detector so that I can analyze it. 'Sa good
deal like calculus in that respect. It took thousands of years to get it
in the first place, but it's easy when somebody that already knows it
shows you how it goes."

"The Fenachrone learned to direct fifth-order rays so quickly, then, by
an analysis of our fifth-order projector there?"

"Our secondary projector, yes. They must have had some neutronium in
stock, too--but it would have been funny if they hadn't, at
that--they've had intra-atomic power for ages."

Silent and grim, he seated himself at the console, and for an hour he
wove an intricate pattern of forces upon the inexhaustible supply of
keys afforded by the ultra-projector before he once touched a plunger.

"What are you doing? I followed you for a few hundred steps, but could
go no farther."

"Merely a little safety-first stuff. In case they should send any real
pattern of sixth-order rays this set-up will analyze it, record the
complete analysis, throw out a screen against every frequency of the
pattern, throw on the molecular drive, and pull us back toward the
galaxy at full acceleration, while switching the frequency of our
carrier wave a thousand times a second, to keep them from shooting a hot
one through our open band. It'll do it all in about a millionth of a
second, too--I want to get us all back alive if possible! Hm--m. They've
shut off their ray--they know we've tapped onto it. Well, war's declared
now--we'll see what we can see."

Transferring the assembled beam to a plunger, he sent out a secondary
projector toward the Fenachrone vessel, as fast as it could be driven,
close behind a widespread detector net. He soon found the enemy cruiser,
but so immense was the distance that it was impossible to hold the
projection anywhere in its neighborhood. They flashed beyond it and
through it and upon all sides of it, but the utmost delicacy of the
controls would not permit of holding even upon the immense bulk of the
vessel, to say nothing of holding upon such a relatively tiny object as
the power bar. As they flashed repeatedly through the warship, they saw
piecemeal and sketchily her formidable armament and the hundreds of men
of her crew, each man at battle station at the controls of some
frightful engine of destruction. Suddenly they were cut off as a screen
closed behind them--the Earth-men felt an instant of unreasoning terror
as it seemed that one-half of their peculiar dual personalities vanished
utterly. Seaton laughed.

"That was a funny sensation, wasn't it? It just means that they've
climbed a tree and pulled the tree up after them."

