"Never mind," Lou said. She smiled across the table at Malone.

Malone jerked a finger under his collar.

"What made you decide to come here?" Sir Lewis said. He had the pipe
lit now, and blew a cloud of fragrant smoke over the table.

Malone wondered where to start. "One of the clues," he said at last,
"was the efficiency of the FBI. It hit me the same way the efficiency
of the PRS had hit me, while I was looking at the batch of reports
that had been run off so rapidly."

"Ah," Sir Lewis said. "The dossiers."

"Dossiers?" Burris said.

Sir Lewis puffed at his pipe. "Sorry," he said. "I thought you had
been tuned in for that."

"I was busy," Burris said. "I can't tune into everything. After all,
I've only got one mind."

"And two hands," Malone said at random.

"At least," Lou said. Their eyes met in a glance of perfect
understanding.

"What the hell do hands have to do with it?" Burris said.

Sir Lewis shrugged. "Tune in and see," he said. "It's an old joke; but
you'll never really adjust to telepathy unless you practice."

"Damn it," Burris said, "I practice. I'm always practicing. This and
that and the other thing--after all, I am the director of the FBI.
There's a lot to be done."

Sir Lewis puffed at his pipe again. "At any rate," he said smoothly,
"Mr. Malone had requested some dossiers on us. On the PRS, myself, and
Luba. They arrived very quickly. The efficiency of that arrival, and
the efficiency he'd been noting about the FBI ever since he began work
on this case, finally struck home to him."

"Ah," Burris said. "You see? The FBI's a full-time job. It's got to be
efficient."

"Of course," Sir Lewis said soothingly.

"Anyhow," Malone said, "Sir Lewis is right. While every other branch
of the government was having its troubles with the Great Confusion,
the FBI was ticking along like a transistorized computer."

"A good start," Sir Lewis said.

"Darn good," Burris said. "Malone, I knew I could depend on you.
You're a good man."

Malone swallowed hard. "Well, anyway," he said after a pause, "when I
saw that I began to remember a few other things. Starting with a
couple of years ago, when we first found Her Majesty, remember?"

"I'll never forget it," Burris said fervently. "She knighted me.
Knight Commander of the Queen's Own FBI. What a moment."

"Thrilling," Malone said. "But you got to Yucca Flats for your
knighting awfully quickly, a little too fast even for a modern plane."

"It had to be done," Burris said. "Anyhow, I've never really liked
planes. Basically unsafe. People crash in them."

"But you wouldn't," Malone said. "You could always teleport yourself
out."

"Sure," Burris said. "But that's troublesome. Why bother? Anyhow, I'd
been to Yucca Flats before, so I could teleport there--a little way
down the road, where I could meet my car--without any trouble."

"Anyhow, that was one thing," Malone said. "And then there was Her
Majesty, when she pointed at that visiphone screen and accused you of
being the telepathic spy. Remember?"

"She wasn't pointing at me," Burris said. "She was pointing at the man
in the next room. How about you doing some remembering?"

"Sure she was," Malone said. "But it was just a little coincidence.
And I have a hunch she felt, subconsciously, that there was something
not quite right about you."

"Maybe," Burris conceded. "But that doesn't answer my question."

"It doesn't?" Malone said.

"Now look, Malone," Burris said. "None of this is proof. Not real
proof. Not the kind the FBI has trained you to look for."

"But--"

"What I want to know," Burris said, "is why you came here, to my home?
And in spite of everything you've said, that hasn't been tied down."

Malone frowned. After a second's thought he said, "Well...  All I know
is that it just seemed obvious. That's all."

"Indeed it is," Sir Lewis said. "But one of the things we'll have to
teach you, my boy, is how to distinguish between a deduction from
observed fact and a psionic intuition. You've been confusing them for
some years now."

"I have?" Malone said.

"Sure you have," Burris said. "And, what's more--"

"Well, he's no worse than you are, Andrew," Lou said.

Burris turned. "Me?" he said in a voice of withering scorn.

"Certainly," Lou said. "After all, you've never really become used to
mixtures of thought and speech. And, what's more, you've been using
telepathy so long that when you try to communicate with nothing but
words you only confuse yourself."

"And everybody else," Sir Lewis added.

"Hmpf," Burris said. "I'm busy all the time. I haven't got any extra
time for practice."

Malone nodded, comparatively unsurprised. He'd wondered for years how
a man so obviously unable to express himself clearly could run an
organization like the FBI as well as he did. Having psionic abilities
evidently led to drawbacks as well as advantages.

"Actually," he said, "my prescience made one mistake."

"Really?" Burris said, looking both worried and pleased about it.

"I expected the place to be full of people," Malone said. "I thought
the elite corps of the PRS would be here."

"Oh," Burris said, looking crestfallen.

"Why, that was no mistake," Sir Lewis said. "As a matter of fact, they
are all here. But they're quite busy at the moment; things are coning
to a head, you know, and they must work quite undisturbed."

"And this," Burris added, "is a good place for it. There are sixty
rooms in this house. Sixty."

"That's a lot of rooms," Malone said politely.

"A mansion," Burris said. "A positive mansion. And my family has lived
here ever since--"

"I'm sure Ken isn't very interested in your family just now," Lou
broke in.

"My family," Burris said with dignity, "is a very interesting family."

"I'm sure it must be," Lou said demurely. Sir Lewis choked with
laughter suddenly and began waving his pipe. After a minute, Malone
joined in.

"Damn it," Burris said. "Let's stick to one thing or the other. Did I
say that?"

"Twice," Malone said.

"Sixty rooms," Burris said. "All built by my family. And local
contractors, of course. That's enough to house sixty rooms full of
people. And that number of people is a large houseful, I should
think."

"It sounds like a lot," Malone said.

"It is a lot," Burris said. "All in my house. The house my family
built."

"And we're grateful for it," Sir Lewis said soothingly. "We truly
are."

"Good," Burris said.

"You must have had a large family," Lou said.

"A large family," Burris said, "and many guests. Many, many guests.
From all over. Including famous people. General Hood slept in this
house, and he slept very well indeed."

"As a matter of fact," Lou added, "he's still sleeping. They call it
being dead."

"That's not funny," Burris snapped.

"Sorry," Lou said. "It was meant to be."

"I--" Burris shut his mouth and glared.

Malone was far away, thinking of the sixty rooms full of people,
sitting quietly, their minds ranging into the distance, meshed
together in small units. It was a picture that frightened and
comforted him at the same time. He wasn't sure he liked it, but he
certainly didn't dislike it, either.

After all, he told himself confusedly, too many cooks save a stitch in
time.

He veered away from that sentence quickly. "Tell me," he said, "were
you receiving my broadcast on the way here?"

Burris and Sir Lewis nodded. Lou started to nod, too, but stopped and
looked surprised. "You mean you didn't know we were?" she said.

"How could I know?" Malone said. "After all, I was just tossing it out
and hoping that somebody was on the listening end."

"But of course somebody was," Lou said. "I was."

"Good," Malone said. "But I still don't see how I was supposed to know
that you--"

"I answered you, silly," Lou said. "I kept on answering you.
Remember?"

Malone blinked, focused and then said, very slowly, "That was my
imagination. Please tell me it was my imagination before I go nuts."

"Sorry," Lou said. "It wasn't."

"But that kind of thing," Malone said, "it takes a tremendous amount
of power, doesn't it?"

"Not when the receiver is a telepath," Lou said sweetly.

Malone nodded slowly. "That," he said, "is exactly what I'm afraid of.
Don't tell me--"

There was silence.

"Well?" Malone said.

"You said not to tell you," Lou said instantly.

"All right," Malone said. "I rescind the order. Am I a telepath, or am
I not?"

Lou's lips didn't move. But then, they didn't have to.

The message came, unbidden, into Malone's mind.

_Of course you are. That was the whole reason for Andrew's assigning
you to this type of case._

"My God," Malone said softly.

Sir Lewis laid down his pipe in a handy ashtray. "Of course," he said,
"you will find it difficult to pick up anyone but Lou, at first. The
rapport between you two is really quite strong."

"Very strong indeed," Lou murmured. Malone found himself beginning to
blush.

"It will be some time yet," Sir Lewis went on, "before you can really
call yourself a telepath, my boy."

"I'll bet it will," Malone said. "Before I can call myself a telepath
I'm going to have to get thoroughly used to the idea. And that's going
to take a long, long time indeed."

"You only think that," Sir Lewis said. "Actually, you're used to the
idea now. That was Andrew's big job."

"His big job?" Malone said. "Now, wait a minute--"

"You don't think I picked you for our first psionics case out of thin
air, do you?" Burris said. "Before anything else, you had to be forced
to accept the fact that such things as telepaths really existed."

"Oh, they do," Malone said. "They certainly do."

"There's me, for instance," Burris said. "But you had to be convinced.
So I ordered you to go out and find one."

"Like the Bluebird of Happiness," Malone said.

Burris frowned. "What's like the Bluebird of Happiness?" he said.

"You are," Malone said.

"I am not," Burris said indignantly. "Bluebirds eat worms. My God,
Malone."

"But the Bluebird," Malone said doggedly, "was right at home all the
time, while everyone searched for it far away. And I had to go far
away to find a telepath, when you were the one who ordered me to do
it."

"Right," Burris said. "So you went and found Her Majesty. And, when
you did find her, she forced acceptance on you simply by being Her
Majesty and proving to you, once and for all, that she could read
minds."

"Great," Malone said. "Of course, I could have got myself killed
taking these lessons--"

"We were watching you," Burris said. "If anything had happened, we'd
have been right on the spot."

"In time to bury the body," Malone said. "I think that's very
thoughtful of you."

"We would have arrived in time to save you," Burris said. "Don't
quibble. You're alive, aren't you?"

"Well," Malone said slowly, "if you're not sure, I don't know how I
can convince you."

"There," Burris said triumphantly. "You see?"

Malone sighed wearily. "Okay," he said. "So you sent me out to find a
telepath and to prove to me that there were such things. And I did.
And then what happened?"

"You had a year," Burris said, "to get used to the idea of somebody
reading your mind."

"Thanks," Malone said. "Of course, I didn't know it was you."

"It was Her Majesty too," Burris said. "Everybody."

"Good old Malone," Malone said. "The human peep-show."

"Now, that's what we mean," Sir Lewis broke in. "Subconsciously, you
disliked the idea of leaving your thoughts bare to anyone, even a
sweet little old lady. To some extent, you still do. But that will
pass."

"Goody," Malone said.

"The residue is simply not important," Sir Lewis went on. "Your
telepathic talents prove that."

"Oh, fine," Malone said. "Here I am reading minds and teleporting and
all sorts of things. What will the boys back at Headquarters think
now?"

"We'll get to that," Burris said. "But that first case did one more
thing for you. Because you didn't like the idea of leaving your mind
open, you began to develop a shield. That allowed you some sort of
mental privacy."

"And then," Malone said, "I met Mike Fueyo and his little gang of
teleporting juvenile delinquents."

"So that you could develop a psionic ability of your own," Burris
