oil-skin bag, or bathing-tub of tin, so managed, that the current of warm
air or steam should pass round and cover the whole of the body except the
head, which might not be exposed to it; and thus the absorbents of the
lungs might be induced to act more powerfully by sympathy with the skin,
and not by the stimulus of heat. See Uses of Warm Bath, Art. II. 2. 2. 1.

IV. 1. Venous absorption. Cellary, water-cresses, cabbages, and many other
vegetables of the Class Tetradynamia, do not increase the heat of the body
(except those whose acrimony approaches to corrosion), and hence they seem
alone, or principally, to act on the venous system; the extremities of
which we have shewn are absorbents of the red blood, after it has passed
the capillaries and glands.

2. In the sea-scurvy and petechial fever the veins do not perfectly perform
this office of absorption; and hence the vibices are occasioned by blood
stagnating at their extremities, or extravasated into the cellular
membrane. And this class of vegetables, stimulating the veins to perform
their natural absorption, without increasing the energy of the arterial
action, prevents future petechiae, and may assist the absorption of the
blood already stagnated, as soon as its chemical change renders it proper
for that operation.

3. The fluids, which are extravasated, and received into the cells of the
cellular membrane, seem to continue there for many days, so as to undergo
some chemical change, and are then taken up again by the mouths of the
cellular absorbents. But the new vessels produced in inflamed parts, as
they communicate with the veins, are probably absorbed again by the veins
along with the blood which they contain in their cavities. Hence the blood,
which is extravasated in bruises or vibices, is gradually many days in
disappearing; but after due evacuations the inflamed vessels on the white
of the eye, if any stimulant lotion is applied, totally disappear in a few
hours.

Amongst absorbents affecting the veins we should therefore add the external
application of stimulant materials; as of vinegar, which makes the lips
pale on touching them. Friction, and electricity.

4. Haemorrhages are of two kinds, either arterial, which are attended with
inflammation; or venous, from a deficiency in the absorbent power of this
set of vessels. In the former case the torpentia are efficacious; in the
latter steel, opium, alum, and all the tribe of sorbentia, are used with
success.

5. Sydenham recommends vegetables of the class Tetradynamia in rheumatic
pains left after the cure of intermittents. These pains are perhaps similar
to those of the sea-scurvy, and seem to arise from want of absorption in
the affected part, and hence are relieved by the same medicines.

V. 1. Intestinal absorption. Some astringent vegetables, as rhubarb, may be
given in such doses as to prove cathartic; and, after a part of it is
evacuated from the body, the remaining part augments the absorption of the
intestines; and acts, as if a similar dose had been exhibited after the
operation of any other purgative. Hence 4 grains of rhubarb strengthen the
bowels, 30 grains first empty them.

2. The earthy salts, as alum, increase the intestinal absorption, and hence
induce constipation in their usual dose; alum is said sometimes to cure
intermittents, perhaps when their seat is in the intestines, when other
remedies have failed. It is useful in the diabaetes by exciting the
absorbents of the bladder into their natural action; and combined with
resin is esteemed in the fluor albus, and in gleets. Lime-stone or chalk,
and probably gypsum, possess effects in some degree similar, and increase
the absorption of the intestines; and thus in certain doses restrain some
diarrhoeas, but in greater doses alum I suppose will act as a cathartic.
Five or ten grains produce constipation, 20 or 30 grains are either emetic
or cathartic.

3. Earth of alum, tobacco-pipe clay, marl, Armenian bole, lime, crab's eyes
or claws, and calcined hartshorn, or bone ashes, restrain fluxes; either
mechanically by supplying something like mucilage, or oil, or rollers to
abate the friction of the aliment over inflamed membranes; or by increasing
their absorption. The two last consist of calcareous earth united to
phosphoric acid, and the Armenian bole and marl may contain iron. By the
consent between the intestines and the skin 20 grains of Armenian bole
given at going into bed to hectic patients will frequently check their
tendency to sweat as well as to purge, and the more certainly if joined
with one grain of opium.

VI. 1. Absorption from the liver, stomach, and other viscera. When
inflammations of the liver are subdued to a certain degree by venesection,
with calomel and other gentle purges, so that the arterial energy becomes
weakened, four or eight grains of iron-filings, or of salt of steel, with
the Peruvian bark, have wonderful effect in curing the cough, and restoring
the liver to its usual size and sanity; which it seems to effect by
increasing the absorption of this viscus. The same I suppose happens in
respect to the tumours of other viscera, as of the spleen, or pancreas,
some of which are frequently enlarged in agues.

2. Haemorrhages from the nose, rectum, kidnies, uterus, and other parts,
are frequently attendant on diseased livers; the blood being impeded in the
vena portarum from the decreased power of absorption, and in consequence of
the increased size of this viscus. These haemorrhages after venesection,
and a mercurial cathartic, are most certainly restrained by steel alone, or
joined with an opiate; which increase the absorption, and diminish the size
of the liver.

Chalybeates may also restrain these haemorrhages by their promoting venous
absorption, though they exert their principal effect upon the liver. Hence
also opiates, and bitters, and vitriolic acid, are advantageously used
along with them. It must be added that some haemorrhages recur by periods
like the paroxysms of intermittent fevers, and are thence cured by the same
treatment.

3. The jaundice is frequently caused by the insipidity of the bile, which
does not stimulate the gall-bladder and bile-ducts into their due action;
hence it stagnates in the gall-bladder, and produces a kind of
crystallization, which is too large to pass into the intestines, blocks up
the bile-duct, and occasions a long and painful disease. A paralysis of the
bile duct produces a similar jaundice, but without pain.

4. Worms in sheep called flukes are owing to the dilute state of the bile;
hence they originate in the intestines, and thence migrate into the biliary
ducts, and corroding the liver produce ulcers, cough, and hectic fever,
called the rot. In human bodies it is probable the inert state of the bile
is one cause of the production of worms; which insipid state of the bile is
owing to deficient absorption of the thinner parts of it; hence the pale
and bloated complexion, and swelled upper lip, of wormy children, is owing
to the concomitant deficiency of absorption from the cellular membrane.
Salt of steel, or the rust of it, or filings of it, with bitters, increase
the acrimony of the bile by promoting the absorption of its aqueous part;
and hence destroy worms, as well as by their immediate action on the
intestines, or on the worms themselves. The cure is facilitated by
premising a purge with calomel. See Class I. 2. 3. 9.

5. The chlorosis is another disease owing to the deficient action of the
absorbents of the liver, and perhaps in some degree also to that of the
secretory vessels, or glands, which compose that viscus. Of this the want
of the catameniae, which is generally supposed to be a cause, is only a
symptom or consequence. In this complaint the bile is deficient perhaps in
quantity, but certainly in acrimony, the thinner parts not being absorbed
from it. Now as the bile is probably of great consequence in the process of
making the blood; it is on this account that the blood is so destitute of
red globules; which is evinced by the great paleness of these patients. As
this serous blood must exert less stimulus on the heart, and arteries, the
pulse in consequence becomes quick as well as weak, as explained in Sect.
XII. 1. 4.

The quickness of the pulse is frequently so great and permanent, that when
attended by an accidental cough, the disease may be mistaken for hectic
fever; but is cured by chalybeates, and bitters exhibited twice a day; with
half a grain of opium, and a grain of aloe every night; and the expected
catamenia appears in consequence of a restoration of the due quantity of
red blood. This and the two former articles approach to the disease termed
paralysis of the liver. Sect. XXX. 1. 4.

6. It seems paradoxical, that the same treatment with chalybeates, bitters,
and opiates, which produces menstruation in chlorotic patients, should
repress the too great or permanent menstruation, which occurs in weak
constitutions at the time of life when it should cease. This complaint is
an haemorrhage owing to the debility of the absorbent power of the veins,
and belongs to the paragraph on venous absorption above described, and is
thence curable by chalybeates, alum, bitters, and particularly by the
exhibition of a grain of opium every night with five grains of rhubarb.

7. Metallic salts supply us with very powerful remedies for promoting
absorption in dropsical cases; which frequently are caused by enlargement
of the liver. First, as they may be given in such quantities as to prove
strongly cathartic, of which more will be said in the article on
invertentia; and then, when their purgative quality ceases, like the effect
of rhubarb, their absorbent quality continues to act. The salts of mercury,
silver, copper, iron, zinc, antimony, have all been used in the dropsy;
either singly for the former purpose, or united with bitters for the
latter, and occasionally with moderate but repeated opiates.

8. From a quarter of a grain to half a grain of blue vitriol given every
four or six hours, is said to be very efficacious in obstinate
intermittents; which also frequently arise from an enlarged viscus, as the
liver or spleen, and are thence owing to the deficient absorption of the
lymphatics of that viscus. A quarter of a grain of white arsenic, as I was
informed by a surgeon of the army, cures a quartan ague with great
certainty, if it be given an hour before the expected fit. This dose he
said was for a robust man, perhaps one eighth of a grain might be given and
repeated with greater safety and equal efficacy.

Dr. Fowler has given many successful cases in his treatise on this subject.
He prepares it by boiling sixty-four grains of white arsenic in a Florence
flask along with as much pure vegetable fixed alcali in a pint of distilled
water, till it is dissolved, and then adding to it as much distilled water
as will make the whole exactly sixteen ounces. Hence there are four grains
of arsenic in every ounce of the solution. This should be put into a phial
of such a size of the edge of its aperture, that sixty drops may weigh one
dram, which will contain half a grain of arsenic. To children from two
years old to four he gives from two to five drops three or four times a
day. From five years old to seven, he directs seven or eight drops. From
eight years old to twelve, he directs from seven to ten drops. From
thirteen years old to eighteen he directs from ten to twelve drops. From
eighteen upwards, twelve drops. In so powerful a medicine it is always
prudent to begin with smaller doses, and gradually to increase them.

A saturated solution of arsenic in water is preferable I think to the above
operose preparation of it; as no error can happen in weighing the
ingredients, and it more certainly therefore possesses an uniform strength.
Put much more white arsenic reduced to powder into a given quantity of
distilled water, than can be dissolved in it. Boil it for half an hour in a
Florence flask, or in a tin sauce-pan; let it stand to subside, and filter
it through paper. My friend Mr. Greene, a surgeon at Brewood in
Staffordshire, assured me, that he had cured in one season agues without
number with this saturated solution; that he found ten drops from a
two-ounce phial given thrice a day was a full dose for a grown person, but
that he generally began with five.

9. The manner, in which arsenic acts in curing intermittent fevers, cannot
be by its general stimulus, because no intoxication or heat follows the use
of it; nor by its peculiar stimulus on any part of the secreting system,
since it is not in small doses succeeded by any increased evacuation, or
heat, and must therefore exert its power, like other articles of the
sorbentia, on the absorbent system. In what manner it destroys life so
suddenly is difficult to understand, as it does not intoxicate like many
vegetable poisons, nor produce fevers like contagious matter. When applied
externally it seems chemically to destroy the part like other caustics.
Does it chemically destroy the stomach, and life in consequence? or does it
destroy the action of the stomach by its great stimulus, and life in
consequence of the sympathy between the stomach and the heart? This last
appears to be the most probable mode of its operation.

The success of arsenic in the cure of intermittent fevers I suspect to
depend on its stimulating the stomach into stronger action, and thus, by
the association of this viscus with the heart and arteries, preventing the
torpor of any part of the sanguiferous system. I was led to this conclusion
from the following considerations.

First. The effects of arsenic given a long time internally in small doses,
or when used in larger quantities externally, seem to be similar to those
of other great stimuli, as of wine or alcohol. These are a bloated
countenance, swelled legs, hepatic tumours, and dropsy, and sometimes
eruptions on the skin. The former of these I have seen, where arsenic has
been used externally for curing the itch; and the latter appears on
evidence in the famous trial of Miss Blandy at Chelmsford, about forty
years ago.

Secondly. I saw an ague cured by arsenic in a child, who had in vain
previously taken a very large quantity of bark with great regularity. And
another case of a young officer, who had lived intemperately, and laboured
under an intermittent fever, and had taken the bark repeatedly in
considerable quantities, with a grain of opium at night, and though the
paroxysms had been thrice thus for a time prevented, they recurred in about
a week. On taking five drops of a saturated solution of arsenic thrice a
day the paroxysms ceased, and returned no more, and at the same time his
appetite became much improved.

Thirdly. A gentleman about 65 years of age had for about ten years been
subject to an intermittent pulse, and to frequent palpitations of his
heart. Lately the palpitations seemed to observe irregular periods, but the
intermission of every third or fourth pulsation was almost perpetual. On
giving him four drops of a saturated solution of arsenic from a two-ounce
phial about every four hours for one day, not only the palpitation did not
return, but the intermission ceased entirely, and did not return so long as
he took the medicine, which was three or four days.

Now as when the stomach has its action much weakened by an over-dose of
digitalis, the pulse is liable to intermit, this evinces a direct sympathy
between these parts of the system, and as I have repeatedly observed, that
when the pulse begins to intermit in elderly people, that an eructation
from the stomach, voluntarily produced, will prevent the threatened stop of
the heart; I am induced to think, that the torpid state of the stomach, at
the instant of the production of air occasioned by its weak action, caused
the intermission of the pulse. And that arsenic in this case, as well as in
the cases of agues above mentioned, produced its effects by stimulating the
stomach into more powerful action; and that the equality of the motions of
the heart was thus restored by increasing the excitement of the sensorial
power of association. See Sect. XXV. 17. Class IV. 2. 1. 18.

10. Where arsenic has been given as a poison, it may be discovered in the
contents of the stomach by the smell like garlic, when a few grains of it
are thrown on a red-hot iron. 2. If a few grains are placed between two
plates of copper, and subjected to a red heat, the copper becomes whitened.
3. Dissolve arsenic in water along with vegetable alcali, add to this a
solution of blue vitriol in water, and the mixture becomes of a fine green,
which gradually precipitates, as discovered by Bergman. 4. Where the
quantity is sufficient, some wheat may be steeped in a solution of it,
which given to sparrows or chickens will destroy them.

VII. Absorption of the matter from venereal ulcers. No ulcer can heal,
unless the absorption from it is as great as the deposition in it. The
preparations or oxydes of mercury in the cure of the venereal disease seem
to act by their increasing the absorption of the matter in the ulcers it
occasions; and that whether they are taken into the stomach, or applied on
the skin, or on the surface of the ulcers. And this in the same manner as
sugar of lead, or other metallic oxydes, promote so rapidly the healing of
other ulcers by their external application; and probably when taken
internally, as rust of iron given to children affected with scrophulous
ulcers contributes to heal them, and solutions of lead were once famous in
phthisis.

The matter deposited in large abscesses does not occasion hectic fever,
till it has become oxygenated by being exposed to the open air, or to the
air through a moist membrane; the same seems to happen to other kinds of
matter, which produce fever, or which occasion spreading ulcers, and are
thence termed contagious. See Class II. 1. 3. II. 1. 5. II. 1. 6. 6. This
may perhaps occur from these matters not being generally absorbed, till
they become oxygenated; and that it is the stimulus of the acid thus formed
by their union with oxygen, which occasions their absorption into the
circulation, and the fever, which they then produce. For though collections
of matter, and milk, and mucus, are sometimes suddenly absorbed during the
action of emetics or in sea-sickness, they are probably eliminated from the
body without entering the circulation; that is, they are taken up by the
increased action of one lymphatic branch, and evacuated by the inverted
action of some other lymphatic branch, and thus carried off by stool or
urine.

But as the matter in large abscesses is in general not absorbed, till it
becomes by some means exposed to air, there is reason to conclude, that the
stimulus of this new combination of the matter with oxygen occasions its
absorption; and that hence the absorption of matter in ulcers of all kinds,
is still more powerfully effected by the external application or internal
use of metallic oxydes; which are also acids consisting of the metal united
with oxygen; and lastly, because venereal ulcers, and those of itch, and
tinea, will not heal without some stimulant application; that is, the
secretion of matter in them continues to be greater, than the absorption of
it; and the ulcers at the same time continue to enlarge, by the contagion
affecting the edges of them; that is, by the stimulus of the oxygenated
matter stimulating the capillary vessels in its vicinity into actions
similar to those of the ulcer, which produces it.

This effect of the oxydes of mercury occurs, whether salivation attends its
use or not. Salivation is much forwarded by external warmth, when mercury
is given to promote this secretion; but as the cure of venereal complaints
depends on its absorbent quality, the act of salivation is not necessary or
useful. A quarter of a grain of good corrosive sublimate twice a day will
seldom fail of curing the most confirmed pox; and will as seldom salivate,
if the patient be kept cool. A quarter of a grain thrice a day I believe to
be infallible, if it be good sublimate.

Mercury alone when swallowed does not act beyond the intestines, its active
preparations are the salts formed by its union with the various acids, as
mentioned in the catalogue. Its union with the vegetable acid, when
triturated with manna, is said to compose Keyser's Pill. Triturated with
gum arabic it is much recommended by Plenk; and triturated with sugar and a
little essential oil, as directed in a former Edinburgh Dispensatory, it
probably forms some of the syrups sold as nostrums.

United with sulphur it seldom enters the circulation, as when cinnabar, or
Aethiop's mineral, are taken inwardly. But united with fat and rubbed on
the skin, it is readily absorbed. I know not whether it can be united to
charcoal, nor whether it has been given internally when united with animal
fat.

VIII. 1. Absorptions in general are increased by inanition; hence the use
of evacuations in the cure of ulcers. Dr. Jurin absorbed in one night,
after a day's abstinence and exercise, eighteen ounces from the atmosphere
in his chamber; and every one must have observed, how soon his sheets
became dry, after having been moistened by sweat, if he throws off part of
the bed-clothes to cool himself; which is owing to the increased cutaneous
absorption after the evacuation by previous sweat.

2. Now as opium is an universal stimulant, as explained in the article on
Incitantia, it must stimulate into increased action both the secretory
system, and the absorbent one; but after repeated evacuation by
venesection, and cathartics, the absorbent system is already inclined to
act more powerfully; as the blood-vessels being less distended, there is
less resistance to the progress of the absorbed fluids into them. Hence
after evacuations opium promotes absorption, if given in small doses, much
more than it promotes secretion; and is thus eminently of service at the
end of inflammations, as in pleurisy, or peripneumony, in the dose of four
or five drops of the tincture, given before the access of the evening
paroxysm; which I have seen succeed even when the risus sardonicus has
existed. Some convulsions may originate in the want of the absorption of
some acrid secretion, which occasions pain; hence these diseases are so
much more certainly relieved by opium after venesection or other
evacuations.

IX. 1. Absorption is increased by the calces or solutions of mercury, lead,
zinc, copper, iron, externally applied; and by arsenic, and by sulphur, and
by the application of bitter vegetables in fine powder. Thus an ointment
consisting of mercury and hog's fat rubbed on the skin cures venereal
ulcers; and many kinds of herpetic eruptions are removed by an ointment
consisting of 60 grains of white precipitate of mercury and an ounce of
hog's fat.

2. The tumours about the necks of young people are often produced by the
absorption of a saline or acrid material, which has been deposited from
eruptions behind the ears, owing to deficient absorption in the surface of
the ulcer, but which on running down on the skin below becomes absorbed,
and swells the lymphatic glands of the neck; as the variolous matter, when
inserted into the arm, swells the gland of the axilla. Sometimes the
perspirative matter produced behind the ears becomes putrid from the want
of daily washing them, and may also cause by its absorption the tumours of
the lymphatics of the neck. In the former case the application of a cerate
of lapis calaminaris, or of cerussa applied in dry powder, or of rags
dipped in a solution of sugar of lead, increases the absorption in the
ulcers, and prevents the effusion of the saline part of the secreted
material. The latter is to be prevented by cleanliness.

After the eruptions or ulcers are healed a solution of corrosive sublimate
of one grain to an ounce of water applied for some weeks behind the ear,
and amongst the roots of the hair on one side of the head, where the mouths
of the lymphatics of the neck open themselves, frequently removes these
tumours.

3. Linen rags moistened with a solution of half an ounce of sugar of lead
to a pint of water applied on the erysipelas on anasarcous legs, which have
a tendency to mortification, is more efficacious than other applications.
White vitriol six grains dissolved in one ounce of rose-water removes
inflammations of the eyes after evacuation more certainly than solutions of
lead. Blue vitriol two or three grains dissolved in an ounce of water cures
ulcers in the mouth, and other mucous membranes, and a solution of arsenic
externally applied cures the itch, but requires great caution in the use of
it. See Class II. 1. 5. 6.

4. Bitter vegetables, as the Peruvian bark, quilted between two shirts, or
strewed in their beds, will cure the ague in children sometimes. Iron in
solution, and some bitter extract, as in the form of ink, will cure one
kind of herpes called the ringworm. And I have seen seven parts of bark in
fine powder mixed with one part of ceruss, or white lead, in fine powder,
applied dry to scrophulous ulcers, and renewed daily, with great advantage.

5. To these should be added electric sparks and shocks, which promote the
absorption of the vessels in inflamed eyes of scrophulous children; and
disperse, or bring to suppuration, scrophulous tumours about the neck. For
this last purpose smart shocks should be passed through the tumours only,
by inclosing them between two brass knobs communicating with the external
and internal coating of a charged phial. See Art. II. 2. 2. 2.

X. 1. Bandages increase absorption, if they are made to fit nicely on the
part; for which purpose it is necessary to spread some moderately adhesive
plaster on the bandage, and to cut it into tails, or into shreds two inches
wide; the ends are to be wrapped over each other; and it must be applied
when the part is least tumid, as in the morning before the patient rises,
if on the lower extremities. The emplastrum de minio made to cover the
whole of a swelled leg in this manner, whether the swelling is hard, which
is usually termed scorbutic; or more easily compressible, as in anasarca,
reduces the limb in two or three days to its natural size; for this purpose
I have sometimes used carpenter's glue, mixed with one twentieth part of
honey to prevent its becoming too hard, instead of a resinous plaster; but
the minium plaster of the shops is in general to be preferred. Nothing so
much facilitates the cure of ulcers in the legs, as covering the whole limb
from the toes to the knee with such a plaster-bandage; which increases the
power of absorption in the surface of the sore.

2. The lymph is carried along the absorbent vessels, which are replete with
valves, by the intermitted pressure of the arteries in their neighbourhood.
Now if the external skin of the limb be lax, it rises, and gives way to the
pressure of the arteries at every pulsation; and thence the lymphatic
vessels are subject to the pressure of but half the arterial force. But
when the external skin is tightened by the surrounding bandage, and thence
is not elevated by the arterial diastole, the whole of this power is
exerted in compressing the lymphatic vessels, and carrying on the lymph
already absorbed; and thence the absorbent power is so amazingly increased
by bandage nicely applied. Pains are sometimes left in the fleshy parts of
the thighs or arms, after the inflammation is gone, in the acute
rheumatism, or after the patient is too weak for further evacuation; in
this case after internal absorbent medicines, as the bark, and opiates,
have been used in vain, I have successfully applied a plaster-bandage, as
above described, so as to compress the pained part.

XI. 1. We shall conclude by observing, that the sorbentia strengthen the
whole habit by preventing the escape of the fluid part of the secretions
out of the body, before it has given up as much nourishment, as it is
capable; as the liquid part of the secretion of urine, sweat, saliva, and
of all other secretions, which are poured into receptacles. Hence they have
been said to brace the body, and been called tonics, which are mechanical
terms not applicable to the living bodies of animals; as explained in Sect.
XXXII. 3. 2.

2. A continued use of bitter medicines for years together, as of Portland's
powder, or of the bark, is supposed to induce apoplexy, or other fatal
diseases. Two cases of this kind have fallen under my observation; the
patients were both rather intemperate in respect to the use of fermented
liquors, and one of them had been previously subject to the gout. As I
believe the gout generally originates from a torpor of the liver, which
instead of being succeeded by an inflammation of it, is succeeded by an
inflammation of some of the joints; or by a pimpled face, which is another
mode, by which the disease of the liver is terminated. I conceive, that the
daily use of bitter medicine had in these patients prevented the removal of
a gouty inflammation from the liver to the membranes of the joints of the
extremities, or to the skin of the face, by preventing the necessary torpor
of these parts previous to the inflammation of them; in the same manner as
cold fits of fever are prevented by the same medicines; and, as I believe,
the returns of the gout have sometimes for two or three years been
prevented by them.

One of these patients died of the apoplexy in a few hours; and the other of
an inflammation of the liver, which I believe was called the gout, and in
consequence was not treated by venesection, and other evacuations. From
hence it appears, that the daily use of hop in our malt liquor must add to
the noxious quality of the spirit in it, when taken to excess, and
contribute to the production of apoplexy, or inflammation of the liver.

III. CATALOGUE OF THE SORBENTIA.

I. Sorbentia affecting the skin.

    1. Acid of vitriol, of sea-salt, lemons, sloes, prunus spinosa, crabs,
    pyrus, quince, pyrus cydonia, opium.

    2. Externally calx of zinc, of lead, of mercury.

II. Sorbentia affecting the mucous membranes.

    1. Juice of sloes, crabs, Peruvian bark, cinchona, opium.

    2. Externally blue vitriol.

III. Sorbentia affecting the cellular membrane.

    1. Peruvian bark, wormwoods, artemisia maritima, artemisia absynthium,
    worm-seed, artemisia santonicum, chamomile, anthemis nobilis, tansey
    tanacetum, bogbean, menyanthes trifoliata, centaury, gentiana
    centaurium, gentian, gentiana lutea, artichoke-leaves, cynara scolymus,
    hop, humulus lupulus.

    2. Orange-peel, cinnamon, nutmeg, mace.

    3. Vomits, squill, digitalis, tobacco.

    4. Bath of warm air, of steam.

IV. Sorbentia affecting the veins.

    1. Water-cress, sisymbrium nasturtium aquaticum, mustard, sinapis,
    scurvy-grass cochlearia hortensis, horse-radish cochlearia armoracia,
    cuckoo-flower, cardamine, dog's-grass, dandelion, leontodon taraxacon,
    cellery apium, cabbage brassica.

    2. Chalybeates, bitters, and opium, after sufficient evacuation.

    3. Externally vinegar, friction, electricity.

V. Sorbentia affecting the intestines.

    1. Rhubarb, rheum palmatum, oak-galls, gallae quercinae, tormentil,
    tormentilla erecta, cinquefoil potentilla, red-roses, uva ursi,
    simarouba.

    2. Logwood, haematoxylum campechianum, succus acaciae, dragon's blood,
    terra japonica, mimosa catechu.

    3. Alum, earth of alum, Armenian bole, chalk, creta, crab's claws,
    chelae cancrorum, white clay, cimolia, calcined hartshorn, cornu cervi
    calcinatum, bone-ashes.

VI. Sorbentia affecting the liver, stomach, and other viscera. Rust of
iron, filings of iron, salt of steel, sal martis, blue vitriol, white
vitriol, calomel, emetic tartar, sugar of lead, white arsenic.

VII. Sorbentia affecting venereal ulcers. Mercury dissolved or corroded by
the following acids:

    1. Dissolved in vitriolic acid, called turpeth mineral, or hydrargyrus
    vitriolatus.

    2. Dissolved in nitrous acid, called hydrargyrus nitratus ruber.

    3. Dissolved in muriatic acid, mercurius corrosivus sublimatus, or
    hydrargyrus muriatus.

    4. Corroded by muriatic acid. Calomel.

    5. Precipitated from muriatic acid, mercurius precipitatus albus, calx
    hydrargyri alba.

    6. Corroded by carbonic acid? The black powder on crude mercury.

    7. Calcined, or united with oxygen.

    8. United with animal fat, mercurial ointment.

    9. United with sulphur. Cinnabar.

    10. Partially united with sulphur. Aethiops mineral.

    11. Divided by calcareous earth. Hydrargyrus cum creta.

    12. Divided by vegetable mucilage, by sugar, by balsams.

VIII. Sorbentia affecting the whole system. Evacuations by venesection and
catharsis, and then by the exhibition of opium.

IX. Sorbentia externally applied.

    1. Solutions of mercury, lead, zinc, copper, iron, arsenic; or metallic
    calces applied in dry powder, as cerussa, lapis calaminaris.

    2. Bitter vegetables in decoctions and in dry powders, applied
    externally, as Peruvian bark, oak bark, leaves of wormwood, of tansey,
    camomile flowers or leaves.

    3. Electric sparks, or shocks.

X. Bandage spread with emplastrum e minio, or with carpenter's glue mixed
with one twentieth part of honey.

XI. Portland's powder its continued use pernicious, and of hops in beer.

       *       *       *       *       *

ART. V.

INVERTENTIA.

I. Those things, which invert the natural order of the successive
irritative motions, are termed invertentia.

1. Emetics invert the motions of the stomach, duodenum, and oesophagus.

2. Violent cathartics invert the motions of the lacteals, and intestinal
lymphatics.

3. Violent errhines invert the nasal lymphatics, and those of the frontal
and maxillary sinuses. And medicines producing nausea, invert the motions
of the lymphatics about the sauces.

4. Medicines producing much pale urine, as a certain quantity of alcohol,
invert the motions of the urinary absorbents; if the dose of alcohol is
greater, it inverts the stomach, producing the drunken sickness.

5. Medicines producing cold sweats, palpitation of the heart, globus
hystericus; as violent evacuations, some poisons, fear, anxiety, act by
inverting the natural order of the vascular motions.

II. OBSERVATIONS ON THE INVERTENTIA.

I. 1. The action of vomiting seems originally to have been occasioned by
disagreeable sensation from the distention or acrimony of the aliment; in
the same manner as when any disgustful material is taken into the mouth, as
a bitter drug, and is rejected by the retrograde motions of the tongue and
lips; as explained in Class IV. 1. 1. 2. and mentioned in Sect. XXXV. 1. 3.
Or the disagreeable sensation may thus excite the power of volition, which
may also contribute to the retrograde actions of the stomach and
oesophagus, as when cows bring up the contents of their first stomach to
re-masticate it. To either of these is to be attributed the action of mild
emetics, which soon cease to operate, and leave the stomach stronger, or
more irritable, after their operation; owing to the accumulation of the
sensorial power of irritation during its torpid or inverted action. Such
appears to be the operation of ipecacuanha, or of antimonium tartarizatum,
in small doses.

2. But there is reason to believe, that the stronger emetics, as digitalis,
first stimulate the absorbent vessels of the stomach into greater action;
and that the inverted motions of these absorbents next occur, pouring the
lymph, lately taken up, or obtained from other lymphatic branches, into the
stomach: the quantity of which in some diseases, as in the cholera morbus,
is inconceivable. This inverted motion, first of the absorbents of the
stomach, and afterwards of the stomach itself, seems to originate from the
exhaustion or debility, which succeeds the unnatural degree of action, into
which they had been previously stimulated. An unusual defect of stimulus,
as of food without spice or wine in the stomachs of those, who have been
much accustomed to spice or wine, will induce sickness or vomiting; in this
case the defective energy of the stomach is owing to defect of accustomed
stimulus; while the action of vomiting from digitalis is owing to a
deficiency of sensorial power, which is previously exhausted by the excess
of its stimulus. See Sect. XXXV. 1. 3. and Class IV. 1. 1. 2.

For first, no increase of heat arises from this action of vomiting; which
always occurs, when the secerning system is stimulated into action.
Secondly, the motions of the absorbent vessels are as liable to inversion
as the stomach itself; which last, with the oesophagus, may be considered
as the absorbent mouth and belly of that great gland, the intestinal canal.
Thirdly, the class of sorbentia, as bitters and metallic salts, given in
large doses, become invertentia, and vomit, or purge. And lastly, the
sickness and vomiting induced by large potations of wine, or opium, does
not occur till next day in some people, in none till some time after their
ingurgitation. And tincture of digitalis in the dose of 30 or 60 drops,
though applied in solution, is a considerable time before it produces its
effect; though vomiting is instantaneously induced by a nauseous idea, or a
nauseous taste in the mouth. At the same time there seem to be some
materials, which can immediately stimulate the stomach into such powerful
action, as to be immediately succeeded by paralysis of it, and consequent
continued fever, or immediate death; and this without exciting sensation,
that is, without our perceiving it. Of these are the contagious matter of
some fevers swallowed with the saliva, and probably a few grains of arsenic
taken in solution. See Suppl. I. 8. 8. Art. IV. 2. 6. 9.

3. Some branches of the lymphatic system become inverted by their sympathy
with other branches, which are only stimulated into too violent absorption.
Thus when the stomach and duodenum are much stimulated by alcohol, by
nitre, or by worms, in some persons the urinary lymphatics have their
motion inverted, and pour that material into the bladder, which is absorbed
from the intestines. Hence the drunken diabetes is produced; and hence
chyle is seen in the urine in worm cases.

When on the contrary some branches of the absorbent systems have their
motions inverted in consequence of the previous exhaustion of their
sensorial power by any violent stimulus, other branches of it have their
absorbent power greatly increased. Hence continued vomiting, or violent
cathartics, produce great absorption from the cellular membrane in cases of
dropsy; and the fluids thus absorbed are poured into the stomach and
intestines by the inverted motions of the lacteals and lymphatics. See
Sect. XXIX. 4. and 5.

4. The quantity of the dose of an emetic is not of so great consequence as
of other medicines, as the greatest part of it is rejected with the first
effort. All emetics are said to act with greater certainty when given in a
morning, if an opiate had been given the night before. For the sensorial
power of irritation of the stomach had thus been in some measure previously
exhausted by the stimulus of the opium, which thus facilitates the action
of the emetic; and which, when the dose of opium has been large, is
frequently followed on the next day by spontaneous sickness and vomitings,
as after violent intoxication.

Ipecacuanha is the most certain in its effect from five grains to thirty;
white vitriol is the most expeditious in its effect, from twenty grains to
thirty dissolved in warm water; but emetic tartar, antimonium tartarizatum,
from one grain to four to sane people, and from thence to twenty to insane
patients, will answer most of the useful purposes of emetics; but nothing
equals the digitalis purpurea for the purpose of absorbing water from the
cellular membrane in the anasarca pulmonum, or hydrops pectoris. See Art.
IV. 2. 3. 7.

II. Violent cathartics. 1. Where violent cathartics are required, as in
dropsies, the squill in dried powder made into small pills of a grain, or a
grain and a half, one to be given every hour till they operate briskly, is
very efficacious; or half a grain of emetic tartar dissolved in an ounce of
peppermint-water, and given every hour, till it operates. Scammony, and
other strong purges, are liable to produce hypercatharsis, if they are not
nicely prepared, and accurately weighed, and are thence dangerous in common
practice. Gamboge is uncertain in its effects, it has otherwise the good
property of being tasteless; and on that account some preparation of it
might be useful for children, by which its dose could be ascertained, and
its effects rendered more uniform.

2. In inflammations of the bowels with constipation calomel, given in the
dose from ten to twenty grains after due venesection, is most efficacious;
and if made into very small pills is not liable to be rejected by vomiting,
which generally attends those cases. When this fails, a grain of aloes
every hour will find its way, if the bowel is not destroyed; and sometimes,
I believe, if it be, when the mortification is not extensive. If the
vomiting continues after the pain ceases, and especially if the bowels
become tumid with air, which sounds on being struck with the finger, these
patients seldom recover. Opiates given along with the cathartics I believe
to be frequently injurious in inflammation of the bowels, though they may
thus be given with advantage in the saturnine colic; the pain and
constipation in which disease are owing to torpor or inactivity, and not to
too great action.

III. Violent errhines and sialagogues. 1. Turpeth mineral in the quantity
of one grain mixed with ten grains of sugar answers every purpose to be
expected from errhines. Their operation is by inverting the motions of the
lymphatics of the membrane, which lines the nostrils, and the caverns of
the forehead and cheeks; and may thence possibly be of service in the
hydrocephalus internus.

Some other violent errhines, as the powder of white hellebore, or Cayan
pepper, diluted with some less acrid powder, are said to cure some cold or
nervous head-achs; which may be effected by inflaming the nostrils, and
thus introducing the sensorial power of sensation, as well as increasing
that of irritation; and thus to produce violent action of the membranes of
the nostrils, and of the frontal and maxillary sinuses, which may by
association excite into action the torpid membranes, which occasion the
head-ach.

2. A copious salivation without any increase of heat often attends hysteric
diseases, and fevers with debility, owing to an inversion of the lymphatics
of the mouth, see Class I. 1. 2. 6. The same occurs in the nausea, which
precedes vomiting; and is also excitable by disagreeable tastes, as by
squills, or by nauseous smells, or by nauseous ideas. These are very
similar to the occasional discharge of a thin fluid from the nostrils of
some people, which recurs at certain periods, and differs from defective
absorption.

IV. Violent diuretics. 1. If nitre be given from a dram to half an ounce in
a morning at repeated draughts, the patient becomes sickish, and much pale
water is thrown into the bladder by the inverted action of the urinary
lymphatics. Hence the absorption in ulcers is increased and the cure
forwarded, as observed by Dr. Rowley.

2. Cantharides taken inwardly so stimulate the neck of the bladder as to
increase the discharge of mucus, which appears in the urine; but I once saw
a large dose taken by mistake, not less than half an ounce or an ounce of
the tincture, by which I suppose the urinary lymphatics were thrown into
violent inverted motions, for the patient drank repeated draughts of
subtepid water to the quantity of a gallon or two in a few hours; and
during the greatest part of that time he was not I believe two entire
minutes together without making water. A little blood was seen in his water
the next day, and a soreness continued a day longer without any other
inconvenience.

3. The decoction of foxglove should also be mentioned here, as great
effusions of urine frequently follow its exhibition. See Art. IV. 2. 3. 7.
And an infusion or tincture of tobacco as recommended by Dr. Fowler of
York.

4. Alcohol, and opium, if taken so as to induce slight intoxication, and
the body be kept cool, and much diluting liquids taken along with them,
have similar effect in producing for a time a greater flow of urine, as
most intemperate drinkers must occasionally have observed. This
circumstance seems to have introduced the use of gin, and other vinous
spirits as a diuretic, unfortunately in the gravel, amongst ignorant
people; which disease is generally produced by fermented or spirituous
liquors, and always increased by them.

5. Fear and anxiety are well known to produce a great frequency of making
water. A person, who believed he had made a bad purchase concerning an
estate, told me, that he made five or six pints of water during a sleepless
night, which succeeded his bargain; and it is usual, where young men are
waiting in an anti-room to be examined for college preferment, to see the
chamber-pot often wanted.

V. Cold sweats about the head, neck, and arms, frequently attend those,
whose lungs are oppressed, as in some dropsies and asthma. A cold sweat is
also frequently the harbinger of death. These are from the inverted motions
of the cutaneous lymphatic branches of those parts.

III. CATALOGUE OF INVERTENTIA.

I. Emetics, ipecacuanha, emetic tartar, antimonium tartarisatum, squill,
scilla maritima, carduus benedictus, cnicus acarna, chamoemile, anthemis
nobilis, white vitriol, vitriolum zinci, foxglove, digitalis purpurea,
clysters of tobacco.

II. Violent cathartics, emetic tartar, squill, buckthorn, rhamnus
catharticus, scammonium, convolvulus scammonia, gamboge, elaterium,
colocynth, cucumis colocynthis, veratrum.

III. Violent errhines and sialagogues, Turpeth mineral, hydrargyrus
vitriolatus, asarum europaeum, euphorbium, capsicum, veratrum, nauseous
smells, nauseous ideas.

IV. Violent diuretics, nitre, squill, seneka, cantharides, alcohol,
foxglove, tobacco, anxiety.

V. Cold sudorifics, poisons, fear, approaching death.

       *       *       *       *       *

ART. VI.

REVERTENTIA.

I. Those things, which restore the natural order of the inverted irritative
motions, are termed Revertentia.

1. As musk, castor, asafoetida, valerian, essential oils.

2. Externally the vapour of burnt feathers, of volatile salts, or oils,
blisters, sinapisms.

These reclaim the inverted motions without increasing the heat of the body
above its natural state, if given in their proper doses, as in the globus
hystericus, and palpitation of the heart.

The incitantia revert these morbid motions more certainly, as opium and
alcohol; and restore the natural heat more; but if they induce any degree
of intoxication, they are succeeded by debility, when their stimulus
ceases.

II. OBSERVATIONS ON THE REVERTENTIA.

I. The hysteric disease is attended with inverted motions feebly exerted of
the oesophagus, intestinal canal and lymphatics of the bladder. Hence the
borborigmi, or rumbling of the bowels, owing to their fluid contents
descending as the air beneath ascends. The globus hystericus consists in
the retrograde motion of the oesophagus, and the great flow of urine from
that of the lymphatics spread on the neck of the bladder; and a copious
salivation sometimes happens to these patients from the inversion of the
lymphatics of the mouth; and palpitation of the heart owing to weak or
incipient inversion of its motions; and syncope, when this occurs in its
greatest degree.

