of macerated flesh.

But in that instant Jim had fought free again. He caught Lucille and
dragged her back toward the Atom Smasher.

       *       *       *       *       *

Tode had already broken from his captors and was working at it
frantically.

"Hold on!" screeched old Parrish. "Hold on!"

They had a moment's leeway. The Drilgoes had driven the priests back
into the hooks. With awful shrieks the fanatics were yielding up their
lives, in the place of their selected victims.

But more Drilgoes were pouring up the stairs. A moment's leeway, and
no more, before the savage band would impale the four upon their
stone-pointed spears. There was not the slightest chance that they
would be able to make their identity known.

"For God's sake hurry!" Jim yelled in Tode's ear.

The wheels were revolving, a stream of violet light, leaping out of
the central tunnel, cast a lurid illumination upon the scene.

But it was too late. A score of Drilgoes, with leveled spears, were
rushing on the four.

"Hold tight!" screeched Parrish. He thrust his arm into his breast,
and pulled out a little lever. Jim recognized it and remembered. It
was the instrument of universal death--the uranium release of untold
forces of cataclysmic depredation.

"Take that!" screamed the old man, inserting the lever into the secret
groove in the Atom Smasher and jerking it in the direction of the
priests.


CHAPTER XI

_Tode's Last Gamble_

A roar that seemed to rend the heavens followed. Roar upon roar, as
the infinite momentum of the disintegrating uranium struck obstacle
after obstacle. The Drilgoes vanished, the amphitheatre melted away,
walls and roof.... Overhead were the moon and stars.

And proud Atlantis was sinking into the depths of the sea.... Not as a
ship sinks, but piecemeal, her walls and towers crumbling and toppling
as a child's sand-castle crumbles under the attack of the lapping
waves. Down they crashed, carrying their freight of black, clinging,
human ants, while from the sea's depths a wave, a mile high, rose and
battered the fragments to destruction. From the crater of the volcano
a huge wave of fire fanned forward, and where fire and water met a
cloud of steam rose up.

A boiling chaos in which water and earth and fire were blended, spread
over land and sea. And then suddenly it was ended. Where the last
island of the Atlantean continent had been, only the ocean was to be
seen, placid beneath the stars.

The Atom Smasher was vibrating at tremendous speed. Jim, with one arm
round Lucille, faced Tode at the instrument board. Near by sat
Parrish, watching him too.

"That took a whole year," said Tode. "That pretty little scene of
destruction we've just witnessed. The good old Atom Smasher has been
doing some lively stunts, or we'd have been engulfed too. We're not
likely to see anything so pretty in history again, unless we go to
watch the destruction of Herculaneum and Pompeii by lava from
Vesuvius. But that would be quite tame in comparison with this."

       *       *       *       *       *

Tode's jeering tone grated on Jim's ears immeasurably.

"I don't think any of us are craving any more experiments, Tode," he
said, trying to keep his voice steady. "Suppose you take us back to
Peconic Bay. We'll dump the Atom Smasher into the pond, and try to
forget that we've had anything except a bad nightmare."

"Don't trust him, Jim," whispered Lucille.

Tode heard. "Thank you," he answered, scowling. "But seriously, Dent,
we can't go back with nothing to show for all our trouble. Those fools
tried to betray me, and then the Eye went out. Perhaps I have you to
thank for that performance? However, the sensible thing is to let
bygones be bygones. But we must make a little excursion. How about
picking up a little treasure from the hoards of Solomon or Genghis
Khan? A few pounds of precious stones would make a world of difference
in our social status when we reach Long Island."

Jim felt a cold fury permeating him. Tode saw his grim look and
laughed malignantly.

"Well, Dent, I'm ready to be frank with you," he said. "The game's
still in my hands. I want Lucille. I'm willing to take you and Parrish
back, provided you agree she shall be mine. I'll have to trust you,
but I shall have means of evening up if you play crooked."

"Why don't you ask my girl herself?" piped old Parrish.

"He needn't trouble. He knows the answer!" cried Lucille scornfully.

"There's your answer," said Jim. "Now, what's the alternative?"

"The alternative is, that I have already set the dial to eternity,
Dent," grinned Tode. "Eternity in the fifth dimension. Didn't know I'd
worked that out, did you? A pleasant little surprise. No, don't try to
move. My hand is on the lever. I have only to press it, and we're
there."

       *       *       *       *       *

Jim stood stock still in horror. Tode's voice rang true. He believed
Tode had the power he claimed.

"Yes, the fifth dimension, and eternity," said Tode, "where time and
space reel into functionlessness. Don't ask me what it's like there.
I've never been there. But my impression of it is that it's a fairly
good representation of the place popularly known as hell.

"You fool, Dent," Tode's voice rang out with vicious, snarling
emphasis, "I gave you your chance to come in with me. Together we'd
have made ourselves masters of Atlantis and brought back her plunder
to our Twentieth Century world. You refused because of a girl--a girl,
Dent, who loved me long before you came upon the scene."

"That's a lie, Lucius," answered Lucille steadily. "And you can do
your worst. There's one factor you haven't reckoned in your
calculations, and that's called God."

"The dark blur on the spectral lines," old Parrish muttered.

Tode laughed uproariously. "Come, make your choice, Dent," he mocked.
"It's merely to press this lever. You'll find yourself--well, we won't
go into that. I don't know where you'll find yourself. You'll
disappear. So shall I. But I'm desperate. I must have Lucille.
Choose!" His voice rang out in maniac tones. "Choose, all of you!"

"Lucille has answered you," Jim retorted.

"And how about you, old man?" called Tode to Parrish.

Parrish leased forward, making a swift movement with his hand. "Go to
your own hell, you dev--"

A blinding light, a frantic oscillation of the Atom Smasher, a sense
of death, awful and indescribable--and stark unconsciousness rushed
over Jim. His last thought was that Lucille's arms were about him, and
that he was holding her. Nothing mattered, therefore, even though they
two were plunged into that awful nothingness of the fifth dimension,
where neither space nor time recognizably exists. Love could exist
there.


CHAPTER XII

_Solid Earth_

"He's coming around, Lucille. Thank God for it!"

Jim opened his eyes. For a few moments he looked about him without
understanding. Then the outlines of a room etched themselves against
the clouded background. And in the foreground Lucille's face. The girl
was bending over Jim, one hand soothing his forehead.

"Where am I?" Jim muttered.

"Back on earth, Jim, the good old earth, never again to leave it,"
answered Lucille, with a catch in her voice. With an effort she
composed herself. "You mustn't talk," she said.

"But what place is this?"

"It's Andy Lumm's house. Now rest, and I'll explain everything later."

But the first explanation came from Andy Lumm. "Well, Mr. Dent, my
wife and me sure were glad to be on the spot when you and Miss Parrish
got bogged on the edge of the Black Pool," he said. "Mean, treacherous
place it is. Thar was a cow got mired thar last month, up to her
belly. If us hadn't found her, and dragged her out with ropes, she'd
have gone clear under. Granpop Dawes says thar's underground springs
around the edge, and that it runs straight down to hell, though that
seems sorter far-fetched to me.

"Yessir, and if I hadn't heard WNYC giving Miss Parrish on the list of
missing persons, and as having been seen near here, I reckon I'd never
have found you. Made me and my wife uneasy, that did. 'Andy,' she
says. 'I got an inkling you oughter go to the Vanishing Place and see
if she ain't there.' And there I found you two, mired to the waist,
and Mr. Parrish dancing around and fretting, and his clothes burned to
cinders.

"It sure seems strange to me, to think Mr. Parrish got away safe after
that explosion five years ago, and of his wandering around with loss
of memory, till you found him, and brung him back here to restore it,
but thar's strange things in the world--yes, sir, thar surely is!"

In the happiness of being back on Earth once more, Jim was content to
let further explanations go. The return of Parrish had been duly
chronicled in the newspapers, and had provoked a mild interest, but
fortunately the public mind was so occupied at the moment with the
trial of a night club hostess that, after the first rush of newspaper
men, the three were left alone.

       *       *       *       *       *

Day after day, in the brilliant autumn weather, Jim and Lucille would
roam the tinted woods, recharging themselves with the feel of Earth,
until the memory of those dread experiences grew dim.

"Well, Jim, I reckon I'd better tell you and get it over," said old
Parrish one morning--Parrish, quite his old, jaunty self again. "Tode
had got the dials pointing to the fifth dimension--eternity, he called
it, though actually I believe it's nothing more than annihilation, a
grand smash. Well, he pressed that lever. But something had gone
wrong.

"You remember how poor Cain seemed to take great interest in the Atom
Smasher. There's no way of telling what had been going on in that
brain of his, but it looks to me like he'd known that that lever meant
death. It was sealed up in wax, and Tode had got it free on the way
out of Atlantis.

"Well--this it what I made out from examining the thing afterward.
Cain had been monkeying with the lever. He'd pried loose one of the
wires that hooked to the transformer, and short-circuited it, not
knowing, of course, just what he was doing. The result was that when
Tode pressed that lever, instead of blowing the whole contraption to
pieces, he got a couple of billion volts of electricity through his
body, combined with a larger amperage than has ever been imagined. It
burned him to a few grease spots. He simply--vanished. You don't
remember what you did at the moment, boy?"

"I don't seem to remember anything," said Jim.

"Well, your response was an automatic one. You jumped him. Luckily
you were too late, for Tode vanished like that!" Old Parrish snapped
his fingers. "But you must have got into the field of magnetic
force--any way, you were almost electrocuted. Lucille and I thought
you were dead for hours.

"We laid you down and set a course for home. I used those dial
numberings Tode had given me. He'd said they wouldn't work, but he'd
lied. They did work. They brought us back to the Vanishing Place.

"We carried you out, and then I saw your eyelid twitch. We worked over
you with artificial respiration till it looked as if there was a
chance for you. Then I shut off the power and let the waters rush in
over the Atom Smasher, and swam ashore. And there it lies at the
bottom of the pool, and may it lie there till the Judgment Day."

       *       *       *       *       *

"Tode was a genius," said Jim, "but he never understood that character
counts for more than genius."

"Let's think no more about him," said Lucille. She had come up to
them, and the two looked at each other and smiled. Love is
self-centred; other things it forgets very quickly.

"To-morrow we go back to New York," said Jim. "You think you're able
to face the world and take up life again?"

"I think so, Jim," said Lucille.

"You're not remembering him after all?"

"No, Jim. I was thinking of poor Cain. He died for me."

"But that was twelve thousand years ago, my dear, and to-day's
to-day," said Jim. "And to-morrow a new life begins for you and me."

He drew her closer to him. No, he would never quite forget, but that
was twelve thousand years ago ... and to-morrow was his wedding day.




_A Meeting Place for Readers of_ Astounding Stories

[Illustration: _The Readers' Corner_]


_An "Astounding" Career_

Dear Editor:

     A friend introduced me to your new magazine, and it is
     wonderful. The best story in the magazine, or, rather, the
     one I liked best, outside of the serial, which I didn't
     read, is "The Cave of Horror," by Capt. S. P. Meek. Next
     comes Ray Cummings' story of the Fourth Dimension, "Phantoms
     of Reality." Other good ones are, "Tanks," "Invisible
     Death," and "Compensation."

     I did not like "The Stolen Mind." It seemed to me to be a
     mixture of superstition and magic. A fairy tale. I am glad
     that you are publishing this magazine, and I think that it
     is worth double its present price. You have my good wishes
     to the magazine for a long and astounding career. My way of
     reading a serial is to save copies and to read the story at
     one time. I do not like to wait a month for a story to end
     or continue.

     Your next issue seems to sound quite interesting. "The Spawn
     of the Stars," a very interesting and, I am sure, a fit name
     for the story. "Creatures of the Light" is a very vague
     name--you don't know what to expect. The others will prove
     to be as interesting as any that I have named. I prefer
     interplanetary stories the most, as any amount of science
     can be injected in them.--Nathan Greenfield, 318 East 78th
     St., New York, N. Y.


_Prefers Long Stories_

Dear Editor:

     I got your first issue of Astonishing Stories, and, although
     I like the stories, I do not like the way you have it bound.
     (This is supposed to be criticism, so don't take it to
     heart.) The pages are uneven and hard to turn. But the
     stories in the first copy were good. And you'll have a swell
     magazine if you have stories by Harl Vincent and Ray
     Cummings. The aforesaid men are two of the best in the
     science fiction field. Another thing: don't have any short
     stories. If you have about 3 or 4 l-o-n-g stories, I'd like
     it better. I hope your magazine enjoys much success!--Linus
     Hogenmiller, 502 N. Washington Street, Farmington, Mo.


_Another Who Likes Interplanetary Stories_

Dear Editor:

     I have read the first issue of Astounding Stories with much
     pleasure, and if the first issue is any indication of what
     is to follow I will continue to be a reader.

     You inquire as to the kind of stories that your readers
     think should be published. I think you will find the most
     popular brand to be interplanetary stories and stories along
     the line of the "Beetle Horde." Best wishes for success in
     your new endeavor--F. C. Cowherd, Room 333, L. & N.
     Railroad, Louisville, Ky.


_Attention, Joiners!_

Dear Editor:

     I have just finished one of the stories in your magazine,
     and could not resist the temptation to write and tell you
     how much I enjoyed it. The stories are great and are just
     the thing to give one rest and recreation. At the same time
     they fire imagination and are not trashy love stories.

     The main purpose of the letter is to revive an old idea and
     see if I can put it through. I propose to organize a
     correspondence society for readers interested in science. We
     would use Astounding Stories as our official medium. Each
