
The two bombs exploded almost simultaneously. The ground shook, and
all over the cavern masses of stone came crashing to the floor. Bits
of rock hummed and shrieked over our heads. And--yes! There was a
draft of cooler, purer air on our faces. The bombs had done their
work.

"One more effort and we're outside, men," I called. "The passage is
open, and there are only a few of the enemy before us. Ready?"

"Ready!" went up the hoarse shout.

"Then, forward!"

It was easy to give the command, but hard to execute it. We were
pressed so hard that only the men on the outside of the group could
use their weapons. And our captors were making a terrible, desperate
effort to hold us.

Two more of our men were literally torn to pieces before my eyes, but
I had the satisfaction of ripping holes in the heads of the creatures
whose tentacles had done the beastly work. And in the meantime we were
working our way slowly but surely to the entrance.

       *       *       *       *       *

I glanced up as I dodged out into the open. That soft humming sound
was familiar, and properly so. There, at an elevation of less than
fifty feet, was the _Ertak_, with Hendricks standing in the exit,
leaning forward at a perilous angle.

"Ahoy the _Ertak_!" I hailed. "Descend at once!"

"Right, sir!" Hendricks turned to relay the order, and, as the rest of
the men burst forth from the cavern, the ship struck the ground before
us.

"All hands board ship!" I ordered. "Lively, now." As many years as I
have commanded men, I have never seen an order obeyed with more
alacrity.

I was the last man to enter, and as I did so, I turned for a last
glance at the enemy.

They could not come through the small opening my bombs had driven in
the rock, although they were working desperately to enlarge it.
Leaping back and forth between me and the entrance I could see the
vague, shadowy figures of the outside slaves, eagerly seeping up the
life-giving fumes that escaped from the cavern.

"Your orders, sir?" asked Hendricks anxiously; he was a very young
officer, and he had been through a very trying experience.

"Ascend five hundred feet, Mr. Hendricks," I said thoughtfully.
"Directly over this spot. Then I'll take over.

"It isn't often," I added, "that the Service concerns itself with
economic conditions. This, however, is one of the exceptions."

"Yes, sir," said Hendricks, for the very good reason, I suppose, that
that was about all a third officer could say to his commander, under
the circumstances.

       *       *       *       *       *

"Five hundred feet, sir," said Hendricks.

"Very well," I nodded, and pressed the attention signal of the
non-commissioned officer in charge of the big forward ray projector.

"Ott? Commander Hanson speaking. I have special orders for you."

"Yes, sir!"

"Direct your ray, narrowed to normal beam and at full intensity, on
the spot directly below. Keep the ray motionless, and carry on until
further orders. Is that clear?"

"Perfectly, sir." The disintegrator ray generators deepened their purr
as I turned away.

"I trust, sir, that I did the right thing in following you with the
_Ertak_?" asked Hendricks. "I was absolutely without precedent, and
the circumstances were so mysterious--"

"You handled the situation very well indeed," I told him. "Had you not
been waiting when we fought our way into the open, the nearly
invisible things on the outside might have--but you don't know about
them yet."

Picking up the microphone again, I ordered a pair of searchlights to
follow the disintegrator ray, and made my way forward, where I could
observe activities through a port.

The ray was boring straight down into a shoulder of a rocky hill, and
the bright beams of the searchlights glowed redly with the dust of
disintegration. Here and there I could see the shadowy, transparent
forms of the creatures that the self-constituted rulers of this world
had doomed to a demi-existence, and I smiled grimly to myself. The
tables would soon be turned.

       *       *       *       *       *

For perhaps an hour the ray melted its way into the solid rock, while
I stood beside Ott and his crew, watching. Then, down below us, things
began to happen.

Little fragments of rock flew up from the shaft the ray had drilled.
Jets of black mud leaped into the air. There was a sudden blast from
below that rocked the _Ertak_, and the shaft became a miniature
volcano, throwing rocky fragments and mud high into the air.

"Very good, Ott," I said triumphantly. "Cease action." As I spoke, the
first light of the dawn, unnoticed until now, spread itself over the
scene, and we witnessed then one of the strangest scenes that the
Universe has ever beheld.

Up to the very edge of that life-giving blast of mineral-laden gas the
tenuous creatures came crowding. There were hundreds of them,
thousands of them. And they were still coming, crowding closer and
closer and closer, a mass of crawling, yellowish shadows against the
sombre earth.

Slowly, they began to fill out and darken, as they drew in the fumes
that were more than bread and meat and water to us. Where there had
been formless shadows, rotund creatures such as we had met in the
cavern stood and lashed their tentacles about in a sort of frenzied
gladness, and fell back to make room for their brothers.

       *       *       *       *       *

"It's a sight to make a man doubt his own eyes, sir," said Correy, who
had come to stand beside me. "Look at them! Thousands of them pouring
from every direction. How did it happen?"

"It didn't happen. I used our disintegrator ray as a drill; we simply
sunk a huge shaft down into the bowels of the earth until we struck
the source of the vapor which the self-appointed 'ruling class' has
bottled up. We have emancipated a whole people, Mr. Correy."

"I hate to think of what will happen to those in the cavern," replied
Correy, smiling grimly. "Or rather, since you've told me of the
pleasant little death they had arranged for us. I'm mighty glad of it.
They'll receive rough treatment, I'm afraid!"

"They deserve it. It has been a great sight to watch, but I believe
we've seen enough. It has been a good night's work, but it's daylight,
now, and it will take hours to repair the damage to the _Ertak's_
hull. Take over in the navigating room, if you will, and pick a likely
spot where we will not be disturbed. We should be on our course by
to-night, Mr. Correy."

"Right, sir," said Correy, with a last wondering look at the strange
miracle we had brought to pass on the earth below us. "It will seem
good to be off in space again, away from the troubles of these little
worlds."

"There are troubles in space, too," I said dryly, thinking of the
swarm of meteorites that had come so close to wiping the _Ertak_ off
the records of the Service. "You can't escape trouble even in space."

"No, sir," said Correy from the doorway. "But you can get your sleep
regularly!"

And sleep is, when one comes to think of it, a very precious thing.

Particularly for an old man, whose eyelids are heavy with years.




Readers' Corner

[Illustration: Readers' Corner]


     _Now In Book Form_

     Readers of Astounding Stories will be interested to hear
     that two of the continued novels which appeared in our pages
     during last year are coming out in book form.

     The first of these is "Murder Madness," by Murray Leinster.
     It is due sometime in February, so by the time this issue is
     on the newsstands it will no doubt be already out. The
     publishers are Brewer and Warren, and the price is $2.00.
     Here's your chance, collectors, and those who missed an
     instalment or two.

     The other book is "Brigands of the Moon," by--everyone
     knows--Ray Cummings. It should be coming along in a month or
     so. Watch out for it!


_Mr. Cummings Sits In_

     Dear Editor:

     Thank you for the opportunity to address our Readers on
     certain side-lights of my tale, "The Exile of Time." I
     particularly welcome it, for the theme of Time-traveling is,
     I think, the most interesting of any upon which I have
     written.

     Some of you will no doubt recall my stories "The Man Who
     Mastered Time" and "The Shadow Girl." In "The Exile of
     Time," I present the third of the trilogy. It has no
     fictional connection with the others; it is in no sense a
     sequel, but rather a companion story.

     To write about Time-traveling is for me a difficult but
     fascinating task. The opportunities are endless; and I hope
     you may think I have taken advantage of them with a measure
     of success.

     I wrote those conceptions of Time and Space and the Great
     Cosmos, which you will find in the text of the story,
     because I feel them very deeply. Each occasion upon which
     circumstances allow me to present my theories, I eagerly
     welcome. How much of the conception is original with me, I
     cannot say. It is the product of my groping interpretation
     of the theories of many brilliant scientific minds of
     today--humbly combined with perhaps some originality of my
     own. The mind flings far afield when it starts to grope with
     the Unknown. Try it! Read what I have written and then let
     your mind roam a little further. Probe a little deeper.
     Perhaps we may contribute something. It is only by that
     process--each mind following some other's cleared path and
     pushing forward a little on his own--that the Unknown can be
     pierced.

     When once you admit the basic idea of Time-traveling to be
     plausible, what fascinating vistas are opened to the
     imagination!

     Space is so crowded! The room in which you are now sitting
     as you read these words--just think what that Space around
     you has held in the Past, and will hold in the Future! You
     occupy it now, playing out your little part; but think what
     has happened where you are now sitting so calmly reading!
     What tumultuous, crowding events! Your room is quiet now,
     but its space has rung with war-cries; the ground under you
     has been drenched with blood; and further back it was lush
     with primeval jungle; and in another age it was frozen
     beneath a great ice-cap; and before that it blazed, molten
     with fire. Back to the Beginning.

     And your little Space in the Future? It will be in the heart
     of a great mechanical city, perhaps. A mechanical servant
     may murder his human master in the space which you now call
     your room. The great revolt of the mechanisms may start in
     your room....

     I think that your room will some day again be shrouded under
     a forest growth. The mechanical city will be neglected,
     tumbled into ruins, buried beneath the silt of the passing
     centuries. The sun will slowly rise--a giant dull red ball,
     burning out, cooling. And the Earth will cool. Humans,
     perhaps, will have passed decadence and reverted to
     savagery. Perhaps the polar ice-caps will again come down,
     and ice slowly cover the dying world. All nature will be
     struggling and dying, with the sun a red ball turning dark
     like a cooling ember.

     Millions of centuries, with whatever events--who am I to
     say?--but it will go on to the End. That's a long way from
     the Beginning, isn't it? And yet ours is only a tiny planet
     living briefly in the great cosmos of Time and Space!

     A segment of Everything that ever was and ever will be
     marches through the Space of your room. What an enormously
     thronged little Space! There is only Time, to keep
     consecutive and orderly the myriad events which in your room
     are pushing and jostling one another! I say, then, "Time is
     what keeps everything from happening at once." It seems a
     good definition.

     I do hope you like "The Exile of Time." The writing of it
     made me realize how unimportant I am. A human lifetime is
     really as brief as the flash of an electric spark. The whole
     lifetime of our Earth is not much more than that. Stars,
     worlds, are born, live and die, and the Great Cosmos goes
     majestically on. Yet some people seem to feel that they and
     the Space they occupy in this Time they call the Present are
     the most important things that ever were or ever will be in
     the whole Universe. It is a good thing to realize that that
     isn't so.--Ray Cummings.


_Likes_

     Dear Editor:

     Starting with the August issue, I am going to give my
     opinion of the stories.

     "The Planet of Dread," by R. F. Starzl, couldn't have been
     better. Get more stories by him. "Murder Madness," by Murray
     Leinster, was a good story, but it didn't belong in a
     Science Fiction magazine. "The Terrible Tentacles of L-472,"
     a good story; "The Invisible Death," a very good story;
     "Prisoners on the Electron," very good; "The Ape-Men of
     Xlotli," a good story, but it does not belong in a Science
     Fiction magazine; "The Pirate Planet," very excellent--much
     more so because it is an interplanetary story. "Vagabonds of
     Space," "The Fifth Dimension Catapult," "The Gate of Xoran,"
     "The Dark Side of Antri"--all good.

     Well, I guess I will sign off and give somebody else a
     chance to broadcast.--Wm. McCalvy, 1244 Beech St., St. Paul,
     Minn.


_I Do; I Don't_

     Dear Editor:

     "I like the magazine the way it is," "I want a larger
     magazine," "I want a magazine twice a month," "I want a
     quarterly," and so do I, "There is a terrible flaw in one of
     the stories," "All of the stories are flawless," "I want
     reprints," "I don't," "I like Ray Cummings," "I don't," "I
     want a better grade paper," "The paper's O. K. with me," "I
     want smooth edges on the magazine," "So do I," "And so do
     I!"--these seem to be the most often repeated sentences in
     the letters from Readers.

     However, I have a new one to add: I would like to see an
     answer, by the Editor, to each letter that is printed in
     "The Readers' Corner," like this: "I liked 'An Extra Man,'
     etc.--Mr. Syence Ficshun" (I am very glad to hear that you
     liked this little masterpiece, etc.--Editor). Why not?

     The illustration on the cover of the January issue surely
     shows that you're starting the new year out right by putting
     on an extremely astounding cover. The story "The Gate to
     Xoran" is simply amazing. Let's read many more of Mr. Wells
     stories. It is far surpassed, however, by "The Fifth
     Dimension Catapult," which is the best story (novelette)
     that I have ever read in "our" magazine.

     The Boys' Scientification Club is now a branch of the famous
     Science Correspondence Club. Remember, boys between the ages
     of 10 and 15, if you're interested in reading Science
     Fiction, by all means join the B. S. C. We have many copies
     of Astounding Stories in our library and members are welcome
     to read them. For further details write to me.--Forrest J.
     Ackerman, President-Librarian, B. S. C., 530 Staples Avenue,
     San Francisco, Cal.


_Souls and Integrations_

     Dear Editor:

     You are starting your second year as Editor of Astounding
     Stories. If your standard during 1931 is up to your standard
     of 1930, we shall be satisfied. If possible, give us, the
     Readers, the best in Science Fiction. I have no doubt but
     that the Readers of Astounding Stories would not want
     fantasy unless written by a master; and to my mind there is
