vials. One, two, three, he injected small, but precisely measured
amounts of the fluids into the three vital localities, then placed the
inert form upon a deeply cushioned couch.

"There! That'll take care of the gas in five or six hours. The paralysis
will wear off long before that, so he'll be all right when he wakes up;
and we're going away from here with everything we can put out. I've done
everything I know how to do, for the present."

Then only did Costigan turn and look down, directly into Clio's eyes.
Wide, eloquent blue eyes that gazed back up into his, tender and
unafraid; eyes freighted with the oldest message of woman to chosen man.
His hard young face softened wonderfully as he stared at her; there were
two quick steps and they were in each other's arms. Lips upon eager
lips, blue eyes to gray, motionless they stood clasped in ecstasy;
thinking nothing of the dreadful past, nothing of the fearful future,
conscious only of the glorious, wonderful present.

"Clio mine ... darling ... girl, girl, how I love you!" Costigan's deep
voice was husky with emotion. "I haven't kissed you for seven thousand
years! I don't rate you, by a million steps; but if I can just get you
out of this mess, I swear by all the gods of interplanetary space...."

"You needn't, lover. Rate _me_? Good Heavens, Conway! It's just the
other way...."

"Stop it!" he commanded in her ear. "I'm still dizzy at the idea of your
loving me at all, to say nothing of loving me _this_ way! But you do,
and that's all I ask, here or hereafter."

"Love you? _Love_ you!" Their mutual embrace tightened and her low voice
thrilled brokenly as she went on: "Conway dearest ... I can't say a
thing, but you know.... Oh, Conway!"

After a time Clio drew a long and tremulous, but supremely happy breath
as the realities of their predicament once more obtruded themselves upon
her consciousness. She released herself gently from Costigan's arms.

"Do you really think that there is a chance of us getting back to the
Earth, so that we can be together ... always?"

"A chance, yes. A probability, no," he replied, unequivocally. "It
depends upon two things. First, how much of a start we got on Nerado.
His ship is the biggest and fastest thing I ever saw, and if he strips
her down and drives her--which he will--he'll catch us long before we
can make Tellus. On the other hand, I gave Rodebush a lot of data, and
if he and Lyman Cleveland can add it to their own stuff and get that
super-ship of ours rebuilt in time, they'll be out here on the prowl;
and they'll have what it takes to give even Nerado plenty of argument.
No use worrying about it, anyway. We won't know anything until we can
detect one or the other of them, and then will be the time to do
something about it."

"If Nerado catches us, will you...." She paused.

"Rub you out? I will not. Even if he does catch us, and takes us back to
Nevia, I won't. There's lots more time coming onto the clock. Nerado
won't hurt either of us badly enough to leave scars, either physical,
mental, or moral. I'd kill you in a second if it were Roger; he's dirty.
He's mean--he's thoroughly bad. But Nerado's a good enough old scout, in
his way. He's big and he's clean. You know, I could really like that
fish if I could meet him on terms of equality sometime?"

"_I_ couldn't!" she declared vigorously. "He's crawly and scaly and
snaky; and he smells so ... so...."

"So rank and fishy?" Costigan laughed deeply. "Details, girl; mere
details. I've seen people who looked like money in the bank and who
smelled like a bouquet of violets that you couldn't trust half the
length of Nerado's neck."

"But look what he did to us!" she protested. "And they weren't trying to
recapture us back there; they were trying to kill us."

"That was perfectly all right, what he did and what they did--what else
could they have done?" he wanted to know. "And while you're looking,
look at what we did to them--plenty, I'd say. But we all had it to do,
and neither side will blame the other for doing it. He's a square
shooter, I tell you."

"Well, maybe, but I don't like him a bit, and let's not talk about him
any more. Let's talk about us. Remember what you said once, when you
advised me to 'let you lay,' or whatever it was?" Woman-like, she wished
to dip again lightly into the waters of pure emotion, even though she
had such a short time before led the man out of their profoundest
depths. But Costigan, into whose hard life love of woman had never
before entered, had not yet recovered sufficiently from his soul-shaking
plunge to follow her lead. Inarticulate, distrusting his newly found
supreme happiness, he must needs stay out of those enchanted waters or
plunge again. And he was afraid to plunge--diffident, still deeming
himself unworthy of the miracle of this wonder-girl's love--even though
every fiber of his being shrieked its demand to feel again that slender
body in his arms. He did not consciously think those thoughts. He acted
them without thinking; they were prime basics in that which made Conway
Costigan what he was.

"I do remember, and I still think it's a sound idea, even though I am
too far gone now to let you put it into effect," he assured her, half
seriously. He kissed her, tenderly and reverently, then studied her
carefully. "But you look as though you'd been on a Martian picnic. When
did you eat last?"

"I don't remember, exactly. This morning, I think."

"Or maybe last night, or yesterday morning? I thought so! Bradley and I
can eat anything that's chewable, and drink anything that will pour, but
you can't. I'll scout around and see if I can't fix up something that
you'll be able to eat."

He rummaged through the store-rooms, emerging with sundry viands from
which he prepared a highly satisfactory meal.

"Think you can sleep now, sweetheart?" After supper, once more within
the circle of Costigan's arms, Clio nodded her head against his
shoulder.

"Of course I can, dear. Now that you are with me, out here alone, I'm
not a bit afraid any more. You will get us back to Earth some way,
sometime; I just know that you will. Good-night, Conway."

"Good-night, Clio ... little sweetheart," he whispered, and went back to
Bradley's side.

In due time the captain recovered consciousness, and slept. Then for
days the speedster flashed on toward our distant solar system; days
during which her wide-flung detector screens remained cold.

"I don't know whether I'm afraid they'll hit something or afraid that
they won't," Costigan remarked more than once, but finally those tenuous
sentinels did in fact encounter an interfering vibration. Along the
detector line a visibeam sped, and Costigan's face hardened as he saw
the unmistakable outline of Nerado's interstellar cruiser, far behind
them.

"Well, a stern chase always was a long one," Costigan said finally. "He
can't catch us for plenty of days yet ... now what?" for the alarms of
the detectors had broken out anew. There was still another point of
interference to be investigated. Costigan traced it, and there, almost
dead ahead of them, between them and their sun, nearing them at the
incomprehensible rate of the sum of the two vessels' velocities, came
another cruiser of the Nevians!

"Must be the sister-ship, coming back from our System with a load of
iron," Costigan deduced. "Heavily loaded as she is, we may be able to
dodge her; and she's coming so fast that if we can stay out of her range
we'll be all right--he won't be able to stop for probably three or four
days. But if our super-ship is anywhere in these parts, now's the time
for her to rally 'round!"

He gave the speedster all the side-thrust she would take; then, putting
every available communicator tube behind a tight beam, he aimed it at
Sol and began sending out a long-continued call to his fellows of the
Triplanetary Service.

Nearer and nearer the Nevian flashed, trying with all her power to
intercept the speedster; and it soon became evident that, heavily laden
though she was, she could make enough sideway to bring her within range
at the time of meeting.

"Of course, they've got partial neutralization of inertia, the same as
we have," Costigan cogitated, "and by the way he's coming I'd say that
he had orders to blow us out of the ether--he knows as well as we do
that he can't capture us alive at anything like the relative velocities
we've got now. I can't give her any more side thrust without overloading
the gravity controls, so overloaded they've got to be. Strap down, you
two, because they may go out entirely!"

"Do you think that you can pull away from them, Conway?" Clio was
staring in horrified fascination into the plate, watching the pictured
vessel increase in size, moment by moment.

"I don't know whether I can or not, but I'm going to try. Just in case
we don't, though, I'm going to keep on yelling for help. In solid? All
right, boat, DO YOUR STUFF!"




CHAPTER 19

GIANTS MEET


"Check your blast, Fred, I think that I hear something trying to come
through!" Cleveland called out, sharply. For days the _Boise_ had torn
through the illimitable reaches of empty space, and now the long vigil
of the keen-eared listeners was to be ended. Rodebush cut off his power,
and through the crackling roar of tube noise an almost inaudible voice
made itself heard.

"... all the help you can give us. Samms--Cleveland--Rodebush--anybody
of Triplanetary who can hear me, listen! This is Costigan, with Miss
Marsden and Captain Bradley, heading for where we think the sun is, from
right ascension about six hours, declination about plus fourteen
degrees. Distance unknown, but probably a good many light-years. Trace
my call. One Nevian ship is overhauling us slowly, another is coming
toward us from the sun. We may or may not be able to dodge it, but we
need all the help you can give us. Samms--Rodebush--Cleveland--anybody
of Triplanetary...."

Endlessly the faint, faint voice went on, but Rodebush and Cleveland
were no longer listening. Sensitive ultra-loops had been swung, and
along the indicated line shot Triplanetary's super-ship at a velocity
which she had never before even approached; the utterly
incomprehensible, almost incalculable velocity attained by inertialess
matter driven through an almost perfect vacuum by the _Boise's_ maximum
projector blasts--a blast which would lift her stupendous normal tonnage
against a gravity five times that of Earth. At the full frightful
measure of that velocity the super-ship literally annihilated distance,
while ahead of her the furiously driven spy-ray beam fanned out in quest
of the three Triplanetarians who were calling for help.

"Got any idea how fast we're going?" Rodebush demanded, glancing up for
an instant from the observation plate. "We should be able to see him,
since we could hear him, and our range is certainly as great as anything
he can have."

"No. Can't figure velocity without any reliable data on how many atoms
of matter exist per cubic meter out here." Cleveland was staring at the
calculator. "It's constant, of course, at the value at which the
friction of the medium is equal to our thrust. Incidentally, we can't
hold it too long. We're running a temperature, which shows that we're
stepping along faster than anybody ever computed before. Also, it points
out the necessity for something that none of us ever anticipated needing
in an open-space drive--refrigerators or radiating wall-shields or
repellers or something of the sort. But to get back to our
velocity--taking Throckmorton's estimates it figures somewhere near the
order of magnitude of ten to the twenty-seventh. Fast enough, anyway, so
that you'd better bend an eye on that plate. Even after you see them you
won't know where they really are, because we don't know any of the
velocities involved--our own, theirs, or that of the beam--and we may be
right on top of them."

"Or, if we happen to be outrunning the beam, we won't see them at all.
That makes it nice piloting."

"How are you going to handle things when we get there?"

"Lock to them and take them aboard, if we're in time. If not, if they
are fighting already--_there they are_!"

The picture of the speedster's control room flashed upon the speaker.

"Hi, Fritz! Hi, Cleve! Welcome to our city! Where are you?"

"We don't know," Cleveland snapped back, "and we don't know where you
are, either. Can't figure anything without data. I see you're still
breathing air. Where are the Nevians? How much time have we got yet?"

"Not enough, I'm afraid. By the looks of things they will be within
range of us in a couple of hours, and you haven't even touched our
detector screen yet."

"A couple of _hours_!" In his relief Cleveland shouted the words.
"That's time to burn--we can be just about out of the Galaxy in
that...." He broke off at a yell from Rodebush.

"Broadcast, Spud, BROADCAST!" the physicist had cried, as Costigan's
image had disappeared utterly from his plate.

He cut off the _Boise's_ power, stopping her instantaneously in
mid-space, but the connection had been broken. Costigan could not
possibly have heard the orders to change his beam signal to a broadcast,
so that they could pick it up; nor would it have done any good if he had
heard and had obeyed. So immeasurably great had been their velocity that
they had flashed past the speedster and were now unknown thousands--or
millions--of miles beyond the fugitives they had come so far to help;
far beyond the range of any possible broadcast. But Cleveland understood
instantly what had happened. He now had a little data upon which to
work, and his hands flew over the keys of the calculator.

"Back blast, at maximum, seventeen seconds!" he directed crisply. "Not
exact, of course, but that will put us close enough so that we can find
'em with our detectors."

For the calculated seventeen seconds the super-ship retraced her path,
at the same awful speed with which she had come so far. The blast
expired and there, plainly limned upon the observation plates, was the
Nevian speedster.

"As a computer, you're good, Cleve," Rodebush applauded. "So close that
we can't use the neutralizers to catch him. If we use one dyne of drive
we'll overshoot a million kilometers before I could snap the switch."

"And yet he's so far away and going so fast that if we keep our inertia
on it'll take all day at full blast to overtake--no, wait a minute--we
could _never_ catch him." Cleveland was puzzled. "What to do? Shunt in a
potentiometer?"

"No, we don't need it." Rodebush turned to the transmitter. "Costigan!
We are going to take hold of you with a very light tractor--a tracer,
really--and whatever you do, DON'T CUT IT, or we can't reach you in
time. It may look like a collision, but it won't be--we'll just touch
you, without even a jar."

"A tractor--inertialess?" Cleveland wondered.

"Sure. Why not?" Rodebush set up the beam at its absolute minimum of
power and threw in the switch.

While hundreds of thousands of miles separated the two vessels and the
attractor was exerting the least effort of which it was capable, yet the
super-ship leaped toward the smaller craft at a pace which covered the
intervening distance in almost no time at all. So rapidly were the
objectives enlarging upon the plates that the automatic focusing devices
could scarcely function rapidly enough to keep them in place. Cleveland
flinched involuntarily and seized his arm-rests in a spasmodic clutch as
he watched this, the first inertialess space-approach; and even
Rodebush, who knew better than anyone else what to expect, held his
breath and swallowed hard at the unbelievable rate at which the two
vessels were rushing together.

And if these two, who had rebuilt the super-ship, could hardly control
themselves, what of the three in the speedster, who knew nothing
whatever of the wonder-craft's potentialities? Clio, staring into the
plate with Costigan, uttered one piercing shriek as she sank her fingers
into his shoulders. Bradley swore a mighty deep-space oath and braced
himself against certain annihilation. Costigan stared for an instant,
unable to believe his eyes; then, in spite of the warning, his hand
darted toward the studs which would cut the beam. Too late. Before his
flying fingers could reach the buttons the _Boise_ was upon them; had
struck the speedster in direct central impact. Moving at the full
measure of her unthinkable velocity though the super-ship was in the
instant of impact, yet the most delicate recording instruments of the
speedster could not detect the slightest shock as the enormous globe
struck the comparatively tiny torpedo and clung to it; accommodating
instantaneously and effortlessly her own terrific pace to that of the
smaller and infinitely slower craft. Clio sobbed in relief and Costigan,
one arm around her, sighed hugely.

"Hey, you spacelugs!" he cried. "Glad to see you, and all that, but you
might as well kill a man outright as scare him to death! So _that's_ the
super-ship, huh? _Some_ ship!"

"Hi-ya, Murf! Hi, Spud!" came from the speaker.

"Murf? Spud? How come?" Clio, practically recovered now, glanced upward
questioningly. It was plain that she did not quite know whether or not
to like the nicknames which the rescuers were calling her Conway.

"My middle name is Murphy, so they've called me things like that ever
since I was so high." Costigan indicated a length of approximately
twelve inches. "And now you'll probably live long enough--I hope--to
hear me called a lot worse stuff than that."

"Don't _talk_ that way--we're safe now, Con ... Spud? It's nice that
they like you so much--but they would, of course." She snuggled even
closer, and both listened to what Rodebush was saying.

"... realize myself that it would look so bad; it scared me as much as
it did anybody. Yes, this is IT. She really works--thanks more than
somewhat to Conway Costigan, by the way. But you had better transfer.
If you'll get your things...."

"'Things' is good!" Costigan laughed, and Clio giggled sunnily.

"We've made so many transfers already that what you see is all we've
got," Bradley explained. "We'll bring ourselves, and we'll hurry. That
Nevian is coming up fast."

"Is there anything on this ship you fellows want?" Costigan asked.

