of chaotic appearance such as that represented in Fig. 146. Above these
in point of development stand the spiral, ring, and planetary nebulæ,
although the exact sequence in which they should be arranged remains a
matter of doubt. Still higher up in the scale are star clusters whose
individual members, as well as isolated stars, are to be classified by
means of their spectra, as shown in Fig. 151, where the order of
development of each star is probably from Type I, through II, into III
and beyond, to extinction of its light and the cutting off of most of
its radiant energy. Jupiter and Saturn are to be regarded as stars which
have recently entered this dark stage. The earth is further developed
than these, but it is not so far along as are Mars and Mercury; while
the moon is to be looked upon as the most advanced heavenly body
accessible to our research, having reached a state of decrepitude which
may almost be called death--a stage typical of that toward which all the
others are moving.

Meteors and comets are to be regarded as fragments of celestial matter,
chips, too small to achieve by themselves much progress along the normal
lines of development, but destined sooner or later, by collision with
some larger body, to share thenceforth in its fortunes.

247. STABILITY OF THE UNIVERSE.--It was considered a great achievement
in the mathematical astronomy of a century ago when Laplace showed that
the mutual attractions of sun and planets might indeed produce endless
perturbations in the motions and positions of these bodies, but could
never bring about collisions among them or greatly alter their existing
orbits. But in the proof of this great theorem two influences were
neglected, either of which is fatal to its validity. One of these--tidal
friction--as we have already seen, tends to wreck the systems of
satellites, and the same effect must be produced upon the planets by any
other influence which tends to impede their orbital motion. It is the
inertia of the planet in its forward movement that balances the sun's
attraction, and any diminution of the planet's velocity will give this
attraction the upper hand and must ultimately precipitate the planet
into the sun. The meteoric matter with which the earth comes ceaselessly
into collision must have just this influence, although its effects are
very small, and something of the same kind may come from the medium
which transmits radiant energy through the interstellar spaces.

It seems incredible that the luminiferous ether, which is supposed to
pervade all space, should present absolutely no resistance to the motion
of stars and planets rushing through it with velocities which in many
cases exceed 50,000 miles per hour. If there is a resistance to this
motion, however small, we may extend to the whole visible universe the
words of Thomson and Tait, who say in their great Treatise on Natural
Philosophy, "We have no data in the present state of science for
estimating the relative importance of tidal friction and of the
resistance of the resisting medium through which the earth and moon
move; but, whatever it may be, there can be but one ultimate result for
such a system as that of the sun and planets, if continuing long enough
under existing laws and not disturbed by meeting with other moving
masses in space. That result is the falling together of all into one
mass, which, although rotating for a time, must in the end come to rest
relatively to the surrounding medium."

Compare with this the words of a great poet who in The Tempest puts into
the mouth of Prospero the lines:

    "The cloud-capp'd towers, the gorgeous palaces,
    The solemn temples, the great globe itself,
    Yea, all which it inherit, shall dissolve;
    And, like this insubstantial pageant faded,
    Leave not a rack behind."

248. THE FUTURE.--In spite of statements like these, it lies beyond the
scope of scientific research to affirm that the visible order of things
will ever come to naught, and the outcome of present tendencies, as
sketched above, may be profoundly modified in ages to come, by
influences of which we are now ignorant. We have already noted that the
farther our speculation extends into either past or future, the more
insecure are its conclusions, and the remoter consequences of present
laws are to be accepted with a corresponding reserve. But the one great
fact which stands out clear in this connection is that of _change_. The
old concept of a universe created in finished form and destined so to
abide until its final dissolution, has passed away from scientific
thought and is replaced by the idea of slow development. A universe
which is ever becoming something else and is never finished, as shadowed
forth by Goethe in the lines:

    "Thus work I at the roaring loom of Time,
    And weave for Deity a living robe sublime."




APPENDIX


THE GREEK ALPHABET

The Greek letters are so much used by astronomers in connection with the
names of the stars, and for other purposes, that the Greek alphabet is
printed below--not necessarily to be learned, but for convenient
reference:

        Greek.          Name.  English.

    [A]  [a]            Alpha    a

    [B]  [b]            Beta     b

    [G]  [g]            Gamma    g

    [D]  [d]            Delta    d

    [E]  [e] or [e]     Epsilon  [)e]

    [Z]  [z]            Zeta      z

    [Ê]  [ê]            Eta       [=e]

    [Th]  [th] or [th]  Theta     th

    [I]  [i]            Iota      i

    [K]  [k]            Kappa     k

    [L]  [l]            Lambda    l

    [M]  [m]            Mu        m

    [N]  [n]            Nu        n

    [X]  [x]            Xi        x

    [O]  [o]            Omicron   [)o]

    [P]  [p]            Pi        p

    [R]  [r]            Rho       r

    [S]  [s] or [s]     Sigma     s

    [T]  [t]            Tau       t

    [Y]  [y]            Upsilon   u

    [Ph]  [ph]          Phi       ph

    [Ch]  [ch]          Chi       ch

    [Ps]  [ps]          Psi       ps

    [Ô]  [ô]            Omega     [=o]


POPULAR LITERATURE OF ASTRONOMY

The following brief bibliography, while making no pretense at
completeness, may serve as a useful guide to supplementary reading:


_General Treatises_

YOUNG. _General Astronomy._ An admirable general survey of the entire
field.

NEWCOMB. _Popular Astronomy._ The second edition of a German translation
of this work by Engelmann and Vogel is especially valuable.

BALL. _Story of the Heavens._ Somewhat easier reading than either of the
preceding.

CHAMBERS. _Descriptive Astronomy._ An elaborate but elementary work in
three volumes.

LANGLEY. _The New Astronomy._ Treats mainly of the physical condition of
the celestial bodies.

PROCTOR and RANYARD. _Old and New Astronomy._


_Special Treatises_

PROCTOR. _The Moon._ A general treatment of the subject.

NASMYTH and CARPENTER. _The Moon._ An admirably illustrated but
expensive work dealing mainly with the topography and physical
conditions of the moon. There is a cheaper and very good edition in
German.

YOUNG. _The Sun._ International Scientific Series. The most recent and
authoritative treatise on this subject.

PROCTOR. _Other Worlds than Ours._ An account of planets, comets, etc.

NEWTON. _Meteor._ Encyclopædia Britannica.

AIRY. _Gravitation._ A non-mathematical exposition of the laws of
planetary motion.

STOKES. _On Light as a Means of Investigation._ Burnett Lectures. II.
The basis of spectrum analysis.

SCHELLEN. _Spectrum Analysis._

THOMSON (Sir W., Lord KELVIN), _Popular Lectures, etc._ Lectures on the
Tides, The Sun's Heat, etc.

BALL. _Time and Tide._ An exposition of the researches of G. H. Darwin
upon tidal friction.

GORE. _The Visible Universe._ Deals with a class of problems
inadequately treated in most popular astronomies.

DARWIN. _The Tides._ An admirable elementary exposition.

CLERKE. _The System of the Stars._ Stellar astronomy.

NEWCOMB. Chapters on the Stars, in _Popular Science Monthly_ for 1900.

CLERKE. _History of Astronomy during the Nineteenth Century._ An
admirable work.

WOLF. _Geschichte der Astronomie._ München, 1877. An excellent German
work.


A LIST OF STARS FOR TIME OBSERVATIONS

See § 20.

 ------------------+---------------+------------------+-------------+
 NAME.             |  Magnitude.   | Right Ascension. | Declination.|
 ------------------+---------------+------------------+-------------+
                   |               |                  |             |
                   |               |     h. m.        |      °      |
 [b] Ceti          |       2       |     0 38.6       |    - 18.5   |
 [ê] Ceti          |       3       |     1  3.6       |    - 10.7   |
 [a] Ceti          |       3       |     2 57.1       |    +  3.7   |
 [g] Eridani       |       3       |     3 53.4       |    - 13.8   |
 _Aldebaran_       |       1       |     4 30.2       |    + 16.3   |
                   |               |                  |             |
 _Rigel_           |       0       |     5  9.7       |    -  8.3   |
 [k] Orionis       |       2       |     5 43.0       |    -  9.7   |
 [b] Canis Majoris |       2       |     6 18.3       |    - 17.9   |
 _Sirius_          |      -1       |     6 40.7       |    - 16.6   |
 _Procyon_         |       0       |     7 34.1       |    +  5.5   |
                   |               |                  |             |
 [a] Hydræ         |       2       |     9 22.7       |    -  8.2   |
 _Regulus_         |       1       |    10  3.0       |    + 12.5   |
 [n] Hydræ         |       3       |    10 44.7       |    - 15.7   |
 [e] Corvi         |       3       |    12  5.0       |    - 22.1   |
 [g] Corvi         |       3       |    12 10.7       |    - 17.0   |
                   |               |                  |             |
 _Spica_           |       1       |    13 19.9       |    - 10.6   |
 [z] Virginis      |       3       |    13 29.6       |    -  0.1   |
 [a] Libræ         |       3       |    14 45.3       |    - 15.6   |
 [b] Libræ         |       3       |    15 11.6       |    -  9.0   |
 _Antares_         |       1       |    16 23.3       |    - 26.2   |
                   |               |                  |             |
 [a] Ophiuchi      |       2       |    17 30.3       |    + 12.6   |
 [e] Sagittarii    |       2       |    18 17.5       |    - 34.4   |
 [d] Aquilæ        |       3       |    19 20.5       |    +  2.9   |
 _Altair_          |       1       |    19 45.9       |    +  8.6   |
 [b] Aquarii       |       3       |    21 26.3       |    -  6.0   |
                   |               |                  |             |
 [a] Aquarii       |       3       |    22  0.6       |    -  0.8   |
 _Fomalhaut_       |       1       |    22 52.1       |    - 30.2   |
 ------------------+---------------+------------------+-------------+




INDEX


The references are to section numbers.


  Absorption of starlight, 225.

  Absorption spectra, 87.

  Accelerating force, 35.

  Adjustment of observations, 2.

  Albedo of moon, 97.
    of Venus, 148.

  Algol, 205.

  Altitudes, 4, 21.

  Andromeda nebula, 214.

  Angles, measurement of, 2.

  Angular diameter, 7.

  Annular eclipse, 64.

  Asteroids, 156.

  Atmosphere of the earth, 49.
    of the moon, 103.
    of Jupiter, 139.
    of Mars, 153.

  Aurora, 51.

  Azimuth, 5, 21.


  Biela's comet, 181.

  Bode's law, 134, 232.

  Bredichin's theory of comet tails, 180.


  Calendar, O. S. and N. S., 61.

  Capture of comets and meteors, 176.

  Canals of Mars, 154.

  Celestial mechanics, 32.

  Changes upon the moon, 108.

  Chemical constitution of sun, 116.
    of stars, 210.

  Chromosphere, the sun's, 124.

  Chronology, 59.

  Classification of stars, 212.

  Clocks and watches, 74.
    sidereal clock, 12.

  Collisions with comets, 183.

  Colors of stars, 209.

  Comets, general characteristics, 158-164.
    development of, 179, 181.
    groups, 177.
    orbits, 161.
    periodic, 176.
    spectra, 182.
    tails, 180.

  Comets and meteors, relation of, 175.

  Conic sections, 38.

  Constellations, 184.

  Corona, the sun's, 123.

  Craters, lunar, 105.


  Dark stars, 201.

  Day, 52, 62.

  Declination, 21.

  Development of comet, 179.
    of moon, 241.
    of nebulæ, 245.
    of stars, 242, 244.
    of sun, 228.
  of universe, 226.

  Distribution of stars and nebulæ, 220.

  Diurnal motion, 10, 15.

  Doppler principle, 89.

  Double nebulæ, 215.

  Double stars, 198.
    development of, 244.

  Driving clock, 80.


  Earth, atmosphere, 48.
    mass, 45.
    size and shape, 44.
    warming of the earth, 47.

  Eclipses, nature of, 63.
    annular eclipse, 64.
    eclipse limits, 68.
    eclipse maps, 70, 71.
    number of, in a year, 69.
    partial eclipse, 64.
    prediction of, 70, 71.
    recurrence of, 72.
