a glimpse of fiery cones, triangles, and circles, ranged in tier behind
tier with a piercing eye in the center, and the light that came from
them resembled nothing that I have ever seen. It seemed to be a _living
emanation_, and almost paralyzed me."

"We must get away from them," cried De Beauxchamps, as soon as the first
overwhelming effect of the attack upon the bell had passed. And
immediately he set the propellers at their highest speed.

The bell shook and half rolled over, there was a scurrying among the
monsters outside, and two or three of them floated away partly in
collapse, as if they had been seriously wounded by the short propeller
blades.

The direction of flight chanced to carry them past the dome of the
Columbia University Library, which was standing almost intact, and then
they floated near the monumental tomb of General Grant, which had
crowned a noble elevation overlooking the Hudson River. A portion of the
upper part of this structure had been carried away, but the larger part
remained in position. They saw no more of the globular creatures which
had haunted the ruins of the cathedral, but, instead, there appeared
around the bell an immense multitude of small luminescent animals, many
of them most beautifully formed, and emitting from their light-producing
organs various exquisite colors which turned the surrounding water into
an all-embracing rainbow.

[Illustration: "AND THEN THEY FLOATED NEAR THE MONUMENTAL TOMB OF
GENERAL GRANT"]

But a more marvelous phenomenon quickly made its appearance, causing
them to gasp with astonishment. As they drew near the dismantled dome a
brilliant gleam suddenly streamed into the ports on the side turned
toward the monument--a gush of light so bright that the air inside the
bell seemed to have been illuminated with a golden sunrise. They glanced
toward the monument, and saw that it was surmounted by some vibrating
object which seemed instinct with blinding fire. The colors that sprang
from it changed rapidly from gold to purple, and then, through
shimmering hues of bronze, to a deep rich orange. It looked like a sun,
poised on the horizon. The spectacle was so dazzling, so unexpected, so
beautiful, and, associated with the architectural memorial of one of the
greatest characters in American history, so strangely suggestive, that
even King Richard and the two Frenchmen were strongly moved, while Cosmo
and his fellow-countrymen grasped each other by the hand, and the former
said, in solemn tones:

"My friends, to my mind, this scene, however accidental, has something
of prophecy about it. It changes the current of my thought--America is
not dead; in some way she yet survives upon the earth."

Long they gazed and wondered, but at last, partly recovering from their
astonishment, at the suggestion of De Beauxchamps, they drew nearer the
monument. But when they had arrived within a few yards of it, the
blinding light disappeared as if snuffed out, and they saw nothing but
the broken gray walls of the dome. The moving object, which had been
dimly visible at the beginning, and had evidently been the source of the
light, had vanished.

"The creature that produced the illumination," said Professor Abel Able,
"has been alarmed by our approach, and has withdrawn into the interior."

This was, no doubt, the true explanation, but they could perceive no
signs of life about the place, and they finally turned away from it with
strange sensations.

Avoiding the neighborhood of the cathedral, they steered the bell down
the former course of the Hudson, but afterward ventured once more over
the drowned city until they arrived at the site of the great station of
the Pennsylvania Railroad, which they found completely unroofed. They
sank the bell into the vast space where the tunnels entered from
underneath the old river bed, and again they had a startling experience.
Something huge, elongated, and spotted, and provided with expanding
claw-like limbs, slowly withdrew as their light streamed upon the
reddish ooze covering the great floor. The nondescript retreated
backward into the mouth of a tunnel. They endeavored, cautiously, to
follow it, turning a magnifying window in its direction, and obtaining a
startling view of glaring eyes, but the creature hastened its retreat,
and the last glimpse they had was of a grotesque head, which threw out
piercing rays of green fire as it passed deeper into the tunnel.

"This is too terrible," exclaimed King Richard, shuddering. "In Heaven's
name, let us go no farther."

"We must visit Wall Street," said Amos Blank. "We must see what the
former financial center of the world now looks like."

Accordingly they issued from the ruined station, and, resuming their
course southward, arrived at length over the great money center. The
tall buildings which had shouldered each other in that wonderful
district, turning the streets into immense gorges, had, to a certain
extent, protected one another against the effects of the waves, and the
skeletons of many were yet standing. In the midst of them the dark spire
of old Trinity still pointed stoutly upward, as if continuing its
hopeless struggle against the spirit of worldly grandeur whose aspiring
creations, though in ruins, yet dwarfed this symbol of immortality. At
the intersection of the Wall and Broad Street canyons they found an
enormous steel edifice, which had been completed a short time before the
deluge, tumbled in ruins upon the classic form of the old Stock
Exchange, the main features of whose front were yet recognizable. The
weight of the fallen building had been so great that it had crushed the
roof of the treasure vaults which had occupied its ground floor, and the
fragments of safes with their contents had been hurled over the northern
expanse of Broad Street. The red ooze had covered most of the wasted
wealth there heaped up, but in places piles of gold showed through the
covering. Amos Blank became greatly excited at this. His old
proclivities seemed to resume their sway and his former madness to
return, and he buried his finger nails in his clenched palms as he
pressed his face against a window, exclaiming:

"_My gold!_ MY GOLD! Let me out of this! I must have it!"

"Nobody can get out of the bell, Mr. Blank," said Cosmo soothingly. "And
the gold is now of no use to anybody."

"I tell you," cried Blank, "that that is _my_ gold. It comes from _my_
vaults, and I _must_ get out!" And he dashed his fists wildly against
the glass until his knuckles were covered with blood. Then he sought
about for some implement with which to break the glass. They were
compelled to seize him, and a dreadful struggle followed in the
restricted space within the bell. In the midst of it Blank's face became
set, and his eyes stared wildly out of a window.

The others followed the direction of his gaze, and they were almost
frozen into statues. Close beside the bell, which had, during the
struggle, floated near to the principal heap of mingled treasure and
ruin, heavily squatted on the very summit of the pile, was such a
creature as no words could depict--of a ghastly color, bulky and
malformed, furnished with three burning eyes that turned now green, now
red with lambent flame, and great shapeless limbs, which it uplifted one
after the other, striking awkward, pawing blows at the bell! It seemed
to the horrified onlookers to be the very demon of greed defending its
spoil. Blank sank helpless on the bottom side of the bell, and the
others remained for a time petrified, and unable to speak. Suddenly the
dreadful creature, making a forward lunge from its perch, struck the
bell a mighty blow that sent it spinning in a partly upward direction.
The inmates were tumbled over one another, bruised and cut by the
projections that served for hand and foot holds. So great had been the
impact of the blow that the bell continued to revolve for several
minutes, and they could do nothing to help themselves, except to seize
the holds as they came within their grasp, and hang on for dear life.
The violent shaking up roused Blank from his trance, and he hung on
desperately with the others.

After a while the bell ceased to spin, and began to sink again toward
the bottom. De Beauxchamps, who had recovered some degree of
self-command, instantly began to operate the control governing the
propellers, and in a few minutes he had the bell moving in a fixed
direction.

"This way, this way," cried Cosmo, glancing out of the windows to orient
himself. "We have seen enough! We must get back to the cable, and return
to the Ark!"

They were terror-stricken now, and pushing the propellers to their
utmost, they fled toward the site of the Metropolitan tower. On their
way, although for a time they passed over the course of the East River,
they saw no signs of the great bridges except the partly demolished but
yet beautiful towers of the oldest of them, which had been constructed
of heavy granite blocks. They found the cable attached as they had left
it, and, although they were yet nervous from their recent experience,
they had no great difficulty in re-attaching it to the bell. Then, with
a sigh of relief, they signaled, and shouted through the telephone to
the Ark.

But no answer came, and there was no responsive movement of the cable!
They signaled and called again, but without result.

"My God!" said Cosmo, in a faltering voice. "Can anything have happened
to the cable?"

They looked at each other with blanched cheeks, and no man found a word
to reply.




CHAPTER XXVI

NEW AMERICA


There had been great excitement on the Ark when the first communication
from the bell was received, announcing the arrival of the adventurers at
the Metropolitan tower. The news spread everywhere in a few seconds, and
the man in charge of the signaling apparatus and telephone would have
been mobbed if Captain Arms had not rigorously shut off all
communication with him, compelling the eager inquirers to be content
with such information as he himself saw fit to give them. When the
announcement was made that the bell had been cut loose, and the
exploration begun, the excitement was intensified, and a Babel of voices
resounded all over the great ship.

As hour after hour passed with no further communication from below the
anxiety of the multitude became almost unbearable. Some declared that
the adventurers would never be able to re-attach the bell to the cable,
and the fear rapidly spread that they would never be seen again. Captain
Arms strove in vain to reassure the excited passengers, but they grew
every moment more demoralized, and he was nearly driven out of his
senses by the insistent questioning to which he was subjected. It was
almost a relief to him when the lookout announced an impending change of
weather--although he well new the peril which such a change might bring.

It came on more rapidly than anybody could have anticipated. The sky, in
the middle of the afternoon, became clouded, the sun was quickly hidden,
and a cold blast arose, quickly strengthening into a regular blow. The
Ark began to drift as the rising waves assailed its vast flanks.

"Pay out the cable!" roared Captain Arms through his trumpet.

If he had not been instantly obeyed it is probable that the cable would
have been dragged from its precarious fastening below. Then he instantly
set the engines at work, and strove to turn the Ark so as to keep it
near the point of descent. At first they succeeded very well, but the
captain knew that the wind was swiftly increasing in force, and that he
could not long continue to hold his place. It was a terrible emergency,
but he proved himself equal to it.

"We must float the cable," he shouted to his first assistant. "Over with
the big buoy."

This buoy of levium had been prepared for other possible emergencies. It
was flat, presenting little surface to the wind, and when, working with
feverish speed, aided by an electric launch, they had attached the cable
to it, it sank so low that its place on the sea was indicated only by
the short mast, capped with a streamer, which rose above it.

When this work was completed a sigh of relief whistled through Captain
Arms's huge whiskers.

"May Davy Jones hold that cable tight!" he exclaimed. "Now for
navigating the Ark. If I had my old _Maria Jane_ under my feet I'd defy
Boreas himself to blow me away from here--but this whale!"

The wind increased fast, and in spite of every effort the Ark was driven
farther and farther toward the southwest, until the captain's telescope
no longer showed the least glimpse of the streamer on the buoy. Then
night came on, and yet the wind continued to blow. The captain compelled
all the passengers to go to their rooms. It would be useless to
undertake to describe the terror and despair of that night. When the sun
rose again the captain found that they had been driven seventy-five
miles from the site of New York, and yet, although the sky had now
partly cleared, the violence of the wind had not diminished.

Captain Arms had the passengers' breakfast served in their rooms, simply
sending them word that all would be well in the end. But in his secret
heart he doubted if he could find the buoy again. He feared that it
would be torn loose with the cable.

About noon the wind lulled, and at last the Ark could be effectively
driven in the direction of the buoy. But their progress was slow, and
night came on once more. During the hours of darkness the wind ceased
entirely, and the sea became calm. With the sunrise the search for the
buoy was begun in earnest. The passengers were now allowed to go upon
some of the decks, and to assemble in the grand saloon, but no
interference was permitted with the navigators of the Ark. Never had
Captain Arms so fully exhibited his qualities as a seaman.

"We'll find that porpoise if it's still afloat," he declared.

About half after eight o'clock a cry ran through the ship, bringing
everybody out on the decks.

The captain had discovered the buoy through his glass!

It lay away to the nor'ard, about a mile, and as they approached all
could see the streamer, hanging down its pole, a red streak in the
sunshine.

"Hurrah! Hurrah! Hurrah!" The Ark echoed with glad cries from stem to
stern. A thousand questions were shouted at the captain on his bridge,
but he was imperturbable. He only glanced at his watch, and then said,
in an undertone, to Joseph Smith, who stood beside him:

"Forty-seven hours and twenty minutes. By the time we can get the cable
back on the drum it will be full forty-eight hours since they started,
and the air in the bell could be kept in condition no longer than that.
It may take as much as two hours more to draw it up."

"Can you do it so rapidly as that?" asked Smith, his voice trembling.

"I'll do it or bust," returned the captain. "Perhaps they may yet be
alive."

Smith turned his eyes upward and clasped his hands. The Ark was put to
its utmost speed, and within the time estimated by the captain the cable
was once more on the great drum. Before starting it the captain attached
the telephone and shouted down. There was no reply.

"Start gently, and then, if she draws, drive for your lubberly lives,"
he said to the men in charge of the big donkey engine.

The moment it began to turn he inspected the indicator.

"Hurrah!" he exclaimed. "She pulls; the bell is attached."

The crowded decks broke into a cheer. In a few minutes the Ark was
vibrating with the strokes of the engine. Within five minutes the
strong, slender cable was issuing out of the depths at the rate of 250
feet a minute. But there were six miles of it! The engineer controlling
the drum shook his head.

"We may break the cable," he said.

"Go on!" shouted Captain Arms. "It's their only chance. Every second of
delay means sure death."

Within forty minutes the cable was coming up 300 feet a minute. The
speed increased as the bell rose out of the depths. It was just one hour
and forty-five minutes after the drum began to revolve when the anxious
watchers were thrown into a furore of excitement by the appearance of a
shining blue point deep beneath. It was the bell! Again there broke
forth a tempest of cheers.

Rapidly the rising bell grew larger under their eyes, until at last it
burst the surface of the sea. The engine had been skillfully slowed at
the last moment, and the rescued bell stopped at the level of the deck
open to receive it. With mad haste it was drawn aboard and the hermetic
door was opened. Those who were near enough glanced inside and turned
pale. Tumbled in a heap at the bottom lay the six men, with yellow faces
and blank, staring eyes. In an instant they were lifted out and two
doctors sprang to the side of each. Were they dead? Could any skill
revive them? A hush as of death spread over the great vessel.

They were not dead. The skill of the physicians brought them, one after
another, slowly back to consciousness. But it was two full days before
they could rise from their beds, and three before they could begin to
tell their story--the story of the wonders they had seen, and of the
dreadful struggle for breath in the imprisoned bell before they had sunk
into unconsciousness. Not a word was ever spoken about the strange
outbreak of Blank at the sight of the gold, although the others all
recorded it in their notebooks. He himself never referred to it, and it
seemed to have faded from his mind.

As soon as it was evident that the rescued men would recover, Captain
Arms, acting on his own responsibility, had started the Ark on its
westward course. It was a long and tedious journey that they had yet
before them, but the monotony was broken by the undying interest in the
marvelous story of the adventures of the bell.

Three weeks after they left the vicinity of New York, the observations
showed that they must be nearing the eastern border of the Colorado
plateau. Then one day a bird alighted on the railing of the bridge,
close beside Cosmo and Captain Arms.

"A bird!" cried Cosmo. "But it is incredible that a bird should be here!
How can it ever have kept itself afloat? It surely could not have
remained in the air all this time, and it could not have rested on the
waves during the downpour from the sky! Its presence here is absolutely
miraculous!"

The poor bird, evidently exhausted by a long journey, remained upon the
rail, and permitted Cosmo to approach closely before taking flight to
another part of the Ark. Cosmo at first thought that it might have
escaped from his aviary below.

But close inspection satisfied him that it was of a different species
from any that he had taken into the Ark, and the more he thought of the
strangeness of its appearance here the greater was his bewilderment.

While he was puzzling over the subject the bird was seen by many of the
passengers, flitting from one part of the vessel to another, and they
were as much astonished as Cosmo had been, and all sorts of conjectures
