O-Tar was exhorting his warriors to attack, when a bloody and
disheveled padwar burst into the chamber through a side entrance. "The
city has fallen!" he cried aloud. "The hordes of Manatos pour through
The Gate of Enemies. The slaves from Gathol have arisen and destroyed
the palace guards. Great ships are landing warriors upon the palace
roof and in the Fields of Jetan. The men of Helium and Gathol are
marching through Manator. They cry aloud for the Princess of Helium and
swear to leave Manator a blazing funeral pyre consuming the bodies of
all our people. The skies are black with ships. They come in great
processions from the east and from the south."

And then once more the doors from The Hall of Chiefs swung wide and the
men of Manator turned to see another figure standing upon the
threshold--a mighty figure of a man with white skin, and black hair,
and gray eyes that glittered now like points of steel and behind him
The Hall of Chiefs was filled with fighting men wearing the harness of
far countries. Tara of Helium saw him and her heart leaped in
exultation, for it was John Carter, Warlord of Barsoom, come at the
head of a victorious host to the rescue of his daughter, and at his
side was Djor Kantos to whom she had been betrothed.

The Warlord eyed the assemblage for a moment before he spoke. "Lay down
your arms, men of Manator," he said. "I see my daughter and that she
lives, and if no harm has befallen her no blood need be shed. Your city
is filled with the fighting men of U-Thor, and those from Gathol and
from Helium. The palace is in the hands of the slaves from Gathol,
beside a thousand of my own warriors who fill the halls and chambers
surrounding this room. The fate of your jeddak lies in your own hands.
I have no wish to interfere. I come only for my daughter and to free
the slaves from Gathol. I have spoken!" and without waiting for a reply
and as though the room had been filled with his own people rather than
a hostile band he strode up the broad main aisle toward Tara of Helium.

The chiefs of Manator were stunned. They looked to O-Tar; but he could
only gaze helplessly about him as the enemy entered from The Hall of
Chiefs and circled the throne room until they had surrounded the entire
company. And then a dwar of the army of Helium entered.

"We have captured three chiefs," he reported to The Warlord, "who beg
that they be permitted to enter the throne room and report to their
fellows some matter which they say will decide the fate of Manator."

"Fetch them," ordered The Warlord.

They came, heavily guarded, to the foot of the steps leading to the
throne and there they stopped and the leader turned toward the others
of Manator and raising high his right hand displayed a jeweled dagger.
"We found it," he said, "even where I-Gos said that we would find it,"
and he looked menacingly upon O-Tar.

"A-Kor, jeddak of Manator!" cried a voice, and the cry was taken up by
a hundred hoarse-throated warriors.

"There can be but one jeddak in Manator," said the chief who held the
dagger; his eyes still fixed upon the hapless O-Tar he crossed to where
the latter stood and holding the dagger upon an outstretched palm
proffered it to the discredited ruler. "There can be but one jeddak in
Manator," he repeated meaningly.

O-Tar took the proffered blade and drawing himself to his full height
plunged it to the guard into his breast, in that single act redeeming
himself in the esteem of his people and winning an eternal place in The
Hall of Chiefs.

As he fell all was silence in the great room, to be broken presently by
the voice of U-Thor. "O-Tar is dead!" he cried. "Let A-Kor rule until
the chiefs of all Manator may be summoned to choose a new jeddak. What
is your answer?"

"Let A-Kor rule! A-Kor, Jeddak of Manator!" The cries filled the room
and there was no dissenting voice.

A-Kor raised his sword for silence. "It is the will of A-Kor," he said,
"and that of the Great Jed of Manatos, and the commander of the fleet
from Gathol, and of the illustrious John Carter, Warlord of Barsoom,
that peace lie upon the city of Manator and so I decree that the men of
Manator go forth and welcome the fighting men of these our allies as
guests and friends and show them the wonders of our ancient city and
the hospitality of Manator. I have spoken." And U-Thor and John Carter
dismissed their warriors and bade them accept the hospitality of
Manator. As the room emptied Djor Kantos reached the side of Tara of
Helium. The girl's happiness at rescue had been blighted by sight of
this man whom her virtuous heart told her she had wronged. She dreaded
the ordeal that lay before her and the dishonor that she must admit
before she could hope to be freed from the understanding that had for
long existed between them. And now Djor Kantos approached and kneeling
raised her fingers to his lips.

"Beautiful daughter of Helium," he said, "how may I tell you the thing
that I must tell you--of the dishonor that I have all unwittingly done
you? I can but throw myself upon your generosity for forgiveness; but
if you demand it I can receive the dagger as honorably as did O-Tar."

"What do you mean?" asked Tara of Helium. "What are you talking
about--why speak thus in riddles to one whose heart is already
breaking?"

Her heart already breaking! The outlook was anything but promising, and
the young padwar wished that he had died before ever he had had to
speak the words he now must speak.

"Tara of Helium," he continued, "we all thought you dead. For a long
year have you been gone from Helium. I mourned you truly and then, less
than a moon since, I wed with Olvia Marthis." He stopped and looked at
her with eyes that might have said: "Now, strike me dead!"

"Oh, foolish man!" cried Tara. "Nothing you could have done could have
pleased me more. Djor Kantos, I could kiss you!"

"I do not think that Olvia Marthis would mind," he said, his face now
wreathed with smiles. As they spoke a body of men had entered the
throne room and approached the dais. They were tall men trapped in
plain harness, absolutely without ornamentation. Just as their leader
reached the dais Tara had turned to Gahan, motioning him to join them.

"Djor Kantos," she said, "I bring you Turan the panthan, whose loyalty
and bravery have won my love."

John Carter and the leader of the new come warriors, who were standing
near, looked quickly at the little group. The former smiled an
inscrutable smile, the latter addressed the Princess of Helium. "'Turan
the panthan!'" he cried. "Know you not, fair daughter of Helium, that
this man you call panthan is Gahan, Jed of Gathol?"

For just a moment Tara of Helium looked her surprise; and then she
shrugged her beautiful shoulders as she turned her head to cast her
eyes over one of them at Gahan of Gathol.

"Jed or panthan," she said; "what difference does it make what one's
slave has been?" and she laughed roguishly into the smiling face of her
lover.

            *   *   *   *   *

His story finished, John Carter rose from the chair opposite me,
stretching his giant frame like some great forest-bred lion.

"You must go?" I cried, for I hated to see him leave and it seemed that
he had been with me but a moment.

"The sky is already red beyond those beautiful hills of yours," he
replied, "and it will soon be day."

"Just one question before you go," I begged.

"Well?" he assented, good-naturedly.

"How was Gahan able to enter the throne room garbed in O-Tar's
trappings?" I asked.

"It was simple--for Gahan of Gathol," replied The Warlord. "With the
assistance of I-Gos he crept into The Hall of Chiefs before the
ceremony, while the throne room and Hall of Chiefs were vacated to
receive the bride. He came from the pits through the corridor that
opened behind the arras at the rear of the throne, and passing into The
Hall of Chiefs took his place upon the back of a riderless thoat, whose
warrior was in I-Gos' repair room. When O-Tar entered and came near him
Gahan fell upon him and struck him with the butt of a heavy spear. He
thought that he had killed him and was surprised when O-Tar appeared to
denounce him."

"And Ghek? What became of Ghek?" I insisted.

"After leading Val Dor and Floran to Tara's disabled flier which they
repaired, he accompanied them to Gathol from where a message was sent
to me in Helium. He then led a large party including A-Kor and U-Thor
from the roof, where our ships landed them, down a spiral runway into
the palace and guided them to the throne room. We took him back to
Helium with us, where he still lives, with his single rykor which we
found all but starved to death in the pits of Manator. But come! No
more questions now."

I accompanied him to the east arcade where the red dawn was glowing
beyond the arches.

"Good-bye!" he said.

"I can scarce believe that it is really you," I exclaimed. "Tomorrow I
will be sure that I have dreamed all this."

He laughed and drawing his sword scratched a rude cross upon the
concrete of one of the arches.

"If you are in doubt tomorrow," he said, "come and see if you dreamed
this."

A moment later he was gone.




JETAN, OR MARTIAN CHESS

For those who care for such things, and would like to try the game, I
give the rules of Jetan as they were given me by John Carter. By
writing the names and moves of the various pieces on bits of paper and
pasting them on ordinary checkermen the game may be played quite as
well as with the ornate pieces used upon Mars.

THE BOARD: Square board consisting of one hundred alternate black and
orange squares.

THE PIECES: In order, as they stand upon the board in the first row,
from left to right of each player.

Warrior: 2 feathers; 2 spaces straight in any direction or combination.

Padwar: 2 feathers; 2 spaces diagonal in any direction or combination.

Dwar: 3 feathers; 3 spaces straight in any direction or combination.

Flier: 3 bladed propellor; 3 spaces diagonal in any direction or
combination; and may jump intervening pieces.

Chief: Diadem with ten jewels; 3 spaces in any direction; straight or
diagonal or combination.

Princess: Diadem with one jewel; same as Chief, except may jump
intervening pieces.

Flier: See above.

Dwar: See above.

Padwar: See above.

Warrior: See above.

And in the second row from left to right:

Thoat: Mounted warrior 2 feathers; 2 spaces, one straight and one
diagonal in any direction.

Panthans: (8 of them): 1 feather; 1 space, forward, side, or diagonal,
but not backward.

Thoat: See above.

The game is played with twenty black pieces by one player and twenty
orange by his opponent, and is presumed to have originally represented
a battle between the Black race of the south and the Yellow race of the
north. On Mars the board is usually arranged so that the Black pieces
are played from the south and the Orange from the north.

The game is won when any piece is placed on same square with opponent's
Princess, or a Chief takes a Chief.

The game is drawn when either Chief is taken by a piece other than the
opposing Chief, or when both sides are reduced to three pieces, or
less, of equal value and the game is not won in the ensuing ten moves,
five apiece.

The Princess may not move onto a threatened square, nor may she take an
opposing piece. She is entitled to one ten-space move at any time
during the game. This move is called the escape.

Two pieces may not occupy the same square except in the final move of a
game where the Princess is taken.

When a player, moving properly and in order, places one of his pieces
upon a square occupied by an opponent piece, the opponent piece is
considered to have been killed and is removed from the game.

The moves explained. Straight moves mean due north, south, east, or
west; diagonal moves mean northeast, southeast, southwest, or
northwest. A Dwar might move straight north three spaces, or north one
space and east two spaces, or any similar combination of straight
moves, so long as he did not cross the same square twice in a single
move. This example explains combination moves.

The first move may be decided in any way that is agreeable to both
players; after the first game the winner of the preceding game moves
first if he chooses, or may instruct his opponent to make the first
move.

Gambling: The Martians gamble at Jetan in several ways. Of course the
outcome of the game indicates to whom the main stake belongs; but they
also put a price upon the head of each piece, according to its value,
and for each piece that a player loses he pays its value to his
opponent.









End of Project Gutenberg's The Chessmen of Mars, by Edgar Rice Burroughs

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE CHESSMEN OF MARS ***

***** This file should be named 1153.txt or 1153.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/1/1/5/1153/

Produced by Judy Boss

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.


