"And then that will be the day of deliverance. The day of deliverance
and of royalty."

Several hours later I took the knife with which we had skinned the
desert gazelle and, in the sand at the foot of the rock where
Tanit-Zerga had given up her spirit, I made a little hollow where she
was to rest.

When everything was ready, I wanted to look once more at that dear
little face. Courage failed me for a moment.... Then I quickly drew
the _haik_ over the brown face and laid the body of the child in the
hollow.

I had reckoned without Gale.

The eyes of the mongoose had not left me during the whole time that I
was about my sad duty. When she heard the first handfuls of sand fall
on the _haik_, she gave a sharp cry. I looked at her and saw her ready
to spring, her eyes daring fire.

"Gale!" I implored; and I tried to stroke her.

She bit my hand and then leapt into the grave and began to dig,
throwing the sand furiously aside.

I tried three times to chase her away. I felt that I should never
finish my task and that, even if I did, Gale would stay there and
disinter the body.

My carbine lay at my feet. A shot drew echoes from the immense empty
desert. A moment later, Gale also slept her last sleep, curled up, as
I so often had seen her, against the neck of her mistress.

When the surface showed nothing more than a little mound of trampled
sand, I rose staggering and started off aimlessly into the desert,
toward the south.




XX

THE CIRCLE IS COMPLETE


At the foot of the valley of the Mia, at the place where the jackal
had cried the night Saint-Avit told me he had killed Morhange, another
jackal, or perhaps the same one, howled again.

Immediately I had a feeling that this night would see the
irremediable fulfilled.

We were seated that evening, as before, on the poor veranda improvised
outside our dining-room. The floor was of plaster, the balustrade of
twisted branches; four posts supported a thatched roof.

I have already said that from the veranda one could look far out over
the desert. As he finished speaking, Saint-Avit rose and stood leaning
his elbows on the railing. I followed him.

"And then...." I said.

He looked at me.

"And then what? Surely you know what all the newspapers told--how, in
the country of the Awellimiden, I was found dying of hunger and thirst
by an expedition under the command of Captain Aymard, and taken to
Timbuctoo. I was delirious for a month afterward. I have never known
what I may have said during those spells of burning fever. You may be
sure the officers of the Timbuctoo Club did not feel it incumbent upon
them to tell me. When I told them of my adventures, as they are
related in the report of the Morhange--Saint-Avit Expedition, I could
see well enough from the cold politeness with which they received my
explanations, that the official version which I gave them differed at
certain points from the fragments which had escaped me in my delirium.

"They did not press the matter. It remains understood that Captain
Morhange died from a sunstroke and that I buried him on the border of
the Tarhit watercourse, three marches from Timissao. Everybody can
detect that there are things missing in my story. Doubtless they guess
at some mysterious drama. But proofs are another matter. Because of
the impossibility of collecting them, they prefer to smother what
could only become a silly scandal. But now you know all the details as
well as I."

"And--she?" I asked timidly.

He smiled triumphantly. It was triumph at having led me to think no
longer of Morhange, or of his crime, the triumph of feeling that he
had succeeded in imbuing me with his own madness.

"Yes," he said. "She! For six years I have learned nothing more about
her. But I see her, I talk with her. I am thinking now how I shall
reenter her presence. I shall throw myself at her feet and say simply,
'Forgive me. I rebelled against your law. I did not know. But now I
know; and you see that, like Lieutenant Ghiberti, I have come back.'

"'Family, honor, country,' said old Le Mesge, 'you will forget all for
her.' Old Le Mesge is a stupid man, but he speaks from experience. He
knows, he who has seen broken before Antinea the wills of the fifty
ghosts in the red marble hall.

"And now, will you, in your turn, ask me 'What is this woman?' Do I
know myself? And besides, what difference does it make? What does her
past and the mystery of her origin matter to me; what does it matter
whether she is the true descendant of the god of the sea and the
sublime Lagides or the bastard of a Polish drunkard and a harlot of
the Marbeuf quarter?

"At the time when I was foolish enough to be jealous of Morhange,
these questions might have made some difference to the ridiculous
self-esteem that civilized people mix up with passion. But I have held
Antinea's body in my arms. I no longer wish to know any other, nor if
the fields are in blossom, nor what will become of the human
spirit....

"I do not wish to know. Or, rather, it is because I have too exact a
vision of that future, that I pretend to destroy myself in the only
destiny that is worth while: a nature unfathomed and virgin, a
mysterious love.

"_A nature unfathomed and virgin_. I must explain myself. One winter
day, in a large city all streaked with the soot that falls from black
chimneys of factories and of those horrible houses in the suburbs, I
attended a funeral.

"We followed the hearse in the mud. The church was new, damp and poor.
Aside from two or three people, relatives struck down by a dull
sorrow, everyone had just one idea: to find some pretext to get away.
Those who went as far as the cemetery were those who did not find an
excuse. I see the gray walls and the cypresses, those trees of sun and
shade, so beautiful in the country of southern France against the low
purple hills. I see the horrible undertaker's men in greasy jackets
and shiny top hats. I see.... No, I'll stop; it's too horrible.

"Near the wall, in a remote plot, a grave had been dug in frightful
yellow pebbly clay. It was there that they left the dead man whose
name I no longer remember.

"While they were lowering the casket, I looked at my hands, those
hands which in that strangely lighted country had pressed the hands of
Antinea. A great pity for my body seized me, a great fear of what
threatened it in these cities of mud. 'So,' I said to myself, 'it may
be that this body, this dear body, will come to such an end! No, no,
my body, precious above all other treasures, I swear to you that I
will spare you that ignominy; you shall not rot under a registered
number in the filth of a suburban cemetery. Your brothers in love, the
fifty knights of orichalch, await you, mute and grave, in the red
marble hall. I shall take you back to them.'

"A _mysterious love_. Shame to him who retails the secrets of his
loves. The Sahara lays its impassable barrier about Antinea; that is
why the most unreasonable requirements of this woman are, in reality,
more modest and chaste than your marriage will be, with its vulgar
public show, the bans, the invitations, the announcements telling an
evil-minded and joking people that after such and such an hour, on
such and such a day, you will have the right to violate your little
tupenny virgin.

"I think that is all I have to tell you. No, there is still one thing
more. I told you a while ago about the red marble hall. South of
Cherchell, to the west of the Mazafran river, on a hill which in the
early morning, emerges from the mists of the Mitidja, there is a
mysterious stone pyramid. The natives call it, 'The Tomb of the
Christian.' That is where the body of Antinea's ancestress, that
Cleopatra Selene, daughter of Mark Antony and Cleopatra, was laid to
rest. Though it is placed in the path of invasions, this tomb has kept
its treasure. No one has ever been able to discover the painted room
where the beautiful body reposes in a glass casket. All that the
ancestress has been able to do, the descendant will be able to surpass
in grim magnificence. In the center of the red marble hall, on the
rock whence comes the plaint of the gloomy fountain, a platform is
reserved. It is there, on an orichalch throne, with the Egyptian
head-dress and the golden serpent on her brow and the trident of
Neptune in her hand, that the marvelous woman I have told you about
will be ensconced on that day when the hundred and twenty niches,
hollowed out in a circle around her throne, shall each have received
its willing prey.

"When I left Ahaggar, you remember that it was niche number 55 that
was to be mine. Since then, I have never stopped calculating and I
conclude that it is in number 80 or 85 that I shall repose. But any
calculations based upon so fragile a foundation as a woman's whim may
be erroneous. That is why I am getting more and more nervous. 'I must
hurry,' I tell myself. 'I must hurry.'

"I must hurry," I repeated, as if I were in a dream.

He raised his head with an indefinable expression of joy. His hand
trembled with happiness when he shook mine.

"You will see," he repeated excitedly, "you will see."

Ecstatically, he took me in his arms and held me there a long moment.

An extraordinary happiness swept over both of us, while, alternately
laughing and crying like children, we kept repeating:

"We must hurry. We must hurry."

Suddenly there sprang up a slight breeze that made the tufts of thatch
in the roof rustle. The sky, pale lilac, grew paler still, and,
suddenly, a great yellow rent tore it in the east. Dawn broke over the
empty desert. From within the stockade came dull noises, a bugle call,
the rattle of chains. The post was waking up.

For several seconds we stood there silent, our eyes fixed on the
southern route by which one reaches Temassinin, Eguere and Ahaggar.

A rap on the dining-room door behind us made us start.

"Come in," said Andre de Saint-Avit in a voice which had become
suddenly hard.

The Quartermaster, Chatelain, stood before us.

"What do you want of me at this hour?" Saint-Avit asked brusquely.

The non-com stood at attention.

"Excuse me, Captain. But a native was discovered near the post, last
night, by the patrol. He was not trying to hide. As soon as he had
been brought here, he asked to be led before the commanding officer.
It was midnight and I didn't want to disturb you."

"Who is this native?"

"A Targa, Captain."

"A Targa? Go get him."

Chatelain stepped aside. Escorted by one of our native soldiers, the
man stood behind him.

They came out on the terrace.

The new arrival, six feet tall, was indeed a Targa. The light of dawn
fell upon his blue-black cotton robes. One could see his great dark
eyes flashing.

When he was opposite my companion, I saw a tremor, immediately
suppressed, run through both men.

They looked at each other for an instant in silence.

Then, bowing, and in a very calm voice, the Targa spoke:

"Peace be with you, Lieutenant de Saint-Avit."

In the same calm voice, Andre answered him:

"Peace be with you, Cegheir-ben-Cheikh."

[Transcriber's Notes:
1.In the original books, there were handwritten characters for the
Greek words used in the discussion of the Tifinar engravings; the
approximate Greek transliterations have been substituted.
2. Another inscription was hand-drawn in the book, and the center
symbol looks like a capital W, rotated 90 degrees counter-clockwise. I
placed notes to that effect where the symbol appears.]






End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Atlantida, by Pierre Benoit

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK ATLANTIDA ***

***** This file should be named 14301.txt or 14301.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.net/1/4/3/0/14301/

Produced by Elaine Walker, Ronald Holder and the PG Online Distributed
Proofreading Team


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

