Captain, looking with implacable hatred at the vessel nearing them.
One could feel that the same desire of vengeance animated every soul.
I went down at the moment another projectile struck the Nautilus, and I
heard the Captain exclaim:

"Strike, mad vessel!  Shower your useless shot!  And then, you will not
escape the spur of the Nautilus.  But it is not here that you shall
perish!  I would not have your ruins mingle with those of the Avenger!"

I reached my room.  The Captain and his second had remained on the
platform.  The screw was set in motion, and the Nautilus, moving with
speed, was soon beyond the reach of the ship's guns.  But the pursuit
continued, and Captain Nemo contented himself with keeping his distance.

About four in the afternoon, being no longer able to contain my
impatience, I went to the central staircase.  The panel was open, and I
ventured on to the platform.  The Captain was still walking up and down
with an agitated step.  He was looking at the ship, which was five or
six miles to leeward.

He was going round it like a wild beast, and, drawing it eastward, he
allowed them to pursue.  But he did not attack.  Perhaps he still
hesitated?  I wished to mediate once more.  But I had scarcely spoken,
when Captain Nemo imposed silence, saying:

"I am the law, and I am the judge!  I am the oppressed, and there is
the oppressor!  Through him I have lost all that I loved, cherished,
and venerated--country, wife, children, father, and mother.  I saw all
perish!  All that I hate is there!  Say no more!"

I cast a last look at the man-of-war, which was putting on steam, and
rejoined Ned and Conseil.

"We will fly!"  I exclaimed.

"Good!" said Ned.  "What is this vessel?"

"I do not know; but, whatever it is, it will be sunk before night.  In
any case, it is better to perish with it, than be made accomplices in a
retaliation the justice of which we cannot judge."

"That is my opinion too," said Ned Land, coolly.  "Let us wait for
night."

Night arrived.  Deep silence reigned on board.  The compass showed that
the Nautilus had not altered its course.  It was on the surface,
rolling slightly.  My companions and I resolved to fly when the vessel
should be near enough either to hear us or to see us; for the moon,
which would be full in two or three days, shone brightly.  Once on
board the ship, if we could not prevent the blow which threatened it,
we could, at least we would, do all that circumstances would allow.
Several times I thought the Nautilus was preparing for attack; but
Captain Nemo contented himself with allowing his adversary to approach,
and then fled once more before it.

Part of the night passed without any incident.  We watched the
opportunity for action.  We spoke little, for we were too much moved.
Ned Land would have thrown himself into the sea, but I forced him to
wait.  According to my idea, the Nautilus would attack the ship at her
waterline, and then it would not only be possible, but easy to fly.

At three in the morning, full of uneasiness, I mounted the platform.
Captain Nemo had not left it.  He was standing at the fore part near
his flag, which a slight breeze displayed above his head.  He did not
take his eyes from the vessel.  The intensity of his look seemed to
attract, and fascinate, and draw it onward more surely than if he had
been towing it.  The moon was then passing the meridian.  Jupiter was
rising in the east.  Amid this peaceful scene of nature, sky and ocean
rivalled each other in tranquillity, the sea offering to the orbs of
night the finest mirror they could ever have in which to reflect their
image.  As I thought of the deep calm of these elements, compared with
all those passions brooding imperceptibly within the Nautilus, I
shuddered.

The vessel was within two miles of us.  It was ever nearing that
phosphorescent light which showed the presence of the Nautilus.  I
could see its green and red lights, and its white lantern hanging from
the large foremast.  An indistinct vibration quivered through its
rigging, showing that the furnaces were heated to the uttermost.
Sheaves of sparks and red ashes flew from the funnels, shining in the
atmosphere like stars.

I remained thus until six in the morning, without Captain Nemo noticing
me.  The ship stood about a mile and a half from us, and with the first
dawn of day the firing began afresh.  The moment could not be far off
when, the Nautilus attacking its adversary, my companions and myself
should for ever leave this man.  I was preparing to go down to remind
them, when the second mounted the platform, accompanied by several
sailors.  Captain Nemo either did not or would not see them.  Some
steps were taken which might be called the signal for action.  They
were very simple.  The iron balustrade around the platform was lowered,
and the lantern and pilot cages were pushed within the shell until they
were flush with the deck.  The long surface of the steel cigar no
longer offered a single point to check its manoeuvres.  I returned to
the saloon.  The Nautilus still floated; some streaks of light were
filtering through the liquid beds.  With the undulations of the waves
the windows were brightened by the red streaks of the rising sun, and
this dreadful day of the 2nd of June had dawned.

At five o'clock, the log showed that the speed of the Nautilus was
slackening, and I knew that it was allowing them to draw nearer.
Besides, the reports were heard more distinctly, and the projectiles,
labouring through the ambient water, were extinguished with a strange
hissing noise.

"My friends," said I, "the moment is come.  One grasp of the hand, and
may God protect us!"

Ned Land was resolute, Conseil calm, myself so nervous that I knew not
how to contain myself.  We all passed into the library; but the moment
I pushed the door opening on to the central staircase, I heard the
upper panel close sharply.  The Canadian rushed on to the stairs, but I
stopped him.  A well-known hissing noise told me that the water was
running into the reservoirs, and in a few minutes the Nautilus was some
yards beneath the surface of the waves.  I understood the manoeuvre.
It was too late to act.  The Nautilus did not wish to strike at the
impenetrable cuirass, but below the water-line, where the metallic
covering no longer protected it.

We were again imprisoned, unwilling witnesses of the dreadful drama
that was preparing.  We had scarcely time to reflect; taking refuge in
my room, we looked at each other without speaking.  A deep stupor had
taken hold of my mind:  thought seemed to stand still.  I was in that
painful state of expectation preceding a dreadful report.  I waited, I
listened, every sense was merged in that of hearing!  The speed of the
Nautilus was accelerated.  It was preparing to rush.  The whole ship
trembled.  Suddenly I screamed.  I felt the shock, but comparatively
light.  I felt the penetrating power of the steel spur.  I heard
rattlings and scrapings.  But the Nautilus, carried along by its
propelling power, passed through the mass of the vessel like a needle
through sailcloth!

I could stand it no longer.  Mad, out of my mind, I rushed from my room
into the saloon.  Captain Nemo was there, mute, gloomy, implacable; he
was looking through the port panel.  A large mass cast a shadow on the
water; and, that it might lose nothing of her agony, the Nautilus was
going down into the abyss with her.  Ten yards from me I saw the open
shell, through which the water was rushing with the noise of thunder,
then the double line of guns and the netting.  The bridge was covered
with black, agitated shadows.

The water was rising.  The poor creatures were crowding the ratlines,
clinging to the masts, struggling under the water.  It was a human
ant-heap overtaken by the sea.  Paralysed, stiffened with anguish, my
hair standing on end, with eyes wide open, panting, without breath, and
without voice, I too was watching!  An irresistible attraction glued me
to the glass!  Suddenly an explosion took place.  The compressed air
blew up her decks, as if the magazines had caught fire.  Then the
unfortunate vessel sank more rapidly.  Her topmast, laden with victims,
now appeared; then her spars, bending under the weight of men; and,
last of all, the top of her mainmast.  Then the dark mass disappeared,
and with it the dead crew, drawn down by the strong eddy.

I turned to Captain Nemo.  That terrible avenger, a perfect archangel
of hatred, was still looking.  When all was over, he turned to his
room, opened the door, and entered.  I followed him with my eyes.  On
the end wall beneath his heroes, I saw the portrait of a woman, still
young, and two little children.  Captain Nemo looked at them for some
moments, stretched his arms towards them, and, kneeling down, burst
into deep sobs.



CHAPTER XXII

THE LAST WORDS OF CAPTAIN NEMO

The panels had closed on this dreadful vision, but light had not
returned to the saloon:  all was silence and darkness within the
Nautilus.  At wonderful speed, a hundred feet beneath the water, it was
leaving this desolate spot.  Whither was it going?  To the north or
south?  Where was the man flying to after such dreadful retaliation?  I
had returned to my room, where Ned and Conseil had remained silent
enough.  I felt an insurmountable horror for Captain Nemo.  Whatever he
had suffered at the hands of these men, he had no right to punish thus.
He had made me, if not an accomplice, at least a witness of his
vengeance.  At eleven the electric light reappeared.  I passed into the
saloon.  It was deserted.  I consulted the different instruments.  The
Nautilus was flying northward at the rate of twenty-five miles an hour,
now on the surface, and now thirty feet below it.  On taking the
bearings by the chart, I saw that we were passing the mouth of the
Manche, and that our course was hurrying us towards the northern seas
at a frightful speed.  That night we had crossed two hundred leagues of
the Atlantic.  The shadows fell, and the sea was covered with darkness
until the rising of the moon.  I went to my room, but could not sleep.
I was troubled with dreadful nightmare.  The horrible scene of
destruction was continually before my eyes.  From that day, who could
tell into what part of the North Atlantic basin the Nautilus would take
us?  Still with unaccountable speed.  Still in the midst of these
northern fogs.  Would it touch at Spitzbergen, or on the shores of Nova
Zembla?  Should we explore those unknown seas, the White Sea, the Sea
of Kara, the Gulf of Obi, the Archipelago of Liarrov, and the unknown
coast of Asia?  I could not say.  I could no longer judge of the time
that was passing.  The clocks had been stopped on board.  It seemed, as
in polar countries, that night and day no longer followed their regular
course.  I felt myself being drawn into that strange region where the
foundered imagination of Edgar Poe roamed at will.  Like the fabulous
Gordon Pym, at every moment I expected to see "that veiled human
figure, of larger proportions than those of any inhabitant of the
earth, thrown across the cataract which defends the approach to the
pole." I estimated (though, perhaps, I may be mistaken)--I estimated
this adventurous course of the Nautilus to have lasted fifteen or
twenty days.  And I know not how much longer it might have lasted, had
it not been for the catastrophe which ended this voyage.  Of Captain
Nemo I saw nothing whatever now, nor of his second.  Not a man of the
crew was visible for an instant.  The Nautilus was almost incessantly
under water.  When we came to the surface to renew the air, the panels
opened and shut mechanically.  There were no more marks on the
planisphere.  I knew not where we were.  And the Canadian, too, his
strength and patience at an end, appeared no more.  Conseil could not
draw a word from him; and, fearing that, in a dreadful fit of madness,
he might kill himself, watched him with constant devotion.  One morning
(what date it was I could not say) I had fallen into a heavy sleep
towards the early hours, a sleep both painful and unhealthy, when I
suddenly awoke.  Ned Land was leaning over me, saying, in a low voice,
"We are going to fly."  I sat up.

"When shall we go?"  I asked.

"To-night. All inspection on board the Nautilus seems to have ceased.
All appear to be stupefied.  You will be ready, sir?"

"Yes; where are we?"

"In sight of land.  I took the reckoning this morning in the
fog--twenty miles to the east."

"What country is it?"

"I do not know; but, whatever it is, we will take refuge there."

"Yes, Ned, yes.  We will fly to-night, even if the sea should swallow
us up."

"The sea is bad, the wind violent, but twenty miles in that light boat
of the Nautilus does not frighten me.  Unknown to the crew, I have been
able to procure food and some bottles of water."

"I will follow you."

"But," continued the Canadian, "if I am surprised, I will defend
myself; I will force them to kill me."

"We will die together, friend Ned."

I had made up my mind to all.  The Canadian left me.  I reached the
platform, on which I could with difficulty support myself against the
shock of the waves.  The sky was threatening; but, as land was in those
thick brown shadows, we must fly.  I returned to the saloon, fearing
and yet hoping to see Captain Nemo, wishing and yet not wishing to see
him.  What could I have said to him?  Could I hide the involuntary
horror with which he inspired me?  No. It was better that I should not
meet him face to face; better to forget him.  And yet----  How long
seemed that day, the last that I should pass in the Nautilus.  I
remained alone.  Ned Land and Conseil avoided speaking, for fear of
betraying themselves.  At six I dined, but I was not hungry; I forced
myself to eat in spite of my disgust, that I might not weaken myself.
At half-past six Ned Land came to my room, saying, "We shall not see
each other again before our departure.  At ten the moon will not be
risen.  We will profit by the darkness.  Come to the boat; Conseil and
I will wait for you."

The Canadian went out without giving me time to answer.  Wishing to
verify the course of the Nautilus, I went to the saloon.  We were
running N.N.E. at frightful speed, and more than fifty yards deep.  I
cast a last look on these wonders of nature, on the riches of art
heaped up in this museum, upon the unrivalled collection destined to
perish at the bottom of the sea, with him who had formed it.  I wished
to fix an indelible impression of it in my mind.  I remained an hour
thus, bathed in the light of that luminous ceiling, and passing in
review those treasures shining under their glasses.  Then I returned to
my room.

I dressed myself in strong sea clothing.  I collected my notes, placing
them carefully about me.  My heart beat loudly.  I could not check its
pulsations.  Certainly my trouble and agitation would have betrayed me
to Captain Nemo's eyes.  What was he doing at this moment?  I listened
at the door of his room.  I heard steps.  Captain Nemo was there.  He
had not gone to rest.  At every moment I expected to see him appear,
and ask me why I wished to fly.  I was constantly on the alert.  My
imagination magnified everything.  The impression became at last so
poignant that I asked myself if it would not be better to go to the
Captain's room, see him face to face, and brave him with look and
gesture.

It was the inspiration of a madman; fortunately I resisted the desire,
and stretched myself on my bed to quiet my bodily agitation.  My nerves
were somewhat calmer, but in my excited brain I saw over again all my
existence on board the Nautilus; every incident, either happy or
unfortunate, which had happened since my disappearance from the Abraham
Lincoln--the submarine hunt, the Torres Straits, the savages of Papua,
the running ashore, the coral cemetery, the passage of Suez, the Island
of Santorin, the Cretan diver, Vigo Bay, Atlantis, the iceberg, the
South Pole, the imprisonment in the ice, the fight among the poulps,
the storm in the Gulf Stream, the Avenger, and the horrible scene of
the vessel sunk with all her crew.  All these events passed before my
eyes like scenes in a drama.  Then Captain Nemo seemed to grow
enormously, his features to assume superhuman proportions.  He was no
longer my equal, but a man of the waters, the genie of the sea.

It was then half-past nine.  I held my head between my hands to keep it
from bursting.  I closed my eyes; I would not think any longer.  There
was another half-hour to wait, another half-hour of a nightmare, which
might drive me mad.

At that moment I heard the distant strains of the organ, a sad harmony
to an undefinable chant, the wail of a soul longing to break these
earthly bonds.  I listened with every sense, scarcely breathing;
plunged, like Captain Nemo, in that musical ecstasy, which was drawing
him in spirit to the end of life.

Then a sudden thought terrified me.  Captain Nemo had left his room.
He was in the saloon, which I must cross to fly.  There I should meet
him for the last time.  He would see me, perhaps speak to me.  A
gesture of his might destroy me, a single word chain me on board.

But ten was about to strike.  The moment had come for me to leave my
room, and join my companions.

I must not hesitate, even if Captain Nemo himself should rise before
me.  I opened my door carefully; and even then, as it turned on its
hinges, it seemed to me to make a dreadful noise.  Perhaps it only
existed in my own imagination.

I crept along the dark stairs of the Nautilus, stopping at each step to
check the beating of my heart.  I reached the door of the saloon, and
opened it gently.  It was plunged in profound darkness.  The strains of
the organ sounded faintly.  Captain Nemo was there.  He did not see me.
In the full light I do not think he would have noticed me, so entirely
was he absorbed in the ecstasy.

I crept along the carpet, avoiding the slightest sound which might
betray my presence.  I was at least five minutes reaching the door, at
the opposite side, opening into the library.

I was going to open it, when a sigh from Captain Nemo nailed me to the
spot.  I knew that he was rising.  I could even see him, for the light
from the library came through to the saloon.  He came towards me
silently, with his arms crossed, gliding like a spectre rather than
walking.  His breast was swelling with sobs; and I heard him murmur
these words (the last which ever struck my ear):

"Almighty God! enough! enough!"

Was it a confession of remorse which thus escaped from this man's
conscience?

In desperation, I rushed through the library, mounted the central
staircase, and, following the upper flight, reached the boat.  I crept
through the opening, which had already admitted my two companions.

"Let us go! let us go!"  I exclaimed.

"Directly!" replied the Canadian.

The orifice in the plates of the Nautilus was first closed, and
fastened down by means of a false key, with which Ned Land had provided
himself; the opening in the boat was also closed.  The Canadian began
to loosen the bolts which still held us to the submarine boat.

Suddenly a noise was heard.  Voices were answering each other loudly.
What was the matter?  Had they discovered our flight?  I felt Ned Land
slipping a dagger into my hand.

"Yes," I murmured, "we know how to die!"

The Canadian had stopped in his work.  But one word many times
repeated, a dreadful word, revealed the cause of the agitation
spreading on board the Nautilus.  It was not we the crew were looking
after!

"The maelstrom! the maelstrom!"  Could a more dreadful word in a more
dreadful situation have sounded in our ears!  We were then upon the
dangerous coast of Norway.  Was the Nautilus being drawn into this gulf
at the moment our boat was going to leave its sides?  We knew that at
the tide the pent-up waters between the islands of Ferroe and Loffoden
rush with irresistible violence, forming a whirlpool from which no
vessel ever escapes.  From every point of the horizon enormous waves
were meeting, forming a gulf justly called the "Navel of the Ocean,"
whose power of attraction extends to a distance of twelve miles.
There, not only vessels, but whales are sacrificed, as well as white
bears from the northern regions.

It is thither that the Nautilus, voluntarily or involuntarily, had been
run by the Captain.

It was describing a spiral, the circumference of which was lessening by
degrees, and the boat, which was still fastened to its side, was
carried along with giddy speed.  I felt that sickly giddiness which
arises from long-continued whirling round.

We were in dread.  Our horror was at its height, circulation had
stopped, all nervous influence was annihilated, and we were covered
with cold sweat, like a sweat of agony!  And what noise around our
frail bark!  What roarings repeated by the echo miles away!  What an
uproar was that of the waters broken on the sharp rocks at the bottom,
where the hardest bodies are crushed, and trees worn away, "with all
the fur rubbed off," according to the Norwegian phrase!

What a situation to be in!  We rocked frightfully.  The Nautilus
defended itself like a human being.  Its steel muscles cracked.
Sometimes it seemed to stand upright, and we with it!

"We must hold on," said Ned, "and look after the bolts.  We may still
be saved if we stick to the Nautilus."

He had not finished the words, when we heard a crashing noise, the
bolts gave way, and the boat, torn from its groove, was hurled like a
stone from a sling into the midst of the whirlpool.

My head struck on a piece of iron, and with the violent shock I lost
all consciousness.



CHAPTER XXIII

CONCLUSION
