Normandie, I believe?'

"All the morning I had Wilhelmina to myself, and at dinner I sat
beside her, with the professor opposite. The latter was cheerful
enough, but he nearly ruined my appetite, for he smelled strongly of
catnip. After dinner he became restless and fidgeted about in his
chair until coffee was brought, and we went up to the parlor of our
apartment. Here his restlessness increased to such an extent that I
ventured to ask him if he was in good health.

"'It's that basket--the covered basket which I have in the next room,'
he said.

"'What's the trouble with the basket?' I asked.

"'The basket's all right--but the contents worry me.'

"'May I inquire what the contents are?' I ventured.

"The professor rose.

"'Yes,' he said, 'you may inquire of my daughter.' He left the room,
but reappeared shortly, carrying a saucer of milk.

"I watched him enter the next room, which was mine.

"'What on earth is he taking that into my room for?' I asked
Wilhelmina. 'I don't keep cats.'

"'But you will,' she said.

"'I? Never!'

"'You will if I ask you to.'

"'But--but you won't ask me.'

"'But I do.'

"'Wilhelmina!'

"'Harold!'

"'I detest cats.'

"'You must not.'

"'I can't help it.'

"'You will when I ask it. Have I not given myself to you? Will you not
make a little sacrifice for me?'

"'I don't understand--'

"'Would you refuse my first request?'

"'No,' I said, miserably, 'I will keep dozens of cats--'

"'I do not ask that; I only wish you to keep one.'

"'Was that what your father had in that basket?' I asked,
suspiciously.

"'Yes, the basket came from Antwerp.'

"'What! The white Antwerp cat!' I cried.

"'Yes.'

"'And you ask me to keep that cat? Oh, Wilhelmina!'

"'Listen!' she said. 'I have a long story to tell you; come nearer,
close to me. You say you love me?'

"I bent and kissed her.

"'Then I shall put you to the proof,' she murmured.

"'Prove me!'

"'Listen. That cat is the same cat that ran out of the apartment in
the Waldorf when your great-aunt ceased to exist--in human shape. My
father and myself, having received word from the Mahatmas of the Trust
Company, sheltered and cherished the cat. We were ordered by the
Mahatmas to convert you. The task was appalling--but there is no such
thing as refusing a command, and we laid our plans. That man with a
white spot in his hair was my father--'

"'What! Your father is bald.'

"'He wore a wig then. The white spot came from dropping chemicals on
the wig while experimenting with a substance which you could not
comprehend.'

"'Then--then that clew was useless; but who could have taken the
Crimson Diamond? And who was the man with the white spot on his head
who tried to sell the stone in Paris?'

"'That was my father.'

"'He--he--st--took the Crimson Diamond!' I cried, aghast.

"'Yes and no. That was only a paste stone that he had in Paris. It
was to draw you over here. He had the real Crimson Diamond also.'

"'Your father?'

"'Yes. He has it in the next room now. Can you not see how it
disappeared, Harold? Why, the cat swallowed it!'

"'Do you mean to say that the white tabby swallowed the Crimson
Diamond?'

"'By mistake. She tried to get it out of the velvet bag, and, as the
bag was also full of catnip, she could not resist a mouthful, and
unfortunately just then you broke in the door and so startled the cat
that she swallowed the Crimson Diamond.'

"There was a painful pause. At last I said:

"'Wilhelmina, as you are able to vanish, I suppose you also are able
to converse with cats.'

"'I am,' she replied, trying to keep back the tears of mortification.

"'And that cat told you this?'

"'She did.'

"'And my Crimson Diamond is inside that cat?'

"'It is.'

"'Then,' said I, firmly, 'I am going to chloroform the cat.'

"'Harold!' she cried, in terror, 'that cat is your great-aunt!'

"I don't know to this day how I stood the shock of that announcement,
or how I managed to listen while Wilhelmina tried to explain the
transmigration theory, but it was all Chinese to me. I only knew that
I was a blood relation of a cat, and the thought nearly drove me mad.

"'Try, my darling, try to love her,' whispered Wilhelmina; 'she must
be very precious to you--'

"'Yes, with my diamond inside her,' I replied, faintly.

"'You must not neglect her,' said Wilhelmina.

"'Oh no, I'll always have my eye on her--I mean I will surround her
with luxury--er, milk and bones and catnip and books--er--does she
read?'

"'Not the books that human beings read. Now, go and speak to your
aunt, Harold.'

"'Eh! How the deuce--'

"'Go; for my sake try to be cordial.'

"She rose and led me unresistingly to the door of my room.

"'Good Heavens!' I groaned; 'this is awful.'

"'Courage, my darling!' she whispered. 'Be brave for love of me.'

"I drew her to me and kissed her. Beads of cold perspiration started
in the roots of my hair, but I clenched my teeth and entered the room
alone. The room was dark and I stood silent, not knowing where to
turn, fearful lest I step on my aunt! Then, through the dreary
silence, I called, 'Aunty!'

"A faint noise broke upon my ear, and my heart grew sick, but I strode
into the darkness, calling, hoarsely:

"'Aunt Tabby! It is your nephew!'

"Again the faint sound. Something was stirring there among the
shadows--a shape moving softly along the wall, a shade which glided by
me, paused, wavered, and darted under the bed. Then I threw myself on
the floor, profoundly moved, begging, imploring my aunt to come to
me.

"'Aunty! Aunty!' I murmured. 'Your nephew is waiting to take you to
his heart!'

"At last I saw my great-aunt's eyes shining in the dark."

The young man's voice grew hushed and solemn, and he lifted his hand
in silence:

"Close the door. That meeting is not for the eyes of the world! Close
the door upon that sacred scene where great-aunt and nephew are united
at last."

       *       *       *       *       *

A long pause followed; deep emotion was visible in Miss Barrison's
sensitive face. She said:

"Then--you are married?"

"No," replied Mr. Kensett, in a mortified voice.

"Why not?" I asked, amazed.

"Because," he said, "although my fiancee was prepared to accept a cat
as her great-aunt, she could not endure the complications that
followed."

"What complications?" inquired Miss Barrison.

The young man sighed profoundly, shaking his head.

"My great-aunt had kittens," he said, softly.

       *       *       *       *       *

The tremendous scientific importance of these experiences excited me
beyond measure. The simplicity of the narrative, the elaborate
attention to corroborative detail, all bore irresistible testimony to
the truth of these accounts of phenomena vitally important to the
entire world of science.

We all dined together that night--a little earnest company of
knowledge-seekers in the vast wilderness of the unexplored; and we
lingered long in the dining-car, propounding questions, advancing
theories, speculating upon possibilities of most intense interest.
Never before had I known a man whose relatives were cats and kittens,
but he did not appear to share my enthusiasm in the matter.

"You see," he said, looking at Miss Barrison, "it may be interesting
from a purely scientific point of view, but it has already proved a
bar to my marrying."

"Were the kittens black?" I inquired.

"No," he said, "my aunt drew the color-line, I am proud to say."

"I don't see," said Miss Barrison, "why the fact that your great-aunt
is a cat should prevent you from marrying."

"It wouldn't prevent _me_!" said the young man, quickly.

"Nor me," mused Miss Barrison--"if I were really in love."

Meanwhile I had been very busy thinking about Professor Farrago, and,
coming to an interesting theory, advanced it.

"If," I began, "he marries one of those transparent ladies, what about
the children?"

"Some would be, no doubt, transparent," said Kensett.

"They might be only translucent," suggested Miss Barrison.

"Or partially opaque," I ventured. "But it's a risky marriage--not to
be able to see what one's wife is about--"

"That is a silly reflection on women," said Miss Barrison, quietly.
"Besides, a girl need not be transparent to conceal what she's
doing."

This observation seemed to end our postprandial and tripartite
conference; Miss Barrison retired to her stateroom presently; after a
last cigar, smoked almost in silence, the young man and I bade each
other a civil good-night and retired to our respective berths.

I think it was at Richmond, Virginia, that I was awakened by the negro
porter shaking me very gently and repeating, in a pleasant, monotonous
voice: "Teleg'am foh you, suh! Teleg'am foh Mistuh Gilland, suh. 'Done
call you 'lev'm times sense breakfass, suh! Las' call foh luncheon,
suh. Teleg'am foh--"

"Heavens!" I muttered, sitting up in my bunk, "is it as late as that!
Where are we?" I slid up the window-shade and sat blinking at a flood
of sunshine.

"Telegram?" I said, yawning and rubbing my eyes. "Let me have it. All
right, I'll be out presently. Shut that curtain! I don't want the
entire car to criticise my pink pajamas!"

"Ain' nobody in de cyar, 'scusin yo'se'f, suh," grinned the porter,
retiring.

I heard him, but did not comprehend, sitting there sleepily unfolding
the scrawled telegram. Suddenly my eyes flew wide open; I scanned the
despatch with stunned incredulity:


              "ATLANTA, GEORGIA.

    "We couldn't help it. Love at first sight. Married this
    morning in Atlanta. Wildly happy. Forgive. Wire blessing.

          "(Signed) HAROLD KENSETT,
          "HELEN BARRISON KENSETT."

"Porter!" I shouted. "Porter! Help!"

There was no response.

"Oh, Lord!" I groaned, and rolled over, burying my head in the
blankets; for I understood at last that Science, the most jealous,
most exacting of mistresses, could never brook a rival.



THE END


       *       *       *       *       *

    +--------------------------------------------------------------+
    | Typographical errors corrected in text:                      |
    |                                                              |
    | Page  86: beautful replaced with beautiful                   |
    | Page 180: Magazin replaced with Magazine                     |
    | Page 206: sun-sorched replaced with sun-scorched             |
    |                                                              |
    +--------------------------------------------------------------+

       *       *       *       *       *






End of Project Gutenberg's In Search of the Unknown, by Robert W. Chambers

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK IN SEARCH OF THE UNKNOWN ***

***** This file should be named 18668.txt or 18668.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/1/8/6/6/18668/

Produced by Suzanne Shell, Jeannie Howse and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net


