The brigand ship with its surrounding darkness was not far from us. No
one was out here. We passed the wreckage of broken projectors, and
gruesome, shattered human forms.

We prowled closer. The hull of the ship loomed ahead of us. All dark.

We came at last close against the sleek metal hull side, slid along it
to where I was sure the manual lock would be located.

Abruptly I realized that Anita was not behind me! Then I saw her at a
little distance, struggling in the grip of a giant helmeted figure!
The brigand lifted her--turned, and ran.

I did not dare fire. I bounded after them along the hull-side, around
under the curve of the pointed bow, down along the other side.

I had mistaken the hull port location. It was here. The running,
bounding figure reached it, slid the panel. I was only fifty feet
away--not much more than a single leap. I saw Anita being shoved into
the pressure lock. The Martian flung himself after her.

I fired at him in desperation, but missed. I came with a rush. And as
I reached the port, it slid closed in my face, barring me!




XXXVII


With puny fists I pounded the panel. A small pane in it was
transparent. Within the lock I could see the blurred figures of Anita
and her captor--and it seemed, another figure there. The lock was some
ten feet square, with a low ceiling. It glowed with a dim tube-light.

I strained at it with futile, silent effort. The mechanism was here to
open this manual; but it was now clasped from within so would not
operate.

A few seconds, while I stood there in a panic of confusion, raging to
get in. This disaster had come so suddenly. I did not plan: I had no
thought save to batter my way in and rescue Anita. I recall that I
finally beat on the glassite pane with my bullet projector until the
weapon was bent and useless. And I flung it with a wild despairing
rage at my feet.

They were letting the ship's air-pressure into this lock. Soon they
would open the inner panel, step into the secondary chamber--and in a
moment more would be within the ship's hull corridor. Anita, lost to
me!

The outer panel suddenly opened! I had lunged against it with my
shoulder; the giant figure inside slid it. It was taken by surprise! I
half fell forward.

Huge arms went around me. The goggled face of the helmet peered into
mine.

"So it is you, Haljan! I thought I recognized that little device over
your helmet bracket. And here is my little Anita, come back to me
again!"

Miko!

This was he. His great bloated arms encircling me, bending me
backward, holding me helpless. I saw over his shoulder that Anita was
clutched in the grip of another helmeted figure. No giant, but tall
for an Earth man--almost as tall as myself. Then the tube light in the
room illumined the visor. I saw the face, recognized it. Moa!

I gasped, "So--I've got you--Miko--"

"Got me! You're a fool to the last, Haljan! A fool to the last! But
you were always a fool."

I could scarcely move in his grip. My arms were pinned. As he slowly
bent me backward, I wound my legs around one of his: it was as
unyielding as a steel pillar. He had closed the outer panel; the air
pressure in the lock was rising. I could feel it against my suit.

My helmeted head was being forced backward; Miko's left arm held me.
In his gloved right hand as it came slowly up over my throat I saw a
knife blade, its naked, sharpened metal glistening blue-white in the
light from overhead.

I seized his wrist. But my puny strength could not hold him. The
knife, against all of my efforts, came slowly down.

A moment of this slow, deadly combat--the end of everything for me.

I was aware of the helmeted figure of Moa casting off Anita--and then
the two girls leaping upon Miko. It threw him off his balance, and my
hanging weight made him topple forward. He took a step to recover
himself; his hand with the knife was flung up with an instinctive,
involuntary balancing gesture. And as it came down again, I forced the
knife-blade to graze his throat. Its point caught in the fabric of his
suit.

His startled oath jangled in my ears. The girls were clawing at him;
we were all four scrambling, swaying. With despairing strength I
twisted at his wrist. The knife went into his throat. I plunged it
deeper.

His suit went flabby. He crumpled over me and fell, knocking me to the
floor. His voice, with the horrible gurgling rasp of death in it,
rattled my ear-grids.

"Not such a fool--are you, Haljan--"

Moa's helmeted head was close over us. I saw that she had seized the
knife, jerked it from her brother's throat. She leaped backward,
waving it.

I twisted from beneath Miko's lifeless, inert body. As I got to my
feet, Anita flung herself to shield me. Moa was across the lock, back
up against the wall. The knife in her hand went up. She stood for the
briefest instant regarding Anita and me, holding each other. I thought
that she was about to leap upon us. But before I could move, the knife
came down and plunged into her breast. She fell forward, her grotesque
helmet striking the grid-floor almost at my feet.

"Gregg!"

"She's dead."

"No! She moved! Get her helmet off! There's enough air here."

My helmet pressure indicator was faintly buzzing to show that a safe
pressure was in the room. I shut off Moa's Erentz motors, unfastened
her helmet and raised it off. We gently turned her body. She lay with
closed eyes, her pallid face blue. With our own helmets off, we knelt
over her.

"Oh, Gregg--is she dead?"

"No. Not quite--but dying."

"Gregg, I don't want her to die! She was trying to help you there at
the last."

She opened her eyes. The film of death was glazing them. But she saw
me, recognized me.

"Gregg--"

"Yes, Moa. I'm here."

Her vivid lips were faintly drawn in a smile. "I'm--so glad--you took
the helmets off, Gregg. I'm--going--you know."

"No!"

"Going--back to Mars--to rest with the fire-makers--where I came
from. I was thinking--maybe you would kiss me, Gregg?"

Anita gently pushed me down. I pressed the white, faintly smiling lips
with mine. She sighed, and it ended with a rattle in her throat.

"Thank you--Gregg--closer--I can't talk so loudly--"

One of her gloved hands struggled to touch me, but she had no strength
and it fell back. Her words were the faintest of whispers:

"There was no use living--without your love. But I want you to
see--now--that a Martian girl can die with a smile--"

Her eyelids fluttered down; it seemed that she sighed and then was not
breathing. But on her livid face the faint smile still lingered, to
show me how a Martian girl could die.

We had forgotten for the moment where we were. As I glanced up I saw
through the inner panel, past the secondary lock, that the hull's
corridor was visible. And along its length a group of Martians was
advancing! They saw us, and came running.

"Anita! Look! We've got to get out of here!"

The secondary lock was open to the corridor. We jammed on our helmets.
The unhelmeted brigands by then were fumbling at the inner panel. I
pulled at the lever of the outer panel. The brigands were hurrying,
thinking that they could be in time to stop me. One of the more
cautious fumbled with a helmet.

"Anita, run! Try and keep your feet."

I slid the outer panel and pushed at Anita. Simultaneously the
brigands opened the inner port.

The air came with a tempestuous rush. A blast through the inner
port--through the small pressure lock--a wild rush, out to the airless
Moon. All the air in the ship madly rushing to escape....

Like feathers, we were blown with it. I recall an impression of the
hurtling brigand figures and swift flying rocks under me. A silent
crash as I struck.

Then soundless, empty blackness.




XXXVIII


"Is he conscious? We'd better take him back: get his helmet off."

"It's over. We can get back to the camp now. Venza dear, we've
won--it's over."

"He hears us!"

"Gregg!"

"He hears us. He'll be all right!"

I opened my eyes, I lay on the rocks. Over my helmet, other helmets
were peering, and faint, familiar voices mingled with the roaring in
my ears.

"--back to the camp and get his helmet off."

"Are his motors smooth? Keep them right, Snap--he must have good air."

I seemed unhurt. But Anita....

She was here. "Gregg, dear one!"

Anita safe! All four of us here on the Earthlit rocks, close outside
the brigand ship.

"Anita!"

She held me, lifted me. I was uninjured. I could stand: I staggered up
and stood swaying. The brigand ship, a hundred feet away, loomed dark
and silent, a lifeless hulk, already empty of air, drained in the mad
blast outward. Like the wreck of the _Planetara_--a dead, useless,
pulseless hulk already.

We four stood together, triumphant. The battle was over. The brigands
were worsted, almost the last man of them dead or dying. No more than
ten or fifteen had been available for that final assault upon the camp
buildings. Miko's last strategy. I think perhaps he had intended, with
his few remaining men, to take the ship and make away, deserting his
fellows.

All on the ship, caught unhelmeted by the explosion, were dead long
since.

I stood listening to Snap's triumphant account. It had not been
difficult for the flying platforms to hunt down the attacking brigands
on the open rocks. We had only lost one more platform.

Human hearts beat sometimes with very selfish emotions. It was a
triumphant ending for us, and we hardly gave a thought that half of
Grantline's men had perished.

We huddled on Snap's platform. It rose, lurching drunkenly barely
carrying us.

As we headed for the Grantline buildings, where still the rift in the
wall had not quite broken, there came the final triumph. Miko had been
aware of it, and knew he had lost. Grantline's searchlight leaped
upward, swept the sky, caught its sought-for object--a huge silver
cylinder, bathed brightly in the white searchbeam glare.

The police ship from Earth.

       *       *       *       *       *




TWO PLANETS CLASH FOR LUNAR TREASURE


Gregg Haljan was aware that there was a certain danger in having the
giant spaceship _Planetara_ stop off at the moon to pick up
Grantline's special cargo of moon ore. For that rare metal--invaluable
in keeping Earth's technology running--was the target of many greedy
eyes.

But nevertheless he hadn't figured on the special twist the clever
Martian brigands would use. So when he found both the ship and himself
suddenly in their hands, he knew that there was only one way in which
he could hope to save that cargo and his own secret--that would be by
turning space-pirate himself and paying the BRIGANDS OF THE MOON back
in their own interplanetary coin.

       *       *       *       *       *

Here is a science-fiction classic, as exciting and ingenious as only a
master of super-science could write.

       *       *       *       *       *

When RAY CUMMINGS took leave of this planet early in 1957, the world
of modern science-fiction lost one of its genuine founding fathers.
For the imagination of this talented writer supplied a great many of
the most basic themes upon which the present superstructure of
science-fiction is based. Following the lead of Jules Verne and H. G.
Wells, Cummings successfully bridged the gap between the early dawning
of science-fiction in the last decades of the Nineteenth Century and
the full flowering of the field in these middle decades of the
Twentieth.

Born in 1887, Cummings acquired insight into the vast possibilities of
future science by a personal association with Thomas Alva Edison.
During the 1920's and 1930's, he thrilled millions of readers with his
vivid tales of space and time. The infinite and the infinitesimal were
all parts of his canvas, and past, present, and future, the
interplanetary and the extra-dimensional, all made their initial
impact on the reading public through his many stories and novels.

       *       *       *       *       *

Previously published in an ACE edition is his novel,
_The Man Who Mastered Time_ (D-173).

       *       *       *       *       *






End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Brigands of the Moon, by Ray Cummings

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK BRIGANDS OF THE MOON ***

***** This file should be named 19066.txt or 19066.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/1/9/0/6/19066/

Produced by Greg Weeks, Jason Isbell, Sankar Viswanathan,
and the Online Distributed Proofreading Team at
http://www.pgdp.net


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.
