enable him to construct them for himself. The aim of the book is to
lead the pupil _to observe and to think_.

C. F. EMERSON, _Prof. of Physics, Dartmouth College_: It takes up the
subject on the right plan, and presents it in a clear, yet scientific,
way.

WM. NOETLING, _Prof. of Rhetoric, Theory and Practice of Teaching,
State Normal School, Bloomsburg, Pa._: Every page of the book shows
that the author is a _real_ teacher and that he knows how to make
pupils think. I know of no other work on the subject of which this
treats that I can so unreservedly recommend to all wide-awake teachers
as this.

B. F. WRIGHT, _Supt. of Public Schools, St. Paul, Minn._: I like it
better than any text-book on physics I have seen.

O. H. ROBERTS, _Prin. of High School, San Jose, Cal._: Gage's Physics
is giving great satisfaction.


_Introduction to Physical Science._

  By A. P. GAGE, Instructor in Physics in the English High School,
  Boston, Mass., and Author of _Elements of Physics_, etc. 12mo.
  Cloth. viii + 353 pages. With a chart of colors and spectra. Mailing
  Price, $1.10; for introduction, $1.00; allowance for an old book in
  exchange, 30 cents.

The great and constantly increasing popularity of Gage's _Elements of
Physics_ has created a demand for an equally good but easier book, on
the same plan, suitable for schools that can give but a limited time
to the study. The _Introduction to Physical Science_ has been prepared
to supply this demand.

ACCURACY is the prime requisite in scientific text-books. A false
statement is not less false because it is plausible, nor an
inconclusive experiment more satisfactory because it is diverting. In
books of entertainment, such things may be permissible; but in a
text-book, the first essentials are correctness and accuracy. It is
believed that the _Introduction_ will stand the closest expert
scrutiny. Especial care has been taken to restrict the use of
scientific terms, such as _force_, _energy_, _power_, etc., to their
proper significations. Terms like _sound_, _light_, _color_, etc.,
which have commonly been applied to both the effect and the agent
producing the effect have been rescued from this ambiguity.

RECENT ADVANCES in physics have been faithfully recorded, and the
relative practical importance of the various topics has been taken
into account. Among the new features are a full treatment of electric
lighting, and descriptions of storage batteries, methods of
transmitting electric energy, simple and easy methods of making
electrical measurements with inexpensive apparatus, the compound
steam-engine, etc. Static electricity, which is now generally regarded
as of comparatively little importance, is treated briefly; while
dynamic electricity, the most potent and promising physical element of
our modern civilization, is placed in the clearest light of our
present knowledge.

In INTEREST AND AVAILABILITY the _Introduction_ will, it is believed,
be found no less satisfactory. The wide use of the _Elements_ under
the most varied conditions, and, in particular, the author's own
experience in teaching it, have shown how to improve where improvement
was possible. The style will be found suited to the grades that will
use the book. The experiments are varied, interesting, clear, and of
practical significance, as well as simple in manipulation and ample in
number. Certain subjects that are justly considered difficult and
obscure have been omitted; as, for instance, certain laws relating to
the pressure of gases and the polarization of light. The
_Introduction_ is even more fully illustrated than the _Elements_.

IN GENERAL. The _Introduction_, like the _Elements_, has this distinct
and distinctive aim,--to elucidate science, instead of "popularizing"
it; to make it liked for its own sake, rather than for its gilding and
coating; and, while teaching the facts, to impart the spirit of
science,--that is to say, the spirit of our civilization and progress.

GEORGE E. GAY, _Prin. of High School, Malden, Mass._: With the matter,
both the topics and their presentation, I am better pleased than with
any other Physics I have seen.

R. H. PERKINS, _Supt. of Schools, Chicopee, Mass._: I have no doubt we
can adopt it as early as next month, and use the same to great
advantage in our schools. (_Feb. 6, 1888._)

MARY E. HILL, _Teacher of Physics, Northfield Seminary, Mass._: I like
the truly scientific method and the clearness with which the subject
is presented. It seems to me admirably adapted to the grade of work
for which it is designed. (_Mar. 5, '88._)

JOHN PICKARD, _Prin. of Portsmouth High School, N.H._: I like it
exceedingly. It is clear, straightforward, practical, and not too
heavy.

EZRA BRAINERD, _Pres. and Prof. of Physics, Middlebury College, Vt._:
I have looked it over carefully, and regard it as a much better book
for high schools than the former work. (_Feb. 6, 1888._)

JAMES A. DE BOER, _Prin. of High School, Montpelier, Vt._: I have not
only examined, but studied it, and consider it superior as a text-book
to any other I have seen. (_Feb. 10, '88._)

E. B. ROSA, _Teacher of Physics, English and Classical School,
Providence, R.I._: I think it the best thing in that grade published,
and intend to use it another year. (_Feb. 23, '88._)

G. H. PATTERSON, _Prin. and Prof. of Physics, Berkeley Sch.,
Providence, R.I._: A very practical book by a practical teacher.
(_Feb. 2, 1888._)

GEORGE E. BEERS, _Prin. of Evening High School, Bridgeport, Conn._:
The more I see of Professor Gage's books, the better I like them. They
are popular, and at the same time scientific, plain and simple, full
and complete. (_Feb. 18, 1888._)

ARTHUR B. CHAFFEE, _Prof. in Franklin College, Ind._: I am very much
pleased with the new book. It will suit the average class better than
the old edition.

W. D. KERLIN, _Supt. of Public Schools, New Castle, Ind._: I find that
it is the best adapted to the work which we wish to do in our high
school of any book brought to my notice.

C. A. BRYANT, _Supt. of Schools, Paris, Tex._: It is just the book for
high schools. I shall use it next year.


_Introduction to Chemical Science._

  By R. P. WILLIAMS, Instructor in Chemistry in the English High
  School, Boston. 12mo. Cloth. 216 pages. Mailing Price, 90 cents; for
  introduction, 80 cents; Allowance for old book in exchange,
  25 cents.

In a word, this is a working chemistry--brief but adequate. Attention
is invited to a few special features:--

1. This book is characterized by directness of treatment, by the
selection, so far as possible, of the most interesting and practical
matter, and by the omission of what is unessential.

2. Great care has been exercised to combine clearness with accuracy of
statement, both of theories and of facts, and to make the explanations
both lucid and concise.

3. The three great classes of chemical compounds--acids, bases, and
salts--are given more than usual prominence, and the arrangement and
treatment of the subject-matter relating to them is believed to be a
feature of special merit.

4. The most important experiments and those best illustrating the
subjects to which they relate, have been selected; but the modes of
experimentation are so simple that most of them can be performed by
the average pupil without assistance from the teacher.

5. The necessary apparatus and chemicals are less expensive than those
required for any other text-book equally comprehensive.

6. The special inductive feature of the work consists in calling
attention, by query and suggestion, to the most important phenomena
and inferences. This plan is consistently adhered to.

7. Though the method is an advanced one, it has been so simplified
that pupils experience no difficulty, but rather an added interest, in
following it; the author himself has successfully employed it in
classes so large that the simplest and most practical plan has been a
necessity.

8. The book is thought to be comprehensive enough for high schools and
academies, and for a preparatory course in colleges and professional
schools.

9. Those teachers in particular who have little time to prepare
experiments for pupils, or whose experience in the laboratory has been
limited, will find the simplicity of treatment and of experimentation
well worth their careful consideration.

Those who try the book find its merits have not been overstated.

A. B. AUBERT, _Prof. of Chemistry, Maine State College, Orono, Me._:
All the salient points are well explained, the theories are treated of
with great simplicity; it seems as if every student might thoroughly
understand the science of chemistry when taught from such a work.

H. T. FULLER, _Pres. of Polytechnic Institute, Worcester, Mass._: It
is clear, concise, and suggests the most important and most
significant experiments for illustration of general principles.

ALFRED S. ROE, _Prin. of High School, Worcester, Mass._: I am very
much pleased with it. I think it the most practical book for actual
work that I have seen.

FRANK M. GILLEY, _Science Teacher, High School, Chelsea, Mass._: I
have examined the proof-sheets in connection with my class work, and
after comparison with a large number of text-books, feel convinced
that it is superior to any yet published.

G. S. FELLOWS, _Teacher of Chemistry, High School, Washington, D.C._:
The author's method seems to us the ideal one. Not only are the
theoretical parts rendered clear by experiments performed by the
student himself, but there is a happy blending of theoretical and
applied chemistry as commendable as it is unusual.

J. I. D. HINES, _Prof. of Chemistry, Cumberland University, Lebanon,
Tenn._: I am very much pleased with it, and think it will give the
student an admirable introduction to the science of chemistry.

HORACE PHILLIPS, _Prin. of High School, Elkhart, Ind._: My class has
now used it three months. It proves the most satisfactory text-book in
this branch that I have ever used. The cost of apparatus and material
is very small.

O. S. WESCOTT, _Prin. North Division H. Sch., Chicago_: My chemistry
professor says it is the most satisfactory thing he has seen, and
hopes we may be able to have it in future.


_Laboratory Manual of General Chemistry._

  By R. P. WILLIAMS, Instructor in Chemistry, English High School,
  Boston, and author of _Introduction to Chemical Science_. 12mo.
  Boards. xvi + 200 pages. Mailing Price, 30 cents; for Introduction,
  25 cents.

This Manual, prepared especially to accompany the author's
_Introduction to Chemical Science_, but suitable for use with any
text-book of chemistry, gives directions for performing one hundred of
the more important experiments in general chemistry and metal
analysis, with blanks and a model for the same, lists of apparatus and
chemicals, etc.

The Manual is commended as well-designed, simple, convenient, and
cheap,--a practical book that classes in chemistry need.

W. M. STINE, _Prof. of Chemistry, Ohio University, Athens, O._: It is
a work that has my heartiest endorsement. I consider it thoroughly
pedagogical in its principles, and its use must certainly give the
student the greatest benefit from his chemical drill. (_Dec. 30,
1888._)


_Young's General Astronomy._

  A Text-book for colleges and technical schools. By CHARLES A. YOUNG,
  Ph.D., LL.D., Professor of Astronomy in the College of New Jersey,
  and author of _The Sun_, etc. 8vo. viii + 551 pages. Half-morocco.
  Illustrated with over 250 cuts and diagrams, and supplemented with
  the necessary tables. Introduction Price, $2.25. Allowance for an
  old book in exchange, 40 cents.

The OBJECT of the author has been twofold. First and chiefly, to make
a book adapted for use in the college class-room; and, secondly, to
make one valuable as a permanent storehouse and directory of
information for the student's use after he has finished his prescribed
course.

The METHOD of treatment corresponds with the object of the book.
Truth, accuracy, and order have been aimed at first, with clearness
and freedom from ambiguity.

In AMOUNT, the work has been adjusted as closely as possible to the
prevailing courses of study in our colleges. The fine print may be
omitted from the regular lessons and used as collateral reading. It is
important to anything like a complete view of the subject, but not
essential to a course. Some entire chapters can be omitted, if
necessary.

NEW TOPICS, as indicated above, have received a full share of
attention, and while the book makes no claims to novelty, the name of
the author is a guarantee of much originality both of matter and
manner.

The book will be found especially well adapted for high school and
academy teachers who desire a work for reference in supplementing
their brief courses. The illustrations are mostly new, and prepared
expressly for this work. The tables in the appendix are from the
latest and most trustworthy sources. A very full and carefully
prepared index will be found at the end.

The eminence of Professor Young as an original investigator in
astronomy, a lecturer and writer on the subject, and an instructor of
college classes, and his scrupulous care in preparing this volume, led
the publishers to present the work with the highest confidence; and
this confidence has been fully justified by the event. More than one
hundred colleges adopted the work within a year from its publication.


_Young's Elements of Astronomy._

  A Text-Book for use in High Schools and Academies. With a
  Uranography. By CHARLES A. YOUNG, Ph.D., LL.D., Professor of
  Astronomy in the College of New Jersey (Princeton), and author of _A
  General Astronomy_, _The Sun_, etc. 12mo. Half leather. x + 472
  pages, and four star maps. Mailing Price, $1.55; for Introduction,
  $1.40; allowance for old book in exchange, 30 cents.

_Uranography._

  From Young's Elements of Astronomy. 12mo. Flexible covers. 42 pages,
  besides four star maps. By mail, 35 cents; for Introduction,
  30 cents.

This volume is a new work, and not a mere abridgment of the author's
_General Astronomy_. Much of the material of the larger book has
naturally been incorporated in this, and many of its illustrations are
used; but everything has been worked over, with reference to the high
school course.

Special attention has been paid to making all statements correct and
accurate _as far as they go_. Many of them are necessarily incomplete,
on account of the elementary character of the work; but it is hoped
that this incompleteness has never been allowed to become untruth, and
that the pupil will not afterwards have to unlearn anything the book
has taught him.

In the text no mathematics higher than elementary algebra and geometry
is introduced; in the foot-notes and in the Appendix an occasional
trigonometric formula appears, for the benefit of the very
considerable number of high school students who understand such
expressions. This fact should be particularly noted, for it is a
special aim of the book to teach astronomy scientifically without
requiring more knowledge and skill in mathematics than can be expected
of high school pupils.

Many things of real, but secondary, importance have been treated of in
fine print; and others which, while they certainly ought to be found
within the covers of a high school text-book of astronomy, are not
essential to the course, are relegated to the Appendix.

A brief URANOGRAPHY is also presented, covering the constellations
visible in the United States, with maps on a scale sufficient for the
easy identification of all the principal stars. It includes also a
list of such telescopic objects in each constellation as are easily
found and lie within the power of a small telescope.


_Plant Organization._

  By R. HALSTED WARD, M.D., F.R.M.S., Professor of Botany in the
  Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute, Troy, N.Y. Quarto. 176 pages.
  Illustrated. Flexible boards. Mailing Price, 85 cents; for Introd.,
  75 cents.

It consists of a synoptical review of the general structure and
morphology of plants, clearly drawn out according to biological
principles, fully illustrated, and accompanied by a set of blanks for
written exercises by pupils. The plan is designed to encourage close
observation, exact knowledge, and precise statement.


_A Primer of Botany._

  By Mrs. A. A. KNIGHT, of Robinson Seminary, Exeter, N.H. 12mo.
  Boards. Illus. vii + 115 pp. Mailing Price, 35 cents; for Introd.,
  30 cents.

This Primer is designed to bring physiological botany to the level of
primary and intermediate grades.


_Outlines of Lessons in Botany._

  For the use of teachers, or mothers studying with their children. By
  Miss JANE H. NEWELL. Part I.: From Seed to Leaf. Sq. 16mo. Illus.
  150 pp. Cloth. Mailing Price, 55 cents; for Introd., 50 cents.

This book aims to give an outline of work for the pupils themselves.
It follows the plan of Gray's _First Lessons_ and _How Plants Grow_,
and is intended to be used with either of these books.


_A Reader in Botany._

  Selected and adapted from well-known Authors. By Miss JANE H.
