
"No language spoken by man possesses words sufficiently weighty to
express our indebtedness to you, Karfedix Seaton, our guest and our
savior. The First Cause has willed that you should be the instrument
through which Kondal is this day made supreme upon Osnome.

In small and partial recognition of that instrumentality, I bestow upon
you these symbols, which proclaim you our overlord, the ultimate
authority of Osnome.

While this is not the way in which I had thought to bid you farewell,
the obligations which you have heaped upon us render all smaller things
insignificant. When you return, as I hope and trust you soon will, the
city shall be built anew and we can welcome you as befits your station."

Lifting both arms above his head he continued:

"May the great First Cause smile upon you in all your endeavors until
you solve the Mystery: may your descendants soon reach the Ultimate
Goal. Goodbye."

Seaton uttered a few heartfelt words in response and the party stepped
backward toward the Skylark. As they reached the vessel the standing
Karfedix and the ranks of kneeling nobles snapped into the double
salute--truly a rare demonstration in Kondal.

"What'll we do now?" whispered Seaton.

"Bow, of course," answered Dorothy.

They bowed, deeply and slowly, and entered their vessel. As the Skylark
shot into the air with the greatest acceleration that would permit its
passengers to move about, the grand fleet of Kondalian warship fired a
deafening salute.

       *       *       *       *       *

It had been planned before the start that each person was to work
sixteen hours out of the twenty-four. Seaton was to drive the vessel
during the first two eight-hour periods of each day. Crane was to
observe the stars during the second and to drive during the third.
DuQuesne was to act as observer during the first and third periods.
Margaret had volunteered to assist the observer in taking his notes
during her waking hours, and Dorothy appointed herself cook and
household manager.

As soon as the Skylark had left Osnome, Crane told DuQuesne that he and
his wife would work in the observation room until four o'clock in the
afternoon, at which time the prearranged system of relief would begin,
and DuQuesne retired to his room.

Crane and Margaret made their way to the darkened room which housed the
instruments and seated themselves, watching intently and making no
effort to conceal their emotion as first the persons beneath them, then
the giant war-vessels, and finally the ruined city itself, were lost to
view. Osnome slowly assumed the proportions of a large moon, grew
smaller, and as it disappeared Crane began to take notes. For a few
hours the seventeen suns of this strange solar system shone upon the
flying space-car, after which they assumed the aspect of a
widely-separated cluster of enormous stars, slowly growing smaller and
smaller and shrinking closer and closer together.

At four o'clock in the afternoon, Washington time, DuQuesne relieved
Crane, who made his way to the engine room.

"It is time to change shifts, Dick. You have not had your sixteen hours,
but everything will be regular from now on. You two had better get some
rest."

"All right," replied Seaton, as he relinquished the controls to Crane,
and after bidding the new helmsman goodnight he and Dorothy went below
to their cabin.

Standing at a window with their arms around each other they stared down
with misty eyes at the very faint green star, which was rapidly
decreasing in brilliance as the Skylark increased its already
inconceivable velocity. Finally, as it disappeared altogether, Seaton
turned to his wife and tenderly, lovingly, took her in his arms.

"Littlest Girl.... Sweetheart...." he whispered, and paused, overcome by
the intensity of his feelings.

"I know, husband mine," she answered, while tears dimmed her glorious
eyes. "It is too deep. With nothing but words, we can't say a single
thing."




CHAPTER XIX

The Return to Earth


DuQuesne's first act upon gaining the privacy of his own cabin was to
open the leather bag presented to him by the Karfedix. He expected to
find it filled with rare metals, with perhaps some jewels, instead of
which the only metal present was a heavily-insulated tube containing a
full pound of metallic radium. The least valuable items in the bag were
scores of diamonds, rubies, and emeralds of enormous size and of
flawless perfection. Merely ornamental glass upon Osnome, Dunark knew
that they were priceless upon Earth, and had acted accordingly. To this
great wealth of known gems, he had added a rich and varied assortment of
the rare and strange jewels peculiar to his own world, the faidon alone
being omitted from the collection. DuQuesne's habitual calmness of mind
almost deserted him as he classified the contents of the bag.

The radium alone was worth millions of dollars, and the scientist in him
exulted that at last his brother scientists should have ample supplies
of that priceless metal with which to work, even while he was rejoicing
in the price he would exact for it. He took out the familiar jewels,
estimating their value as he counted them--a staggering total. The bag
was still half full of the strange gems, some of them glowing like
miniature lamps in the dark depths, and he made no effort to appraise
them. He knew that once any competent jeweler had compared their cold,
hard, scintillating beauty with that of any Earthly gems, he could
demand his own price.

"At last," he breathed to himself, "I will be what I have always longed
to be--a money power. Now I can cut loose from that gang of crooks and
go my own way."

He replaced the gems and the tube of radium in the bag, which he stowed
away in one of his capacious pockets, and made his way to the galley.

       *       *       *       *       *

The return voyage through space was uneventful, the Skylark constantly
maintaining the same velocity with which she had started out. Several
times, as the days wore on, she came within the zone of attraction of
various gigantic suns, but the pilot had learned his lesson. He kept a
vigilant eye upon the bar, and at the first sign of a deviation from the
perpendicular he steered away, far from the source of the attraction.
Not content with these precautions, the man at the board would, from
time to time, shut off the power, to make sure that the space-car was
not falling toward a body directly in its line of flight.

When half the distance had been covered, the bar was reversed, the
travelers holding an impromptu ceremony as the great vessel spun around
its center through an angle of one hundred and eighty degrees. A few
days later the observers began to recognize some of the fixed stars in
familiar constellations and knew that the yellowish-white star directly
in their line of flight was the sun of their own solar system. After a
time they saw that their course, instead of being directly toward that
rapidly-brightening star, was bearing upon a barely visible star a
little to one side of it. Pointing their most powerful telescope toward
that point of light, Crane made out a planet, half of its disk shining
brightly. The girls hastened to peer through the telescope, and they
grew excited as they made out the familiar outlines of the continents
and oceans upon the lighted portion of the disk.

It was not long until these outlines were plainly visible to the unaided
vision. The Earth appeared as a great, softly shining, greenish
half-moon, with parts of its surface obscured by fleecy wisps of cloud,
and with its two gleaming ice-caps making of its poles two brilliant
areas of white. The returning wanderers stared at their own world with
their hearts in their throats as Crane, who was at the board, increased
the retarding force sufficiently to assure himself that they would not
be traveling too fast to land upon the Earth.

After Dorothy and Margaret had gone to prepare a meal, DuQuesne turned
to Seaton.

"Have you gentlemen decided what you intend to do with me?"

"No. We haven't discussed it yet. I can't make up my own mind what I
want to do to you, except that I sure would like to get you inside a
square ring with four-ounce gloves on. You have been of too much real
assistance on this trip for us to see you hanged, as you deserve. On the
other hand, you are altogether too much of a thorough-going scoundrel
for us to let you go free. You see the fix we are in. What would you
suggest?"

"Nothing," replied DuQuesne calmly. "As I am in no danger whatever of
hanging, nothing you can say on that score affects me in the least. As
for freeing me, you may do as you please--it makes no difference to me,
one way or the other, as no jail can hold me for a day. I can say,
however, that while I have made a fortune on this trip, so that I do not
have to associate further with Steel unless it is to my interest to do
so, I may nevertheless find it desirable at some future time to
establish a monopoly of X. That would, of course, necessitate the death
of yourself and Crane. In that event, or in case any other difference
should arise between us, this whole affair will be as though it had
never existed. It will have no weight either way, whether or not you try
to hang me."

"Go as far as you like," Seaton answered cheerfully. "If we're not a
match for you and your gang, on foot or in the air, in body or in mind,
we'll deserve whatever we get. We can outrun you, outjump you, throw you
down, or lick you; we can run faster, hit harder, dive deeper, and come
up dryer, than you can. We'll play any game you want to deal, whenever
you want to deal it; for fun, money, chalk, or marbles."

His brow darkened in anger as a thought struck him, and the steady gray
eyes bored into the unflinching black ones as he continued, with no
trace of his former levity in his voice:

"But listen to this. Anything goes as far as Martin and I personally are
concerned. But I want you to know that I could be arrested for what I
think of you as a man; and if any of your little schemes touch Dottie or
Peggy in any way, shape or form, I'll kill you as I would a snake--or
rather, I'll take you apart as I would any other piece of scientific
apparatus. This isn't a threat, it's a promise. Get me?"

"Perfectly. Good-night."

For many hours the Earth had been obscured by clouds, so that the pilot
had only a general idea of what part of the world was beneath them, but
as they dropped rapidly downward into the twilight zone, the clouds
parted and they saw that they were directly over the Panama Canal.
Seaton allowed the Skylark to fall to within ten miles of the ground,
when he stopped so that Martin could get his bearings and calculate the
course to Washington, which would be in total darkness before their
arrival.

DuQuesne had retired, cold and reticent as usual. Glancing quickly about
his cabin to make sure that he had overlooked nothing he could take with
him, he opened a locker, exposing to view four suits which he had made
in his spare time, each adapted to a particular method of escape from
the Skylark. The one he selected was of heavy canvas, braced with steel
netting, equipped with helmet and air-tanks, and attached to a strong,
heavy parachute. He put it on, tested all its parts, and made his way
unobserved to one of the doors in the lower part of the vessel. Thus,
when the chance for escape came, he was ready for it. As the Skylark
paused over the Isthmus, his lips parted in a sardonic smile. He opened
the door and stepped out into the air, closing the door behind him as he
fell. The neutral color of the parachute was lost in the gathering
twilight a few seconds after he left the vessel.

The course laid, Seaton turned almost due north and the Skylark tore
through the air. After a short time, when half the ground had been
covered, Seaton spoke suddenly.

"Forgot about DuQuesne, Mart. We'd better iron him, hadn't we? Then
we'll decide whether we want to keep him or turn him loose."

"I will go fetch him," replied Crane, and turned to the stairs.

He returned shortly, with the news of the flight of the captive.

"Hm ... he must have made himself a parachute. I didn't think even he
would tackle a sixty-thousand-foot drop. I'll tell the world that he
sure has established a record. I can't say I'm sorry that he got away,
though. We can get him again any time we want him, anyway, as that
little object-compass in my drawer is still looking right at him," said
Seaton.

"I think he earned his liberty," declared Dorothy, stoutly, and Margaret
added:

"He deserves to be shot, but I'm glad he's gone. He gives me the
shivers."

At the end of the calculated time they saw the lights of a large city
beneath them, and Crane's fingers clenched upon Seaton's arm as he
pointed downward. There were the landing-lights of Crane Field, seven
peculiarly-arranged searchlights throwing their mighty beams upward into
the night.

"Nine weeks, Dick," he said, unsteadily, "and Shiro would have kept them
burning nine years if necessary."

The Skylark dropped easily to the ground in front of the testing shed
and the wanderers leaped out, to be greeted by the half-hysterical Jap.
Shiro's ready vocabulary of peculiar but sonorous words failed him
completely, and he bent himself double in a bow, his yellow face
wreathed in the widest possible smile. Crane, one arm around his wife,
seized Shiro's hand and wrung it in silence. Seaton swept Dorothy off
her feet, pressing her slender form against his powerful body. Her arms
tightened about his neck as they kissed each other fervently and he
whispered in her ear:

"Sweetheart wife, isn't it great to be back on our good old Earth
again?"


THE END

  +--------------------------------------------------------------+
  |                                                              |
  | Transcriber's Notes & Errata                                 |
  |                                                              |
  | The editorial notes associated with the three installments   |
  | of the story have been placed in ASCII text boxes and        |
  | incorporated at the appropriate places in the text.          |
  |                                                              |
  | Illustrations have been moved to the appropriate place in    |
  | the text.                                                    |
  |                                                              |
  | The chemical symbol for water is represented as H2O.         |
  |                                                              |
  | The following typographical errors have been corrected.      |
  |                                                              |
  |               |Error         |Correction    |                |
  |               |              |              |                |
  |               |plantinum     |platinum      |                |
  |               |refused.      |refused."     |                |
  |               |We            |"We           |                |
  |               |abstruce      |abstruse      |                |
  |               |I love        |"I love       |                |
  |               |CHAPTE        |CHAPTER       |                |
  |               |food          |fool          |                |
  |               |unmistakeable |unmistakable  |                |
  |               |ever          |even          |                |
  |               |Mat           |Mart          |                |
  |               |gravity.      |gravity."     |                |
  |               |completely.   |completely."  |                |
  |               |ecstacy       |ecstasy       |                |
  |               |embarassment  |embarrassment |                |
  |               |Naloon        |Nalboon       |                |
  |               |inumerable    |innumerable   |                |
  |               |but           |"but          |                |
  |               |efficient     |efficient."   |                |
  |               |Dare          |"Dare         |                |
  |               |wit           |wait          |                |
  |               |They produce  |"They produce |                |
  |                                                              |
  |                                                              |
  | Variable hyphenation                                         |
  |                                                              |
  | The number of times each form appears in the text is given   |
  | in parentheses.                                              |
  |                                                              |
  |           |blue-prints (2)    |blueprints (4)    |           |
  |           |border-line (3)    |borderline (1)    |           |
  |           |break-down (1)     |breakdown (1)     |           |
  |           |devil-fish (1)     |devilfish (1)     |           |
  |           |Good-bye (4)       |Goodbye (1)       |           |
  |           |good-bye (4)       |goodbye (3)       |           |
  |           |good-night (2)     |goodnight (2)     |           |
  |           |half-way (4)       |halfway (1)       |           |
  |           |hand-rail (1)      |handrail (2)      |           |
  |           |hand-rails (1)     |handrails (1)     |           |
  |           |home-coming (1)    |homecoming (1)    |           |
  |           |major-domo (3)     |majordomo (1)     |           |
  |           |near-by (1)        |nearby (4)        |           |
  |           |nitro-glycerin (2) |nitroglycerin (2) |           |
  |           |to-night (2)       |tonight (7)       |           |
  |                                                              |
  +--------------------------------------------------------------+



***END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE SKYLARK OF SPACE***

