"I do not like the odds, Dick," Crane's face was grave. "They have many
hundreds of men, all trained; and we are only two. Yes, only one, for I
count for nothing at those controls."

"All the better, Mart. This board more than makes up the difference.
They've got a lot of stuff, of course, but they haven't got anything
like this control system. Their captain's got to issue orders, whereas
I've got everything right under my hands. Not so uneven as they think!"

       *       *       *       *       *

Within battle range at last, Seaton hurled his utmost concentration of
direct forces, under the impact of which three courses of Fenachrone
defensive screen flared through the ultra-violet and went black. There
the massed direct attack was stopped--at what cost the enemy alone
knew--and the Fenachrone countered instantly and in a manner totally
unexpected. Through the narrow slit in the fifth-order screen through
which Seaton was operating, in the bare one-thousandth of a second that
it was open, so exactly synchronized and timed that the screens did not
even glow as it went through the narrow opening, a gigantic beam of
heterodyned force struck full upon the bow of the _Skylark_, near the
sharply-pointed prow, and the stubborn metal instantly flared blinding
white and exploded outward in puffs of incandescent gas under the awful
power of that Titanic thrust. Through four successive skins of inoson,
the theoretical ultimate of possible strength, toughness, and
resistance, that frightful beam drove before the automatically-reacting
detector closed the slit and the impregnable defensive screens, driven
by their mighty uranium bars, flared into incandescent defense. Driven
as they were, they held, and the Fenachrone, finding that particular
attack useless, shut off their power.

"Wow! They sure have got something!" Seaton exclaimed in unfeigned
admiration. "They sure gave us a solid kick that time! We will now take
time out for repairs. Also, I'm going to cut our slit down to a width of
one kilocycle, if I can possibly figure out a way of working on that
narrow a band, and I'm going to step up our shifting speed to a hundred
thousand. It's a good thing they built this ship of ours in a lot of
layers--if that'd go through the interior we would have been punctured
for fair. You might weld up those holes, Mart, while I see what I can do
here."

Then Seaton noticed the women, white and trembling, upon a seat.

"'Smatter? Cheer up, kids, you ain't seen nothing yet. That was just a
couple of little preliminary love-taps, like two boxers kinda feeling
each other out in the first ten seconds of the first round."

"Preliminary love-taps!" repeated Dorothy, looking into Seaton's eyes
and being reassured by the serene confidence she read there. "But they
hit us, and hurt us badly--why, there's a hole in our _Skylark_ as big
as a house, and it goes through four or five layers!"

"Yes, but we're not hurt a bit. They're easily fixed, and we've lost
nothing but a few tons of inoson and uranium. We've got lots of spare
metal. I don't know what I did to him, any more than he knows what he
did to us, but I'll bet my other shirt that he knows he's been nudged!"

Repairs completed and the changes made in the method of projection,
Seaton actuated the rapidly-shifting slit and peered through it at the
enemy vessel. Finding their screens still up, he directed a
complete-coverage attack upon them with four bars, while with the entire
massed power of the remaining generators concentrated into one
frequency, he shifted that frequency up and down the spectrum, probing,
probing, ever probing with that gigantic beam of intolerable
energy--feeling for some crack, however slight, into which he could
insert that searing sheet of concentrated destruction. Although much of
the available power of the Fenachrone was perforce devoted to repelling
the continuous attack of the Terrestrials, they maintained an equally
continuous attack offensive, and in spite of the narrowness of the open
slit and the rapidity with which that slit was changing from frequency
to frequency, enough of the frightful forces came through to keep the
ultra-powered defensive screens radiating far into the violet--and, the
utmost power of the refrigerating system proving absolutely useless
against the concentrated beams being employed, mass after mass of inoson
was literally blown from the outer and secondary skins of the _Skylark_
by the comparatively tiny jets of force that leaked through the
momentarily open slit from time to time, as exact synchronization was
accidentally obtained.

Seaton, grimly watching his instruments, glanced at Crane, who, calm but
watchful at his console, was repairing the damage as fast as it was
done.

"They're sending more stuff, Mart, and it's getting hotter to handle.
That means they're building more projectors. We can play that game, too.
They're using up their fuel reserves fast; but we're bigger than they
are, carry more metal, and it's more efficient metal, too. Only one way
out of it, I guess--what say we put in enough generators to smother them
down by brute force, no matter how much power it takes?"

"Why don't you use some of those awful copper shells? Or aren't we close
enough yet?" Dorothy's low voice came clearly, so utterly silent was
that frightful combat.

"Close! We're still better than two hundred thousand light-years apart!
There may have been longer-range battles than this somewhere in the
Universe, but I doubt it. And as for copper, even if we could get it to
them, it'd be just like so many candy kisses compared to the stuff we're
both using. Dear girl, there are fields of force extending for thousands
of miles from each of these vessels beside which the exact center of the
biggest lightning flash you ever saw would be a dead area!"

He set up a series of integrals and, machine after machine, in a space
left vacant by the rapidly-vanishing store of uranium, there appeared
inside the fourth skin of the _Skylark_ a row of gigantic generators,
each one adding its hellish output to the already inconceivable stream
of energy being directed at the foe. As that frightful flow increased by
leaps and bounds, the intensity of the Fenachrone attack diminished, and
finally it ceased altogether as every iota of the enemy's power became
necessary for the maintenance of the defenses. Still greater grew the
stream of force from the _Skylark_, and, now that the attack had ceased,
Seaton opened the slit wider and stopped its shifting, in order still
further to increase the efficiency of his terrible weapon. Face set in a
fighting mask and eyes hard as gray iron, deeper and deeper he drove his
now irresistible forces. His flying fingers were upon the keys of his
console; his keen and merciless eyes were in a secondary projector near
the now doomed ship of the Fenachrone, directing masterfully his
terrible attack. As the output of his generators still increased, Seaton
began to compress a searing hollow sphere of seething energy upon the
furiously-straining defensive screens of the Fenachrone. Course after
course of the heaviest possible screen was sent out, driven by massed
batteries of copper now disintegrating at the rate of tons in every
second, only to flare through the ultra-violet and to go down before
that dreadful, that irresistible onslaught. Finally, as the inexorable
sphere still contracted, the utmost efforts of the defenders could not
keep their screens away from their own vessel, and simultaneously the
prow and the stern of the Fenachrone cruiser was bared to that awful
field of force, in which no possible substance could endure for even the
most infinitesimal instant of time.

There was a sudden cessation of all resistance, and those Titanic
forces, all directed inward, converged upon a point with a power behind
which there was the inconceivable energy of four hundred thousand tons
of uranium, being disintegrated at the highest possible rate, short of
instant disruption. In that same instant of collapse, the enormous mass
of power-copper in the Fenachrone cruiser and the vessel's every atom,
alike of structure and contents, also exploded into pure energy at the
touch of that unimaginable field of force.

In that awful moment before Seaton could shut off his power it seemed to
him that space itself must be obliterated by the very concentration of
the unknowable and incalculable forces there unleashed--must be
swallowed up and lost in the utterly indescribable brilliance of the
field of radiance driven to a distance of millions upon incandescent
millions of miles from the place where the last representatives of the
monstrous civilization of the Fenachrone had made their last stand
against the forces of Universal Peace.




Epilogue


The three-dimensional, moving, talking, almost living picture, being
shown simultaneously in all the viewing areas throughout the innumerable
planets of the Galaxy, faded out and the image of an aged, white-bearded
Norlaminian appeared and spoke in the Galactic language.

"As is customary, the showing of this picture has opened the celebration
of our great Galactic holiday, Civilization Day. As you all know, it
portrays the events leading up to and making possible the formation of
the League of Civilization by a mere handful of planets. The League now
embraces all of this, the First Galaxy, and is spreading rapidly
throughout the Universe. Varied are the physical forms and varied are
the mentalities of our almost innumerable races of beings, but in
Civilization we are becoming one, since those backward people who will
not co-operate with us are rendered impotent to impede our progress
among the more enlightened.

"It is peculiarly fitting that the one who has just been chosen to head
the Galactic Council--the first person of a race other than one of those
of the Central System to prove himself able to wield justly the vast
powers of that office--should be a direct descendant of two of the
revered persons whose deeds of olden times we have just witnessed.

"I present to you my successor as Chief of the Galactic Council, Richard
Ballinger Seaton, the fourteen hundred sixty-ninth, of Earth."


THE END




SOME REMARKS ON THE "SKYLARK THREE" AND ABOUT ERRORS. A COMPLIMENT TO
DR. SMITH'S STORIES.


_Editor_, AMAZING STORIES:

Dr. Smith, in his foreword to "Skylark Three" mentions two errors which
he made knowingly. I think I can recognize the astronomical one, at any
rate.

Of course, the acceleration of twice 186,000 miles per second, as used
in escaping the field of the great "dud" star, as told in "Skylark of
Space" was impossible. Nothing could withstand that strain. Further, no
gravitational field could be that intense. It would have exactly the
effect Dr. Smith describes and allots to the zone of force in "Skylark
Three"--it would make a hole in space and pull the hole in after it.
Light would be too heavy to leave the planet. The effect on space would
be so great as to curve it so violently as to shut it in about it like a
blanket. The dud would be both invisible and unapproachable.

The astronomical error? I wonder how Dr. Smith solved the problem of
three--or more--bodies? Osnome is a planet of a sun in a group of
seventeen suns, is it not? The gravitational field about even two suns
is so exceedingly complex that a planet could take up an orbit only
such that one sun was at each of the two foci of the ellipse of its
orbit, and then only provided the suns were of very nearly the same
mass, and stationary, which in turn means they must have _no_ attraction
for each other. No, I think his complex system of seventeen suns would
not be so good for planets. Celestial Mechanics won't let them stay
there. And I really don't see why it was necessary to have so complex a
system.

Further, I wonder if Dr. Smith considered the proposition of his ammonia
cooling plant carefully? The ammonia "cooling" plant works only to
_transmit_ heat, not to remove it. The heat is removed by it from the
inside of an icebox for instance, and put outside, which is what is
wanted. However, it must have some place to dump the heat. In the fight
with the Mardonalians, Seaton has an arenak cylinder on his compressor,
and runs it very heavily, but if he can't get the heat outside the ship,
and away from it, he wouldn't cool the machine at all. Since the
Mardonalians kept the outside so hot, and the story says the
compressor-cooling was accomplished by a water cooler which boiled--some
amount of water, too, if it would absorb all the heat of that
Mardonalian fleet in any way--and this heat was then merely transferred
from outside to inside--where they DIDN'T want it!

Again, in this battle, to protect themselves against ultra-violet
radiation, they smear themselves with _red_ paint--presumably because
red will stop ultra-violet.

Personalty, I'd have picked some ultra-violet paint--if any were handy
as that would _reflect_ the rays. Red wouldn't affect them at all, so
far as I can see--he might as well have used blue. What he wanted, was a
complementary color of ultra-violet, and I don't believe it is
red--green is the complement of red. (Green light won't pass through red
glass.)

Dr. Smith invited "knocks" with that foreword of his--I hope I am
complying, as an interested reader, and a hopeful scientist. However, my
personal opinion has always been that "Skylark of Space" was the best
story of scientifiction ever printed, without exception. I have recently
changed my opinion, however, since "Skylark Three" has come out.

John W. Campbell, Jr.

Cambridge, Mass.


(This letter from a fellow author is an excellent comment on Dr. Smith's
foreword to "Skylark Three." But the writer of this letter is himself
inclined to deal with and use very large quantities and high
accelerations and velocities in his stories. We are going to let your
knocks await a reply from Dr. Smith. The Editor does not desire to find
himself between the upper and lower millstones represented by an author
and his critic. But you certainly make amends for your criticism by what
you say about the merit of "The Skylark Stories." We hope to hear from
Dr. Smith.--EDITOR.)

  +--------------------------------------------------------------+
  | Transcriber's Note & Errata                                  |
  |                                                              |
  | Images have been moved to their appropriate places in the    |
  | text.                                                        |
  |                                                              |
  | All SmallCaps text has been changed to ALL CAPS.             |
  |                                                              |
  | The heading and title of Chapter VII were reversed in order  |
  | in the text. Restored.                                       |
  |                                                              |
  | The following typographical errors have been corrected       |
  |                                                              |
  |    Error         |Correction                                 |
  |    briar;        |briar,                                     |
  |    musn't        |mustn't                                    |
  |    heads         |head                                       |
  |    torpedos      |torpedoes                                  |
  |    corruscating  |coruscating                                |
  |    Tarnana       |Tarnan                                     |
  |    The attackers |"The attackers                             |
  |    concience     |conscience                                 |
  |    tubular,      |tubular                                    |
  |    psssible      |possible                                   |
  |    trending      |tending                                    |
  |    Normalin      |Norlamin                                   |
  |    Seaton        |Rovol                                      |
  |    gear-strain   |gear-train                                 |
  |    long.         |long."                                     |
  |    You are       |"You are                                   |
  |    emperically   |empirically                                |
  |    desired."     |desired.                                   |
  |    aways         |always                                     |
  |    fast.         |fast."                                     |
  |    acceleration? |acceleration?"                             |
  |                                                              |
  | Both 'cerebin' and 'cerebrin' were used once each. No        |
  | changes have been made.                                      |
  |                                                              |
  | Variable hyphenation has not been corrected. Numbers in      |
  | parentheses in the following table indicate the number of    |
  | times each form has been used.                               |
  |                                                              |
  |    air-lock (3)       |airlock (4)                           |
  |    air-tight (1)      |airtight (1)                          |
  |    Earth-men (2)      |Earthmen (1)                          |
  |    head-set (1)       |headset (12)                          |
  |    inter-galactic (2) |intergalactic (1)                     |
  |    stop-watch (1)     |stopwatch (1)                         |
  |    store-rooms (1)    |storerooms (1)                        |
  +--------------------------------------------------------------+






End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Skylark Three, by Edward Elmer Smith

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK SKYLARK THREE ***

***** This file should be named 21051.txt or 21051.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/2/1/0/5/21051/

Produced by Greg Weeks, LN Yaddanapudi, Flash Sheridan and
the Online Distributed Proofreading Team at
