spot was isolated, communications were difficult, local labor was
inadequate. The exhaustion of the fuel supply made it impossible to fly
grassfighters in and men had to be sent by sea with makeshift equipment.
Happily there were two supercyclone fans at Lochinvar which had been
shipped there by mistake and these were immediately dispatched to the
threatened area.

The clump was fought with fire and dynamite, with the fans preventing
the broken stolons from rooting themselves again. After a period of
grave anxiety and doubt there seems to be no question this particular
peril has been averted--not a trace of the threatening weed remains. The
Queen went personally to Westminster Abbey to give thanks.

_August 30_: Work on the _Sisyphus_ proceeding slowly. I have decided to
keep my own cabin intact and have the adjoining one fitted for a writing
room. Then I can accompany F on her experimental excursions and not lose
any time on my book, which is progressing famously. What a satisfaction
creative endeavor is!

_August 31_: The bill for the construction of Burlet's city was debated
today. The PM stated flatly that the Grass would be overcome before the
city could be built. (Cheers) The Hon. Member from South Tooting rose to
inquire if the Right Hon. Member could offer something besides his bare
word for this? (Groans, faint applause, cries of "Shame," "No
gentleman," etcetera) The Home Minister begged to inform the Hon. Member
from South Tooting that Her Majesty's government had gone deeply into
the question of the socalled vertical cities long before the Hon. Member
had ever heard of them. Did the Hon. Member ever consider, no matter how
many precautions were taken in the building of conduits for a water
supply, that seeds of the Grass would undoubtedly find their way in
through that medium? Or through the air intakes, no matter how high?
(Dead silence) The Hon. Member from Stoke Pogis asked if the opposition
to his Hon. friend's bill wasnt the result of pressure by a certain
capitalist, concerned principally with the manufacture of concentrated
foods? (Groans and catcalls)

The Chancellor of the Exchequer inquired if the Hon. Member meant to
impugn the integrity of the government? (Cries of "Shame," "No,"
"Unthinkable," etcetera) If not, what did the Hon. Member imply?
(Obstinate silence) Since no answer was forthcoming he would move for a
division. Result: the bill overwhelmingly voted down.

Since the Skye excitement everyone is inclined to be jittery and nerves
are stretched tightly. When I told F she had missed a great opportunity
to test her formula in Scotland she blew up and called me a meddling
parasite. This is pretty good coming from a dependent. Only my
forbearance and consideration for her sex kept me from turning her out
on the spot.

_September 1_: Encouraged by the Skye episode, a group of volunteers is
being formed to attempt an attack on the Grass covering the Channel
Islands. More than can possibly be used are offering their services. I
subscribed L10,000 toward the venture.

Preparations for moving to Kilkenny almost complete. Even if F gets
going by December and the Scottish repulse is permanent, I believe I
shall be better off in Ireland until the first definite victory is won
against the Grass.

_September 5_: The Grass moved again and this time all attempts to
repulse it failed. It is now firmly entrenched on both the Orkneys and
the Hebrides. Terrible pessimism. Commons voted "No confidence" 422 to
117 and my old friend D N is back in office.

_September 6_: _Sisyphus_ almost ready. Find I can get a crew to work
for wages when not in port. Luncheon at Chequers. PM urges me not to
leave England as it might shake confidence. I told him I would consider
the matter.

_September 7_: F says she is ready to make new tests and what is holding
up work on the _Sisyphus_? Replied it was complete except for my cabins.
She had the effrontery to say these werent important and she was ready
to go ahead without me. I pointed out that the _Sisyphus_ was my
property and it would not sail until I was properly accommodated.


_99._ _September 8_: I shall not move to Ireland afterall. The Grass has
a foothold in Ulster.

_September 9_: The Irish are swarming into Scotland and Wales.
Impossible to keep them out.

_September 10_: Donegal overrun.

_September 12_: On board the _Sisyphus_. Wrote an incredible amount;
still beyond me how anybody can call the fashioning of a book work. We
left Southampton last night on a full tide and are now cruising the
Channel about four miles from the French coast. It is quite
unbelievable--under this tropical green blanket lies the continent of
Europe, the home of civilization. And the bodies of millions, too.
Except for a few gulls who shriek their way inland and return
dejectedly, there is not a living thing in sight but the Grass.

I have reserved the afterdeck to myself and as I sit here now,
scribbling these notes, I think what impresses me more than anything
else is the feeling of vitality which radiates from the herbaceous
coast. The dead continent is alive, alive as never before--wholly
alive; moving with millions of sensitive feelers in every direction. For
the first time I have a feeling of sympathy for Joe's constant talk of
the beauty of the Grass, but in spite of this, the question which comes
to my mind is, can you speak glibly about the beauty of something which
has strangled nearly all the world?

_Later_: Sitting on the gently swaying deck, I was moved to add several
pages to my history. But now we are approaching the narrower part of the
Channel and the sea is getting choppy. I shall have to give up my
jottings for a while.

_Still later_: F finally picked a spot she considered suitable--the
remains of a small harbor--and we anchored. I must say she was
overfussy--one cove is pretty much the same as another these days.
Possibly she was so choosy in order to heighten her importance.

Repetition of the involved etiquette of inspecting the intended victim
and turning on the sprays; only this time the suppressed excitement
anticipating possible success made even the preliminaries interesting.
Miss Francis and her assistants retired for a mysterious conference
immediately after the application and I stayed up late talking with the
captain till he was called away by some duty. It is now nearly two A M--in
a few hours we shall know.

_September 13_: Horribly shaken this morning to find the Grass
unaffected. Even wondered for a moment if it were conceivable that F
would never find the right compound--that nothing could hurt the Grass.
Had I been illadvised in not going more seriously into Burlet's vertical
cities?

F very phlegmatic about it. Says another twelve hours of observation may
be of value. She and A rowed ashore over the runners trailing in the
water and with great difficulty succeeded in hacking off a few runners
of the sprayed Grass. I thought her undertaking this hazard an absurd
piece of bravado--she might just as well have sent someone else.

Disregarding her rudeness in not inviting me, I accompanied her unasked
to her laboratory-cabin. She laid the stolons on an enamelsurfaced table
and busied herself with some apparatus. I could not take my eyes from
these segments of the Grass. They lay on the table, not specimens of
vegetation, but stunned creatures ready to spring to vigorous and
vengeful life when they recovered. It was impossible not to pick one up
and run it through my fingers, feeling again the soft, electric touch.

Miss Francis' preparations were interminable. If she follows such an
elaborate ritual for the mere checking of an unsuccessful experiment no
wonder she is taking years to get anywhere. My attention wandered and I
started to leave the cabin when I noticed my hand still held one of the
specimens.

It was withered and dry.


_100._ _September 17_: The enthusiasm greeting the discovery that F's
reagent mortally affected the Grass was only tempered by the dampening
thought that its action had been incomplete. What good was the lethal
compound if its work were final only when the sprayed parts were
severed?

F seemed to think it was a great deal of good. Her manner toward me,
boisterous and quite out of keeping with our respective positions and
sexes, could almost be called friendly. During the return to Southampton
she constantly clapped me on the back and shouted, "It's over, Weener;
it's all over now."

"But it isnt over," I protested. "Your spray hadnt the slightest direct
effect on the Grass."

"Oh, that. That's nothing. A mere impediment. A matter of time only."

"Time only! Good God, do you realize the Grass is halfway through
Ireland? That we are surrounded now on four sides?"

"A lastminute rescue is quite in the best tradition. Don't disturb
yourself; you will live to gloat over the deaths of better men."

I urged the PM to be cautious about overoptimism in giving out the news.
He nodded his head solemnly in agreement, but he evidently couldnt
communicate whatever wisdom he possessed to the BBC announcer, for he,
in butter voice, spoke as though Miss Francis had actually destroyed a
great section of the weed upon the French coast. There were celebrations
in the streets of London and a vast crowd visited the cenotaph and sang
_Rule Britannia_.

_September 18_: Hoping to find F in a calmer mood, I asked her today
just how long she meant by "a matter of time"? She shrugged it off. "Not
more than four or five months," she said blithely.

"In a month at most the Grass will be in Britain."

"Let it come," she responded callously. "We shall take the _Sisyphus_
and conclude our work there."

"But millions will die in the meantime," I protested.

She turned on me with what I can only describe as tigrish ferocity. "Did
you think of the millions you condemned to death when you refused to
sell concentrates to the Asiatic refugees?"

"How could I sell to people who couldnt buy?"

"And the millions who died because you refused them employment?"

"Am I responsible for those too shiftless to fend for themselves?"

"'Am I my brother's keeper?' If fifty million Englishmen die because I
cannot hasten the process of trial and error, the guilt is mine and I
admit it. I do not seek to exculpate myself by pointing a finger at you
or by silly and pompous evasions of my responsibility. If the Grass
comes before I am ready, the fault is mine. In the meantime, while one
creature remains alive, even if his initials be A W, I shall seek to
preserve him. As long as there is a foothold on land I shall try on
land; and when that fails we shall board the _Sisyphus_ and finish our
work there, somewhere in the Atlantic."

"You mean you definitely abandon hope of perfecting your compound before
England goes?"

"I abandon nothing," she replied. "I think it's quite possible I'll
finish in time to save England, but I can't afford to do anything but
look forward to the worst. And that is that we'll be driven to the
sea."

I was appalled by the picture her words elicited: a few ships containing
the survivors; a world covered with the Grass.

"And when success is attained we shall fight our way back inch by inch."

But this piece of bombast didnt hearten me. I had no desire to fight our
way back inch by inch; I wanted at least a fragment of civilization
salvaged.

_September 19_: F has not been the only one to think of the high seas as
a final refuge. The London office has been literally besieged by men of
wealth eager to pay any price to charter one of our ships. I have given
orders to grant no more charters for the present.

_September 20_: The enthusiasm is subsiding and people are beginning to
ask how long it will be before they can expect the reconquest of the
Continent to begin. BBC spoke cautiously about "perfection" of the
compound for the first time, opening the way to the implication that it
doesnt work as yet. Added quite a bit to my manuscript.

_September 21_: Mrs H, in very dignified mood, approached me; said she
heard I had made plans to leave England in case the Grass threatened.
She asked nothing for herself, she said, being quite content to accept
whatever fate Providence had in store for her, but, would I take her
daughter and family along on the _Sisyphus_? They would be quite useful,
she added lamely.

I said I would give the matter my attention, but assured her there was
no immediate danger.

_September 22_: Grass on the Isle of Man.

_September 23_: Ordered stocking of the _Sisyphus_ with as much
concentrates as she can carry. The supply will be ample for a full crew,
F's staff and myself for at least six months.

_September 24_: Ive known for years that F is insane, but her latest
phase is so fantastic and preposterous I can hardly credit it. She
demands flatly the _Sisyphus_ take along at least fifty "nubile females
in order to restock the world after its reconquest." After catching my
breath I argued with her. The prospect of England's loss was by no means
certain yet.

"Good. We'll give the girls a seavoyage and land them back safe and
sound."

"We have enough supplies for six months; if we take along these
superfluous passengers our time will be cut to less than three."

Her answer was a brutal piece of blackmail. "No women, no go."

If F were a young man instead of an elderly woman I could understand
this aberration better.

_September 25_: It seems Mrs H's grandchildren are all girls between
twelve and eighteen, which leaves the problem of fulfilling F's
ultimatum to finding fortyseven others. I have delegated the selection
to Mrs H.

_September 26_: Grass on Skye for the second time. This invasion was not
repulsed.

_September 27_: The cyclone fans have been set up from Moray Firth to
the Firth of Lorne. I am in two minds about asking the Tharios to join
us.

The bill authorizing the construction of a vertical city at Stonehenge
passed Commons.

_September 28_: Grass reported near Aberdeen. Panic in Scotland. No more
train service.

_September 29_: Day of fasting, humiliation and prayer proclaimed by the
Archbishop of Canterbury. Grass south of the Dee. All mines shut down.

_September 30_: Every seaworthy vessel, and many not seaworthy, now
under charter. I have ordered all remaining stores of concentrates
loaded on our own hulls, to be manned by skeleton crews. They will stand
by the _Sisyphus_ on her voyage. Lack of railway transportation making
things difficult.

_October 1_: They have actually broken ground at Stonehenge for Burlet's
fantastic city.

_October 2_: Wrote on my book for nearly twelve solid hours. The postal
service has been stopped.

_October 3_: Hearing the royal family had made no plans for departure,
the London office ventured to offer them accommodations on one of our
ships. I had always heard the House of Windsor was meticulous in its
politeness, but I cannot characterize their rejection of our wellmeant
aid as anything but rude.

_October 4_: Mrs H asks, Are we to live solely on concentrates now the
shops are shut? My query as to whether this seemed objectionable to her
was evaded.

_October 5_: Grass in Inverness and Perthshire.

_October 6_: F announces she is ready for another test. Under present
conditions, the journey to Scotland being out of the question, we
decided to use the _Sisyphus_ again and the French coast. Leaving
tomorrow.

_October 11_: This constant series of frustrations is beyond endurance.
In spite of F's noncommittal pessimism anticipating success only after
the Grass has covered England, I feel she is merely making some sort of
propitiatory gesture when she looks on the darkest side of the picture
that way. As for myself I'm convinced the Grass will be stopped in a
week or so. But in the meantime F's work advances by the inch, only to
be set back again and again.

We repeated the previous test with just enough added success to give our
failure the quality of supreme exasperation. This time there was no
question but what the growth sprayed actually withered within twentyfour
hours. But it was not wiped out and not long afterward it was overrun
and covered up by a new and vigorous mass. Such a victory early in the
fight would have meant something; now it is too late for such piecemeal
destruction. We must have a counteragent which communicates its lethal
effect to a larger area of the Grass than is actually touched by it--or
at very least makes the affected spot untenable for future growth.

What help is it for F to rub her hands smugly and say, "We're on the
right track, all right"? Weve been on the right track for months, but
the train doesnt get anywhere.

_October 12_: Columbus Day.

_October 13_: Grass in Fife and Stirling. BBC urges calm.

_October 14_: Rumor has it work abandoned at Stonehenge. It was a
futile gesture anyway. I'm sure F will perfect the counteragent anyday.

_October 15_: Mrs H announced she has completed her selection of fifty
young women, adding, "I hope they will prove satisfactory, sir." For a
horrible moment I wondered if she thought I was arranging for a harem.

_October 16_: Decided, purely as a matter of convenience and not from
panic, such as is beginning to affect even the traditionally stolid
British, to move aboard the _Sisyphus_. Grass on the outskirts of
Edinburgh.

_October 17_: In a burst of energy last night I brought my history down
to the Grass in Europe.

Disconcerting hitch. Most of the _Sisyphus'_ crew, including the
captain, want to take their wives along. I find it difficult to believe
them all uxoriously wed--at any rate this is not a pleasure excursion.
Agreed the captain should take his and told him to effect some
compromise on the others. The capacity of the _Sisyphus_ is not elastic.

_October 18_: Grass almost to the Tweed. PM on the wireless with the
assurance a counteragent will be perfected within the week. F furious;
wanted to know if I couldnt control my politicians better. I answered
meekly--really, her anger was ludicrous--that I was an American citizen,
not part of the British electorate, and therefore had no influence over
the prime minister of Great Britain. Seriously, however, perhaps the
premature announcement will spur her on.

The erratic phone service finally stopped altogether.

_October 19_: Riots and looting--unEnglish manifestations carried out in
a very English way. Hysterical orators called for the destruction of all
foreign refugees from the Grass, or at very least their exclusion from
the benefits of the lootings. In every case the mob answered them in
almost identical language: "Fair play," "Share and share alike," "Yer
nyme Itler, maybe?" "Come orf it, sonny, oo er yew? Gord Orlmighty's
furriner, aint E?" Having heckled the speakers, they proceeded
cheerfully to clean out all stocks of available goods--the refugees
getting their just shares. There must be a peculiar salubrity about the
English air. Otherwise Britons could not act so differently at home and
abroad.

Thankful indeed all Consolidated Pemmican stores safely loaded.

_October 20_: As anticipated, the Grass crossed the Tweed into
Northumberland, but quite unexpectedly England has also been invaded
from another quarter. Norfolk has the Grass from Yarmouth to Cromer. F,
the PM, and myself hanged in effigy. Shall not tarry much longer.

_October 21_: Durham and Suffolk. Consulted the captain about a set of
auxiliary sails for the _Sisyphus_. Moving aboard tonight.

_October 22_: Heard indirectly that the Tharios had managed to charter a
seagoing tug on shares with friends. This takes a great load off my
mind.

Postponed moving to the ship in order to superintend packing of personal
possessions, including the manuscript of my history. F says it is still
not impossible to perfect compound before the Grass reaches London.

_October 23_: On board the _Sisyphus_. What has become of the stolid
heroism of the English people? On the way down to the ship, I ran into a
crowd no better behaved than the adherents of the Republic One and
Indivisible. I mention the episode lightly, but it was no laughing
matter. I was lucky to escape with my life.

Nervous and upset with the strain. I shall not return to The Ivies till
the Grass begins its retreat. Too restless to continue my book. Paced
the deck a long time.

_October 24_: The fifty girls arrived, and a more maddening cargo I
can't imagine. I gave orders to keep them forward, but their shrill
presence nevertheless penetrates aft.

I hear all electricity has been cut off. Grass in Yorkshire.

_October 25_: F came aboard with the other scientists and immediately
wanted to know why we didnt set sail. I asked her if her work could be
carried on any more easily at sea. She shrugged her shoulders. I pointed
out that only rats leave a sinking ship and England was far from
overcome. She favored me with one of her fixed stares.

"You are dithery, Weener. Your epigrams have lost their jaunty air of
discovery and your face is almost green."

"You would not expect me to remain unaffected by the events around us,
Miss Francis."

"Wouldnt I?" she retorted incomprehensibly and went below to her
cabin-laboratory.

The Grass is reported in Essex and Hertfordshire. I understand there are
at least two other ships equipped for research and manned by English
scientists. It would serve F right if they perfected a counteragent
first.

October 26: Have ordered our accompanying ships to lie offshore, lest
they be boarded by fearcrazed refugees, for the Grass is now in the
vicinity of London and England is in a horrible state.

October 27: BBC transmitting from Penzance. Faint.


_101._ _November 3_: On board the _Sisyphus_ off Scilly. The last days
of England have passed. Heightening the horror, the BBC in its final
moments forwent its policy of soothing its listeners and urging calmness
upon them. Instead, it organized an amazing news service, using
thousands of pigeons carrying messages from eyewitnesses to the station
at Penzance to give a minutebyminute account of the end. Dispassionately
and detachedly, as though this were some ordinary disaster, announcer
after announcer went on the air and read reports; heartpiercing,
anticlimactic, tragic, trivial, noble and thoroughly English reports....
