desire to sleep. The maiden Issa's hair lay within the hollow of his
arm, a pool of rippled gold; it was like looking down into an enchanted
well; the waters seem to rise and meet him. The glow at the curtain-edge
grew stronger; now it was a lake of liquid fire into which he gazed.

       *       *       *       *       *

The threshold of the door had warped and sprung, and through the crack
crept a thin line of smoke; it raised itself sinuously, as does a snake;
it darted its head from side to side, preparing to strike.

       *       *       *       *       *

Descending the staircase, Constans saw that the time was growing
perilously short. On three sides of them the buildings were burning, and
Arcadia House itself was on fire at the southern wing. The hurricane,
shifting back to the northwest, was at its wildest, and the air was full
of ashes and incandescent sparks. As Constans and Esmay emerged from the
shelter of the house, it seemed as though the universe itself was on
fire. Could they ever hope to reach the river? His heart sank as he
looked at that fiery rain through which they must pass. He turned to
Esmay.

"It is the only way," he began, and then stopped, wondering that she
should look so strangely upon him.

"I thought you dead," she answered, humbly. "It was the last thing I
heard--the silver whistle and Nanna misunderstood my question."

"Oh," said Constans, enlightened, and at the same time subtly warned
that he must not press her too far. "So you feared that it might have
been my spirit that came to fetch you?"

"No; not feared," she answered, and with such sweet confidence that
Constans's heart thrilled to new courage. By God's splendor! this woman
trusted him and he would save her.

Half way to the boat-stage they were caught in a whirlwind of choking
vapor; they struggled onward for a few steps, and then the girl fell.
With infinite difficulty Constans half carried, half dragged her down
the last slope to the landing. The boat, a small canoe or dugout, was
there, but he could find only one broken paddle. It was a mad thing to
venture out upon the wind-lashed river with equipment so imperfect, but
there could be no choice of another way.

The tide was running out strongly and Constans could do nothing more
than keep the craft on a straight course and out of the trough of the
heavier seas. He looked longingly at the opposite shore, so near to the
eye and so impossible to attain against that wind and tide; he realized
that they were drifting down into the open bay, and that would be the
end. Yet he would fight for it, and now that the fresh air had aroused
Esmay from her swoon, she crept to his side and sat there comforting
him.

Four hours later the keel grated on a pebbly shingle, and Constans,
looking about him with weary eyes, recognized the little bay, with its
fringing semicircle of trees. Here was the very log upon which he had
sat and dreamed of unutterable things that bright May morning in the
long ago, a dream from which he had awakened to make first acquaintance
with Quinton Edge.

A little way up the grassy glade a fire was burning, and there was the
savory odor of roasted meat in the air. Constans helped Esmay out of the
boat, and with stiffened limbs they dragged themselves up the forest
way. There was a little shriek, a rush of feet, and swishing skirts, and
Nanna's arms were about her sister, while Constans was looking into
Piers Minor's honest eyes.

Far in the north, a smoke as of a furnace ascended, and the sky was
darkened. But here the sun shone brightly, the grass was green
underfoot, the birds sang in the branches above their heads, and the
smell of the spring-tide was in the air. Truly, life and light are sweet
to him who has once walked in the shadow.




XXX

THE STAR IN THE EAST


It was in October of the same year that Constans and Esmay stood one day
in the court-yard of the Greenwood Keep, now restored and rebuilt.

His father's blood friends had helped generously in the rehabilitation
of his fortunes, and Constans had worked hard with his own hands. Now
the task was finished, and he had persuaded Esmay to ride over from the
River Barony and pronounce in person upon its merits. For let it be
known that Piers Minor had lost no time in bringing home his bride, and
both he and Nanna had insisted that Esmay must live with them. And Esmay
had accepted gratefully, for all that she was an heiress in her own
right, through inheritance of her uncle Hugolin's estate, and could have
bought and sold Piers Minor and Nanna, and all their holdings, ten times
over. But all of her red gold could not buy love, and Esmay was wise
enough to know this. Moreover, the River Barony was but twenty miles
distant from the Greenwood Keep, and at least twice every week Constans
rode over and spent the night. It was pleasant to hear him tell proudly
of the progress of the work; how yesterday the roofing of the
guard-house had been started, and how to-day they had turned for the
first time the waters of the Ochre brook into the moat. Esmay always
listened attentively, and it pleased her to think that Constans looked
at her when he talked, even though his actual words might be addressed
to Piers Minor or to Nanna. Listening always, but speaking seldom, for
she felt that he was waiting purposely until some milestone of
achievement had been passed, and she feared that he might consider her
unwomanly. So the summer had gone, the great work was accomplished, and
now they were viewing it together. They had seen everything, going in
turn from lighting platform to calving-barn; from forge and smithy to my
lady's bower. And Esmay had duly admired all and pronounced it good.

Now they were standing in the great hall watching the martins as they
circled around the red-capped gatehouse, and the white doves cooing in
the eaves. A silence had fallen between them, and Constans, leaning
against the window-casement, seemed to have forgotten of Esmay's very
existence. Quietly she drew aside and left him, impelled by an
irresistible desire to know if he would notice her absence and would
follow her. Hardly had she stolen five steps away than she heard him
start, and then turn to seek her. A sheer delight coursed through her
veins, and she began to run.

"Esmay!" he called, but she would not stop, gathering up her skirts in
both her hands, and trying not to look behind her. But he was quickly at
her heels, and an inexplicable terror seemed to seize her; she looked
about for a hiding-place; a door presented itself, and she clutched the
handle desperately, but it refused to turn. Seeing her discomfiture,
Constans believed that he was entitled to enjoy his triumph. He walked
up with leisurely deliberation. "You are a goose," he said, and took
her hands in his, as one who reproves a wilful child.

She assented meekly.

"To run away like that--so foolish, when I had something serious to say
to you. Why do you suppose I brought you here? Why should I want you to
see the house? why did I build it at all? Be good enough to answer me."

She looked up at him with the most innocent expression in the world.
"Why?" she echoed, as though mightily puzzled, and immediately the male
creature became miserably bewildered, and lost his confident bearing in
the twinkling of an eye. Had she really misunderstood him? had he been
deceiving himself from the very beginning? He turned pale and dropped
her hands, and she, misinterpreting this relinquishment of ownership,
felt the blood receding from her own checks. Two utterly foolish
creatures, and yet their folly is not to be argued away by the wise men.
For while it is the accepted theory that a woman always knows when she
is loved (with which men please themselves), and _per contra_ that a man
is never unconscious of the favor in which he stands (with which women
torment themselves), yet the truth is that neither man nor woman is ever
certain of the fact until it is finally proclaimed in actual speech. So
this is why lovers are always being asked to repeat and repeat again the
magic words upon which all their happiness depends.

"The reason--you know--the reason why," he stammered, and then she came
to his aid.

"Yes, I know, but _tell_ me."

And thereupon he did tell her.

A year later, and Constans and his wife sat on a high point of land that
overlooked the waters of the Lower bay and the broad, salt sea beyond
the dunes. Several of Constans's neat-cattle had strayed, and he had
determined to ride to the fishermen's village below the Narrows to
inquire if the estrays had been seen in that direction. Esmay had
accompanied him, and they had been all day in the saddle and were weary.
Nevertheless, they were satisfied, for the lost cattle had been
recovered, and in the morning the herdsmen would be sent over to drive
them home.

They had shared a frugal supper of bread and cheese and dried grapes,
and now they were waiting until the horses should have cropped their
fill. There was no hurry, the moon not rising for an hour yet, and it
was useless to arrive at the Kills before the time of slack water.
Constans had his back against a pine-stump, and Esmay's head rested on
her husband's shoulder. They sat in silence, gazing out upon the gray
sea, content in their present happiness and looking forward to a yet
greater one in the near future. For to Constans Esmay had just made a
wife's final confession, the secret being whispered into his inmost ear,
though there was only the land and the sea to overhear.

Suddenly, on the darkened eastern sky-line, a bright light flashed out,
in color like to a star, and yet incomparably more brilliant. And the
light was not fixed, but continually changed its base, as was shown by
the broad band of rays that now swept the surface of the sea and then
traced their luminous way on the overhanging clouds. Another shift and
the shining pathway reached to their very feet, illuminating with its
radiance every object within its focus, down to the tiniest shell upon
the beach. Esmay, startled, clung to her husband's arm.

"What is it?" she asked, but he could not answer her.

Yet as they gazed upon the new star, insensibly they became comforted.
Whatever this prodigy foretold, it could not be an omen of lasting evil.
Had they not seen for themselves that, even in the worst of worlds,
righteousness and justice and truth had been something more than names.
Doom had fallen; for more than a twelvemonth the ruins had smouldered,
and to-day they were but the harmless haunt of bat and badger. And the
world relieved of that intolerable incubus, and recovered of its purging
and cleansing sickness, had started once more upon its appointed
path--slowly, indeed, at the first, but ever onward and upward.

"It is only one more of the things that we cannot understand," said
Constans at the last. "But we who love need not fear."

He drew his wife's face to his own, and there, full in the radiance of
the unknown star, he kissed her on the lips.

       *       *       *       *       *

Early that same evening Sub-Lieutenant Jarvison, watch-officer of the
electric cruiser _Erebus_, reported to his commander that a landfall had
been made six points away on the port bow. Captain Laws immediately
hastened to the bridge of the vessel and ordered that the engines be
stopped and the customary signals shown. But no reply was received to
the rockets displaying the red, green, and white colors of the Antarctic
Republican Navy; apparently the country was not inhabited. Yet to make
sure, the search-light was put in requisition. Up and down, from side to
side, swept the giant beam, and now they could see that the land on the
left rose gradually into a considerable headland. Beyond opened the wide
waters of what must be a great bay. Captain Laws reflected for a moment,
and then gave another order to his executive.

Under half speed, and with a leadsman in the chains, the _Erebus_ moved
steadily towards the unknown coast.


THE END




       *       *       *       *       *

TYPOGRAPHICAL ERRORS CORRECTED

The following typographical errors in the text were corrected as
detailed here.

In the text: "It was only necessary to dampen these sponges to ensure
a perfect discharge of the electrical current passing through the
head-rest ..." the word "ensue" was corrected to "ensure."

Some hypenation was inconsistently used in the original. These have been
retained as they appear in the original text.

       *       *       *       *       *






End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of The Doomsman, by Van Tassel Sutphen

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE DOOMSMAN ***

***** This file should be named 27730.txt or 27730.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/2/7/7/3/27730/

Produced by Greg Weeks, Geetu Melwani, George P. Snoga and
the Online Distributed Proofreading Team at
http://www.pgdp.net


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
