grandfather's withered face paler than the fur of White Bear's guardian
spirit, the old servant's bloodshot eyes wide.

She remembered that the sun had been low in the west when she came to
this house. Sunlight still slanted through the paper-covered west window
and fell on the layer of leaves that covered White Bear's bed.

But when she tried to move, pain struck her like knives driven into her
knees and elbows, as if she had been sitting in the same position for
days.

"His eyes!" Yellow Hair cried, pointing at White Bear. From the floor
Redbird could not see what Yellow Hair was seeing. She forced her aching
legs to lift her.

White Bear looked at Redbird, then at Yellow Hair. He smiled faintly.

She had done it. He was back in his body.

A spring of pure, sweet joy burst up inside her. A sob welled from her
lips. She stumbled toward Yellow Hair and felt that she was going to
fall. Yellow Hair's arms held her up.

She saw his mouth open, heard him whisper to her, "You brought me back.
I will always love you."

"And I will always love you," Redbird said. Her voice was a croak, as if
she had not spoken in days.

She turned to Yellow Hair. "Now he will live."

Laughing and crying at once, Yellow Hair thanked Redbird again and again
in their common language, calling on her God to bless Redbird.

_Bless me? But what of that man in the mine?_

"Give White Bear the tea of elm bark now. Later, little food, only
little," Redbird said. "Easy-eat food. Hominy good. Later, soup with
meat."

Yellow Hair eagerly agreed.

"Must sleep," said Redbird. She slurred her words, too worn out to speak
clearly.

She could lie down in another room, Yellow Hair said, leading her away
from the canopied bed where the weeping grandfather bent over White
Bear, holding him by his shoulders.

"I gone many days?" Redbird asked.

Yellow Hair's deep blue eyes widened. She shook her head at the word
"days." She assured Redbird that she had been silent only for an
instant. She had been singing, then she closed her eyes, and a moment
later when she opened them again, White Bear had opened his. Yellow Hair
hugged her so hard it hurt her.

_Just an instant?_ Every time Redbird went on a shaman's journey she
learned something new.

Yellow Hair, her arm around Redbird's shoulders, led her to a bed in
another room. Redbird had never lain on a pale eyes' bed, but she sat
down on the edge and fell back. If she was not so tired she would not
have been able to sleep in this bed. It was too soft. Yellow Hair lifted
her legs onto the bed for her.

That was the last thing Redbird remembered.

       *       *       *       *       *

After a day and a night of sleep, Redbird woke refreshed. And hungry. A
cure for that was quickly produced for her; and now she was sitting on a
pale eyes' chair at a pale eyes' table, devouring slices of fried pig
meat and fluffy cakes brought to her by the old servant.

Seated across from her was a fat, smiling woman she had met once
before. This woman had tried to comfort her the day Floating Lily was
killed. This, she knew, was White Bear's aunt.

Yellow Hair, tears streaming from her turquoise eyes, appeared in the
doorway of the room where White Bear lay.

White Bear, she said, wanted Redbird to come to him.

Redbird's hunger vanished. She went rigid.

_Yellow Hair weeps now, but I will weep forever after._

She heard the suffering in Yellow Hair's voice and knew that her heart
was hurting because she believed Redbird was going to take White Bear
away from her.

Redbird knew better. She had defiled her powers by using them to destroy
White Bear's uncle, and now she must pay for it.

The lance twisted in her heart as she stood up at the table.

The fat woman stood up when Redbird did, came around the table and
hugged her. She smelled of fresh-baked bread.

Redbird walked past Yellow Hair to enter the bedroom. White Bear was
reclining with pillows behind his head in the bed where he had lain for
so many days. His chest was bare except for the white bindings that
protected his wound. The wrappings made his olive skin look darker, and
above the cloth Redbird could see the start of the five shining scars
that ran down his chest.

The leaves had been cleared away from the quilt that covered him. His
bundle of talking papers telling the story of the first man and woman
and how they lost their land of happiness was on the table beside his
bed. Next to it lay the knife Star Arrow had given him when he was a
small boy.

When he saw her his face glowed and he held out his arms to her. She
rushed to him, and heard a cry of pain behind her. The door of the
bedroom shut softly.

She threw herself across the bed, longing to hold White Bear. His arms
around her were not as strong as she remembered them, but his embrace
was firm.

"You came to me while my spirit wandered on the prairie," he said.

"The Redbird guided me to you."

"Before you came I saw many things."

"What things?"

He said, "The pale eyes will spread across the Great River and even
into the Great Desert. There will be no place left for our people."

"If we go far enough west--" she began.

"No," he said. "They will go as far as the western ocean. The Turtle
warned me about this." He stroked her hair lightly, and she rested her
head on his shoulder.

She had a heart-crushing feeling that she would never lie like this with
him again.

"You are so much better today," she said.

"You, too, know the way of the shaman now. You healed me."

She lifted her head and looked into his eyes. This was the moment when
they must decide.

"I am the only shaman our people have now," she forced herself to say.
"The few who are left need me. I must go back to them."

His eyes shut tight suddenly, as if his wound was paining him.

"Stay here with me," he said.

His words struck her and tore through her, as his uncle's bullet had
torn through him.

"I could never stay here. When you are well enough, will you not come
back to your people?"

He shook his head. "We cannot fight the pale eyes and we cannot run from
them. They will destroy us. Unless we learn to live as the pale eyes
do."

"That destroys us too."

"That saves us!" His nostrils flared and his dark eyes glowed. "I can
use the power this wealth and this land gives me to fight for our
people. And you can do it with me. And Eagle Feather. I will show the
people how to make use of pale eyes' ways. I will share my land with
them."

Her heart felt as if it were being ground between stones. This, she
understood, was what she must suffer because she had used her shaman's
powers to hurt another. She was going to lose White Bear. She had saved
him from death. He was going to live, but not with her.

The claws of that giant Bear that was his other self seemed to stab into
her chest and tear her in two. She could not live with this pain. She
must surrender to White Bear.

_Yes, I must stay with him. I cannot leave him. Eagle Feather needs him.
We will be safe here, and comfortable, and at peace._

She would send for Eagle Feather. The fat aunt and the grandfather would
love them and care for them.

She tried to see herself living here with White Bear. For a moment the
picture was clear in her mind. Then it dissolved in blackness as she
realized that taking herself out of the Sauk tribe would be like pulling
a medicine plant up by its roots without its consent.

She would die. It would be a slow death that would be worse than the
pain she was suffering now.

And then another thought struck her.

_Children!_

Her heart felt heavy as a mountain.

She remembered how Owl Carver had said, after Eagle Feather smoked the
peace pipe with the Winnebago, that he could be a greater shaman than
any of them. But that would happen only if he was raised as a Sauk.

Floating Lily was dead. Redbird could not live with the people who had
murdered her.

And--she touched her belly--this was not White Bear's child.

She began to cry aloud.

She sobbed till she thought her ribs would crack. Her throat burned; her
voice rasped. She pressed her forehead against his chest. She heard him
groan in pain, but he was hurting her more than she could ever hurt him.

"How can you ask me to stay where they killed Floating Lily? How can
_you_ stay here?"

"What would you have me do?"

A sudden thought occurred to her. "The pale eyes give gold for land.
Take pale eyes gold for this land, and you can take the gold with you to
the Ioway country and share it with our people."

"No, Redbird," he said sadly. "What could we do with gold, out there in
Ioway? Sometimes the long knives have given our chiefs gold in return
for land, yes. In no time the gold melted away. Gold by itself is like
seed corn. Without the right ground to plant it in, it is soon used up
and gone. The only way I can use the wealth my father Star Arrow left to
me is to stay here and work with it."

She had stopped crying. This hurt too much for tears. Only when Floating
Lily was killed had she felt more pain than this.

For a moment she could not bring herself to say the words she had to
say.

From somewhere she summoned the strength to speak.

"Then I must leave you."

Each word, she felt, was an arrow fired into him.

His arms tightened around her. "I beg you to stay."

_Spirit of the Redbird, help me to do what I must._

It would hurt less if she acted at once. She pushed herself away from
him. She stood up and crossed the room to the closed door.

"May you walk always in honor, White Bear."

"No, Redbird, no!" _He_ was crying bitterly now, and he rolled over and
buried his head in his pillows, beating the bed with his clenched fists.

She could not bear to leave him weeping like this, like a child she was
abandoning. She would rather see him angry.

Then the spirit Bird, whom she had called on for help, sent her a
message. She saw Wolf Paw, as he had looked when he was proud and
undefeated, with the red crest on his head, a red blanket wrapped around
him and black paint around his eyes.

_Why did I never see it before?_

Wolf Paw wore the markings of the Bird she was named after, the Bird
that was her spirit guide. Neither she nor he had been aware of it. But
it must mean that they were destined for each other, and that what had
already happened between herself and Wolf Paw _had_ to happen.

To live out her life with Wolf Paw and never to see White Bear again was
like being told she would never again see a day with sunlight.

But it was as the spirit Bird had sung to her-- _What must happen, must
happen_.

She breathed deeply. She hated having to tell White Bear about Wolf Paw.
If he had been willing to come with her, she would not have had to say
anything. Wolf Paw would not have tried to hold her. And if she gave
birth a moon or two too soon, White Bear would have forgiven her. But
now she had to use Wolf Paw to hurt White Bear.

To hurt him so as to heal him.

_But when I am gone from here, who will heal me? Must the shaman suffer
wounds that can never be healed?_

_Yes, if she has dealt such wounds._

"You would not want me anymore, White Bear," she said. "These past moons
since you left us I have been Wolf Paw's woman."

He raised his tear-streaked face from the pillow and stared at her.
"What are you saying?"

"Wolf Paw lost his wives and his children at the Bad Axe. He was like a
dead man. I wanted to heal him, and I will heal him, by living with
him."

His eyes widened. She could see anger darkening his cheeks.

He said, "After my father took me to live here, you waited six summers
for me while Wolf Paw courted you. Could you not keep him off for a few
moons?"

She held out her hands imploringly. "Before, when he was an honored
warrior and had his family, he had no need of me. He wanted me as he
wanted another feather to hang in his hair. But now he needs me. Without
me he would be as good as dead. And he is the last brave in our band."

"I need you."

She put her hands over her belly. It was still flat, but she knew what
was there.

"I am carrying Wolf Paw's child."

He pushed against the bed till he was sitting bolt upright, and he
pounded his fist on his knee. He was still badly wounded. He could hurt
himself. What if he tried to get out of bed, and tore the wound open?

But when he looked up at her his eyes were large and dark with sadness.

"I still love you, whatever you did with Wolf Paw. And I will love _any_
baby you bear."

She felt his hands seize her heart, tearing it out of her chest,
crushing it. She cried out with the pain and staggered backward.

She cried, "You offer me everything but the one thing I want--for you to
come back to our people."

"What I do, I do for our people." His voice was so low that she could
barely hear him. "One Sauk, at least, will take back land the pale eyes
stole from us."

The world grew darker and darker for her. With every word he spoke she
was losing him a little more.

She made the flat-handed "no" gesture. "The pale eyes here in this land
are too strong for the red people. And in you there is both pale eyes
and red man, and the pale eyes is stronger than the red."

His shoulders slumped. She saw a dullness in his eyes that made her
think of Wolf Paw as he had looked after the people of Victor had killed
Floating Lily.

_Have I hurt White Bear so badly that he will get sick again?_ Sudden
fear rippled through her.

But then he lifted his head and looked at her, and there was strength in
his gaunt face.

"I will always love you. And as long as this place is mine, there will
be a home here for you, for Eagle Feather, for any child of yours. For
any Sauk. When you go back, tell them that."

Grief crushed her as she gazed at the man she loved, knowing that they
were parting forever.

He reached out to her, and she went back to lie beside him on the bed.
It felt so good to be held by him, and it hurt so much to know that this
was the last time they would ever lie heart against heart, she thought
she would scream at the agony of it.

       *       *       *       *       *

_Good-bye, Floating Lily, my daughter. I may never be able to come back
here again. I hope you have begun your journey West. But if your spirit
lingers here, know that your father is close by._

Redbird stood a moment looking down at the mound of earth, now covered
with leaves, the strip of red blanket tied to the willow wand now faded.
She rocked back and forth in the pale eyes shoes made of heavy leather
that Yellow Hair had given her. She wailed softly in her sorrow for
Floating Lily.

Then she turned to Yellow Hair, who stood under a nearby maple.

"You take White Bear here and show him."

Yellow Hair nodded.

They went back to Yellow Hair's carriage. The buggy was laden with food
and blankets, and Redbird carried with her a heavy bag of gold coins
given her by White Bear's grandfather. Used wisely, the gold would buy
blankets and food, rifles and ammunition from the traders to help the
Sauk get through the winter. Now they would not have to winter over at
Fort Armstrong, but could cross over at once to join the rest of the
tribe in Ioway.

The wound in Redbird's heart ached constantly, and she sat bent forward
on the buggy seat, her hands gripping her knees. As they rattled down
the road to Fort Armstrong she felt some small relief at leaving the
place where she had lost so much. She tried to tell herself that she was
on the way to a new life.

Yellow Hair said she didn't understand why White Bear was not with them.
She wanted to know if he would follow Redbird when he got better.

_She understands, but she does not dare believe he is going to stay with
her. She thinks it is too much to hope for._

Redbird said, "He still your husband, Yellow Hair. You want him?"

Yellow Hair's lips quivered as she asked, would Redbird not come back to
be with White Bear?

Redbird gritted her teeth. It hurt to have to explain to Yellow Hair.

Redbird made the flat-hand motion. "He not follow me. I never come back
here."

Now Yellow Hair's eyes were glowing like turquoise set in silver. But
she put a comforting hand on Redbird's arm.

She wanted to know why. How could Redbird part from White Bear and he
from her? Did it not hurt too much?

"Yes, hurt much," said Redbird softly, watching the rutted dirt road
pass under the wheels of the buggy.

But Yellow Hair pressed her. How could White Bear tear himself away from
the Sauk?

"Pale eyes family now his people."

But his son--how could he give up his son?

Redbird struggled to find words and gestures to explain this. "Maybe
some day White Bear come for Eagle Feather, like Star Arrow once come
for White Bear." She remembered how White Bear had wept when Sun Woman
told him he must go to live with the pale eyes. "That day, I not say
Eagle Feather must go or must not go. Eagle Feather do what he want."

Yellow Hair shook her head, her braids lashing. She repeated over and
over again an English word Redbird understood, but it asked a question
she could never answer.

"_Why?_"

Again Redbird wrestled with the English words. "Land of his father and
grandfather holds him. He not want to leave."

But what about the uncle who nearly killed him?

"That uncle no more trouble," said Redbird.

_And because of that, I must lose him._

Then when would Redbird see White Bear again? Yellow Hair's question
buried itself in Redbird's heart like a steel arrowhead.

"Never!" she screamed.

Yellow Hair shrank back, her eyes wide with shock. Redbird sighed and
let her body droop.

They drove on in silence. Redbird heard small sounds beside her that
told her Yellow Hair was weeping.

Redbird reached over and took Yellow Hair's hand.

"Make him happy."

Yellow Hair uttered a sob and turned her head away.

But Redbird was no longer crying. Dry-eyed, she stared ahead at the road
south. Her sorrow was too deep for tears.




26

Blood on the Land


Raoul Francois Philippe Charles de Marion woke trembling in damp
blackness, wondering whether it was day or night outside. His heart was
beating so hard that it ached. For a moment he couldn't think what had
scared him so badly. Then he remembered the dream.

He struggled out of the old blanket he'd wrapped around himself and sat
up, panting.

A white bear coming at him down here in the mine. Why in hell would he
dream about a creature like that? There were white bears up in Canada,
he'd heard, but he'd never even seen one.

White Bear--that was Auguste's Indian name. Was he dreaming about
Auguste coming after him?

_Well, Auguste is rotting in the ground now. I killed him._

He still hated Auguste even after his death. Because of Auguste he had
to stay holed up here, blackness pressing on his eyeballs. His eyes were
wide open and he stared till they hurt, but he could see nothing,
nothing at all. It was like being blind.

He wished he had told just one of his men where to find him. He badly
wanted news of what was going on back at Victor. But if he'd told anyone
it would have been Armand, and he couldn't trust the bastard. Armand
might stupidly let himself be followed here. Or give way to threats, or
even sell him out, if Papa offered a big enough reward.

_Armand would. Sure he would. I could see in his eyes how he resented
me. He hated Pierre and he hated me too._

Raoul only had two candles left. Should he light one now? He could spare
it, because he was going to get out of this mine today--or tonight. He'd
waited long enough.

He wasn't sure anymore how long he'd been hiding down here in the dark.
When he slept, he had no idea how long he slept. A watch was one of the
many things he had forgotten to bring with him, leaving in such a hurry.
And yet he'd stupidly brought the silver case with Pierre's spectacles
in it. Stuck it in his pocket when he left the trading post to get the
mongrel. He felt it now, a hard oval in his coat pocket.

How long?

The men pursuing him had searched the mine, as he figured they would.
Days had passed, he was sure, since he'd heard their voices in the mine,
footsteps echoing. He was certain he was the only man in Victor who knew
about the tunnel he was hiding in, its entrance, just big enough to
crawl through, covered by a pile of gravel that appeared to have nothing
but wall behind it. He'd tried to disturb the gravel as little as
possible while crawling in, and had carefully replaced what he'd pushed
aside.

But he might have left some trace on the other side. He'd sat in the
blackness, waiting to hear the sounds of digging, his back pressed
against the damp rock wall, knees drawn up to his chin. His hands, cold
as if they'd been plunged into a snowdrift, had rested on his loaded
rifle and his pistol. And he'd drawn his Bowie knife and laid it beside
him. They'd pay dearly to take him. If there were no more than four or
five of them, he might manage to kill them all and get away.

But the sounds of the search party had faded away. He'd welcomed the
black cotton silence that had followed. He would stay down here as long
as he could. He'd found a place in his tunnel where underground water
had seeped in, and was able to keep refilling his canteen from that. He
found another small branch tunnel some distance from where he slept,
where he could piss and shit. But he'd come into the mine with only six
candles, and he was afraid to use them up, so he spent most of the time
sitting in the dark feeling as if he was going mad with alternating
worry and boredom.

He had brought his canteen of whiskey down here with him, and it had
made time pass easier for a while. But now it was all gone. Seemed like
a hell of a long time since he'd had a drink.

He made a flame with flint, steel and cotton wool, lit his next to last
candle and set it in a pool of its own wax. The light hurt his eyes for
a moment, and the sight of his own shadow moving on the dark gray rock
walls frightened him.

His hollow belly kept squealing and grumbling, and visions of beef and
turkey and duck and pork tormented him. Out of one of his saddlebags he
took the bundle of corn biscuits and dried beef he'd thrown together at
the trading post in his flight. He bit into a biscuit as hard and dry as
a lump of wood and rolled it around in his mouth until his saliva
softened it enough to chew and swallow.

Now he'd go up to the mine entrance, and if it was nighttime he'd leave.
The Flemings had their cabin about a mile from here. Their men had
joined the Regulators, so they deserved to have him take a horse from
them. Then he'd ride north to Galena.

He hefted the other saddlebag, loaded with gold and silver coins and
Bank of Illinois paper. He'd had to leave a lot behind in his office
safe, and they'd probably steal it from him. But he'd get it all back.

Because this was enough to buy him an army.

Galena would be crowded with the roughest men in the Northwest Territory
right now. Surely more men than could make a living in the mines around
there, boom or no boom. Rough and hungry, just what he needed.

_I'll yet see that high-and-mighty Cooper swinging from a tree. And I'll
piss on Auguste's grave._

He bit into a slice of dried beef. It was tough as rawhide, but he
forced it down.

_When I'm running things in Smith County again, Nicole and Frank and
that pack of squalling brats are leaving. I've put up with Frank and his
damned newspaper long enough, just because he's married to my sister._

If Frank gave any trouble, his new press, the one Papa helped him buy,
would end up at the bottom of the Mississippi. Or maybe he'd even be
Cooper's dancing partner on that tree.

_I've knocked my father down. I've killed my brother's squaw and his
mongrel bastard son. Why put up with my sister and her husband? What
have they ever done, except hate me?_

And the old man would have to go, too, if he was still alive, and that
brandy-pickled bag of bones, Guichard. Time to be rid of them all. De
Marion would still be the foremost name in Smith County, but it would be
a new de Marion family, not this old Injun-loving bunch that understood
nothing.

Nancy. What about her?

The teacher needed to be taught a lesson or two. If she hadn't let
Auguste service her when she was captured by the Injuns, then she'd
probably never had a man's cock up inside her. Once she found out what
pleasure he could give her, she'd forget about Auguste. She was still
young enough for children, good-looking children, and smart.

That brat Woodrow that she had living with her. Imagine him saying in
court that the redskins treated him better than his parents did. Send
him packing, just like the Hopkinses.

With Smith County and with Nancy all his, it would be time to rebuild
Victoire.

He'd put that off because he wanted to do it right. And he'd left the
ruin till now to remind himself and everyone in Victor why the Sauk had
to be driven out of Illinois.

No, that was a damned lie.

Alone here in the dark he could not keep the truth from pecking at his
brain like a buzzard's beak: Every time he went near the ruin of the
chateau, he thought of Clarissa and the boys, and guilt stabbed him
without mercy. He'd looked down on Clarissa, and he had not felt for the
boys as a father should.

He'd left them unprotected, let them die horribly, just as Helene had
died.

_I did to Andy and Phil just what Papa and Pierre did to me. When my
boys needed me most, I wasn't there._

_And the Sauk never would have attacked Victor if I hadn't shot Auguste
and the other two redskins at Old Man's Creek._

He forced himself to stop thinking about the family he'd made without
wanting to and then had lost. Their blood was spilled, and nothing would
bring them back. He'd shed plenty of Indian blood to avenge them.

He remembered the Indian witch woman, Auguste's mother, the Bowie knife
slicing open her throat, her blood warm on his hand. What curse had she
laid on him before he killed her?

He put her out of his mind and thought of Victoire. When he rebuilt
Victoire it would not be just another blockhouse, but a stone mansion
that could be seen from the river. It would be the center of Raoul de
Marion's new empire--steamships, railroads, cattle, farmlands, mines.
Now that the Indians were gone for good, now that Pierre's bastard was
dead, there was no limit to what Raoul could make of the family's
wealth.

The dreams heartened him. Time to move. He stuffed the little bundle of
beef and biscuit into one saddlebag. He slung the saddlebags over his
shoulder, the light one with food hanging down his front, the heavy one
with the money in it on his back. He loosened the Bowie knife in its
sheath on his left hip. He checked the loads in his pistol and his rifle
again.

As he pushed back his coat to holster his pistol, he felt Pierre's
spectacle case in his pocket.

_What the hell am I carrying that around for?_

At times he'd suspected that he kept Pierre's spectacles because he
really did love his older brother, in spite of everything Pierre had
done to him.

The silver case, he told himself, was valuable. But the spectacles were
worthless. The eyes that had needed them had stopped seeing a year ago.

_Had they?_

He opened the case. The lenses glinted in the candlelight as if there
were eyes behind them.

"Goddamn it!" he shouted, and turned the case over, dropping the
spectacles to the stone floor. They shattered with a crack that sounded
loud as a pistol shot. He stamped on them for good measure, crushing the
glass to glittering splinters and twisting the frames out of shape under
the sole of his boot.

He threw the case into a pile of rock shards. Valuable or not, he didn't
want the damned thing anymore.

"I hope you're in Hell, Pierre!"

He didn't love Pierre. He hated him. He'd never loved him. He'd always
hated him, ever since Fort Dearborn.

Holding the bit of candle high in his left hand, his rifle in his right,
he started up the sloping tunnel. It was a long climb; the sacks of
coins in the saddlebag on his back weighed him down.

He stopped at the gravel pile that blocked entry to this tunnel. He
listened, and heard nothing but his blood hissing in his ears. He
scraped chunks of stone away from the pile until he could crawl through.

After more walking and climbing through tunnels and shafts, he no
longer had any notion how long it had been since he left his hideout. He
saw ahead a little square of gray, in the center of the black all around
him. And then he could make out the walls and floor of the tunnel.
Moonlight or starlight must be illuminating the mine entrance. Night,
then. Good, he could leave at once.

About twenty feet from the entrance he saw up ahead an opening where
another tunnel branched off from this one. He remembered it. This was
the side tunnel where the Indian he'd killed seven years ago had hidden.

As he came close to that opening he heard a rumbling sound.

The growl of an animal.

He felt as if he'd been doused with ice-cold water.

He took a few steps back from the branch tunnel opening, curled his
finger around the trigger of his rifle and raised it, one-handed. He
didn't want to let go of the candle.

It hadn't just been a dream. There _was_ something in this mine.

Maybe a wolf. Or a bear would like a deserted mine like this for a den.

He heard snuffling, grunting noises. Then a growl so deep it seemed to
shake the stone under his feet. He felt his stomach clench, and he
nearly lost his grip on his bowels.

Claws scraped on rock. With trembling fingers he set the candle in one
of the wall niches the miners had carved for their lanterns and raised
his rifle to his shoulder.

The bear came out of the branch tunnel. He saw the huge, pointed white
head from the side at first, with a golden eye that glared at him. A
perfectly white bear.

Like his dream.

The head swung toward him, a gaping mouth lined with teeth like ivory
daggers.

The whole white body emerged, bigger than a bull bison.

It roared, deafening as a cannon blast. It reared up on its hind legs,
filling the tunnel like a white avalanche. After the roar, it rumbled
steadily, deep in its chest. Though it was more than ten feet away, he
could smell its rotten-meat breath.

He squeezed the trigger. His rifle thundered, echoes slamming the sides
of his head. Smoke obscured the vast white body. His ears jangled.

He felt a sudden terror that the shot might start a cave-in.

But it didn't.

It didn't stop the bear either. It came on, padded feet scraping on the
tunnel floor, swinging claws like rows of sickles.

_I couldn't have missed. Oh Jesus, oh God, I couldn't have._

He threw the rifle down, snatched his pistol out of his holster and
fired again.

Blinding flash, deafening blast, stinking smoke.

And the bear kept coming.

It was so close, the lead balls _must_ have gone into it. It must be
just so damned big it would take more than two shots to kill it.

But there was no time to reload. The bear towered over him, white body
filling the whole world, eyes, claws, teeth, all shining in the glow of
that pitiful little candle that somehow had stayed lit.

He screamed and sobbed like a little boy in his terror, but he managed
to get his Bowie knife out. He'd killed a big Indian with this knife.

A paw the size of his head knocked the knife from his hand.

"Oh, please don't kill me!" he wept. "For the love of Jesus!"

The other paw hit his chest like a sledgehammer. He felt his ribs cave
in. He felt the claws stab into his lungs.

His breath flew from his body. His strength drained away. He couldn't
scream anymore. He couldn't beg for his life. His voice was gone. Only
blood came out of his throat. The last thing he saw was an enormous
mouth gaping, full of yellow-white pointed teeth coming at him. He felt
claws rip again through his chest and belly and knew that he was going.

       *       *       *       *       *

The pale eyes' smoke boat was a frightening thing, shooting black clouds
and sparks from two black-painted iron tubes that rose up from a big
lodge in its middle. On each side of the boat was a wheel with wooden
boards attached, and the wheels and boards pushed the boat through the
water. Standing on the floor of wood planks at the front end of the
boat, Redbird tried to understand how fire in the boat's belly could
make wheels turn. She felt the monstrous thing tremble under her as it
swam across the river.

About a hundred women and children with a few men were crowded at the
front of the boat, watching the Ioway shore of the Great River come
closer. By unspoken agreement they kept their backs turned to the land
that had once been so good to them, the land they had forever lost.

_The happy land that was lost_, Redbird thought.

At the memory of White Bear, grief stabbed her, and she had to rest
against the railing of the boat. She felt an aching hollow as if she had
been gutted like a butchered deer.

In their midst rose a little mountain of boxes, barrels, sacks and
bales, the supplies they had bought with White Bear's grandfather's
gold. But they had no horses, and when they got to the Ioway shore they
would have to carry these goods on their backs, a journey of probably
four days across the strip of land by the river that He Who Moves
Alertly had surrendered to the long knives. Somewhere beyond that land
they would find the Sauk and Fox who had been wise enough not to follow
Black Hawk. She hoped it would not start to snow before they reached the
camps of their people.

Wolf Paw said, "I have heard that this is the very boat that killed so
many of our people at the Bad Axe."

This boat had killed his wives and his children, then, thought Redbird.
She rested her hand on his arm.

"See there," he said, pointing to holes and black marks on the wood at
the very front end. "A thunder gun was set there. It fired at our people
and tore them to pieces. Like the one that killed so many of our
warriors at the pale eyes town." Through his worn buckskin shirt he
touched the silver coin that still hung around his neck on a leather
thong. Redbird remembered the day White Bear had dug the coin out of
Wolf Paw's body, claiming he had changed a lead ball into a coin.
