in drawing together the broken parts. Durable. Cheap. Sent on 10-day
trial to prove its worth. Beware of imitations. Every appliance made to
individual measurements and sent direct from Marshall. Full information
and Rupture booklet sent free in plain, sealed envelope. Write for all
the facts today.

=BROOKS APPLIANCE CO., 173-B State Street, Marshall, Mich.=

       *       *       *       *       *


CORRECT Your NOSE!

[Illustration]

Thousands have used the Anita Nose Adjuster to improve their appearance.
Shapes flesh and cartilage of the nose--safely, painlessly, while you
sleep. Results are lasting. Doctors approve it. Money back guarantee.
Gold Medal winner. Write for 30-Day TRIAL OFFER and FREE BOOKLET.

=ANITA INSTITUTE, 242 Anita Building, Newark, N.J.=

       *       *       *       *       *


WHAT EVERY ELECTRICIAN WANTS TO _KNOW_!

Is easily found in AUDELS NEW ELECTRIC LIBRARY. Electricity made simple
as ABC. Up-to-date, trade dope for the expert and ALL electrical
workers.

Questions, answers, diagrams, calculations, underwriter's code; design,
construction, operation and maintenance of modern electrical machines
and appliances FULLY COVERED.

All available at small cost, easy terms. BOOK-A-MONTH service puts this
NEW information in your hands for 6c a day.

Write TODAY for Electrical Folder and FREE TRIAL offer.

Theo. Audel & Co. 65 W. 23rd St. New York, Dept. 20

       *       *       *       *       *


Ever Get Nervous When You're Reading?

--_You might see a doctor_,

--_But if you are a girl, and wise_,

--_You'll try reading_

=MISS 1930=

_instead_


--IT'S A TONIC

--A Chance To See your picture in a magazine.

--Real laughs.

--Choosing a Career

--The Fate of Your Name

--Youthful Styles

--And the Best Fiction in any

MAGAZINE FOR THE MODERN GIRL

  MISS 1930
  80 Lafayette Street, New York City

  25c. AT YOUR NEWSDEALER
  SUBSCRIPTION $3.00 PER YEAR

       *       *       *       *       *

Please mention NEWSSTAND GROUP--MEN'S LIST, when answering
advertisements

       *       *       *       *       *


[Illustration: FOR THOUSANDS OF MEN]

Tobacco Habit Banished

Let Us Help You

Stop craving tobacco in any form. Tobacco Redeemer in most cases
relieves all craving for it in a few days' time. Don't try to quit the
tobacco habit unaided. It's often a losing fight against heavy odds, and
may mean a distressing shock to the nervous system. Let Tobacco Redeemer
help the habit to quit _you_. Tobacco users usually can depend upon this
help by simply using Tobacco Redeemer according to simple directions. It
is pleasant to use, acts quickly, and is thoroughly reliable.


Not a Substitute

Tobacco Redeemer contains no habit-forming drugs of any kind. It is in
no sense a substitute for tobacco. After finishing the treatment, there
should be no desire to use tobacco again or to continue the use of the
remedy. In case the treatment is not perfectly satisfactory, we will
gladly refund any money paid. It makes not a particle of difference how
long tobacco has been used, or in what form--whether it is cigars,
cigarettes, pipe, plug, fine cut or snuff. In most cases Tobacco
Redeemer removes all craving for tobacco in any form in a very few days.
And remember, it is offered with a positive money-back guarantee. Write
today for our free booklet showing the injurious effect of tobacco upon
the human system and convincing evidence that TOBACCO REDEEMER does
quickly relieve the craving for tobacco in most cases.

  =NEWELL PHARMACAL COMPANY
  Dept. 793
  Clayton Station
  St. Louis, Mo.=

       *       *       *       *       *


10 Inches Off Waistline In 35 Days

[Illustration]

"I reduced from 48 inches to 38 inches in 35 days," says R. E. Johnson,
of Akron, O., "just by wearing a Director Belt. Stomach now firm,
doesn't sag and I feel fine."

The Director Belt gets at the _cause_ of fat and quickly removes it by
its gentle, kneading, massaging action on the abdomen, which causes the
fat to be dissolved and absorbed. Thousands have proved it and doctors
recommend it as the natural way to reduce. Stop drugs, exercises and
dieting. Try this easy way.


Sent on Trial

Let us prove our claims. We'll send a Director for trial. If you don't
get results you owe nothing. You don't risk a penny. Write for trial
offer, doctors' endorsements and letters from users. Mail the coupon
NOW!

  =LANDON & WARNER=
  =332 S. La Salle St., Chicago, Ill.=

       *       *       *       *       *

Landon & Warner, Dept. C-71, 332 S. LaSalle, Chicago

Gentlemen: Without cost or obligation on my part please send me details
of your trial offer.

  Name ........................................

  Address .....................................

       *       *       *       *       *


[Illustration: WANTED--for murder!]

$1,000 Reward!

In a dirty, forelorn shack by the river's edge they found the mutilated
body of Genevieve Martin. Her pretty face was swollen and distorted.
Marks on the slender throat showed that she had been brutally choked to
death. Who had committed this ghastly crime?

Crimes like this are being solved every day by Finger Print Experts. We
read in the papers of their exploits, hear of the mysteries they solve,
the rewards they win. Finger Print Experts are the heroes of the hour.


More Trained Men Needed

The demand for trained men by governments, states, cities, detective
agencies, corporations, and private bureaus is becoming greater every
day. Here is a real opportunity for YOU. Can you imagine a more
fascinating line of work than this? Often life and death depend on
finger print evidence--and big rewards go to the expert. Many experts
earn regularly from $3,000 to $10,000 per year.


Learn At Home in Spare Time

Now, through this amazing new, simple course, you can learn the secrets
of this science easily and quickly at home in your spare time. Any man
with common school education and average ability can become a Finger
Print Detective in surprisingly short time.


FREE--The Confidential Reports No. 38 Made to His Chief!

IF YOU ACT QUICK--We will send you free and with no obligation
whatsoever, a copy of the gripping, fascinating, confidential report
Secret Service Operator No. 38 made to His Chief. Mail coupon NOW!

Write quickly for fully illustrated free book on Finger Prints which
explains this wonderful training in detail. Don't wait. You may never
see this announcement again! You assume no obligation. Mail coupon
NOW--while this offer lasts!

  =Institute of Applied Science=
  =Dept. 15-62=
  =1920 Sunnyside Avenue, Chicago=

       *       *       *       *       *

  =INSTITUTE OF APPLIED SCIENCE,=
  =Dept. 15-62 1920 Sunnyside Avenue, Chicago, Ill.=

Gentlemen: Without any obligation whatever, send me your new, fully
illustrated FREE book on Finger Prints and the free copy of the
Confidential Reports of Operator No. 38 made to His Chief.

  _Name_ ........................................

  _Address_ .....................................

  ............................. _Age_ ...........

       *       *       *       *       *

Please mention NEWSSTAND GROUP--MEN'S LIST, when answering
advertisements

       *       *       *       *       *


Muscles 5c apiece!

Wouldn't it be great if we could buy muscles by the bag--take them home
and paste them on our shoulders? Then our rich friends with money to buy
them, sure would be socking us all over the lots. But they don't come
that easy, fellows. If you want muscle you have to work for it. That's
the reason why the lazy fellow never can hope to be strong. So if you're
lazy and don't want to work--you had better quit right here. This talk
was never meant for you.

[Illustration: =EARLE LIEDERMAN, The Muscle Builder=]

_Author of "Muscle Building," "Science of Wrestling and Jiu Jitsu,"
"Secrets of Strength," "Here's Health," "Endurance," Etc._


I WANT LIVE ONES

I've been making big men out of little ones for over fifteen years. I've
made pretty near as many strong men as Heinz has made pickles. My system
never fails. That's why I guarantee my works to do the trick. That's why
they gave me the name of "The Muscle Builder."

I have the surest bet that you ever heard of. Eugen Sandow himself said
that my system is the shortest and surest that America ever had to
offer.

Follow me closely now and I'll tell you a few things I'm going to do for
you.


HERE'S WHAT I GUARANTEE

In just 30 days I'm going to increase your arm one full inch. Yes, and
add two inches to your chest in the same length of time. But that's
nothing. I've only started; get this--I'm going to put knobs of muscles
on your shoulders like baseballs. I'm going to deepen your chest so that
you will double your lung capacity. Each breath you take will flood
every crevice of your pulmonary cavity with oxygen. This will load your
blood with red corpuscles, shooting life and vitality throughout your
entire system. I'm going to give you arms and legs like pillars. I'm
going to work on every inner muscle as well, toning up your liver, your
heart, etc. You'll have a snap to your step and a flash to your eye.
You'll feel the real pep shooting up and down your old backbone. You'll
stretch out your big brawny arms and crave for a chance to crush
everything before you. You'll just bubble over with vim and animation.

Sounds pretty good, what? You can bet your old ukulele it's good. It's
wonderful. And don't forget, fellow--I'm not just promising all this--I
guarantee it. Well, let's get busy, I want action--So do you.


Send for my new 64-page book "_Muscular Development_"

IT IS FREE

It contains forty-eight full-page photographs of myself and some of the
many prize-winning pupils I have trained. Some of these came to me as
pitiful weaklings, imploring me to help them. Look them over now, and
you will marvel at their present physiques. This book will prove an
impetus and a real inspiration to you. It will thrill you through and
through. This will not obligate you at all, but for the sake of your
future health and happiness, do not put it off. Send today--right now,
before you turn this page.

  EARLE LIEDERMAN
  DEPT. 1702
  305 BROADWAY, N.Y. CITY

       *       *       *       *       *

  =EARLE LIEDERMAN=
  =Dept. 1702, 305 Broadway, New York City=

Dear Sir:--Please send me without any obligation on my part whatever, a
copy of your latest book "Muscular Development." (Please write or print
plainly.)

  Name ......................... Age ..........

  Address .....................................

  City ...................... State ...........

       *       *       *       *       *

Please mention NEWSSTAND GROUP--MEN'S LIST, when answering
advertisements

       *       *       *       *       *


  change to
  OLD GOLD
  in kindness to your
  THROAT

THE SMOKE SCREEN THAT KEEPS OUT THROAT-SCRATCH


"COLD" WEATHER IS OLD GOLD WEATHER

[Illustration: Old Gold Cigarettes]

In raw, damp, or cold weather, change to OLD GOLD. Its naturally good
tobaccos are smooth and kind to your throat.

Just clean, ripe tobacco, blended to honey-smoothness. And a flavor that
has won more than 100,000 taste tests. No artificial treatment ... just
better tobacco, that's all. And it has put OLD GOLD among the leaders in
THREE years! Take a carton home. Do it today. For this is the weather
for mild OLD GOLD.

=Better tobaccos make them smoother and better ... with "not a cough in
a carload"=

       *       *       *       *       *


WHEN CRITICAL SMOKERS GET TOGETHER

[Illustration: Camel]

Their experience recognizes that Camel is indeed "a better cigarette":

    Better in its quality of mellow, fragrant tobacco.

    Better in the mildness and satisfying taste of the Camel blend.

When they learn the difference they flock to Camels.

CAMEL _CIGARETTES_

       *       *       *       *       *




Transcriber Corrections:

He turned quickly and was astonished at the sight of [added 'the']

shook a skinny forefinger [standardized 'fore-finger'] in Tom's face.

I was successful [was 'successsful'] in business

His eyes were riveted [standardized 'rivetted'] to an undulating,

One is that it would be [was 'would me']

propellers [standardized 'propellors'] ripping into the summer night

The thing was halfway [standardized 'half-way'] to the high bank

On some were propellers [standardized 'propellors'].

the slim shafts with their little propellerlike [standardized
'propellorlike'] fans.

There were others without the propellers; [standardized 'propellors']

He saw from below the swift plane, [added comma] the streaming,
intangible ray

does not sympathize [was 'symphathize'] with radicals.

and took up a cigarette. Lighting [was 'Lightning'] it

The light of the match died, plunging me into a pit of gloom. [was ,]

more comfort than [was 'that'] a room of grotesque shadows

familiar [was 'familar'] to him. He had seen it pictured

throughout the sun-ship, [standardized 'sun ship'] Northwood, going
into the cabin for fur coats,

Athalia's [was 'Athania's'] picture was gone.

He seized a telescope and focused [was 'focusd'] it

Northwood [was 'Norwood'] narrowed his eyes as

"Do I guess right," said Northwood, [was ;] "that the light is

"Yes," said Dr. Mundson. [was 'Munson'] "In your American slang,

New Eden, [was 'Elden'] where supermen are younger than babes

while she possessed the freshness of young girlhood, [changed from ;]
her skin and eyes

the iciness [was 'icyness'] was gone from his blue eyes

you would be disappointed in him, [added ,] especially after having
