image of his Maker, is told to acknowledge Him his greater, and to sound
His praise in his eternal course. The Moon, the fixed stars, and the
planets are called upon to resound the praise of the Creator, whose
glory is declared in the Heavens--

    Fairest of Stars, last in the train of night,
    If better thou belong not to the dawn,
    Sure pledge of day, that crown'st the smiling morn
    With thy bright circlet, praise Him in thy sphere
    While day arises, that sweet hour of prime.
    Thou Sun, of this great world both eye and soul,
    Acknowledge Him thy greater; sound his praise
    In thy eternal course, both when thou climb'st,
    And when high noon hast gained, and when thou fall'st.
    Moon, that now meet'st the orient Sun, now fliest
    With the fixed stars, fixed in their orb that flies;
    And ye five other wandering Fires, that move
    In mystic dance, not without song, resound
    His praise, who out of darkness called up Light.--v. 166-79.

Milton's conception of celestial distances, and of the vast regions of
interstellar space, is finely described in the following lines:--

                        Down thither prone in flight
    He speeds, and through the vast ethereal sky
    Sails between worlds and worlds, with steady wing
    Now on the polar winds; then with quick fan
    Winnows the buxom air, till, within soar
    Of towering eagles.--v. 266-71.

As in their morning, so in their evening devotions, our first parents
never fail to introduce a reference to the celestial orbs as indicating
the power and goodness of the Creator, made manifest in the beauty and
greatness of His works--

    Thus, at their shady lodge arrived, both stood,
    Both turned, and under open sky adored
    The God that made both Sky, Air, Earth and Heaven
    Which they beheld; the Moon's resplendent globe,
    And starry pole.--iv. 720-24.

The numerous extracts contained in this volume impress upon one's mind
how largely astronomy enters into the composition of 'Paradise Lost,'
and of how much assistance the knowledge of this science was to Milton
in the elaboration of his poem. Indeed, it would be hard to imagine how
such a work could have been written except by a poet who possessed a
proficient and comprehensive knowledge of astronomy. The chief
characteristic of Milton's poetry is its sublimity, which is the natural
outcome of the magnificence of his conceptions and of his own pure
imaginative genius. Among all the fields of literature, science, and
philosophy explored by him, he found none more congenial to his tastes,
or that afforded his imagination more freedom for its loftiest flights,
than the sublimest of sciences--astronomy. Whether we admire most the
accuracy of his astronomical knowledge, or the wonderful creations of
his poetic fancy, or his beautiful descriptions of the celestial orbs,
it is apparent that in this domain of science, as a poet, he stands
alone and without a rival. In his choice of the Ptolemaic cosmology
Milton adopted a system with which he had been familiar from his
youth--the same which his favourite poet Dante introduced into his poem,
'The Divina Commedia,' and which was well adapted for poetic
description. The picturesque conception of ten revolving spheres,
carrying along with them the orbs assigned to each, which, by their
revolution round the steadfast Earth, brought about with unfailing
regularity the successive alternation of day and night, and in every
twenty-four hours exhibited the pleasing vicissitudes of dawn, of
sunshine, of twilight, and of darkness, relieved by the soft effulgence
of the nocturnal sky, afforded Milton a favourable basis upon which to
construct a cosmical epic. The Copernican theory--with which he was
equally conversant, and in the accuracy and truthfulness of which he
believed--though less complicated than the Ptolemaic in its details, did
not possess the same attractiveness for poetic description that belonged
to the older system. According to this theory there is, surrounding us
on all sides, a boundless uncircumscribed ocean of space, to which it is
impossible to assign any conceivable limit; in every effort to
comprehend its dimensions or fathom its depths, the mind recoils upon
itself, baffled and discomfited, with a conscious feeling that there can
be no nearer approach to the end when end there is none that can be
conceived of. Interspersed throughout the regions of this azure vast of
space is the stellar universe, which to our comprehension is as infinite
as the abyss in which it exists. The solar system, though of magnificent
dimensions, is but a unit in the astronomical whole, in which are
embraced millions of other similar units--other solar systems, perhaps
differing in construction from that of ours, with billions of miles of
interstellar space intervening between each; yet so vast are the
dimensions of the celestial sphere that those distances when measured
upon it sink into utter insignificance. As the receding depths of space
are penetrated by powerful telescopes, they are found to be pervaded
with stars and starry archipelagoes, distributed in profusion over the
circular immensity and extending away into abysmal depths, beyond the
reach of visibility by any optical means which we possess. To the
universe there is no known end--nowhere in imagination can its boundary
be reached! This bewildering conception of the cosmos did not trouble
the minds of pre-Copernican thinkers. They regarded the steadfast Earth
as the most important body in the universe; nor were the celestial orbs
which circled round it believed to be very far distant. Tycho Brahe
imagined that the stars were not much more remote than the planets.
Epicurus thought the stars were small crystal mirrors in the sky which
reflected the solar rays, and the Venerable Bede remarked that they
needed assistance from the Sun's light in order to render them more
luminous.

The adoption of the Ptolemaic system by Milton afforded greater scope
for the exercise of his imaginative powers, and enabled him to bring
within the mental grasp of his readers a conception of the universe
which was not lost in the immensity associated with the Copernican view
of things. Besides, it also furnished him with a distinctly defined
basis upon which to erect the superstructure of his poem. Above the
circumscribed universe was Heaven or the Empyrean; underneath it was
Chaos, from which it had been reclaimed, and in the lowest depth of
which Milton located the infernal world called Hell. These four regions
embraced universal space; and in the elaboration of his great epic
Milton relied upon his imaginative genius, his brilliant scholarship,
his vast erudition, and the divine inspiration of the heavenly muse.
With these, aided by the power and vigour of his intellect, he was
enabled to produce a cosmical epic that surpassed all previous efforts
of a similar kind, and which still remains without a parallel.

One of the distinguishing features of Milton's mind was his wonderful
imagination, and in its exercise he beheld those sublime celestial and
terrestrial visions on which he reared fabrics of splendour and beauty,
described in harmonious numbers with the fervid eloquence and charm of a
true poet. An example of the loftiness and originality of his
imagination is afforded us in his description of the Creation, the main
facts of which he derived from the first two chapters of Genesis, and
upon these he elaborated in full and striking detail his magnificent
conception of the efforts of Divine Might, which in six successive
creative acts called into existence the universe and all that it
contains. The rising of the Earth out of Chaos; the creation of light
and of the orbs of the firmament; the joyfulness associated with the
onward career of the new-born Sun; the subdued illumination of the
full-orbed Moon, and the thousand thousand stars that spangle the
nocturnal sky--all these afforded Milton a rich field in which his
imagination luxuriated, and in the description of which he found
subject-matter worthy of his gifted intellect.

Milton gives an ampler and more detailed description of the new universe
in his narration of Satan's journey through space in search of this
world, and brings more vividly before the imagination of his readers the
glories of the celestial regions. The fiend, having emerged from the
dark abyss of Chaos into a region of light, first beheld the new
creation from such a distance that to his view it appeared as a star
suspended by a golden chain from the Empyrean. This stellar conception
of the poet's harmonised with the views of the Ptolemaists, who believed
that the universe was of limited extent, and though its dimensions were
vast beyond comprehension, it was, nevertheless, enclosed by the tenth
sphere or Primum Mobile. It was on the surface of this sphere that Satan
alighted, and over which he wandered, until attracted by a beam of light
that appeared through an opening at its zenith, where, by means of a
stair or ladder, communication was maintained between the new universe
and Heaven above. Hither the undaunted fiend hied, and, standing on the
lower steps of this structure, momentarily paused to gaze upon the
glorious sight which burst upon his view before directing his flight
down into the newly created universe. Milton then describes his progress
through the stellar regions, his landing in the Sun and what he saw
there, and the termination of his journey when he descends from the
ecliptic down to the Earth. In doing so the poet gives a wonderfully
beautiful description of the starry universe, of the Sun, Moon, and
Earth (Book III. 540-742), enhanced and adorned with his own poetic
imaginings derived from fable, philosophy, and science.

Milton makes more frequent allusion to the Sun than to any of the other
orbs of the firmament. This we should expect: the poet always gives the
orb the precedence which is his due, and never fails, when the occasion
requires it, to surround him with the 'surpassing glory' which marks his
pre-eminence above all other occupants of the sky. The Moon, his
consort--peerless in the subdued effulgence of her borrowed light; the
beautiful star of evening, Hesperus; the sidereal heavens with their
untold glories; the Galaxy, overpowering in the magnificence of its
clouds and streams of stars--all these have their beauties and charms
mirrored in the pages of this remarkable poem.

That the observation of the celestial orbs, their phases, and the varied
phenomena which occur as a consequence of their motions, were to Milton
an unfailing source of enjoyment and of meditative delight, is evident
from the frequency with which he alludes to them. The following lines
also testify to this:--

    For wonderful indeed are all his works,
    Pleasant to know, and worthiest to be all
    Had in remembrance always with delight!
    But what created mind can comprehend
    Their number, or the wisdom infinite
    That brought them forth, but hid their causes deep?--iii. 703-708.

It is very pleasant, as Milton says, to

                        sit and rightly spell
    Of every star that heaven doth show.

It is also pleasant to know the astronomy of his 'Paradise Lost,' and to
linger over the delightful and harmonious utterances associated with the
sublimest of sciences, expressed in the melodious language of England's
greatest epic poet.


              PRINTED BY
SPOTTISWOODE AND CO., NEW-STREET SQUARE
                LONDON




FOOTNOTES:


[1] Chambers's _Handbook of Astronomy_.

[2] Brewster's _Martyrs of Science_.

[3] The transit occurred on a Sunday, and the 'business of the highest
importance' to which Horrox alludes was his clerical duties.

[4] A fresco by the late Mr. Ford Maddox-Brown, depicting Crabtree
observing the transit of Venus, adorns the interior of the Manchester
Town Hall.

[5] William Crabtree died on August 1, 1644, aged 34 years.

[6] The constellation Virgo.

[7] _Life of Galileo_ (Library of Useful Knowledge).

[8] Miss Clerke's _System of the Stars_.

[9] Miss Clerke's _System of the Stars_.

[10] Miss Clerke's _System of the Stars_.

[11] _Ibid._

[12] An expression in Book VIII. 148-49 would seem to indicate that this
was inaccurate, but the lines

                          'and other suns perhaps
    With their attendant moons, thou wilt descry,'

are an allusion to the planets Jupiter and Saturn, whose satellites had
been recently discovered.

[13] Mr. E. W. Maunder, in _Knowledge_, March 1894.

[14] Though not a celestial body, it is considered desirable to describe
the Earth as a member of the solar system.

[15] See diagram, chap. iii. p. 96.





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of The Astronomy of Milton's 'Paradise
Lost', by Thomas Orchard

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK ASTRONOMY ***

***** This file should be named 28434.txt or 28434.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/2/8/4/3/28434/

Produced by David Edwards, Nigel Blower and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This
file was produced from images generously made available
by The Internet Archive/American Libraries.)


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
