
"So you had to stop it," Malone said after a long second. "But I still
don't see--"

"Of course you don't," Sir Lewis said. "But you've got to understand
why you don't see it first."

"Because I'm stupid," Malone said.

Luba was shaking her head. Malone turned to face her. "Not stupid,"
she said. "But some people, Kenneth, have certain talents. Others
have--other talents. There's no way of equating these talents; all are
useful, each performs a different function."

"And my talent," Malone said, "is stupidity. But--"

She lit a cigarette daintily. "Not at all," she said. "You've done a
really tremendous job, Kenneth. I was trained ever since I was a baby
to use my psionic abilities--the PRS has known how to train children
in that line ever since 1970. Only Mike Fueyo developed a system for
instruction independently; the boy was, and is, a genius, as you've
noticed."

"Agreed," Malone said. "But--"

"You, however," Luba said, "have the distinction of being the first
human being who has, as an adult, achieved his full powers without
childhood training. In addition, you're the only human being who has
ever developed to the extent you have--in precognition, too."

She puffed on the cigarette. Malone waited.

"But what you don't have," she said at last, very carefully, "is the
ability to reason out the steps you've taken, after you've reached the
proper conclusion."

"Like the calculus student," Malone said. "I flunk." Something inside
him grated over the marrow in his bones. It was as though someone had
decided that the best cure for worry was coarse emery in the joints,
and he, Kenneth J. Malone, had been picked for the first experiment.

"You're not flunking," Luba said. "You're a very long way from
flunking, Kenneth."

Burris cleared his throat suddenly. Malone turned to him. The Head of
the FBI stuck an unlighted cigar into his mouth, chewed it a little,
and then said: "Malone, we've been keeping tabs on you. Your shield
was unbreakable--but we have been able to reach the minds of people
you've talked to: Mike Sands, Primo Palveri, and so on. And Her
Majesty, of course: you opened up a gap in your shield to talk to her,
and you haven't closed it down. Until you started broadcasting here on
the way up, naturally."

"All right," Malone said, waiting with as much patience as possible
for the point.

"I tried to take you off the case," Burris went on, "because Sir Lewis
and the others felt you were getting too close to the truth. Which you
were, Malone, which you were." He lit his cigar and looked obscurely
pleased. "But they didn't know how you'd take it," he said. "They ...
we ... felt that a man who hadn't been trained since childhood to
accept the extrasensory abilities of the human mind couldn't possibly
learn to accept the reality of the job the PRS has to do."

"I still don't," Malone said. "I'm stupid. I flunk. Remember?"

"Now, now," Burris said helplessly. "Not at all, Malone. But we were
worried. I lied to you about those three spies--I put the drug in the
water-cooler. I tried to keep you from learning the Fueyo method of
teleportation. I didn't want you to learn that you were telepathic."

"But I did," Malone said, "And what does that make me?"

"That," Sir Lewis cut in, "is what we're attempting to find out."

Malone felt suitably crushed, but he wasn't sure by what. "I've got
some questions," he said after a second. "I want to know three
things."

"Go ahead," Sir Lewis said.

"One:" Malone said, "How come Her Majesty and the other nutty
telepaths didn't spot you? Two: How come you sent me out on these jobs
when you were afraid I was dangerous? And three: What was it that was
so safe about busting up civilization? How did that save us from the
Last War?"

Sir Lewis nodded. "First," he said, "we've developed a technique of
throwing up a shield and screening it with a surface of innocuous
thoughts--like hiding behind a movie screen. Second ... well, we had
to get the jobs done, Malone. And Andrew thought you were the most
capable, dangerous or not. For one thing, we wanted to get all the
insane telepaths in one place; it's difficult to work when the
atmosphere's full of such telepathic ravings."

"But wrecking the world because of a man with a mind-shield--why not
just work things so his underlings wouldn't obey him?" Malone shook
his head. "That sounds more reasonable."

"It may," Sir Lewis said. "But it wouldn't work. As a matter of fact,
it was tried, and it didn't work. You see, the Sino-Soviet top men
were smart enough to see that their underlings were being tampered
with. And they've developed a system, partly depending on automatic
firing systems, partly on individuals with mind-blocks--that is,
people who aren't being tampered with--which we can't disrupt
directly. So we had to smash them."

"And the United States at the same time," Burris said. "The economic
balance had to be kept; a strong America would be forced in to fill
the power vacuum otherwise, and that would make for an even worse
catastrophe. And if we weren't in trouble, the Sino-Soviet Bloc would
blame their mess on us. And that would start the Last War before
collapse could get started. Right, Malone?"

"I see," Malone said, thinking that he almost did. He told himself he
could feel happy now; the danger--which hadn't been danger to him,
really, but danger from him toward the PRS, toward civilization--was
over. But he didn't feel happy. He didn't feel anything.

"There's a crisis building in New York," Sir Lewis said suddenly,
"that's going to take all our attention. Malone, why don't you ...
well, go home and get some rest? We're going to be busy for a while,
and you'll want to be fresh for the work coming up."

"Sure," Malone said listlessly. "Sure."

As the others rose, he closed his eyes and took a deep breath. Then
he vanished.


XVII

Two hours passed, somehow. Bourbon and soda helped them pass, Malone
discovered; he drank two high-balls slowly, trying not to think about
anything. He felt terrible. After a while he made himself a third
high-ball and started on it. Maybe this would make him feel better.
Maybe he thought, he ought to break out his cigars and celebrate.

But there didn't seem to be very much to celebrate somehow. He felt
like an amoeba on a slide being congratulated on having successfully
conquered the world.

He drank some more bourbon-and-soda. Amoebae, he told himself, didn't
drink bourbon-and-soda. He was better off than an amoeba. He was
happier than an amoeba. But somehow he couldn't imagine any amoeba in
the world, no matter how heart-broken, feeling any worse than Kenneth
J. Malone.

He looked up. There was another amoeba in the room.

Then he frowned. She wasn't an amoeba, he thought. She was the
scientist the amoeba was supposed to fall in love with, so the
scientist could report on everything he did, so all the other
scien--psiontists could know all about him. But whoever heard of a
scien--psiontist--falling in love with an amoeba? Nobody. It was fate.
And fate was awful. Malone had often suspected it, but now he was
sure. Now he was looking at things from the amoeba's side, and fate
was terrible.

"No, Ken," the psiontist said. "It needn't be at all like that."

"Oh, yes, it need," Malone said positively. "It need be even worse.
When I have some more to drink, it'll _be_ even worse. Wait and see."

"Ken," Luba said softly, "you don't have to suffer this way."

"No," Malone said agreeably, "I don't. You could shoot me and then I'd
be dead. Just quit all this amoebing around, O.K.?"

"You're already half shot," Luba said sharply. "Now be quiet and
listen. You're angry because you've fallen in love with me and you're
all choked up over the futility of it all."

"Exactly," Malone said. "Ex-positively-actly. You're a psionic
super-man--woman. You can figure things out in your own little head
instead of just getting along on dum psionic luck like us amoebae.
You're too far above me."

"Ken, listen!" Luba snapped. "Look into my mind. You can link up with
me: go ahead and do it. You can read me clear down to the subconscious
if you want to."

Malone blinked.

"Now, Ken!" Luba said.

Malone looked. For a long time.

       *       *       *       *       *

Half an hour later, Kenneth J. Malone, alone in his room, was humming
happily to himself as he brushed a few specks of dust from the top of
his best royal blue bowler. He faced the mirror on the wall, puffed on
the cigar clenched between his teeth, and adjusted the bowler to just
the right angle.

There was a knock on the door. He went and opened it, carefully
disposing of the cigar first. "Oh," he said. "What are you doing
here?"

"Just saying hello," Thomas Boyd grinned. "Back at work?"

Boyd didn't know, of course, what had happened. Nor need he ever know.
"Just about," Malone said. "Spending the evening relaxing, though."

"Hm-m-m," Boyd said. "Let me guess. Her name begins with L?"

"It does not," Malone said flatly.

"But--" Boyd began.

Malone cast about in his mind for an explanation. Telling Boyd the
truth--that Luba and Kenneth J. Malone just weren't equals as far as
social intercourse went--would leave him exactly nowhere. But,
somehow, it had to be said. "Tom," he said, "suppose you met a
beautiful girl--charming, wonderful, brilliant."

"Great," Boyd said. "I like it already."

"Suppose she looked about ... oh ... twenty-three," Malone went on.

"Do any more supposing," Boyd said, "and I'll be pawing the ground."

"And then," Malone said, very carefully, "suppose you found out, after
you'd been out with her ... well, when you took her out, say, you met
your grandmother."

"My grandmother," Boyd said virtuously, "doesn't go to joints like
that."

"Use your imagination," Malone snapped. "And suppose your grandmother
recognized the girl as an old schoolmate of hers."

Boyd swallowed hard. "As a what?"

"An old schoolmate," Malone said. "Suppose this girl were so charming
and everything just because she'd had ... oh, ninety years or so to
practice in."

"Malone," Boyd said in a depressed tone, "you can spoil more ideas--"

"Well," Malone said, "would you go out with her again?"

"You kidding?" Boyd said. "Of course not."

"But she's the same girl," Malone said. "You've just found out
something new about her, that's all."

Boyd nodded. "So," he said, "you found out something new about Luba.
Like, maybe, she's ninety years old?"

"No," Malone said. "Nothing like that. Just--something." He remembered
Queen Elizabeth's theory of politeness toward superiors: people, she'd
said, act as if they believed their bosses were superior to them, but
they didn't believe it.

On the other hand, he thought, when a man knows and believes that
someone actually _is_ superior--then, he doesn't mind at all. He can
depend on that superiority to help him. And love, ordinary
man-and-woman love, just can't exist.

Nor, Malone told himself, would anyone want it to. It would, after
all, be damned uncomfortable.

"So who's the girl?" Boyd said. "And where? The clubs are all closed,
and the streets probably aren't very safe just now."

"Barbara Wilson," Malone said, "and Yucca Flats. I ought to be able to
get a fast plane." He shrugged. "Or maybe teleport," he added.

"Sure," Boyd said. "But on a night with so many troubles--"

"Oh, King Henry," Malone said, "hearken. A man who looks as historical
as you do ought to know a little history."

"Such as?" Boyd said, bristling slightly.

"There have always been troubles," Malone said. "In the Eighth
Century, it was Saracens; in the Fourteenth, the Black Death. Then
there was the Reformation, and the Prussians in 1870, and the Spanish
in 1898, and--"

"And?" Boyd said.

Malone took a deep breath. He could almost feel the court dress
flowing over him, as the court manners did. Lady Barbara, after all,
attendant to Her Majesty, would expect a certain character from him.

After a second, he had it.

"In 1914, it was enemy aliens," said Sir Kenneth Malone.


THE END

       *       *       *       *       *






End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Occasion for Disaster, by
Gordon Randall Garrett and Laurence Mark Janifer

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK OCCASION FOR DISASTER ***

***** This file should be named 30434.txt or 30434.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/3/0/4/3/30434/

Produced by Sankar Viswanathan, Greg Weeks, and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
