     Anthony Gilmore's tale was the first that I have read of
     that author, and I will be delighted to see more.

     Funny how I developed into a Reader of Science Fiction. I
     exhausted all other fields of reading, and having nothing
     else to read I delved into a science magazine and here I
     am.--Michael Racano, 51 Brookwood St., East Orange, N. J.


_Turns to It First_

     Dear Editor:

     The June issue of Astounding Stories can't be beat. What an
     issue! As it seems to be the usual thing, I'll start at the
     front and go to the back.

     The cover: very colorful: another proof of Wesso's talent.
     And speaking of artists, I was very pleasantly surprised at
     the unexpected illustration by Paul. I certainly hope you
     can get him, if not for cover pictures, at least for the
     inside illustrations. (Too bad you are modest about printing
     complimentary letters, for I mean this to be all roses, no
     brickbats.)

     "The Man from 2071"--another good story of "John Hanson's."
     "Manape the Mighty," although somewhat like the Tarzan
     series, is a wonderfully fine story. "Holocaust"--good. "The
     Earthman's Burden," as all of Starzl's, was exceptionally
     good. "The Exile of Time"--getting better every issue.

     "The Readers' Corner" as usual was one of the most
     interesting parts of the magazine. I always turn to it
     first, for I know I will have an enjoyable time reading
     every letter. And, by the way, the significance of "Manape"
     just came to me. Don't know why I didn't see it
     before.--Linus Hogenmiller, 502 N. Washington St.,
     Farmington, Mo.


_Likes the "Joke"_

     Dear Editor:

     Although I have read only two issues of Astounding Stories,
     I feel the urge to write a line. The June number was better
     than the May issue. Arthur J. Burks' story, "Manape the
     Mighty," was excellent, though I am not so strong for the
     idea of having Barter escape the apes and carry on his
     experiments as suggested by the Author. It would be against
     common sense to have the apes allow him to make a getaway.
     The prize winner in the May issue was "Dark Moon." There
     might be a sequel to that, and I'd like to see it.

     I like a little variety in a magazine. The Readers who say
     they do not care for stories scientifically impossible may
     be right; in that case "The Exile of Time" is the greatest
     joke ever written--yet I like it immensely. One thing that
     is impossible is the destruction of matter. It can be broken
     up, or condensed as in "When Caverns Yawned," but not
     destroyed completely.

     Mr. W. H. Flowers evidently has a grudge against the fair
     sex. The love interest is not necessary in short stories,
     it's true; but what kind of a long novel would it be if the
     hero had no incentive, nothing to risk his life for, except
     a possible word of praise from the scientific world?

     No matter how much a man loves his work it is my opinion
     that he would not die for the purpose of proving his point.

     Not being able to take a hint, the knockers still appear to
     mar an otherwise perfect day--this time in the person of
     Harry Pancoast. If Astounding Stories ever gets so bad that
     not even one story in it is of interest to me--I'll just
     drop out of the waiting line--and keep my mouth
     closed.--Richard Waite, 8 South Ave., Warsaw, N. Y.


_Never Noticed That_

     Dear Editor:

     Just bought my latest copy of Astounding Stories, and what
     an edition! First, the cover (Wesso has all others beat by a
     mile). Then, the stories. Well, take "Manape the Mighty": it
     is one of the best Science Fiction stories I have ever read.
     "The Exile of Time" was great.

     Have you ever noticed that almost every critic of Science
     Fiction is either a teacher or a female? Jim Nicholson and I
     certainly know that.--Billy Roche, Sec. Interplanetary Dept.
     of the B. S. B., 101 St. Elmo, San Francisco, Cal.


_Sunflowers for All_

     Dear Editor:

     Miracles do happen! I was never so thoroughly astounded in
     all my life as when I received the great June issue of "our"
     magazine with _straight_ edges! Thank you and all concerned
     for publishing "our" magazine sans rough edges. The smooth
     edges ought to cut the reading time of Astounding Stories
     down to an hour and forty-five minutes as we always used to
     waste a lot of time fumbling about with the pages.

     But if I was astounded at the long awaited straight edges, I
     was still more amazed at the great innovation of an
     illustration by Paul! Let's have more and more of his
     remarkable drawings. Astounding Stories is truly great now
     with its fine Editor, splendid Authors, excellent stories,
     worthy illustrations, essential "Readers' Corner," Paul
     (Ah!) and good binding! Yes! You heard right! I said good
     binding! Of course it makes amusing material to write about
     the binding and remark that it comes off after once handling
     it, or that the paper is soon worn to shreds, but such
     matters shouldn't be honestly believed. I have every issue
     of Astounding Stories (eighteen great numbers!) and each and
     every issue is as good as new. I have never had any trouble
     with the covers departing from the rest of the magazine or
     the pages becoming moldy.

     Sewell Peaslee Wright's "The Man from 2071" is just perfect.
     I enjoy nothing more than one of his realistic stories of
     Commander John Hanson. We want more! Arthur J. Burks'
     novelette, "Manape the Mighty," was clever. I had a
     premonition that I wouldn't like this story, and in fact
     told a friend so. It just goes to prove that hunches can be
     wrong. Charles Willard Diffin should be proud of his
     "Holocaust." I'm sure that most Readers enjoyed it as much
     as I did. Of course, Starzl's "The Earthman's Burden" was a
     peach. His stories of other planets are always weird,
     bizarre, and yet they seem to ring true. That is the magic
     of R. F. Starzl! Paul illustrated it in his own
     unapproachable style. "The Exile of Time," as everyone
     agrees, is Cummings' best. I am waiting for its thrilling
     conclusion.

     I am one who would like Astounding Stories to be a large
     size magazine, but it can easily be seen that everyone can't
     be pleased. If you'll just leave it the way it is--i. e.,
     straight edges, illustrations by Paul, same authors and same
     excellent Editor--I'll be satisfied.--Forrest J. Ackerman,
     530 Staples Ave., San Francisco, Cal.


"_Great Relief_"

     Dear Editor:

     The story, "Manape the Mighty," by Arthur J. Burks, was by
     far one of the most thrilling and educational stories that
     ever appeared in Astounding Stories. Of course, others will
     disagree, but an Author cannot please all. It is of great
     relief to change from the monotonous every day kind of
     stories that appear in Collier's, Liberty and The Saturday
     Evening Post to the refreshing and soothing "impossible"
     type of A. S.

     Ever since the January issue, I've been an ardent pursuer of
     Astounding Stories. To me it is even more astounding that I
     seem to like it more and more each succeeding issue. I find
     it, undoubtedly, the best magazine of its type. I've tried
     others of similar type, but it seems as if my mind couldn't
     grasp the knack of their stories, which were either boresome
     with scientific and technical explanations, or, as one might
     say, "not a darn thing to them."

     R. F. Starzl is a wonderful author. Ray Cummings, Sewell
     Peaslee Wright, Charles Willard Diffin, Captain S. P. Meek,
     Edmond Hamilton, F. V. W. Mason and Murray Leinster are
     excellent.

     There is one thing that I'd like to see in Astounding
     Stories, and I'm sure many of the Readers would, too. It is
     always my habit to read while eating. To finish the story in
     time, I pick the shortest one. Sad to say, Astounding has
     rather long stories. How about an occasional short story?
     I'm sure your readers will approve. They would go over with
     a bang!--P. Nikolaioff, 4325 S. Seeley Ave., Chicago, Ill.


_Sometimes Gets Mad_

     Dear Editor:

     Although I have been an interested reader of Astounding
     Stories since its inception, this is the first time I have
     written. Astounding Stories have been so good lately that I
     just had to write and compliment you on your good work.
     There are, however, some criticisms I have to make. The
     first is: I think Mr. W. H. Flowers of Pittsburgh, Pa, is
     right when he says you sometimes have too much love in some
     of your stories. The second is, I think it would be a good
     thing to put notes at the end of a page to explain some of
     the terms for the Readers who read mostly for the science
     part. That is what I do, and I get mad when I read something
     that does not give me the inside dope on it. Outside of that
     I think Astounding Stories can't be beat.

     One more thing before I close. Keep Capt. S. P. Meek on your
     staff or I will stop reading Astounding Stories, as much as
     I would hate to do that. I think he is your best author by a
     long shot.--Wilson Adams, Seat Pleasant, Md.


_From a "Female Woman"_

     Dear Editor:

     The comment of Jim Nicholson in the June issue that it is
     only "the females" who consider him "cracked" for reading
     Science Fiction, and only women who do not care for science
     in the stories, moves me to break into "The Readers' Corner"
     for the first time.

     I happen to be a "female woman," and it is the men in our
     family and circle of friends who laugh at me for buying
     every Science Fiction magazine and book that I can find.
     They call them my "nutty magazines." I have to admit that I
     do not understand much of the scientific explanation, since
     my mind does not run along mathematical or scientific lines,
     but I do not mind having that in stories, for those who do
     care for it and can understand it, as I can simply skip over
     it, taking what I can grasp and letting the rest go. It
     doesn't spoil the story for me.

     I have no criticism, constructive or otherwise, to make. I
     enjoy the stories with some romance involved, and enjoy
     those without equally well. My own preference would be that
     you continue using rough paper and your present mechanical
     construction, so that more money will be available to pay
     for the stories. Few of us keep the magazines anyway, so
     there isn't so much need for expensive paper. I like
     interplanetary stories best, I think; but I was intensely
     interested in "Beyond the Vanishing Point," "Manape the
     Mighty" and "Holocaust." All different, but all very good. I
     can't remember one I did not like.

     My work requires much study and concentration. I have
     recommended to several men who do similar mental work that
     they follow my plan of securing delightful relaxation by
     losing themselves in another world through Science Fiction
     magazines. Most of them find it as restful as I
     do.--Berenice M. Harrison, Angola, Ind.


_Likes R. F. Starzl_

     Dear Editor:

     It has been my purpose to write to you before, but due to an
     extraordinary amount of detail work which I have had to do,
     I have been unable to.

     I have read your marvelous magazine ever since the first
     issue came into my hands, and I can honestly say that there
     is no other book on the market which has held my attention
     as long as yours has. I congratulate you on your very
     interesting magazine.

     Arthur J. Burks, in his latest story, has conceived an
     entirely new type of story, and I, for one, think it very
     interesting. Plenty of science for the laymen and enough
     interest for the others.

     I liked R. F. Starzl's story, "The Earthman's Burden," very
     much, and I hope you will have more by this author soon. His
     stories are perfect. Starzl is a deep thinker, and I am
     right here to say that there is a man who understands men
     and men's longings and inhibitions.--A. W. Gowing, 17
     Pasadena St., Springfield, Mass.


"_The Readers' Corner_"

All readers are extended a sincere and cordial invitation to "come
over in 'The Readers' Corner'" and join in our monthly discussion of
stories, authors, scientific principles and possibilities--everything
that's of common interest in connection with our Astounding Stories.

Although from time to time the Editor may make a comment or so, this
is a department primarily for Readers, and we want you to make full
use of it. Likes, dislikes, criticisms, explanations, roses,
brickbats, suggestions--everything's welcome here; so "come over in
'The Readers' Corner'" and discuss it with all of us!

                                                 _The Editor._

       *       *       *       *       *


A LIVING, DISEMBODIED HEART


A disembodied heart, not only still steadily beating but writing, as
it throbbed, a permanent, minutely precise record of its pulsations,
was exhibited recently at Princeton in a demonstration of the newest
instrument developed by science for the advancement of medicine and
psychology.

The device, invented by A. L. Loomis of Tuxedo Park, N. Y., and
perfected in collaboration with Dr. Edmund N. Harvey, professor of
psychology at Princeton University, is called the Loomis chronograph.

It will facilitate study of the phenomena of heart action and the
effect of drugs on that vital organ. The chronograph opens the way to
the accurate measuring and recording of the speed and variation of
human heart beats over long periods, even during the sleeping hours of
the subject, which is expected to prove of great value to
physiologists and criminologists.

The heart of the recent demonstration was that of a turtle, removed
from the reptile while alive, freed of all extraneous tissue and
suspended in a physiological salt solution exactly duplicating body
conditions. In this state the organ continues to beat for thirty-six
hours, at the same time setting down, by means of the chronograph, a
graphic history of the approximately 72,000 pulsations it makes in
that time. With each beat the tiny organism pulled down a little lever
that dipped a fine filament into a drop of mercury and made a contact
that transmitted an electric impulse to the chronograph. There it was
translated to a fraction of a second into a record inked on a chart.

Introduction into the solution of nicotine--one part in 10,000--and of
adrenalin--one part in a billion--was immediately noted by a marked
retarding of the heart tempo in the first case and swift acceleration
in the second.

Use of the chronograph to study the action of any heart that can be
removed from the living body is possible, the scientist said, adding
that a comparatively simple adjustment will make possible recording of
the human heart by a device applied to the chest.

Application of the instrument to tests of human nerve reactions and to
psychological tests is forecast.

       *       *       *       *       *







End of Project Gutenberg's Astounding Stories,  August, 1931, by Various
