with lime and magnesia. All animal and vegetable organisms contain a
large proportion of carbon as an essential constituent; albumen contains
about 53 per cent., alcohol contains 52 per cent., starch 44 per cent.,
cane sugar 42 per cent., and so on. The presence of carbon in the large
class of bodies known to chemists as carbohydrates, of which starch and
sugar are prominent examples, can be easily demonstrated. If a little
strong sulphuric acid be added to some powdered cane sugar in a glass,
the mass will soon begin to darken in color and swell up, and in the
course of a few minutes a mass of black porous carbon will separate,
which can be purified from the acid by repeated washings; the sugar is
composed of carbon, hydrogen, and oxygen, the two last-named elements
being present in the exact proportion necessary to form water; the
sulphuric acid having a strong affinity for water, removes the hydrogen
and oxygen, and the carbon is then left in a free state.

Carbon forms two compounds with oxygen--carbon monoxide, commonly called
carbonic oxide, and carbon dioxide, commonly called carbonic acid; and
the last-named, being of most importance, will be studied first.

_Carbon Dioxide, or Carbonic Acid, Symbol CO_2_.--Carbonic acid occurs,
as we have already stated, in large quantities in combination with lime
and magnesia, forming immense rock formations of limestone, chalk,
marble, dolomite, etc.; it also issues in a gaseous state from
volcanoes, and it is always present in small quantities in the
atmosphere; it is found dissolved in well and river waters, and it is a
product of the respiration of animals. Brewers also are well aware of
the existence of this body, for it is evolved in enormous quantities
during the alcoholic fermentation of saccharine fluids. When
carbonaceous substances are burnt the bulk of the carbon is converted
into carbonic acid, and thus our furnaces and fireplaces are continually
emitting enormous quantities of carbonic acid into the atmosphere. With
these different sources of supply it might reasonably be thought that
carbonic acid would be gradually accumulating in our atmosphere; the
breathing of animals, the eruption of volcanoes, the combustion of
fuel, and the fermentation of sugar, are ever going on, and to a
fast-increasing extent with the progress of civilization, and yet the
proportion of carbonic acid in our atmosphere is no greater now than it
was at the earliest time when exact chemical research determined its
presence and quantity. A counteracting influence is always at work;
nature has beautifully provided for this by causing plants to absorb
carbonic acid, holding some of the carbon, and allowing the oxygen to
escape again into the atmosphere to restore the equilibrium of purity.
This mutual evolution and absorption of carbonic acid is continually
going on; occasionally there may be either an excess or a deficiency in
a particular place, but fortunately any irregularity in this respect is
soon overcome, and the air retains its original composition, otherwise
animal life on the face of the globe would be doomed to gradual but sure
extinction.

Carbonic acid can be prepared for experimental purposes by causing
dilute hydrochloric acid to act upon fragments of marble placed in a
bottle with two necks, into one neck of which a funnel passing through a
cork is fixed, and into the other a bent tube for conveying the gas into
any suitable receiver. The evolution of carbonic acid by this method is
rapid, but easily regulated, and the gas may be purified by causing
it to pass through some water contained in another two-necked bottle,
similar to the generator. The chemical change involved in this
decomposition is expressed by the following equation:

  CaCO_3  +     2HCl    =   CO_2  + H_2O  +  CaCl_2
 Calcium    Hydrochloric  Carbonic  Water.  Calcium
Carbonate.      Acid.       Acid.           Chloride.

By referring to the table of combining weights given in a previous
paper, it will be seen that 100 parts of calcium carbonate will yield 44
parts of carbonic acid. Instead of hydrochloric acid any other acid may
be used, and in the practical manufacture of carbonic acid for aerated
waters sulphuric acid is the one usually employed. Carbonic acid is
colorless and inodorous, but has a peculiar sharp taste; it is half as
heavy again as air, its exact specific gravity being 1529; one hundred
cubic inches weigh 47.26 grains. It is uninflammable, and does not
support combustion or animal respiration. Under a pressure of about 38
atmospheres, at a temperature of 32 deg. F., carbonic acid condenses into
a colorless liquid, which may also be frozen into a compact mass
resembling ice, or into a white powder like snow. Carbonic acid is
soluble in water, and at the ordinary pressure and temperature one
volume of water will hold in solution one volume of the gas; under
increased pressures, far larger quantities of the gas can be held in
solution, but this is rapidly evolved as soon as the excess of pressure
is removed. Upon this property the manufacture of aerated waters
depends. The presence of free carbonic acid can be easily detected by
causing the gas to pass over the surface of some clear lime-water. If
any be present a white film of carbonate of lime will at once be formed.
In testing carbonic acid in a state of combination, the gas must first
be liberated by acting upon the substance with a stronger acid, and
then applying the lime-water test. The presence of large quantities of
carbonic acid in a gaseous mixture can be readily detected by plunging
into the vessel a lighted taper, which will be immediately extinguished.
This ought always to be adopted in a brewery, where many fatal accidents
have happened through workmen going down into empty fermenting vats and
wells without first taking this precaution.

The presence of carbon in this colorless gas can be demonstrated by
causing some of it to pass over a piece of the metal potassium placed
in a hard glass tube, and heated to dull redness; the potassium then
eagerly combines with the oxygen, forming oxide of potassium, and the
carbon is liberated and can be separated in the form of a black powder
by washing the tube out with water.

_Carbon Monoxide, or Carbonic Oxide. Symbol CO._--This is formed when
carbon is burnt with an insufficient supply of oxygen, or when carbonic
acid gas is passed over some carbon heated to redness. This gas is
continually being formed in our furnaces and fire-places; at the lower
part of the furnace, where the air enters, the carbon is converted into
carbonic acid, which in its turn has to pass through some red-hot coals,
so that before reaching the surface it is again converted into carbonic
oxide; over the surface of the fire this carbonic oxide meets with a
fresh supply of oxygen, and is then again converted into carbonic acid.
The peculiar blue lambent flame often observed on the surface of our
open fire-places is due to the combustion of carbonic oxide, which has
been formed in the way we have just described. Carbonic oxide is a
colorless, tasteless gas, which differs from carbonic acid by being
combustible, and by not having any action on lime water.--_Brewers'
Guardian._

       *       *       *       *       *




SEYFFERTH'S PYROMETER.


The thermometers and pyrometers usually employed are almost all based on
the expansion of some fluid or other, or upon that of different metals.
The first can only be constructed with glass tubes, thus rendering them
fragile. The second are often wanting in exactness, because of the
change that the molecules of a solid body undergo through heat, thus
preventing them from returning to exactly their first position on
cooling.

[Illustration: Fig. 1.--Pyrometer with Electric Indicator.]

The principle of the Seyfferth pyrometer is based on the fact that
the pressure of saturated vapors, that is, vapors which remain in
communication with the liquid which has produced them, preserves a
constant ratio with the temperature of such liquid, while, on the other
hand, the temperature of the latter when shut up in a vessel will
correspond exactly with that of the medium into which it is introduced.

[Illustration: Fig. 2.--Method of Mounting by means of a cone on vacuum
apparatus.]

[Illustration: Fig. 3.--Mounting by means of a sleeve on vacuum
apparatus.]

This instrument is composed of a metallic vessel or tube which contains
the liquid to be exposed to heat, and of a spring manometric apparatus
communicating with the tube, and by means of which the existing
temperature is shown. The dial may be provided with index needles to
show minimum and maximum temperatures, as well as be connected with
electric bells (Fig. 1) giving one or more signals at maximum and
minimum temperatures. The vessel to contain the liquid may be of any
form whatever, but it is usually made in the shape of a straight or
a bent tube. The nature of the metal of which the latter is made is
subordinate, not only to the maximum temperature to which the apparatus
are to be exposed, but also to the nature of the liquid employed. It is
of either yellow metal or iron. To prevent oxidation of the tube, when
iron is employed, it is inclosed within another iron tube and the space
between the two is filled in with lead. When the apparatus is exposed to
a high temperature the lead melts and prevents the air from reaching the
inner tube, so that no oxidation can take place.

_Pyrometers filled with Ether._-These are tubular, and constructed of
yellow metal, and are graduated from 35 deg. C. to 120 deg. They are used for
obtaining temperatures in vacuum apparatus, cooking apparatus, diffusion
apparatus, saturators, etc. Figs. 2, 3, 4, and 5, show the different
modes of mounting the apparatus according to the purpose for which it is
designed.

_Pyrometers filled with distilled water_ are used for ascertaining
temperatures ranging from 100 deg. to 265 deg. C., 80 deg. to 210 deg. R., or 212 deg. to
510 deg. F.

_Pyrometers filled with mercury_ are constructed for ascertaining
temperatures from 360 deg. to 750 deg. C.

[Illustration: Fig. 4.--Mounting on horizontal pipes by thread on the
tube.]

[Illustration: Fig. 5.--Mounting by means of a clasp in reservoirs.]


APPLICATION OF THE PYROMETER IN BONE BLACK FURNACES.

The temperature necessary for the complete carbonization of the organic
substances of animal charcoal is from 430 deg. to 500 deg. C. In order to
transmit this temperature from the cylinder to the charcoal it is
indispensable that the air surrounding the cylinder be heated to 480 deg.
to 550 deg. If the heating of the animal black exceeds 500 deg. the product
hardens, diminishes in volume, and loses its porosity. There are two
methods of ascertaining the temperature of the red-hot bone black by
means of the pyrometer: First, by inserting the tube of the instrument
into the black. (Fig. 6, a.) Second, by finding the temperature of the
hot gases in the furnaces (Fig. 6, b.). In the first case, the plunge
tube should be of sufficient length to allow its extremity to penetrate
to the very bottom layer of the red-hot black. This mode of direct
control of the temperature of the black is only employed for
ascertaining the work accomplished by the furnace, that is to say, the
ratio existing between the temperature of the hot air surrounding the
cylinder and the black itself. This calculation being effected, it is
useless to note the differences of temperature which arise in the spaces
between the cylinders of which the furnace is composed.

The position that the pyrometer should occupy is subordinate to the
construction of the furnace. Fig. 6 shows the type which is most
employed.

[Illustration: Fig. 6.--The Pyrometer mounted on a bone-black furnace.]

In a furnace with lateral fire-place, cc are the heating cylinders,
and dd the cooling cylinders. C D is the plate on which are mounted
vertically the former, and from which are suspended the latter, b shows
the pyrometer, the length of which must be such that the manometric
apparatus shall stand out one or two inches from the external surface of
the wall, while its tube, traversing the wall, shall reach the very last
row of heating cylinders.

That the apparatus may form a permanent regulator for the stoker it is
well to adapt to it an arrangement permitting of a graphic control of
the work accomplished and signaling by means of an electric bell when
the temperature of the gases in the furnace descends below 480 deg. C. or
rises above 550 deg. C.


APPLICATION OF THE APPARATUS TO BRICK FURNACES AND IN THE MANUFACTURE OF
CHEMICAL PRODUCTS.

The operation of heating brick furnaces is generally performed according
to empirical methods, the temperature having to vary much according to
the products that it is desired to obtain. It is necessary, however, for
a like product to maintain as uniform a temperature as possible. These
observations are particularly applicable to continuous furnaces such as
annular brick furnaces, etc., in which a uniformity of temperature in
the different chambers is of vital importance to perfect the baking. In
these furnaces the tube of the pyrometer is inserted through one of the
apertures at the top, as shown in Fig. 7. The dial is graduated up to
750 deg., which is more than sufficient, since the temperature of the upper
part of a compartment fully exposed to the heat rarely exceeds 670 deg. to
680 deg. C.

[Illustration: Fig. 7.--The Pyrometer mounted on a brick furnace.]

       *       *       *       *       *




MANUFACTURERS' SOAPS AND THEIR PRODUCTION.

By W. J. MENZIES.


Potash soaps are generally superior to soda soaps for most purposes, but
more especially in washing wool and woolen goods. The difference between
the use of a potash and a soda soap for these purposes is very marked.
Potash lubricates the fiber of the wool, renders it soft and silky, and
to a certain extent bleaches it; soda, on the other hand, has a tendency
to turn wool a yellow color, and renders the fiber hard and brittle.
It cannot be too strongly insisted upon, therefore, that nothing but a
potash soap (or some form of potash in preference to soda if an alkali
alone is employed) should be used in washing wool in any form--either
manufactured or unmanufactured. This is fully borne out by nature,
who invariably assimilates the most appropriate substances. Wool when
growing in its natural state is lubricated and protected by a sticky
substance called "grease" or "suinte;" this consists to the extent of
nearly half its weight of carbonate of potash, hardly a trace of soda
being present. It is very evident, therefore, that potash must be more
suitable for washing wool than soda, as the teaching of nature is always
correct.

There are certain prejudices against the use of potash soap, which have,
to a great extent, prevented its more extensive use. Many consumers
of soap fancy that because a potash soap is soft it necessarily must
contain more water than a soda soap; this, however, is quite an
erroneous notion. A potash soap is soft, because it is the nature of all
potash soaps to be so, just in the same way that on the other hand all
soda soaps are hard. As an actual fact a good potash soap contains
less water than many quite hard soda soaps that are now in the market.
Another reason is that soapmakers have had every interest in using soda
in preference to potash--particularly when latterly soda has been so
cheap.

Potash not only is a more expensive alkali, but its combining equivalent
is greatly against it as compared with soda; that is to say, that
thirty-one parts of actual or anhydrous soda will saponify as much
tallow or oil as forty-seven parts of anhydrous potash. It will be
evident, therefore, that the use of potash instead of soda is decidedly
more advantageous to the soapboiler, and more particularly in the
present age, when the demand is for cheap articles, often quite without
regard to the quality or purpose for which they are to be used. As far
as consumers are concerned, this has been a mistake. Potash soap, though
it may cost more, is in most cases actually the most economical. Soap is
never used in exact chemical equivalents, but an excess is always
taken. Potash soap is much more soluble than a soda soap; it therefore
penetrates the fiber, and consequently removes dirt and grease much more
quickly. Notwithstanding, also, that its chemical combining equivalent
is greater than that of soda, it is, nevertheless, the strongest base,
and always combines with any substance in preference to soda. For these
reasons--probably combined also with the fact that in the whole realm of
the animal and vegetable kingdoms, to which all textile fabrics belong,
potash is more naturally assimilated than soda--a smaller quantity of
potash soap will do more practical work than a larger quantity of soda
soap.

There are other reasons why potash soaps have not been used; originally
soft soap was made either with fish oil or olive oil. Fish oil is
objectionable, as the strong smell imparted to the soap renders it unfit
for many finishing purposes. Nothing can be better than olive oil soap,
but it is a costly article, and only can be used for finer purposes.
There are now, however, many of the seed oils that are much cheaper.
Linseed, rape seed, and cotton seed all produce a good soap. Cotton seed
oil is particularly suitable for the purpose; the manufacture of this
oil during the last few years has been brought to great perfection, and
the cost is now much less than that of tallow or of any other seed oil.
It is now difficult to distinguish a well refined cotton seed oil from
olive oil; it is therefore in every way suitable for making soft soap.
One of the chief causes, however, why potash soap has not been
more generally made is that a convenient form of potash has been
unobtainable. For many years the only source of potash was from the
ashes of burnt trees. These ashes are collected, mixed with lime,
lixiviated, and the resulting lye boiled down. The result is a very
impure form of potash, also of a very variable composition, depending
upon the trees used for the purpose. Canada has been the principal
source of supply of this form of potash; hence the commercial name
of Montreal potashes. The classification of "firsts," "seconds," and
"thirds" is from the inspection at the warehouse there; this, however,
is exceedingly superficial, the ashes being simply tested for their
_alkaline_ strength, with no discrimination between potash and soda,
which is a difficult and delicate chemical test. Soda being now far
cheaper than potash, and also the alkaline equivalent, as previously
explained, being greatly in favor of soda, there has been every
inducement to "enterprising" producers of ashes to adulterate them with
soda, which, in many cases, has been largely done. Another source of
potash has been beetroot ashes, very similar to wood ashes, and also
German carbonate of potash, which latter about corresponds to a common
soda ash, as compared with caustic soda; with these articles, a tedious
boiling process, very similar to the old process for the production
of hard soap, had to be adopted, the ashes, or carbonate of potash,
previously being dissolved and causticized with lime by the soap maker.
The production of a first-class soft soap was also a very difficult
operation, as the impurities and soda contained varied considerably,
often causing the "boil" to go wrong and give considerable trouble to
the soapboiler.

During the last two years, however, caustic potash has been introduced,
that manufactured by the Greenbank Alkali Co., of St. Helens, being very
nearly pure. With this article there is no difficulty in producing a
pure potash soap, either for wool scouring, fulling, or sizing, by a
cold process very similar to that described for the production of hard
soda soap with pure powdered caustic soda.

The following directions will produce an excellent soap for wool
scouring: Fifty pounds of Greenbank pure caustic potash are put into
eight gallons of soft water; the potash dissolves immediately, heating
the water. This lye is allowed to cool, and then slowly added, with
continual mixing, to 20 gallons of cotton seed oil, mixed with 20 pounds
of melted tallow, the whole being brought to a temperature of about 90 deg.
F. After stirring for some minutes, so as to completely combine the lye
and oil, the mixture is left for two days in a warm place, when a slow
and gradual saponification of the mass takes place. If when examined the
oil and lye are then found not completely combined, the stiff soap is
again stirred and left two days, when the saponification will be found
complete, the result being the formation of about 330 pounds of very
stiff potash soap, each pound being equal to about two pounds of the
ordinary "fig" soap sold. The requisite quantity is thrown into the
scouring vat with about five per cent of its weight of refined pearl ash
to increase the alkali present, the weight depending somewhat upon the
kind of wool washed on purpose for which the soap is required. If the
wool is very dirty or greasy, rather a stronger soap is sometimes
advisable. This can easily be attained by reducing the quantity of oil
used to 18 gallons.

The advantages to be gained by the wool scourer or other consumer making
his own potash soap are that a pure, uniform article can always be thus
produced at a less cost than that at which the soap can be bought.
Potash soap, like soda soap now sold, is much adulterated, in addition
to all the impurities originally contained in the potash used, and
which, unlike soda soap, cannot be separated by any salting process.
Many other adulterations are added to increase the weight and cheapen
the cost. Silicate of potash, resin, and potato flour are all more or
less employed for this purpose, to the gain of the soap maker and at the
expense of the consumer.

The production of potash soap for fulling and sizing, and the most
suitable oils and tallow for the production of the various qualities
required for these purposes, must be reserved for the next
issue.--_Textile Manufacturer._

       *       *       *       *       *




THE PREPARATION OF PERFUME POMADES.


We have, on a previous occasion, described the process of "maceration"
or "enfleurage," that is, the impregnation of purified fat with the
aroma of certain scented flowers which do not yield any essential oil in
paying quantities. At present we wish to describe an apparatus which
is used in several large establishments in Europe for obtaining such
products on the large scale and within as short a time as possible. The
drawing gives the idea of the general arrangement of the parts rather
than the actual appearance of a working apparatus, for the latter will
have to vary according to the conveniences and interior arrangements of
the factory.[1]

[Footnote 1: Our illustration has been taken from C. Hofmann,
"Chemisch-technisches Universal-Receptbuch," 8vo, Berlin, 1879, p. 207.]

A series of frames with wire-sieve bottoms are charged with a layer of
fat in form of fine curly threads, obtained by pressing or rubbing the
fat through a finely-perforated sieve. The frames are then placed one
on top of the other, and to make the connection between them air-tight,
pressed together in a screw press. A reservoir, E, is charged with a
suitable quantity of the flowers, etc., and tightly closed with the
cover, after which the bellows are set into motion by any power most
convenient. Scented air is thereby drawn from the reservoir, E, through
the pipe, G B, toward the stack of frames containing the finely divided
fat, which latter absorbs the aroma, while the nearly deodorized air is
sent back to the reservoir by the pipe, D, to be freshly charged and
again sent on its circuit. This apparatus is said to facilitate the
turning out of nearly twenty times the amount of pomade for the same
number of frames and the same time, as the old process of "enfleurage."
It might be called the "ensoufflage" process.--_New Remedies._

[Illustration: "ENSOUFFLAGE" APPARATUS FOR PERFUMES.]

       *       *       *       *       *




ORGANIC MATTER IN SEA-WATER.


At a recent meeting of the London Chemical Society, Mr. W. Jago read
a paper "On the Organic Matter in Sea-water." On p. 133 of the "Sixth
Report of the Rivers Commission," it is stated that the proportion
of organic elements in sea-water varies between such wide limits in
different samples as to suggest that much of the organic matter consists
of living organisms, so minute and gelatinous as to pass readily through
the best filters. At the suggestion of Dr. Frankland, the author has
investigated this subject. The water was collected in mid-channel
between Newhaven and Dieppe by the engineers of the London, Brighton,
and South Coast Railway in stoppered glass carboys. The author has used
the combustion method, the albuminoid ammonia, and in some cases the
oxygen process of Prof. Tidy. To determine how the various methods of
water-analysis were effected by a change of the organic matter from
organic compounds in solution to organisms in suspension, some
experiments were made with hay-infusion. The results confirm those of
Kingzett (_Chem. Soc. Journ_., 1880, 15). the oxygen required first
rising and then diminishing. The author concludes that the organic
matter of sea-water is much more capable of resisting oxidizing agents
than that present in ordinary fresh waters, and that the organic matter
in sea-water is probably organized and alive.

       *       *       *       *       *




BACTERIA LIFE.


W. M. Hamlet, in a paper before the London Chemical Society, said:
Flasks similar to those of Pasteur ("Etudes sur la Biere," p. 81),
holding about 1/4 liter, were used. The liquids employed were Pasteur's
fluid with sugar, beef-tea, hay infusion, urine, brewers' wort, and
extract of meat. Each flask was about half filled, and boiled for ten
minutes, whereby all previously existing life was destroyed. The flask
was then allowed to cool, the entering air being filtered through a plug
of glass wool or asbestos. The flask was then inoculated with a small
quantity of previously cultivated hay solution or Pasteur's fluid.
Hydrogen, oxygen, carbonic oxide, marsh-gas, nitrogen, and sulphureted
hydrogen, were without effect on the bacteria. Chlorine and hydric
peroxide (about 7 per cent, of a 5 vol. solution) were fatal to
bacteria. The action of various salts and organic acids in 5 per cent,
solution was tried. Many, including potash, soda, potassic bisulphite,
sodic hyposulphite, potassic chlorate, potassic permanganate, oxalic
acid, acetic acid, glycerin, laudanum, and alcohol, were without effect
on the bacterial life. Others--the alums, ferrous sulphate, ferric
chloride, magnesic and aluminic chlorides, bleaching powder, camphor,
salicylic acid, chloroform, creosote, and carbolic acid--decidedly
arrested the development of bacteria. The author has made a more
extended examination of the action of chloroform, especially as regards
the statement of Muentz, that bacteria cannot exist in the presence of
21/2 per cent, of chloroform, which substance is therefore useful in
distinguishing physiological from chemical ferments. The author
concludes that amounts of chloroform, phenol, and creosote, varying from
1/4 to 3 per cent., do not destroy bacteria, although their functional
activity is decidedly arrested while in contact with these reagents. To
use the author's words, bacteria may be pickled in creosote and carbolic
acid without being deprived of their vitality. The author concludes that
the substances which destroy bacteria are those which are capable of
exerting an immediate and powerful oxidizing action, and that it is
active oxygen, whether from the action of chlorine, ozone, or peroxide
of hydrogen, which must be regarded as the greatest known enemy to
bacteria.

Mr. Hamlet, in replying to some remarks of Messrs. Kingzett and
Williams, said that in all cases the solution which he had used had
been completely sterilized by exposure to a temperature of 105 deg. for ten
minutes. The India-rubber tubing he had used was steamed. Carbolic acid
solution must contain at least 5 per cent, of carbolic acid to be fatal
to bacteria. He was quite aware of the importance of distinguishing
between the action of the substances on various kinds of bacteria, and
was quite prepared to admit that a treatment which would be fatal to one
kind of bacterium might not injure another.

       *       *       *       *       *




ON THE COMPOSITION OF ELEPHANTS' MILK.

