mind of man is incapable of grasping the secrets within them. The
question has even occurred to me whether, if a being of such
supernatural power as to understand the operations going on in a
molecule of matter or in a current of electricity as we understand the
operations of a steam-engine should essay to explain them to us, he
would meet with any more success than we should in explaining to a fish
the engines of a ship which so rudely invades its domain. As was
remarked by William K. Clifford, perhaps the clearest spirit that has
ever studied such problems, it is possible that the laws of geometry
for spaces infinitely small may be so different from those of larger
spaces that we must necessarily be unable to conceive them.

Still, considering mere possibilities, it is not impossible that the
twentieth century may be destined to make known natural forces which
will enable us to fly from continent to continent with a speed far
exceeding that of the bird.

But when we inquire whether aerial flight is possible in the present
state of our knowledge, whether, with such materials as we possess, a
combination of steel, cloth, and wire can be made which, moved by the
power of electricity or steam, shall form a successful flying-machine,
the outlook may be altogether different. To judge it sanely, let us
bear in mind the difficulties which are encountered in any
flying-machine. The basic principle on which any such machine must be
constructed is that of the aeroplane. This, by itself, would be the
simplest of all flyers, and therefore the best if it could be put into
operation. The principle involved may be readily comprehended by the
accompanying figure. A M is the section of a flat plane surface, say a
thin sheet of metal or a cloth supported by wires. It moves through the
air, the latter being represented by the horizontal rows of dots. The
direction of the motion is that of the horizontal line A P. The
aeroplane has a slight inclination measured by the proportion between
the perpendicular M P and the length A P. We may raise the edge M up or
lower it at pleasure. Now the interesting point, and that on which the
hopes of inventors are based, is that if we give the plane any given
inclination, even one so small that the perpendicular M P is only two
or three per cent of the length A M, we can also calculate a certain
speed of motion through the air which, if given to the plane, will
enable it to bear any required weight. A plane ten feet square, for
example, would not need any great inclination, nor would it require a
speed higher than a few hundred feet a second to bear a man. What is of
yet more importance, the higher the speed the less the inclination
required, and, if we leave out of consideration the friction of the air
and the resistance arising from any object which the machine may carry,
the less the horse-power expended in driving the plane.

[Illustration]

Maxim exemplified this by experiment several years ago. He found that,
with a small inclination, he could readily give his aeroplane, when it
slid forward upon ways, such a speed that it would rise from the ways
of itself. The whole problem of the successful flying-machine is,
therefore, that of arranging an aeroplane that shall move through the
air with the requisite speed.

The practical difficulties in the way of realizing the movement of such
an object are obvious. The aeroplane must have its propellers. These
must be driven by an engine with a source of power. Weight is an
essential quality of every engine. The propellers must be made of
metal, which has its weakness, and which is liable to give way when its
speed attains a certain limit. And, granting complete success, imagine
the proud possessor of the aeroplane darting through the air at a speed
of several hundred feet per second! It is the speed alone that sustains
him. How is he ever going to stop? Once he slackens his speed, down he
begins to fall. He may, indeed, increase the inclination of his
aeroplane. Then he increases the resistance to the sustaining force.
Once he stops he falls a dead mass. How shall he reach the ground
without destroying his delicate machinery? I do not think the most
imaginative inventor has yet even put upon paper a demonstratively
successful way of meeting this difficulty. The only ray of hope is
afforded by the bird. The latter does succeed in stopping and reaching
the ground safely after its flight. But we have already mentioned the
great advantages which the bird possesses in the power of applying
force to its wings, which, in its case, form the aeroplanes. But we
have already seen that there is no mechanical combination, and no way
of applying force, which will give to the aeroplanes the flexibility
and rapidity of movement belonging to the wings of a bird. With all the
improvements that the genius of man has made in the steamship, the
greatest and best ever constructed is liable now and then to meet with
accident. When this happens she simply floats on the water until the
damage is repaired, or help reaches her. Unless we are to suppose for
the flying-machine, in addition to everything else, an immunity from
accident which no human experience leads us to believe possible, it
would be liable to derangements of machinery, any one of which would be
necessarily fatal. If an engine were necessary not only to propel a
ship, but also to make her float--if, on the occasion of any accident
she immediately went to the bottom with all on board--there would not,
at the present day, be any such thing as steam navigation. That this
difficulty is insurmountable would seem to be a very fair deduction,
not only from the failure of all attempts to surmount it, but from the
fact that Maxim has never, so far as we are aware, followed up his
seemingly successful experiment.

There is, indeed, a way of attacking it which may, at first sight, seem
plausible. In order that the aeroplane may have its full sustaining
power, there is no need that its motion be continuously forward. A
nearly horizontal surface, swinging around in a circle, on a vertical
axis, like the wings of a windmill moving horizontally, will fulfil all
the conditions. In fact, we have a machine on this simple principle in
the familiar toy which, set rapidly whirling, rises in the air. Why
more attempts have not been made to apply this system, with two sets of
sails whirling in opposite directions, I do not know. Were there any
possibility of making a flying-machine, it would seem that we should
look in this direction.

The difficulties which I have pointed out are only preliminary ones,
patent on the surface. A more fundamental one still, which the writer
feels may prove insurmountable, is based on a law of nature which we
are bound to accept. It is that when we increase the size of any
flying-machine without changing its model we increase the weight in
proportion to the cube of the linear dimensions, while the effective
supporting power of the air increases only as the square of those
dimensions. To illustrate the principle let us make two flying-machines
exactly alike, only make one on double the scale of the other in all
its dimensions. We all know that the volume and therefore the weight of
two similar bodies are proportional to the cubes of their dimensions.
The cube of two is eight. Hence the large machine will have eight times
the weight of the other. But surfaces are as the squares of the
dimensions. The square of two is four. The heavier machine will
therefore expose only four times the wing surface to the air, and so
will have a distinct disadvantage in the ratio of efficiency to weight.

Mechanical principles show that the steam pressures which the engines
would bear would be the same, and that the larger engine, though it
would have more than four times the horse-power of the other, would
have less than eight times. The larger of the two machines would
therefore be at a disadvantage, which could be overcome only by
reducing the thickness of its parts, especially of its wings, to that
of the other machine. Then we should lose in strength. It follows that
the smaller the machine the greater its advantage, and the smallest
possible flying-machine will be the first one to be successful.

We see the principle of the cube exemplified in the animal kingdom. The
agile flea, the nimble ant, the swift-footed greyhound, and the
unwieldy elephant form a series of which the next term would be an
animal tottering under its own weight, if able to stand or move at all.
The kingdom of flying animals shows a similar gradation. The most
numerous fliers are little insects, and the rising series stops with
the condor, which, though having much less weight than a man, is said
to fly with difficulty when gorged with food.

Now, suppose that an inventor succeeds, as well he may, in making a
machine which would go into a watch-case, yet complete in all its
parts, able to fly around the room. It may carry a button, but nothing
heavier. Elated by his success, he makes one on the same model twice as
large in every dimension. The parts of the first, which are one inch in
length, he increases to two inches. Every part is twice as long, twice
as broad, and twice as thick. The result is that his machine is eight
times as heavy as before. But the sustaining surface is only four times
as great. As compared with the smaller machine, its ratio of
effectiveness is reduced to one-half. It may carry two or three
buttons, but will not carry over four, because the total weight,
machine plus buttons, can only be quadrupled, and if he more than
quadruples the weight of the machine, he must less than quadruple that
of the load. How many such enlargements must he make before his machine
will cease to sustain itself, before it will fall as an inert mass when
we seek to make it fly through the air? Is there any size at which it
will be able to support a human being? We may well hesitate before we
answer this question in the affirmative.

Dr. Graham Bell, with a cheery optimism very pleasant to contemplate,
has pointed out that the law I have just cited may be evaded by not
making a larger machine on the same model, but changing the latter in a
way tantamount to increasing the number of small machines. This is
quite true, and I wish it understood that, in laying down the law I
have cited, I limit it to two machines of different sizes on the same
model throughout. Quite likely the most effective flying-machine would
be one carried by a vast number of little birds. The veracious
chronicler who escaped from a cloud of mosquitoes by crawling into an
immense metal pot and then amused himself by clinching the antennae of
the insects which bored through the pot until, to his horror, they
became so numerous as to fly off with the covering, was more scientific
than he supposed. Yes, a sufficient number of humming-birds, if we
could combine their forces, would carry an aerial excursion party of
human beings through the air. If the watch-maker can make a machine
which will fly through the room with a button, then, by combining ten
thousand such machines he may be able to carry a man. But how shall the
combined forces be applied?

The difficulties I have pointed out apply only to the flying-machine
properly so-called, and not to the dirigible balloon or airship. It is
of interest to notice that the law is reversed in the case of a body
which is not supported by the resistance of a fluid in which it is
immersed, but floats in it, the ship or balloon, for example. When we
double the linear dimensions of a steamship in all its parts, we
increase not only her weight but her floating power, her carrying
capacity, and her engine capacity eightfold. But the resistance which
she meets with when passing through the water at a given speed is only
multiplied four times. Hence, the larger we build the steamship the
more economical the application of the power necessary to drive it at a
given speed. It is this law which has brought the great increase in the
size of ocean steamers in recent times. The proportionately diminishing
resistance which, in the flying-machine, represents the floating power
is, in the ship, something to be overcome. Thus there is a complete
reversal of the law in its practical application to the two cases.

The balloon is in the same class with the ship. Practical difficulties
aside, the larger it is built the more effective it will be, and the
more advantageous will be the ratio of the power which is necessary to
drive it to the resistance to be overcome.

If, therefore, we are ever to have aerial navigation with our present
knowledge of natural capabilities, it is to the airship floating in the
air, rather than the flying-machine resting on the air, to which we are
to look. In the light of the law which I have laid down, the subject,
while not at all promising, seems worthy of more attention than it has
received. It is not at all unlikely that if a skilful and experienced
naval constructor, aided by an able corps of assistants, should design
an airship of a diameter of not less than two hundred feet, and a
length at least four or five times as great, constructed, possibly, of
a textile substance impervious to gas and borne by a light framework,
but, more likely, of exceedingly thin plates of steel carried by a
frame fitted to secure the greatest combination of strength and
lightness, he might find the result to be, ideally at least, a ship
which would be driven through the air by a steam-engine with a velocity
far exceeding that of the fleetest Atlantic liner. Then would come the
practical problem of realizing the ship by overcoming the mechanical
difficulties involved in the construction of such a huge and light
framework. I would not be at all surprised if the result of the exact
calculation necessary to determine the question should lead to an
affirmative conclusion, but I am quite unable to judge whether steel
could be rolled into parts of the size and form required in the
mechanism.

In judging of the possibility of commercial success the cheapness of
modern transportation is an element in the case that should not be
overlooked. I believe the principal part of the resistance which a
limited express train meets is the resistance of the air. This would be
as great for an airship as for a train. An important fraction of the
cost of transporting goods from Chicago to London is that of getting
them into vehicles, whether cars or ships, and getting them out again.
The cost of sending a pair of shoes from a shop in New York to the
residence of the wearer is, if I mistake not, much greater than the
mere cost of transporting them across the Atlantic. Even if a dirigible
balloon should cross the Atlantic, it does not follow that it could
compete with the steamship in carrying passengers and freight.

I may, in conclusion, caution the reader on one point. I should be very
sorry if my suggestion of the advantage of the huge airship leads to
the subject being taken up by any other than skilful engineers or
constructors, able to grapple with all problems relating to the
strength and resistance of materials. As a single example of what is to
be avoided I may mention the project, which sometimes has been mooted,
of making a balloon by pumping the air from a very thin, hollow
receptacle. Such a project is as futile as can well be imagined; no
known substance would begin to resist the necessary pressure. Our
aerial ship must be filled with some substance lighter than air.
Whether heated air would answer the purpose, or whether we should have
to use a gas, is a question for the designer.

To return to our main theme, all should admit that if any hope for the
flying-machine can be entertained, it must be based more on general
faith in what mankind is going to do than upon either reasoning or
experience. We have solved the problem of talking between two widely
separated cities, and of telegraphing from continent to continent and
island to island under all the oceans--therefore we shall solve the
problem of flying. But, as I have already intimated, there is another
great fact of progress which should limit this hope. As an almost
universal rule we have never solved a problem at which our predecessors
have worked in vain, unless through the discovery of some agency of
which they have had no conception. The demonstration that no possible
combination of known substances, known forms of machinery, and known
forms of force can be united in a practicable machine by which men
shall fly long distances through the air, seems to the writer as
complete as it is possible for the demonstration of any physical fact
to be. But let us discover a substance a hundred times as strong as
steel, and with that some form of force hitherto unsuspected which will
enable us to utilize this strength, or let us discover some way of
reversing the law of gravitation so that matter may be repelled by the
earth instead of attracted--then we may have a flying-machine. But we
have every reason to believe that mere ingenious contrivances with our
present means and forms of force will be as vain in the future as they
have been in the past.










End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Side-lights on Astronomy and Kindred
Fields of Popular Science, by Simon Newcomb

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK SIDE-LIGHTS ON ASTRONOMY ***

***** This file should be named 4065.txt or 4065.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/4/0/6/4065/

Produced by Charles Franks, Robert Rowe and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team. HTML version by Al Haines.


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

