to Hugo. It salved his tribulations. It brought him to a gradual
assurance that any work with such men would be sufficient for him. He
was going backward into the world instead of forward; that did not
matter. He stood on the frontier of human knowledge. He was a factor in
its preparation, and if what they carried back with them was no more
than history, if it cast no new light on existing wants and
perplexities, it still served a splendid purpose. Months rolled by
unheeded; Hugo gathered friends among these men--and the greatest of
those friends was Daniel Hardin.

In their isolation and occasional loneliness each of them little by
little stripped his past for the others. Only Hugo remained silent about
himself until his reticence was conspicuous. He might never have spoken,
except for the accident.

It was, in itself, a little thing, which happened apart from the main
field of activity. Hugo and two Indians were at work on a small temple
at the city's fringe. Hardin came down to see. The great stone in the
roof, crumbled by ages, slipped and teetered. Underneath the professor
stood, unheeding. But Hugo saw. He caught the mass of rock in his arms
and lifted it to one side. And Dan Hardin turned in time to perceive the
full miracle.

When Hugo lifted his head, he knew. Yet, to his astonishment, there was
no look of fear in Hardin's blue eyes. Instead, they were moderately
surprised, vastly interested. He did not speak for some time. Then he
said: "Thanks, Danner. I believe you saved my life. Should you mind
picking up that rock again?"

Hugo dismissed the Indians with a few words. He glanced again at Hardin
to make sure of his composure. Then he lifted the square stone back to
its position.

Hardin was thinking aloud. "That stone must weigh four tons. No man
alive can handle four tons like that. How do you do it, Hugo?"

Hot, streaming sun. Tumbled debris. This profound question asked again,
asked mildly for the first time. "My father--was a biologist. A great
biologist. I was--an experiment."

"Good Lord! And--and that's why you've kept your past dark, Hugo?"

"Of course. Not many people--"

"Survive the shock? You forget that we--here--are all scientists. I
won't press you."

"Perhaps," Hugo heard himself saying, "I'd like to tell you."

"In that case--in my room--to-night. I should like to hear."

That night, after a day of indecision, Hugo sat in a dim light and
poured out the story of his life. Hardin never interrupted, never
commented, until the end. Then he said softly: "You poor devil. Oh, you
poor bastard." And Hugo saw that he was weeping. He tried to laugh.

"It isn't as bad as that--Dan."

"Son"--his voice choked with emotion--"this thing--this is my life-work.
This is why you came to my office last winter. This is--the most
important thing on earth. What a story! What a man you are!"

"On the contrary--"

"Don't be modest. I know. I feel. I understand."

Hugo's head shook sadly. "Perhaps not. You can see--I have tried
everything. In itself, it is great. I can see that. It is, objectively,
the most important thing on earth. But the other way--What can I do?
Tell me that. You cannot tell me. I can destroy. As nothing that ever
came before or will come again, I can destroy. But destruction--as I
believe, as you believe--is at best only a step toward re-creation. And
what can I make afterwards? Think. Think, man! Rack your brains! What?"
His hands clenched and unclenched. "I can build great halls and palaces.
Futile! I can make bridges. I can rip open mountains and take out the
gold. I am that strong. It is as if my metabolism was atomic instead of
molecular. But what of it? Stretch your imagination to its uttermost
limits--and what can I do that is more than an affair of petty profit to
myself? Mankind has already extended its senses and its muscles to their
tenth powers. He can already command engines to do what I can do. It is
not necessary that he become an engine himself. It is preposterous that
he should think of it--even to transcend his engines. I defy you, I defy
you with all my strength, to think of what I can do to justify myself!"

The words had been wrung from Hugo. Perspiration trickled down his face.
He bit his lips to check himself. The older man was grave. "All your
emotions, your reflections, your yearnings and passions, come--to that.
And yet--"

"Look at me in another light," Hugo went on. "I've tried to give you an
inkling of it. You were the first who saw what I could do--glimpsed a
fraction of it, rather--and into whose face did not come fear, loathing,
even hate. Try to live with a sense of that. I can remember almost back
to the cradle that same thing. First it was envy and jealousy. Then, as
I grew stronger, it was fear, alarm, and the thing that comes from
fear--hatred. That is another and perhaps a greater obstacle. If I found
something to do, the whole universe would be against me. These little
people! Can you imagine what it is to be me and to look at people? A
crowd at a ball game? A parade? Can you?"

"Great God," the scientist breathed.

"When I see them for what they are, and when they exert the tremendous
bulk of their united detestation and denial against me, when I feel rage
rising inside myself--can you conceive--?"

"That's enough. I don't want to try to think. Not of that. I--"

"Shall I walk to my grave afraid that I shall let go of myself,
searching everywhere for something to absorb my energy? Shall I?"

"No."

The professor spoke with a firm concentration. Hugo arrested himself.
"Then what?"

"Did it ever dawn on you that you had missed your purpose entirely?"

The words were like cold water to Hugo. He pulled himself together with
a physical effort and replied: "You mean--that I have not guessed it so
far?"

"Precisely."

"It never occurred to me. Not that I had missed it entirely."

"You have."

"Then, for the love of God, what is it?"

Hardin smiled a gentle, wise smile. "Easy there. I'll tell you. And
listen well, Hugo, because to-night I feel inspired. The reason you have
missed it is simple. You've tried to do everything single-handed--"

"On the contrary. Every kind of assistance I have enlisted has failed me
utterly."

"Except one kind."

"Science?"

"No. Your own kind, Hugo."

The words did not convey their meaning for several seconds. Then Hugo
gasped. "You mean--other men like me?"

"Exactly. Other men like you. Not one or two. Scores, hundreds. And
women. All picked with the utmost care. Eugenic offspring. Cultivated
and reared in secret by a society for the purpose. Not necessarily your
children, but the children of the best parents. Perfect bodies,
intellectual minds, your strength. Don't you see it, Hugo? You are not
the reformer of the old world. You are the beginning of the new. We
begin with a thousand of you. Living by yourselves and multiplying, you
produce your own arts and industries and ideals. The new Titans!
Then--slowly--you dominate the world. Conquer and stamp out all these
things to which you and I and all men of intelligence object. In the
end--you are alone and supreme."

Hugo groaned. "To make a thousand men live my life--"

"But they will not. Suppose you had been proud of your strength. Suppose
you had not been compelled to keep it a secret. Suppose you could have
found glorious uses for it from childhood--"

"In the mountains," Hugo whispered, his eyes bemused, "where the sun is
warm and the days long--these children growing. Even here, in this
place--"

"So I thought. Don't you see, Hugo?"

"Yes, I see. At last, thank God, I do see!"

For a long time their thoughts ran wild. When they cooled, it was to
formulate plans. A child taken here. Another there. A city in the
jungle--the jungle had harboured races before: not only these Mayas, but
the Incas, Khmers, and others. A modern city for dwellings, and these
tremendous ruins would be the blocks for the nursery. They would teach
them art and architecture--and science. Engineering, medicine--their
own, undiscovered medicine--the new Titans, the sons of dawn--so ran
their inspired imaginations.

When the night was far advanced and the camp was wrapped in slumber,
they made a truce with this divine fire. They shook each other's hands.

"Good-night, Hugo. And to-morrow we'll go over the notes."

"I'll bring them."

"Till evening, then."

Hugo lay on his bed, more ecstatic than he had ever been in his life. By
and by he slept. Then, as if the ghosts of Uctotol had risen, his mind
was troubled by a host, a pageant of dreams. He turned in his sleep,
rending his blankets. He moaned and mumbled. When he woke, he understood
that his soul had undergone another of its diametric inversions. The mad
fancies of the night before had died and memory could not rekindle them.
Little dreads had goaded away their brightness. Conscience was bickering
inside him. Humanity was content; it would hate his new race. And the
new race, being itself human, might grow top-heavy with power. If his
theory about the great builders of the past was true, then perhaps this
incubus would explain why the past was no more. If his Titans disagreed
and made war on each other--surely that would end the earth. He quailed.

Overcome by a desire to think more about this giants' scheme, he avoided
Hardin. In the siesta hour he went back to his tent and procured the
books wherein his father had written the second secret of life. He
crammed them into his pocket and broke through the jungle. When he was
beyond sight and sound, he dropped his machete and made his way as none
but he could do. With his body he cut a swath toward the mountains and
emerged from the green veil on to the bare rocks, panting and hot.
Upward he climbed until he had gained the summit. To the west were
strewn the frozen billows of the range. To the east a limitless sea of
verdure. At his feet the ruins in neat miniature, like a model. Above,
scalding sun and blue sky. Around him a wind, strangely chill. And
silence.

He sat with his head on his hands until his thoughts were disturbed. A
humid breath had risen sluggishly from the jungle floor. The sun was
dull. Looking toward the horizon, he could see a black cloud. For an
instant he was frightened, the transformation had been so gigantic and
so soundless. He knew a sudden, urgent impulse to go back to the valley.
He disobeyed it and watched the coming of the storm. The first rapier of
lightning through the bowels of the approaching cloud warned him again.
Staunchly he stood. He had come there to think.

"I must go back and begin this work," he told himself. "I have found a
friend!" The cloud was descending. Thunder ruminated in heaven's garret.
"It is folly," he repeated, "folly, folly, folly in the face of God."
Now the sun went out like an extinguished lamp, and the horizon crept
closer. A curtain of torrential rain was lowered in the north. "They
will make the earth beautiful," he said, and ever and again: "This thing
is not beautiful. It is wrong." His agitation increased rapidly. The
cloud was closing on the mountain like a huge hand. The muscles in his
legs quivered.

"If there were only a God," he whispered, "what a prayer I would make!"
Then the wind came like a visible thing, pushing its fingers over the
vegetation below, and whirling up the mountain, laden with dust. After
the wind, the rain--heavy, roaring rain that fell, not in separate
drops, but in thick streams. The lightning was incessant. It illuminated
remote, white-topped peaks, which, in the fury of the storm, appeared to
be swaying. It split clouds apart, and the hurricane healed the rents.
All light went out. The world was wrapped in darkness.

Hugo clutched his precious books in the remnants of his clothing and
braced himself on the bare rock. His voice roared back into the storm
the sounds it gave. He flung one hand upward.

"Now--God--oh, God--if there be a God--tell me! Can I defy You? Can I
defy Your world? Is this Your will? Or are You, like all mankind,
impotent? Oh, God!" He put his hand to his mouth and called God like a
name into the tumult above. Madness was upon him and the bitter irony
with which his blood ran black was within him.

A bolt of lightning stabbed earthward. It struck Hugo, outlining him in
fire. His hand slipped away from his mouth. His voice was quenched. He
fell to the ground.

After three days of frantic searching, Daniel Hardin came upon the
incredible passage through the jungle and followed it to the mountain
top. There he found the blackened body of Hugo Danner, lying face down.
His clothing was burned to ashes, and an accumulation of cinders was
all that remained of the notebooks. After discovering that, Professor
Hardin could not forbear to glance aloft at the sun and sky. His face
was saddened and perplexed.

"We will carry him yonder to Uctotol and bury him," he said at last;
"then--the work will go on."





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Gladiator, by Philip Wylie

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK GLADIATOR ***

***** This file should be named 42914.txt or 42914.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/4/2/9/1/42914/

Produced by Greg Weeks, Mary Meehan and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
