hypochlorites that are obtained by well known processes.

In the latter case the metal is brought to the state of oxide in
presence of the water that is necessary for the reaction. But the
results obtained in practicing this method are deceiving, as far as
bleaching is concerned, and it is evidently more rational and economical
to endeavor to compound the hypochlorite directly by borrowing all its
elements from the metallic chloride itself, and from the water by means
of which such transformation is to be effected. This is a reversal of
the problem, and, _a propos_ thereof, we would call the attention of
the reader to an apparatus invented by Messrs. Naudin & Schneider for
effecting such synthesis in a simple and practical manner.

If a solution of chloride of sodium or kitchen salt, NaCl, be submitted
to electrolysis in a hermetically closed vessel containing the material
to be bleached, a formation of hypochlorite of soda is produced in the
following way:

2NaCl + 2 H_{2}O = NaCl + NaO, ClO + 4H.

In operating in this manner we shall have the advantage that results
from the nascent body through the electrical double decomposition of the
chloride of sodium and water, which puts the chlorine, the metal, the
hydrogen, and the oxygen simultaneously in presence. The chlorine and
oxygen will combine their action to decolorize the textile material.

While starting from this idea, it will nevertheless be preferable to
adopt Naudin & Schneider's arrangement.

The apparatus consists of a hermetically closed electrolyzer, A,
into the lower part of which enters the electrodes, E and F, of any
electrical machine whatever. The receptacle, A, is provided with a
safety-tube, T, that issues from its upper part and communicates with
a reservoir, B. A second tube, D, forms a communication between the
electrolyzer and the vessel, C. The liquid contained in this latter is
sucked up by a pump, P, and forced to the lower part of the vessel, A,
by means of the tubes, G and H.

The apparatus operates as follows:

The closed vessel, C, in which the material to be bleached is put, is
filled, as is also the electrolyzer, with a solution of chloride of
sodium. This solution is then submitted to the action of an electric
current, when, as a consequence of the chemical decomposition of
the chloride and the water, the elements in a nascent state form
hypochlorite of soda. When the partial or total conversion of the liquid
has been effected (this being ascertained by chlorometric tests), the
pump, P, is set rapidly in operation, and, as a consequence, draws up
the chloride of sodium from the bottom of the vessel, C, to the lower
part of the electrolyzer, A. The hypochlorite that has formed passes
through the tube, D (as a natural consequence of the elevation of the
level of the liquid in A brought about by the entrance of a new supply
of chloride), and distributes itself throughout the vessel, C, where it
acts upon the textile material.

[Illustration: APPARATUS FOR BLEACHING TEXTILE FIBERS BY ELECTRICITY.]

The safety-tube, T, which is attached to the electrolyzer, permits
of the escape of the hydrogen which is produced during the chemical
reaction, and fixes, through an alkaline solution contained in the
reservoir, B, the chloride whose escape might discommode the operator.

As may be conceived, the slow transfer of the saline solution from
the receptacle, C, to the electrolyzer, and its rapid conversion into
decolorizing chloride, as well as its prompt application upon the
materials to be bleached, presents important advantages.

While, in the present state of the industries that make use of bleaching
chlorides, the chloride of sodium is converted into hydrochloric acid,
which, in order to disengage chlorine, must in its turn react upon
binoxide of manganese, we shall be able, with this new method, to
utilize the chloride of sodium, which is derived from ordinary salt
works, and extract from it the constituent elements of the hypochlorite
by a simple displacement of molecules produced under the influence of an
electric current.

Another and very serious advantage of electric bleaching is that of
having constantly at hand a fresh solution of hypochlorite possessing a
uniform decolorizing power, which may be regulated by the always known
intensity of the current.

We must remark that the hypochlorites require a certain length of time
to permit the chlorine to become disengaged, and that, besides, all
chlorides, bromides, and iodides that are isomorphous are capable of
undergoing an analogous chemical transformation and of being employed
for the same purpose. This is especially the case with the chlorides
of potassium or barium, the bromides of strontium or calcium, and the
iodides of aluminum or magnesium. On another hand, as sea water contains
different chlorides, it results that it might serve directly as a raw
material for bleaching textile fibers. Then, when the solution of
chloride of sodium has been deprived of its chlorine by electrolysis,
there remains a solution of caustic soda which may be utilized for
scouring fibers.--_H. Danzer, in Le Genie Civil_.

       *       *       *       *       *




IMPROVED SPRING TRACTION ENGINE.


Messrs. J. & H. McLaren, of the Midland Engine Works, Hunslet, Leeds,
England, for several years past have devoted considerable attention to
the question of mounting traction engines on springs. The outcome of
this is the engine in question, the front end of which is carried by a
pair of Timmis spiral springs, resting on the center pin of the front
axle, which is on Messrs. McLaren's principle, which enables it to
accommodate itself to the inequalities of the road without throwing any
undue strain on the front carriage. The chief difficulty hitherto has
been to mount the hind end on springs without interfering with the spur
gearing, which must be kept perfectly rigid to prevent breakage of the
cogs. This is entirely provided for by the new arrangement, whereby all
the spring is allowed for in the spokes of the wheel itself, which will
be clearly seen on reference to the illustrations, in which Fig. 1 is a
perspective view of the engine, while Fig. 2 shows a detail view of the
wheel. The rim of the wheel is built up in the ordinary way of strong
T-iron rings, with steel crossplates riveted on. The nave of the wheel
has wrought-iron ribs to which the spokes are bolted. These spokes are
made of the best spring steel, specially manufactured and rolled for the
purpose, 9 inches wide and 1/2 inch thick. They are bent in a pear shape,
with the narrow ends fastened to the nave, and the crown resting upon
the rim of the wheel, where they are divided, and held in their places
by means of clip fastened with bolts. When the weight of the engine
comes on these spokes, those nearest the ground are compressed and
those, at the top are elongated a little. In order to avoid any of the
driving strain passing through the springs, a strong arm is fixed on the
differential wheel and attached to the rim as shown in Fig. 2, so that
the springs have really no work to do beyond carrying the weight of the
engine. Messrs. McLaren naturally felt a certain amount of diffidence
in placing their invention before the public until they had thoroughly
tested it in practical work. This, we are informed, they have done, with
the most satisfactory results, during the last five or six months; and
they have a set of springs which ran during that time between 2,000 and
3,000 miles, besides which there are several of these spring engines in
daily use.--_Iron_.

[Illustration: FIG 1. IMPROVED SPRING TRACTION ENGINE.]

[Illustration: FIG. 2]

       *       *       *       *       *




TABLE SHOWING THE RELATIVE DIMENSIONS, LENGTHS, RESISTANCES, AND WEIGHTS
OF PURE COPPER WIRE.


         DIAMETER    |         AREA
                     |
B.W.G  Inch. Milli-  | Circu-  Square      Square
No.          metres  | lar     inches.     Milli-
                     | Mils.               metres.
                     |
0000   .454  11.5313 | 206116  .161883     10.4435
 000   .425  10.795  | 180625  .141862      9.152
  00   .38    9.6518 | 144400  .113411      7.3165
   0   .34    8.6358 | 115600  .0907922     5.8573
   1   .3     7.620  |  90000  .070686      4.5602
   2   .284   7.2134 |  80656  .0633472     4.0867
   3   .259   6.5784 |  67081  .0526854     3.3989
   4   .238   6.0451 |  56644  .0444881     2.8701
   5   .22    5.5879 |  48400  .0380133     2.4523
   6   .203   5.1561 |  41209  .0323655     2.088
   7   .18    4.5719 |  32400  .0254469     1.6417
   8   .165   4.1909 |  27225  .0213825     1.3794
   9   .148   3.7591 |  21904  .0172034     1.1098
  10   .134   3.4035 |  17956  .0141026      .9096
  11   .12    3.0479 |  14400  .0113097      .7296
  12   .109   2.7701 |  11881  .00933133     .60199
  13   .095   2.4129 |   9025  .0070882      .4573
  14   .083   2.1082 |   6889  .00541062     .34906
  15   .072   1.8288 |   5184  .00407151     .2486
  16   .065   1.6510 |   4225  .00331831     .21407
  17   .058   1.4732 |   3364  .0026421      .17045
  18   .049   1.2446 |   2401  .00188574     .12165
  19   .042   1.0668 |   1764  .00138544     .0894
  20   .035   0.8890 |   1225  .000962115    .06207
  21   .032   0.8128 |   1024  .00080425     .05188
  22   .028   0.7112 |    784  .000615753    .03972
  23   .025   0.635  |    625  .00049087     .03167
  24   .022   0.5588 |    484  .000380133    .02452
  25   .02    0.508  |    400  .00031416     .02027

  26   .018   0.4571 |    324  .000254469    .01642
  27   .016   0.4064 |    256  .000201062    .01297
  28   .014   0.3556 |    196  .000153938    .00993
  29   .013   0.3302 |    169  .000132732    .00856
  30   .012   0.3048 |    144  .000113097    .007296

LENGTH AND WEIGHT

B.W.G  Pounds      Pounds       Pounds      Pounds      Feet       Yards        1.000 feet  Miles
No.    per         per          per 1.000   per         per lb.    per lb.      per lb.     per lb.
       foot.       Yard         ft.         mile.

0000   .623924     1.871772     623.924     3294.32       1.60276     .534253    .00160276  .00303553
 000   .54676      1.64028      546.76      2886.89       1.82895     .60965     .00182895  .0034639
  00   .437105     1.311315     437.105     2307.92       2.28777     .76259     .00228777  .004333
   0   .349928     1.049784     349.928     1847.62       2.85773     .9525766   .00285773  .0054124
   1   .272435      .817305     272.435     1438.43       3.6706     1.22353     .0036706   .0069519
   2   .244151      .732453     244.151     1289.11       4.0958     1.365266    .0040958   .0077573
   3   .203058      .609174     203.058     1072.15       4.9247     1.641566    .0049247   .009327
   4   .171463      .514395     171.465      905.333      5.8321     1.944033    .0058321   .0110457
   5   .14651       .43953      146.510      773.56       6.8255     2.275166    .0068255   .012927
   6   .124742      .374226     124.742      658.638      8.0165     2.672166    .0080165   .015183
   7   .098076      .294228      98.076      517.844     10.1962     3.39873     .0101962   .019311
   8   .082411      .247233      82.411      435.135     12.1345     4.04483     .0121345   .022981
   9   .066305      .198915      66.305      350.089     15.0818     5.027266    .0150818   .028564
  10   .054354      .163062      54.354      286.99      18.398      6.13266     .018398    .034845
  11   .04359       .13077       43.590      230.152     22.9413     7.6471      .0229413   .04345
  12   .035964      .107892      35.964      189.893     27.805      9.2683      .027805    .05266
  13   .027319      .081957      27.319      144.245     36.6046    12.20153     .0366046   .069326
  14   .020853      .062559      20.853      110.1088    47.954     15.98466     .047954    .09082
  15   .015692      .047076      15.692       82.855     63.7267    21.24223     .0637261   .12069
  16   .012789      .038367      12.789       67.5276    78.1902    26.0634      .0781902   .14809
  17   .0101828     .0305484     10.1828      53.7665    98.202     32.734       .098203    .18589
  18   .00726795    .02180388     7.26796     38.3748    137.590    45.8633      .137590    .260587
  19   .00533972    .01601916     5.33972     28.1937    187.276    62.4253      .187276    .35469
  20   .00370815    .01112445     3.70815     19.579     269.676    89.892       .2696676   .51075
  21   .00309972    .00929910     3.09972     16.3665    322.610   107.5366      .322610    .61100
  22   .00237312    .00711936     2.37312     12.5301    421.384   140.4613      .421334    .798078
  23   .0018910     .0056757      1.8919       9.9892    528.570   176.190       .528570    .100108
  24   .0014650     .0043950      1.4650       7.7357    682.55    227.5166      .68255     .129271
  25   .00121082    .00363246     1.21082      6.39315   825.880   275.2943      .825883    .156417
  26   .00098077    .00294231      .98077      5.17844  1019.61    339.870      1.01961     .193108
  27   .00077492    .00232476      .77492      4.0916   1290.44    430.1466     1.29044     .24440
  28   .0005933     .0017799       .5933       3.13264  1685.48    561.8266     1.68548     .31922
  29   .000511571   .001534713     .511571     2.7011   1954.76    651.5866     1.95476     .370220
  30   .0004359     .0013077       .4359       2.30152  2294.13    764.710      2.29413     .434496

LENGTH AND RESISTANCE

B.W.G  Feet         Yards        1.000 feet   Miles      Ohms         Ohms          Ohms        Ohms
No.    per Ohm.     per Ohm.     per Ohm.     per Ohm.   per foot.    per yard.     per 1.000   per mile.
                                                                                    foot.

0000   19966.5      6655.5       19.9665      3.7815     .000050684   .00156252       .050084      .264443
 000   17497.15     5832.3833    17.49715     3.31385    .0000571522  .0001714566     .0571522     .301763
  00   13988.64     4662.68      13.98804     2.64925    .000071489   .000214467      .071489      .377465
   0   11198.17     3732.7333    11.19817     2.12086    .0000893002  .0002679006     .0893002     .471505
   1    8718.30     2906.10       8.71830     1.6512     .00011470    .0003441        .114701      .60562
   2    7813.50     2604.50       7.81350     1.47973    .00012799    .00038397       .12799       .67580
   3    6498.14     2166.0466     6.49814     1.23071    .00015389    .00046167       .15389       .81254
   4    5487.107    1829.0357     5.487107    1.03923    .000182245   .000546735      .182245      .962256
   5    4688.51     1562.8366     4.68851      .887975   .000213287   .000639861      .213287     1.12616
   6    3991.91     1330.6366     3.99191      .756045   .000250506   .000751518      .250506     1.32267
   7    3138.59     1046.1966     3.13859      .59443    .000318614   .000955842      .318614     1.68228
   8    2637.29      879.0966     2.63729      .499486   .000379177   .001137531      .379177     2.00206
   9    2121.84      707.280      2.12184      .401864   .000471289   .001413867      .471289     2.488405
  10    1739.40      579.80       1.73940      .329432   .000574911   .001724733      .574911     3.03553
  11    1394.93      464.9766     1.39493      .264191   .000716882   .002150646      .716882     3.78514
  12    1150.91      383.6366     1.15091      .217976   .000868875   .002606625      .868875     4.58766
  13     874.252     291.4173      .874252     .165578   .00114383    .00343149       1.14383     6.03945
  14     667.338     222.446       .667338     .12639    .00149849    .00449547       1.49849     7.91203
  15     502.175     167.39166     .502175     .095109   .00199134    .00597402       1.99134    10.5142
  16     409.276     136.42533     .409276     .077514   .00244334    .00733002       2.44334    12.9008
  17     325.871     108.62366     .325871     .061718   .0030687     .0092061        3.0687     16.20274
  18     232.585      77.52833     .232585     .04405    .0042995     .0128985        4.2995     22.7014
  19     170.879      56.95966     .170879     .032363   .0058521     .0175563        5.8521     30.8991
  20     149.3915     49.797166    .1493915    .022475   .00842703    .02528109       8.42703    44.4947
  21      99.195      33.065       .099195     .018787   .01008110    .03024348      10.08116    53.2285
  22      75.9461     25.315366    .0759461    .014384   .0131672     .0395016       13.1672     69.5230
  23      60.54377    20.181256    .06054377   .011467   .0165170     .0495510       16.5170     87.2096
  24      46.8851     15.628356    .0468851    .0088798  .02132874    .06398622      21.32874   112.616
  25      38.748      12.916       .038748     .0073386  .025808      .077424        25.808     136.265
  26      31.3859     10.461966    .0313859    .0059443  .03186144    .09558432      31.86144   168.229
  27      24.79873     8.266243    .02479873   .0046967  .0403246     .1209738       40.3246    212.914
  28      18.98653     6.328843    .01898653   .0035959  .05266892    .15800676      52.66892   278.092
  29      16.3710      5.4570      .0163710    .0031006  .0610834     .1832502       61.0834    322.521
  30      13.9493      4.649766    .0139493    .0026419  .07168825    .21506475      71.68825   378.514

RESISTANCE & WEIGHT

B.W.G  Ohms           Lbs.
No.    per lb.        per Ohm.

0000      .000080272  12457.5
 000      .000104529   9566.7
  00      .000163553   6114.24
   0      .000255196   3918.58
   1      .00042102    2375.18
   2      .00052422    1907.59
   3      .00075786    1319.50
   4      .0010629      940.844
   5      .0014558      686.911
   6      .0020082      497.96
   7      .00324863     307.822
   8      .00460101     217.343
   9      .00710791     140.689
  10      .0105772       94.543
  11      .0164462       60.842
  12      .0241593       41.392
  13      .0418692       23.8839
  14      .0718583       13.9163
  15      .126788         7.8872
  16      .191045         5.2344
  17      .301355         3.31835
  18      .59157          1.6904
  19     1.09596           .912445
  20     2.27254           .44003
  21     3.25229           .30748
  22     5.54843           .18023
  23     8.73035           .11454
  24    14.5579            .068691
  25    21.3142            .046917
  26    32.4863            .030782
  27    52.0367            .019217
  28    88.7724            .011265
  29   119.404             .008375
  30   164.4762            .0060804

PURE COPPER weighs 555 lbs. per cubic foot. The Resistance of 1 mil.
foot at 60 deg. Fahr. is, according to Dr. Matthiessen, 10.32311 ohms. Upon
these data the above Table has been calculated.

The _Resistance_ of Copper varies with the temperature about 0.38 per
cent. per degree Centigrade, or 0.21 per cent. per degree Fahrenheit.

STRANDED WIRES.--With a conductor of a definite lenght, made of
_Stranded_ Wires, the total _weight_ is _greater_, and the _Resistance
less_ than is a similar length of Conductor with Wires _not_ Stranded.

  To convert--Inches to Millimetres multiply by 25.3994
              Feet to Metres            "         .3048
              Yards to Metres           "         .9144
              Miles to Kilometres       "         .6214
              Pounds to Kilogrammes     "         .45359

PEPARED BY WALTER T. GLOVER & CO., ELECTRICAL WIRE AND CABLE MAKERS, 25,
BOOTH STREET MANCHESTER.

       *       *       *       *       *




IRON FRAME GANG MILLS.


The gang mill is regarded as possessing material advantages in the rapid
and economical manufacture of lumber. Among the recent improvements
tending to perfect such mills, those which are shown in the iron frame
stock gang, manufactured by Wickes Bros., East Saginaw, Mich., are
eminently valuable. Our large engraving represents one of these mills,
constructed to be driven by belt, friction, or direct engine, as may be
desired. The important requisite in this class of mills is such design
and proportion of parts as will insure durability and continued movement
at the highest speed, safely increasing the quantity and improving the
quality of work done at a lesser feed, and admitting the use of thinner
saws than is practical in the slower moving sash. These are among the
advantages gained in the iron frame machine, overcoming the necessity
of an expensive mill frame, saving time and expense in setting up, and
avoiding the liability of decay or change of position.

[Illustration: IMPROVED IRON FRAME GANG SAW MILL.]

Many improvements have been made in the mechanism of oscillation, and
from these the builders of this mill have adopted what is known as the
Wilkin movement, which oscillates the top and bottom slides. The top
slides are pivoted at the top end, and the bottom ones from the bottom
end, both being operated by one rock shaft from the center. This
movement when properly adjusted gives an easy clearance and the easiest
cut yet obtained. It adds no extra weight to the sash, and avoids the
cumbrous rock shaft and its attendant joints, usually weighing from
three hundred to five hundred pounds, which have been found so
objectionable in many other movements. The feed is continuous, and is
made variable from 1/4 to 11/4 inch to each stroke, controllable by the
sawyer. Power is applied to the press rolls in the double screw form
with pivot point, also operated by the same hand. A special feature of
this machine is the spreading of the lower frame so that its base rests
upon an independent portion of the foundation from the main pillow block
or crank shaft. The solidity of the whole structure is thus increased,
both by the increased width at the base and the prevention of connecting
vibrations, which necessarily communicate when resting upon the same
part, as in other forms of such machines heretofore in use.

The mill shown in the perspective view is one of twenty-six saws 41/2 feet
long, sash 38 inches wide in the clear, and stroke 20 inches, capable
of making 230 strokes per minute. The crank shaft is nine inches in
diameter, of the best forged iron. The main pillow block has a base
61/2 feet long by 21 inches bearing, weighing 2,800 pounds. The cap
is secured by two forged bolts 31/2 inches in diameter, and by this
arrangement no unequal strain upon the cap is possible. A disk crank is
used with suitable counterbalance, expressly adapted to the weight and
speed of sash; a hammered steel wrist pin five inches in diameter, and a
forged pitman of the most approved pattern, with best composition boxes.
The iron drive pulley is 4 to 41/2 feet in diameter and 24 inches face;
the fly-wheel six feet in diameter, and weighing 4,700 pounds, turned
off at rim. When a wider and heavier sash is required, a proportionate
increase is made in all these parts.

In the construction of the sash the stiles are made of steel; the lower
girt and upper heads are made in one solid piece, without rivets, giving
the greatest strength possible, with the least weight. The outfit also
includes eight iron rollers for the floor, 81/2 inches in diameter, with
iron stands, and geared as live rolls when desired, a full set of
Lippencott's steel saw hangings, and gauges for one-inch lumber. The
weight of the machine here shown is 181/2 tons. They are, however, built
in larger or smaller sizes, adapted to any locality, quality or quantity
of work desired.

       *       *       *       *       *

It is said that the St. Gothard Tunnel is diverting the bulk of the
Italian trade into the hands of the Belgians, Germans, and Hollanders
with startling rapidity. Without breaking bulk, early fruits are taken
from all parts of Italy to Ostend, Antwerp, and Rotterdam, whence they
are carried by fast steamers to London and other English ports. But, on
the other hand, Germany is sending into Italy large quantities of coal,
iron, machinery, copper, and other articles of which the latter received
nothing before. In two months alone, the Italians imported 1,446 tons of
paper.

       *       *       *       *       *




THE HEAT REGENERATIVE SYSTEM OF FIRING GAS RETORTS.


The system of heat regeneration in the firing of gas retorts, in
accordance with the principle which Dr. C.W. Siemens has worked out in
such a variety of ways in the industrial arts, has lately been applied
with very marked success at the Dalmarnock Station of the Glasgow
Corporation Gas Works. Notwithstanding the fact that a period of about
twenty years has elapsed since Dr. Siemens successfully adapted his
system to the firing of retorts at the Paris Gas Works, it seems to have
made but little progress up to the present time; for what reasons it is
perhaps difficult to explain. It is certain, however, that so-called
regenerator furnaces of various forms have, from time to time, been
brought into use at gas works for the purpose in question both on the
Continent and in this country; and in recent years the subject has
received much attention from gas engineers, the general opinion
eventually being that the adoption of such a system of working would be
certain to result in so great an amount of economy as to put gas as an
illuminating agent on a more secure footing to compete successfully with
its modern and somewhat aggressive rival, the electric light. Of course,
it is now admitted that the mode of adapting the heat regenerative
principle at the Paris Gas Works was attended with a degree of
complexity in the structural arrangements that was so great and so
expensive as to place it practically beyond the reach of gas companies
and gas corporations generally, when the expense as well as the
