these strange sights. Several of them were dead or severely wounded at
having been accidentally mauled by their fighting brethren. Across the
ocean from the island there was another landmass, whose far edges were
not in sight. On it were many ape-men bowing down in worship of a
gigantic White Eagle which was soaring far above them with a multitude
of lords and ladies gripped in its massive talons. The lords were
dressed in silken robes and adorned with many pieces of fine jewelry,
and the ladies were clothed in skirts of crimson; both groups had upon
their faces looks of pleasure, and contempt towards those far below
them.

Onan continued speaking, "You see, Jehu, the whole of history, both that
now written and that yet to come, is planned, executed according to its
own power, for the course of time is marked as clearly as the tides: by
its own coming and going it is revealed. Revealed, however, only in an
abstract and undefined manner, so that while its marks are clearly seen,
it is only by special revelations that it is shown in a comprehensive
and detailed light. And that is why I have summoned you here, my dear
Jehu, for you are the chosen one, summoned to help me."

I was skeptical and asked him, "You summoned me? But how, I was to
forced to crash land on the island by the weather, and accidentally fell
into the volcano's mouth. It was by my own freewill decisions that the
circumstances of my arrival here were fulfilled."

Onan laughed quietly and said, "History is not an unstoppable machine,
allied with fate to control the destiny of all things past and future,
nor does it nullify the power of man's freewill, yet the force that acts
upon the minds of men to form them is history itself. You see, men are
not the opponents of history and fate, for they do not impede its
progress with their freewill decisions, instead they are its minions,
its slaves, building up its strength and carrying out its dictates by
its influence, so that they become history as they serve it, adding to
its organism their own consciouses. While you were brought to these
Chambers by circumstances of your own choosing, your desires in choosing
those circumstances were dictated by the experiences of the past. But
never mind how I summoned you, for you are here now."

"Very well," I said, not wishing to disagree with the Lord of the Past.
Still, I was in a stubborn frame of mind, and asked, "But if the past is
as powerful as you construe it to be, then why does the Lord of the Past
need the help of a mere mortal like myself? Or do you mean you need a
more direct agent than those you control only by influence?"

"Something like that," he answered. "You see, there was a great disaster
once, which was blamed on me, and in order to atone for it, I promised
to send a kinsman redeemer before anything so devastating happened
again, and I believe you are the perfect choice."

"What devastating event hasn't been blamed on the past in one form or
another?" I said, "But why not just go yourself?"

"It is against the rules," Onan told me.

"How typical."

"Yes, indeed, I sometimes wonder what good it is to be a god if you
can't do anything yourself," he said with a sigh.

"What do you want me to do there, then?"

"I cannot tell you, unfortunately."

"Against the rules?" I asked.

"Very much so. All that I can do is send an agent with a slight
understanding of the situation of history and physical existence to the
people, but he must make the judgments of how to proceed all on his own.
If I did tell you, it wouldn't be much different than going myself, and
then there would be no human resolution to human problems."

"Our lives serve as a spectator sport to the gods, then?" I inquired of
him.

"I am afraid not," he said, "It is much more serious than that. The
Greeks were not all wrong, you know."

"Who else, I wonder."

"Not many," he sighed, "But tell me, are you ready?"

"As I'll ever be."

"Then I will begin. The understanding of life begins with the
understanding of physical existence," Onan said, "And by physical
existence I mean the quality of being materially animated. Not to
confuse it with consciousness, which is the ability to think and reason,
it is rather the realm in which one has substance and continuity. I will
call the elements of physical being time and matter, those words
representing widely known concepts. Matter provides the raw substance
and time gives those lifeless objects a plane of being to exist in.
Without time, matter can do nothing except sit in a sterile state, in a
vacuum in which nothing could occur; and without matter, time would
flow, but nothing would move with it. Thus, the basis of physical
existence is time and matter, each being useless separately, yet
together being the perfect combination of a tangible object and the
fluid, forward movement to animate it. Imagine it as a three-dimensional
painting, matter given depth by time."

"Not so complicated," I said cheerfully.

"Not yet, you mean," he laughed.

"Exactly, tell me more."

"Not just yet, Jehu. First you must help me."

"The time to begin has come then?" I asked.

"Yes, you must go now," he said, "And remember, I'll be watching.
Good-bye."

And with that, not even standing up, Onan put me into a deep state of
comatose and sent me through time to the unknown lands and people whom I
was to deliver. I awoke, as you will remember, in the center of the
savanna. Now that you know the circumstances of my arrival on Daem, I
will go back to where I was before: on the way to the Canitaur's hidden
fortress.






Chapter 5: The Treeway



I was walking in silence through the rugged forests of northern Daem
alongside Bernibus the Canitaur, with his fellows Wagner and Taurus
before and behind us, respectively, the former leading the way, the
latter covering our tracks, and both on the lookout for an ambush. An
entire lifetime of guerrilla warfare and privations of all kinds had
instilled in the Canitaurs a strong and prevailing sense of caution,
which sometimes rendered their lighthearted and almost spiritually
frivolous nature to the casual observer a dense, deceiving demeanor used
to conceal their true selves. But that was not the case, I believe, for
they were, or at least Bernibus was, truly amorous in personality.

The sky was then in its deepest dark, and in the few breaks in the
canopy above large enough to be seen through, there were few celestial
lights to illuminate the depths of that mountainous forest. The forest
itself sprawled like a great metropolis along the lands above the large
central lake of Daem, Lake Umquam Renatusum, which was close beside the
Canitaur outpost where we had narrowly escaped discovery and capture.
However deficient in sight the forest was, it was abounding with sounds,
everything from the call of the owl to groan of the bull frog, it was as
if the whole of the forest had congregated about us, drawn to us by some
unknown scent of interest and intrigue.

Continuing on for some time in the same way, I found myself growing
weary, nodding my head slowly towards the oblivion of sleep, until I was
brought to an instant liveliness by Wagner's announcement that we had
reached our destination. I looked around carefully, yet I saw nothing at
all to indicate the entrance to a large, covert military establishment,
much to my companions delight. Their whimsical sense of humor surfaced
once again as they laughed with seemingly infinite pleasure, both at my
wondering expression and with a sense of satisfaction at their own
cleverness. After the outburst had been subdued and a certain level of
solemnity had been reached, Wagner approached the nearest tree and
knocked on it with a rhythmic rut-tut-tut.

Expecting their old trick to be replayed, I waited for the tree to open,
but to my surprise, it didn't, instead a strong rope ladder dropped down
from a tree several yards to the east. This we climbed, and I found that
I had been mistaken as to the height of the ancient wooden towers, for
they proved to be even loftier in dimensions than I had imagined.
Accordingly, it took us a good five minutes to reach its top at a quick
and steady pace, and all through the climb I was terrified at the long
drop, from which the ladder offered no protections. Yet I made it to the
top safely, and found that there was a large platform built securely
among its upper branches, with enough room to hold a few dozen persons,
and there was even comfortable seating in the center. There were four
guards stationed on the platform, each equipped with a long bow and a
quiver of metal tipped arrows, and though they were hardly visible
through the dim light emitted from the covered lantern that lit the
platform, I could see them quietly conversing with Wagner and Taurus
while Bernibus and myself reposed on the seats provided for that very
purpose.

They conversed for awhile, though I could not hear them, nor could I see
them well enough to judge their facial expressions, but Bernibus waylaid
any anxious thoughts I had with his encouraging tone, and also by giving
me a drought of ale and a loaf of bread to overcome my fatigue and
hunger, both of which I quickly consumed. He gave me more bread, but
wouldn't allow me another glass of ale, for safety's sake. At first I
thought he deemed me easily overcome by spirits, but I soon discovered
his reasons and thanked him.

Wagner returned from the guards and, finding that we were ready to
proceed, led us to the far corner of the platform, where we were joined
by Taurus. We then set off on a road that ran above the lower levels of
the canopy, made from jointed platforms that were attached to the
massive limbs of the trees, meeting the branches of the next tree half
way across, forming a continuous, snaking path far above the ground.
Traveling on those paths we made our way criss-crossingly to the west.
The walking was no more difficult than on the ground, for the boards
were firmly secured to the great branches, which were at least five or
six feet wide, and there were short rails as well.

After no more than half an hour of travel on the 'Treeway', we reached
another large platform in the center of a great tree which was very much
like the first one, excepting that the trunk of the tree came up through
its center and there was a door leading into the trunk. There were eight
guards on this platform, but they let us pass without more than a
friendly gesture, their scouts having, no doubt, seen us long before and
ascertained our identity and intentions. They seemed to have been
expecting the return of Wagner's group, though the addition of me they
appeared to eye curiously.

Wagner led us directly to the door, which opened into a set of circular
stairs that wound down the inside of the tree like the insides of an old
world lighthouse tower. The stairs descended further than the tree
ascended, wrapping around almost infinitely, at least to my wearied
senses, which were depleted of vividness by the treacherous toils of the
proceeding day. Down, down, down went the stairs, until at length we
reached the bottom and found ourselves in a cave, the stairs ending in a
small foyer area which opened out into the cave, it being delved into
the bedrock layer, indicating that we had indeed passed below the
surface on our descent. The passage was really a narrow defile with high
walls on either side, impenetrable due to the fact that they were the
foundations of the earth above. It stretched on for a ways, its whole
length commanded by little, turret like stations which stuck out from
the upper wall, in which were stationed groups of archers, and though
they now stood in a solemn, dignified manner, any opposition that
attempted to force a way through would have been decimated. Yet they
stood at attention and made no noise or movement at our passing, instead
being the essence of well disciplined soldiery.

This narrow chasm led onward for about three hundred yards, the walls
stretching upwards in such a fashion that it brought to mind images of
Moses crossing the Red Sea, with great walls of water suspended in air
on either side, ready at any moment to come crashing down upon them,
their lives in the hands of another. So did I then feel, the Canitaur
guards being able to slay me on the slightest whim of fancy that struck
their minds into a sadistic mood. Yet I was not afraid, instead I was
overcome by a feeling of relaxation, where all cares and worries are
given up as frivolous burdens, not necessary and not helpful, being, in
fact, harmful to the mind.

The defile, or narrow passage, led to a great abyss, crossable only by a
drawbridge controlled on the other side, which was at this time lowered
and ready for us to cross, which we did, accompanied by four honor
guards who were dressed in all the pomp and pleasantry known by the
Canitaurs. It was a custom among them to greet newcomers with an honor
guard which escorted them to the body of dignitaries and aristocrats
that would be waiting to welcome them in style. This was done for us,
and we were led into the fortress' great room, which was used for
discussions and debates, via another winding stairway that took us even
further below the surface. It was a splendid room, equipped with all
kinds of luxuries and embellishments and spreading out like a quarter
circle around a central stage with a podium upon it. Seats were arranged
in arching rows, with a sort of cluster of seats around a wooden desk
being allotted to each of the members of the council and his aide de
camps; there were two hundred such clusters. Sitting there like they had
been woken from sleep to attend to us were the delegates, looking tired
and untidy, a rare state for a Canitaur to be in, with their clothes
ruffled, their hair uncombed, and their eyes glazed with a discordant
state of mind.

Wagner, who turned out to be a high official among them, led me to the
top of the stage where the podium was, with a sofa, desk, and several
chairs behind it, concealed from the council by the raised floor and
walls that formed the base of the podium, creating a small, private
anteroom for those at the podium. I laid myself down tiredly on the sofa
to rest while Wagner took the stage and began to speak.

"Friends, comrades, associates," he said to the council, "I thank you
for neglecting your beds at this late hour to join with us here in the
Hall of Meeting, for there is something very important to be shared. You
are all no doubt familiar with the ancient prophecy of the Externus
Miraculum: long ago it was told that in our extreme need, when hope no
longer exists in the hearts of many, an ancient would be sent by Onan
our lord to redeem and deliver us from the evils of this world, for as
our doom was wrought in their times, so would our hope originate. The
past cannot be changed except by those who first made it, and our
present is dictated by the happenings of the past, so that for a better
future the past must be changed, and only then will we be freed from the
burdens of history."

He continued, "We have therefore long awaited the arrival of our kinsman
redeemer, who will change the past and prevent the cause of our current
woes from happening, for without its roots, what evil can grow and
flourish? Our redeemer was to come on the Kootch Patah, when our
adversaries the Zards are not watchful, being drunk with celebrations at
the turning of the year. Myself, Taurus and Bernibus went to the shores
of Lake Umquam Renatusum, as is our custom, to watch for the coming of
the promised one, and this time we were not disappointed, for he came to
us, even as the prophecy says, as we sat hidden in the living tower.
Seen by the Zards, we were almost discovered, until the promise of the
hidden fortress drew them away, even as the prophecy says. And now we
are here, delegates of the Canitaurian people, safely within our
fortress with our kinsman redeemer, so what shall be done? Let us
decide."

At this point he cast a glance towards me, as if desiring me to speak
before the council, but I was in the last throes of wakefulness, where
sleep has crept so far upon you that arrival in the land of dreams is
only a matter of moments, and wakefulness is not desired, nor is
anything else. I looked at him with my eyes glazed with that sweet,
savory taste of sleep, and though I was conscious, I was not in control,
only an audience to actions of my subconscious whims, and even that
passed beyond my reach as my eyes fell shut, isolating me in the realm
where worldly concerns mean nothing. And so I was when my exhaustion
overtook me, leaving me sound asleep on the sofa behind the podium.






Chapter 6: The Fiery Lake



When I woke I was no longer in that room but in another, a small homely
room where I was laid on a bed, the room being located, as I found out
later, not too far from the Hall of Meeting. Though the depth of the
fortress prevented me from knowing the time, it felt to be early
afternoon by that strange internal clock that so seldom errs. It was
correct, as usual. There was a quaint fireplace on the far wall of the
room with a small, unadorned and unpretentious mantle, decorated like
the rest of the fortress in a practical and experienced way, finding
just the right flavor between the ornate, the practical, and the quaint,
and avoiding all the while the clutter brought by superfluous material
possessions. A table in the center of the room was furnished with a
steaming meal, beside which sat my new friend Bernibus, smiling on me
with a benevolent and almost paternal affection.

"Good morning, Jehu," he said, "Or should I say afternoon, for the
morning has quite passed by already."

"Yes, and it has left in me a great appetite, my good man."

"As is shown clearly in your eyes," he jested, "Come and eat."

Needing no further urging, I leapt from my bed, sat down across from him
at the table, and began partaking greedily of the hearty breakfast of
hash browns and pancakes, which were pleasing to my mouth and stomach,
for the tastes in food are controlled more by the condition of the body
than by the time of day. When I had satisfied my needs, we reclined in
our chairs and began conversing:

"Tell me," I said, "Did my untimely slumber yester eve cause any
irritated prides?"

"Quite to the contrary, the council was well humored and followed your
lead to their bed chambers."

"I am relieved to hear it, for I was anxious of appearing lax in ardor
or animation."

"Not so, my friend, you are quite exonerated from doubtful thoughts.
There is a session planned for this evening though, so may yet feel
yourself put on trial."

"Unfortunate," said I, "But surely they can mean no harm, am I not the
kinsman redeemer, after all?"

"Yes, you are," Bernibus said with a look of subdued apprehension, "We
have an end in view, though the means are as yet not wholly decided. It
is a complicated situation."

I smiled softly, "So is always the case."

"In truth it is: time reveals all things yet do all things reveal time?"


"What do you mean?" I asked him.

"Our situation is complicated by differing views of time, and I was
wondering aloud if history and the present reality disclose the truth
about time in the same way that time reveals the truth of the present.
If our way were more illuminated, the journey would be easier."

"Perhaps that is why men look to the well lit paths of history, or to
the dim conjectures of the future rather than the dark, yet detailed
ways of present."

"Perhaps," he said, "But the present is so fleeting that it holds little
intrigue."

"Even so, it is the stage, not still waiting behind the curtain, nor
already performed."

"Yet the past controls by influences and prejudices, justified or not,
and it will doubtless be the view of the council that the past must be
redone, that the problems be addressed at the source," Bernibus replied.


"I am still in the dark about all your inferences," I said.

"My apologies, I forget myself. But let us not dwell on subjects which
may become quite exhausted in the near future, for better or worse," he
told me.

"Fair enough," I returned, acceding to the subject change, and jumping
on the opportunity to steer it in a different direction, "I know little
of you, Bernibus, so tell me all."

"There isn't much to tell," he coyly responded.

"Nonsense, Bernibus, tell me or I shall get very angry," I jested,
imitating some mythological god's wrath.

He smiled discreetly and yielded to my request, "Very well, I will tell
you. I was born in the year 490 D.V. (that is, Durante Vita), to a poor
couple from the northernmost pier of Daem, the Gog."

"Wait a moment, Bernibus," I interrupted, "I didn't mean in that
fashion, for when I say I know little of you, it is because I literally
know little of 'you', not the circumstances that make up your past. I
guess it goes back to the interpretation of the past and its powers, and
since we can't seem to escape discussing it, lets embrace it willingly.
You seem to believe that the events of your life have shaped you in such
a profound way that their mere description is sufficient to explain your
personality; I will grant that their influence has effected you subtly,
but history is not the scapegoat of the present. The circumstances do
more to define the character of an individual than to shape it, for even
siblings with the exact same experiences can be greatly different in
personality and achievements. But what I mean is this: your past has
influenced your present, yet it is gone and your present remains, show
me Bernibus, not his previous forms."

You, who are now reading this, may think this statement of mine to
Bernibus to be hypocritical, in light of the very purpose and intent of
these memoirs. You may be thinking that I am relating this whole
happening in order to justify my actions and decisions. But that is not
the case, for I understand that you have no power over me, I have long
been dead in your present and your sentiments mean naught to me. In
fact, I wish to tell of the circumstances I found myself in as much as
of myself, so that you may have a retrospective clarity in visions of
the future. You will understand that statement later on, but for now let
me say that I wished to know the essence, the person, the consciousness
of Bernibus, whereas I wish to impart to you my story, though ere its
end you may come also to know me. I have no ambitions of material
immortality.

Bernibus understood my meaning, and though he disagreed with its
theoretical imputations, he humored me and did as I suggested. He pulled
back his brow in a reflective demeanor, brought his eyes to mine and
began:

"You desire me to tell you about myself without literally telling you of
myself. I suppose you mean that we discourse on some variety of
subjects, so that you can see who I am discreetly," he said.

"Exactly," I replied, "You say it better than I."

"Perhaps it is for the best, as you will draw your own conclusions
rather than be given mine, and instead of my telling you what I would
like to think I am, you would see what I am in truth. Strange, isn't it,
that though we think we know ourselves, we very much do not, and it is
only the unbiased observer who sees us as we are. You know, I was once
thinking of writing my memoirs, and I would have, except that I was
afraid that if I read them afterward I would be forced to see myself as
I am and be horrified at the truth."

"Damn the truth," I said.

"You're starting to sound like a philosopher," he laughed.

"And you a psychologist," I rejoined.

"And where would that place us on the scale of artificial intelligence,"
Bernibus jested.

"Following the footsteps of Jeroboam," I returned.

"Hmm?

"Oh, nothing. Tell me," I asked more solemnly, "What position does
Wagner hold among the Canitaurs?"

"He is the Khedive Kibitzer, our ruler in that he leads the council."

"And you?"

"I am his brother-in-law, a relationship that our culture places great
importance on, especially as he has no blood brothers. I become, in
effect, his partner, though he doesn't accept me emotionally as one,
only in etiquette."

"Why is that?" I inquired.

"Because, I am of weak heritage. His sister loved me, and I her, but to
him there is no such thing as love, only business, the destruction of
the Zards at any cost. No price is too high," he told me with almost a
vengeful scowl on his usually pleasant features, it soon passed, though,
and left no trace when it had.

"You sound bitter, Bernibus."

"My feelings betray me, yet I am not bitter, only disillusioned."
