  size of compared with the Earth, 308;
  and with other planets, 119;
  subject to another attraction besides the Sun, 314

Ursa major (_see_ Great Bear)


V

Variable Stars, 429

Vega, 414, 423, 424, 479;
  Struve's measurement of, 442

Velocity, of light, 261, 262, 265;
  of light, laws dependent upon, 511;
  of planets, 140-143, 146, 237;
  of stars, values of, 483-4

Venus, ancient study of, 6;
  aspects of, 171;
  atmosphere of, 189;
  brilliancy of, 168;
  density of, 558;
  diameter of, 191, 558;
  distance of, from the Sun, 191, 558;
  habitability of, 173;
  movement of, 168;
  neighbour to the Earth, 109;
  orbit of, 114, 135;
  orbit form of, 139, 191;
  periodic time of, 558;
  a planet or "wanderer," 111;
  rotation of, 191;
  shape of, 169;
  size of, compared with other planets, 116, 169;
  surface of, 171;
  transit of, 152, 176-190;
  transit, importance of, 173;
  transit predicted by Kepler, 163;
  velocity and periodic time of, 142, 143, 191;
  view of the ancients about, 157

Vesta, 233, 238

Victoria, 242

Vienna telescope, 14-16

Virgo, 423

Vogel and Algol, 485;
  and Spica, 486, 487;
  and the spectra of the stars, 479, 483

Volcanic origin of meteorites, 400;
  outbreaks on the Earth, 197

Von Asten and Encke's comet, 349, 350;
  and the distance of the Sun, 351;
  and the weight of Mercury, 166

Vortex rings, 469

Vulcan, 152, 153;
  and the Sun, 3


W

Wargentin, 90

Watson, Professor, and Mercury, 154

Watson, Sir William, friendship with Herschel, 302

Wave-lengths, 60

Weather, not affected by the Moon, 82

Wilson, Mr. W.E., and the nebula in Orion, 469

Witt, Herr G., and Eros, 236

Wold Cottage meteorite, the, 392

Wright, Thomas, and the Milky Way, 474


Y

"Year of Stars," the, 377

Yerkes Observatory, Chicago, 16

Young, Professor, account of a marvellous Sun-prominence, 42;
  and Sun-spots, 38;
  observations on magnetic storms, 39


Z

Zeeman, Dr., and spectral lines, 491

Zinc in the Sun, 50

Zodiac, the, 5

Zodiacal light, 67

Zone of minor planets, 234


PRINTED BY CASSELL & COMPANY, LIMITED, LA BELLE SAUVAGE, LONDON, E.C.


FOOTNOTES:

[1] It may, however, be remarked that a star is never _seen_ to set, as,
owing to our atmosphere, it ceases to be visible before it reaches the
horizon.

[2] "Popular Astronomy," p. 66.

[3] _Limb_ is the word used by astronomers to denote the _edge_ or
circumference of the apparent disc of a heavenly body.

[4] "The Sun," p. 119.

[5] It has been frequently stated that the outburst in 1859, witnessed
by Carrington and Hodgson, was immediately followed by an unusually
intense magnetic storm, but the records at Kew and Greenwich show that
the magnetic disturbances on that day were of a very trivial character.

[6] Some ungainly critic has observed that the poet himself seems to
have felt a doubt on the matter, because he has supplemented the dubious
moonbeams by the "lantern dimly burning." The more generous, if somewhat
a sanguine remark has been also made, that "the time will come when the
evidence of this poem will prevail over any astronomical calculations."

[7] This sketch has been copied by permission from the very beautiful
view in Messrs. Nasmyth and Carpenter's book, of which it forms Plate
XI. So have also the other illustrations of lunar scenery in Plates
VIII., IX. The photographs were obtained by Mr. Nasmyth from models
carefully constructed from his drawings to illustrate the features on
the moon. During the last twenty years photography has completely
superseded drawing by eye in the delineation of lunar objects. Long
series of magnificent photographs of lunar scenery have been published
by the Paris and Lick Observatories.

[8] At the British Association's meeting at Cardiff in 1892, Prof.
Copeland exhibited a model of the moon, on which the appearance of the
streaks near full moon was perfectly shown by means of small spheres of
transparent glass attached to the surface.

[9] The duration of an occultation, or, in other words, the length of
time during which the moon hides the star, would be slightly shorter
than the computed time, if the moon had an atmosphere capable of
sensibly refracting the light from the star. But, so far, our
observations do not indicate this with certainty.

[10] I owe my knowledge of this subject to Dr. G. Johnstone Stoney,
F.R.S. There has been some controversy as to who originated the
ingenious and instructive doctrine here sketched.

[11] The space described by a falling body is proportional to the
product of the force and the square of the time. The force varies
inversely as the square of the distance from the earth, so that the
space will vary as the square of the time, and inversely as the square
of the distance. If, therefore, the distance be increased sixty-fold,
the time must also be increased sixty-fold, if the space fallen through
is to remain the same.

[12] See Newcomb's "Popular Astronomy," p. 78.

[13] Recent investigation by Newcomb on the motion of Mercury have led
to the result that the hypothesis of a planet or a ring of very small
planets between the orbit of Mercury and the sun cannot account for the
difference between theory and observation in the movements of Mercury.
Harzer has come to the same result, and has shown that the disturbing
element may possibly be the material of the Solar Corona.

[14] "The Sun: its Planets, and their Satellites." London: 1882 (page
147).

[15] James Gregory, in a book on optics written in 1667, had already
suggested the use of the transit of Venus for this purpose.

[16] _See_ "Astronomy and Astrophysics," No. 128.

[17] _See_ "Astronomy and Astrophysics," No. 128.

[18] This is the curved marking which on Plate XVIII. appears in
longitude 290 deg. and north of (that is, below) the equator. Here, as in
all astronomical drawings, north is at the foot and south at the top.
_See_ above, p. 82 (Chapter III.).

[19] Now Director of the Lick Observatory.

[20] The heliometer is a telescope with its object-glass cut in half
along a diameter. One or both of these halves is movable transversely by
a screw. Each half gives a complete image of the object. The measures
are effected by observing how many turns of the screw convey the image
of the star formed by one half of the object-glass to coincide with the
image of the planet formed by the other.

[21] See "Astronomy and Astrophysics," No. 109.

[22] It is only right to add that some observers believe that, in
exceptional circumstances, points of Jupiter have shown some slight
degree of intrinsic light.

[23] Professor Pickering, of Cambridge, Mass., has, however, effected
the important improvement of measuring the decline of light of the
satellite undergoing eclipse by the photometer. Much additional
precision may be anticipated in the results of such observations.

[24] "Newcomb's Popular Astronomy," p. 336.

[25] _See_ Grant, "History of Physical Astronomy," page 255.

[26] Now Director of the Lick Observatory.

[27] We are here neglecting the orbital motion of Saturn, by which the
whole system is moved towards or from the earth, but as this motion is
common to the ball and the ring, it will not disturb the relative
positions of the three spectra.

[28] According to Prof. Barnard's recent measures, the diameter of Titan
is 2,700 miles. This is the satellite discovered by Huyghens; it is the
sixth in order from the planet.

[29] Extract from "Three Cities of Russia," by C. Piazzi Smyth, vol.
ii., p. 164: "In the year 1796. It then chanced that George III., of
Great Britain, was pleased to send as a present to the Empress Catharine
of Russia a ten-foot reflecting telescope constructed by Sir William
Herschel. Her Majesty immediately desired to try its powers, and
Roumovsky was sent for from the Academy to repair to Tsarskoe-Selo,
where the Court was at the time residing. The telescope was accordingly
unpacked, and for eight long consecutive evenings the Empress employed
herself ardently in observing the moon, planets, and stars; and more
than this, in inquiring into the state of astronomy in her dominions.
Then it was that Roumovsky set before the Imperial view the Academy's
idea of removing their observatory, detailing the necessity for, and the
advantages of, such a proceeding. Graciously did the 'Semiramis of the
North,' the 'Polar Star,' enter into all these particulars, and warmly
approve of the project; but death closed her career within a few weeks
after, and prevented her execution of the design."

[30] _See_ Professor Holden's "Sir William Herschel, his Life and
Works."

[31] Arago says that "Lemonnier's records were the image of chaos."
Bouvard showed to Arago one of the observations of Uranus which was
written on a paper bag that in its time had contained hair-powder.

[32] The first comet of 1884 also suddenly increased in brightness,
while a distinct disc, which hitherto had formed the nucleus, became
transformed into a fine point of light.

[33] The three numbers 12, 1, and 1/4 are nearly inversely proportional
to the atomic weights of hydrogen, hydrocarbon gas, and iron vapour, and
it is for this reason that Bredichin suggested the above-mentioned
composition of the various types of tail. Spectroscopic evidence of the
presence of hydrogen is yet wanting.

[34] This illustration, as well as the figure of the path of the
meteors, has been derived from Dr. G.J. Stoney's interesting lecture on
"The Story of the November Meteors," at the Royal Institution, in 1879.

[35] On the 27th November, 1885, a piece of meteoric iron fell at
Mazapil, in Mexico, during the shower of Andromedes, but whether it
formed part of the swarm is not known. It is, however, to be noticed
that meteorites are said to have fallen on several other occasions at
the end of November.

[36] Hooke had noticed, in 1664, that the star Gamma Arietis was double.

[37] Perhaps if we could view the stars without the intervention of the
atmosphere, blue stars would be more common. The absorption of the
atmosphere specially affects the greenish and bluish colours. Professor
Langley gives us good reason for believing that the sun itself would be
blue if it were not for the effect of the air.

[38] The declination of a star is the arc drawn from the star to the
equator at right angles to the latter.

[39] The distance of 61 Cygni has, however, again been investigated by
Professor Asaph Hall, of Washington, who has obtained a result
considerably less than had been previously supposed; on the other hand,
Professor Pritchard's photographic researches are in confirmation of
Struve's and those obtained at Dunsink.

[40] I am indebted for this drawing to the kindness of Messrs. De la
Rue.

[41] _See_ Chapter XIX., on the mass of Sirius and his satellite.

[42] As the earth carries on the telescope at the rate of 18 miles a
second, and as light moves with the velocity of 180,000 miles a second
very nearly, it follows that the velocity of the telescope is about one
ten-thousandth part of that of light. While the light moves down the
tube 20 feet long, the telescope will therefore have moved the
ten-thousandth part of 20 feet--_i.e._, the fortieth of an inch.

[43] _See_ Newcomb's "Popular Astronomy," p. 508, where the discovery of
this law is attributed to Mr. J. Homer Lane, of Washington. The
contraction theory is due to Helmholtz.

[44] The theory of Tidal Evolution sketched in this chapter is mainly
due to the researches of Professor G.H. Darwin, F.R.S.

[45] The hour varies with the locality: it would be 11.49 at Calais; at
Liverpool, 11.23; at Swansea Bay, 5.56, etc.

[46] Having decided upon the units of mass, of angle, and of distance
which we intend to use for measuring these quantities, then any mass, or
angle, or distance is expressed by a certain definite number. Thus if we
take the mass of the earth as the unit of mass, the angle through which
it moves in a second as the unit of angle, and its distance from the sun
as the unit of distance, we shall find that the similar quantities for
Jupiter are expressed by the numbers 316, 0.0843, and 5.2 respectively.
Hence its orbital moment of momentum is 316 x 0.0843 x (5.2) squared.






End of Project Gutenberg's The Story of the Heavens, by Robert Stawell Ball

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE STORY OF THE HEAVENS ***

***** This file should be named 27378.txt or 27378.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/2/7/3/7/27378/

Produced by K. Nordquist, Brenda Lewis, Stephen Hope, Greg
Bergquist and the Online Distributed Proofreading Team at
http://www.pgdp.net (This file was produced from images
generously made available by The Internet Archive/American
Libraries.)


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
