
She put her hand on her aching heart. Would things ever stop reminding
her of White Bear?

She stared down at the gray-green water rushing by the side of the boat,
and it made her dizzy. A canoe could never travel this fast, even a big
one paddled by many men. And a canoe could never go straight across the
river, without being pushed downstream by the current, as this
smoke-belching boat was doing.

Had she been wrong not to stay with White Bear, as he had begged her to?
She missed him so much. Tears came to her eyes. She hoped Wolf Paw and
Eagle Feather would not see her crying, and she wiped her eyes quickly.

She felt like jumping from this boat and swimming back to shore. If she
drowned in the Great River, even that would be better than being carried
away from White Bear.

She told herself she had made up her mind. She was determined to be a
Sauk for the rest of her days. And Eagle Feather would be a Sauk.

_White Bear is wrong to stay behind, even for all that land._

Eagle Feather gripped her arm. "Do not be afraid, Mother. The pale eyes
will not hurt us today." His blue eyes were sad. He must have noticed
her misery.

Wolf Paw smiled faintly. "No, today they only want to be rid of us."

Eagle Feather said, "One day Earthmaker will give us a medicine so
strong that the long knives' guns will not hurt us."

Redbird smiled at her son. "May it be you who finds that medicine."

_We can hope for that. Now that we have lost so much, the spirits might
grant us new powers that will help us to resist the pale eyes._

Of one thing she was sure, White Bear's way was not a trail that the
people should travel. For a Sauk to become a pale eyes was a kind of
death.

_We are Sauk, or we are nothing. White Bear is no longer a Sauk. My
husband is dead._

She turned back to Wolf Paw and Eagle Feather. She did not like to see
Wolf Paw's hair hanging loose around his head, his slumped shoulders. He
had always stood so straight. Before the people at Victor killed
Floating Lily.

She put her hand on his back and stroked it with a circular motion, and
he straightened his shoulders. As he looked at her a light dawned in his
eyes.

She must get him to shave his head again, to put the red crest back in
place. The people needed a new leader, a true leader. Black Hawk had
been wrong too many times, and He Who Moves Alertly would do whatever
the pale eyes told him to do. Wolf Paw would help her heal the people.

_How I hated him the night he mocked White Bear, putting a woman's dress
on him. But he has suffered much since then, and he is a wiser man now._

Eagle Feather was standing at the rail looking across the purple river
at the winter-gray hills on the Ioway shore. Redbird moved to stand
behind him and put her hands on his small, square shoulders. He held
himself very straight.

Eagle Feather said suddenly, "I wish I could have seen my father one
last time." She could barely hear him above the noise of the smoke boat
and the rushing water.

She closed her eyes against the pain of that and bit her lower lip to
keep it from trembling.

When she was able to speak she said, "I think that one day you will see
him again."

But for now Eagle Feather and White Bear must be parted. Because Eagle
Feather must grow up as a Sauk. The people would need him, too, in
summers and winters to come.

But until Eagle Feather was grown, the people would turn to her. The
men, like Wolf Paw, had lost heart. She would give them heart again.

In spite of the pale eyes, the Sauk would find a good trail.

       *       *       *       *       *

The walk from Grandpapa's house to the ruins of Victoire seemed to
Auguste to take all morning. By the time he stood facing the blackened
chimney that towered over him like some ancient idol, his legs hurt. He
was panting, but the crisp winter air infused vigor into his nostrils
and lungs. He sat down to rest on a broken beam that had once held up
the ceiling of the great hall.

He was still weak from having been so badly wounded and from lying in
bed recovering. And even now his left lung was still not able to fill
itself full with air, and probably never would be.

This was the farthest he had ever walked. Too far, really. But the
bright December day invited him out of doors, and he wanted to see his
land.

_My land._

It was his now, without question. Now that Raoul's body had been found.

He was glad there had been no marks on the body. Glad that the Fleming
children, who had found it day before yesterday while playing down in
the gorge, hadn't had to see a human body torn to pieces, as he feared
Raoul might be found.

Ginnie, the middle Fleming girl, had followed a cardinal into the mine
entrance; once the child had seen the body, the little redbird had flown
out again and disappeared.

Raoul's rifle and his pistol, both of which he apparently had fired just
before he died, lay beside him. His Bowie knife had fallen a short
distance away, as if he had thrown it.

When Auguste and Grandpapa had gone to see the body laid out in Dr.
Surrey's examining room, Auguste had been shocked to see the grimace of
terror frozen on Raoul's face--jaws wide apart, lips drawn back from his
teeth, eyes bulging. A good thing the light in the mine had been dim and
the Fleming girl hadn't gotten a good look at that face.

Auguste and Dr. Surrey had both carefully examined the body and could
find no cause of death. Surrey opined that Raoul had gone mad hiding in
the mine and had been frightened to death by his own hallucinations.

Auguste knew what had killed Raoul. He vividly remembered his wanderings
in the other world, in that endless prairie, with Redbird.

Auguste could only imagine what the encounter between Raoul and the
White Bear had been like. It had taken place in the other world. The
White Bear spirit must have attacked and destroyed Raoul's soul--if a
soul could be destroyed. Like the men on spirit journeys who died
because their souls never returned to their bodies, Raoul's body had
been deprived of life. The White Bear could leave its mark in this world
when it chose, but usually it left tangible signs as a mark of favor.
This time the only mark it had left was that look of terror on Raoul's
dead face.

And Auguste had paid the price for having sent the White Bear against
Raoul: he had lost Redbird.

_For the rest of my life I will never see a cardinal without my heart
breaking all over again._

They would bury Raoul, with a mass, in the little cemetery overlooking
the river, just like any other member of the de Marion family. There
would be no revenge after death. Pere Isaac was coming up from Kaskaskia
to officiate.

_And I'm afraid it will not be long before Grandpapa lies down to rest
not far from Raoul._

Even as Auguste had begun to get out of bed and walk about, Elysee
seemed to be spending more and more time sleeping. One day, Auguste
expected, he would simply not wake up at all. Though he mourned in
expectation of the old man's passing, it was with a warm feeling that
Elysee had done much, had walked a long trail with honor. It was now
right that his spirit move on and his body return to the earth.

_I am thinking like a Sauk._

And then it all swept over him in a wave of anguish. He saw the
happiness he had lost. He saw the gardens and long houses of Saukenuk,
cool and pleasant in the summer, the snow-covered, warm winter wickiups
in Ioway. The hunting and fishing, the feasts, the dances. The beloved
faces drew close before his eyes--Sun Woman, Floating Lily, Eagle
Feather, Owl Carver, Black Hawk.

Redbird.

He gave an agonized shout that reverberated in the stone chimney that
towered over him. He beat his chest with his fist again and again, until
a bolt of pain shot through him where Raoul's bullet had pierced him. He
did not want to stop hurting himself, but he could not hit his chest
anymore. His head hung down and he sobbed brokenly.

He had sacrificed too much. He had given up everything he really loved
to become a prisoner of this place. He was trapped on this land. The
ancient wealth of the de Marions held him in golden chains.

_I could ride away from all this, even now. I could take a horse and
swim it across the Mississippi--the Great River--and I could find the
Sauk and live with them again. I could be free._

Redbird had said she had become Wolf Paw's woman. Anger boiled him at
the thought of that. But he knew it was the healer in her who had chosen
that path. As she had said, Wolf Paw was one of the last braves of the
British Band, and by healing him she healed the people.

And was he not lying to himself to think he could do anything for the
Sauk here? How could he resist the immense power of men like Sharp
Knife, who, he was sure, were bent on exterminating the Sauk, on
exterminating all the red people on this continent?

To make the de Marion estate prosper he would have to learn to perform a
thousand tasks about which he knew almost nothing. He must give all his
heart and mind and strength to this domain if it was to flourish. That
was the burden Star Arrow, Pierre de Marion, had laid on him. In taking
up that burden, might he not forget his other tie, to the Sauk, so far
away?

But it was his being a Sauk that chained him so irrevocably to
Victoire--the afternoon he smoked the calumet with Star Arrow--the
Turtle calling on him to be guardian of this land.

Somehow he must try both to be master of Victoire and to fulfill his
destiny as a Sauk.

_This land, right here, once belonged to my people. If I leave it, it
will never belong to them again._

_I will dedicate my possessions to them. I will send them what they
need. I will use the influence my wealth gives me with the lawyers and
politicians to protect them, so they will never be driven from their
land again, never be massacred again._

He stood up and walked away from the charred wreckage of Victoire into
the fields that surrounded it. The farmhands had planted corn last
spring, but the Sauk raiders had burned it, and some prairie grass had
come back. It had only had time to grow chest high before the frost
killed it, and as he pushed his way through it he could see fields
beyond, where the yellow horizon met the sky.

Nancy would share this land with him. She would love him, and they would
raise Woodrow together and have children of their own. He loved Nancy,
though there were places in him that only Redbird could touch. Those
places would be sealed off now. Hand in hand Nancy and he would walk
their path together.

    The World was all before them, where to choose
    Their place of rest, and Providence their guide:
    They hand in hand with wand'ring steps and slow,
    Through Eden took their solitary way.

But he would never stop missing Redbird and Eagle Feather.

And he would never stop wishing he could live out his life as a Sauk.
Inwardly he would always be a Sauk. The Bear spirit would always be with
him to guide him.

_I failed the Sauk when they needed me. I warned them not to go to war,
but I could not make them listen. They need a shaman who will make them
listen._

He thought of the many, more than a thousand, who had died following
Black Hawk, and a sudden, crushing grief struck him to his knees.

"Hu-hu-hu-u-u-u-u," he wailed, stretching his arms wide and lifting his
face up to look at long, faint streaks of cloud that stretched across
the sky. "Whu-whu-whu-u-u-u-u."

He tore open his coat and his shirt. Kneeling, he could see only a patch
of blue directly overhead, framed by the tassels of the prairie grass
that rose up all around him. Staring up into the blue he wailed for the
dead for a long time.

He felt something wet running down his chest. He felt the cold grip of
fear on his heart. When he had struck his breast before, had he reopened
the hole Raoul's bullet made?

He looked down. Beads of dark red were pushing their way through the
five claw scars. Further down his chest they ran together as rivulets.
Five streams of blood trickled down his stomach.

The sight of flowing blood lifted his heart. It was a sign that the Bear
spirit was still with him. He bent forward and put out his hands to grip
the land at the roots of the prairie grass. His fingers dug into the
ashes of corn stalks and the roots of grass. A bright red spot appeared
on the ground between his hands and knees, and then another.

_My blood drips into the soil. I give myself to this land._

"I hold this land for the Sauk nation," he said. First he said it in
Sauk, then he repeated it again in English.

He pushed himself to his feet and drew from its sheath at his waist the
knife Star Arrow had left him long ago.

Standing, he could see over the waving grass. He flourished the knife
blade at the vast dome of sky covering the prairie. He faced toward the
east, whence came those waves of pale eyes that had driven his people
from their homes. Whence, too, had come his father and one of his
grandfathers.

The last Sauk shaman this side of the Great River held up his knife so
the sun glinted from it.

"I will defend this land!" he shouted.

As long as he lived, he would give his blood to this earth.




Afterword


The reader may suspect the author of a bit of frontier-style
exaggeration, with one President and three future Presidents--two of the
United States and one of the Confederacy--playing parts in this novel.
But it's a historic fact that Colonel Zachary Taylor and Lieutenant
Jefferson Davis were among the regular Army officers who pursued Black
Hawk's people. The two ultimately drew even closer, when Davis married
Taylor's daughter Sarah. Davis resigned from the military and took his
new bride back to Mississippi, where they settled on a plantation. But
the daughter of U.S. President Zachary Taylor was not to be First Lady
of the Confederacy; she died of malaria a few months after the wedding.
And after the Civil War Jefferson Davis saw the inside of Fort Monroe
once again--as a prisoner.

The meeting of Andrew Jackson and Black Hawk in the President's
House--as the White House was known in 1832--is also an actual
historical incident. When Sharp Knife sent the Sauk leaders on a tour of
major Eastern cities, including Baltimore, Philadelphia and New York,
the crowds that came to see Black Hawk greeted him as if he was a
conquering hero, somewhat to Jackson's chagrin. But "King Andrew," as
his political opponents called him, handily won the election of 1832.
During the second four years of his reign Congress enacted into law his
policy of forcing all Native American tribes in the U.S. to move west of
the Mississippi. Even though the Winnebago and the Potawatomi remained
neutral or actively helped the Americans, they also had to give up their
land in Illinois and Wisconsin and move westward.

Abraham Lincoln, aged twenty-three, joined the Illinois militia in April
1832, and was promptly elected captain of the Sangamon County company of
volunteers. In May, Lincoln was one of those who helped bury the slain
militiamen at Old Man's Creek. When his company was disbanded, the men
having served their four weeks' enlistment, Lincoln signed up for two
more short hitches. He served them as a private, and was finally
mustered out in July. His horse was stolen, and he and a friend walked
and canoed 250 miles southward to their home, in New Salem, Illinois.
Though Black Hawk War veterans tended to make much of their exploits,
Lincoln was content to say afterward that the only combat he saw was
against flies and mosquitoes. Thomas Ford, Auguste's attorney, served as
governor of Illinois from 1842 to 1846. His _History of Illinois_,
written in 1847, is one of the sources for this novel.

Other than Black Hawk himself, the most historically prominent Sauk in
these pages is He Who Moves Alertly. For the sake of consistency I've
translated all the Native American names in the novel into English.
Otherwise you'd have met He Who Moves Alertly under the name he's better
known by--Keokuk. And I would have referred to Shooting Star, the
Shawnee war chief mentioned in Chapters Five and Sixteen, as Tecumseh.
But then I'd have had to call Black Hawk by his Sauk name,
Makataimeshekiakiak. No wonder Emerson called consistency a hobgoblin.

Also an unfamiliar name today is Michigan Territory as a term for the
land north of Illinois through which Black Hawk and his people made
their final trek from the Trembling Lands to the mouth of the Bad Axe.
That land would soon become the state of Wisconsin. After achieving
statehood in 1848, Wisconsin promptly laid claim to the prosperous
northern portion of Illinois, including Chicago; but Illinois
politicians knew all about clout even then, and beat the Badgers back.

Large parts of Illinois and Wisconsin were lands previously occupied by
the Sauk and Fox. In the seventeenth century the Sauk migrated from
Canada, driven by wars with the Iroquois, down into what is today
eastern Wisconsin. During the eighteenth century they formed a
confederacy with the Fox and moved into the southwestern part of
Wisconsin and northern Illinois. In Black Hawk's time there were about
four thousand Sauk and sixteen hundred Fox, living in villages along the
Wisconsin (earlier spelled Ouisconsin) and Mississippi rivers and at the
mouth of the Rock River.

With the Louisiana Purchase of 1803, the U.S. took charge of the Sauk
and Fox homeland. In 1804 white settlers attacked a party of Sauk men,
women and children, and three whites were killed. As territorial
Governor William Henry Harrison demanded, a delegation of five Sauk and
Fox chiefs brought one of the accused killers to St. Louis. Harrison
used the occasion to negotiate a treaty in which the Sauk and Fox ceded
to the U.S. all their land east of the Mississippi, including what is
today northwestern Illinois and southwestern Wisconsin, as well as a
portion of Missouri. All together the Sauk gave up 51 million acres. For
this they got $2234.50 and an annual payment of $1000 worth of goods.
Later one of the chiefs who had signed the treaty said that the
delegation had been drunk most of the time they were in St. Louis. The
prisoner the chiefs had delivered to Harrison was "killed while trying
to escape."

Black Hawk never recognized this treaty or later confirmations of it. In
defiance, he led his people back to Saukenuk every spring.

There is a gaudy rural playground area in south-central Wisconsin known
as the Wisconsin Dells, where local folks will show tourists a cave in
which, they swear, Black Hawk was hiding when captured by two Winnebago
warriors named Chaetar and One Eye Decorah. But Dr. Nancy O. Lurie of
the Milwaukee Public Museum has unearthed a different account of Black
Hawk's surrender, written by John Blackhawk, grandson of a Winnebago
chief and no relation to the Sauk leader. I find the John Blackhawk
version much more probable than the Wisconsin Dells story, and it's the
one I've followed, adding, inevitably, my own fictional elaborations. Be
it noted that the incident of the small boy who commits Black Hawk's
party to surrendering by smoking Wave's peace pipe is not my invention,
but is reported in the John Blackhawk manuscript. Tobacco was that
sacred to the Native Americans of those times.

Another matter on which historians disagree is the origin of the
expression "O.K.," which made its appearance in the American language in
the 1830s. Here I propose an explanation (see page 239) that I haven't
seen anywhere else, but that, like John Blackhawk's story, makes sense
to me. People at that time attached the adjective "old" to anyone or
anything they felt affectionate about--Old Glory, Old Ironsides, Old
Hickory. By the time he got around to running for President, Zachary
Taylor was "Old Rough and Ready." The most popular alcoholic beverage in
early nineteenth-century America was whiskey, and the best whiskey was
distilled in Kentucky and widely known as Old Kaintuck. It was a jug of
Old Kaintuck that Raoul grudgingly shared with Abe Lincoln. It seems
likely enough that the nickname Old Kaintuck would in time be shortened
to "O.K."--easier to say after you've had a few--and come to mean the
good stuff in any area of life.




About the Author


Robert Shea is the co-author of the epic fantasy _The Illuminatus!
Trilogy_ and author of the two-volume _Shike_, among other novels. For
many years he worked for magazines, and he has been writing novels
full-time since 1977. He lives in Glencoe, Illinois.




                                 SHAMAN
               A man of potent magic and mystical vision

                                 SHAMAN
 Healer, future-teller, initiate into the mysteries of the spirit world

                                 SHAMAN
        A story of sacred Indian rites and the land-greed of an
                          expanding new nation


It was a time of bloody confrontation between the white man and the red
man, a time when the pioneers of a new nation were pushing out across
the Great Plains and yet the powerful spirits of an ancient mystical
religion still held sway over the Indians. In this troubled, dangerous
time, there is a man who has the privilege--and the curse--of belonging
to both worlds. He is Gray Cloud, a disciple of the aging shaman Owl
Carver. A handsome young half-breed, he is chosen by the Great Turtle to
become the mystical leader of the Sauk people ... and summoned by his
French-born aristocratic father to inherit the vast estate of Victoire.

Here is the riveting drama of Gray Cloud's transformation into the
powerful shaman White Bear, and his desperate struggle to reconcile the
opposing forces of his white and Indian heritage. It is a sweeping epic
of mysticism and history, of bitter love and brutal warfare, and of the
tragic fate of an ancient people.






End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Shaman, by Robert Shea

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK SHAMAN ***

***** This file should be named 28976.txt or 28976.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/2/8/9/7/28976/

Produced by Greg Weeks, Stephen Blundell and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions will be
renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no one
owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation (and
you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without permission
and without paying copyright royalties. Special rules, set forth in the
General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to copying and
distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to protect the
PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a
registered trademark, and may not be used if you charge for the eBooks,
unless you receive specific permission. If you do not charge anything
for copies of this eBook, complying with the rules is very easy. You may
use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation of derivative
works, reports, performances and research. They may be modified and
printed and given away--you may do practically ANYTHING with public
domain eBooks. Redistribution is subject to the trademark license,
especially commercial redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://www.gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.
This particular work is one of the few copyrighted individual works
included with the permission of the copyright holder.  Information on
the copyright owner for this particular work and the terms of use
imposed by the copyright holder on this work are set forth at the
beginning of this work.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS,' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org

Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.

Each eBook is in a subdirectory of the same number as the eBook's
eBook number, often in several formats including plain vanilla ASCII,
compressed (zipped), HTML and others.

Corrected EDITIONS of our eBooks replace the old file and take over
the old filename and etext number.  The replaced older file is renamed.
VERSIONS based on separate sources are treated as new eBooks receiving
new filenames and etext numbers.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.

EBooks posted prior to November 2003, with eBook numbers BELOW #10000,
are filed in directories based on their release date.  If you want to
download any of these eBooks directly, rather than using the regular
search system you may utilize the following addresses and just
download by the etext year.
