
[Illustration: FIG. 12.]

Fig. 12 illustrates the Ingersoll-Sergeant Piston Inlet Cold Air
Compressor. This a straight line direct-acting engine, with steam and
air pistons connected to a single rod through a crosshead which connects
with two fly wheels. The strains are direct and the power and resistance
are equalized by the inertia of the crosshead, piston, rods, and fly
wheels. The Meyer's adjustable cut-off is used on the steam cylinder.
The air cylinder is provided with a tail rod tube through which all the
air is admitted into the cylinder.

[Illustration: FIG. 13.--AN AUTOMATIC AND ADJUSTABLE REGULATOR AND
UNLOADING DEVICE APPLIED TO INGERSOLL-SERGEANT AIR COMPRESSORS.]

Fig. 13 illustrates an unloading device and regulator applied to the
Ingersoll-Sergeant compressor.

The purpose of this unloading device is to maintain a uniform air
pressure in the receiver and a uniform speed of engine, notwithstanding
the consumption of the air, and to do this without waste of power or
attention on the part of the engineer. A weighted valve of safety valve
pattern is attached to the air cylinder, and is connected with the air
receiver, and with a discharge valve on each end of the air cylinder,
also with a balanced throttle valve in the steam pipe. When the pressure
of the air gets above the desired point in the receiver, the valve is
lifted and the air is exhausted from behind the discharge valves, thus
letting the compressed air at full receiver pressure into the cylinder
at both ends, and balancing the engine. At the same instant the
compressed air is exhausted from the little piston connected with the
balanced steam valve and the steam is automatically throttled, so that
only enough steam is admitted to keep the engine turning around, or to
overcome the friction, no work being done.

[Illustration: FIG. 14.]

When the compressor is unloaded, it is evident that the function of the
air piston is merely to force the compressed air through the discharge
valves and passages from one end to the other until more compressed air
is required, this being indicated by a fall in the receiver pressure.
The weighted valve now closes and the small connecting pipes are
instantly filled with compressed air; the steam valve automatically
opens, and the compression goes on in the regular way. Another function
of this device is to prevent the compressor from stopping or getting on
the center. Direct-acting compressors are liable to center when doing
work at slow speed.

[Illustration: FIG. 15. PISTON INLET VALVE OPERATED BY THE NATURAL LAWS
OF MOMENTUM.]

Fig. 15 illustrates the Ingersoll-Sergeant Air Cylinder and Piston.

Fig. 16 shows the piston inlet valve, situated at G in Fig. 15. Two of
these valves are placed in each piston of a double-acting air cylinder,
the piston being hollow and the free air being admitted through a
tail-rod pipe, letter E, Fig. 15. JJ are water jacket passages for
cooling the air during compression. Owing to the absence of inlet
valves, large water jackets are provided, not only around the cylinder
itself, but through the heads. As the heat of compression is greater
near the end of the stroke, the advantage of a cool head is manifest. H
H are the discharge valves through which the compressed air is forced.

[Illustration: FIG. 16. PISTON INLET VALVE OPERATED BY THE NATURAL LAWS
OF MOMENTUM.]

The most interesting feature of this cylinder is the piston inlet valve.
It is evident that this valve being attached to the piston needs no
springs or other connections, but is opened and closed exactly at the
right time by its natural inertia. With only about 1/4 of an inch throw of
valve a large area is opened, through which the free air is drawn. The
valve is made of a single piece of composition metal and is practically
indestructible. Its construction is such that it fills the clearance
spaces to a greater extent than is usual in air compressors. A singular
feature is that indicator cards taken on these cylinders show a free air
line in some cases a little above the atmospheric line. Poppet valve
compressors almost invariably show a slight vacuum, due to several
causes, mainly the duty performed in compressing the springs of the
valves, but the vacuum is also influenced by insufficiency of valve
area, hot air cylinders, etc. This cylinder gives its full volume of
air, and apparently a little more at times, because the air is admitted
by a concentrated inlet in which free _air is always moving in one
direction_. After it has been started, the speed of the compressor is
such that the air attains a momentum due to its velocity and density;
this serves a useful purpose in piling up the free air in the cylinder
before the inlet valve closes on the return stroke.

[Illustration: FIG. 17.--COMBINED STEAM AND AIR INDICATOR CARD:

Taken from a 16x18 Sergeant piston inlet air compressor, meyer's cut-off
at 3/10. Steam at 58 lb.; air pressure, 77 lb.; total engine friction, 5
per cent.]

Fig. 17 illustrates a combined steam and air indicator card taken from
one of these cylinders. It will be observed that with steam and air
cylinders equal in diameter and stroke, an air pressure of 77 pounds is
reached with a steam pressure of only 58 pounds. The reason for this is
plainly shown in the cards, their areas being nearly equal. What is made
up in the air card by high pressure is represented in the steam card by
greater volume. The indicated efficiency deduced from these cards is 95
per cent., that is, the area of the air card divided by the area of the
steam card, representing the resistance divided by the power, results in
95 per cent. While several cards have been taken on the cylinders
showing a loss by friction of only 5 per cent., yet on the average the
best practice shows a loss of 6 per cent. or an efficiency of 94 per
cent. This result indicates an almost perfect proportion between power
and resistance, and good workmanship in air-compressing machinery. It is
difficult to conceive an engine of this size being worked with a less
expenditure for friction than 5 or 6 per cent. Were it possible to
retain the heat which is in the air, and which is represented by the
space between the dotted isothermal curve and the actual curve, we might
attain high efficiency in using compressed air power, but it is evident
that the power represented by the area of this space will be lost by
radiation of heat before it is used in an engine situated several
hundred feet away.

These indicator cards show at a glance that heat is responsible for the
important air losses, and that so far as the design of the compressing
engine is concerned, we have attained a point very near perfection. All
the devices, past, present and future, on which inventors spend so much
time, and in the development of which capitalists are innocently
inveigled, _aim to save this six per cent. loss!_ We hear a good deal
about "Centrifugal Air Compressors," "Rotaries," "Plunger Pumps," etc.,
designs involving expensive complications without any heat advantage,
and which seem to be based upon the "iridescent dream" of a large loss
in the present method of compressing air. Here we have a simple engine,
compact and complete in itself, capable of high speed without injury,
constructed on the basis of our best steam engine practice, which
produces compressed air power at a loss of only six per cent.

Clearance is not taken into consideration in the foregoing figures, but
clearance is very much more of a _bete noir_ in theory than in practice.
The early designers, as shown in the "Dubois-Francois" illustrations,
Figs. 3 and 4, regarded clearance loss as a very serious matter. Even at
the present time some air compressor manufacturers admit water through
the inlet valves into the air cylinder, not so much for the purpose of
cooling as to fill up the clearance space. A long stroke involving
expensive construction is usually justified by the claim that a large
saving is effected by reduced clearance loss. Let us see what the effect
of this clearance is. Assuming that we have an air compressor which
shows an isothermal pressure line, there would be some loss of power due
to clearance space, because we would have a certain volume of air upon
which work was done and heat produced, that heat having been absorbed
and the air being retained in the cylinder and not serving any useful
purpose. But let us assume that we have a compressor which shows an
adiabatic pressure line. We now have the air in the clearance space
acting precisely as a spring, compressed at each stroke, retaining its
heat of compression, and giving it out against the air piston at the
point when the stroke is reversed. There is no loss of power in such a
case as this, but, on the contrary, the air spring is useful in
overcoming the inertia of the piston and moving parts. The best air
compressors give a result about midway between the isothermal and the
adiabatic, and the net loss of _power_ directly due to clearance is so
small as to be practically unworthy of consideration.

It must not be inferred from the preceding remarks that the designer of
an air compressor may neglect the question of clearance. On the
contrary, it is a very important consideration. If we assume a large
clearance space in the end of an air cylinder of a compressor which is
furnishing air at a high pressure, we may readily conceive that space to
be so large, and that pressure so high, that the entire volume of the
cylinder would be filled by the air from the clearance space alone, and
the compressor would take in no free air and would, of course, produce
no compressed air.

Loss in _capacity_ of air compressors by clearance is in direct
proportion to the pressure.

Owing to the loss of capacity by clearance space at high pressures, it
is important that compound air cylinders should be used for furnishing
air at high pressure. With compound air cylinders the air is compressed
to alternate stages of pressure in the different cylinders, and the
clearance loss is thus reduced because of the reduced density of the air
in the clearance spaces. In ordinary practice air compressors deliver
the air at less than 100 pounds pressure, so that with a properly
designed air cylinder the clearance space is so small that the capacity
of the compressor is not materially affected.

Two systems are in use by which the heat of compression is absorbed, and
the difference between one and the other is so distinct that air
compressors are usually divided into two classes (1) wet compressors,
(2) dry compressors.

A _wet_ compressor is that which introduces water directly into the air
cylinder during compression.

A _dry_ compressor is that which introduces no water into the air during
compression.

_Wet_ compressors may be subdivided into two classes.

(1) Those which inject water in the form of a spray into the cylinder
during compression.

(2) Those which use a water piston for forcing the air into confinement.

The injection of water into the cylinder is usually known as the
Colladon idea. Compressors built on this system have shown the highest
isothermal results, that is, by means of a finely divided spray of cold
water the heat of compression has been absorbed to a point where the
compressed air has been discharged at a temperature nearly equal to that
at which it was admitted to the cylinder. The advantages of water
injection during compression are as follows:

(1) Low temperature of air during compression.

(2) Increased volume of air per stroke, due to filling of clearance
spaces with water and to a cold air cylinder.

(3) Low temperature of air immediately after compression, thus
condensing moisture in the air receiver.

(4) Low temperature of cylinder and valves, thus maintaining packing,
etc.

(5) Economical results, due to compression of moist air (see table 3).

TABLE 3.--SHOWING THE RELATIVE QUANTITY OF WORK REQUIRED TO COMPRESS A
GIVEN VOLUME AND WEIGHT OF AIR, BOTH DRY AND MOIST--ALSO RELATIVE
VOLUMES WITH AND WITHOUT INCREASE OF TEMPERATURE FROM COMPRESSION.

_______________________________________________________________________________________
  |                |                                  |
  |Compression at  |Compression                       |
  |a Constant      |with                              |
  |Temperature.    |Increase of                       |
  |Mariotte's Law. |Temperature.                      |
__|________________|__________________________________|________________________________
  |     |     |    |     |     |    |     |     |     |    |     |     |   |     |
 1|0.1  |     |    |     |     |    | 20  | 68  |1.0  |    |     | 68  |   |     |
 2|0.5  | 7199|1468|0.612| 7932|1618| 85.5|186  |1.222| 733|0.092|111  |3.0|23500|22500
 3|0.333|11356|2316|0.459|13360|2725|130.4|267  |1.375|2004|0.150|135.5|4.0|37000|35000
 4|0.25 |14260|2909|0.374|17737|3618|165.6|330  |1.495|3477|0.196|153.5|4.8|48500|45000
 5|0.200|16580|3383|0.320|21209|4326|195.3|384  |1.595|4629|0.213|167  |5.4|58500|52500
 6|0.167|18475|3768|0.281|24310|4959|220.5|429  |1.681|5835|0.240|179  |6.0|67000|60000
 7|0.143|20038|4087|0.252|27048|5517|243.2|470  |1.758|7040|0.260|190  |6.4|75000|66000
 8|0.125|21422|4370|0.229|29518|6021|263.6|506.5|1.828|8096|0.274|     |   |     |
 9|0.111|     |    |0.210|     |    |282  |539.6|1.891|    |     |     |   |     |
10|0.100|     |    |0.195|     |    |299  |570.2|1.950|    |     |     |   |     |
_______________________________________________________________________________________
  |     |     |    |     |     |    |     |     |     |    |     |     |   |     |
 1|  2  |  3  |  4 |  5  |  6  |  7 |  8  |  9  | 10  | 11 |  12 |  13 | 14|  15 |  16
__|_____|_____|____|_____|_____|____|_____|_____|_____|____|_____|_____|___|_____|_____

Column  Heading
1       Tension in Atmospheres.
2       Volume.
3       Work of Compression. Cubic Meters in Kilogram-meters.
4       Work of Compression. Cubic Feet in Foot Pounds.
5       Volume.
6       Work of Compression. (Dry.) Cubic Meters in Kilogram-meters.
7       Work of Compression. (Dry.) Cubic Feet in Foot Pounds. Deduced from 6.
8       Temperatures. (Dry.) Cent.
9       Temperatures. (Dry.) Fah.
10      Ratio of Greater to Less Temperature. Absolute.
11      Loss of Work in Compressing one Cubic Meter in Kilogram-meters.
        By Increase of Temperature alone.
12      Percentage of Work of Compression Converted into Heat and Lost.
        By Increase of Temperature alone.
13      Final Temperature if Water is used in Compression. Fah.
14      Percentage of Water to Air Required.
15      Foot Pounds to Compress One Pound Air. Dry.
16      Foot Pounds to Compress One Pound Air. With sufficient Moisture.

The first advantage is by far the most important one, and is really the
only excuse for water injection in air compressors. We have seen (table
3) that the percentage of work of compression which is converted into
heat and loss when no cooling system is used is as follows:

Compressing to 2 atmospheres loss  9.2 per cent.
   "         " 3     "        "   15.0  "   "
   "         " 4     "        "   19.6  "   "
   "         " 5     "        "   21.3  "   "
   "         " 6     "        "   24.0  "   "
   "         " 7     "        "   26.0  "   "
   "         " 8     "        "   27.4  "   "

We see that in compressing air to five atmospheres, which is the usual
practice, the heat loss is 21.3 per cent., so that if we keep down the
temperature of the air during compression to the isothermal line, we
save this loss. The best practice in America has brought this heat loss
down to 3.6 per cent. (old Ingersoll Injection Air Compressor), while in
Europe the heat loss has been reduced to 1.6 per cent. Steam-driven air
compressors are usually run at a piston speed of about 350 feet per
minute, or from 60-80 revolutions per minute of compressors of average
sizes, say 18" diameter of cylinder. Sixty revolutions per minute is
equal to 120 strokes, or two strokes per second. An air cylinder 18" in
diameter filled with free air once every half second, and at each stroke
compressing the air to 60 pounds, and thereby producing 309 degrees of
heat, is thus, by means of water injection, cooled to an extent hardly
possible with mere surface contact. The specific heat of water being
about four times that of air, it readily takes up the heat of
compression.

A properly designed spray system must not be confused with the numerous
devices applied to air cylinders, by means of which water is introduced.
In some cases the water is merely drawn in through the inlet valves. In
others it passes through the center of the piston and rod, coming in
contact with the interior walls of the air cylinder between the packing
rings. Introducing water into the air cylinder in _any other way, except
in the form of a spray, has but little effect in cooling the air during
compression._ On the contrary, it is a most fallacious system, because
it introduces all the disadvantages of water injection without its
isothermal influence. Water, by mere surface contact with air, takes up
but little heat, while the air, having a chance to increase its
temperature, absorbs water through the affinity of air for moisture, and
thus carries over a volume of saturated hot air into the receiver and
pipes, which on cooling, as it always does in transit to the mine,
deposits its moisture and gives trouble through water and freezing. It
is, therefore, of much importance to bear in mind that unless water can
be introduced _during compression_ to such an extent as to _keep down
the temperature of the air in the cylinder_, it had better not be
introduced at all.

If too little water is introduced into an air cylinder during
compression, the result is warm, moist air, and if too much water is
used, it results in a surplus of power required to move a body of water
which renders no useful service. The following table deduced from
Zahner's formula gives the quantity of water which should be injected
per cubic foot of air compressed in order to keep the temperature down
to 104 degrees Fah.

  _________________________________________________________________________
                 |                 |                  |
                 |                 |Weight of water   |Weight of water
                 |                 |to be injected at |to be injected at
                 |Heat units devel-|68 deg. Fah. to keep  |68 deg. Fah. to keep
  Compression    |oped in 1 lb.    |the temperature at|the temperature at
  by atmosphere  |free air by      |104 deg. Fah. in lbs. |104 deg. Fah. in lbs. of
  above a volume.|compression.     |of water and per  |water for 1 cubic
                 |                 |lb. of free air.  |foot of free air.
  _______________|_________________|__________________|____________________
                 |                 |                  |
         2       |        3.702    |        0.734     |        0.056
         3       |        5.867    |        1.664     |        0.089
         4       |        7.406    |        1.469     |        0.113
         5       |        8.598    |        1.701     |        0.131
         6       |        9.570    |        1.891     |        0.145
         7       |       10.398    |        2.063     |        0.158
         8       |       11.109    |        2.204     |        0.167
         9       |       11.740    |        2.329     |        0.179
        10       |       12.301    |        2.440     |        0.188
        11       |       12.813    |        2.542     |        0.195
        12       |       13.278    |        2.634     |        0.202
        13       |       13.706    |        2.719     |        0.209
        14       |       14.102    |        2.798     |        0.215
        15       |       14.471    |        2.871     |        0.223
  _______________|_________________|__________________|____________________

Objections to water injection are as follows:

(1) Impurities in the water, which, through both mechanical and chemical
action, destroy exposed metallic surfaces.

(2) Wear of cylinder, piston and other parts, due directly to the fact
that water is a bad lubricant, and as the density of water is greater
than that of oil, the latter floats on the water and has no chance to
lubricate the moving parts.

(3) Wet air arising from insufficient quantity of water and from
inefficient means of ejection.

(4) Mechanical complications connected with the water pump, and the
difficulties in the way of proportioning the volume of water and its
temperature to the volume, temperature and pressure of the air.

(5) Loss of power required to overcome the inertia of the water.

(6) Limitations to the speed of the compressor, because of the liability
to break the cylinder head joint by water confined in the clearance
spaces.

(7) Absorption of air by water.

Before the introduction of condensing air receivers, wet air resulting
in freezing was considered the most serious obstacle to water injection;
but this difficulty no longer exists, as experience has conclusively
demonstrated that a large part of the moisture in compressed air may be
abstracted in the air receiver. Even in the so-called dry compressors a
great deal of moisture is carried over with the compressed air, because
the atmosphere is never free from moisture. This subject will be
referred to more fully when treating of the transmission of compressed
air.

By far the most serious obstacle to water injection, and that which
condemns the wet compressor, is the influence of the injected water upon
the air cylinder and parts. Even when pure water is used, the cylinders
wear to such an extent as to produce leakage and to require reboring.
The limitation to the speed of a compressor is also an important
objection. The claim made by some that the injected water does not fill
the clearance spaces, but is aerated, does not hold good, except with an
inefficient injection system. The writer has increased the speed of an
air compressor (cylinders 12 in. and 12 in. by 18 in., injection air
cylinder) ten revolutions per minute by placing his fingers over the
orifice of the suction pipe of the water pump. The boiler pressure
remained the same, the cut-off was not changed and the air pressure was
uniform, hence this increase of speed arose from the fact that the water
was restricted and the clearance spaces were filled with compressed air,
which served as a cushion or spring. While the volume of compressed air
furnished by this compressor would be somewhat reduced by the
restriction of the water, yet the increase in speed which was obtained
without any increase of power fully compensated for the clearance loss.

Mr. John Darlington, of England, gives the following particulars of a
modern air compressor of European type:

"Engine, two vertical cylinders, steam jacketed, with Meyer's expansion
gear. Cylinders, 16.9 inches diameter, stroke 39.4 inches; compressor,
two cylinders, diameter of piston, 23.0 inches; stroke 39.4 inches;
revolutions per minute, 30 to 40; piston speed 39 to 52 inches per
second, capacity of cylinder per revolution, 20 cubic feet: diameter of
valves, viz., four inlet and four outlet, 51/2 inches; weight of each
inlet valve, 8 lb.; outlet, 10 lb.; pressure of air, 4 to 5 atmospheres.
The diagrams taken of the engine and compressor show that the work
