(1848),
  not Lem. (1838).

Differs from the last form (var. greggii) chiefly in its
cespitose habit, much larger tubercles, and two unusually stout
and short central spines (fide Engelmann, who examined specimens
in Coll. Salm-Dyck).

Credited to Mexico in general, but said by Budd to occur within
the southern border of Pecos County, Tex.

  ** Central spines present and one or more hooked.
  +  Mostly globose and simple plants (occasionally somewhat
     cylindrical).

15. Cactus wrightii (Engelm.) Kuntze. Rev. Gen. Pl. 261 (1891).

  Mamillaria wrightii  Engelm. Syn. Cact. 262 (1856).

Globose or depressed globose (top-shaped below), 3 to 7.5 cm. in
diameter, simple: tubercles 10 to 12 mm. long, with naked axils:
radial spines 8 to 12, white (the upper dusky-tipped), pubescent,
8 to 12 mm. long central spines mostly 2 (usually side by side
and divergent), rarely 1 or 3, scarcely longer, hooked and
reddish-black: flowers 2.5 cm. long, bright purple: fruit about
2.5 cm. long, somewhat subglobose, purple: seeds 1.4 mm long,
black and pitted.  (Ill. Cact. Mex. Bound. t.8. figs. 1-8)  Type,
Wright of 1851 in Herb. Mo. Bot. Gard.

High plains and rocky places, from the Upper Pecos, east of Santa
Fe, N. Mex., southward through extreme southwestern Texas
(between the Pecos and El Paso), and into Chihuahua (near Lake
Santa Maria).

Specimens examined: New Mexico (Wright of 1851; Rusby of 1880):
also growing in Mo. Bot. Gard. 1893.

Dr. Engelmann calls attention to the fact that this species is
closely allied to the Mexican C. zephranthoides (Scheidw.), but
in the absence of material representing the latter species no
comparison can be made.  In descriptions of the Mexican species
the differently colored flowers and the much longer spines
suggest differences that an examination of fruit and seed
characters may still further emphasize.

16. Cactus goodrichii (Scheer) Kuntze. Rev. Gen. Pl. 260 (1891).

  Mamillaria goodrichii  Scheer in Salm Cact. Hort. Dyck. 91
  (1850).

Globose or ovate, 5 to 7.5 cm. high, subsimple: tubercles ovate,
short (3 to 5 mm.), somewhat corky and persistent, with dense
wool in the young axils containing 5 to 8 stiff bristles: radial
spines 11 to 15 (the uppermost one sometimes wanting), white and
rigid, 5 to 7 mm. long, entangled with adjoining clusters;
central spines 3 or 4 (often solitary in young plants),
brownish-black,the upper ones divergent and straight (rarely
showing a tendency to hook), the lower longer (9 to 10 mm.),
stouter and hooked (usually upwards): flowers 12 to 18 mm, long,
the petals yellowish-white with red midribs: fruit clavate and
scarlet. (Ill. Cact. Mex. Bound. t. 8. figs. 9-14)  Type: Scheer
says that the plant was brought from the Island of "Corros"
(Cedros?) by Dr. Goodrich, and "unfortunately perished in the
gardens," which generally means that there is not a fragment of
the type in existence.

In dry ravines, from San Diego County, California, southward
throughout Lower California and the neighboring islands
(including Guadalupe Island).  "Llavina."

Specimens examined: California (Parry of 1850, 1875; Agassiz of
1872; Parish 450 of 1882 at Vallecito): Lower California (Gabb 18
of 1867; Brandegee of 1889 on Magdalena Island, and 240 of 1890
from San Jose del Cabo): also specimens cultivated in Gard.
Salm-Dyck.

By a misprint in Cact. Mex. Bound, the specific name appeared as
"Goodridgii," and this error appears in almost every subsequent
mention of the species, even in Watson's Bibliographical Index,
although in Syn. Cact. and other references by Dr. Engelmann the
correct form appears.

17. Cactus pondii (Greene).

  Mamillaria pondii  Greene, Pittonia, i, 268 (1889).

Oval or cylindrical, from low to 30 cm. high, simple or sparingly
branched: radial spines 20 to 30, white and slender; centrals 4
or 5, the longest over 25 mm, long, rigid and strongly hooked,
dark brown above the middle: flowers nearly 5 cm. long, bright,
scarlet: fruit unknown.  Type, Pond specimens in Herb. Greene.

Cedros Island, off the west coast of Lower California.  Fl.
February.

Unfortunately, the type specimen has been mislaid, so that no
examination of it could be made.  Evidently related to C.
goodrichii, but differing in its much more robust habit, more
numerous radials, much longer spines, and larger scarlet flowers.

18. Cactus barbatus (Engelm.) Kuntze, Rev. Gen. Pl. 261 (1891).

  Mamillaria barbata  Engelm. Wisliz. Rep. 22 (1848).

Depressed-globose, about 4 cm. in diameter, simple: tubercles 8
mm. long, with naked axils: radial spines very numerous (50 to
60), in two series, 6 to 8 mm. long, the outer (about 40) slender
but rigid and white, the inner (10 to 15) a little stouter and
yellow; usually one central spine, stout and erect, hooked
downwards, brownish: flowers 18 to 20 mm. long, rose-red: fruit
oblong, 10 to 12 mm. long, green (when mature?): seeds minute,
dark brown and lightly pitted. (Ill. Cact. Mex. Bound t. 6. figs.
9-12)  Type, Wislizenus of 1846 in Herb. Mo. Bot. Gard.

Central Chihuahua.  Fl. May, in cultivation.

Specimens examined: Chihuahua (Wislizenus of 1846, 1850): also
specimens cultivated in Baumann's Garden in 1857, 1858; also
growing in Mo. Bot. Gard. 1893.

Dr. Engelmann observed a curious intermediate character in the
origin of the flowers of this species, the first ones of the
season appearing in the axils of the last tubercles of the
preceding year, while the later ones develop from the axils of
the first tubercles of the same season.  The specimen growing in
Mo. Bot. Gard, in 1893 had 3 central spines, one or two being
hooked.

19. Cactus grahami (Engelm.) Kuntze, Rev. Gen. Pl. 260 (1891).

  Mamillaria grahami  Engelm. Syn. Cact. 262 (1856).

Globose or at length ovate, 2.5 to 7.5 cm. high, simple or
branched from the base and even cespitose: tubercles ovate, 6 mm.
long, dilated at base (corky and persistent when old), with naked
axils: radial spines 15 to 30 in a single series, white, often
dusky-tipped, slender but rigid, naked or puberulent, 6 to 12 mm.
long, the shorter ones uppermost, the longer ones lateral;
central spines 1 to 3, blackish from a paler base, the lower
(often the only) one stouter and longer (6 to 18 mm.), hooked
upward, the one or two upper ones (when present) shorter and
slenderer, divergent: flowers 2 to 2.5 cm. long, rose-colored:
fruit 2 to 2.5 cm. long: seeds 0.8 to 1 mm. long, black and
pitted.  (Ill. Cact. Mex. Bound. t. 6. figs. 1-8)  Type, Wright
of 1852 and Bigelow of 1852 in Herb. Mo. Bot. Gard.

In rocky places, from the mountains of extreme southwestern Texas
(west of the Pecos) to southern Utah, southern California (common
along the Colorado), and Sonora.  Fl. June-August.

Specimens examined: Texas (Wright of 1852; Newberry of 1858; G.
R. Vasey of 1881; Miller of 1881; Briggs of 1892): New Mexico
(Evans of 1891): Arizona (Bigelow of 1852; Schott of 1858; Cous
of 1865; Palmer of 1869, 1870; Engelmann of 1880; Pringle of
1884): Utah (Parry of 1874): Sonora (Schott of 1853): also
specimens cultivated in the Mo. Bot. Gard. in 1881.

In all references to the fruit of this species it is described as
"oval and green," except in Ives Report, where Dr. Engelmann
describes its real character as the ordinary fruit of
Eumamillaria.  The immature fruit is "oval and green," but with
maturity it becomes clavate and scarlet.  The Utah specimens of
Parry show an exceptional character in their 30 to 33 scabrous
radial spines, but otherwise they are quite normal.  M.
microcarpa Engelm., Emory's Rep. 156. f. 3, should be dropped as
a synonym of this species, at least as to figure and description.
In all probability C.grahami is one of the forms of the Mexican
C. schelhasii (Pfeiff.).  Except that in C. grahami the radial
spines are apt to be more numerous and longer, and the centrals
much darker; and in C. schelhasii the 3 centrals seem to be
always present and sometimes all hooked, the descriptions suggest
no difference.  In the absence of authentic specimens of the
latter species, however, and with its fruit and seed entirely
unknown, such a reference of C. grahami must be deferred.

20. Cactus bocasanus (Poselger).

  Mamillaria bocasana  Poselger, Gart. Zeit. 94 (1853).

Depressed-globose, 2 to 3 cm. high: tubercles 8 mm. long, with
long axillary wool: radial spines 25 to 30, white and capillary,
10 to 25 mm. long; central spines 2 to 4, slender and naked (or
slightly puberulent), the most central one hooked (usually
upwards), 15 to 25 mm. long, the upper 1 to 3 shorter and
straight, all yellow with red tips, the hooked one often
brownish-red nearly to the base: flowers unknown: fruit green,
about 4 mm. long: seeds cinnamon-brown, oblique, broadly obovate,
with narrowly ovate basal hilum.  Type unknown.

San Luis Potosi, so far as known.  Poselger says, "Texas, auf der
Seira de Bocas, among rocks," which station we have been unable
to locate.

Specimens examined: San Luis Potosi (Eschanzier of 1891): also
specimens cultivated in Hort. Pfersdorff in 1869; in Mo. Bot.
Gard. in 1891; also growing in Mo. Bot. Gard. 1893.

The capillary radials give the plant a white-woolly appearance.
The younger spines at the vertex are erect and tufted.  It
resembles C. grahami, but the tubercles are much more slender and
not thickened at base, all the spines are more slender, the
central hooked one is more reddish, and the fruit is much
shorter.

21. Cactus eschanzieri, sp. nov.

Depressed-globose, 3 cm. in diameter, simple: tubercles broader
at base, 6 to 8 mm. long, with naked axils: spines all pubescent;
radials 15 to 20, with dusky tips, the lateral 10 to 12 mm. long,
the lower weaker, shorter and curved, the upper shorter; solitary
central spine reddish, slender, somewhat twisted, usually hooked
upwards, 15 to 25 mm. long: flowers red (?): fruit reddish (?),
ovate, about 10 mm, long: seeds reddish, oblique-obovate, 1.2 mm.
long, pitted, with subventral hilum.  Type in Herb. Coulter.

San Luis Potosi.

Specimens examined: San Luis Potosi (Eschanzier of 1891).

Resembles C. grahami, but with fewer and more slender pubescent
spines, longer and less rigid central, more exserted fruit, and
much larger reddish and strongly pitted seeds with subventral
hilum.

22. Cactus tetrancistrus (Engelm.).

  Mamillaria tetrancistra  Engelm. Am. Jour. Sci. II. xiv. 337
  (1852), in part.
  Mamillaria phellosperma  Engelm. Syn. Cact. 262 (1856).
  Cactus pellospermus  Kuntze, Rev. Gen. Pl. 261 (1891).

Ovate or ovate-cylindrical, 5 to 25 cm. high, 3.5 to 7.5 cm. in
diameter, simple or rarely branching at base: tubercles
ovate-cylindrical, 8 to 14 mm. long, with axillary
bristle-bearing wool, at length naked: radial spines 30 to 60, in
two series, the exterior bristle-like, shorter and white, the
interior stouter, longer and dusky-tipped or purplish; central
spines 3 or 4, stouter, longer, brown or blackish from a paler
base, the upper 2 or 3 (10 to 14 mm. long) straight, or one or
two or even all hooked, the lower stouter and longer (12 to 18
mm.), hooked upwards: flowers about 2.5 cm. long: fruit 1 to 2.5
cm. long: seeds large (1.2 to 1.5 mm. in diameter), globose and
wrinkled, partly immersed in a brown spongy or corky cup-shaped
3-lobed appendage. (Ill. Cact. Mex. Bound. t. 7)  Type, Parry of
1850, but modified by Le Conte 14 and Bigelow of 1854, all in
Herb. Mo. Bot. Gard.

Gravelly soil and sandy stream-banks, from the eastern slopes of
the mountains of southern California, throughout western Arizona
and southern Nevada to southern Utah; referred also to "N. W.
Mexico" by Hemsley (Biol. Centr.-Amer.).

Specimens examined: California (Parry of 1850; Newberry of 1858;
Parish of 1882): Arizona (Le Conte 14; Bigelow of 1854; Dr. Loew
of 1875: also Palmer of 1870, but with no locality.

In the original description this species was confounded with C.
grahami, with which it grows and which it much resembles; and
this, together with the fact that 4 central hooked spines are
seldom found, induced Dr. Engelmann (Syn. Cact. 262) to propose
the more appropriate but untenable name M. phellosperma.  The
resemblance to C. grahami is not so close as general appearance
would indicate, as the more oblong or cylindrical form, longer
and less crowded tubercles, more numerous spines, often more than
one hooked central, large seeds, and remarkable seed appendages
serve well to distinguish it.

++ Plants with fasciculate slender cylindrical stems (30 to 45
   cm. high, and 2.5 to 6 cm. in diameter): Lower Californian.

23. Cactus roseanus (Brandegee).

  Mamillaria longihamata  Engelm. Mss.
  Mamillaria roseana  Brandegee, Zoe, ii. 19 (1891).

Fasciculately branched at base, the stems 30 to 45 cm. long
(sometimes pendent from rocks and as much as 200 cm. long) and
2.5 to 5 cm. in diameter, the whole plant glaucous: tubercles
elongated-conical, ascending, 10 to 12 mm. long, with woolly
axils: radial spines 7 to 10, straight, rigid and sharp, 9 to 15
mm. long, dark reddish when young, becoming ashy, the upper ones
the longer; the solitary central much longer (20 to 30 mm.),
almost black below and with reddish tip, becoming ashy with age,
usually hooked downwards: flowers numerous, 2.5 to 3.5 cm. long,
bright scarlet: fruit obovate to globose, scarlet, 6 to 9 mm. in
diameter, fleshy: seeds black and pitted.  Type in Herb. Calif.
Acad.

