deplorable accounts from Africa, and the Australian aborigines appear to
have been already exterminated.  The Northern races have as yet shown
greater resisting power than the Southern.  This, you see, is dated from
Marseilles at nine-forty-five this morning.  I give it to you verbatim:--

"'All night delirious excitement throughout Provence.  Tumult of vine
growers at Nimes.  Socialistic upheaval at Toulon.  Sudden illness
attended by coma attacked population this morning.  _Peste foudroyante_.
Great numbers of dead in the streets.  Paralysis of business and
universal chaos.'

"An hour later came the following, from the same source:--

"'We are threatened with utter extermination.  Cathedrals and churches
full to overflowing.  The dead outnumber the living.  It is inconceivable
and horrible.  Decease seems to be painless, but swift and inevitable.'

"There is a similar telegram from Paris, where the development is not yet
as acute.  India and Persia appear to be utterly wiped out.  The Slavonic
population of Austria is down, while the Teutonic has hardly been
affected.  Speaking generally, the dwellers upon the plains and upon the
seashore seem, so far as my limited information goes, to have felt the
effects more rapidly than those inland or on the heights.  Even a little
elevation makes a considerable difference, and perhaps if there be a
survivor of the human race, he will again be found upon the summit of
some Ararat.  Even our own little hill may presently prove to be a
temporary island amid a sea of disaster.  But at the present rate of
advance a few short hours will submerge us all."

Lord John Roxton wiped his brow.

"What beats me," said he, "is how you could sit there laughin' with that
stack of telegrams under your hand.  I've seen death as often as most
folk, but universal death--it's awful!"

"As to the laughter," said Challenger, "you will bear in mind that, like
yourselves, I have not been exempt from the stimulating cerebral effects
of the etheric poison.  But as to the horror with which universal death
appears to inspire you, I would put it to you that it is somewhat
exaggerated.  If you were sent to sea alone in an open boat to some
unknown destination, your heart might well sink within you.  The
isolation, the uncertainty, would oppress you.  But if your voyage were
made in a goodly ship, which bore within it all your relations and your
friends, you would feel that, however uncertain your destination might
still remain, you would at least have one common and simultaneous
experience which would hold you to the end in the same close communion.
A lonely death may be terrible, but a universal one, as painless as this
would appear to be, is not, in my judgment, a matter for apprehension.
Indeed, I could sympathize with the person who took the view that the
horror lay in the idea of surviving when all that is learned, famous, and
exalted had passed away."

"What, then, do you propose to do?" asked Summerlee, who had for once
nodded his assent to the reasoning of his brother scientist.

"To take our lunch," said Challenger as the boom of a gong sounded
through the house.  "We have a cook whose omelettes are only excelled by
her cutlets.  We can but trust that no cosmic disturbance has dulled her
excellent abilities.  My Scharzberger of '96 must also be rescued, so far
as our earnest and united efforts can do it, from what would be a
deplorable waste of a great vintage."  He levered his great bulk off the
desk, upon which he had sat while he announced the doom of the planet.
"Come," said he.  "If there is little time left, there is the more need
that we should spend it in sober and reasonable enjoyment."

And, indeed, it proved to be a very merry meal.  It is true that we could
not forget our awful situation.  The full solemnity of the event loomed
ever at the back of our minds and tempered our thoughts.  But surely it
is the soul which has never faced death which shies strongly from it at
the end.  To each of us men it had, for one great epoch in our lives,
been a familiar presence.  As to the lady, she leaned upon the strong
guidance of her mighty husband and was well content to go whither his
path might lead.  The future was our fate.  The present was our own.  We
passed it in goodly comradeship and gentle merriment.  Our minds were, as
I have said, singularly lucid.  Even I struck sparks at times.  As to
Challenger, he was wonderful!  Never have I so realized the elemental
greatness of the man, the sweep and power of his understanding.
Summerlee drew him on with his chorus of subacid criticism, while Lord
John and I laughed at the contest and the lady, her hand upon his sleeve,
controlled the bellowings of the philosopher.  Life, death, fate, the
destiny of man--these were the stupendous subjects of that memorable
hour, made vital by the fact that as the meal progressed strange, sudden
exaltations in my mind and tinglings in my limbs proclaimed that the
invisible tide of death was slowly and gently rising around us.  Once I
saw Lord John put his hand suddenly to his eyes, and once Summerlee
dropped back for an instant in his chair.  Each breath we breathed was
charged with strange forces.  And yet our minds were happy and at ease.
Presently Austin laid the cigarettes upon the table and was about to
withdraw.

"Austin!" said his master.

"Yes, sir?"

"I thank you for your faithful service."  A smile stole over the
servant's gnarled face.

"I've done my duty, sir."

"I'm expecting the end of the world to-day, Austin."

"Yes, sir.  What time, sir?"

"I can't say, Austin.  Before evening."

"Very good, sir."

The taciturn Austin saluted and withdrew.  Challenger lit a cigarette,
and, drawing his chair closer to his wife's, he took her hand in his.

"You know how matters stand, dear," said he.  "I have explained it also
to our friends here.  You're not afraid are you?"

"It won't be painful, George?"

"No more than laughing-gas at the dentist's.  Every time you have had it
you have practically died."

"But that is a pleasant sensation."

"So may death be.  The worn-out bodily machine can't record its
impression, but we know the mental pleasure which lies in a dream or a
trance.  Nature may build a beautiful door and hang it with many a gauzy
and shimmering curtain to make an entrance to the new life for our
wondering souls.  In all my probings of the actual, I have always found
wisdom and kindness at the core; and if ever the frightened mortal needs
tenderness, it is surely as he makes the passage perilous from life to
life.  No, Summerlee, I will have none of your materialism, for I, at
least, am too great a thing to end in mere physical constituents, a
packet of salts and three bucketfuls of water.  Here--here"--and he beat
his great head with his huge, hairy fist--"there is something which uses
matter, but is not of it--something which might destroy death, but which
death can never destroy."

"Talkin' of death," said Lord John.  "I'm a Christian of sorts, but it
seems to me there was somethin' mighty natural in those ancestors of ours
who were buried with their axes and bows and arrows and the like, same as
if they were livin' on just the same as they used to.  I don't know," he
added, looking round the table in a shamefaced way, "that I wouldn't feel
more homely myself if I was put away with my old .450 Express and the
fowlin'-piece, the shorter one with the rubbered stock, and a clip or two
of cartridges--just a fool's fancy, of course, but there it is.  How does
it strike you, Herr Professor?"

"Well," said Summerlee, "since you ask my opinion, it strikes me as an
indefensible throwback to the Stone Age or before it.  I'm of the
twentieth century myself, and would wish to die like a reasonable
civilized man.  I don't know that I am more afraid of death than the rest
of you, for I am an oldish man, and, come what may, I can't have very
much longer to live; but it is all against my nature to sit waiting
without a struggle like a sheep for the butcher.  Is it quite certain,
Challenger, that there is nothing we can do?"

"To save us--nothing," said Challenger.  "To prolong our lives a few
hours and thus to see the evolution of this mighty tragedy before we are
actually involved in it--that may prove to be within my powers.  I have
taken certain steps----"

"The oxygen?"

"Exactly.  The oxygen."

"But what can oxygen effect in the face of a poisoning of the ether?
There is not a greater difference in quality between a brick-bat and a
gas than there is between oxygen and ether.  They are different planes of
matter.  They cannot impinge upon one another.  Come, Challenger, you
could not defend such a proposition."

"My good Summerlee, this etheric poison is most certainly influenced by
material agents.  We see it in the methods and distribution of the
outbreak.  We should not _a priori_ have expected it, but it is
undoubtedly a fact.  Hence I am strongly of opinion that a gas like
oxygen, which increases the vitality and the resisting power of the body,
would be extremely likely to delay the action of what you have so happily
named the daturon.  It may be that I am mistaken, but I have every
confidence in the correctness of my reasoning."

"Well," said Lord John, "if we've got to sit suckin' at those tubes like
so many babies with their bottles, I'm not takin' any."

"There will be no need for that," Challenger answered.  "We have made
arrangements--it is to my wife that you chiefly owe it--that her boudoir
shall be made as airtight as is practicable.  With matting and varnished
paper."

"Good heavens, Challenger, you don't suppose you can keep out ether with
varnished paper?"

"Really, my worthy friend, you are a trifle perverse in missing the
point.  It is not to keep out the ether that we have gone to such
trouble.  It is to keep in the oxygen.  I trust that if we can ensure an
atmosphere hyper-oxygenated to a certain point, we may be able to retain
our senses.  I had two tubes of the gas and you have brought me three
more.  It is not much, but it is something."

"How long will they last?"

"I have not an idea.  We will not turn them on until our symptoms become
unbearable.  Then we shall dole the gas out as it is urgently needed.  It
may give us some hours, possibly even some days, on which we may look out
upon a blasted world.  Our own fate is delayed to that extent, and we
will have the very singular experience, we five, of being, in all
probability, the absolute rear guard of the human race upon its march
into the unknown.  Perhaps you will be kind enough now to give me a hand
with the cylinders.  It seems to me that the atmosphere already grows
somewhat more oppressive."



Chapter III

SUBMERGED


The chamber which was destined to be the scene of our unforgettable
experience was a charmingly feminine sitting-room, some fourteen or
sixteen feet square.  At the end of it, divided by a curtain of red
velvet, was a small apartment which formed the Professor's dressing-room.
This in turn opened into a large bedroom.  The curtain was still hanging,
but the boudoir and dressing-room could be taken as one chamber for the
purposes of our experiment.  One door and the window frame had been
plastered round with varnished paper so as to be practically sealed.
Above the other door, which opened on to the landing, there hung a
fanlight which could be drawn by a cord when some ventilation became
absolutely necessary.  A large shrub in a tub stood in each corner.

"How to get rid of our excessive carbon dioxide without unduly wasting
our oxygen is a delicate and vital question," said Challenger, looking
round him after the five iron tubes had been laid side by side against
the wall.  "With longer time for preparation I could have brought the
whole concentrated force of my intelligence to bear more fully upon the
problem, but as it is we must do what we can.  The shrubs will be of some
small service.  Two of the oxygen tubes are ready to be turned on at an
instant's notice, so that we cannot be taken unawares.  At the same time,
it would be well not to go far from the room, as the crisis may be a
sudden and urgent one."

There was a broad, low window opening out upon a balcony.  The view
beyond was the same as that which we had already admired from the study.
Looking out, I could see no sign of disorder anywhere.  There was a road
curving down the side of the hill, under my very eyes.  A cab from the
station, one of those prehistoric survivals which are only to be found in
our country villages, was toiling slowly up the hill.  Lower down was a
nurse girl wheeling a perambulator and leading a second child by the
hand.  The blue reeks of smoke from the cottages gave the whole
widespread landscape an air of settled order and homely comfort.  Nowhere
in the blue heaven or on the sunlit earth was there any foreshadowing of
a catastrophe.  The harvesters were back in the fields once more and the
golfers, in pairs and fours, were still streaming round the links.  There
was so strange a turmoil within my own head, and such a jangling of my
overstrung nerves, that the indifference of those people was amazing.

"Those fellows don't seem to feel any ill effects," said I, pointing down
at the links.

"Have you played golf?" asked Lord John.

"No, I have not."

"Well, young fellah, when you do you'll learn that once fairly out on a
round, it would take the crack of doom to stop a true golfer.  Halloa!
There's that telephone-bell again."

From time to time during and after lunch the high, insistent ring had
summoned the Professor.  He gave us the news as it came through to him in
a few curt sentences.  Such terrific items had never been registered in
the world's history before.  The great shadow was creeping up from the
south like a rising tide of death.  Egypt had gone through its delirium
and was now comatose.  Spain and Portugal, after a wild frenzy in which
the Clericals and the Anarchists had fought most desperately, were now
fallen silent.  No cable messages were received any longer from South
America.  In North America the southern states, after some terrible
racial rioting, had succumbed to the poison.  North of Maryland the
effect was not yet marked, and in Canada it was hardly perceptible.
Belgium, Holland, and Denmark had each in turn been affected.  Despairing
messages were flashing from every quarter to the great centres of
learning, to the chemists and the doctors of world-wide repute, imploring
their advice.  The astronomers too were deluged with inquiries.  Nothing
could be done.  The thing was universal and beyond our human knowledge or
control.  It was death--painless but inevitable--death for young and old,
for weak and strong, for rich and poor, without hope or possibility of
escape.  Such was the news which, in scattered, distracted messages, the
telephone had brought us.  The great cities already knew their fate and
so far as we could gather were preparing to meet it with dignity and
resignation.  Yet here were our golfers and laborers like the lambs who
gambol under the shadow of the knife.  It seemed amazing.  And yet how
could they know?  It had all come upon us in one giant stride.  What was
there in the morning paper to alarm them?  And now it was but three in
the afternoon.  Even as we looked some rumour seemed to have spread, for
we saw the reapers hurrying from the fields.  Some of the golfers were
returning to the club-house.  They were running as if taking refuge from
a shower.  Their little caddies trailed behind them.  Others were
continuing their game.  The nurse had turned and was pushing her
perambulator hurriedly up the hill again.  I noticed that she had her
hand to her brow.  The cab had stopped and the tired horse, with his head
sunk to his knees, was resting.  Above there was a perfect summer
sky--one huge vault of unbroken blue, save for a few fleecy white clouds
over the distant downs.  If the human race must die to-day, it was at
least upon a glorious death-bed.  And yet all that gentle loveliness of
nature made this terrific and wholesale destruction the more pitiable and
awful.  Surely it was too goodly a residence that we should be so
swiftly, so ruthlessly, evicted from it!

But I have said that the telephone-bell had rung once more.  Suddenly I
heard Challenger's tremendous voice from the hall.

"Malone!" he cried.  "You are wanted."

I rushed down to the instrument.  It was McArdle speaking from London.

"That you, Mr. Malone?" cried his familiar voice.  "Mr. Malone, there are
terrible goings-on in London.  For God's sake, see if Professor
Challenger can suggest anything that can be done."

"He can suggest nothing, sir," I answered.  "He regards the crisis as
universal and inevitable.  We have some oxygen here, but it can only
defer our fate for a few hours."

"Oxygen!" cried the agonized voice.  "There is no time to get any.  The
office has been a perfect pandemonium ever since you left in the morning.
Now half of the staff are insensible.  I am weighed down with heaviness
myself.  From my window I can see the people lying thick in Fleet Street.
The traffic is all held up.  Judging by the last telegrams, the whole
world----"

His voice had been sinking, and suddenly stopped.  An instant later I
heard through the telephone a muffled thud, as if his head had fallen
forward on the desk.

"Mr. McArdle!" I cried.  "Mr. McArdle!"

There was no answer.  I knew as I replaced the receiver that I should
never hear his voice again.

At that instant, just as I took a step backwards from the telephone, the
thing was on us.  It was as if we were bathers, up to our shoulders in
water, who suddenly are submerged by a rolling wave.  An invisible hand
seemed to have quietly closed round my throat and to be gently pressing
the life from me.  I was conscious of immense oppression upon my chest,
great tightness within my head, a loud singing in my ears, and bright
flashes before my eyes.  I staggered to the balustrades of the stair.  At
the same moment, rushing and snorting like a wounded buffalo, Challenger
dashed past me, a terrible vision, with red-purple face, engorged eyes,
and bristling hair.  His little wife, insensible to all appearance, was
slung over his great shoulder, and he blundered and thundered up the
stair, scrambling and tripping, but carrying himself and her through
sheer will-force through that mephitic atmosphere to the haven of
temporary safety.  At the sight of his effort I too rushed up the steps,
clambering, falling, clutching at the rail, until I tumbled half
senseless upon by face on the upper landing.  Lord John's fingers of
steel were in the collar of my coat, and a moment later I was stretched
upon my back, unable to speak or move, on the boudoir carpet.  The woman
lay beside me, and Summerlee was bunched in a chair by the window, his
head nearly touching his knees.  As in a dream I saw Challenger, like a
monstrous beetle, crawling slowly across the floor, and a moment later I
heard the gentle hissing of the escaping oxygen.  Challenger breathed two
or three times with enormous gulps, his lungs roaring as he drew in the
vital gas.

"It works!" he cried exultantly.  "My reasoning has been justified!" He
was up on his feet again, alert and strong.  With a tube in his hand he
