my prey in wonderment.

It was the figure of an immense grey-black creature, rearing its
colossal shoulders twelve or fourteen feet above the ground.  Never in
my life had I seen such a beast, nor did I at first recognize it, so
different in appearance is the live reality from the stuffed, unnatural
specimens preserved to us in our museums.

But presently I guessed the identity of the mighty creature as Elephas
africanus, or, as the ancients commonly described it, African elephant.

The antelope, although in plain view of the huge beast, paid not the
slightest attention to it, and I was so wrapped up in watching the
mighty pachyderm that I quite forgot to shoot at the buck and
presently, and in quite a startling manner, it became impossible to do
so.

The elephant was browsing upon the young and tender shoots of some low
bushes, waving his great ears and switching his short tail.  The
antelope, scarce twenty paces from him, continued their feeding, when
suddenly, from close beside the latter, there came a most terrifying
roar, and I saw a great, tawny body shoot, from the concealing verdure
beyond the antelope, full upon the back of a small buck.

Instantly the scene changed from one of quiet and peace to
indescribable chaos.  The startled and terrified buck uttered cries of
agony.  His fellows broke and leaped off in all directions.  The
elephant raised his trunk, and, trumpeting loudly, lumbered off through
the wood, crushing down small trees and trampling bushes in his mad
flight.

Growling horribly, a huge lion stood across the body of his prey--such
a creature as no Pan-American of the twenty-second century had ever
beheld until my eyes rested upon this lordly specimen of "the king of
beasts."  But what a different creature was this fierce-eyed demon,
palpitating with life and vigor, glossy of coat, alert, growling,
magnificent, from the dingy, moth-eaten replicas beneath their glass
cases in the stuffy halls of our public museums.

I had never hoped or expected to see a living lion, tiger, or
elephant--using the common terms that were familiar to the ancients,
since they seem to me less unwieldy than those now in general use among
us--and so it was with sentiments not unmixed with awe that I stood
gazing at this regal beast as, above the carcass of his kill, he roared
out his challenge to the world.

So enthralled was I by the spectacle that I quite forgot myself, and
the better to view him, the great lion, I had risen to my feet and
stood, not fifty paces from him, in full view.

For a moment he did not see me, his attention being directed toward the
retreating elephant, and I had ample time to feast my eyes upon his
splendid proportions, his great head, and his thick black mane.

Ah, what thoughts passed through my mind in those brief moments as I
stood there in rapt fascination!  I had come to find a wondrous
civilization, and instead I found a wild-beast monarch of the realm
where English kings had ruled.  A lion reigned, undisturbed, within a
few miles of the seat of one of the greatest governments the world has
ever known, his domain a howling wilderness, where yesterday fell the
shadows of the largest city in the world.

It was appalling; but my reflections upon this depressing subject were
doomed to sudden extinction.  The lion had discovered me.

For an instant he stood silent and motionless as one of the mangy
effigies at home, but only for an instant.  Then, with a most ferocious
roar, and without the slightest hesitancy or warning, he charged upon
me.

He forsook the prey already dead beneath him for the pleasures of the
delectable tidbit, man.  From the remorselessness with which the great
Carnivora of modern England hunted man, I am constrained to believe
that, whatever their appetites in times past, they have cultivated a
gruesome taste for human flesh.

As I threw my rifle to my shoulder, I thanked God, the ancient God of
my ancestors, that I had replaced the hard-jacketed bullets in my
weapon with soft-nosed projectiles, for though this was my first
experience with Felis leo, I knew the moment that I faced that charge
that even my wonderfully perfected firearm would be as futile as a
peashooter unless I chanced to place my first bullet in a vital spot.

Unless you had seen it you could not believe credible the speed of a
charging lion.  Apparently the animal is not built for speed, nor can
he maintain it for long.  But for a matter of forty or fifty yards
there is, I believe, no animal on earth that can overtake him.

Like a bolt he bore down upon me, but, fortunately for me, I did not
lose my head.  I guessed that no bullet would kill him instantly.  I
doubted that I could pierce his skull.  There was hope, though, in
finding his heart through his exposed chest, or, better yet, of
breaking his shoulder or foreleg, and bringing him up long enough to
pump more bullets into him and finish him.

I covered his left shoulder and pulled the trigger as he was almost
upon me.  It stopped him.  With a terrific howl of pain and rage, the
brute rolled over and over upon the ground almost to my feet.  As he
came I pumped two more bullets into him, and as he struggled to rise,
clawing viciously at me, I put a bullet in his spine.

That finished him, and I am free to admit that I was mighty glad of it.
There was a great tree close behind me, and, stepping within its shade,
I leaned against it, wiping the perspiration from my face, for the day
was hot, and the exertion and excitement left me exhausted.

I stood there, resting, for a moment, preparatory to turning and
retracing my steps to the launch, when, without warning, something
whizzed through space straight toward me.  There was a dull thud of
impact as it struck the tree, and as I dodged to one side and turned to
look at the thing I saw a heavy spear imbedded in the wood not three
inches from where my head had been.

The thing had come from a little to one side of me, and, without
waiting to investigate at the instant, I leaped behind the tree, and,
circling it, peered around the other side to get a sight of my would-be
murderer.

This time I was pitted against men--the spear told me that all too
plainly--but so long as they didn't take me unawares or from behind I
had little fear of them.

Cautiously I edged about the far side of the trees until I could obtain
a view of the spot from which the spear must have come, and when I did
I saw the head of a man just emerging from behind a bush.

The fellow was quite similar in type to those I had seen upon the Isle
of Wight.  He was hairy and unkempt, and as he finally stepped into
view I saw that he was garbed in the same primitive fashion.

He stood for a moment gazing about in search of me, and then he
advanced.  As he did so a number of others, precisely like him, stepped
from the concealing verdure of nearby bushes and followed in his wake.
Keeping the trees between them and me, I ran back a short distance
until I found a clump of underbrush that would effectually conceal me,
for I wished to discover the strength of the party and its armament
before attempting to parley with it.

The useless destruction of any of these poor creatures was the farthest
idea from my mind.  I should have liked to have spoken with them, but I
did not care to risk having to use my high-powered rifle upon them
other than in the last extremity.

Once in my new place of concealment, I watched them as they approached
the tree.  There were about thirty men in the party and one woman--a
girl whose hands seemed to be bound behind her and who was being pulled
along by two of the men.

They came forward warily, peering cautiously into every bush and
halting often.  At the body of the lion, they paused, and I could see
from their gesticulations and the higher pitch of their voices that
they were much excited over my kill.

But presently they resumed their search for me, and as they advanced I
became suddenly aware of the unnecessary brutality with which the
girl's guards were treating her.  She stumbled once, not far from my
place of concealment, and after the balance of the party had passed me.
As she did so one of the men at her side jerked her roughly to her feet
and struck her across the mouth with his fist.

Instantly my blood boiled, and forgetting every consideration of
caution, I leaped from my concealment, and, springing to the man's
side, felled him with a blow.

So unexpected had been my act that it found him and his fellow
unprepared; but instantly the latter drew the knife that protruded from
his belt and lunged viciously at me, at the same time giving voice to a
wild cry of alarm.

The girl shrank back at sight of me, her eyes wide in astonishment, and
then my antagonist was upon me.  I parried his first blow with my
forearm, at the same time delivering a powerful blow to his jaw that
sent him reeling back; but he was at me again in an instant, though in
the brief interim I had time to draw my revolver.

I saw his companion crawling slowly to his feet, and the others of the
party racing down upon me.  There was no time to argue now, other than
with the weapons we wore, and so, as the fellow lunged at me again with
the wicked-looking knife, I covered his heart and pulled the trigger.

Without a sound, he slipped to the earth, and then I turned the weapon
upon the other guard, who was now about to attack me.  He, too,
collapsed, and I was alone with the astonished girl.

The balance of the party was some twenty paces from us, but coming
rapidly.  I seized her arm and drew her after me behind a nearby tree,
for I had seen that with both their comrades down the others were
preparing to launch their spears.

With the girl safe behind the tree, I stepped out in sight of the
advancing foe, shouting to them that I was no enemy, and that they
should halt and listen to me.  But for answer they only yelled in
derision and launched a couple of spears at me, both of which missed.

I saw then that I must fight, yet still I hated to slay them, and it
was only as a final resort that I dropped two of them with my rifle,
bringing the others to a temporary halt.  Again, I appealed to them to
desist.  But they only mistook my solicitude for them for fear, and,
with shouts of rage and derision, leaped forward once again to
overwhelm me.

It was now quite evident that I must punish them severely,
or--myself--die and relinquish the girl once more to her captors.
Neither of these things had I the slightest notion of doing, and so I
again stepped from behind the tree, and, with all the care and
deliberation of target practice, I commenced picking off the foremost
of my assailants.

One by one the wild men dropped, yet on came the others, fierce and
vengeful, until, only a few remaining, these seemed to realize the
futility of combating my modern weapon with their primitive spears,
and, still howling wrathfully, withdrew toward the west.

Now, for the first time, I had an opportunity to turn my attention
toward the girl, who had stood, silent and motionless, behind me as I
pumped death into my enemies and hers from my automatic rifle.

She was of medium height, well formed, and with fine, clear-cut
features.  Her forehead was high, and her eyes both intelligent and
beautiful.  Exposure to the sun had browned a smooth and velvety skin
to a shade which seemed to enhance rather than mar an altogether lovely
picture of youthful femininity.

A trace of apprehension marked her expression--I cannot call it fear
since I have learned to know her--and astonishment was still apparent
in her eyes.  She stood quite erect, her hands still bound behind her,
and met my gaze with level, proud return.

"What language do you speak?" I asked.  "Do you understand mine?"

"Yes," she replied.  "It is similar to my own.  I am Grabritin.  What
are you?"

"I am a Pan-American," I answered.  She shook her head.  "What is that?"

I pointed toward the west.  "Far away, across the ocean."

Her expression altered a trifle.  A slight frown contracted her brow.
The expression of apprehension deepened.

"Take off your cap," she said, and when, to humor her strange request,
I did as she bid, she appeared relieved.  Then she edged to one side
and leaned over seemingly to peer behind me.  I turned quickly to see
what she discovered, but finding nothing, wheeled about to see that her
expression was once more altered.

"You are not from there?" and she pointed toward the east.  It was a
half question.  "You are not from across the water there?"

"No," I assured her.  "I am from Pan-America, far away to the west.
Have you ever heard of Pan-America?"

She shook her head in negation.  "I do not care where you are from,"
she explained, "if you are not from there, and I am sure you are not,
for the men from there have horns and tails."

It was with difficulty that I restrained a smile.

"Who are the men from there?" I asked.

"They are bad men," she replied.  "Some of my people do not believe
that there are such creatures.  But we have a legend--a very old, old
legend, that once the men from there came across to Grabritin.  They
came upon the water, and under the water, and even in the air.  They
came in great numbers, so that they rolled across the land like a great
gray fog.  They brought with them thunder and lightning and smoke that
killed, and they fell upon us and slew our people by the thousands and
the hundreds of thousands.  But at last we drove them back to the
water's edge, back into the sea, where many were drowned.  Some
escaped, and these our people followed--men, women, and even children,
we followed them back.  That is all.  The legend says our people never
returned.  Maybe they were all killed.  Maybe they are still there.
But this, also, is in the legend, that as we drove the men back across
the water they swore that they would return, and that when they left
our shores they would leave no human being alive behind them.  I was
afraid that you were from there."

"By what name were these men called?" I asked.

"We call them only the 'men from there,'" she replied, pointing toward
the east.  "I have never heard that they had another name."

In the light of what I knew of ancient history, it was not difficult
for me to guess the nationality of those she described simply as "the
men from over there."  But what utter and appalling devastation the
Great War must have wrought to have erased not only every sign of
civilization from the face of this great land, but even the name of the
enemy from the knowledge and language of the people.

I could only account for it on the hypothesis that the country had been
entirely depopulated except for a few scattered and forgotten children,
who, in some marvelous manner, had been preserved by Providence to
re-populate the land.  These children had, doubtless, been too young to
retain in their memories to transmit to their children any but the
vaguest suggestion of the cataclysm which had overwhelmed their parents.

Professor Cortoran, since my return to Pan-America, has suggested
another theory which is not entirely without claim to serious
consideration.  He points out that it is quite beyond the pale of human
instinct to desert little children as my theory suggests the ancient
English must have done.  He is more inclined to believe that the
expulsion of the foe from England was synchronous with widespread
victories by the allies upon the continent, and that the people of
England merely emigrated from their ruined cities and their devastated,
blood-drenched fields to the mainland, in the hope of finding, in the
domain of the conquered enemy, cities and farms which would replace
those they had lost.

The learned professor assumes that while a long-continued war had
strengthened rather than weakened the instinct of paternal devotion, it
had also dulled other humanitarian instincts, and raised to the first
magnitude the law of the survival of the fittest, with the result that
when the exodus took place the strong, the intelligent, and the
cunning, together with their offspring, crossed the waters of the
Channel or the North Sea to the continent, leaving in unhappy England
only the helpless inmates of asylums for the feebleminded and insane.

My objections to this, that the present inhabitants of England are
mentally fit, and could therefore not have descended from an ancestry
of undiluted lunacy he brushes aside with the assertion that insanity
is not necessarily hereditary; and that even though it was, in many
cases a return to natural conditions from the state of high
civilization, which is thought to have induced mental disease in the
ancient world, would, after several generations, have thoroughly
expunged every trace of the affliction from the brains and nerves of
the descendants of the original maniacs.

Personally, I do not place much stock in Professor Cortoran's theory,
though I admit that I am prejudiced.  Naturally one does not care to
believe that the object of his greatest affection is descended from a
gibbering idiot and a raving maniac.

But I am forgetting the continuity of my narrative--a continuity which
I desire to maintain, though I fear that I shall often be led astray,
so numerous and varied are the bypaths of speculation which lead from
the present day story of the Grabritins into the mysterious past of
their forbears.

As I stood talking with the girl I presently recollected that she still
was bound, and with a word of apology, I drew my knife and cut the
rawhide thongs which confined her wrists at her back.

She thanked me, and with such a sweet smile that I should have been
amply repaid by it for a much more arduous service.

"And now," I said, "let me accompany you to your home and see you
safely again under the protection of your friends."

"No," she said, with a hint of alarm in her voice; "you must not come
with me--Buckingham will kill you."

Buckingham.  The name was famous in ancient English history.  Its
survival, with many other illustrious names, is one of the strongest
arguments in refutal of Professor Cortoran's theory; yet it opens no
new doors to the past, and, on the whole, rather adds to than
dissipates the mystery.

"And who is Buckingham," I asked, "and why should he wish to kill me?"

"He would think that you had stolen me," she replied, "and as he wishes
me for himself, he will kill any other whom he thinks desires me.  He
killed Wettin a few days ago.  My mother told me once that Wettin was
my father.  He was king.  Now Buckingham is king."

Here, evidently, were a people slightly superior to those of the Isle
of Wight.  These must have at least the rudiments of civilized
government since they recognized one among them as ruler, with the
title, king.  Also, they retained the word father.  The girl's
pronunciation, while far from identical with ours, was much closer than
the tortured dialect of the Eastenders of the Isle of Wight.  The
longer I talked with her the more hopeful I became of finding here,
among her people, some records, or traditions, which might assist in
clearing up the historic enigma of the past two centuries.  I asked her
if we were far from the city of London, but she did not know what I
meant.  When I tried to explain, describing mighty buildings of stone
and brick, broad avenues, parks, palaces, and countless people, she but
shook her head sadly.

"There is no such place near by," she said.  "Only the Camp of the
Lions has places of stone where the beasts lair, but there are no
people in the Camp of the Lions.  Who would dare go there!"  And she
shuddered.

"The Camp of the Lions," I repeated.  "And where is that, and what?"

"It is there," she said, pointing up the river toward the west.  "I
have seen it from a great distance, but I have never been there.  We
are much afraid of the lions, for this is their country, and they are
angry that man has come to live here.

"Far away there," and she pointed toward the south-west, "is the land
of tigers, which is even worse than this, the land of the lions, for
the tigers are more numerous than the lions and hungrier for human
flesh.  There were tigers here long ago, but both the lions and the men
set upon them and drove them off."

"Where did these savage beasts come from?" I asked.

"Oh," she replied, "they have been here always.  It is their country."

"Do they not kill and eat your people?" I asked.

"Often, when we meet them by accident, and we are too few to slay them,
or when one goes too close to their camp.  But seldom do they hunt us,
for they find what food they need among the deer and wild cattle, and,
too, we make them gifts, for are we not intruders in their country?
Really we live upon good terms with them, though I should not care to
meet one were there not many spears in my party."

"I should like to visit this Camp of the Lions," I said.

"Oh, no, you must not!" cried the girl.  "That would be terrible.  They
would eat you."  For a moment, then, she seemed lost in thought, but
presently she turned upon me with: "You must go now, for any minute
Buckingham may come in search of me.  Long since should they have
learned that I am gone from the camp--they watch over me very
closely--and they will set out after me.  Go!  I shall wait here until
they come in search of me."

"No," I told her.  "I'll not leave you alone in a land infested by
lions and other wild beasts.  If you won't let me go as far as your
camp with you, then I'll wait here until they come in search of you."

"Please go!" she begged.  "You have saved me, and I would save you, but
nothing will save you if Buckingham gets his hands on you.  He is a bad
man.  He wishes to have me for his woman so that he may be king.  He
would kill anyone who befriended me, for fear that I might become
another's."

"Didn't you say that Buckingham is already the king?" I asked.

"He is.  He took my mother for his woman after he had killed Wettin.
But my mother will die soon--she is very old--and then the man to whom
I belong will become king."

Finally, after much questioning, I got the thing through my head.  It
appears that the line of descent is through the women.  A man is merely
head of his wife's family--that is all.  If she chances to be the
oldest female member of the "royal" house, he is king.  Very naively
the girl explained that there was seldom any doubt as to whom a child's
mother was.

This accounted for the girl's importance in the community and for
Buckingham's anxiety to claim her, though she told me that she did not
wish to become his woman, for he was a bad man and would make a bad
king.  But he was powerful, and there was no other man who dared
dispute his wishes.

"Why not come with me," I suggested, "if you do not wish to become
Buckingham's?"

"Where would you take me?" she asked.

Where, indeed!  I had not thought of that.  But before I could reply to
her question she shook her head and said, "No, I cannot leave my
people.  I must stay and do my best, even if Buckingham gets me, but
you must go at once.  Do not wait until it is too late.  The lions have
had no offering for a long time, and Buckingham would seize upon the
first stranger as a gift to them."

I did not perfectly understand what she meant, and was about to ask her
when a heavy body leaped upon me from behind, and great arms encircled
my neck.  I struggled to free myself and turn upon my antagonist, but
in another instant I was overwhelmed by a half dozen powerful,
half-naked men, while a score of others surrounded me, a couple of whom
