bottom and prevent its being thrust out by the powerful plunger. Oil
is also used plentifully, so that as the plunger works slowly down the
red hot mass, it is surrounded by smoky flames. It presently forces
the cylinder into the well, and when the end of the stroke is reached,
a stop piece is inserted through an opening in the upper part of the
well, so as to arrest the edge of the cylinder while the reverse
action of drawing out the plunger is proceeded with. Directly the
finger is drawn out of the glove--in other words, immediately the
plunger is raised out of the cylinder--the latter drops down below
with a heavy thud, still in a red hot condition.

[Illustration: FIG 3.]

This operation of hot drawing is repeated again and again in rams of
diminishing size until the cylinder assumes the diameter and length
required. This hot drawing leaves the surface of the metal marked with
longitudinal lines, not unlike the glacier scratches on a rock, albeit
they are straighter and more regular. But the next operation not only
obliterates these markings, and gives the metal a smooth surface like
that of polished silver, but it also confers upon the material a
homogeneity which it did not before possess, and without which it
would never bear the pressure which it is destined to withstand when
finished. This operation consists in a final application of the
hydraulic ram while the metal remains perfectly cold, instead of red
hot, as in the previous cases.

As the result of these various hydraulic operations, we have a
perfectly formed cylinder closed at one end, and we now follow it into
another department of the works, when its open end is once more
brought in a furnace to a red heat. The object of this is to make the
metal soft while the shoulder and neck of the vessel are formed. To
accomplish this, the heated open end of the cylinder is laid
horizontally upon a kind of semicircular cradle, and is held there by
tongs handled by two men. Another workman places over the open end a
die of the form shown in Fig. 4, and while the cylinder is slowly
turned round in its cradle, two sledge hammers are brought down with
frequent blows upon the die, closing in the end of the cylinder, but
leaving a central hole as shown in Fig. 5. Further operations reduce
the opening still more until it is closed altogether, and a projection
is formed as shown at Fig. 6. This projection is now bored through,
and the cylinder is ready for testing.

[Illustration: FIG. 4.]

[Illustration: FIG. 5.]

[Illustration: FIG. 6.]

The cylinder is submitted to a water test, the liquid being forced in
until the gauge shows a pressure of two tons to the square inch.
Cylinders have been known to give way under this ordeal, but without
any dangerous consequences. The metal simply rips up, making a report
at the moment of fracture as loud as a gun. The wonderful strength of
the metal employed may be gauged by the circumstance that the walls of
the cylinder designed to hold 100 feet of gas are only five-sixteenths
of an inch in thickness.

During the manufacture of the cylinder, as we have already indicated,
much oil is used, and, so far as steel can be saturated with that
fluid--in the popular sense--the metal is in that state. It is
essential that this oil should be completely got rid of, and this is
carefully done before the cylinder is charged with gas. Previous to
such charging, the vessel has to be fitted with its valve. Of these
valves there are three kinds, known respectively as the Brin, the
Birmingham, and the Manchester. Each has its admirers, but we cannot
here discuss their individual merits.

The charging of the cylinder is brought about by a powerful pump
having three cylinders so arranged that the compressed contents of the
first cylinder are still further compressed in the second, and still
more highly in the third. The filling of a 100 ft. cylinder occupies
about half an hour.--_Photographic News_.

       *       *       *       *       *




HISTORICAL DEVELOPMENT OF THE HORSESHOE.

BY DISTRICT VETERINARIAN ZIPPELIUS, OF WURTZBURG.

_Translated by S.E. Weber, V.S.[1]_

   [Footnote 1: From _Theirarztliche Mittheilungen_, organ des
   Vereins badischer Theirarzte, Karlsruhe, No. IV., April,
   1891.--_Veterinary Archives._]


      Kind, gentle steed, nobly standing,
      Four shoes will I put on your feet,
      Firm and good, that you'll be fleet,
      That is Donar's hammer saying.

      To the woods and homeward go,
      Always on the straight road thro',
      Far from what is bad, still fleeing,
      That is Donar's hammer saying.

      Should wounds and pain become distressing,
      Blood to blood shall flow,
      Bone to bone shall grow,
      That is Donar's hammer saying.

      Carry the rider, true little steed,
      Onward to all good luck bringing;
      Carry him thence and back with speed,
      That is Donar's hammer saying.

                  --_Old Meresburger Song_.

The horse appeared comparatively late in the group of domestic
animals. In searching the monuments of the ancients, which have
furnished the foundation for our present culture, that is, of the
littoral inhabitants of the Mediterranean, and of the people of
Mesopotamia, we find in Egypt the first traces of the horse. But even
here it appears late, on the monuments of the first ruling patricians
of human origin.[2] Especially during the period of Memphis (I-X
Dynasty), then under the rules of Thebes (XI-XVI Dynasty), there is no
trace of the horse.

   [Footnote 2: Until the time Menes, with whom historical times
   begin, ruled in Egypt among visionary heroes or mythological
   gods.]

It is first in the transition period, from the late rule of Thebes
(XVII-XX Dynasty) to the so-called period of Sut (XXI-XXX Dynasty)
that there appears, in the wall pictures of the Pharaohs' tombs,
representations of the horse. The oldest, now known, picture of the
horse is found on the walls of the tombs of Seti I. (1458-1507 B.C.)
under whose reign the Israelite wandered from Egypt. The horses of the
mortuary pictures are very well drawn, and have an unmistakable
oriental type. There has therefore undoubtedly existed in Egypt high
culture, for over 4,000 years, without representation of the horse,
which was the next animal domesticated after the cat.

From this time on we find the horse frequently represented both by the
vainglorious despots of Mesopotamia and on the so-called Etruscan
vases, which appeared after the influence of Greek art, when, on
almost every urn, horses in lively action and in various forms of
bodily development, almost always of an oriental type, are to be
recognized. But neither here, nor in Homer, nor in the many later
representations of the horse on the Roman triumphal arches, etc., are
to be found horses whose hoofs have any trace of protection. Records,
which describe to us the misfortunes of armies, whose horses had run
their feet sore, we find on the contrary at a very early time, as in
Diodorus, regarding the cavalry of Alexander the Great, in Xenophon,
regarding the retreat of the ten thousand, in Polybius, regarding the
cavalry of Hannibal in Etruria, etc. It is also known that the cavalry
of the linguist King of Pontus, Mithridates the Great, at times and
specially at the siege of Cyzicus were delayed, in order to let the
hoofs of the horses grow.

On the contrary it seems strange that of the Huns alone, whose
horsemen swept over whole continents from the Asiatic highlands like a
thunderstorm, such trouble had not become known either through the
numerous authors of the eastern and western Roman empire or from
Gallia.

Horseshoeing, very likely, was invented by different nations at about
the same period during the migration of the nations, and the various
kinds of new inventions were brought together in Germany only, after
each had acquired a national stamp according to climate and
usefulness.

In this way come from the south the thin, plate-like horseshoes, with
staved rim, covering the whole hoof; from the Mongolian tribes of
middle Asia the "Stolleneisen" (calk shoe); while to our northern
ancestors, and indeed the Normans, must be ascribed with great
probability the invention of the "Griffeneisen" (gripe shoe),
especially for the protection of the toes.

All varieties of the horseshoe of southern Europe are easily
distinguished from the Roman so-called "Kureisen" (cure shoe), of
which several have been unearthed at various excavations and are
preserved at the Romo-Germanic Museum in Mentz (Mainz), Germany. The
shoes, Figs. 1 and 2, each represent thin iron plates, covering the
whole hoof, which in some cases have an opening in the middle, of
several centimeters in diameter.

[Illustration: Fig. 1.]

These plates, apparently set forth to suit oriental and occidental
body conformation, are either directly provided with loops or have
around the outer margin a brim several centimeters high, in which
rings are fastened. Through the loops or rings small ropes were drawn,
and in this way the shoe was fastened to the crown of the hoof and to
the pastern. Sufficient securing of the toe was wanting in all these
shoes, and, on account of this, the movement of the animal with the
same must have been very clumsy, and we can see from this that the
ropes must have made the crown of the hoof and pastern sore in a short
time. One of these shoes[3] evidently was the object of improvement,
to prevent the animal from slipping as well as from friction, and we
therefore find on it three iron cubes 11/2 centimeters high, which were
fastened corresponding to our toes and calks of to-day, and offer a
very early ready proof, from our climatic and mountainous conditions,
which later occur, principally in southern Germany, that this style of
horseshoeing was not caused by error, but by a well founded local and
national interest or want.

   [Footnote 3: Not illustrated.]

[Illustration: FIG. 2.]

Aside from the so-called "Kureisen" (cure shoe) for diseased hoofs, we
find very little from the Romans on horseshoeing or hoof protection,
and therefore we must observe special precautions with all their
literature on the subject. It is because of this that I excuse Prof.
Sittl's communication in the preface of Winckelmann's "Geschichte der
Kunst in Alterthum" (History of Ancient Art), which contains a notice
that Fabretti, in some raised work in Plazzo Matti, of a
representation of a hunt by the Emperor Gallienus (Bartoli Admirand
Ant. Tab. 24), showed that at that time horseshoes fastened by nails,
the same as to-day, were used (Fabretti de Column. Traj. C. 7 pag.
225; Conf. Montlanc. Antiq. Explic. T. 4, pag. 79). This statement
proves itself erroneous, because he was not aware that the foot of the
horse was repaired by an inexperienced sculptor.

How then did out of this Roman cure shoe develop the horseshoeing of
southern Europe?

It was to be expected, with the Roman horseshoe, that the mode of
fastening became unsatisfactory and necessitated a remedy or change.
An attempt of this kind has been preserved in the so-called
"Asiatischen Koppeneisensole" (Asiatic cap-iron-sole) (Fig. 3), which
the Hon. Mr. Lydtin at Karlsruhe had made according to a model of the
Circassian Horse Tribe Shaloks, and also according to the reverse of
Lycian coins (called Triguetra).

[Illustration: FIG. 3.]

This horseshoe plate, likely originating in the twelfth century,
covers the whole surface of the sole, like the Roman shoes, with the
exception of the wall region, which contains a rim 1 centimeter high,
and above this rises at one side toward the heel three beak-like
projections, about 4 centimeters high and 1 centimeter wide at the
base, being pointed above and turned down, which were fastened in the
wall of the hoof, in the form of a hook.

This mode of fastening evidently was also insufficient, and so the
fastening of the shoe by nails was adopted. These iron plates used for
shoes were too thin to allow nails with sunken heads to be used, so
only nails with blades and cubical shaped heads were applicable. These
nail heads, 6 to 8 in number, which left the toe and the back part of
the heel free, served at the same time to secure the horse from
slipping, which the smooth plates, covering the whole hoof surface,
without doubt facilitated.

[Illustration: FIG. 4.]

Shoes of this kind, after the old Roman style, with a very strong rim
bent upward, likely proved very comfortable for the purpose of
protection, in the Sierras of the Pyrenean peninsula, where they seem
to have been in use for a long time; for in the twelfth century we
find in Spain the whole form of the Roman shoe, only fastened by nails
(Figs. 4 and 5). At first the shoe seems to have been cut off at the
heel end, but as apparently after being on for some time, bruises were
noticed, the shoe was made longer at the heel, and this part was
turned up so as to prevent them from becoming loose too soon, as both
the Spanish horseshoes of this period show, and the acquisition was
even later transferred to England (Fig. 7).

[Illustration: FIG. 5.]

The shoe containing a groove (Fig. 6), which we shall see later, made
its appearance in Germany in the fifteenth century. From this time,
according to our present knowledge, ceases the period of the Roman
horseshoe. Its influence, however, lasted a great deal longer, and has
even remained until our present day.

[Illustration: FIG. 6.]

Its successor became partly the Arabo-Turkomanic and partly the
Southwest European horseshoe.

For the descendants of the Numidian light cavalry, the Roman and old
Spanish horseshoe was evidently too heavy for their sandy, roadless
deserts, so they made it thinner and omitted the bent-up rim, because
it prevented the quick movement of the horse. For the protection of
the nail heads the outer margin of the shoe was staved, so as to form
a small rim on the outer surface of the shoe, thus preventing the nail
heads from being worn and the shoe lost too soon.

[Illustration: FIG. 7.]

[Illustration: FIG. 8.]

[Illustration: FIG. 9.]

A horseshoe of that kind is shown by Fig. 8, which was used in North
Africa in the twelfth century, and became the model for all forms of
horseshoes of the Mahometan tribes. Even now quite similar shoes (Fig.
9) are made south and east from the Caspian Sea, at the Amu-Darja, in
Samarkand, etc., which were probably introduced under Tamerlane, the
conqueror of nearly the whole of Asia Minor in the fourteenth century.

The so-called "Sarmatische" (Sarmatian) horseshoe (Figs. 10 and 11),
of South Russia, shows in its form, at the same time, traces of the
last named shoe, however, greatly influenced by the Mongolian shoe,
the "Goldenen Horde," which at the turn of the sixteenth to the
seventeenth century played havoc at the Volga and the Aral. The
unusual width of the toe, and especially the lightness of the iron,
reminds us of the Turkomanic horseshoe, whereas, on the contrary, the
large bean-shaped holes, as well as the calks, were furnished through
Mongolian influence.

[Illustration: FIG. 10.]

The Sarmatian tribes were principally horsemen, and it is not
surprising, therefore, that the coat of arms of the former kingdom of
Poland in the second and third quadrate shows a silver rider in armor
on a silver running horse shod with golden shoes, and that at present
about 1,000 families in 25 lineages of the Polish Counts Jastrzembiec
Bolesezy, the so-called "Polnische Hufeisen Adel" (Polish Horseshoe
Nobility), at the same time also carried the horseshoe on their coats
of arms. The silver horseshoe in a blue field appears here as a symbol
of the "Herbestpfardes" (autumnal horse), to which, after the
christianization of Poland, was added the golden cross. The noblemen
participating in the murder of the holy Stanislaus in 1084 had to
carry the horseshoe reversed on their escutcheon.

[Illustration: FIG. 11.]

From the African and Turkomanic horseshoe, through the turning up of
the toes and heels, originated later the Turkish, Grecian and
Montenegrin horseshoe of the present as shown by Fig. 12.

[Illustration: FIG. 12.]

By the Moorish invasion in Spain, the Spanish-Gothic horseshoeing was
also modified, through which the shoe became smooth, staved at the
margin, very broad in the toe, and turned up at toe and heel, and at a
later period the old open Spanish national horseshoe (Fig. 13) was
developed. As we thus see, we can in no way deny the Arabian-Turkish
origin of this shoe.

[Illustration: FIG. 13.]

As France had received her whole culture from the south, and as the
crusades especially brought the Roman nation in close contact with
them for centuries, so it cannot appear strange that the old French
horseshoe, a form of which has been preserved by Bourgelat and is
represented by Fig. 14, still remained in the smooth, turned up in
front and behind, like the shoe of the southern climates, with Asiatic
traces, which hold on the ground, the same as all southern shoeing, by
the nail heads.

[Illustration: FIG. 14.]

The transit of the German empire, in order to keep up the historical
course, once more brings us back to the middle of the fifth century.
At this time Attila, the "Godegisel" (gods' scourge), left his wooden
capitol in the lowlands near the river Theis, to go to the Roman
empire and to the German and Gallican provinces, there to spread
indescribable misery to the horrors of judgment day.

The following is a prayer in those days of horror:

      "Kleiner Huf, kleines Ross,
      Krummer Sabel, spitz Geschoss--
      Blitzesschnell und sattlefest:
      Schrim uns Herr von Hunnenpest."

We are at present reminded of those times of fright, when during the
clearing and tilling of the soil, a small roughly made horseshoe is
found in Southern Germany, about as far as the water boundary of the
Thuringian forest, and occasionally on, but principally around
Augsburg, and in France as far as the Loire.

These shoes, covering the margin or wall of the foot, show slight
traces of having been beveled on the lower surface, and contain two
bent calks very superficially placed. Occasionally they are sharpened
and turned in two directions. The characteristic wide bean-shaped nail
holes are conical on the inside, and are frequently placed so near the
outer margin of the shoe that from the pressure the hoofs were likely
to split open. The nail heads were shaped like a sleigh runner, and
almost entirely sunk into the shoe. It evidently was not bent up at
the toe, like the old form of these kinds of shoes.

These shoes, according to our conception of to-day, were so carelessly
finished that in the scientific circles of historical researches they
were, until very recently, looked upon as saddle mountings or
something similar, and not as horseshoes.

This shoe was for some time, while it was plentifully found in France,
regarded as of Celtic make; but this is certainly not the case, as it
is of Hunish and Hungarian "nationalitat" (nationality). An exactly
scientific proof, it is true, according to our present knowledge,
cannot be furnished; however, it will stand well enough until the
error is proved.

This peculiar kind of horseshoe has been found in South Germany and
Northeast France, as far as the region of Orleans, where, as it has
been proved, the Huns appeared. This, therefore, speaks for their
descendants: 1st, the far extended and yet sharply limited places of
finding the shoe; 2d, the small size corresponds to the historically
proved smallness of the Hunish horse; 3d, the hasty and careless make,
which does not indicate that it was made by settled workmen; 4th, the
horseshoe (Fig. 15) bespeaks the Hunish workmanship of the present
Chinese shoe, which, in making of the nail holes, shows to-day related
touches of the productions of the Mongolian ancestors.

[Illustration: FIG. 15.]

Aside from the peculiar shaped nail holes, the characteristic of the
Hunish shoe consists in the changes of the calks for summer and winter
shoeing, as well as in the sinking of the nail heads. The Huns,
therefore, aside from the indistinctly marked attempts of the Romans
in this direction, which are the only ones known to me, must be
regarded as the inventors not only of the calks, but partly, next to
the Normans, also of the sharpened winter shoeing, and of the not
unimportant invention of sinking the nail heads observed in Fig. 15.

The Hunish shoeing was therefore an important invention for the
Germans. After centuries later, wherever horseshoeing was practiced,
it was done solely according to Hunish methods; whereby the shoe was
very possibly made heavier, was more carefully finished and in course
of time showed an attempt to bend the toe (Fig. 16a).

[Illustration: FIG. 16.]

[Illustration: FIG. 16A.]

In the Bomberg Dom we find an equestrian statue, not unknown in the
history of art, which was formerly held to be that of Emperor Conrad
III. At present however the opinion prevails generally that it
represents "Stephen I., den Heiligen" (Stephen I., the Saint).

Stephen I., the first king of Hungary, formerly was a heathen, and was
named "Najk." He reigned from 997 to 1038. His important events were
the many victorious wars led against rebellious chieftains of his
country, and he was canonized in 1087. His equestrian monument in
Bomberg Dom was, in consequence, hardly made before the year 1087.
Notwithstanding that the Huns had been defeated 500 years before on
the plains of Catalania, the horse of the above mentioned monument
carries, as I have convinced myself personally, Hunish horseshoes,
modified, however, by blade-shaped calks just then coming into use.
This is proof that, at least in Hungary, the Hunish method of shoeing
was preserved an extraordinary long time. By this it has not become
improbable that at least the many shoes of this kind which were found
on the Lechfield come, not directly from the Huns, but from their
