diameter, attached by casting into a head of cast iron. Each carbon
weighs 20 lb, and, when new, is about 48 inches long.

The head of the electrode is screwed to the copper rods or "leads,"
which can be readily connected with the flexible cable supplying the
current.

The electric furnaces are rectangular troughs built of fire brick,
their internal dimensions being 60 in. x 20 in. x 36 in. deep. Into
each end is built a cast iron tube, through which the carbon
electrodes enter the furnace.

The electrodes are so arranged that it is possible by means of
screwing to advance or withdraw them from the furnace.

The whole current generated by the great dynamo of the Cowles Company
was passed through the furnace.

In the experiments raw materials only were used, for it was evident
that it was only by the direct production of phosphorus from the
native minerals which contain it, such as the phosphates of lime,
magnesia, or alumina that there was any hope of superseding, in point
of economy, the existing process of manufacture.

In the furnaces as used at Milton much difficulty was experienced in
distributing the heat over a sufficiently wide area. So locally
intense indeed was the heat within a certain zone, that all the oxygen
contained in the mixture was expelled and alloys of iron, aluminum,
and calcium combined with more or less silicon, and phosphorus were
produced. Some of these were of an extremely interesting nature.

We now turn to a short account of the works and plant which have been
erected near Wolverhampton to prove the commercial success of the new
system of manufacturing phosphorus.

The ground is situated on the banks of a canal and extends to about 10
acres, which are wholly without buildings except those which have been
erected for the purposes of these industrial experiments. These
consist of boiler and engine houses, and large furnace sheds.

There are three Babcock & Wilcox steam boilers of 160 horse power
each, and each capable of evaporating 5,000 lb. of water per hour. The
water tubes are 18 ft. long x 4 inches diameter, and the steam and
water drums 43 in. in diameter and 231/2 ft. long, of steel 7/16 ths.
in. thick, provided with a double dead head safety valve, stop valves,
blow-off cock, water gauges, and steam gauge.

The total heating surface on each boiler is 1,619 square feet and the
total grate surface is 30 square feet.

The boilers are worked at 160 lb. pressure.

The engine is a triple compound one of the type supplied for torpedo
boats, and built by the Yarrow Shipbuilding Company. It is fitted with
a Pickering governor for constant speed. The engine is capable of
delivering (with condenser) 1,200 indicated horse power, and without
condenser 250 indicated horse power less.

With steam at 170 lb. pressure the engine worked at 350 revolutions
per minute, but it has been rearranged so as to deliver 700 indicated
horse power with 160 lb. steam pressure without condenser, and at 300
revolutions per minute:

    The high pressure cylinder is 141/2 inches diameter.
     " intermediate       "    "  25     "       "
     " low pressure       "    "  32     "       "
     " stroke is 16 inches.

The dynamo for producing the requisite amount of electric current
supplied to the furnaces is one of the well known Elwell-Parker type
of alternating current dynamos, designed to give 400 units of
electrical energy, equivalent to 536 indicated horse power.

The armature in the machine is stationary, with double insulation
between the armature coils and the core, and also between the core and
the frame, and is so arranged that its two halves may be readily
connected in series or in parallel in accordance with the requirements
of the furnaces, e.g., at an electromotive force of 80 volts it will
give 5,000 amperes, and at 160 volts, 2,500 amperes when running at
300 revolutions per minute.

The exciting current of the alternator is produced by an Elwell-Parker
shunt wound machine, driven direct from a pulley on the alternator
shaft, and so arranged as to give 90 amperes at 250 volts when running
at a speed of 800 revolutions per minute. From 60 to 70 amperes are
utilized in the alternator, the remainder being available for lighting
purposes (which is done through accumulators) and general experimental
purposes.

The process is carried out in the following way: The raw materials,
all intimately and carefully mixed together, are introduced into the
furnace and the current is then turned on. Shortly afterward,
indications of phosphorus make their appearance.

The vapors and gases from the furnace pass away to large copper
condensers--the first of which contains hot and the second cold
water--and finally pass away into the air.

As the phosphorus forms, it distills off from the mixture, and the
residue forms a liquid slag at the bottom of the furnace. Fresh
phosphorus yielding material is then introduced at the top. In this
way the operation is a continuous one, and may be continued for days
without intermission.

The charges for the furnace are made up with raw material, i.e.,
native phosphates without any previous chemical treatment, and the
only manufactured material necessary--if such it may be called--is the
carbon to effect the reduction of the ores.

The crude phosphorus obtained in the condensers is tolerably pure, and
is readily refined in the usual way.

Dr. Readman and Mr. Parker have found that it is more advantageous to
use a series of furnaces instead of sending the entire current through
one furnace. These furnaces will each yield about 11/2 cwt. of
phosphorus per day.

Analyses of the slag show that the decomposition of the raw phosphates
is very perfect, for the percentage of phosphorus left in the slag
seldom exceeds 1 per cent.--_Chemical Trade Journal_.

       *       *       *       *       *




NEW BLEACHING APPARATUS.


The apparatus forming the subject of this invention was designed by
Francis A. Cloudman, Erwin B. Newcomb, and Frank H. Cloudman, of
Cumberland Mills, Me., and comprises a series of tanks or chests, two
or more in number, through which the material to be bleached is caused
to pass, being transferred from one to the next of the series in
order, while the bleaching agent is caused to pass through the series
of chests in the reverse order, and thus acts first and at full
strength upon the materials which have previously passed through all
but the last one of the series of chests and have already been
subjected to the bleaching agent of less strength.

For convenience, the chest in which the material is first introduced
will be called the "first of the series" and the rest numbered in the
order in which the material is passed from one to the other, and it
will be understood that any desired number may be used, two, however,
being sufficient to carry on the process.

The invention is shown embodied in an apparatus properly constructed
for treating pulp used for the manufacture of paper, and for
convenience the material to be bleached will be hereinafter referred
to as the pulp, although it is obvious that similar apparatus might be
used for bleaching other materials, although the apparatus might have
to be modified to adapt it for conveying other materials of different
nature than pulp from one bleaching chest to the other and for
separating out the bleaching liquid and conveying it from one chest to
the other in the reverse order to that in which the material passes
from one chest to the next.

The pulp material with which the apparatus herein illustrated is
intended to be used is retained in suspension in the bleaching liquid
and flows readily through ducts or passages provided for it in the
apparatus in which the pulp to be bleached and the bleaching liquid
are introduced together at the bottom of each chest and flow upward
therethrough, while at the top of each chest there are two conveyors,
one for carrying the pulp from one chest to the next in order, while
the other carries the bleaching liquid from one tank to the next in
the reverse order, the said conveyors also acting to partially
separate the pulp from the liquid in which it has been suspended
during its upward passage through the chest.

Suitable agitators may be employed for thoroughly mixing the materials
in the chest and in the apparatus shown the bleaching agent and
material to be bleached pass through each chest in the same
direction--namely from the bottom to the top--although they are
carried from one chest to the next in the reverse order, the material
to be bleached being primarily introduced into the chest at one end of
the series, while the bleaching agent or solution is introduced
primarily into the chest at the other end of the series.

Fig. 1 is a plan view of an apparatus for bleaching in accordance with
this invention, comprising a series of four chests, and Fig. 2 is a
vertical longitudinal section of a modified arrangement of two chests
in line with one another, and with the conveyor for the material to be
bleached and the passage through which said material passes from the
top of one chest into the bottom of the next chest in the plane of
section.

[Illustration: Fig. 1]

The chests, _a_ _a2_ _a3_ _a4_, may be of any desired shape
and dimensions and any desired number may be used. Each of said chests
is provided with an inlet passage, _b_, opening into the same near its
bottom, and through this passage the materials are introduced. The
unbleached material, which may be paper pulp or material which is
readily held in suspension in a liquid and is capable of flowing or
being conveyed from one point to another in a semi-fluid condition, is
introduced through the inlet passage, _b_, to the first chest, _a_, of
the series, said pulp preferably having had as much as possible of the
liquid in which it was previously suspended removed without, however,
drying it, and, together with the said pulp, the bleaching agent which
has previously passed through the other chests of the series, as will
be hereinafter described, is introduced so that both enter together at
the lower portion of the first chest, _a_, of the series. The said
materials are caused to flow into the chest continuously, so that the
portion at each moment entering tends to displace that which has
already entered, thus causing the materials to rise gradually or flow
upward from the bottom to the top of the chest.

Suitable stirring devices or agitators, _c_, may be employed to keep
the pulp in suspension and to expose it thoroughly and uniformly to
the liquid introduced with it.

[Illustration: Fig. 2]

When the materials (the pulp and the bleaching liquid) arrive at or
near the top of the chest, they are partially separated from one
another and removed from the chest at substantially the same rate that
they are introduced, as follows: Each chest is provided at its upper
part with a liquid conveyor, _d_, having a construction similar to
that of the device known as a "washer" in paper making machinery,
consisting of a rotating drum, the periphery of which is covered with
gauze, which permits the liquid to pass into it, but excludes the pulp
suspended in the liquid, the said drum containing blades or buckets
that raise the liquid which thus enters through the gauze and
discharges it at _d2_ near the axis of said drum. There is one of
these washers in each one of the series of chests, and each discharges
the liquid taken from its corresponding chest into the inlet pipe of
the next preceding chest of the series, the washer in the chest,
_a4_, for example, delivering into the inlet passage, _b_, of the
chest, _a2_, and so on, while the washer of the first chest, _a_,
of the series delivers into a discharge pipe, _e_, through which the
liquid may be permitted to run to waste or conveyed to any suitable
receptacle, if it is desired to subject it to chemical action for the
purpose of renewing its bleaching powers or obtaining the chemical
agents that may be contained within it.

The operation of the washers in removing the liquid from the upper
part of the chest tends to thicken the pulp therein, and the said
thickened pulp is conveyed from one chest to the next in the series by
any suitable conveying device, _f_ (shown in this instance as a worm
working in a trough or case, _f2_), which may be made foraminous
for the purpose of permitting the liquid to drain out of the pulp that
is being carried through by the worm, in order that the pulp may be
introduced into the next chest of the series as free as possible from
the liquid in which it has been suspended while in the chest from
which it is just taken. The pulp is thus conveyed from one chest in
the series to the inlet passage leading to the next chest of the
series, and in the said inlet passage it meets the liquid coming in
the reverse order from the next chest beyond in the series, the pulp
and liquid thus commingling in the inlet pipe and entering the chest
together, and being thoroughly mixed by the agitators in passing
through the chest by the continued action of fresh material entering
and of the conveyors taking the material out from the chests. In the
last of the series of chests into which the pulp is introduced the
fresh or strong bleaching liquid is introduced through a suitable
inlet pipe, _g_, and the pulp conveyor, _f_, that takes the pulp from
the last chest, delivers it into a pipe, _h_, by which it may be
conveyed to any desired point, the said pulp having been sufficiently
bleached before arriving at the said pipe, _h_. It will be seen that
by these means all the pulp is thoroughly and uniformly subjected to
the bleaching agent and that the bleaching is gradually performed in
all parts of the pulp, which is first acted upon by the weaker
bleaching agent that has previously operated upon the pulp before
treated, and that finally, when nearly bleached, the pulp is acted
upon by the bleaching material of full strength, this action being far
more efficient than when the materials are simply mixed together, the
unbleached material with the strong bleaching agent, and allowed to
remain together until the bleaching operation is finished, in which
plan the bleaching agent loses its strength as the bleaching operation
approaches completion, so that when the pulp is nearly bleached it is
operated upon by a very weak bleaching agent. By having the pulp
transferred from one chest to the next in the reverse order to that in
which the liquid is transferred it will be seen that all parts of the
pulp are acted upon uniformly and equally and that the operation may
go on continuously for an indefinite period of time without
necessitating stopping to empty the vats, as is the case when the
liquor only is transferred from one vat to the next. A pump may be
used for lifting the bleaching liquid, as shown, for example, at _k_,
Fig. 1. where said pump is used to raise the liquid delivered from the
chest, _a2_, and discharge it into the trough, _m_, by which the
pulp is carried to the inlet pipe, _b_. By the use of the pump, _h_, a
stronger flow of the liquid into the pipe _b_, of the first chest,
_a_, is effected than if it were taken directly from the washer of the
chest, _a2_, which is desirable, as the pulp is delivered in the
trough, _m_, with but little moisture.

It is obvious that the construction of the apparatus may be varied
considerably without materially changing the essential features of
operation. For example, the washers might be dispensed with and the
liquid permitted to flow through suitable strainers from one chest to
the next in order, by gravity, the successive chests in the order of
the passage of the pulp being placed each at a higher level than the
preceding one, and it is also obvious that the construction of the
pulp conveyors might be widely varied, it being essential only that
means should be provided for removing the pulp from one chest and
delivering it into the next while carrying only a small amount of the
liquid from one chest to the next with the pulp.

       *       *       *       *       *




THE USE OF COMPRESSED AIR IN CONJUNCTION WITH MEDICINAL SOLUTIONS IN
THE TREATMENT OF NERVOUS AND MENTAL AFFECTIONS.

BEING A NEW SYSTEM OF CEREBRO-SPINAL THERAPEUTICS.

By J. LEONARD CORNING, A.M., M.D., New York, Consultant in Nervous
Diseases to St. Francis Hospital, St. Mary's Hospital, the Hackensack
Hospital, etc.


To merely facilitate the introduction of medicinal agents into the
system by way of the air passages, in the form of gases, medicated or
non-medicated, has heretofore constituted the principal motive among
physicians for invoking the aid of compressed air. The experiments of
Paul Bert with nitrous oxide and oxygen gas, performed over fourteen
years ago, and the more recent proposals of See, are illustrations in
point.

The objects of which I have been in search are quite different from
the foregoing, and have reference not to the introduction of the
remedy, but to the enhancement of its effects after exhibition. Let me
be more explicit on this point, by stating at once that, in
contradistinction to my predecessors, I shall endeavor to show that by
far the most useful service derivable from compressed air is found in
its ability to enhance and perpetuate the effects of soluble remedies
(introduced hypodermically, by the mouth, or otherwise) upon the
internal organs, and more especially upon the cerebro-spinal axis.
Some chemical affinity between the remedy employed and the protoplasm
of the nerve cell is, of course, assumed to exist; and it is with the
enhancement of this affinity--this bond of union between the medicinal
solution and the nervous element--that we shall chiefly concern
ourselves in the following discussion.

By way of introduction, I may recall the fact that my attention was
directed several years since to the advisability of devising some
means by the aid of which medicinal substances, and more especially
anaesthetics, might be made to localize, intensify, and perpetuate
their action upon the peripheral nerves. The simple problem in
physiology and mechanics involved in this question I was fortunate
enough to solve quite a long time ago; and I must confess that in the
retrospect these undertakings in themselves do not seem to me of great
magnitude, though in their practical application their significance
appears more considerable. Herein lies, it may be, the explanation of
the interest which these studies excited in the profession at the time
of their publication. These things are, however, a part of medical
history; and I merely refer to them at this time because they have led
me to resume the solution of a far greater problem--that of
intensifying, perpetuating, and (to some extent at least) localizing
the effects of remedies upon the brain and spinal cord. I speak of
resuming these studies because, as far back as 1880 and 1882, I made
some attempts--albeit rather abortive--in the same direction.

In constructing the argument for the following study, I am beholden
more especially to three facts, the knowledge of which came to me as
the direct result of experimental tests. One may place confidence,
therefore, in the procedure which I have based upon these premises,
for at no point, I think, in the following argument will mere
affirmation be found to have usurped the place of sound induction.
Without anticipating further, then, let me specify as briefly as may
be the nature of these facts.


PREMISES OF ARGUMENT. _First Fact._--The amount of ether, chloroform,
chloral hydrate, the bromides, strychnine, and many other remedies,
required to produce physiological effects upon the cerebro-spinal
mechanism may be reduced by first securing a ligature around the
central portion of one or several of the limbs of an animal, so as to
interrupt both the arterial and venous circulation.

The proof and explanation of this may be thus presented:

In the first place, it is well known that children and small animals
are affected by much smaller quantities of anaesthetics and other
medicinal substances than are required to produce equal effects in men
and large animals.

At first sight, there appears to exist a certain definite relation
between the weight of the animal and the quantity of medicament
required to produce physiological effects. On closer inquiry, however,
we find behind this proposition the deeper truth that the real
proportion is between the magnitude of the blood-mass and the amount
of medicament. Thus, if we withdraw a considerable amount of blood
from a large dog, we may be able to affect him by much smaller doses
than those required under ordinary circumstances; and, among human
beings, we find the anaemic much more susceptible to remedies than the
full-blooded of equal weight.

The degree of saturation of the blood-mass with the remedy is
obviously, then, the principal thing; the greater the amount of blood,
the more remedy--everything else being equal--we shall have to give in
order to obtain definite results.

If we wish to embody the proposition in a mathematical statement, we
may do so in the following simple manner:

Let a represent the total quantity of blood, _b_, the amount of remedy
exhibited, and _x_ the magnitude of the physiological effect. We shall
then have the simple formula, x = b / a.

Again, if we withdraw a certain quantity of blood from the circulation
by venesection, and call that amount _d_, we shall then have the
formula x = b / (a-d).

But, if we wish to act upon the organs of the trunk, and more
especially upon those contained within the cerebro-spinal canal, it is
not necessary to resort to such a drastic expedient as copious
blood-letting; for, in place of this, we may dam up and effectually
eliminate from the rest of the body a certain amount of blood by
passing a ligature around the central portion of one or several
extremities, so as to interrupt the circulation in both artery and
vein. When this has been done it is clear that we may introduce a
remedy into the system by way of the stomach, or hypodermically into
some portion of the trunk; and it is equally certain that a remedy so
introduced will be diluted only in the ratio of the amount of blood
freely circulating, and more especially by that contained within the
trunk and head. That which is incarcerated behind the ligatures is as
effectually withdrawn from the realm of physiological action as though
it had been abstracted by the surgeon's knife. Elimination by the
knife and elimination by the ligature are, for present purposes, then,
one and the same thing. Hence, if we let _d'_ represent the amount of
blood incarcerated behind the ligatures, _x_ the magnitude of the
physiological effect which we are seeking, _b_ the amount of remedy
exhibited, and a the total amount of blood contained in the whole
organism, we shall have the formula,

                b        b
         x =  ------ = -----
              a - d'   a - d

Several years since, I had an excellent opportunity of proving the
truth of the foregoing, in connection with the administration of ether
in the case of a patient who resisted all attempts to anaesthetize him
in the ordinary way.

The case in question was a man under treatment at the Manhattan Eye
and Ear Hospital, upon whom it was deemed advisable to perform an
operation. As has been said, the ordinary means of inducing anaesthesia
had proved ineffectual, for the man was a confirmed drunkard; and it
was at this juncture that I was called in consultation and requested
by my friend, Dr. David Webster, one of the surgeons of the hospital,
to endeavor to devise some means of getting the man under the
influence of the anaesthetic.

The procedure which I suggested was this:[3] Around the upper part of
each thigh a flat rubber tourniquet was tightly drawn and secured in
place in the usual manner. By this means the sequestration of all the
blood contained in the lower limbs was accomplished; but, inasmuch as
both artery and vein were compressed, only the amount of blood usually
contained in each limb was shut off from the rest of the body--which
would not have been the case had we contented ourselves with merely
compressing the veins, as some have done.

[Footnote 3: On the "Effective and Rapid Induction of General
Anaesthesia," the New York _Medical Journal_, October 22 and December
24, 1887.]

In subsequently commenting on my published report of this case, that
most accomplished writer and physician, Henry M. Lyman--than whom
there is no greater authority on anaesthesia--observes that the plan
proposed and adopted by me on this occasion (that of compressing both
vein and artery) is far preferable to compression of the vein alone.

The reason for this is not far to seek. When we compress the veins
alone there is a rapid accumulation of blood in the extremities
through the accessions derived from the uninterrupted arteries. Now,
as this blood is derived from the trunk, and consequently also from
the organs contained within the cerebro-spinal canal, there is danger
of syncope and even heart failure. When, on the other hand, both
artery and vein are compressed no such derivative action occurs, and
all danger is, consequently, removed. With an apology for this brief
digression, I now return to the interesting case which has given rise
to it.

Having, as previously stated, applied tourniquets to the central
portion of the lower limbs, the ether cap was placed over the mouth
and nose of the patient, and in an incredibly short time he was
unconscious, and the surgeons were able to go on with the operation.

The late Dr. Cornelius R. Agnew and many other members of the staff of
the hospital were present, and gave emphatic expressions of approval.

Dr. F.W. Ring, assistant surgeon to the Manhattan Eye and Ear
Hospital, declared that both the amount of ether and the time consumed
in its administration were infinitesimal when compared with what had
been expended in previous efforts at inducing anaesthesia in the usual
way. The facts brought out on this occasion with regard to the
administration of ether have since been repeatedly verified by
different observers; so that at the present day their validity cannot
be questioned. I will merely add, however, that I have long known that
the dosage of phenacetin, antipyrine, morphine, chloralamid, chloral,
the bromides, and many other remedies might be reduced by resort to
the same procedure; all of which is merely equivalent to stating that
their pharmaco-dynamic energy may be increased in this way. And this
brings us to the second fact, which requires no special elaboration,
and may be stated thus:

_Second Fact._--The duration of the effect of a remedy upon the
cerebro-spinal axis is in the inverse ratio of its volatility; and
this is equally true whether the remedy be given with or without the
precautions previously detailed. For example, the anaesthetic effects
of ether disappear shortly after removal of the inhaler, whether we
apply tourniquets to the extremities or not; but, on the other hand,
the analgesic influence of antipyrin, phenacetin, morphine, and other
like remedies lasts very much longer, and their dose may be reduced,
or--what is the same thing--their pharmaco-dynamic potency may be
enhanced by the sequestration of the blood contained within the
extremities. So far as I know, I was the first to announce this fact.
In so far as a simple expression of the above truth is concerned, we
may employ the following formula:

Let _a_ represent the normal blood-mass contained in the entire body,
_d_ the amount of blood sequestrated by the ligatures, _b_ the amount
of the remedy, _c_ the volatility of the remedy, and _x_ the
pharmaco-dynamic potency of which we are in search; we shall then have

                        b
              x =  -----------
                   (a - d') x c

