cutting the whole section of the heavy armature conductor at
practically the same instant. This brisk transfer of lines goes on
from each projection to the succeeding one in front of the field pole,
leaving a very low density of field at any time between the
projections. The best results would be obtained when the armature
conductor does not project beyond or quite fill the depth of groove
between the projections. Of course there are other remedies for the
eddy current difficulty, notably the stranding and twisting of the
conductor on the armatures so as to average the position of the parts
of the compound conductor.

[Illustration: Fig. 9.]

Perhaps the most extreme case of what may be called dilution of field
by projections and by closed magnetic circuits in transformers would
be that of a block of iron, B, Fig. 10, moved between poles, N and S,
and having a hole through it, into and through which a conductor is
carried. The path through the iron is so good that we can scarcely
consider that any lines cross the hole from N to S; yet as B moves
forward there is a continual snapping transfer of lines from the right
forward side of the hole to the left or backward side, cutting the
conductor as they fly across, and developing an electromotive force in
it. I have described this action more in detail because we have in it
whatever distinction in the manner of cutting the lines of the field
is to be found between wire on smooth armatures and on projection
armatures and modifications thereof; and also between flat, open coils
passing through a field and bobbins with cores of iron. The
considerations advanced also bring out the relation which exists
between closed iron circuit transformers and closed iron circuit
(projection) dynamos, as we may call them.

[Illustration: Fig. 10.]

I had intended at the outset of this paper to deal to some extent with
the propagation of lines of magnetism undergoing retardation in
reference to alternating current motor devices, transformers with
limited secondary current, or constant average current, an alternating
motor working with what I may term a translation lag, etc.; but it was
soon found that these matters must remain over for a continuation of
this paper at some future time. My endeavor has been in the present
paper to deal with the lines of force theory as though it were a
symbol of the reality, but I confess that it is done with many
misgivings that I may have carried it too far. Yet, if we are to use
the idea at all it has seemed but right to apply it wherever it may
throw any light on the subject or assist in our understanding of
phenomena.

       *       *       *       *       *




ELECTRIC LIGHTING AT THE PARIS EXHIBITION--THE OERLIKON
WORKS.


Immediately on entering the Machinery Hall by the _galerie_ leading
from the central dome, and occupying a prominent position at the
commencement of the Swiss section, is a very important plant of
dynamos, motors, and steam engines, put down by the Oerlikon Works, of
Zurich. During the time the machinery is kept running in the hall,
power is supplied electrically to drive the whole of the main shafting
in the Swiss section and part of that in the Belgian section,
amounting in all to some 200 ft., a large number of machines of
various industries deriving their power from these lines of shafting,
while during the evening a portion of the upper and lower galleries
adjoining this section is lit by some twenty-five arc lamps run from
this exhibit. Steam is supplied from the Roser boilers in the motive
power court. The whole of the generating plant is illustrated in one
view, and a separate view is given of the motor employed to drive the
main shafting, this latter view showing the details of connection to
the same. On the extreme right hand side of the first view is a direct
coupled engine and dynamo of 20 horse power, a separate cut of which
is given in Fig. 3. The engine is of the vertical single cylinder
type, standing 5 ft. high, and fitted, as are the other two engines
exhibited, with centrifugal governor gear on the fly wheel, acting
directly on the throw of the cutoff valve eccentric. The two
standards, supporting the cylinder and forming the guide bars,
together with the entire field magnets and pole pieces of the dynamo,
and the bed plate common to both, are cast in one piece.

[Illustration: FIG. 3 ENGINE AND DYNAMO FOR STEAMSHIPS.]

The machine is specially designed for ship lighting, and with the view
of preventing any magnetic effect upon the ship's compass, the field
is arranged so that the armature, pole pieces, and coils are entirely
inclosed by iron. Any tendency to leakage of magnetic lines will
therefore be within the machine, the iron acting as a shield. This
build of field--shown in Fig. 3A--is also advantageous as a mechanical
shield to the parts of the machine most likely to suffer from rough
handling in transport, and it will be seen that the field coils are
easily slipped on before the armature is mounted in its bearings.

[Illustration: FIG. 3A]

The winding is compound, and in such a direction that the two opposite
horizontal poles have the same polarity; it follows from this that
there will be two consequent poles in the iron, these being opposite
in name to the horizontal poles and at right angles to them, viz.,
above and below the armature. Opposite sections of the commutator are
connected together internally as in most four-pole machines, so that
only two brushes are necessary, at 90 deg. apart.

The section of iron in the field is 60 square inches and rectangular
in form, and the whole machine measures 4 ft. 3 in. in length, and 2
ft. in height, without including the height of the bed plate. The
armature is 17 in. in length and the same in diameter, measured over
the winding, and develops at the machine terminals 70 volts and 200
amperes at 480 revolutions. The moving parts of the engine are well
balanced, and run remarkably well and without noise at this high rate
of speed.

This dynamo serves to develop power to run a motor in an adjoining
inclosure, containing some fine specimens of lathes and machine tools
constructed by the Oerlikon Works. These are driven by the motor
through the medium of a countershaft, and the power and speed are
controlled from the switch board seen at the left of the exhibit, and
in Fig. 11. The resistance, R1, serves to vary the intensity of the
shunt field of the dynamo, the volts being indicated by the voltmeter
V1, and a resistance separate from the switch board is inserted in
the main circuit of the two machines. The ammeter, A2, is directly
connected to the dynamo, and therefore indicates the current, whatever
circuit this machine is running.

[Illustration: Figs. 5-9, 11 plus THE PARIS EXHIBITION--STAND OF THE
OERLIKON WORKS.]

A larger combined engine and dynamo, seen in the center of the stand,
serves to run the lighting of the galleries. The engine is a 60 horse
power compound, running at 350 revolutions, and fitted with a governor
on the fly wheel, like that described above.

The dynamo is a two-pole machine, the upper pole and yoke being cast
in one, and the lower pole, yoke, and combined bed plate forming a
separate casting. The two vertical cores, over which the field bobbins
are slipped, are of wrought iron, and are turned with a shoulder at
either end, the yokes being recessed to fit them exactly. The cores
are then bolted to the yokes vertically from the top and horizontally
below. The field of this machine is shunt-wound, and in order to
maintain the potential constant a hand-regulated resistance--R2 on
the switch board--is added in circuit with the shunt field. The
voltmeter, V2, immediately above this resistance, serves to
indicate the difference of potential at the machine terminals. Both
voltmeters are fitted with keys, so that they are only put in circuit
when the readings are taken.

The main terminals of this machine are fitted on substantial
insulating bases, fixed one at each end of the top yoke. These connect
to the external circuit by a heavy cable--the machine being capable of
developing 500 amperes--and to the shunt circuit, and regulating
resistance by small wires; while the two connections to the brushes
are by four covered wires in parallel on each side. This mode of
connection is more flexible than a short length of heavy cable, and
looks well, the wires being held neatly together by vulcanized fiber
bridges. The dynamo is a low tension machine, the field being
regulated to give 65 volts when running the lamp circuits.

[Illustration: Fig. 10.]

The illustration, Fig. 10, represents the automatic
re-regulator--C.E.L. Brown's patent. Motion is imparted to the cores
of two electro-magnets at the ends by the pulleys, W W1. The cores
have a projection opposite to the spindle, ab, which latter is
screw-threaded. By a relay one or other electro-magnet is put in
action, and the rotating core, which is magnetized, causes rotation of
the spindle by attraction, resulting in the movement of the contact
along the resistance stops. The relay is acted upon directly by the
potential of the dynamo, and the variable resistance is included in
the shunt field of the machine, so that changes in the potential,
resulting from changes in load or speed, are compensated for.

The arrangements of the lamp circuits and the lamp itself may now be
described. The lamps are all run in parallel circuit, but are divided
into groups of five, each group being controlled by a separate switch
on the board--Figs. 11 and 11A. These switches are not in
direct communication with the dynamo, but make that connection through
a large central switch, S2, which therefore carries the whole
current. The returns from each group are brought to the connections
seen between the two resistances, where the circuits may be
disconnected if desired, and the main current then passes through the
ammeter, A3, to the other terminal of the machine. One of the smaller
switches at the top, Fig. 11A, is directly connected with one terminal
of the 20 horse power dynamo before mentioned, and the other side of
the switch to the motor in the machine tool exhibit. Also one of the
switches in connection with the central switch, S2, is connected to
the same motor, and therefore the latter may be run by either machine,
or, in fact, any combination of machines, lamps, and motor be made as
required.

The form of switch made by the Oerlikon Works is illustrated in Fig.
7. Two thick semicircular bands of copper are screwed at one end to
opposite sides of a square block which is turned round by the switch
handle. The block has a projection at each corner, and two strong,
flat, stationary springs are attached to the framework of the switch
and press on opposite sides of the block. The ends of the springs
engage in the projections and prevent the switch being turned round
the wrong way, while the pressure of the springs on opposite sides
forces the copper bands to take up a position exactly in line with the
terminal contacts when the switch is closed, or at right angles to
them when it is opened.

[Illustration: FIG. 4A]

[Illustration: FIGS. 4, 4B and 4C]

Further, each lamp has its own separate adjustable resistance, fuse,
and switch. These are of special construction, combined in one, and
are illustrated in Figs. 4 and 4A; the other figures, 4B and 4C,
showing some of the details of the same. The wires, W W, lead from and
to one lamp. The current enters at one wire, passes through the fuse,
f--Figs. 4C and 4A--down the center of the cylinder to a divided
contact, into which a switch arm can be shot. When this is so, a
connection is made to the upright brass rod, T, which serves to grip
the band, R, passing round the body of the cylinder. The current then
passes through all the turns of wire above the band, and out at the
other terminal. The resistance can be varied by raising or lowering
the band. Fig. 4B shows the manner of tightening the band against the
wires on the cylinder. The upright rod, T, is seen in section, and is
fixed in one position to the frame of the apparatus. Abutting against
this, and working in the block to which the two ends of the band are
screwed, is a thumb screw, S, by turning which the band may be
loosened for adjusting, and tightened when the right position is
found. The cylinder is covered with asbestos sheet, and the wire,
which is of nickel, and measures altogether from 3 to 4 ohms, is wound
helically round this. The switch arm, to which the handle is attached
below, does not itself make and break the circuit, but carries a
spring, as shown, which, when the arm is at the end of its movement,
pulls over the contact lever with a rapid action, shooting the same
between the divided contact piece, and making a perfect contact. The
switchboard forms one side of a closed wooden case or cupboard, with
sufficient room for a man to enter and adjust the resistances or
switches for each lamp. These are screwed to the inside of the case in
rows, to the number of twenty-five. The greatest care has been taken
in the fixing of the connections to the inside of this case, and no
leading wires of different potential are allowed to cross each other.

[Illustration: FIG. 11A]

The Oerlikon lamp, which is designed to work with constant potential,
is shown partly in section in Fig. 8. There is only one solenoid, A,
through which all the current passes, and whose action is to strike
the arc and maintain the current constant. The soft iron core, C, is
suspended from the inside of the tube, T, in which it has an up and
down movement checked by an air piston in the tube. An end elevation
of the brake wheels and solenoid is given in Fig. 9, where it will be
seen that the spindle carrying these wheels also carries between them
a pinion engaging with the rack rod, R. The top carbon attached to the
rack rod falls by its own weight, and is therefore in contact with the
lower carbon before the lamp is switched in circuit. When this is done
the core is instantly magnetized, and attracted to the soft iron brake
wheels, which it holds firmly. The air cushion in the tube prevents
the core being drawn up until it has fairly gripped the sides of the
wheels. The subsequent raising of the core therefore turns the wheels,
raises the rack rod, and strikes the arc. The feed is operated by the
weakening of the magnetic field of the coil, which causes the core to
lose its grip of the wheels, and allows the top carbon to descend. The
catch, L, Fig. 8, has a lateral play, and serves to engage in the
teeth of the rack rod, so as to prevent its falling when being
trimmed. Each carbon when in position is held against two rectangular
guide bars by the pressure of a wire spring--see figure. In this way
the carbon is pressed against two parallel knife edges, and is
therefore always in true alignment. The action of the lamp is very
simple, the working parts are few and solidly constructed, and the
regulation, as exhibited by the lamps running in the galleries, is
exceptionally steady.

The transmission of power plant consists of two 250 horse power
dynamos--C.E.L. Brown's patent--the generator being driven by a
vertical compound condensing engine of the same power, running at 180
revolutions. The dynamo generator is a four-pole 600 volt direct
current machine, series wound, and may be distinguished in the
engraving next to the switch board; while the motor receiver
connected to it, and erected in another portion of the Swiss section,
is of exactly the same size and type. The field, which is hexagonal in
shape, is cast in two pieces, bolted together horizontally, the
cross-sectional area of iron being 170 square inches. The armature is
cylindrical, and built up of flat rings stamped out of soft sheet
iron, eight notches in the same being provided to fit over the arms of
the spider keyed to the shaft. The spider is in halves, which are
bolted together longitudinally after the rings are in position. It is
Gramme wound, and measures over the winding 7 in. radial depth, 37 in.
outside diameter, and 22 in. in length. The current is collected by
four brushes. The fitting and mechanical build of the dynamos leaves
nothing to be desired. All the working parts of the dynamos and
engines are turned up to gauge and template, so as to be
interchangeable. As an instance of this, the armature of the generator
was built in the works, while the field magnets were being erected in
the exhibition, and, on arrival, fitted in position perfectly, and ran
at once without trouble.

The energy taken off on the motor shaft is close on 200 horse power,
but varies according to the machines at work; the speed of the motor
does not, however, vary more than 3 per cent., and the brushes need no
adjustment. About 6 ft. of shafting is coupled on in line with the
motor shaft, and an extra plummer block fixed at the end. This
shafting carries at its extremity an additional 2 ft. pulley, the
power being delivered by belting from these pulleys to two large
pulleys on the main shaft.

The machines run by this transmission consist of the looms of Rieter &
Co., of Winterthur; the large flour mill and lift of A. Millot & Co.;
the flour milling machinery of Frederick Wegmann & Co., of Zurich; the
brick and tile making machines of the Rorschach foundries; and the
looms of Messrs. Houget & Teston, of Verviers, in the Belgian section.
A 15 horse power two-pole Oerlikon dynamo is also run by a belt from
the main shaft, and generates power to drive a motor of similar type
in the Swiss section of the upper gallery. This runs a length of
countershafting supplying power to three silk-weaving machines
constructed by Benninger Freres; six weaving machines from the Ruti
works, near Zurich; and one knitting machine exhibited by Edward
Dubied & Co., of Couvet.

The dynamo and motor are connected to the main cable by switches of
the type shown in Fig. 5. These are specially designed to destroy the
extra current on breaking circuit by the formation of an arc which
gradually increases the resistance till the break occurs, rendering it
less sudden. One wire passes through the handle and makes contact with
the springs, and the other is attached to the clamp in which the
carbon rod is held. The current is made to enter at the carbon rod, so
that the arcs formed cause consumption of the carbon. A magnetic
cut-out--Fig. 6--is also provided to each machine; this consists of an
electro-magnet, through which the main current passes, provided with
side pole pieces. A flat soft iron plate armature is hinged so as to
come up against the pole pieces when attracted. When the current is
not sufficiently strong to cause the plate to be attracted, a hole in
the center of the latter engages over a small projection in the top of
a weighted arm hinged in the center of the board, and keeps it
upright. If now the current exceeds the limits of safety to the
machine, due to a too heavy load being thrown on, the armature is
attracted and releases the vertical arm, which falls over and enters
with considerable force between the two spring contacts below. These
contacts are connected to the field terminals, which are, therefore,
short-circuited, and prevent the dynamo generating any current. A
retractile spring can be adjusted to cause cut-off at any required
current. These details are indicated in our illustrations mounted on
their respective switch boards.

Since the erection of plant by these works at Solothurn for
transmitting 50 horse power five miles distant, which attracted so
much interest some time ago, several important works have been carried
out. Among these we may mention a 280 horse power transmission at 11/2
kilom. distance to a cotton mill at Derendingen in Switzerland, a 250
horse power transmission at 1/2 kilom. distance, carried out for Gaetano
Rossi at Piovene in Italy, and a 300 horse transmission at 6 kilom.
distance installed for Giovanni Rossi, in which the power is given off
at two different stations.--_The Engineer._

       *       *       *       *       *




THE ADER FLOURISH OF TRUMPETS.


Although telephonic novelties are not numerous at the Universal
Exposition, telephony--that quite young branch of electric science--is
daily the object of curious and interesting experiments which we must
make known to our readers, a large number of whom were not yet born to
scientific life when the experiments were made for the first time at
Paris in 1881; and it is proper to congratulate the Societe Generale
des Telephones on having repeated them in 1889 to the great
satisfaction of the rising generation.

We allude to the Ader system of telephonic transmissions of sounds in
such a way that they can be heard by an audience.

The essential parts of this mode of transmission consist of two
distinct systems--transmitters and receivers.

[Illustration: FIG. 1.--THE ADER FLOURISH OF TRUMPETS]

The transmitters are four in number, and are actuated by the same
number of musicians, each humming into them his part of the quartet
(Fig. 1). This transmitter, represented apart in elevation and section
in Fig. 2, is identical with the one used in the curious experiment
with the singing condenser. At A is a mouthpiece before which the
musician hums his part as upon a reed pipe. He causes the plate, B, to
vibrate in unison with the sound that he emits, and this produces
periodical interruptions of varying rapidity between the disk, B, and
the point, C. The button, D, serves to regulate the distance in such a
way that the breakings of the circuit shall be very complete and
produce sounds in the receivers as pure as allowed by this special
mode of transmission, in which all the harmonics are systematically
suppressed in order to re-enforce the fundamental.

[Illustration: FIG. 2.--DETAILS OF THE TRANSMITTER.]

This transmitter interrupter is interposed in the circuit of a battery
of accumulators, with the five receivers that it actuates, in such a
way that the four transmitters and five receivers form in reality four
groups of distinct autonomous transmission, the accordance of which is
absolutely dependent upon that of the artists who make them vibrate.

The five receivers are arranged over the front door of the telephone
pavilion, near the Eiffel tower (Fig. 3). Each consists of a horseshoe
magnet provided, between its branches, with two small iron cores
having a space of a few millimeters between them (Fig. 4). Each of
these soft iron cores carries a copper wire bobbin, N, the number of
spirals of which is properly calculated for the effect to be produced.
Opposite the vacant space left by the two cores, there is a small
piece, t, of rectangular form, and also of soft iron, fixed to a
vibrating strip of firwood, L, of about 4 inches section. The
periodical breaking of the circuit produced by the transmitter causes
a variation in the magnetization of the iron cores of the five
receivers and makes the firwood strips vibrate energetically. These
vibrations are received and poured forth as it were in front of the
telephone pavilion, by large brass trumpets arranged in front of each
receiver, as shown in Fig. 3.

[Illustration: FIG. 3.--THE ADER FLOURISH OF TRUMPETS]

It would be difficult for us to pass any judgment whatever upon the
musical and artistic value of these transmissions of trumpet music to
a distance; we prefer to confess our incompetency in the matter. But
it is none the less certain that these experiments are having the same
success that they had at their inception in 1881 at the Universal
Exposition of Electricity, and they allow us to foresee that there is
a time coming in which it will be possible to transmit speech to a
distance with the same intensity that the present trumpet flourishes
have. Although all the tentatives hitherto made in this direction have
not given very brilliant results, we must not despair of attaining the
end some day or other. Less than fifteen years ago the telephone did
not exist; now it covers the world with its lines.--_La Nature._

[Illustration: Fig. 4.--DETAILS OF THE RECEIVER.]

       *       *       *       *       *




NOTES ON DYEWOOD EXTRACTS AND SIMILAR PREPARATIONS.

By LOUIS SIEBOLD, F.I.C., F.C.S.


During the last ten years there has been an enormous increase in the
production of these preparations, and the time will come when their
application in dyeing and calico printing will become so general as to
completely supersede the employment of the raw materials. The
manufacture of these extracts, to be thoroughly successful, requires
to be so conducted as to secure the perfect exhaustion of the dyewoods
without the slightest destruction or deterioration of the coloring
matters contained in them; and though nothing like perfection has been
reached in the attainment of these objects, it is certain that the
processes of extraction and evaporation now employed by the best
makers are a very great improvement on the older methods. Indeed,
there is no difficulty nowadays in procuring dyewood extracts of high
excellence if the consumer is willing to pay a price for them
corresponding to their quality, and knows how to avail himself of the
aid of chemical skill to control his purchases. Unfortunately,
however, there is so much hankering after cheap articles, and so
little care is taken to ascertain their real quality, that every scope
is afforded to the malpractices of the adulterer. There are many dye
and print works in which large quantities of these extracts are used
without being subjected to trustworthy tests. Moreover, much of the
testing is done by fallacious methods and often by biased hands. So
fallacious, indeed, are some of these tests, that grossly adulterated
extracts are often declared superior to the purer ones, the cause of
this being the application of an insufficient proportion of mordant in
the dyeing or printing trials, and the consequent waste of the excess
of coloring matter in the case of the purer preparation.

Professional analytical chemists have hitherto given but little
attention to these preparations, and the employment of experienced
chemists in works is as yet far from general. The testing of dyewood
extracts in such a manner as to throw full light on their purity, the
quality of raw material from which they are prepared, their exact
commercial value their suitability for special purposes, and the
proportion and nature of any adulterants they may contain, is of
course a difficult and tedious task, and must be left to the expert
who is in possession of authentic specimens prepared by himself of all
the different extracts made from every variety and quality of raw
materials, and who combines a thorough knowledge of experimental
dyeing and printing with a large experience in the chemical
investigation of these preparations. But when the object of the
