to have it show where it starts.

It is these high explosives that have revolutionized warfare. As soon as
the first German shell packed with these new nitrates burst inside the
Gruson cupola at Liege and tore out its steel and concrete by the roots
the world knew that the day of the fixed fortress was gone. The armies
deserted their expensively prepared fortifications and took to the
trenches. The British troops in France found their weapons futile and
sent across the Channel the cry of "Send us high explosives or we
perish!" The home Government was slow to heed the appeal, but no
progress was made against the Germans until the Allies had the means to
blast them out of their entrenchments by shells loaded with five hundred
pounds of TNT.

All these explosives are made from nitric acid and this used to be made
from nitrates such as potassium nitrate or saltpeter. But nitrates are
rarely found in large quantities. Napoleon and Lee had a hard time to
scrape up enough saltpeter from the compost heaps, cellars and caves for
their gunpowder, and they did not use as much nitrogen in a whole
campaign as was freed in a few days' cannonading on the Somme. Now there
is one place in the world--and so far as we know one only--where
nitrates are to be found abundantly. This is in a desert on the western
slope of the Andes where ancient guano deposits have decomposed and
there was not enough rain to wash away their salts. Here is a bed two
miles wide, two hundred miles long and five feet deep yielding some
twenty to fifty per cent. of sodium nitrate. The deposit originally
belonged to Peru, but Chile fought her for it and got it in 1881. Here
all countries came to get their nitrates for agriculture and powder
making. Germany was the largest customer and imported 750,000 tons of
Chilean nitrate in 1913, besides using 100,000 tons of other nitrogen
salts. By this means her old, wornout fields were made to yield greater
harvests than our fresh land. Germany and England were like two duelists
buying powder at the same shop. The Chilean Government, pocketing an
export duty that aggregated half a billion dollars, permitted the
saltpeter to be shoveled impartially into British and German ships, and
so two nitrogen atoms, torn from their Pacific home and parted, like
Evangeline and Gabriel, by transportation oversea, may have found
themselves flung into each other's arms from the mouths of opposing
howitzers in the air of Flanders. Goethe could write a romance on such a
theme.

Now the moment war broke out this source of supply was shut off to both
parties, for they blockaded each other. The British fleet closed up the
German ports while the German cruisers in the Pacific took up a position
off the coast of Chile in order to intercept the ships carrying nitrates
to England and France. The Panama Canal, designed to afford relief in
such an emergency, caved in most inopportunely. The British sent a fleet
to the Pacific to clear the nitrate route, but it was outranged and
defeated on November 1, 1914. Then a stronger British fleet was sent
out and smashed the Germans off the Falkland Islands on December 8. But
for seven weeks the nitrate route had been closed while the chemical
reactions on the Marne and Yser were decomposing nitrogen-compounds at
an unheard of rate.

England was now free to get nitrates for her munition factories, but
Germany was still bottled up. She had stored up Chilean nitrates in
anticipation of the war and as soon as it was seen to be coming she
bought all she could get in Europe. But this supply was altogether
inadequate and the war would have come to an end in the first winter if
German chemists had not provided for such a contingency in advance by
working out methods of getting nitrogen from the air. Long ago it was
said that the British ruled the sea and the French the land so that left
nothing to the German but the air. The Germans seem to have taken this
jibe seriously and to have set themselves to make the most of the aerial
realm in order to challenge the British and French in the fields they
had appropriated. They had succeeded so far that the Kaiser when he
declared war might well have considered himself the Prince of the Power
of the Air. He had a fleet of Zeppelins and he had means for the
fixation of nitrogen such as no other nation possessed. The Zeppelins
burst like wind bags, but the nitrogen plants worked and made Germany
independent of Chile not only during the war, but in the time of peace.

Germany during the war used 200,000 tons of nitric acid a year in
explosives, yet her supply of nitrogen is exhaustless.

[Illustration: World production and consumption of fixed inorganic
nitrogen expressed in tons nitrogen

From _The Journal of Industrial and Engineering Chemistry_, March,
1919.]


Nitrogen is free as air. That is the trouble; it is too free. It is
fixed nitrogen that we want and that we are willing to pay for; nitrogen
in combination with some other elements in the form of food or
fertilizer so we can make use of it as we set it free. Fixed nitrogen in
its cheapest form, Chile saltpeter, rose to $250 during the war. Free
nitrogen costs nothing and is good for nothing. If a land-owner has a
right to an expanding pyramid of air above him to the limits of the
atmosphere--as, I believe, the courts have decided in the eaves-dropping
cases--then for every square foot of his ground he owns as much
nitrogen as he could buy for $2500. The air is four-fifths free nitrogen
and if we could absorb it in our lungs as we do the oxygen of the other
fifth a few minutes breathing would give us a full meal. But we let this
free nitrogen all out again through our noses and then go and pay 35
cents a pound for steak or 60 cents a dozen for eggs in order to get
enough combined nitrogen to live on. Though man is immersed in an ocean
of nitrogen, yet he cannot make use of it. He is like Coleridge's
"Ancient Mariner" with "water, water, everywhere, nor any drop to
drink."

Nitrogen is, as Hood said not so truly about gold, "hard to get and hard
to hold." The bacteria that form the nodules on the roots of peas and
beans have the power that man has not of utilizing free nitrogen.
Instead of this quiet inconspicuous process man has to call upon the
lightning when he wants to fix nitrogen. The air contains the oxygen and
nitrogen which it is desired to combine to form nitrates but the atoms
are paired, like to like. Passing an electric spark through the air
breaks up some of these pairs and in the confusion of the shock the
lonely atoms seize on their nearest neighbor and so may get partners of
the other sort. I have seen this same thing happen in a square dance
where somebody made a blunder. It is easy to understand the reaction if
we represent the atoms of oxygen and nitrogen by the initials of their
names in this fashion:

      NN  +  OO   -->   NO + NO
  nitrogen  oxygen    nitric oxide

The --> represents Jove's thunderbolt, a stroke of artificial
lightning. We see on the left the molecules of oxygen and nitrogen,
before taking the electric treatment, as separate elemental pairs, and
then to the right of the arrow we find them as compound molecules of
nitric oxide. This takes up another atom of oxygen from the air and
becomes NOO, or using a subscript figure to indicate the number of atoms
and so avoid repeating the letter, NO_{2} which is the familiar nitro
group of nitric acid (HO--NO_{2}) and of its salts, the nitrates, and of
its organic compounds, the high explosives. The NO_{2} is a brown and
evil-smelling gas which when dissolved in water (HOH) and further
oxidized is completely converted into nitric acid.

The apparatus which effects this transformation is essentially a
gigantic arc light in a chimney through which a current of hot air is
blown. The more thoroughly the air comes under the action of the
electric arc the more molecules of nitrogen and oxygen will be broken up
and rearranged, but on the other hand if the mixture of gases remains in
the path of the discharge the NO molecules are also broken up and go
back into their original form of NN and OO. So the object is to spread
out the electric arc as widely as possible and then run the air through
it rapidly. In the Schoenherr process the electric arc is a spiral flame
twenty-three feet long through which the air streams with a vortex
motion. In the Birkeland-Eyde furnace there is a series of semi-circular
arcs spread out by the repellent force of a powerful electric magnet in
a flaming disc seven feet in diameter with a temperature of 6300 deg. F. In
the Pauling furnace the electrodes between which the current strikes
are two cast iron tubes curving upward and outward like the horns of a
Texas steer and cooled by a stream of water passing through them. These
electric furnaces produce two or three ounces of nitric acid for each
kilowatt-hour of current consumed. Whether they can compete with the
natural nitrates and the products of other processes depends upon how
cheaply they can get their electricity. Before the war there were
several large installations in Norway and elsewhere where abundant water
power was available and now the Norwegians are using half a million
horse power continuously in the fixation of nitrogen and the rest of the
world as much again. The Germans had invested largely in these foreign
oxidation plants, but shortly before the war they had sold out and
turned their attention to other processes not requiring so much
electrical energy, for their country is poorly provided with water
power. The Haber process, that they made most of, is based upon as
simple a reaction as that we have been considering, for it consists in
uniting two elemental gases to make a compound, but the elements in this
case are not nitrogen and oxygen, but nitrogen and hydrogen. This gives
ammonia instead of nitric acid, but ammonia is useful for its own
purposes and it can be converted into nitric acid if this is desired.
The reaction is:

  NN   +   HH + HH + HH --> NHHH + NHHH
  Nitrogen  hydrogen         ammonia

The animals go in two by two, but they come out four by four. Four
molecules of the mixed elements are turned into two molecules and so the
gas shrinks to half its volume. At the same time it acquires an
odor--familiar to us when we are curing a cold--that neither of the
original gases had. The agent that effects the transformation in this
case is not the electric spark--for this would tend to work the reaction
backwards--but uranium, a rare metal, which has the peculiar property of
helping along a reaction while seeming to take no part in it. Such a
substance is called a catalyst. The action of a catalyst is rather
mysterious and whenever we have a mystery we need an analogy. We may,
then, compare the catalyst to what is known as "a good mixer" in
society. You know the sort of man I mean. He may not be brilliant or
especially talkative, but somehow there is always "something doing" at a
picnic or house-party when he is along. The tactful hostess, the salon
leader, is a social catalyst. The trouble with catalysts, either human
or metallic, is that they are rare and that sometimes they get sulky and
won't work if the ingredients they are supposed to mix are unsuitable.

But the uranium, osmium, platinum or whatever metal is used as a
catalyzing agent is expensive and although it is not used up it is
easily "poisoned," as the chemists say, by impurities in the gases. The
nitrogen and the hydrogen for the Haber process must then be prepared
and purified before trying to combine them into ammonia. The nitrogen is
obtained by liquefying air by cold and pressure and then boiling off the
nitrogen at 194 deg. C. The oxygen left is useful for other purposes. The
hydrogen needed is extracted by a similar process of fractional
distillation from "water-gas," the blue-flame burning gas used for
heating. Then the nitrogen and hydrogen, mixed in the proportion of one
to three, as shown in the reaction given above, are compressed to two
hundred atmospheres, heated to 1300 deg. F. and passed over the finely
divided uranium. The stream of gas that comes out contains about four
per cent. of ammonia, which is condensed to a liquid by cooling and the
uncombined hydrogen and nitrogen passed again through the apparatus.

The ammonia can be employed in refrigeration and other ways but if it is
desired to get the nitrogen into the form of nitric acid it has to be
oxidized by the so-called Ostwald process. This is the reaction:

  NH_{3}  +  4O   -->   HNO_{3} + H_{2}O
  ammonia  oxygen    nitric acid  water

The catalyst used to effect this combination is the metal platinum in
the form of fine wire gauze, since the action takes place only on the
surface. The ammonia gas is mixed with air which supplies the oxygen and
the heated mixture run through the platinum gauze at the rate of several
yards a second. Although the gases come in contact with the platinum
only a five-hundredth part of a second yet eighty-five per cent. is
converted into nitric acid.

The Haber process for the making of ammonia by direct synthesis from its
constituent elements and the supplemental Ostwald process for the
conversion of the ammonia into nitric acid were the salvation of
Germany. As soon as the Germans saw that their dash toward Paris had
been stopped at the Marne they knew that they were in for a long war and
at once made plans for a supply of fixed nitrogen. The chief German dye
factories, the Badische Anilin and Soda-Fabrik, promptly put
$100,000,000 into enlarging its plant and raised its production of
ammonium sulfate from 30,000 to 300,000 tons. One German electrical firm
with aid from the city of Berlin contracted to provide 66,000,000 pounds
of fixed nitrogen a year at a cost of three cents a pound for the next
twenty-five years. The 750,000 tons of Chilean nitrate imported annually
by Germany contained about 116,000 tons of the essential element
nitrogen. The fourteen large plants erected during the war can fix in
the form of nitrates 500,000 tons of nitrogen a year, which is more than
twice the amount needed for internal consumption. So Germany is now not
only independent of the outside world but will have a surplus of
nitrogen products which could be sold even in America at about half what
the farmer has been paying for South American saltpeter.

Besides the Haber or direct process there are other methods of making
ammonia which are, at least outside of Germany, of more importance. Most
prominent of these is the cyanamid process. This requires electrical
power since it starts with a product of the electrical furnace, calcium
carbide, familiar to us all as a source of acetylene gas.

If a stream of nitrogen is passed over hot calcium carbide it is taken
up by the carbide according to the following equation:

       CaC_{2}  +  N_{2}    -->    CaCN_{2}  +  C
  calcium carbide nitrogen   calcium cyanamid  carbon

Calcium cyanamid was discovered in 1895 by Caro and Franke when they
were trying to work out a new process for making cyanide to use in
extracting gold. It looks like stone and, under the name of
lime-nitrogen, or Kalkstickstoff, or nitrolim, is sold as a fertilizer.
If it is desired to get ammonia, it is treated with superheated steam.
The reaction produces heat and pressure, so it is necessary to carry it
on in stout autoclaves or enclosed kettles. The cyanamid is completely
and quickly converted into pure ammonia and calcium carbonate, which is
the same as the limestone from which carbide was made. The reaction is:

      CaCN_{2}  +  3H_{2}O   -->   CaCO_{3}  +  2NH_{3}
  calcium cyanamid  water   calcium carbonate  ammonia

Another electrical furnace method, the Serpek process, uses aluminum
instead of calcium for the fixation of nitrogen. Bauxite, or impure
aluminum oxide, the ordinary mineral used in the manufacture of metallic
aluminum, is mixed with coal and heated in a revolving electrical
furnace through which nitrogen is passing. The equation is:

  Al_{2}O_{3} + 3C + N_{2}   -->   2AlN  +  3CO
  aluminum   carbon nitrogen    aluminum  carbon
   oxide                         nitride   monoxide

Then the aluminum nitride is treated with steam under pressure, which
produces ammonia and gives back the original aluminum oxide, but in a
purer form than the mineral from which was made

  2AlN  +  3H_{2}O --> 2NH_{3} + Al_{2}O_{3}
  Aluminum  water     ammonia   aluminum oxide
   nitride

The Serpek process is employed to some extent in France in connection
with the aluminum industry. These are the principal processes for the
fixation of nitrogen now in use, but they by no means exhaust the
possibilities. For instance, Professor John C. Bucher, of Brown
University, created a sensation in 1917 by announcing a new process
which he had worked out with admirable completeness and which has some
very attractive features. It needs no electric power or high pressure
retorts or liquid air apparatus. He simply fills a twenty-foot tube with
briquets made out of soda ash, iron and coke and passes producer gas
through the heated tube. Producer gas contains nitrogen since it is made
by passing air over hot coal. The reaction is:

  2Na_{2}CO_{3} + 4C + N_{2}   =   2NaCN + 3CO
  sodium       carbon  nitrogen    sodium   carbon
   carbonate                        cyanide   monoxide

The iron here acts as the catalyst and converts two harmless substances,
sodium carbonate, which is common washing soda, and carbon, into two of
the most deadly compounds known to man, cyanide and carbon monoxide,
which is what kills you when you blow out the gas. Sodium cyanide is a
salt of hydrocyanic acid, which for, some curious reason is called
"Prussic acid." It is so violent a poison that, as the freshman said in
a chemistry recitation, "a single drop of it placed on the tongue of a
dog will kill a man."

But sodium cyanide is not only useful in itself, for the extraction of
gold and cleaning of silver, but can be converted into ammonia, and a
variety of other compounds such as urea and oxamid, which are good
fertilizers; sodium ferrocyanide, that makes Prussian blue; and oxalic
acid used in dyeing. Professor Bucher claimed that his furnace could be
set up in a day at a cost of less than $100 and could turn out 150
pounds of sodium cyanide in twenty-four hours. This process was placed
