are just as good for catching flies.

Now, going back to the melted quartz, it is evident that if it ever
became perfectly liquid, it could not exist as a fiber for an instant.
It is the extreme viscosity of quartz, at the heat even of an electric
arc, that makes these fibers possible. The only difference between
quartz in the oxyhydrogen jet and quartz in the arc is that in the
first you make threads and in the second are blown bubbles. I have in
my hand some microscopic bubbles of quartz showing all the perfection
of form and color that we are familiar with in the soap bubble.

An invaluable property of quartz is its power of insulating perfectly,
even in an atmosphere saturated with water. The gold leaves now
diverging were charged some time before the lecture, and hardly show
any change, yet the insulator is a rod of quartz only three-quarters
of an inch long, and the air is kept moist by a dish of water. The
quartz may even be dipped in the water and replaced with the water
upon it without any difference in the insulation being observed.

Not only can fibers be made of extreme fineness, but they are
wonderfully uniform in diameter. So uniform are they that they
perfectly stand an optical test so severe that irregularities
invisible in any microscope would immediately be made apparent. Every
one must have noticed when the sun is shining upon a border of flowers
and shrubs how the lines which spiders use as railways to travel from
place to place glisten with brilliant colors. These colors are only
produced when the fibers are sufficiently fine. If you take one of
these webs and examine it in the sunlight, you will find that the
colors are variegated, and the effect, consequently, is one of great
beauty.

A quartz fiber of about the same size shows colors in the same way,
but the tint is perfectly uniform on the fiber. If the color of the
fiber is examined with a prism, the spectrum is found to consist of
alternate bright and dark bands. Upon the screen are photographs
taken by Mr. Briscoe, a student in the laboratory at South Kensington,
of the spectra of some of these fibers at different angles of
incidence. It will be seen that coarse fibers have more bands than
fine, and that the number increases with the angle of incidence of the
light. There are peculiarities in the march of the bands as the angle
increases which I cannot describe now. I may only say that they appear
to move not uniformly, but in waves, presenting very much the
appearance of a caterpillar walking.

So uniform are the quartz fibers that the spectrum from end to end
consists of parallel bands. Occasionally a fiber is found which
presents a slight irregularity here and there. A spider line is so
irregular that these bands are hardly observable; but, as the
photograph on the screen shows, it is possible to trace them running
up and down the spectrum when you know what to look for.

To show that these longitudinal bands are due to the irregularities, I
have drawn a taper piece of quartz by hand, in which the two edges
make with one another an almost imperceptible angle, and the spectrum
of this shows the gradual change of diameter by the very steep angle
at which the bands run up the spectrum.

Into the theory of the development of these bands I am unable to
enter; that is a subject on which your professor of natural philosophy
is best able to speak. Perhaps I may venture to express the hope, as
the experimental investigation of this subject is now rendered
possible, that he may be induced to carry out a research for which he
is so eminently fitted.

Though this is a subject which is altogether beyond me, I have been
able to use the results in a practical way. When it is required to
place into an instrument a fiber of any particular size, all that has
to be done is to hold the frame of fibers toward a bright and distant
light, and look at them through a low-angled prism. The banded spectra
are then visible, and it is the work of a moment to pick out one with
the number of bands that has been found to be given by a fiber of the
desired size. A coarse fiber may have a dozen or more, while such
fibers as I find most useful have only two dark bands. Much finer ones
exist, showing the colors of the first order with one dark band; and
fibers so fine as to correspond to the white or even the gray of
Newton's scale are easily produced.

Passing now from the most scientific test of the uniformity of these
fibers, I shall next refer to one more homely. It is simply this: The
common garden spider, except when very young, cannot climb up one of
the same size as the web on which she displays such activity. She is
perfectly helpless, and slips down with a run. After vainly trying to
make any headway, she finally puts her hands (or feet) into her mouth
and then tries again, with no better success. I may mention that a
male of the same species is able to run up one of these with the
greatest ease, a feat which may perhaps save the lives of a few of
these unprotected creatures when quartz fibers are more common.

It is possible to make any quantity of very fine quartz fiber without
a bow and arrow at all, by simply drawing out a rod of quartz over and
over again in a strong oxyhydrogen jet. Then, if a stand of any sort
has been placed a few feet in front of the jet, it will be found
covered with a maze of thread, of which the photograph on the screen
represents a sample. This is hardly distinguishable from the web spun
by this magnificent spider in corners of greenhouses and such places.
By regulating the jet and the manipulation, anything from one of these
stranded cables to a single ultro-microscope line may be developed.

And now that I have explained that these fibers have such valuable
properties, it will no doubt be expected that I should perform some
feat with their aid which, up to the present time, has been considered
impossible, and this I intend to do.

Of all experiments, the one which has most excited my admiration is
the famous experiment of Cavendish, of which I have a full size model
before you. The object of this experiment is to weigh the earth by
comparing directly the force with which it attracts things with that
due to large masses of lead. As is shown by the model, any attraction
which these large balls exert on the small ones will tend to deflect
this 6 ft. beam in one direction, and then if the balls are reversed
in position, the deflection will be in the other direction. Now, when
it is considered how enormously greater the earth is than these balls,
it will be evident that the attraction due to them must be in
comparison excessively small. To make this evident, the enormous
apparatus you see had to be constructed, and then, using a fine
torsion wire, a perfectly certain but small effect was produced. The
experiment, however, could only be successfully carried out in cellars
and underground places, because changes of temperature produced
effects greater than those due to gravity.[2]

    [Footnote 2: Dr. Lodge has been able, by an elaborate
    arrangement of screens, to make this attraction just evident to
    an audience.--C. V. B.]

Now I have in a hole in the wall an instrument no bigger than a
galvanometer, of which a model is on the table. The balls of the
Cavendish apparatus, weighing several hundredweight each, are replaced
by balls weighing 13/4 pounds only. The smaller balls of 13/4 pounds are
replaced by little weights of 15 grains each. The 6 foot beam is
replaced by one that will swing round freely in a tube three-quarters
of an inch in diameter. The beam is, of course, suspended by a quartz
fiber. With this microscopic apparatus, not only is the very feeble
attraction observable, but I can actually obtain an effect eighteen
times as great as that given by the apparatus of Cavendish, and what
is more important, the accuracy of observation is enormously
increased.

The light from a lamp passes through a telescope lens, and falls on
the mirror of the instrument. It is reflected back to the table, and
thence by a fixed mirror to the scale on the wall, where it comes to a
focus. If the mirror on the table were plane, the whole movement of
the light would be only about eight inches, but the mirror is convex,
and this magnifies the motion nearly eight times. At the present
moment the attracting weights are in one extreme position, and the
line of light is quiet. I will now move them to the other position,
and you will see the result--the light slowly begins to move, and
slowly increases in movement. In forty seconds it will have acquired
its highest velocity, and in forty more it will have stopped at 5
feet 81/2 inches from the starting point, after which it will slowly
move back again, oscillating about its new position of rest.

It is not possible at this hour to enter into any calculations; I will
only say that the motion you have seen is the effect of a force of
less than one ten-millionth of the weight of a grain, and that with
this apparatus I can detect a force two thousand times smaller still.
There would be no difficulty even in showing the attraction between
two No. 5 shot.

And now, in conclusion, I would only say that if there is anything
that is good in the experiments to which I have this evening directed
your attention, experiments conducted largely with sticks, and string,
and straw and sealing wax, I may perhaps be pardoned if I express my
conviction that in these days we are too apt to depart from the simple
ways of our fathers, and instead of following them, to fall down and
worship the brazen image which the instrument maker hath set up.

       *       *       *       *       *




NATURE, COMPOSITION, AND TREATMENT OF ANIMAL AND VEGETABLE FABRICS.


The inseparable duties of studying the composition of the various
animal and vegetable fabrics, as also their nature--when in contact
with the various mineral, vegetable, animal, and gaseous bodies
applied in the individual industries--should not devolve upon the
heads, chemists, or managers of firms alone. It is most important that
every intelligent workman, whom we cannot expect to acquire a very
extensive knowledge of chemistry and perfect acquaintance of the
particular nature and component parts of fabrics, should, at least, be
able to thwart the possibility of the majority of accidents brought
about in regard to the quality and aspect of materials treated by
them.

In the treatment of wool the first operations are of no mean
importance, and the whole subsequent operations and final results,
almost as a whole, depend on the manner in which the fleece washing
had been effected. In presence of suintine, as also fatty matters, as
well as the countless kinds of acids deposited on the wool through
exudation from the body, etc., the various agents and materials cannot
act and deposit as evenly as might be desired, and the complete
obliteration of the former, therefore, becomes an absolute necessity.

For vegetable fabrics a great technical and practical knowledge is
already requisite in their cultivation itself, and before any
operations are necessary at all. One of the greatest points is the
ripeness of the fibers. It is almost an impossibility to produce
delicate colors on vegetable fabrics which were gathered
inopportunely. Numerous experiments have been made on cotton
containing smaller or larger quantities of unripe fibers, and after
the necessary preceding operations, have been dyed in rose, purple,
and blue colors, and the beauty of the shades invariably differed in
proportion to the greater or lesser quantities of unripe fibers
contained in the samples, and by a careless admixture of unripe and
unseasoned fibers the most brilliant colors have been completely
spoiled in the presence of the former. These deficiencies of unripe
vegetable fibers are so serious that the utmost precautions should be
taken, not only by planters to gather the fibers in a ripe state, but
the natural aspect of ripe and unripe fibers and their respective
differences should be known to the operators of the individual
branches in the cotton industry themselves.

The newest vegetable fabrics, as _ma_ (China grass), pina, _abaca_, or
Manila hemp, _agave_, jute, and that obtained from the palm tree, must
be tended with equal care to that of cotton. The _ma_, or China grass,
is obtained from the _Boehmeria nivea_, as also from the less known
_Boehmeria puya_. The fibers of this stalk, after preparing and
bleaching, have the whiteness of snow and the brilliancy of silk. By a
special process--the description of which we must for the present
leave in abeyance--the China grass can be transformed into a material
greatly resembling the finest quality of wool. The greatest advantage
afforded in the application of China grass is, moreover, that the
tissues produced with this fiber are much more easily washed than
silks, and in this operation they lose none of their beauty or their
quality.

The _abaca_ is produced from the fibrous parts of the bark of the wild
banana tree, found in the Philippines. Its botanical denomination is
_Musa troglodytarum_. The _abaca_ fiber is not spun or wrung, but is
jointed end to end. The threads are wound and subsequently beaten for
softening, and finally bleached by plunging in lime water for
twenty-four hours, and dried in the sun.

The _pina_ is a fiber obtained from the leaf of the anana tree
(_Bromelias ananas_), and is prepared in the same way as the abaca,
but extreme care must in this case be observed in culling the fibers,
in order to sort in accordance with their degree of fineness.

The Arabs manufacture the stuff for their tents with a mixture of
camel's hair and the fibrous flocks (kind of wadding) obtained from
the stalks of the wafer palm (the _Chamaerops humilis_).

The tissues used by the Arabs are coarse and colored, but the palm
fibers--when freed from gluten, which makes them adhere more
strongly--are susceptible to divide in a most astonishing manner.

The _Agave americana_ is a coarse fiber, mostly used in France for the
manufacture of Gobelin carpets and the production of ropes. Great
efforts have been made to bleach it in a satisfactory manner, as is
done with the _Phormium tenax_, but the former kind of fiber resists
the ordinary treatment with lyes, etc., and an appropriate bleaching
process has only been discovered quite recently.

Jute, which by many is confounded with _Phormium tenax_, or New
Zealand lint, is a fiber which can be divided as finely as desired,
and can be most beautifully bleached.

The jute or Indian _paat_ is generally known as a fibrous and textile
fabric, obtained chiefly from Calcutta, and is similar in nature to
the _Corchorus capsularis_, an Oriental species, known in Oriental
India by the name of _hatta jute_ and _gheenatlapaat_. This fibrous
plant has the property of dividing into the finest parallel fibers,
which can be carded without difficulty, and may be said to have the
excellent properties of linen, hemp, and cotton at once. When properly
bleached, it has an aspect which is as beautiful as that of silk. A
mixture of silk and jute can be easily worked together, and can also
be mixed with such vegetable fibers as cotton and linen. An immense
quantity of flannel and other stuffs are now manufactured and imitated
with the different mixtures containing jute.

The _suun_ is a fiber of a plant in the form of a cane (_Crotalaria
juncea_), and the paat or _suncheepaat_ is the thread of a species of
spiral (_Corchorus olitarius_), sold under the name of jute tissues.

The cotton tissues lose about twenty-five per cent. of their weight in
bleaching, five per cent. of the substances are dissolved through
alkalies, and the other twenty per cent., which are not attacked
directly through the alkalies, are removed through chlorine, acids,
and the water itself. The linen and hemp tissues contain eighteen per
cent. of substances which are soluble in alkalies, and they lose from
twenty-seven to thirty per cent. of their weight when taken through
the consecutive bleaching operations.

The substances do not alone include the substances contained in the
fabric originally, but also such as are deposited in the preliminary
treatment of the fabrics, as dirt from the hands of the operator, and
gluten soluble in warm water; as also glue or gelatine, potash or
soda, starch, albumen, and sugar, used by weavers, etc., and which are
all soluble in water; further, such as greasy matters, calcareous
soap, coppery soap, resinous or gummo-resinous matters, and the yellow
and green coloring matters contained in textile fabrics, which are
soluble in caustic soda; and finally, the earthy constituents which
are soluble in acids.

The nature and composition of silk and wool is diametrically opposed
to that of the former. The silk is more of a gummy nature, and is
susceptible to decompose into a kind of gelatinous mass if specially
treated.

The yellow coloring principle in silk was found only to be contained
in a very small proportion, and consisting of several distinct bodies.

The wool contains, first, a fatty matter which is solid at an ordinary
temperature, and perfectly liquid at 60 deg. C.; secondly, a fatty matter
which is liquid at 15 deg. C.; thirdly, a fibrous substance which
essentially constitutes the wool in the strict sense of the word.

The wool at least contains three important principles, as it will be
known that the fibrous substance disengages sulphur and
hydro-sulphuric acid without losing its peculiar properties; and it,
therefore, appears probable that the sulphur entered as an element in
the composition of a body which is perfectly distinct from the fibrous
substance aforementioned.

In treating wool with nitric acid, and taking all possible precautions
to determine as accurately as possible the quantity of sulphuric acid
produced by the contents of sulphur in the wool by the reaction with
chloride of barium, it will be found to contain from 1.53 to 1.87 per
cent. of sulphur.--_Wool and Textile Fabrics._

       *       *       *       *       *




THE PRODUCTION OF AMMONIA FROM COAL.[1]

By LUDWIG MOND.

    [Footnote 1: A paper read at the annual general meeting of the
    Society of Chemical Industry, London, July 10, 1889.]


As exemplifying to a certain extent the application of methodical
research to an industrial problem, I propose to bring before you
to-day an account of the work I have been engaged in for many years in
relation to the procuring of new and abundant supplies of ammonia, and
to investigations connected therewith.

Through the classic researches of Lawes and Gilbert, who proved, in
opposition to no less an authority than Liebig, that ammonia is a most
valuable manure which enables us not only to maintain, but to
multiply, the yield of our fields, and thus to feed on the same area a
much larger number of inhabitants, the immense importance of an
abundant supply of ammonia, more particularly for the Old World, with
its teeming population and worn-out soil, has been apparent to every
one.

For many years Europe has paid to South America millions upon millions
of pounds for ammonia in the shape of guano, and more recently, since
the supply of guano practically ceased, for nitrate of soda, which
effectually serves the same purpose as ammonia. During the past year
South America exported 750,000 tons of nitrate, of which 650,000 went
to Europe, representing a value of not less than 6,500,000l.

The problem of saving this immense expenditure to Europe, of making
ourselves independent of a country so far away for the supply of a
material upon which the prosperity of our agriculture--our most
important industry--depends, by supplying this ammonia from sources at
our own command, is certainly one of the most important which our
science has to solve.

It is more than 100 years since Berthollet ascertained that ammonia
consists of nitrogen and hydrogen, two elements which we have in great
abundance at our command, and innumerable attempts have been made
during this century to produce this valuable product by the direct
combination of the elements, as well as by indirect means. It has been
equally well known that we are in possession of three abundant sources
of nitrogen:

  (1.) In the shape of matter of animal origin.

  (2.) In the shape of matter of vegetable origin.

  (3.) In the atmosphere, which contains no less than 79 per cent.
  of uncombined nitrogen.

In olden times ammonia was principally obtained from animal matter,
originally in Egypt by the distillation of camel dung, later on from
urine, and from the distillation of bones and horn. The quantity so
obtained was very small and the products very expensive. The
introduction of coal gas for illumination gave us a considerable and
constantly increasing supply of ammonia as a by-product of the gas
manufacture, and until recently all practical efforts to increase our
supply of ammonia were directed toward collecting and utilizing in the
best possible manner the ammonia so obtained. The immense extension of
the coal gas industry all over the world has in this way put us into
possession of a very considerable amount of sulphate of ammonia,
amounting in Europe now to 140,000 tons per annum. In recent years
this has been augmented by the ammonia obtained by the distillation of
shale, by the introduction of closed ovens for the manufacture of
coke, combined with apparatus for condensing the ammonia formed in
this manufacture, and also by the condensation of the ammonia
contained in the gases from blast furnaces working with coal. But all
these new sources have so far added only about 40,000 tons of
sulphate of ammonia to our supply, making a total of 180,000 tons per
annum, of which about 120,000 are produced in the United Kingdom,
while we still import 650,000 tons of nitrate of soda, equivalent to
500,000 tons of sulphate of ammonia, to make up our requirements.

Many processes have from time to time been proposed to obtain ammonia
from other sources. The distillation of turf, which contains upward of
3 per cent. of nitrogen, has received much attention, and a large
number of inventors have endeavored to produce ammonia from the
nitrogen of the air; but none of these processes has to my knowledge
been successful on a manufacturing scale.

My attention was called to this subject at an early part of my career.
Already, as far back as 1861, I undertook experiments to utilize, for
the production of ammonia, waste leather, a waste material of animal
origin at once abundant and very rich in nitrogen, containing from 12
per cent. to 15 per cent. of this element. Distillation in iron
retorts yielded about half the nitrogen of this material in the form
of ammonia, the carbon remaining in the retorts containing still from
6 per cent. to 8 per cent. Distillation with a moderate quantity of
hydrate of lime increased the yield of ammonia only by 1 per cent. to
11/2 per cent. A rather better result was obtained by distilling the
ground residual carbon with hydrate of lime, but this operation
proceeded very slowly, and the total yield of ammonia still remained
very far below the quantity theoretically obtainable, so that I came
to the conclusion that it was more rational to utilize the leather,
reduced to powder by mechanical means, by mixing it directly with
other manures.

A few years later I became connected with a large animal charcoal
works, in which sulphate of ammonia was obtained as a by-product. Here
again I was met with the fact that the yield of ammonia by no means
corresponded with the nitrogen in the raw material and that the
charcoal remaining in the retorts contained still about half as much
nitrogen as had been present in the bones used.

From this time forward my attention was for many years given
exclusively to the soda manufacture, and it was only in 1879 that I
again took up the question of ammonia. I then determined to submit the
various processes which had been proposed for obtaining ammonia from
the nitrogen of the air to a searching investigation, and engaged Mr.
Joseph Hawliczek to carry out the experimental work.

These processes may be broadly divided into three classes:

  (1.) Processes which propose to combine nascent hydrogen with
  nitrogen at high temperatures or by electricity, with or without
  the presence of acid gases.

  (2.) Processes in which nitrides are first formed, from which
  ammonia is obtained by the action of hydrogen or steam.

  (3.) Processes in which cyanides are first formed and the ammonia
  obtained from these by the action of steam.

We began with an investigation of those processes in which a mixture
of steam and nitrogen or of steam and air is made to act upon coke at
a high temperature, sometimes in the presence of lime, baryta, or an
alkali, sometimes in the presence of hydrochloric acid.

Very numerous patents have been taken out in this direction and there
is no doubt that ammonia has been obtained by these processes by many
inventors, but as I was aware that coke contains a considerable
quantity of nitrogen, frequently as much as 1.5 per cent., which might
be the source of the ammonia obtained, I determined to carry on the
investigation in such a way as to make quite certain whether we
obtained the ammonia from the coke or from the nitrogen of the
atmosphere, or from both. For this purpose we made for every
experiment carried on by a mixture of nitrogen or air with steam
another experiment with steam alone, carefully excluding nitrogen from
the apparatus. A very large number of experiments carried on at
carefully determined temperatures, ranging from 500 deg. to 1,200 deg.C., and
in which the directions given by the various inventors were most
carefully observed, all led to the same result, viz., that the
quantities of ammonia obtained were the same whether nitrogen was
introduced into the apparatus with the steam or whether steam alone
was used, thus proving conclusively that the ammonia obtained was
derived from the nitrogen contained in the coke.

Further, on carefully determining the nitrogen in the coke used, it
was found that the quantity of ammonia we had obtained in burning coke
in a current of nitrogen and steam very nearly corresponded with the
total nitrogen in the coke, so that we subsequently made our nitrogen
determinations in the coke by simply burning it in a current of steam.

A process belonging to this class, proposed by Hugo Fleck, in which a
mixture of carbonic oxide, steam, and nitrogen is made to pass over
lime at a moderate red heat in order to obtain ammonia, was also
carefully tried. It was claimed for this process that it produced
nascent hydrogen at temperatures at which the ammonia is not
dissociated, and for this reason succeeded where others had failed. We
found that a considerable amount of hydrogen was obtained in this way
at a temperature not exceeding 350 deg.C., and that the reaction was
nearly complete at 500 deg.C.; but although we tried many experiments over
a great range of temperatures, we never obtained a trace of ammonia by
this process.

Among experiments with processes of the second class, based upon the
formation of nitrides and their subsequent decomposition, the nitrides
