the body; how many the faculties of the soul; how many the mutations of
life; what torments or rewards devolve upon the souls of the dead,
according to their respective deserts."

There is ample evidence, therefore, that the Greeks had communication
with, and borrowed the philosophy of, both Persia and India at a very
early date.

That there was intimate intercourse with India in very ancient times
there can be no doubt. In addition to the classical sources of
information collected chiefly by the officers of Alexander the Great,
Seleucus and the Ptolemies, and which was condensed and reduced to
consistent shape by Diodorus, Strabo, Pliny, and Arrian, within the
first century before and the first century after Christ, we have the
further proof of the fact by the constant finds of innumerable Greek
coins over a large portion of north-western India, and even at Cabul.
These, so far as yet known, commence with the third of the Seleucidae,
and run on for many centuries, the inscriptions showing that the Greek
characters were used in the provinces of Cabul and the Punjab even so
late as the fourth century A.D. The consideration of these coins of the
Graeco-Persian empire of the Seleucidae naturally leads us to the
consideration of the Persians.

I have already shown that the Greeks and Persians held intimate
relations with each other as early as the fourth century B.C., and from
the speech of Demosthenes against a proposed war with Persia, delivered
in 354 B.C, we may well believe that they had already had a long and
intimate connection with each other. The passage rends thus:-

"All Greeks know that, so long as they regarded Persia as their common
enemy, they were at peace with each other, and enjoyed much prosperity,
but since they have looked upon the King (of Persia) as a friend, and
quarrelled about disputes with each other, they have suffered worse
calamities than any one could possibly imprecate upon them."

The Persian empire was founded by Cyrus, about B.C. 560, and rapidly
rose to be perhaps the greatest power of the world of that age. The rise
of the Persian empire is not unlike that of the Arabian power in regard
to the wide range of conquest achieved in a very limited period. Its
actual existence, from the foundation of the empire by Cyrus in B.C. 560
to the death of Darius III., was barely two centuries and a half.

Previous to the Persian empire there existed three principal powers in
Asia--the Medes, the Chaldaeans or Babylonish, and the Lydian. Of these
the Medes and Chaldaeans were the most ancient, and their joint power
would seem to have extended eastward as far as the Oxus and Indus.

Of these nations the Babylonians were the most highly civilized, and,
did time permit, we might find much that would interest and instruct in
examining the various facts relating to the arts and sciences amongst
these nations. We know that arts and sciences must have been diligently
cultivated amongst them, and that magic and astrology were held in high
repute.

That the Persians were well acquainted with other nations is shown
clearly from the remains of their great city of Persepolis, where the
sculptured figures represent many types of mankind--the negro, with
thick lips and flat nose, and with his crisp, wooly hair, clearly cut;
and the half-naked Indian, with his distinguishing features, being
easily singled out from many others.

Persia held sway over a huge district of India--the limits of this are
not known; but, in addition, they were well acquainted with a large
portion of the north-western part of India.

The traditions and historical records of the Persians are contained in
the famous series of writings culled the Zend-avesta. These writings
are, it is thought, of an age even before the Persian dynasty was
established; and it has been shown by the researches of M. Anguetil and
Sir W. Jones that there is indeed a great probability of the Zend having
been a dialect of the ancient Sanscrit language. In the vocabulary
attached to M. Anguetil's great work on the Zend-avesta no less than 60
to 70 per cent. of the words are said to be pure Sanscrit.

As the oldest known language of Persia was Chaldaeic, we are again thrown
back on Indian sources for the origin of the great book of the ancient
Persians. Even the name of the priests of the Persian religion of
Zoroaster, Mag or Magi, is of Sanscrit derivation.

The Persians kept up an enormous army, which was spread through all the
various provinces and Satrapies, and consisted in great part of paid
auxiliaries. In at least the later period of Persian power the Greeks
were preferred to all others, and in the time of Cyrus the Younger they
composed the flower of the Persian army, and were employed in
garrisoning most of the chief cities of Asia Minor.

The description given by Herodotus of the vast army and fleet prepared
for the expedition of Xerxes against the Greeks gives us an idea of the
extent of the Persian power, and of the wide range of countries and
nations over which they held sway. The review held on the Plain of
Doriscus was perhaps the greatest military spectacle ever beheld either
before or since. Herodotus enumerates no less than 56 different nations,
all of them in their national dress and arms. Besides the Persians there
were "Medes and Bactrians; Libyans in war chariots with four horses;
Arabs on camels; Sagartians, wild huntsmen who employed, instead of the
usual weapons of the time, the lasso; the nomadic tribes of Bucharia and
Mongolia; Ethiopians in lions' skins, and Indians in cotton robes;
Phoenician sailors, and Greeks from Asia Minor." All these and many
others were there assembled by the despotic power of the Persian king.

The system of government employed by the Persians, and the constant
reports and tributes sent from every province to the central court of
the king, were well calculated to bring to it, as to a focus, the
curious lore of the various nations who came in contact with or were
subdued by them.

The Persians were famed for their knowledge of astronomy and astrology,
and were said "to have anciently known the most wonderful powers of
nature, and to have therefore acquired great fame as magicians and
enchanters."

The close relation between the Persian religious traditions and those of
the Hindoos is very striking. According to Mohsan, "The best informed
Persians, who professed the faith of Hu-shang as distinguished from that
of Zeratusht, believes that the first monarch of Iran, and, indeed, of
the whole world, was Mahabad (a word apparently Sanscrit), who divided
the people into four orders,--the religious, the military, the
commercial, and the servile, to which he assigned names unquestionably
the same as those now applied to the four primary classes of the
Hindoos."

They added, "that he received from the Creator and promulgated amongst
men a _sacred book in a heavenly language_, to which the Musselman
author gives the _Arabic_ title of _Desatir_, or Regulations, but the
original name of which he has not mentioned; and that _fourteen
Mahabads_ had appeared, or would appear, in human shapes for the
government of this world."

"Now when we know that the Hindoos believe in _fourteen Menus_, or
celestial persons with similar functions, the _first_ of whom left a
book of _regulations_, or divine ordinances, which they hold equal to
the _Veda_, and the language of which they believe to be that of the
gods, we can hardly doubt that the first corruption of the purest and
oldest religion was the system of _Indian_ theology invented by the
_Brahmins_ and prevalent in those territories where the book of Mahabad,
or Menu, is at this moment the standard of all religious and moral
duties."

Having established, then, the long and intimate nature of the Persian
intercourse with India, let us see how it bears on our more immediate
subject.

The works on medicine which are known to exist, and to have been written
in Persian, are not very many in number, but they cover a period of time
of nearly 400 years. The oldest of them is of the year 1392 A.D., and in
it and its successors there are long lists of Arabian authors whose
works had been consulted, and also various Indian works.

Greek physicians were in great request at the Persian court, and when
the daughter of the Emperor Aurelian was sent in marriage to the Persian
monarch, Sapor II., she had a number of Greek physicians in her train.
This king founded a new city called Jondisabour in honour of his Queen,
and owing to the settlement here of a number of Greek physicians, who
had, on account of religious differences, retired into Persia, this city
became celebrated as a medical school. Dr. Friend gives the names of
these as "Damascius the Syrian, Simplicius of Cilicia, Diogenes of
Phaenicea, Isidorus of Gaza, and others, the most learned and greatest
philosophers of the age." It is thought by some authors that many of the
Arabian writers who belonged to the college of Baghdad were educated at
Jondisabour.

The district of Jondisabour is even yet one of the most nourishing in
Persia, and contains mines which still yield turquoise, salt, lead,
copper, antimony, iron, and marble.

During the reign of the Persian king Nooshirwan, his physician Barzoueh
made various journeys into India, one of which was specially for the
purpose of obtaining copies of Indian literature, and another to obtain
medicaments and herbs.

How to account for the strange fact that all schools of medicine which
have risen, flourished, and disappeared, have left some trace in
historical records, with the exception of that of India, is most
difficult, unless under the hypothesis that the language in which the
science and philosophy of India was recorded has been almost a sealed
book to the world, and is even now quite unintelligible to the people of
India itself, generally speaking, and that thus the only way in which
the results of the long ages of philosophic study, which unquestionably
have had a place in India, have only been known by this dark reflection
from the writings of Greek and Arabic writers, which were scattered
broadcast over the ancient world. The Greeks, we know, borrowed their
science largely from the Egyptians, both in respect to theology and
philosophy; and we might, with much profit, pursue the examination of
our subject amongst the records of that highly civilized amongst the
ancient nations.

Many authors have attempted to show that there is a wonderful
resemblance between the Egyptians and the Hindoos, the sculptures on the
monuments of the former are most wonderfully like those of India, and
the features, dress, and arms are all as like as may be.

Both nations had the various arts of weaving, dyeing, embroidering,
working in metals, and the manufacture of glass, and practised them with
but little difference in their methods. The fine muslins of India find
their counterparts as "woven wind" in the transparent tissues figured on
