
Rip shook his head. "O'Brine hasn't told me."

"I don't know a thing," Southwick said. "We got instructions to pack up a
pretty strange assortment of supplies for the _Scorpius_, and that's all
I know. The order was in special cipher, though, so we're all wondering
about it."

The deputy commander returned, reported to O'Brine, then walked up to Rip
and Southwick. "Nothing else needed," he said curtly. "We'll get off at
once."

Southwick nodded, shook hands with Rip, and said in a voice the deputy
could hear, "Don't let these spacemen bother you. Trouble with them is
they all wanted to be Planeteers and couldn't pass the intelligence
tests." He winked, then hurried to the air lock.

Spacemen worked quickly to clear the deck of the new supplies, stowing
them in a nearby workroom. Within five minutes the engine control room
was clear. The safety officer signaled, and the radiation warning
sounded. Taking off!

Rip hurried to the squad room and climbed into an acceleration chair. The
other Planeteers were already in the room, most of them in their bunks.
Koa slid into the chair beside him. "Find out anything, sir?"

"Nothing useful. A bunch of equipment came aboard, but it was in plain
crates. I couldn't tell what it was."

Acceleration pressed them against the chairs. Rip sighed, picked up an
audio-circuit set, and put it over his ears. Might as well listen to what
the circuit had to offer. There was nothing else to do. Music was
playing, and it was the kind he liked. He settled back to relax and
listen.

_Brennschluss_ came some time later. It woke Rip up from a sound sleep.
He blinked, glancing at his chronometer. Great Cosmos! With that length
of acceleration they must be high-vacking for Jupiter! He waited until
the ship went into the gravity spin, then got out of his chair and
stretched. He was hungry. Koa was still sleeping. He decided not to wake
him. The sergeant major would see that the men ate when they wanted to.

In the messroom only one table was occupied--by Commander O'Brine.

Rip gave him a civil hello and started to sit alone at another table. To
his surprise, O'Brine beckoned to him.

"Sit down," the spaceman invited gruffly.

Rip did and wondered what was coming next.

"We'll start to decelerate in about ten minutes," O'Brine said. "Eat
while you can." He signaled, and a spaceman brought Rip the day's ration
in an individual plastic carton with thermo-lining. The Planeteer opened
it and found a block of mixed vegetables, a slab of space meat, and two
units of biscuit. He wrinkled his nose. Space meat he didn't mind. It was
chewy but tasty. The mixed vegetable ration was chosen for its food value
and not for taste. A good mouthful of Earth grass would be a lot more
palatable. He sliced off pieces of the warm stuff and chewed
thoughtfully, watching O'Brine's face for a clue as to why the commander
had invited him to sit down.

It wasn't long in coming. "Your orders are the strangest things I've ever
read," O'Brine stated. "Do you know where we're going?"

Rip figured quickly. They had accelerated for six and a half hours. Now,
ten minutes after _Brennschluss_, they were going to start deceleration.
That meant they had really high-vacked it to get somewhere in a hurry. He
calculated swiftly.

"I don't know exactly," he admitted. "But from the ship's actions, I'd
say we were aiming for the far side of the asteroid belt. Anyway, we'll
fall short of Jupiter."

There was a glimmer of respect in O'Brine's glance. "That's right. Know
anything about asteroids, Foster?"

Rip considered. He knew what he had been taught in astronomy and
astrogation. Between Mars and Jupiter lay a broad belt in which the
asteroids swung. They ranged from Ceres, a tiny world only 480 miles in
diameter, down to chunks of rock the size of a house. No accurate count
of asteroids--or minor planets, as they were called--had been made, but
the observatory on Mars had charted the orbits of thousands. A few were
more than a mile in diameter, but most were great boulders of irregular
shape, from a few feet to several hundred feet at their greatest
dimension.

"I know the usual stuff about them," he told O'Brine. "I haven't any
special knowledge."

O'Brine blinked. "Then why did they assign you? What's your specialty?"

"Astrophysics."

"That might explain it. Second specialty?"

"Astrogation." He couldn't resist adding, "That's more advanced than the
simple space navigation you use, Commander."

O'Brine started to retort, then apparently thought better of it. "I hope
you'll be able to carry out your orders, Lieutenant," he said stiffly.
"I hope, but not much. I don't think you can."

Rip asked, "What are my orders, sir?"

O'Brine waved in the general direction of the wall. "Out there somewhere
in the asteroid belt, Foster, there is a little chunk of matter about one
thousand yards in diameter. A very minor planet. We know its approximate
coordinates as of two days ago, but we don't know much else. It happens
to be a very important minor planet."

Rip waited, intent on the commander's words.

"It's important," O'Brine continued, "because it happens to be pure
thorium."

Rip gasped. Thorium! The rare, radioactive element just below uranium in
the periodic table of the elements, the element used to power this very
ship! "What a find!" he said in a hushed voice. No wonder the job was
Federation priority A, with Space Council security! "What do I do about
it?" he asked.

O'Brine grinned. "Ride it," he said. "Your orders say you're to capture
this asteroid, blast it out of its orbit, and drive it back to Earth!"




CHAPTER FOUR

Find the Needle!


Rip walked into the squad room with a copy of the orders in his hand.
After one look at his face, the Planeteers clustered around him. Santos
woke those who were sleeping, while Rip waited.

"We have our orders, men," he announced. Suddenly he laughed. He couldn't
help it. At first he had been completely overcome by the responsibility
and the magnitude of the job, but now he was getting used to the idea,
and he could see the adventure in it. Ten wild Planeteers riding an
asteroid! Sunny space, what a great big thermonuclear stunt!

Koa remarked, "It must be good. The lieutenant is getting a real atomic
charge out of it."

"Sit down," Rip ordered. "You'd better, because you might fall over when
you hear this. Listen, men. Two days ago the freighter _Altair_ passed
through the asteroid belt on a run from Jupiter to Mars." He sat down,
too, because deceleration was starting. As his men looked at each other
in surprise at the quickness of it, he continued, "The old bucket found
something we need--an asteroid of pure thorium."

The enlisted Planeteers knew as well as he what that meant. There were
whistles of astonishment. Koa slapped his thigh. "By Gemini! What do we
do about it, sir?"

"We capture it," Rip said. "We blast it loose from its orbit and ride it
back to Earth."

He sat back and watched their reactions. At first they were stunned.
Trudeau, the Frenchman, muttered to himself in French. Dominico, the
Italian, held up his hands and exclaimed, "Santa Maria!"

Kemp, one of the American privates, asked, "How do we do it, sir?"

Rip grinned. "That's a good question. I don't know."

That stopped them. They stared at him. He added quickly, "Supplies came
aboard at Marsport. We'll get the clue when we open them. Headquarters
must have known the method when they assigned us and ordered the
equipment they thought we'd need."

Koa stood up. He was the only one who could have moved upright against
the terrific deceleration. He walked to a rack at one side of the squad
room and took down a copy of _The Space Navigator_. Then, resuming his
seat, he looked questioningly at Rip. "Anything else, sir? I thought I'd
read what there is about asteroids."

"Go ahead," Rip agreed. He sat back as Koa began to recite what data
there was, but he didn't listen. His mind was going ten astro-units
a second. He thought he knew why he had been chosen for the job. Word of
the priceless asteroid must have reached headquarters only a short time
before he was scheduled to leave the space platform. He could imagine the
speed with which the specialists at Terra base had acted. They had sent
orders instantly to the fastest cruiser in the area, the _Scorpius_, to
stand by for further instructions. Then their personnel machines must
have whirred rapidly, electronic brains searching for the nearest
available Planeteer officer with an astrophysics specialty and
astrogation training.

He could imagine the reaction when the machine turned up the name of a
brand-new lieutenant. But the choice was logical enough. He knew that
most, if not all, of the Planeteer astrophysicists were in either high
or low space on special work. Chances were there was no astrophysicist
nearer than Ganymede. So the choice had fallen to him.

He had a mental image of the Terra base scientists feeding data into the
electronic brain, taking the results, and writing fast orders for the men
and supplies needed. Work at the Planeteer base had probably been
finished within an hour of the time word was received.

When they opened the cases brought aboard by the Martians, he would see
that the method of blasting the asteroid into a course for Earth was all
figured out for him.

Rip was anxious to get at those cases. Not until he saw the method of
operation could he begin to figure his course. But there was no
possibility of getting at the stuff until _Brennschluss_. He put the
problem out of his mind and concentrated on what his men were saying.

"... and he slugged into that asteroid going close to seven AU's," Santos
was saying. The corporal shrugged expressively.

Rip recognized the story. It was about a supply ship, a chemical drive
rocket job, that had blasted into an asteroid a few years before.

Private Dowst shrugged, too. "Too bad. High vack was waiting for him.
Nothing you can do when Old Man Nothing wants you. Not a thing in space!"

Rip listened, interested. This was the talk of old space hands, who
had given the high vacuum of empty space a personality, calling it
"high vack," or "Old Man Nothing." With understandable fatalism, they
believed--or said they believed--that when high vacuum really wanted
you, there was nothing you could do.

Rip had come across an interesting bit of word knowledge. Spacemen and
Planeteers alike had a way of using the phrase "by Gemini!" Gemini, of
course, was the constellation of the Twins, Castor and Pollux. Both were
useful stars for astrogation. The Roman horse soldiers of ancient history
had sworn "by Gemini," or "by the Twins." The Romans believed the stars
were the famous Greek warriors Castor and Pollux, placed in the heavens
after their deaths. In later years, the phrase degenerated to the simple
"by jiminy," and its meaning had been lost. Now, although few spacemen
knew the history of the phrase, they were using it again, correctly.

Other space talk grew out of space itself, not out of history. For
instance, the worst thing that could happen to a man was to have his
helmet broken. Let the transparent globe be shattered, and the results
were both quick and final. Hence the oft heard threat, "I'll bust your
bubble."

Speaking of bubbles ... Rip realized suddenly that he and his men would
have to live in bubbles and space suits while on the asteroid. None of
the minor planets were big enough to have an atmosphere or much gravity.

If only he could get a look into those cases! But the ship was still
decelerating, and he would have to wait. He put his head against the
chair rest and settled down to wait as patiently as he could.

_Brennschluss_ was a long time coming. When the deceleration finally
stopped, Rip didn't wait for gravity. He hauled himself out of the chair
and the squad room and went down the corridor hand over hand. He headed
straight for where the supplies were stacked, his Planeteers close behind
him.

Commander O'Brine arrived at the same time. "We're starting to scan for
the asteroid," he greeted Rip. "May be some time before we find it."

"Where are we, sir?" Rip asked.

"Just above the asteroid belt near the outer edge. We're beyond the
position where the asteroid was sighted, moving along what the _Altair_
figured as its orbit. I'm not stretching space, Foster, when I tell you
we're hunting for a needle in a junk pile. This part of space is filled
with more objects than you would imagine, and they all register on the
rad screens."

"We'll find it," Rip said confidently.

O'Brine nodded. "Yes. But it probably will take some hunting. Meanwhile,
let's get at those cases. The supply clerk is on his way."

The supply clerk arrived, issued tools to the Planeteers, then opened a
plastic case attached to one of the boxes and produced lists. As the
Planeteers opened and unpacked the crates, Rip and O'Brine inspected, and
the clerk checked off the items.

The first case produced a complete chemical cutting unit, with an
assortment of cutting tips and adapters. Rip looked around for the gas
cylinders and saw none. "Something's wrong," he objected. "Where's the
fuel supply for the torch?"

The supply clerk inspected the lists, shuffled papers, and found the
answer.

"The following," he read, "are to be supplied from the _Scorpius_
complement. One landing boat, large, model twenty-eight. Eight each,
oxygen cutting unit gas bottles. Four each, chemical cutting unit fuel
tanks."

"That's that," Rip said, relieved. Apparently he was supposed to do a lot
of cutting on the asteroid, probably of the thorium itself. The hot flame
of the torch could melt any known substance. The torch itself could melt
in unskilled hands.

The next case yielded a set of astrogation instruments, carefully cradled
in a soft, rubbery plastic. Rip left them in the case and put them to one
side. As he did so, Sergeant Major Koa let out a whistle of surprise.

"Lieutenant, look at this!"

Corporal Santos exclaimed, "Well, stonker me for a stupid space squid! Do
they expect us to find any people on this asteroid?"

The object was a portable rocket launcher designed to fire light attack
rockets. It was a standard item of fighting equipment for Planeteers.

"I recognize the shape of those cases over there, now," Koa said. "Ten
racks of rockets for the launcher, one rack to a case."

Rip scratched his head. He was as puzzled as Santos. Why supply fighting
equipment for a crew on an asteroid that couldn't possibly have any
living thing on it?

He left the puzzle for the future and called for more cases. The next
two yielded projectile-type handguns for ten men, with ammunition, and
standard Planeteer space knives. The space knives had hidden blades,
which were driven forth violently when the operator pushed a thumb lever,
releasing the gas in a cartridge contained in the handle. The blades
snapped forth with enough force to break a bubble or to cut through a
space suit. They were designed for the sole purpose of space hand-to-hand
combat.

The Planeteers looked at each other. What were they up against, that such
equipment was needed on a barren asteroid?

Private Dowst opened a box that contained a complete tool kit, the tools
designed to be handled by men in space suits. Yards of wire, for several
purposes, were wound on reels. Two hand-driven dynamos capable of
developing great power were included.

Corporal Pederson found a small case which contained books, the latest
astronomical data sheets, and a space computer and scratch board. These
were obviously for Rip's personal use. He examined them. There were all
the references he would need for computing orbit, speed, and just about
anything else that might be required. He had to admire the thoroughness
of whoever had written the order. The unknown Planeteer had assumed that
the space cruiser would not have all the astrophysics references
necessary and had included a copy of each.

Several large cases remained. Koa ripped the side from one and let out an
