is your hangar going to be? And where is that spur coming in from? Are
we going to have a lot of building to do to get that blasted thing
snaked over those hills?" Connel pointed to the protective ring of high
rugged peaks that surrounded the Academy.

"That's why Dave Barret here is so important," replied Hemmingwell. "He
figured out a way of tunneling through this section here"--he pointed to
a particularly rugged section of the hills--"at half the cost of
bringing it straight in on that plain there."

Connel and Walters studied the map closely. "Very good," said Walters.

"You think you can do it, Dave?" asked Connel.

"I'm sure I can, sir," replied the young man.

"And save time?" growled Connel.

"I'll have that line through, and in operation, bringing in the first
haul of hangar material in three weeks."

Impressed by the young man's confidence, Connel turned to Commander
Walters and nodded.

"Well, if you can do that, Barret," said Walters, "Professor Hemmingwell
will have to begin his operations now, won't you, Professor?"

"That's right," said the wiry old man. "Right now, this very minute."

Devers suddenly spoke up. "I would like to have one thing explained,
Commander, unless, of course, it's a breach of security, but--" He
hesitated.

"What is it?" asked Connel.

"I've been going along with you for some time now," explained Devers.
"But I still don't know the exact nature of the projectile you propose
to build. What's the purpose of it?"

"You certainly deserve an answer to that question," said Commander
Walters warmly. "You've contributed your services to this operation
absolutely blindly. Now you should know everything." He paused and
looked at Hemmingwell and Connel, who nodded in return. "Carter," he
resumed, "we are going to create a spaceship that can launch a large
projectile filled with cargo and send it to any small area."

Carter Devers' face lighted up. "You mean, you are going to fire
payloads from space freighters instead of landing with them?"

"Exactly," said Walters. "These freighters will deliver mail and
supplies to out-of-the-way settlements that do not have a spaceport
large enough to handle the giant freighters and have to depend on
surface transport from the larger cities."

Carter Devers shook his head slowly. "This is the most amazing thing
I've ever heard of in my life."

"I thought you'd be surprised, Carter," said Walters, his face glowing
with pleasure. "The big item, of course, is to lick the problem of
standardizing the receivers for the projectiles. They must be
lightweight, easily assembled, and precision made, since it's going to
have an electronic gismo inside for the projectile to 'home' on."

Professor Hemmingwell grunted. "That electronic gismo, as you call it,
is the real idea behind the whole operation."

"How is that, Professor?" asked Devers.

"Well, it works on this principle," began Hemmingwell. "The receiver
will send out a distinctive radar beam. In the spaceship, the projectile
designated for that receiver will be tuned in to the frequency of that
beam and fired from the ship. A homing device, built into the projectile
will take over, guiding it right down the beam to its destination."

"And how does that radar beam work?" asked Devers.

"That," said Connel stiffly, "is a military secret."

"Of course," nodded Devers, smiling. "I was just curious."

"Well, now that we're agreed on a site for the operation," said
Professor Hemmingwell, "is there anything else you want to discuss,
Commander?"

"Not for the moment, Professor," replied the commandant of Space
Academy. "You have any more questions, Major Connel?"

When Connel shook his head, Devers spoke up again.

"There is something else I would like to know, if it isn't a breach of
military secrecy," he said with a smile at Connel. "I don't remember
seeing anything about this project in the bills sent before the Solar
Council. When was it authorized?"

"It wasn't," snapped Hemmingwell. "It was blocked before it came to a
vote. So I ran around the whole Solar Alliance, begging and borrowing
the money to finance the project myself."

"And the Solar Guard is just lending technical assistance and
facilities," supplied Walters. "Of course, should the project succeed,
we will go before the Solar Council with an emergency request to
incorporate the idea into the defense of all Solar Guard outposts."

"Private capital, eh?" said Devers, turning to look at the professor
admiringly. "You are a very brave man, Professor Hemmingwell, to risk so
much. And, I might add, you must be an excellent salesman to sell Solar
Alliance bankers your ideas."

"Common sense," snorted the professor. "Plain horse sense."

"Still," insisted Devers, "most of the bankers with whom I've ever tried
to talk common sense _were_ horses." As everyone laughed, he turned to
Walters. "Now, just what do you want me to do, Commander?"

"Carter, you've done so much for this project already that I'm going to
give you a rest," said Walters.

"I don't understand."

"From now on," Major Connel broke in, "the project will be in the hands
of the professor. If he needs anything, he'll tell Steve Strong. If
Strong can't fulfill the request, he'll pass it on to Commander Walters,
and if the commander feels it necessary to have your help, he will
contact you."

"You understand, of course," said Walters, trying to soften the major's
flat statement.

"Of course," replied Devers easily. "Still, if you need my help on this
thing at all, don't fail to call me."

"Thank you, Carter," said Walters. "You've been a great help already."

Shaking hands all around and wishing them well, Devers left the office.
Dave Barret, Commander Walters, and Professor Hemmingwell turned to
their study of the map, but Major Connel remained where he was, rubbing
his chin thoughtfully. He shook his head as if to brush an impossible
idea out of his mind and then turned to the map.

       *       *       *       *       *

Tom Corbett, Roger Manning, and Astro stood at rigid attention in their
dormitory room, backs ramrod straight, eyes front, hands stiffly at
their sides. Captain Steve Strong, his face red and voice hoarse, strode
up and down in front of them.

"And another thing!" he roared. "This court reprimand goes on your
official records, and you're going to spend your time on guard duty like
any common Earthworm that doesn't know its rocket from its pocket!" For
nearly half an hour the cadets had listened to their unit instructor
bawl them out. "When I think," he continued, "when I _think_ of how
close you three space brats came to getting kicked out of the Academy--"
Words seemed to fail the young captain momentarily and he slumped on one
of the bunks and looked at the row of cadets, shaking his head. "Why, in
the name of Saturn, I ever accepted the responsibility of making you
three bird brains into cadets is beyond me. And to think that when you
first came here, I thought you had that special something to make you an
outstanding unit. I even went out on a limb for you. And now you pull a
stunt like this."

Behind them, the door opened and a short man, no more than five feet
tall, but with the bulging muscles of a tiny giant stretching his
bright-red enlisted man's uniform, stepped inside. He saluted Strong
smartly.

"Chief Petty Officer Rush here to assign the _Polaris_ unit to guard
duty, sir," he announced.

"All right, Firehouse," said Strong, using the man's nickname. "Give it
to them. Show them no mercy. By the rings of Saturn, they've got to be
made to realize their responsibilities!"

"Yes, sir," said the thick little man.

Strong walked out of the room without another word, nor even a backward
glance at the cadets.

As soon as the door closed, Timothy "Firehouse" Rush faced the three
cadets, his beaten and battered face glowing with anticipation.

"Get this!" he growled. "When you're assigned to guard duty with the
E.M.'s of the Solar Guard, you leave your immunity as cadets here in the
Academy. From now on, you belong to me. And I'll tell you right now,
there isn't anything in space that I hate more, or think less of, than
Space Cadets. You get special privileges you don't deserve because you
wear that uniform. You get a chance to learn to be a spaceman and most
of you muff it. I've got E.M.'s in my outfit that could blast circles
around either of you--guys that deserve the chance you've got, and
fouled out because they can't spell or don't know how to hold a cup of
tea with their fingers the right way. When you come to me, it means
you've done something bad. You're on your way out. And I'm going to try
my best to see that you make it--_out_." He took a step forward and
glared at them. "Report to me at 1800 hours and"--his voice dropped to a
gravelly roar--"you better not be late--and you better not be early."

He spun on his heels in a perfect about-face and left the room.

"There is only one consolation," sighed Tom. "The _Capella_ unit is
getting the same thing we're getting."

"Here we go!" breathed Roger slowly.

"I've been thinking about quitting the Academy, anyway," growled Astro.




CHAPTER 4


"Halt!"

Roger growled the order into the darkness and unslung the paralo-ray
rifle from his shoulder, bringing it around to firing position. "Advance
and be recognized," he said flatly.

Nothing moved. Even the air seemed still.

"Advance and be recognized," Roger ordered again. Still nothing moved.
The cadet glanced around quickly in the direction of the guardhouse
where he knew there was a communicator to the sergeant of the guard.
Should he call for help? He decided against it and moved forward toward
the noise he had heard, his finger poised on the trigger of the
paralo-ray gun.

"Advance and be recognized," he called again. As he walked slowly
between the huge packing cases piled outside the newly constructed
hangar, he saw a shadowy movement to his left. He raised the deadly ray
gun, and his finger tightened on the trigger.

"Advance and be recognized," he said over the sights of the gun.

"_Mee-ooo-wwww!_"

A tiny white kitten flashed out of a gap between two boxes and ran to
his feet, purring, rubbing up against his space boots.

[Illustration]

"Well, blast my rockets!" Roger laughed. He slung the gun over his
shoulder and reached down to pick the kitten up in his arms. He began
stroking its fur and making little soothing noises. He started back to
the other end of his patrol post.

"You're a cute little fella," murmured Roger, nuzzling the kitten
against his chin. "But you almost got blasted."

"Guard! Stand to!"

Startled, Roger whirled around to see Firehouse Tim behind him, his
battered and beaten face clouded with rage. "Drop that animal at once,"
the petty officer roared.

Roger stooped over to let the kitten run free and it dashed away into a
crack between the boxes and disappeared.

"Manning," began the enlisted spaceman, "the next time I catch you not
attending to your duty, I will bring you up on charges of neglect! Carry
on!" Rush spun on his heel and vanished into the darkness.

"Blasted muscle-bound squirt!" sneered Roger under his breath,
shouldering his rifle and resuming his slow patrol outside the hangar.

For three weeks, Tom, Roger, and Astro, along with the three members of
the _Capella_ unit, had been spending close to eight hours a day on
guard duty, eight to ten hours a day in classroom work, and the rest of
the time studying. They only averaged some two to three hours of sleep
per day. They were dead tired but they stuck to their task doggedly,
without complaint.

Around them, the work on Professor Hemmingwell's project had proceeded
with amazing speed. The tunnel promised by Dave Barret had been finished
in less than five days, with the rail for the monorail spur installed
overhead as each yard of the shaft was completed. In the second week,
scores of cars loaded with building materials began rolling into the
deserted plain several miles away from Space Academy. Then, one morning,
nearly a thousand construction workers arrived and built a hangar in
thirty-six hours. No sooner had the huge building been completed than a
tight guard had been placed around it. Specially designed
identification tags were issued to the guards and workers on the
project. Gradually the huge store of cases and boxes outside the hangar
had been moved inside, with all but a few of the smaller ones remaining
outside. The secret work inside the hangar was advancing rapidly, but
this did not enter into the thoughts of the three cadets of the
_Polaris_ unit, nor of the _Capella_ unit. The harsh discipline
instituted by Tim Rush and the extra study necessary for the end-of-year
exams had forced the cadets into a round-the-clock struggle not only to
keep awake but to make the class promotion lists.

Roger paced off the required distance, wheeled smartly, and in so doing
came face to face with Astro, who was patrolling another side of the
hangar.

"I just saw Firehouse," said Astro quietly. "Did he catch you goofing?"

"Yeah," growled Roger. "I found a kitten and he walked up just as I was
holding it."

Astro grinned. "I wouldn't be surprised if that pocket-sized giant
didn't send that cat down there to tempt you."

"How's Tom?" asked Roger. Astro, in his patrol, came in contact with
both unit mates.

"Sleepy. He's having a tough time with that chapter on space law. He
didn't sleep at all last night."

"He better keep awake," said Roger. "That little fireman's got his
rockets hot tonight. He'll blast Tom sure if--"

"Wait a minute," said Astro suddenly, looking off into the darkness.
"What was that?"

Roger spun around, his rifle in his hands, ready to fire. "What is it?"
he asked.

"I don't know," replied Astro in a whisper. "I thought I saw something
move inside the hangar." He pointed to a large window. "Sort of a shadow
against the frosted glass."

"Are you sure?"

"Of course I'm sure."

"I'll investigate. You get Tom and call Firehouse."

"Right," replied Astro, and raced down the path, alongside the hangar.

Grasping his rifle firmly, Roger inched toward a nearby door. He opened
it a crack, then flattened himself against the wall and watched Astro
run toward the other end of the hangar. He saw the big Venusian say a
few quick words to Tom and then rush off toward the guardhouse and the
communicator. Tom waved to Roger, indicating that he would enter the
opposite door of the hangar.

Roger dropped to his hands and knees and poked his head through the open
door, peering around from one end of the huge dark chamber to the other.
Then, taking a deep breath, he rose and stepped quickly inside. He
closed the door behind him and stood still, listening for some sound.

Suddenly there was a flash of light from the opposite wall. Roger
