the rest of the week and making copious notes on what he would talk
about to each. He needed more whiskey to get to sleep that night.

Whitburn gave him no more trouble, and if any of the trustees or
influential alumni made any protest about what had happened in Modern
History IV, he heard nothing about it. He managed to conduct his
classes without further incidents, and spent his evenings trying, not
always successfully, to avoid drifting into "memories" of the
future....

       *       *       *       *       *

He came into his office that morning tired and unrefreshed by the few
hours' sleep he had gotten the night before, edgy from the strain, of
trying to adjust his mind to the world of Blanley College in mid-April
of 1973. Pottgeiter hadn't arrived yet, but Marjorie Fenner was
waiting for him; a newspaper in her hand, almost bursting with
excitement.

"Here; have you seen it, Doctor Chalmers?" she asked as he entered.

He shook his head. He ought to read the papers more, to keep track of
the advancing knife-edge that divided what he might talk about from
what he wasn't supposed to know, but each morning he seemed to have
less and less time to get ready for work.

"Well, look! Look at that!"

She thrust the paper into his hands, still folded, the big, black
headline where he could see it.

    KHALID IB'N HUSSEIN ASSASSINATED

He glanced over the leading paragraphs. Leader of Islamic Caliphate
shot to death in Basra ... leaving Parliament Building for his palace
outside the city ... fanatic, identified as an Egyptian named Mohammed
Noureed ... old American submachine-gun ... two guards killed and a
third seriously wounded ... seized by infuriated mob and stoned to
death on the spot....

For a moment, he felt guilt, until he realized that nothing he could
have done could have altered the event. The death of Khalid ib'n
Hussein, and all the millions of other deaths that would follow it,
were fixed in the matrix of the space-time continuum. Including,
maybe, the death of an obscure professor of Modern History named
Edward Chalmers.

"At least, this'll be the end of that silly flap about what happened a
month ago in Modern Four. This is modern history, now; I can talk
about it without a lot of fools yelling their heads off."

She was staring at him wide-eyed. No doubt horrified at his
cold-blooded attitude toward what was really a shocking and senseless
crime.

"Yes, of course; the man's dead. So's Julius Caesar, but we've gotten
over being shocked at his murder."

He would have to talk about it in Modern History IV, he supposed;
explain why Khalid's death was necessary to the policies of the
Eastern Axis, and what the consequences would be. How it would hasten
the complete dissolution of the old U. N., already weakened by the
crisis over the Eastern demands for the demilitarization and
internationalization of the United States Lunar Base, and necessitate
the formation of the Terran Federation, and how it would lead,
eventually, to the Thirty Days' War. No, he couldn't talk about that;
that was on the wrong side of the knife-edge. Have to be careful about
the knife-edge; too easy to cut himself on it.

       *       *       *       *       *

Nobody in Modern History IV was seated when he entered the room; they
were all crowded between the door and his desk. He stood blinking,
wondering why they were giving him an ovation, and why Kendrick and
Dacre were so abjectly apologetic. Great heavens, did it take the
murder of the greatest Moslem since Saladin to convince people that he
wasn't crazy?

Before the period was over, Whitburn's secretary entered with a note
in the college president's hand and over his signature; requesting
Chalmers to come to his office immediately and without delay. Just
like that; expected him to walk right out of his class. He was
protesting as he entered the president's office. Whitburn cut him off
short.

"Doctor Chalmers,"--Whitburn had risen behind his desk as the door
opened--"I certainly hope that you can realize that there was nothing
but the most purely coincidental connection between the event featured
in this morning's newspapers and your performance, a month ago, in
Modern History Four," he began.

"I realize nothing of the sort. The death of Khalid ib'n Hussein is a
fact of history, unalterably set in its proper place in time-sequence.
It was a fact of history a month ago no less than today."

"So that's going to be your attitude; that your wild utterances of a
month ago have now been vindicated as fulfilled prophesies? And I
suppose you intend to exploit this--this coincidence--to the utmost.
The involvement of Blanley College in a mess of sensational publicity
means nothing to you, I presume."

"I haven't any idea what you're talking about."

"You mean to tell me that you didn't give this story to the local
newspaper, the _Valley Times_?" Whitburn demanded.

"I did not. I haven't mentioned the subject to anybody connected with
the _Times_, or anybody else, for that matter. Except my attorney, a
month ago, when you were threatening to repudiate the contract you
signed with me."

"I suppose I'm expected to take your word for that?"

"Yes, you are. Unless you care to call me a liar in so many words." He
moved a step closer. Lloyd Whitburn outweighed him by fifty pounds,
but most of the difference was fat. Whitburn must have realized that,
too.

"No, no; if you say you haven't talked about it to the _Valley Times_,
that's enough," he said hastily. "But somebody did. A reporter was
here not twenty minutes ago; he refused to say who had given him the
story, but he wanted to question me about it."

"What did you tell him?"

"I refused to make any statement whatever. I also called Colonel
Tighlman, the owner of the paper, and asked him, very reasonably, to
suppress the story. I thought that my own position and the importance
of Blanley College to this town entitled me to that much
consideration." Whitburn's face became almost purple. "He ... he
laughed at me!"

"Newspaper people don't like to be told to kill stories. Not even by
college presidents. That's only made things worse. Personally, I don't
relish the prospect of having this publicized, any more than you do. I
can assure you that I shall be most guarded if any of the _Times_
reporters talk to me about it, and if I have time to get back to my
class before the end of the period, I shall ask them, as a personal
favor, not to discuss the matter outside."

Whitburn didn't take the hint. Instead, he paced back and forth,
storming about the reporter, the newspaper owner, whoever had given
the story to the paper, and finally Chalmers himself. He was livid
with rage.

"You certainly can't imagine that when you made those remarks in class
you actually possessed any knowledge of a thing that was still a month
in the future," he spluttered. "Why, it's ridiculous! Utterly
preposterous!"

"Unusual, I'll admit. But the fact remains that I did. I should, of
course, have been more careful, and not confused future with past
events. The students didn't understand...."

Whitburn half-turned, stopping short.

"My God, man! You _are_ crazy!" he cried, horrified.

The period-bell was ringing as he left Whitburn's office; that meant
that the twenty-three students were scattering over the campus,
talking like mad. He shrugged. Keeping them quiet about a thing like
this wouldn't have been possible in any case. When he entered his
office, Stanly Weill was waiting for him. The lawyer drew him out into
the hallway quickly.

"For God's sake, have you been talking to the papers?" he demanded.
"After what I told you...."

"No, but somebody has." He told about the call to Whitburn's office,
and the latter's behavior. Weill cursed the college president
bitterly.

"Any time you want to get a story in the _Valley Times_, just order
Frank Tighlman not to print it. Well, if you haven't talked, don't."

"Suppose somebody asks me?"

"A reporter, no comment. Anybody else, none of his damn business. And
above all, don't let anybody finagle you into making any claims about
knowing the future. I thought we had this under control; now that
it's out in the open, what that fool Whitburn'll do is anybody's
guess."

Leonard Fitch met him as he entered the Faculty Club, sizzling with
excitement.

"Ed, this has done it!" he began, jubilantly. "This is one nobody can
laugh off. It's direct proof of precognition, and because of the
prominence of the event, everybody will hear about it. And it simply
can't be dismissed as coincidence...."

"Whitburn's trying to do that."

"Whitburn's a fool if he is," another man said calmly. Turning, he saw
that the speaker was Tom Smith, one of the math professors. "I figured
the odds against that being chance. There are a lot of variables that
might affect it one way or another, but ten to the fifteenth power is
what I get for a sort of median figure."

"Did you give that story to the _Valley Times?_" he asked Fitch,
suspicion rising and dragging anger up after it.

"Of course, I did," Fitch said. "I'll admit, I had to go behind your
back and have some of my postgrads get statements from the boys in
your history class, but you wouldn't talk about it yourself...."

Tom Smith was standing beside him. He was twenty years younger than
Chalmers, he was an amateur boxer, and he had good reflexes. He caught
Chalmers' arm as it was traveling back for an uppercut, and held it.

"Take it easy, Ed; you don't want to start a slugfest in here. This is
the Faculty Club; remember?"

"I won't, Tom; it wouldn't prove anything if I did." He turned to
Fitch. "I won't talk about sending your students to pump mine, but at
least you could have told me before you gave that story out."

"I don't know what you're sore about," Fitch defended himself. "I
believed in you when everybody else thought you were crazy, and if I
hadn't collected signed and dated statements from your boys, there'd
have been no substantiation. It happens that extrasensory perception
means as much to me as history does to you. I've believed in it ever
since I read about Rhine's work, when I was a kid. I worked in ESP for
a long time. Then I had a chance to get a full professorship by coming
here, and after I did, I found that I couldn't go on with it, because
Whitburn's president here, and he's a stupid old bigot with an
air-locked mind...."

"Yes." His anger died down as Fitch spoke. "I'm glad Tom stopped me
from making an ass of myself. I can see your side of it." Maybe that
was the curse of the professional intellectual, an ability to see
everybody's side of everything. He thought for a moment. "What else
did you do, beside hand this story to the _Valley Times?_ I'd better
hear all about it."

"I phoned the secretary of the American Institute of Psionics and
