After Strong had outlined the plans for the time trials, he concluded,
"Each of you competing in the time trials will be given a blast-off time
and an orbital course. Only standard, Solar-Guard-approval equipment
will be allowed in the tests. I will monitor the trials, and Space
Cadets Corbett, Manning, and Astro will be in complete charge of all
inspections of your ships." Strong paused and looked around. "Are there
any questions?"

"When will the first ship blast off, Captain Strong?" asked a lean and
leathery-looking spaceman in the back of the room.

"First time trial takes place at 0600 hours tomorrow morning. Each ship
has a designated time. Consult your schedules for the blast-off time of
your ships."

"What if a ship isn't ready?" asked Kit Barnard, who had slipped into
the room unnoticed.

"Any ship unable to blast off at scheduled time," said Strong, finding
it difficult to look at his old friend, "will be eliminated."

There was a sudden murmur in the room and Quent Miles rose quickly.
"That's not much time to prepare our ships," he said. "I don't know
who's going to be first, but I can't even strip my ship by tomorrow
morning, let alone soup up the reactant." His voice was full of
contempt, and he glanced around the room at the other pilots. "Seems to
me we're being treated a little roughly."

There were several cries of agreement.

Strong held up his hand. "Gentlemen, I know it is difficult to prepare a
ship in twelve hours for a race as important as this one," he said. "But
I personally believe that any spaceman who really wants to make it can
make it!"

"Well, I'm not going to break my back to make a deadline," snarled
Quent. "And I don't think any of the other fellows here will either."

"If you are scheduled to blast off tomorrow at 0600 hours, Captain
Miles," Strong announced coldly, "and you are unable to raise ship, you
will be eliminated."

Stifling an angry retort, Quent Miles sat down, and while Strong
continued to answer questions, Astro, a worried frown on his face,
stared at the spaceman dressed in black. Tom noticed it. "What's wrong
with you, Astro?" he asked.

"That spaceman Miles," replied Astro. "I could swear I know him, yet I'm
sure that I don't."

"He's not a very ordinary-looking guy," observed Roger. "He's plenty big
and he's so dark that it wouldn't be easy to mistake him."

"Still," said Astro, screwing up his forehead, "I know I've seen him
before."

"If there are no further questions, gentlemen," said Strong, "we'll
close this meeting. I know you're anxious to get to your ships and begin
work. But before you go, I would like to introduce the cadet inspectors
to you. Stand up, boys."

Self-consciously, Tom, Roger, and Astro stood up while Strong addressed
the pilots.

"Cadet Manning will be in charge of all electronics inspections, Cadet
Astro in charge of the power deck, and Cadet Corbett will cover the
control deck and over-all inspection of the ship itself."

Quent Miles was on his feet again, shouting, "Do you mean to tell me
that we're going to be told what we can and can't do by those three
kids!" He turned and glared at Tom. "You come messing around my ship,
buster, and you'll be pitched out on your ear!"

"If the cadets do not pass on your ship," said Strong, with more than a
little edge to his voice, "it will not get off the ground."

The two men locked eyes across the room.

"We'll see about that!" growled Miles, and stalked from the room, his
heavy shoulders swinging from side to side in an exaggerated swagger.

"I believe that's all, gentlemen," announced Strong coldly, "and
spaceman's luck to each of you."

After the men had left, the three cadets crowded around Strong. "Do you
think we'll have any trouble with Miles, sir?" asked Tom.

"You have your orders, Tom," said Strong. "If any ship does not meet
standards established for the race, it will be disqualified!"

Astro stared at the doorway through which Quent Miles had disappeared.
He scratched his head and muttered, "If it wasn't for just one thing,
I'd swear by the stars that he's the same spaceman who--" He stopped and
shook his head.

"Who what?" asked Strong.

"Nothing, sir," said Astro. "I _must_ be mistaken. It can't be the same
man."

"I suggest that you sleep out at the spaceport tonight," said Strong.
"The first ship will have to be inspected before she blasts off, and
that means you will have to look her over before six."

"Yes, sir," replied Tom.

"And watch out for Quent Miles," warned Strong.

"Yes, sir," said the curly-haired cadet. "I know what you mean."

[Illustration]




CHAPTER 4


"The course is to Luna and return! Spaceman's luck."

Captain Strong's voice rasped out over the public address system as a
lone spaceship stood poised on the starting ramp, her ports closed, her
crew making last-minute preparations. Ringing the huge spaceport, crews
from other ships paused in their work to watch the first vessel make the
dash around the Moon in a frantic race against the astral chronometer.
In the temporary grandstands at the north end of the field, thousands of
spectators from cities all over Earth leaned forward, hushed and
expectant.

"Are you ready _Star Lady?_" Strong called, his voice echoing over the
field.

A light flashed from the viewport of the ship.

"Stand by to raise ship!" roared Strong. "Blast off, minus five, four,
three, two, one--_zero!_"

There was a sudden, ear-shattering roar and smoke and flame poured from
the exhaust of the ship, spilling over the blast-off ramp. The ship
rocked from side to side gently, rose into the air slowly, and then
gathering speed began to move spaceward. In a moment it was gone and
only the echoing blasts of thunder from its exhausts remained.

[Illustration]

"There goes number one," said Tom to his unit mates as they watched from
a vantage point near one of the service hangars.

"He got a pretty shaky start there at the ramp," commented Astro. "He
must've poured on so much power, he couldn't control the ship."

"Heads up, fellas," announced Roger suddenly. "Here comes work." Kit
Barnard was walking toward them, carrying a small metallic object in his
hand.

"'Morning, boys," said Kit with a weary smile. His eyes were bloodshot.
The cadets knew he had worked all night to revise and resubmit his
specification sheet to Strong.

[Illustration]

"'Morning, sir," said Tom.

"I'd like to have you O.K. this gear unit. I made it last night."

Astro took the gear and examined it closely.

"Looks fine to me," he said finally, handing it back. "Part of your main
pumps?"

"Why, yes," replied Kit, surprised. "Say, you seem to know your
business."

"Only the best rocket buster in space, sir," chimed in Tom. "He eats,
sleeps, and dreams about machinery on a power deck."

"Is that for your new reactor, sir?" asked Astro.

"Yes. Want to come over and take a look at it?"

"Want to!" exclaimed Roger. "You couldn't keep him away with a ray gun,
Captain Barnard."

"Fine," said Kit. "Incidentally, I'm not in the Solar Guard any more;
don't even hold a reserve commission, so you don't have to 'sir' me. I'd
prefer just plain Kit. O.K.?"

The three boys grinned. "O.K., Kit," said Tom.

Astro began to fidget and Tom nudged Roger. "Think we can spare the
Venusian for a little while?"

"Might as well let him go," grunted Roger. "He'd only sneak off later,
anyway."

Astro grinned sheepishly. "If anyone wants me to check anything, I'll be
over at Kit's. Where is your ship?" he asked the veteran spaceman.

"Hangar Fourteen. Opposite the main entrance gate."

"Fine, that's where I'll be, fellows. See you later."

With Astro bending over slightly to hear what Kit was saying, the two
men walked away. Roger shook his head. "You know, I still can't get used
to that guy. He acts like a piece of machinery was a good-looking space
doll!"

"I've seen you look the same way at your radarscope, Roger."

"Yeah, but it's different with me."

"Is it?" said Tom, turning away so that Roger would not see him
laughing. And as he did, he saw something that made him pause. In front
of the hangar, Captain Strong was talking to Quent Miles. There was no
mistaking the tall spaceman in his severe black clothes.

"Here comes more work," muttered Tom. Quent had turned away from Strong
and was walking toward them.

"Strong said I had to get you to O.K. this scope," said Quent with a
sneer. "Hurry it up! I haven't got all day."

He handed them a radarscope that was common equipment on small pleasure
yachts, and was considerably lighter in weight than the type used on
larger freight vessels.

"What's the gross weight of your ship?" asked Roger after a quick glance
at the large glass tube with a crystal surface that had been polished to
a smooth finish.

"Two thousand tons," said Quent. "Why?"

Roger shook his head. "This is too small, Mr. Miles. You will have to
use the standard operational scope."

"But it's too big."

"I'm sorry, sir--" began Roger.

"Sorry!" Quent exploded. "Give me that tube, you squirt." He snatched it
out of Roger's hand. "I'm using this scope whether you like it or not!"

"If you use that scope," said Tom coldly, "your ship will be
disqualified."

Quent glared at the two boys for a moment, his black eyes cold and hard.
"They make kids feel mighty important around here, don't they?"

"They give us jobs to do," said Roger. "Usually we can handle them fine.
Occasionally we run into a space-gassing bum and he makes things
difficult, but we manage to take care of him."

Quent stepped forward in a threatening manner, but Roger did not move.
"Listen," the spaceman snarled, "stay out of my way, you young punk, or
I'll blast you."

"Don't ever make the mistake of touching me, Mister," said Roger
calmly. "You might find that you're the one who's blasted."

Quent stared at them a moment, then spun on his heels and swaggered back
to his ship.

"You know, Roger," said Tom, watching Miles disappear into the hangar,
"I have an idea he is one spaceman who'll back up his threats."

Roger ignored Tom's statement. "Come on. We've got a lot of work to do,"
he said, turning away.

The two cadets headed for the next hangar and boarded a ship with the
picture of a chicken on its nose. While Roger examined the
communications and astrogation deck, Tom busied himself inspecting the
control deck, where the great panels of the master control board were
stripped of everything but absolute essentials. Later, they called Astro
back to make a careful inspection of the power deck on the ship. While
they waited for the Venusian cadet, Tom and Roger talked to the pilot.

Gigi Duarte was a small, dapper Frenchman who somehow, in the course of
his life, had acquired the nickname "Chicken" and it had been with him
ever since. The cadets had met him once before when they rode on a
passenger liner from Mars to Venusport and liked the small, stubby
spaceman. Now, renewing their friendship, the boys and "Gigi the
Chicken" sat on the lower step of the air lock and chatted.

"This is the greatest thing that has happened to me," said Gigi. "Ever
since I can remember, I have wanted to race in space!"

"Don't get much chance when you're hauling passengers around, I guess,"
said Tom.

Gigi shook his head. "One must always be careful. Just so fast, over a
certain route, taking all the precautionary steps for fuel! Bah! But
this flight! This time, I will show you speed! Watch the French Chicken
and you will see speed as you have never--" Suddenly he stopped and
frowned. "But you cannot see me. I will be going too fast!"

Tom and Roger laughed. After Astro joined them, they shook hands with
the Frenchman, wished him luck, and went to the next ship to inspect it.
Gigi's ship was already being towed out to the blast-off ramp, and by
the time the three boys had completed their inspection of the next ship,
the gaily colored French ship flashed the ready signal to Strong.

"Blast off, minus five, four, three, two, one--_zero!_" Strong's voice
boomed out over the loud-speakers and the French Chicken poured on the
power. His ship arose from the ground easily, and in five seconds was
out of sight in the cloudless skies above.

       *       *       *       *       *

All day the spaceport rocked with the thunderous noise of stripped-down
spaceships blasting off on their trial runs around the Moon. Kit Barnard
worked like a demon to complete the cooling system in his aged ship, and
as each ship blasted off on its scheduled run to the Moon, the time for
his own flight drew nearer. Kit worked with his chief crewman, Sid
Goldberg, a serious, swarthy-faced youngster who rivaled Astro in his
love for the power-deck machinery on a spaceship. By nightfall, with
Tom, Roger, and Astro standing by to make their final inspection, Kit
wiped the oil and grime from his hands and stepped back. "Well, she's
finished. You can make your inspections now, boys," he said.

While Tom, Astro, and Roger swarmed over the vessel, examining the newly
designed and odd-looking gear, the veteran spaceman and his young helper
stretched out on the concrete ramp and in thirty seconds were asleep.

The _Polaris_ unit quickly checked out Kit's ship as qualified for the
race, and then turned, fascinated, to the tangle of pipes, cables, and
mechanical gear of the reactor unit and cooling pumps. Tom and Roger
were unable to figure out exactly what changes Kit had made, but Astro
gazed at the new machinery fondly, almost rapturously. He tried to
explain the intricate work to his unit mates, but would stop in the
middle of a sentence when a new detail of the construction would catch
his eye.

"Come on, Roger," Tom sighed. "Let's go on to the next ship. This
lovesick Venusian can catch up with us later."

They turned away and left Astro alone on the power deck, doubtful that
he had even noticed their departure.

The trials had been suspended at nightfall, and the ships that had
already blasted off left sections of the huge spaceport empty. The day
had been a grueling one for the cadets, and Tom and Roger climbed
wearily on the nearest slidewalk that would take them back to the
Academy grounds. Just as they rode through the main field gate, Roger
nudged Tom. "Look! There's Quent Miles up ahead of us," he said. "Isn't
he scheduled to blast off in the morning?"

"Yes. Why?" asked Tom.

"He hasn't called us in to inspect his ship yet."
