purely as a function of the physical brain. So they postulate an
unconscious discarnate personality, or, as you put it, one in a
somnambulistic state. They have to concede memory to this discarnate
personality, since it was by recovery of memories of previous
reincarnations that discarnate existence and reincarnation were proven
to be facts. So they picture the discarnate individuality as a
material object, or physical event, of negligible but actual mass, in
which an indefinite number of memories can be stored as electronic
charges. And they picture it as being drawn irresistibly to the body
of the nearest non-incarnated infant. Curiously enough, the
reincarnation vehicle chosen is almost always of the same sex as the
vehicle of the previous reincarnation, the exceptions being cases of
persons who had a previous history of psychological sex-inversion."

Dr. Harnosh remembered the unlighted pipe in his hand, thrust it into
his mouth, and lit it. For a moment, he sat with it jutting out of his
black beard, until it was drawing to his satisfaction. "This belief in
immediate reincarnation leads the Statisticalists, when they fight
duels or perform voluntary discarnation, to do so in the neighborhood
of maternity hospitals," he added. "I know, personally, of one
reincarnation memory-recall, in which the subject, a Statisticalist,
voluntarily discarnated by lethal-gas inhaler in a private room at one
of our local maternity hospitals, and reincarnated twenty years later
in the city of Jeddul, three thousand miles away." The square black
beard jiggled as the scientist laughed.

"Now, as to the political implications of these contradictory
theories: Since the Statisticalists believe that they will reincarnate
entirely at random, their aim is to create an utterly classless social
and economic order, in which, theoretically, each individuality will
reincarnate into a condition of equality with everybody else. Their
political program, therefore, is one of complete socialization of all
means of production and distribution, abolition of hereditary titles
and inherited wealth--eventually, all private wealth--and total
government control of all economic, social and cultural activities. Of
course," Dr. Harnosh apologized, "politics isn't my subject; I
wouldn't presume to judge how that would function in practice."

"I would," Verkan Vall said shortly, thinking of all the different
time-lines on which he had seen systems like that in operation. "You
wouldn't like it, doctor. And the Volitionalists?"

"Well, since they believe that they are able to choose the
circumstances of their next reincarnations for themselves, they are
the party of the _status quo_. Naturally, almost all the nobles,
almost all the wealthy trading and manufacturing families, and almost
all professional people, are Volitionalists; most of the workers and
peasants are Statisticalists. Or, at least, they were, for the most
part, before we began announcing the results of the Lady Dallona's
experimental work."

"Ah; now we come to it," Verkan Vall said as the story clarified.

"Yes. In somewhat oversimplified form, the situation is rather like
this," Dr. Harnosh of Hosh said. "The Lady Dallona introduced a number
of refinements and some outright innovations into our technique of
recovering memories of past reincarnations. Previously, it was
necessary to keep the subject in an hypnotic trance, during which he
or she would narrate what was remembered of past reincarnations, and
this would be recorded. On emerging from the trance, the subject would
remember nothing; the tape-recording would be all that would be left.
But the Lady Dallona devised a technique by which these memories would
remain in what might be called the fore part of the subject's
subconscious mind, so that they could be brought to the level of
consciousness at will. More, she was able to recover memories of past
discarnate existences, something we had never been able to do
heretofore." Dr. Harnosh shook his head. "And to think, when I first
met her, I thought that she was just another sensation-seeking young
lady of wealth, and was almost about to refuse her enrollment!"

He wasn't the only one whom little Dalla had surprised, Verkan Vall
thought. At least, he had been pleasantly surprised.

"You see, this entirely disproves the Statistical Theory of
Reincarnation. For example, we got a fine set of memory-recalls from one
subject, for four previous reincarnations and four intercarnations. In
the first of these, the subject had been a peasant on the estate of a
wealthy noble. Unlike most of his fellows, who reincarnated into other
peasant families almost immediately after discarnation, this man waited
for fifty years in the discarnate state for an opportunity to
reincarnate as the son of an over-servant. In his next reincarnation, he
was the son of a technician, and received a technical education; he
became a physics researcher. For his next reincarnation, he chose the
son of a nobleman by a concubine as his vehicle; in his present
reincarnation, he is a member of a wealthy manufacturing family, and
married into a family of the nobility. In five reincarnations, he has
climbed from the lowest to the next-to-highest rung of the social
ladder. Few individuals of the class from whence he began this ascent
possess so much persistence or determination. Then, of course, there was
the case of Lord Garnon of Roxor."

He went on to describe the last experiment in which Hadron Dalla had
participated.

"Well, that all sounds pretty conclusive," Verkan Vall commented. "I
take it the leaders of the Volitionalist Party here are pleased with
the result of the Lady Dallona's work?"

"Pleased? My dear Lord Virzal, they're fairly bursting with glee over
it!" Harnosh of Hosh declared. "As I pointed out, the Statisticalist
program of socialization is based entirely on the proposition that no
one can choose the circumstances of his next reincarnation, and that's
been demonstrated to be utter nonsense. Until the Lady Dallona's
discoveries were announced, they were the dominant party, controlling
a majority of the seats in Parliament and on the Executive Council.
Only the Constitution kept them from enacting their entire
socialization program long ago, and they were about to legislate
constitutional changes which would remove that barrier. They had
expected to be able to do so after the forthcoming general elections.
But now, social inequality has become desirable: it gives people
something to look forward to in the next reincarnation. Instead of
wanting to abolish wealth and privilege and nobility, the proletariat
want to reincarnate into them." Harnosh of Hosh laughed happily. "So
you can see how furious the Statisticalist Party organization is!"

"There's a catch to this, somewhere," Marnik the Assassin, speaking
for the first time, declared. "They can't all reincarnate as princes,
there aren't enough vacancies to go 'round. And no noble is going to
reincarnate as a tractor driver to make room for a tractor driver who
wants to reincarnate as a noble."

"That's correct," Dr. Harnosh replied. "There is a catch to it; a
catch most people would never admit, even to themselves. Very few
individuals possess the will power, the intelligence or the capacity
for mental effort displayed by the subject of the case I just quoted.
The average man's interests are almost entirely on the physical side;
he actually finds mental effort painful, and makes as little of it as
possible. And that is the only sort of effort a discarnate
individuality can exert. So, unable to endure the fifty or so years
needed to make a really good reincarnation, he reincarnates in a year
or so, out of pure boredom, into the first vehicle he can find,
usually one nobody else wants." Dr. Harnosh dug out the heel of his
pipe and blew through the stem. "But nobody will admit his own mental
inferiority, even to himself. Now, every machine operator and field
hand on the planet thinks he can reincarnate as a prince or a
millionaire. Politics isn't my subject, but I'm willing to bet that
since Statistical Reincarnation is an exploded psychic theory,
Statisticalist Socialism has been caught in the blast area and
destroyed along with it."

       *       *       *       *       *

Olirzon was in the drawing room of the hotel suite when they returned,
sitting on the middle of his spinal column in a reclining chair,
smoking a pipe, dressing the edge of his knife with a pocket-hone, and
gazing lecherously at a young woman in the visiplate. She was an
extremely well-designed young woman, in a rather fragmentary costume,
and she was heaving her bosom at the invisible audience in anger,
sorrow, scorn, entreaty, and numerous other emotions.

"... this revolting crime," she was declaiming, in a husky contralto,
as Verkan Vall and Marnik entered, "foul even for the criminal beasts
who conceived and perpetrated it!" She pointed an accusing finger.
"This murder of the beautiful Lady Dallona of Hadron!"

Verkan Vall stopped short, considering the possibility of something
having been discovered lately of which he was ignorant. Olirzon must
have guessed his thought; he grinned reassuringly.

"Think nothing of it, Lord Virzal," he said, waving his knife at the
visiplate. "Just political propaganda; strictly for the sparrows. Nice
propagandist, though."

"And now," the woman with the magnificent natural resources lowered
her voice reverently, "we bring you the last image of the Lady
Dallona, and of Dirzed, her faithful Assassin, taken just before they
vanished, never to be seen again."

The plate darkened, and there were strains of slow, dirgelike music;
then it lighted again, presenting a view of a broad hallway, thronged
with men and women in bright varicolored costumes. In the foreground,
wearing a tight skirt of deep blue and a short red jacket, was Hadron
Dalla, just as she had looked in the solidographs taken in Dhergabar
after her alteration by the First Level cosmeticians to conform to the
appearance of the Malayoid Akor-Neb people. She was holding the arm of
a man who wore the black tunic and red badge of an Assassin, a
handsome specimen of the Akor-Neb race. Trust little Dalla for that,
Verkan Vall thought. The figures were moving with exaggerated
slowness, as though a very fleeting picture were being stretched out
as far as possible. Having already memorized his former wife's changed
appearance, Verkan Vall concentrated on the man beside her until the
picture faded.

"All right, Olirzon; what did you get?" he asked.

"Well, first of all, at Assassins' Hall," Olirzon said, rolling up his
left sleeve, holding his bare forearm to the light, and shaving a few
fine hairs from it to test the edge of his knife. "Of course, they
never tell one Assassin anything about the client of another Assassin;
that's standard practice. But I was in the Lodge Secretary's office,
where nobody but Assassins are ever admitted. They have a big panel in
there, with the names of all the Lodge members on it in light-letters;
that's standard in all Lodges. If an Assassin is unattached and free
to accept a client, his name's in white light. If he has a client, the
light's changed to blue, and the name of the client goes up under his.
If his whereabouts are unknown, the light's changed to amber. If he is
discarnated, his name's removed entirely, unless the circumstances of
his discarnation are such as to constitute an injury to the Society.
In that case, the name's in red light until he's been properly
avenged, or, as we say, till his blood's been mopped up. Well, the
name of Dirzed is up in blue light, with the name of Dallona of Hadron
under it. I found out that the light had been amber for two days after
the disappearance, and then had been changed back to blue. Get it,
Lord Virzal?"

Verkan Vall nodded. "I think so. I'd been considering that as a
possibility from the first. Then what?"

"Then I was about and around for a couple of hours, buying drinks for
people--unattached Assassins, Constabulary detectives, political
workers, newscast people. You owe me fifteen System Monetary Units for
that, Lord Virzal. What I got, when it's all sorted out--I taped it in
detail, as soon as I got back--reduces to this: The Volitionalists are
moving mountains to find out who was the spy at Garnon of Roxor's
discarnation feast, but are doing nothing but nothing at all to find
the Lady Dallona or Dirzed. The Statisticalists are making all sorts
of secret efforts to find out what happened to her. The Constabulary
blame the Statistos for the package-bomb: they're interested in that
because of the discarnation of the three servants by an illegal weapon
of indiscriminate effect. They claim that the disappearance of Dirzed
and the Lady Dallona was a publicity hoax. The Volitionalists are
preparing a line of publicity to deny this."

Verkan Vall nodded. "That ties in with what you learned at Assassins'
Hall," he said. "They're hiding out somewhere. Is there any chance of
reaching Dirzed through the Society of Assassins?"

Olirzon shook his head. "If you're right--and that's the way it looks
to me, too--he's probably just called in and notified the Society that
he's still carnate and so is the Lady Dallona, and called off any
search the Society might be making for him."

"And I've got to find the Lady Dallona as soon as I can. Well, if I
can't reach her, maybe I can get her to send word to me," Verkan Vall
said. "That's going to take some doing, too."

"What did you find out, Lord Virzal?" Olirzon asked. He had a piece of
soft leather, now, and was polishing his blade lovingly.

"The Reincarnation Research people don't know anything," Verkan Vall
replied. "Dr. Harnosh of Hosh thinks she's discarnate. I did find out
that the experimental work she's done, so far, has absolutely
disproved the theory of Statistical Reincarnation. The Volitionalists'
theory is solidly established."

"Yes, what do you think, Olirzon?" Marnik added. "They have a case on
record of a man who worked up from field hand to millionaire in five
reincarnations. Deliberately, that is." He went on to repeat what
Harnosh of Hosh had said; he must have possessed an almost eidetic
memory, for he gave the bearded psychicist's words verbatim, and threw
in the gestures and voice-inflections.

Olirzon grinned. "You know, there's a chance for the easy-money boys,"
he considered. "'You, too, can Reincarnate as a millionaire! Let Dr.
Nirzutz of Futzbutz Help You! Only 49.98 System Monetary Units for the
Secret, Infallible, Autosuggestive Formula.' And would it sell!" He
put away the hone and the bit of leather and slipped his knife back
into its sheath. "If I weren't a respectable Assassin, I'd give it a
try, myself."

Verkan Vall looked at his watch. "We'd better get something to eat,"
he said. "We'll go down to the main dining room; the Martian Room, I
think they call it. I've got to think of some way to let the Lady
Dallona know I'm looking for her."

       *       *       *       *       *

The Martian Room, fifteen stories down, was a big place, occupying
almost half of the floor space of one corner tower. It had been fitted
to resemble one of the ruined buildings of the ancient and vanished
race of Mars who were the ancestors of Terran humanity. One whole side
of the room was a gigantic cine-solidograph screen, on which the
gullied desolation of a Martian landscape was projected; in the course
of about two hours, the scene changed from sunrise through daylight
and night to sunrise again.

It was high noon when they entered and found a table; by the time they
had finished their dinner, the night was ending and the first glow of
dawn was tinting the distant hills. They sat for a while, watching the
light grow stronger, then got up and left the table.

There were five men at a table near them; they had come in before the
stars had grown dim, and the waiters were just bringing their first
dishes. Two were Assassins, and the other three were of a breed Verkan
Vall had learned to recognize on any time-line--the arrogant,
cocksure, ambitious, leftist politician, who knows what is best for
everybody better than anybody else does, and who is convinced that he
is inescapably right and that whoever differs with him is not only an
ignoramus but a venal scoundrel as well. One was a beefy man in a
gold-laced cream-colored dress tunic; he had thick lips and a
too-ready laugh. Another was a rather monkish-looking young man who
spoke earnestly and rolled his eyes upward, as though at some
celestial vision. The third had the faint powdering of gray in his
black hair which was, among the Akor-Neb people, almost the only
indication of advanced age.

"Of course it is; the whole thing is a fraud," the monkish young man
was saying angrily. "But we can't prove it."

"Oh, Sirzob, here, can prove anything, if you give him time," the
beefy one laughed. "The trouble is, there isn't too much time. We know
that that communication was a fake, prearranged by the Volitionalists,
with Dr. Harnosh and this Dallona of Hadron as their tools. They fed
the whole thing to that idiot boy hypnotically, in advance, and then,
on a signal, he began typing out this spurious communication. And
then, of course, Dallona and this Assassin of hers ran off somewhere
together, so that we'd be blamed with discarnating or abducting them,
and so that they wouldn't be made to testify about the communication
on a lie detector."

A sudden happy smile touched Verkan Vall's eyes. He caught each of his
Assassins by an arm.

"Marnik, cover my back," he ordered. "Olirzon, cover everybody at the
table. Come on!"

Then he stepped forward, halting between the chairs of the young man
and the man with the gray hair and facing the beefy man in the light
tunic.
