Ranger was busy with the pilot, who lay limply against the controls.
Captain Jellico and Tau were already pulling at the buckles of their
protective crash belts. But one look at the front of the flitter told
Dane that it would not take to the air again without extensive repairs.
Its nose was bent up and back, obscuring the forward view completely.
However, the pilot had made a miraculously safe landing considering the
terrain.

Ten minutes later, the pilot restored to consciousness and the gash in
his head bandaged, they held a council of war.

"The com was off, too. I did not have a chance to report before the
crash," Asaki put the situation straightly. "And our exploring parties
have not yet mapped this side of the range; it has a bad reputation
because of the swamp."

Jellico measured the heights now to their west with resigned eyes.
"Looks as if we climb."

"Not here," the Chief Ranger corrected him. "There is no passing through
the crater lake region on foot. We must travel south along the edge of
the mountain area until we do find a scalable way into the preserve
region."

"You seem very certain we are not going to be rescued if we stay right
here," Tau observed. "Why?"

"Because I'm inclined to believe that any flitter that tries to reach us
may run into the same trouble. Also, they have no com fix on us. It will
be at least a day or more before they will even begin to count us
missing, and then they will have the whole northern portion of the
preserve to comb; there are not enough men here--I can give you a
multitude of reasons, Medic."

"One of which might be sabotage?" demanded Jellico.

Asaki shrugged. "Perhaps. I am not loved in some quarters. But there may
also be something fatal to flitters here as there is over Mygra. We
thought the crater lake district safely beyond the swamp influence, but
it may not be so."

But you took the chance of traveling over it, Dane thought, though he
did not comment aloud. Was this another of the Chief Ranger's attempts
to involve them in some private trouble of his own? Though to
deliberately smash up a flitter and set them all afoot in this
wilderness was a pretty drastic move.

Asaki had started to unload emergency supplies from the flitter. They
each had a trail bag for a pack. But when the pilot staggered over to
pull out a set of stass belts and Jellico began to uncoil them, the
Chief Ranger shook his head.

"With the feeder beam shut off by the mountains, I fear those will no
longer work."

Jellico tossed one on the crumpled nose of the flitter and punched its
button with the tip of the needler barrel. Then he threw a rock at the
dangling belt. The stone landed, taking the wide protective band with it
to the ground. That force field which should have warded off the missile
was not working.

"Oh, fine!" Tau opened his trail bag to pack concentrates. Then he
smiled crookedly. "We aren't signed in for killing licenses, sir. Do you
pay our fines if we are forced to shoot a hole through something that
disputes the right of way?"

To Dane's surprise, the Chief Ranger laughed. "You are off preserve now,
Medic Tau. The rules do not cover wild land. But I would suggest we now
hunt a cave before nightfall."

"Lions?" asked Jellico.

Dane, remembering the black and white beast Lumbrilo had presented, did
not enjoy that thought. They had--his gaze went from man to man checking
weapons--the needler Asaki carried, and another the pilot had slung by
its carrying strap over his shoulder. Tau and the captain both were
armed with blasters and he had a fire ray and a force blade, both
considered small arms but deadly enough perhaps even to dampen a lion's
enthusiasm for the chase.

"Lions, graz, rock apes," Asaki fastened the mouth of his trail bag.
"All are hunters or killers. The graz send out scouts, and they are big
and formidable enough to have no enemies. Lions hunt with intelligence
and skill. Rock apes are dangerous, but luckily they cannot keep silent
when they scent their prey and so give one warning."

As they climbed up-slope from the flitter, Dane, looking back, saw that
perhaps Asaki was right in his belief that they had better try to help
themselves rather than wait for rescue. Putting aside the excuse of
fearing another crack-up, the wrecked flitter made no outstanding mark
on the ground. The higher they climbed, the less it could be
distinguished from the tumble of rocks about it.

He had lagged a little behind and, when he hurried to catch up, found
Jellico standing with his distance vision lenses to his eyes, directing
them toward that shadow marking the swamp. As the younger spaceman
reached him, the captain lowered the glasses and spoke:

"Take your knife, Thorson, and hold it close to that rock--over there."
He pointed to a rounded black knob protruding from the soil a little off
their path.

Dane obeyed, only to have the blade jerk in his hand. And when he
loosened his hold in amazement, the steel slapped tight against the
stone.

"Magnetic!"

"Yes. Which might explain our crash. Also this." Jellico held out a
field compass to demonstrate that its needle had gone completely mad.

"We can use the mountain range itself for a guide," Dane said with more
confidence than he felt.

"True enough. But we may have trouble when we head west again." Jellico
let the lenses swing free on their cord about his neck. "If we were
wrecked on purpose"--his mouth tightened and the old blaster burn on his
cheek stretched as did his jaw set--"then someone is going to answer a
lot of questions--and fast!"

"The Chief Ranger, sir?"

"I don't know. I just don't know!" The captain grunted as he adjusted
his pack and started on.

If fortune had failed them earlier, she smiled on them now. Asaki
discovered a cave before sundown, located not too far from a mountain
stream. The Ranger sniffed the air before that dark opening as the
Hunter pilot shed his equipment and crept forward on his hands and
knees, his head up and his nostrils expanding as he, too, tested the
scent from the cave mouth.

Scent? It was closer to a stench, and one ripe enough to turn the
stomach of an off-worlder. But the Hunter glanced back over his shoulder
and nodded reassuringly.

"Lion. But old. Not here within five days at least."

"Well enough. And even old lion scent will keep away rock apes. We'll
clean some and then we can rest undisturbed," was his superior's
comment.

The cleaning was easy for the brittle bedding of dried bracken and grass
the beast had left burned quickly, cleansing with both fire and smoke.
When they raked the ashes out with branches, Asaki and Nymani brought in
handfuls of leaves which they crumpled and threw on the floor, spreading
an aromatic odor which banished most of the foulness.

Dane, at the stream with the canteens to fill, chanced upon a small pool
where there was a spread of smooth yellow sand. Knowing well the many
weird booby traps one might stumble into on a strange world, the Terran
prospected carefully, stirring up the stand with a stick. Sighting not
so much as a water insect or a curious fish, he pulled off his boots,
rolled up his breeches and waded in. The water was cool and refreshing,
though he dared not drink it until the purifier was added. Then, with
the filled canteens knotted together by their straps, he put on his
boots and climbed to the cave where Tau waited with water tablets.

Half an hour later Dane sat cross-legged by the fire, turning a spit
strung with three small birds Asaki had brought in. One foot closer to
the heat began to tingle and he eased off his boot; his cramped toes
suddenly seeming to have doubled in size. He was staring wide-eyed at
these same toes, puffed, red, and increasingly painful to the touch,
when Nymani squatted beside him, inspected his foot closely, and ordered
him to take off his other boot.

"What is it?" Dane found that shedding the other boot was a minor
torture in itself.

Nymani was cutting tiny splinters, hardly thicker than a needle, from a
stick.

"Sand worm--lays eggs in flesh. We burn them out or you have bad foot."

"Burn them out!" Dane echoed, and then swallowed as he watched Nymani
advance a splinter to the fire.

"Burn them," the Khatkan repeated firmly. "Burn tonight, hurt some
tomorrow; all well soon. No burn--very bad."

Dane ruefully prepared to pay the consequences of his first brush with
the unpleasant surprises Khatka had to offer.




IV


Dane regarded his throbbing feet morosely. Nymani's operations with
burning splinters had been hard to take, but he had endured them without
disgracing himself before the Khatkans, who appeared to regard such a
mishap as just another travel incident. Now, with Tau's salve soothing
the worst of the after affects, the Terran was given time to reflect
upon his own stupidity and the fact that he might now prove a drag on
the whole party the next morning.

"That's queer...."

Dane was startled out of the contemplation of his misery to see the
medic on his knees before their row of canteens, the vial of water
purifier held to the firelight for a closer inspection.

"What's the matter?"

"We must have hit with a pretty hard thump back there. Some of these
pills are powder! Have to guess about the portion to add." With the tip
of his knife blade Tau scraped a tiny amount of pill fragments into each
waiting canteen. "That should do it. But if the water tastes a little
bitter, don't let it bother you."

Bitter water, Dane thought, trying to flex his still swollen toes, was
going to be the least of his worries in the morning. But he determined
that his boots should go on at daybreak, and he would keep on his feet
as long as the others did, no matter how much it cost him.

And when they set out shortly after daybreak, wanting to move as far as
they could before the heat hours when they must rest, the going was not
too bad. Dane's feet were tender to the touch, but he could shuffle
along at the tail of the procession with only Nymani playing rear guard
behind him.

Jungle lay before them and bush knives began to swing, clearing their
path. Dane took his turn with the rest at that chore, thankful that the
business of cutting their way through that mass of greenery slowed them
to a pace he could match--if not in comfort, then by willpower.

But the sand worms were not the only troubles one could encounter on
Khatka. Within an hour Captain Jellico stood sweating and speaking his
mind freely in the native tongues of five different planets while Tau
and Nymani worked as a team with skinning knives. They were not flaying
the spaceman, but they came near to that in places as they worried a
choice selection of tree thorns out of his arm and shoulder. The captain
had been unfortunate enough to trip and fall into the embrace of a very
unfriendly bush.

Dane inspected a fallen tree for evidence of inimical wild life, and
then rested his blanket between him and it as a protecting cushion
before he sat down. These trees were not the towering giants of the true
forests, but rather oversized bushes which had been made into walls by
twined vines. Brilliant bursts of flowers were splotches of vivid color,
and the attendant insect life was altogether too abundant. Dane tried to
tally his immunity shots and hoped for the best. At the moment he
wondered why anyone would want to visit Khatka, let alone pay some
astronomical sum for the privilege. Though he could also guess that the
plush safari arranged for a paying client might be run on quite
different lines from their own present trek.

How _could_ a tracker find his way through this? With the compasses
playing crazy tricks into the bargain! Jellico knew that the compasses
were off, yet the captain had followed Asaki's lead without question, so
he must trust the Ranger's forest craft. But Dane wished they were clear
on the mountain side again.

Time had little meaning in that green gloom. But when they worked
through to meet rock walls again, the sun said it was well into the
after part of the day. They sheltered for a breather under the drooping
limbs of one of the last trees.

"Amazing!" Jellico, his torn arm in a sling across his chest, came
down-slope from the higher point where he had been using the distance
lenses. "We struck straight across and cut off about ten miles by that
jungle jog. Now I believe all that I've heard of your people's ability
to cross wilderness and not lose their built in 'riding beams,' sir.
With the compasses out, I'll admit I've been nourishing a healthy set of
doubts."

Asaki laughed. "Captain, I do not question your ability to flit from
world to world, or how you have learned to set up trade with strange
humans and non-humans alike. To each his own mystery. On Khatka every
boy before he becomes a man must learn to navigate the jungle, and with
no instruments to help him, only what lies in here." He touched his
thumb to his forehead. "So through generations we have developed our
homing instincts. Those who did not, also did not live to father others
who might have had the same lack. We are hounds who can run on a scent,
and we are migrators who have better than a compass within our own
bodies."

"Now we take to climbing again?" Tau surveyed the way before them
critically.

"Not at this hour. That sun on the upward slopes can cook a man's skin
were he to touch any rock. We wait...."

Waiting for the Khatkans was a chance to sleep. They curled up on their
light blankets. But the three spacemen were restless. Dane would have
liked to have taken off his boots, but feared he could not replace them;
and he could tell from the way the captain shifted his position that
Jellico was in pain too. Tau sat quietly, staring at nothing Dane could
see, unless it was a tall rock thrust out of the slope like a finger
pointing skyward.

"What color is that rock?"

Surprised, Dane gave the stony finger closer attention. To him it was
the same color as most of the other rocks, a weathered black which in
certain lights appeared to carry a brownish film.

"Black, or maybe dark brown?"

Tau looked past him to Jellico. The captain nodded.

"I'd agree with that."

Tau cupped his hands over his eyes for a moment and his lips moved as if
he were counting. Then he took his hands away and stared up-slope. Dane
watched the medic's eyelids blink slowly. "Nothing but black or brown?"
Tau pressed.

"No." Jellico supported his injured arm upon his knees, leaning forward,
as intent upon the designated rock as if he expected it to assume some
far more startling appearance.

"Queer," Tau said to himself, and then added briskly, "You're right, of
course. That sun can play tricks with one's eyes."

Dane continued to watch the finger rock. Maybe strong sunlight could
play tricks, but he could see nothing odd about that rough lump. And
since the captain asked no questions of Tau, he did not quite want to
either.

It was perhaps a half-hour later, and the medic and Jellico had both
succumbed to the quiet, the heat, and their own fatigue, when Dane did
sight a movement up-slope. The throbbing in his feet was worse now that
he had nothing to occupy his mind but his own troubles, and he was
sitting facing the finger rock.

Was that what Tau had seen earlier? That quick movement around the side
