this way the motions of the needles are recombined in the motion of
the duplicate pen upon the paper, p.

Fig. 1 is an elevation of the receiving instrument, in which i i are
the coils as before, j j j j the controlling electro-magnets, k is the
writing siphon dipping with its short leg into the ink well, m, and l
is the bridge from which the writing siphon is suspended by means of a
thread and spring. The long leg of the siphon reaches down to the
surface of the paper, p, which is pulled along beneath it in contact
with the film of ink filling the point of the tube. When the siphon is
at rest its point marks a zero line along the middle of the paper, but
when the receiver is working, the siphon point forms each letter of
the message upon the paper as it passes.--_Engineering._

       *       *       *       *       *




ALUMINUM.


The splendid exhibit of the French aluminum manufacturers at the late
Exhibition has again called attention to that metal, which is so
admirably adapted to many purposes on account of its great lightness
and its stability under the influence of the atmosphere. While
aluminum industry has heretofore been thought to be confined to France
solely, we are now told by Mr. C. Bambery, in the Annual Report of the
Society of Berlin Instrument Makers, that for some years past aluminum
has been extensively manufactured in Berlin.

Three firms especially (Stueckradt, Haecke, and Schultze) are engaged in
this branch of industry.

The articles manufactured principally are nautical instruments, as
sextants, compasses, etc. The German navy is supplied throughout with
aluminum instruments. As a proof of the superiority of German
aluminum, it may here be mentioned that the normal sets of weights and
balances used by the International Commission for the regulation of
weights and measures, which lately was in session at Paris, were
obtained from Stueckradt, in Berlin, and not from any of the firms
at Paris, the reputed seat of aluminum industry.

Aluminum is, in Berlin, generally used pure, and cast pieces only are
composed of aluminum containing about 5 per cent of silver.

Nevertheless the use of aluminum will remain limited, even in case the
cost of manufacturing it could be materially reduced, until some
method shall have been discovered by which aluminum may be soldered.

This difficulty has, in spite of all efforts, not yet been overcome,
and for some purposes, to which the metal would otherwise be well
adapted, it remains so far unavailable. Here then is a chance for some
ingenious mind.

       *       *       *       *       *




AN IMPROVED DOOR BOLT.


The accompanying engraving represents, in perspective and in section,
an improved door bolt, recently patented by Mr. Thomas Hoesly, of New
Glaras, Wis.

The principal features of this bolt will be understood by reference to
the engraving. On the plate or body are cast two loops or guides for
the bolt, and the plate is slotted under the bolt, and a lug projects
into the slot and bears against a spring contained by a small casing
riveted to the back of the plate. The end of the bolt is beveled, and
its operation is similar to that of the ordinary door latch. Two
handles are provided, one of which is of sufficient length to reach
through the door, and a pawl or dog accompanies the bolt, which may be
attached to the door with a single screw, and is to be used in locking
the door. The bolt is very simple and strong, suitable for shops,
out-buildings such as barns, stables, etc., and some of the doors of
dwellings.

[Illustration: HOESLY'S DOOR BOLT.]

Further information may be obtained by addressing the inventor, as
above.

       *       *       *       *       *




CHIMNEY FLUES.


Messrs. W. H. Jackson & Co., of this city, whose long experience in
treating refractory flues gives weight to their opinion, communicate
to the _American Architect_ the following useful information:

To secure a good draught the chimney should be of sufficient size,
should be carried up above surrounding objects, should be as straight
as possible throughout its length, and should be as smooth as possible
inside, to avoid friction. As a draught is caused by unequal
temperatures, the chimney should be so arranged as to avoid a rapid
radiation of heat. If in an exterior wall there should be at least 8
inches of brickwork between the flue and the exterior surface. For
country houses it is much better to have the chimneys run up through
the interior, as the flue is more easily kept warm, and the heat that
is radiated helps to warm the house. The most frequent cause of a
"smoky chimney" is the insufficient size of the flue for the grate or
fireplace connected therewith. The flue should not be less than one
eighth the capacity of the square of the width and height of the grate
or fireplace. That is, if the grate has a front opening 20 inches wide
and 26 inches high, the flue should be 8 in. x 8 in.; or, with an
opening 36 inches wide and 32 inches high, the flue should be 12 in. x
12 in.; and, to get the best result, the opening into the flue from
the grate or fireplace should be of a less number of square inches
than the square of the flue, and never larger, as no more air should
be admitted at the inlet than can be carried through the flue. Where
there is more than one inlet to the same flue, the sum of all the
inlets should not more than equal the size of the flue. A number of
stoves may be connected with the same flue, one above another, if this
rule is observed.

A square flue is better than a narrow one, as in two flues containing
the same number of square inches the square flue would have the
smallest amount of wall surface, and consequently less friction for
the ascending currents, and less absorption of heat by the walls.
Chimneys should be closely built, having no cracks nor openings
through which external air may be drawn to weaken the draught. If they
could be made throughout their length as impervious to air as a tube
of glass, with interior surface as smooth, one cause of smoky chimneys
would be removed. A downward current of air is frequently caused by
some contiguous object higher than the chimney, against which the wind
strikes. This higher object may sometimes be quite a distance from the
chimney, and still affect it badly. A good chimney top constructed to
prevent a down draught will remedy this difficulty. Each grate or
fireplace should have a flue to itself. Under very favorable
conditions, two grates or fireplaces might be connected with the same
flue, but it is not a good plan. We have known grates and fireplaces
connected with two flues, where they have been built under a window
for instance, and, owing to there being insufficient room for a flue
of suitable size, a flue has been run up on each side of the window.
This is a very bad plan, and never can work well; it requires too much
heat to warm both flues, and if the room in which the grate or
fireplace is situated should be pretty close, so that there was no
other entrance for air, there is danger that it would circulate down
one flue and up the other, forcing smoke out of the fireplace into the
room.

       *       *       *       *       *




IMPROVED FURNACE FOR BURNING GARBAGE.


The refuse matter and garbage of large cities is in the main composed
of animal and vegetable offal of the kitchens; of the sweepings of
warehouses, manufactories, saloons, groceries, public and private
houses; of straw, sawdust, old bedding, tobacco stems, ashes, old
boots, shoes, tin cans, bottles, rags, and feathers; dead cats, dogs,
and other small animals; of the dust and sweepings of the streets, the
condemned fruit, vegetables, meat, and fish of the markets, all of
which compose a mass of the most obnoxious and unhealthy matter that
can be deposited near human habitations.

The inventor of the furnace shown in the accompanying engravings aims
to produce a change of form and of chemical nature and a great
reduction in bulk of all such refuse and garbage within the limits of
the city where it accumulates, without screening, separating,
preparing, or mixing, without the expense of using other fuel, without
any offensive odors being generated in the operation, and to produce
an entirely unobjectionable residuum or product that may be made
useful.

[Illustration: Fig. 1.--FOOTE'S FURNACE FOR BURNING GARBAGE.]

As a rule organic matter largely preponderates in the refuse, being as
high in some instances as 94 per cent. There is always more than
enough to generate sufficient heat to fuse the earthy or inorganic
portion, which is mainly composed of sand, clay, and the alkalies from
the coal and vegetable ashes, etc.

By producing a high degree of heat in the combustion of the organic
portion of the refuse with a forced blast or forced draught, the
non-combustible elements are fused, and form a vitreous slag, which is
entirely inodorous and unobjectionable, and which may be utilized for
many purposes.

The upper section or cone of the consuming furnace is built of boiler
iron, and lined with fire brick resting upon an iron plate, which is
supported by iron columns.

The hearth is made of fire brick, and is in the form of an inverted
cone, being smaller at the bottom and larger at the top, as shown in
Fig. 2.

The sides of the hearth are perforated near the bottom with arches for
the tuyeres or blast pipes, and also in front for the special blast
pipe and the tapping hole. The top of the furnace is closed with an
iron plate, provided with a circular opening, through which the hopper
enters the top of the furnace.

At the left in the larger engraving is seen an elevator, operated by a
steam engine, for conveying the garbage and refuse to a platform,
whence it is projected into the furnace by an inclined plane or chute.

Gas or smoke conductors convey the gas from the top of the furnace to
the furnace of the boiler and to the heating oven, where it is used in
heating air, which is conveyed through the iron pipes passing through
the heating oven into a wind box, from which it enters the furnace at
several points near the bottom by means of the tuyere pipes.

[Illustration: SECTION OF FURNACE.]

The consumption of the garbage is effected near the bottom of the
furnace, where the air is forced in, and is continued as long as the
blast is applied, and while burning at the base it is continually
sinking down at the top, so that it is necessary to keep filling all
the time. The odoriferous gases and the hot products of such
combustion are forced upward through the superimposed mass, and escape
to the fires of the boiler and heating oven, and, being largely
composed of carbonic oxide and the hydrocarbon gases distilled from
the animal and vegetable offal of the garbage, are thoroughly
consumed; and it is said that by this means not only are all the
offensive odors destroyed, but the heat generated is utilized for
making steam and heating the air used for blast.

The refuse in its descent through the high furnace is exposed to the
drying action of the hot gases of distillation and the hot products of
combustion, its temperature increasing in its descent the nearer it
approaches the tuyeres, and becomes completely desiccated and
combustible when it reaches the blast. The high heat in this way
obtained by the combustion of the organic portion melts all of the
inorganic portion, forming a vitreous slag or glass, which may be
allowed to run continuously, or by closing the tap may be allowed to
accumulate, and can be drawn off at intervals. If there is an adequate
supply of clay and sand in the refuse to combine with the ashes, the
slag will run hot and free. The combination of silex or alumina and an
alkali in proper portions always yields a fusible, easy-running
compound.

The molten slag, as it runs from the furnace, may be discharged into
tanks of cold water, which will pulverize or granulate it, making it
like fine sand, or as it pours over a runner, through which it flows,
if struck with a forcible air or steam blast it will be spun into fine
thread-like wool.

The furnace once lighted and started may be kept running day and night
continuously for days, months, or years, if desired; but if it becomes
necessary to stop at any time, the tuyere pipes may be removed and the
holes all stopped with clay, so as to entirely shut off the supply of
air, and it will then hold in fire for many days, and will be in
readiness to start again at any time the pipes are replaced and the
blast turned on.

This furnace is the invention of Mr. Henry R. Foote, of Stamford,
Conn.

       *       *       *       *       *




AN ANCIENT GREEK VASE.


The vase shown in the accompanying engravings must not be classed with
ordinary ceramic ware, as it is a veritable work of art. It is the
celebrated cup of Arcesilaus, which is preserved in the collection of
the library of Richelieu street after having figured in the Durand
Museum. It was found at Vulsei, in Etruria. It was made by a potter of
Cyrene, the capital of Cyrenaica, founded by Greeks from the island of
Thera. It is remarkable that Cyrene, removed from the center of
Grecian manufacture, should possess a manufactory of painted vases
from which have come so many works of art. The traveler, Paul Lucas,
discovered in the necropolis of Cyrene, in 1714, many antique vases,
both in the tombs and in the soil. One of them is still preserved in
the Museum at Leyden. The Arcesilaus, who is represented on this vase,
is not the celebrated skeptical philosopher of that name; it is
Arcesilaus, King of Cyrenaica, who was sung by Pindar, and who was
vanquished in the Pythian games under the 80th Olympiad (458 years
B.C.).

The height of this vase is 25 centimeters, its diameter 28
centimeters. The paste is very fine, of a pale red. It is entirely
coated with a black groundwork, which has been generally re-covered
with a yellowish white clay, baked on.

According to M. Brongniart, this piece has been subjected to the
baking process at least two or three times, thus indicating that the
ceramic art had made considerable progress in Cyrene even at that
remote epoch.

The following description of this vase is given in the catalogue of
the Durand Museum: The King Arcesilaus is seated under a pavilion upon
the deck of a ship. His head is covered with a kind of hat with a
large brim, and his hair hangs down upon his shoulders. He is clothed
in a white tunic and embroidered cloak or mantle, and he carries a
scepter in his left hand; under his seat is a leopard, and his right
hand he holds toward a young man, who makes the same gesture, and he
is weighing in a large scale assafoetida, which is being let down
into the hold of the ship. We know that he deals with assafoetida
because one of the personages (the one who lifts up his arm toward the
beam of the scale) holds in his right hand something resembling that
which is in the scale, and the Greek word traced near it signifies
"that which prepares _silphium_." Assafoetida, the resinous
matter of the silphium, is used largely by the Greeks in the
preparation of their food. The Orientals to-day make frequent use of
it and call it the delight of the gods; while in Europe, because of
its repulsive odor, it has long been designated as _stircus diaboli_.

[Illustration: Fig. 1.--ANCIENT GREEK VASE.]

[Illustration: Fig. 2.--TOP OF GREEK VASE.]

       *       *       *       *       *




SNOW-RAISED BREAD.


Somebody thinks he has discovered that snow, when incorporated with
dough, performs the same office as baking powder or yeast. "I have
this morning for breakfast," says a writer in the _English Mechanic_,
"partaken of a snow-raised bread cake, made last evening as follows:
The cake when baked weighed about three quarters of a pound. A large
tablespoonful of fine, dry, clean snow was intimately stirred with a
spoon into the dry flour, and to this was added a tablespoonful of
caraways and a little butter and salt. Then sufficient cold water was
added to make the dough of the proper usual consistence (simply
stirred with the spoon, not kneaded by the warm hands), and it was
immediately put into a quick oven and baked three quarters of an hour.
It turned out both light and palatable. The reason," adds the writer,
"appears to be this: the light mass of interlaced snow crystals hold
imprisoned a large quantity of condensed atmospheric air, which, when
the snow is warmed by thawing very rapidly in the dough, expands
enormously and acts the part of the carbonic acid gas in either baking
powder or yeast. I take the precise action to be, then, not due in any
way to the snow itself, but simply to the expansion of the fixed air
lodged between the interstices of the snow crystals by application of
heat. This theory, if carefully followed out, may perchance give a
clew to a simple and perfectly innocuous method of raising bread and
pastry." And stop the discussion as to whether alum in baking powders
is deleterious to health or otherwise.

       *       *       *       *       *




NEW AGRICULTURAL INVENTIONS.


An improved gate, invented by Messrs. P. W. McKinley and George L.
Ellis, of Ripley, O., is designed for general use. It is operated by
cords and pulleys, and can be opened without dismounting from the
horse. It is constructed so that it cannot sag, and is not liable to
get out of order.

An improved apparatus for pressing tobacco has been patented by Mr. F.
B. Deane, of Lynchburg, Va. It consists mainly in the construction of
a suspended jack, arranged to travel over a row of hogsheads, so that
a single jack gives successively to each hogshead the desired
pressure.

An improved combined harrow and corn planter has been patented by Mr.
M. McNitt, of Hanover, Kan. In this machine the opening, pulverizing,
planting, and covering teeth are combined with a single frame.

A machine, which is adapted to the thrashing and cleaning of peas and
seeds, and for cleaning all kinds of grain, has been patented by Mr.
J. J. Sweatt, of Conyersville, Tenn.

Mr. Amos M. Gooch, of Farmington, W. Va., has patented an improved
corn planter, which drops the fertilizer simultaneously with the seed,
and is provided with a device for pressing the soil around the seed,
leaving over the seed a portion of loose earth.

An improved machine for harvesting cotton has been patented by R. H.
Pirtle, of Lowe's, Ky. This machine carries two vertical cylinders
armed with teeth or spurs, and two inclined endless belts provided
with teeth. The teeth of the cylinders and the belts remove the cotton
from the plants, and deliver it to a receptacle carried by the
machine.

Messrs. Julius Fern and Samuel Bligh, of Oneonta, N. Y., have patented
an improved power for churning and other purposes where little power
is required. It consists in the combination of a drum and weight, a
train of gearing, and a pallet wheel arranged to oscillate a balanced
beam.

An improvement in the class of feed cutters in which two or more
knives work between parallel bars attached to the cutter box, has been
patented by Messrs. J. N. Tatum and R. C. Harvey, of Danville, Va. The
improvement consists in arranging the knives so that one begins and
finishes its cut in advance of the other.

Mr. William Bradberry, of Darrtown, O., has invented an improvement in
reciprocating churns. The aim of this inventor is to utilize the
resistance of the milk as a source of power. To accomplish this a
peculiar combination of mechanism is required, which cannot be clearly
described without an engraving.

       *       *       *       *       *




READING AND EYESIGHT.


M. Javel, in a recent lecture, tries to answer the question, "Why is
reading a specially fatiguing exercise?" and also suggests some
remedies for this fatigue. First, M. Javel says reading requires an
absolutely permanent application of eyesight, resulting in a permanent
tension of the organ, which may be measured by the amount of fatigue
or by the production of permanent myopy. Secondly, books are printed
in black on a white ground; the eye is thus in presence of the most
absolute contrast which can be imagined. The third peculiarity lies in
the arrangement of the characters in horizontal lines, over which we
run our eyes. If we maintain during reading a perfect immobility of
the book and the head, the printed lines are applied successively to
the same parts of the retina, while the interspaces, more bright, also
affect certain regions of the retina, always the same. There must
result from this a fatigue analogous to that which we experience when
we make experiments in "accidental images," and physicists will admit
that there is nothing more disastrous for the sight than the prolonged
contemplation of these images. Lastly, and most important of all in M.
Javel's estimation, is the continual variation of the distance of the
eye from the point of fixation on the book. A simple calculation
demonstrates that the accommodation of the eye to the page undergoes a
distinct variation in proportion as the eye passes from the beginning
to the end of each line, and that this variation is all the greater in
proportion to the nearness of the book to the eye and the length of
the line. As to the rules which M. Javel inculcates in order that the
injurious effects of reading may be avoided, with reference to the
permanent application of the eyes, he counsels to avoid excess, to
take notes in reading, to stop in order to reflect or even to roll a
cigarette; but not to go on reading for hours on end without stopping.
As to the contrast between the white of the paper and the black of the
characters, various experiments have been made in the introduction of
colored papers. M. Javel advises the adoption of a slightly yellow
tint. But the nature of the yellow to be used is not a matter of
indifference; he would desire a yellow resulting from the absence of
the blue rays, analogous to that of paper made from a wood paste, and
which is often mistakenly corrected by the addition of an ultramarine
blue, which produces gray and not white. M. Javel has been led to this
conclusion both from practical observation and also theoretically from
the relation which must exist between the two eyes and the colors of
the spectrum. His third advice is to give preference to small volumes
which can be held in the hand, which obviates the necessity of the
book being kept fixed in one place, and the fatigue resulting from
accidental images. Lastly, M. Javel advises the avoidance of too long
lines, and therefore he prefers small volumes, and for the same reason
those journals which are printed in narrow columns. Of course every
one knows that it is exceedingly injurious to read with insufficient
light, or to use too small print, and other common rules. M. Javel
concludes by protesting against an invidious assertion which has
recently been made "in a neighboring country," according to which the
degree of civilization of a people is proportional to the number of
the short sighted shown to exist by statistics; the extreme economy of
light, the abuse of reading to the detriment of reflection and the
observation of real facts, the employment of Gothic characters and of
a too broad column for books and journals, are the conditions which,
M. Javel believes, lead to myopy, especially if successive generations
have been subjected to these injurious influences.

       *       *       *       *       *




PHOSPHORESCENCE.


M. Nuesch records, in a recent number of the _Journal de Pharmacie_,
some curious observations regarding luminous bacteria in fresh meat.
Some pork cutlets, he found, illuminated his kitchen so that he could
read the time on his watch. The butcher who sent the meat told him the
phosphorescence was first observed in a cellar, where he kept scraps
for making sausages. By degrees all his meat became phosphorescent,
and fresh meat from distant towns got into the same state. On
scratching the surface or wiping it vigorously, the phosphorescence
disappears for a time; and the butcher wiped carefully the meat he
sent out. All parts of the animal, except the blood, acquired the
phenomenon over their whole surface. The meat must be fresh; when it
ceases to be so, the phosphorescence ceases, and _Bacterium termo_
appear. None of the customers had been incommoded. It was remarked
that if a small trace of the phosphorescent matter were put at any
point on the flesh of cats, rabbits, etc., the phosphorescence
gradually spread out from the center, and in three or four days
covered the piece; it disappeared generally on the sixth or seventh
day. Cooked meat did not present the phenomenon but it could be had in
a weak manner, from cooked albumen or potatoes. No other butcher's
shop in the place was affected. The author is uncertain whether to
attribute the complete disappearance of the phenomenon to the higher
temperature of the season, or to phenic acid, or to fumigation with
chlorine.

       *       *       *       *       *




THE CHARMS OF NATURAL SCIENCE.


The Earl of Derby, in an address at the Edinburgh University, said:
"Of the gains derivable from natural science I do not trust myself to
speak; my personal knowledge is too limited, and the subject is too
vast. But so much as this I can say--that those who have in them a
real and deep love of scientific research, whatever their position in
other respects, are so far at least among the happiest of mankind....
No passion is so absorbing, no labor is so assuredly its own reward
(well that it is so, for other rewards are few); and they have the
satisfaction of knowing that, while satisfying one of the deepest
wants of their own natures, they are at the same time promoting in the
most effectual manner the interests of mankind. Scientific discovery
has this advantage over almost every other form of successful human
efforts, that its results are certain, that they are permanent, that
whatever benefits grow out of them are world-wide. Not many of us can
hope to extend the range of knowledge in however minute a degree; but
to know and to apply the knowledge that has been gained by others, to
have an intelligent appreciation of what is going on around us, is in
itself one of the highest and most enduring of pleasures."

THE VESUVIUS RAIL WAY.--The Italian Ministry of Public Works, in union
with the Ministry of Finance and the Prefecture of Naples, has issued
the concession for the construction of the Vesuvius Railway. The line
will run along that part of the mountain which has been proved, after
the experience of many years, to be the least exposed to the
eruptions. The work is to be commenced immediately, and it is believed
that it will come into use during the present year. A sufficient
number of carriages are being built to convey 600 persons during the
day. The line is to be constructed upon an iron bridge, built after a
patented system.

       *       *       *       *       *




THE POTTERY TREE.


Among the various economic products of the vegetable kingdom,
scarcely any hold a more important place than barks, whether for
medicinal, manufacturing, or other purposes. The structure and
formation of all barks are essentially very similar, being composed of
cellular and fibrous tissue. The cell contents of these tissues,
however, vary much in different plants; and, for this reason, we have
fibrous or soft, woody, hard, and even stony barks. To explain
everything which relates to the structure of bark would lead us into
long details which our space will not permit. Briefly stated, the bark
of trees (considering, now, those of our own climate) consists of
three layers. The outermost, called the "cortical," is formed of
cellular tissue, and differs widely in consistency in different
species; thus, in the cork oak, which furnishes man with one of his
most useful commercial products, the cortical layer acquires
extraordinary thickness. The middle layer, called the "cellular" or
"green bark," is a cellular mass of a very different nature. The cells
of which it is composed are polyhedral, thicker, and more loosely
joined, and filled with sap and chlorophyl. The inner layer (next the
wood), called the "liber," consists of fibers more or less long and
tenacious. It is from the liber that our most valuable commercial
fibers are obtained. In some plants the fibrous system prevails
throughout the inner bark; but what we wish to refer to more
particularly at present is a remarkable example of the harder and more
silicious barks, and which is to be found in the "Pottery Tree" of
Para. This tree, known to the Spaniards as _El Caouta_, to the French
as _Bois de Fer_, to the Brazilians as _Caraipe_, is the _Moquilea
utilis_ of botanists, and belongs to the natural order _Ternstroeiaceae_.
It is very large, straight, and slender, reaching a height of 100 feet
before branching; its diameter is from 12 to 15 inches; and its wood
is exceedingly hard from containing much flinty matter. Although the
wood of the tree is exceedingly sound and durable, the great value of
the tree to the natives exists in the bark for a purpose which, to say
the least, is a novel one in the application of barks--that of the
manufacture of pottery. The Indians employed in the manufacture of
pottery from this material always keep a stock of it on hand in their
huts for the purpose of drying and seasoning it, as it then burns more
freely, and the ashes can be gathered with more ease than when fresh.
In the process of manufacturing the pottery the ashes of the bark are
powdered and mixed with the purest clay that can be obtained from the
beds of the rivers; this kind being preferred, as it takes up a larger
quantity of the ash, and thus produces a stronger kind of ware. Though
the proportions of ash and clay are varied at the will of the maker,
and according to the quality of the bark, a superior kind of pottery
is produced by a mixture of equal parts of fine clay and ashes. All
sorts of vessels of small or large size for household or other
purposes are made of this kind of ware, as are also vases or
ornamental articles, many of which are painted and glazed. These
articles are all very durable, and are able to stand almost any amount
