the horn jumped from white to pink and finally red, quivering against
the stop pin.

"Hot!" exclaimed Tom. "She almost kicked the pin off!"

"Get off the ship!" roared Connel. "It's a fission bomb with a time
fuse!"

Tom dove at the box and tried to pull it off the stabilizer, but Major
Connel grabbed him by the arm and wrenched him out into space.

"You space-blasted idiot!" Connel growled. "That thing's liable to go
off any second! Get away from here!"

With a mighty shove, the spaceman sent Tom flying out toward the jet
boat and then jumped to safety himself. Within seconds he and the young
cadet were aboard the jet boat again and, not stopping to answer Astro's
or Roger's questions, he jammed his foot down hard on the acceleration
lever, sending the tiny ship blasting away from the _Polaris_.

Not until they were two miles away from the stricken rocket ship did
Connel bring the craft to a stop. He turned and gazed helplessly at the
gleaming hull of the _Polaris_.

"So they know," he said bitterly. "They're trying to stop me from even
reaching Venus."

The three cadets looked at each other and then at the burly spaceman,
bewilderment in their eyes.

"What's this all about, sir?" Roger finally asked.

"I'm not at liberty to tell you, Manning," replied Connel. "Though I
want to thank you for your quick thinking. How did you happen to
discover the bomb?"

"I was sighting on Regulus for a position check and Regulus was dead
astern, so when I swung the periscope scanner around, I spotted that
thing stuck to the fin. I didn't bother to think about it, I just
yelled."

[Illustration]

"Glad you did," nodded Connel and turned to stare at the _Polaris_
again. "Now I'm afraid we'll just have to wait until that bomb goes
off."

"Isn't there anything we can do?" asked Tom.

"Not a blasted thing," replied Connel grimly. "Thank the universe we
shut off all power. If that baby had blown while the reactant was
feeding into the firing chambers, we'd have wound up a big splash of
nothing."

"This way," commented Astro sourly, "it'll just blast a hole in the side
of the ship."

"We might be able to repair that," said Tom hopefully.

"There she goes!" shouted Roger.

[Illustration]

Staring out the windshield, they saw a sudden blinding flash of light
appear over the stern section of the _Polaris_, a white-hot blaze of
incandescence that made them flinch and crouch back.

"By the craters of Luna!" exclaimed Connel.

Before their eyes they saw the stabilizer fin melt and curl under the
intense heat of the bomb. There was no sound or shock wave in the vacuum
of space, but they all shuddered as though an overwhelming force had
swept over them. Within seconds the flash was gone and the _Polaris_ was
drifting in the cold blackness of space! The only outward damage visible
was the twisted stabilizer, but the boys realized that she must be a
shambles within.

"I guess we'll have to wait a while before we go back aboard. There
might be radioactivity around the hull," Roger remarked.

"I don't think so," said Tom. "The _Polaris_ was still coasting when we
left her. We cut out the drive rockets, but we didn't brake her. She's
probably drifted away from the radioactivity already."

"Corbett's right," said Connel. "A hot cloud would be a hundred miles
away by now." He pressed down on the acceleration lever and the jet boat
eased toward the ship. Edging cautiously toward the stern of the
spaceship, they saw the blasted section of the fin already cooling in
the intense cold of outer space.

"Think I'd better call a Solar Guard patrol ship, sir?" asked Roger.

"Let's wait until we check the damage, Manning," replied Connel.

"Yeah," chimed in Astro grimly, "if I can help it, I'm going to bring
the _Polaris_ in." He paused and then added, "If I have to carry her on
my back."

As soon as a quick check with the radiation counter showed them that the
hull was free of radioactivity, Major Connel and the three cadets
re-entered the ship.

While the lack of atmosphere outside had dissipated the full force of
the blast, the effect on the inside of the ship, where Earth's air
pressure was maintained, was devastating. Whole banks of delicate
machinery were torn from the walls and scattered over the decks. The
precision instruments of the inner hull showed no signs of leakage, and
the oxygen-circulating machinery could still function on an auxiliary
power hookup.

Completing the quick survey of the ship, Major Connel realized that they
would never be able to continue their flight to Venus and instructed
Roger to contact the nearest Solar Guard patrol ship to pick them up.

"The _Polaris_ will have to be left in space," continued Connel, "and a
maintenance crew will be sent out to see if she can be repaired. If they
decide it isn't worth the labor, they'll junk her here in space."

The faces of the three cadets fell.

"But there's no real damage on her power deck, sir," said Astro. "And
the hull is in good shape, except for the stabilizer fin and some of the
stern plates. Why, sometimes a green Earthworm unit will crack a fin on
their first touchdown."

"And the radar deck can be patched up easy, sir," spoke up Roger. "With
some new tubes and a few rolls of wire I could have her back in shape in
no time."

"That goes for the control deck, too!" said Tom doggedly. Then, after a
quick glance at his unit mates, he faced Connel squarely. "I think it
goes without saying, sir, that we'd appreciate it very much if you could
recommend that she be restored instead of junked."

Connel allowed himself a smile in the face of such obvious love for the
ship. "You forget that to repair her out in space, the parts have to be
hauled from Venus. But I'll see what I can do. Meantime, Roger, see if
you can't get that patrol ship to give us a lift to Venusport. Tell the
C.O. I'm aboard and on urgent official business."

"Yes, sir," said Roger.

"And," continued the spaceman, noticing the downcast looks of Tom and
Astro, "it wouldn't hurt if you two started repairing as much as you
can. So when the maintenance crew arrives, they won't find her in such a
mess."

"Yes, sir!" chorused the two cadets happily.

Connel returned to his quarters and sat down heavily in the remains of
his bunk, rubbing his chin thoughtfully. Somehow, word had gotten out
that he was going to check on the secret organization on Venus and
someone had made a bold and desperate attempt to stop him before he
could get started. It infuriated him to think that anyone would
interrupt official business. As far as Connel was concerned, nothing
came before official business. And he was doubly furious at the danger
to the three cadets, who had innocently hitched a ride on what was
almost a death ship. Someone was going to pay, Connel vowed, clenching
his huge fists--and pay dearly.

[Illustration]




CHAPTER 4


"_Yeeooowww!_"

Roaring with jubilation and jumping high in the air at every other step,
Astro raced out of the gigantic maintenance hangar at the Venusport
spaceport and charged at his two unit mates waiting on the concrete
apron.

"Everything's O.K.," he yelled, throwing his arms around them. "The
_Polaris_ is going to be brought in for full repairs! I just saw the
audiograph report from the maintenance chief!"

Tom and Roger broke into loud cheers and pounded each other on the back.

"Great Jupiter," gasped Roger, "I feel as though I've been sitting up
with a sick friend!"

"Your friend's going to make a full recovery," asserted Astro.

"Did you see Major Connel?" asked Tom.

"Yeah," said Astro. "I think he had a lot to do with it. I saw him
talking to the head maintenance officer."

"Well, now that we've sweated the old girl through the crisis," asserted
Roger, "how's about us concentrating on our vacation?"

"Great," agreed Tom. "This is your party, Astro. Lead the way."

The three cadets left the spaceport in a jet cab and rode happily into
the city of Venusport. As they slid along the superhighway toward the
first and largest of the Venusian cities, Astro pointed out the sights.
Like slim fingers of glass, the towering Titan crystal buildings of the
city arose before them, reaching above the misty atmosphere to catch the
sunlight.

"Where do we get our safari gear, Astro?" asked Roger.

"In the secondhand shops along Spaceman's Row," replied the big
Venusian. "We can get good equipment down there at half the price."

The cab turned abruptly off the main highway and began twisting through
a section of the city shunned by the average Venusian citizen.
Spaceman's Row had a long and unsavory history. For ten square blocks it
was the hide-out and refuge of the underworld of space. The grimy stores
and shadowy buildings supplied the needs of the countless shadowy
figures who lived beyond the law and moved as silently as ghosts.

Leaving the jet cab, the three cadets walked along the streets, past the
cheaply decorated store fronts and dingy hallways, until they finally
came to a corner shop showing the universal symbol of the pawnshop:
three golden balls. Tom and Roger looked at Astro who nodded, and they
stepped inside.

The interior of the shop was filthy. Rusted and worn space gear was
piled in heaps along the walls and on dusty counters. An old-fashioned
multiple neon light fixture cast an eerie blue glow over everything.
Roger grimaced as he looked around. "Are you sure we're in the right
place, Astro?"

Tom winked. Roger had a reputation for being fastidious.

"This is it," nodded Astro. "I know the old geezer that runs this
place. Nice guy. Name's Spike." He turned to the back of the shop and
bawled, "Hey, Spike! Customers!"

Out of the gloomy darkness a figure emerged slowly. "Yeah?" The man
stepped out into the pale light. He dragged one foot as he walked.
"Whaddaya want?"

Astro looked puzzled. "Where's Spike?" he asked. "Doesn't Spike Freyer
own this place?"

"He died a couple months ago. I bought him out just before." The
crippled man eyed the three cadets warily. "Wanna buy something?"

Astro looked shocked. "Spike, dead? What happened?"

"How should I know," snarled the little man. "I bought him out and he
died a few weeks later. Now, you wanna buy something or not?"

"We're looking for jungle gear," said Tom, puzzled by the man's strange
belligerence.

"Jungle gear?" the man's eyes widened. "Going hunting?"

"Yeah," supplied Roger. "We need complete outfits for three. But you
don't look like you have them. Let's go, fellas." He turned toward the
door, anxious to get out into the open air.

"Just a minute! Just a minute, Cadet," said the proprietor eagerly.
"I've got some fine hunting gear here! A little used, but you won't mind
that! Save you at least half on anything you'd buy up in the city." He
started toward the back of the store and then paused. "Where you going
hunting?"

"Why?" asked Tom.

"So I'll know what kind of gear you need. Light--heavy--kind of guns--"

"Jungle belt in the Eastern Hemisphere," supplied Astro.

"Big game?" asked the man.

"Yeah. Tyrannosaurus."

"Tyranno, eh?" nodded the little man. "Well, now, you'll need heavy
stuff for that. I'd say at least three heavy-duty paralo-ray pistols for
side arms, and three shock rifles. Then you'll need camping equipment,
synthetics, and all the rest." He counted the items off on grubby little
fingers.

"Let's take a look at the blasters," said Tom.

[Illustration]

"Right this way," said the man. He turned and limped to the rear of the
shop, followed by the three cadets. Opening a large cabinet, he pulled
out a heavy rifle, a shock gun that could knock out any living thing at
a range of a thousand yards, and stun the largest animal at twice the
distance.

"This blaster will knock the scales off any tyranno that you hit," he
said, handing the weapon over to Tom who expertly broke it down and
examined it.

As Tom checked the gun, the proprietor turned to the other cadets
casually.

"Why would three cadets want to go into that section of the jungle
belt?"

"We just told you," said Roger. "We're hunting tyranno."

"Uh, yes, of course." He turned away and pulled three heavy-duty
paralo-ray pistols out of the cabinet. "Now these ray guns are the
finest money can buy. Standard Solar Guard equipment...."

"Where did you get them?" demanded Roger sharply.

"Well, you know how it is, Cadet." The man laughed. "One way or another,
we get a lot of gear. A man is discharged from the Solar Guard and he
can keep his equipment, then he gets hard up for a few credits and so he
comes to me."

Tom closed the shock rifle and turned to Astro. "This gun is clean
enough. Think it can stop a tyranno, Astro?"

"Sure," said the big cadet confidently. "Easy."

"O.K.," announced Tom, turning back to the proprietor. "Give us the rest
of the stuff."

"And watch your addition when you make out the bill," said Roger
blandly. "We can add, too."

A half-hour later the three cadets stood in front of the shop with all
the gear they would need and hailed a jet cab. They stowed their newly
purchased equipment inside and started to climb in as Astro announced,
"Spaceport, driver!"

"Huh?" Roger paused. "Why back there?"

"How do you think we're going to get to the jungle belt?" asked Astro.
"Walk?"

"Well, no, but--"

"We have to rent a jet launch," said Astro. "Or try to buy a used one
that we can sell back again. Pile in, now!"

As the cab shot away from the curb with the three cadets, the proprietor
of the pawnshop stepped out of the doorway and watched it disappear, a
puzzled frown on his face. Quickly he re-entered the shop, and limping
to a small locker in the rear, opened it, exposing the screen of a
teleceiver. He flipped on the switch, tuned it carefully, and in a
moment the screen glowed to life.

"Hello, this is the shop," called the little man. "Lemme speak to Lactu!
This is urgent!" As he waited he stared out through the dirty window to
the street where the cadets had been a moment before and he smiled
thinly.

       *       *       *       *       *

Arriving at the spaceport, Astro led his unit mates to a privately owned
repair hangar and dry dock where wealthier Venusian citizens kept their
space yachts, jet-powered craft, and small runabouts. Astro opened the
door to the office with a bang, and a young girl, operating an automatic
typewriter, looked up.

"Astro!" she cried. "How wonderful to see you!"

"Hiya, Agnes," replied Astro shyly. The big cadet was well known and
liked at the repair hangar. His early life had been spent in and around
the spaceport. First just listening to the stories of the older spacemen
and running errands for them, then lending a helping hand wherever he
could, and finally becoming a rigger and mechanic. This all preceded his
years as an enlisted spaceman and his eventual appointment to Space
Academy. His big heart and honesty, his wild enthusiasm for any kind of
rocket power had won him many friends.

"Is Mr. Keene around?" asked Astro.

"He's with a customer right now," replied Agnes. "He'll be out in a
