  accensis, atque in eas oculis defixis caecutiremus_;

"wee should perceive so great a brightnesse of her owne, that would
blind us with the meere sight," and when shee is enlightened by the
Sunne, then no eagles eye if there were any there, is able to looke upon
her. This _Cardan_ saies, and hee doth but say it without bringing any
proofe for its confirmation. However, I will set downe the arguments
that are usually urged for this opinion, and they are taken either from
Scripture or reason; from Scripture is urged that place, _1 Cor. 15._
where it is said, _There is one glory of the Sunne, and another glory
of the Moone_. _Vlysses Albergettus_ urges, that in _Math. 24. 22._
+he selene ou dosei to phengos autes+, _The Moone shall not give her
light_: therefore (saies he) she hath some of her owne.

  [Sidenote 1: _De Subtil. lib. 3._]

But to these wee may easily answer that the glory and light there spoken
of, may be said to be hers, though it be derived, as you may see in many
other instances.

The arguments from reason are taken either

1. From that light which is discerned in her, when there is a totall
eclipse of her owne body, or of the Sunne.

2. For the light which is discerned in the darker part of her body, when
she is but a little distant from the Sunne.

1. For when there are any totall eclipses, there appeares in her body a
great rednesse, and many times light enough to cause a remarkeable
shade, as common experience doth sufficiently manifest: but this cannot
come from the Sunne, since at such times either the earth, or her owne
body shades her from the Sun-beames, therefore it must proceede from her
owne light.

2. Two or three daies after the new Moone, wee may perceive light in her
whole body, whereas the rayes of the Sun reflect but upon a small part
of that which is visible, therefore 'tis likely that there is some light
of her owne.

In answering to these objections, I shall first shew, that this light
cannot be her owne, and then declare that which is the true reason of
it.

That it is not her own, appeares

1. From the variety of it at divers times; for 'tis commonly observed,
that sometimes 'tis of a brighter, sometimes of a darker appearance, now
redder, and at another time of a more duskish colour. The observation of
this variety in divers eclipses, you may see set downe by _Keplar_[1]
and many others, but now this could not be if that light were her owne,
that being constantly the same, and without any reason of such an
alteration: So that thus I may argue.

  [Sidenote 1: _Opt. Astron. c. 7. num. 3._]

If there were any light proper to the Moone, then would that Planet
appeare brightest when she is eclipied in her Perige, being neerest to
the earth, and so consequently more obscure and duskish when she is in
her Apoge or farthest from it; the reason is, because the neerer any
enlightened body comes to the sight, by so much the more strong are the
species and the better perceived. This sequell is granted by some of our
adversaries, and they are the very words of noble _Tycho_,[1]

  _Si luna genuino gauderet lumine, utique cum in umbra terrae esset,
illud non amitteret, sed eo evidentius exereret, omne enim lumen in
tenebris, plus splendet cum alio majore fulgore non praepeditur._

If the Moone had any light of her owne, then would she not lose it in
the earths shadow, but rather shine more clearely, since every light
appeares greater in the darke, when it is not hindered by a more
perspicuous brightnesse.

  [Sidenote 1: _De nova stella lib. 1. c. 10._]

But now the event falls out cleane contrary, (as observation doth
manifest, and our opposites themselves doe grant)[1] the Moone appearing
with a more reddish and cleare light when she is eclipsed being in her
Apoge or farthest distance, and a more blackish yron colour when she is
in her Perige or neerest to us, therefore shee hath not any light of her
owne. Nor may we thinke that the earths shadow can cloud the proper
light of the Moone from appearing, or take away any thing from her
inherent brightnesse, for this were to thinke a shadow to be a body, an
opinion altogether mis-becomming a Philosopher, as _Tycho_ grants in the
fore-cited place,

  _Nec umbra terrae corporeum quid est, aut densa aliqua substantia,
  aut lunae lumen obtenebrare possit, atque id visui nostro praeripere,
  sed est quaedam privatio luminis solaris, ob interpositum opacum
  corpus terrae._

Nor is the earths shadow any corporall thing, or thicke substance, that
it can cloud the Moones brightnesse, or take it away from our sight, but
it is a meere privation of the Suns light, by reason of the
interposition of the earths opacous body.

  [Sidenote 1: Reinhold _comment. in Purb. Theor. pag. 164._]

2. If shee had any light of her owne then that would in it selfe be,
either such a ruddy brightnesse as appeares in the eclipses, or else
such a leaden duskish light as wee see in the darker parts of her body,
when shee is a little past the conjunction. (That it must be one of
these may follow from the opposite arguments) but it is neither of
these, therefore she hath none of her owne.

1. 'Tis not such a ruddy light as appeares in eclipses, for then why can
wee not see the like rednesse, when wee may discerne the obscurer parts
of the Moone?

You will say, perhaps, that then the neerenesse of that greater light,
takes away that appearance.

I reply, this cannot be, for then why does Mars shine with his wonted
rednesse, when he is neere the Moone? or why cannot her greater
brightnesse make him appeare white as the other Planets? nor can there
be any reason given why that greater light should represent her body
under a false colour.

2. 'Tis not such a duskish leaden light, as we see in the darker part of
her body, when shee is about a sextile Aspect distant from the Sunne,
for then why does shee appeare red in the eclipses, since the more shade
cannot choose such variety, for 'tis the nature of darknesse by its
opposition, rather to make things appeare of a more white and cleare
brightnesse then they are in themselves, or if it be the shade, yet
those parts of the Moone are then in the shade of her body, and
therefore in reason should have the like rednesse. Since then neither of
these lights are hers, it followes that she hath none of her owne. Nor
is this a singular opinion, but it hath had many learned patrons, such
was _Macrobius_,[1] who being for this quoted of _Rhodiginus_, he calls
him _vir reconditissimae scientiae_,[2] a man who knew more than ordinary
Philosophers, thus commending the opinion in the credit of the Authour.
To him assents the Venerable _Bede_, upon whom the glosse hath this
comparison.[3] As the Looking-glasse represents not any image within it
selfe, unlesse it receive some from without; so the Moone hath not any
light, but what is bestowed by the Sun. To these agreed _Albertus
Magnus_, _Scaliger_, _Maeslin_, and more especially _Mulapertius_,[4]
whose words are more pat to the purpose then others, and therefore I
shall set them downe as you may finde them in his Preface to his
Treatise concerning the _Austriaca sydera_;

  _Luna, Venus, & Mercurius, terrestris & humidae sunt substantiae
  ideoque de suo non lucere, sicut nec terra._

The Moone, _Venus_, and _Mercurie_ (saith he) are of an earthly and
moyst substance, and therefore have no more light of their owne, then
the earth hath. Nay, some there are who thinke that all the other
Starres doe receive that light, whereby they appeare visible to us from
the Sunne, so _Ptolomie_, _Isidore Hispalensis_, _Albertus Magnus_ and
_Bede_, much more then must the Moone shine with a borrowed light.[5]

  [Sidenote 1: _Somn. Scip. l. 1. c. 20._]

  [Sidenote 2: _Lect. antiq. l. 1. c. 15._]

  [Sidenote 3: _In lib. de natur. rerum._]

  [Sidenote 4: _De 4r. Coaevis. Q. 4ª. Art. 21._
  _Exercit. 62._
  _1. Epitome. Astron. lib. 4. p. 2._]

  [Sidenote 5: _Originum l. 3. c. 60._
  _De Coelo. l. 2._
  _De ratione tempor. c. 4._]

But enough of this. I have now sufficiently shewed what at the first I
promised, that this light is not proper to the Moone. It remaines in the
next place, that I tell you the true reason of it. And here, I thinke
'tis probable that the light which appeares in the Moone at the eclipses
is nothing else but the second species of the Sunnes rayes which passe
through the shadow unto her body: and from a mixture of this second
light with the shadow, arises that rednesse which at such times appeares
unto us. I may call it _Lumen crepusculum_, the _Aurora_ of the Moone,
or such a kinde of blushing light, that the Sunne causes when he is
neere his rising, when he bestowes some small light upon the thicker
vapours. Thus wee see commonly the Sunne being in the Horizon, and the
reflexion growing weake, how his beames make the waters appeare very
red.

The Moabites in _Iehorams_ time when they rose early in the morning, and
beheld the waters a farre off, mistooke them for blood.[1]

  _Et causa hujus est, quia radius solaris in aurora contrahit quandam
  rubedinem, propter vapores combustos manentes circa superficiem
  terrae, per quos radii transeunt, & ideo cum repercutiantur in aqua
  ad oculos nostros, trahunt secum eundem ruborem, & faciunt apparere
  locum aquarum, in quo est repercussio esse rubrum_,

saith _Tostatus_.[2] The reason is, because of his rayes, which being in
the lower vapours, those doe convey an imperfect mixed light upon the
waters. Thus the Moone being in the earths shadow, and the Sunne beames
which are round about it, not being able to come directly unto her body,
yet some second raies there are, which passing through the shadow, make
her appeare in that ruddy colour: So that she must appeare brightest,
when shee is eclipsed, being in her Apoge, of greatest distance from us,
because then the cone of the earths shadow is lesse, and the refraction
is made through a narrower medium. So on the contrary, she must be
represented under a more darke and obscure forme when she is eclipsed,
being in her Perige, or neerest to the earth, because then she is
involved in a greater shadow, or bigger part of the cone, and so the
refraction passing through a greater medium, the light must needes be
weaker which doth proceed from it. If you aske now what the reason may
be of that light which we discerne in the darker part of the new Moone:
I answer, 'tis reflected from our earth which returnes as great a
brightnesse to that Planet, as it receives from it. This I shall have
occasion to prove afterward.

  [Sidenote 1: 2 King. 3. 22.]

  [Sidenote 2: _2ª. Quaest. in hoc cap._]

I have now done with these propositions which were set downe to cleare
the passage, and confirme the suppositions implied in the opinion, I
shall in the next place proceed to a more direct treating of the chiefe
matter in hand.




Proposition 6.

_That there is a world in the Moone, hath beene the direct opinion of
  many ancient, with some moderne Mathematicians, and may probably be
  deduced from the tenents of others._


Since this opinion may be suspected of singularity, I shall therefore
first confirme it by sufficient authority of divers authours, both
ancient and moderne, that so I may the better cleare it from the
prejudice either of an upstart fancy, or an absolute errour. This is by
some attributed to _Orpheus_, one of the most ancient Greeke Poets, who
speaking of the Moone, saies thus, +he poll' ourea echei, poll' astea,
polla melathra+,[1] That it hath many mountaines and cities, and houses
in it. To him assented _Xenophanes_, _Anaxagoras_, _Democritus_, and
_Heraclitus_,[2] all who thought it to have firme solid ground, like to
our earth,[3] containing in it many large fields, champion grounds, and
divers inhabitants, unto these agreed _Pythagoras_, who thought that our
earth was but one of the Planets which moved round about the Sunne,[4]
(as _Aristotle_ relates it of him) and the _Pythagoreans_ in generall
did affirme, that the Moone also was terrestriall, that she was
inhabited as this lower world. That those living creatures & plants
which are in her, exceed any of the like kind with us in the same
proportion, as their daies are longer than ours: _viz._ by 15 times.
This _Pythagoras_[5] was esteemed by all, of a most divine wit, as
appeares especially by his valuation amongst the _Romans_ who being
comanded by the Oracle to erect a statue to the wisest _Grecian_, the
Senate determined[6] _Pythagoras_ to be meant, preferring him in their
judgements before the divine _Socrates_, whom their Gods pronounc'd the
wisest. Some think him a _Iew_ by birth, but most agree that hee was
much conversant amongst the learneder sort, & Priests of that Nation,
by whom he was informed of many secrets, and perhaps, this opinion,
which he vented afterwards in _Greece_, where he was much opposed by
_Aristotle_ in some worded disputations, but never confuted by any solid
reason.

  [Sidenote 1: _Plut. de plac. phil. l. 2. c. 13._]

  [Sidenote 2: _Ibid. c. 25._]

  [Sidenote 3: _Diog. Laert. l. 2. & l. 9._]

  [Sidenote 4: _De Coelo. l. 2. cap. 13._]

  [Sidenote 5: _Plut. ibid. cap. 30._]

  [Sidenote 6: _Plin. Nat. Hist. l. 34. cap. 6._]

To this opinion of _Pythagoras_ did _Plato_ also assent, when hee
considered that there was the like eclipse made by the earth, and this,
that it had no light of its owne, that it was so full of spots. And
therefore wee may often reade in him and his followers,[1] of an
_aetherea terra_, and _lunares populi_, an aethereall earth, and
inhabiters in the Moone; but afterwards this was mixed with many
ridiculous fancies: for some of them considering the mysteries implied
in the number 3. concluded that there must necessarily bee a Trinity of
worlds, whereof the first is this of ours, the second in the Moone whose
element of water is represented by the spheare of _Mercury_, the aire by
_Uenus_, and the fire by the Sunne. And that the whole Universe might
the better end in earth as it began, they have contrived it, that _Mars_
shall be a spheare of the fire, _Iupiter_ of aire, _Saturne_ of water;
and above all these, the Elysian fields, spacious and pleasant places
appointed for the habitation of those unspotted soules, that either
never were imprisoned in, or else now have freed themselves from any
commerce with the body. _Scaliger_[2] speaking of this _Platonicke_
fancie, _quae in tres trientes mundum quasi assem divisit_, thinks 'tis
confutation enough, to say, 'tis _Plato's_. However for the first part
of this assertion, it was assented unto by many others, and by reason of
the grossnesse and inequality of this planet, 'twas frequently called
_quasi terra coelestis_, as being esteemed the sediment and more
imperfect part of those purer bodies, you may see this proved by
_Plutarch_,[3] in that delightfull work which he properly made for the
confirmition of this particular. With him agreed _Alcinous_[4] and
_Plotinus_, later Writers. Unto these I might also adde the imperfect
testimony of _Mahomet_, whose authority of grant can adde but little
credit to this opinion, because hee was an ignorant imposter, but yet
consider that originall, from whence hee derived most of his knowledge,
and then, perhaps, his witnesse may carry with it some probablity. He is
commonly thought by birth to be an Ismaelite, being instructed by the
Jewes in the secrets of their Philosophy,[5] and perhaps, learned this
from those Rabbies, for in his _Alcaron_, hee talkes much of mountaines,
pleasant fields, and cleare rivers in the heavens, but because he was
for the maine very unlearned, he was not able to deliver any thing so
distinctly as he was informed.[6] The Cardinall _Cusanus_ and _Iornandus
Bunus_, held a particular world in every Starre, and therefore one of
them defining our earth, he saies, it is

  _stella quaedam nobilis, quae lunam & calorem & influentiam habet
  aliam, & diversam ab omnibus aliis stellis_;

a "noble starre having a distinct light, heat and influence from all the
rest." Unto this _Nichol. Hill_, a country man of ours was inclined,
when he said _Astrea terrae natura probabilis est_: "That 'tis probable
the earth hath a starry nature."[7]

  [Sidenote 1: _Plat. de conviviis._
  _Macrob. Somn. Scip. lib. 1. ca. 11._]

  [Sidenote 2: _Exercit. 62._]

  [Sidenote 3: _De facie Lunae._]

  [Sidenote 4: _Instit. ad discip._ Plat. _Cael. Rhodig. l. 1. c. 4._]

  [Sidenote 5: _Azoara. 57. & 65._]

  [Sidenote 6: _Cusa. de doct. ign. l. 2. cap. 12._]

  [Sidenote 7: _Philos. epicur. part. 434._]

But the opinion which I have here delivered was more directly proved by
_Maeslin_, _Keplar_, and _Galilaeus_, each of them late writers, and
famous men for their singular skill in Astronomy.[1] As for those workes
of _Maeslin_ and _Keplar_ wherein they doe more expresly treate of this
opinion, I have not yet had the happinesse to see them. However their
opinions appeare plaine enough from their owne writings, and the
testimony of others concerning them. But _Iulius Caesar_, whom I have
above quoted, speaking of their testimony whom I now cite for this
opinion,[2] _viz._ _Keplar_ and _Galilaeus_ affirmes that to his
knowledge they did but jest in those things which they write concerning
this, and as for any such world, he assuredly knowes they never so much
as dreamt of it. But I had rather believe their owne words, then his
pretended knowledge.

  [Sidenote 1: _In Thesibus_
  _dissertatio cum Nic. Hill._
  _Nuncius Sydereus._]

  [Sidenote 2: _De phaenom. lunae. c. 4._]

'Tis true indeed, in many things they doe but trifle, but for the maine
scope of those discourses, 'tis as manifest they seriously meant it, as
any indifferent Reader may easily discerne; otherwise sure _Campanella_
(a man as well acquainted with his opinion, and perhaps his person as
_Caesar_ was) would never have writ an apologie for him. And besides 'tis
very likely if it had beene but a jest, _Galilaeus_ would never have
suffered so much for it as afterwards he did. But as for the knowledge
which hee pretends, you may guesse what it was by his confidence (I say
not presumption) in other assertions, and his boldnesse[1] in them may
well derogate from his credit in this. For speaking of _Ptolome's_
_Hypothesis_ he pronounces this verdict,

  _Impossibile est excentricorum & epicyclorum positio, nec aliquis
  est ex Mathematicis adeo stultus qui veram illam existimet._

  "The position of _Excentricks_ and _Epicycles_ is altogether
  impossible, nor is there any Mathematician such a foole as to
  thinke it true."

I should guesse hee could not have knowledge enough to maintaine any
other Hypothesis who was so ignorant in Mathematicks, as to deny that
any good Authour held this. For I would faine know whether there were
never any that thought the Heavens to be solid bodies, and that there
were such kindes of motion as is by those feined Orbes supplyed; if so,
then _Caesar la Galla_ was much mistaken. I thinke his assertions are
equally true, that _Galilaeus_ and _Keplar_ did not hold this, and that
there were none which ever held that other.

  [Sidenote 1: _Cap. 7._]

But in my following discourse I shall most insist on the observation of
_Galilaeus_, the inventour of that famous perspective, whereby we may
discerne the heavens hard by us, whereby those things which others have
formerly guest at are manifested to the eye, and plainely discovered
beyond exception or doubt, of which admirable invention, these latter
ages of the world may justly boast, and for this expect to be celebrated
by posterity. 'Tis related of _Eudoxus_, that hee wished himselfe burnt
with _Phaeton_, so he might stand over the Sunne to contemplate its
nature; had hee lived in these daies, he might have enjoyed his wish at
an easie rate, and scaling the heavens by this glasse, might plainely
have discerned what hee so much desired. _Keplar_ considering those
strange discoveries which this perspective had made, could not choose
but cry out in a +prosopopeia+ and rapture of admiration.

  _O multiscium & quovis sceptro pretiosius perspicillum! an qui te
  dextra tenet, ille non dominus constituatur operum Dei?_

And _Johannes Fabricius_[1] an elegant writer, speaking of the same
glasse, and for this invention preferring our age before those former
times of greater ignorance, saies thus;

  _Adeo sumus superiores veteribus, ut quam illi carminis magici
  pronunciatu de missam representasse putantur nos non tantum
  innocenter demittamus, sed etiam familiari quodam intuitu ejus quasi
  conditionem intueamur._

  "So much are wee above the ancients, that whereas they were faine by
  their magical charms to represent the Moones approach, wee cannot
  onely bring her lower with a greater innocence, but may also with a
  more familiar view behold her condition."

And because you shall have no occasion to question the truth of those
experiments, which I shal afterwards urge from it; I will therefore set
downe the testimony of an enemy, and such a witnesse hath alwaies beene
accounted prevalent: you may see it in the abovenamed _Caesar la
Galla_,[2] whose words are these:

  _Mercurium caduceum gestantem, coelestia nunciare, & mortuorum animas
  ab inferis revacare sapiens finxit antiquitas. Galilaeum vero novum
  Iovis interpretem Telescopio caducaeo instructum Sydera aperire, &
  veterum Philosophorum manes ad superos revocare solers nostra aetas
  videt & admiratur._

Wise antiquity fabled _Mercury_ carrying a rodde in his hand to relate
newes from Heaven, and call backe the soules of the dead, but it hath
beene the happinesse of our industrious age to see and admire _Galilaeus_
the new Embassadour of the Gods furnished with his perspective to unfold
the nature of the Starres, and awaken the ghosts of the ancient
Philosophers. So worthily and highly did these men esteeme of this
excellent invention.

  [Sidenote 1: _De macula in sole obser._]

  [Sidenote 2: _De phaenom. c. 1._]

Now if you would know what might be done by this glasse, in the sight of
such things as were neerer at hand, the same Authour will tell you,[1]
when hee sayes, that by it those things which could scarce at all bee
discerned by the eye at the distance of a mile and a halfe, might
plainely and distinctly bee perceived for 16 Italian miles, and that as
they were really in themselves, without any transposition or falsifying
at all. So that what the ancient Poets were faine to put in a fable, our
more happy age hath found out in a truth, and we may discerne as farre
with these eyes which _Galilaeus_ hath bestowed upon us, as _Lynceus_
