
He went out and came back with the box almost at once. He snorted at
Doc's incredulous thanks and moved off, his bedroom slippers slapping
against the hard floor.

Doc stared after him. If he were a friend of Jake, willing to invent
some excuse to get a microscope here ... but it didn't matter. Friend or
foe, his death sentence would be equally fatal. And there were other
things to be thought of now. The little microscope was an excellent one,
though only a monocular.

Doc's hands trembled as he drew his cultures out and began making up a
slide. The sun offered the best source of light near the window, and he
adjusted the instrument. Something began to come into view, but too
faintly to be really visible.

He remembered the stains, trying to recall his biology courses. More by
luck than skill, his fourth try gave him results.

Under two thousand powers, he could just see details. There were dozens
of cells in his impure culture, but only one seemed unfamiliar. It was a
long, worm-like thing, sharpened at both ends, with the three separate
nuclei that were typical of Martian life forms. Nearby were a host of
little rodlike squiggles just too small to see clearly.

Martian life! No Martian bug had ever proved harmful to men. Yet this
was no mutated cell or virus from Earth; it was a new disease,
completely different from all others. It was one where all Earth's
centuries of experience with bacteria would be valueless--the first
Martian disease. Unless this was simply some accidental contamination of
his culture, not common to the other samples. He worked on until the
light was too faint before putting the microscope aside.

By the time the trial commenced, however, he was sure of the cause of
the disease. It _was_ Martian. Crude as his cultures were, they had
proved that.

The little courtroom was filled, mostly from the villages. Lou was
there, along with others he had come to know. Then the sight of Jake
caught Doc's eyes. The darned fool had no business there; he could get
too closely mixed into the whole mess.

"Court's in session," Wilson announced. "Doc, you represented by
counsel?"

Jake's voice answered. "Your Honor, I represent the defendant. I think
you'll find my credentials in order."

Chris started to protest, but Wilson grinned. "Never lost your standing
in spite of that little fracas thirty years ago, so far as I know. But
the police thought you were a witness when you came walking in. Figured
you were giving up."

"I never said so," Jake answered.

Chris was squirming angrily, but the florid man acting as counsel for
Medical Lobby shook his head, bending over to whisper in her ear. He
straightened. "No objection to counsel for the defense. We recognize his
credentials."

"You're a fool, Matthews," the judge told him. "Jake was smarter than
half the rest of Legal Lobby before he went native. Still can tie your
tail to a can. Okay, let's start things. I'm too old to dawdle."

Doc lost track of most of what happened. This was totally unlike
anything on Earth, though it might have been in keeping with the general
casualness of the villages. Maybe the ritualistic routine of the Lobbies
was driving those who could resist to the opposite extreme.

Chris was the final witness. Matthews drew comment of Feldman's former
crime from her, and Jake made no protest, though Wilson seemed to expect
one. Then she began sewing his shroud. There wasn't a fact that managed
to emerge without slanting, though technically correct. Jake sat
quietly, smiling faintly, and making no protests.

He got up lazily to cross-examine Chris. "Dr. Ryan, when Daniel Feldman
was examined by the Captain of the _Navaho_ after arriving at Mars
station, did you identify him then as having been Dr. Daniel Feldman?"

She glanced at Matthews, who seemed puzzled but unconcerned. "That's
correct," she admitted. "But--"

"And you later saw him delivered to the surface of Mars. Is that also
correct?" When she assented, Jake hesitated. Then he frowned. "What did
you do then? Did you report him or send anyone to look after him or
anything like that?"

"Certainly not," she answered. "He was no--"

"You did absolutely nothing about him after you identified him and saw
him delivered here? You're quite sure of that?"

"I did nothing."

Jake stood quietly for a moment, then shrugged. "No more questions."

Matthews finished things in a plea for the salvation of all humanity
from the danger of such men as Daniel Feldman. He was looking smug, as
was Chris.

Wilson turned to Jake. "Has the defense anything to say?"

"A few things, Your Honor." Jake stood up, suddenly looking certain and
pleased. "We are happy to admit everything factual the Lobby had
testified. Daniel Feldman performed a surgical operation on Harriet Lynn
in the village of Einstein. But when has it been illegal for a member of
the Medical profession to perform an operation, even with small chance
of success, within an accepted area for such operation? There has been
no evidence adduced that any crime or act of even unethical conduct was
committed."

That brought Chris and Matthews to their feet. Wilson was relaxed again,
looking as if he'd swallowed a whole cage of canaries. He banged his
gavel down.

Jake picked up two ragged and dog-eared volumes from his table. "Case of
Harding vs. Southport, 2043, establishes that a Lobby is responsible for
any member on Mars. It is also responsible for informing the authorities
of any criminal conduct on the part of its members or any former member
known to it. Failure to report shall be considered an admission that the
Lobby recognizes the member as one in good standing and accepts
responsibility for that member's conduct.

"At the time Daniel Feldman arrived, Dr. Christina Ryan was the highest
appointed representative of Medical Lobby in Southport, with full
authority. She identified Feldman as having been a doctor, without
stipulating any change in status. She made no further report to any
authority concerning Daniel Feldman's presence here. It seems obvious
that Medical Lobby at Southport thereby accepted Daniel Feldman as a
doctor in good standing for whose conduct the Lobby accepted full
responsibility."

Wilson studied the book Jake held out, and nodded. "Seems pretty
clear-cut to me," he agreed, passing the book on to Matthews. "There's
still the charge that Dr. Feldman operated outside a hospital."

"No reason he shouldn't," Jake said. He handed over the other volume.
"This is the charter for Medical Lobby on Mars. Medical Lobby agrees to
perform all necessary surgical and medical services for the planet,
though at the signing of this charter there was no hospital on Mars.
Necessarily, Medical Lobby agreed to perform surgery outside of any
hospital, then. But to make it plainer, there's a later paragraph--page
181--that defines each hospital zone as extending not less than three
nor more than one hundred miles. Einstein is about one hundred and ten
miles from the nearest hospital at Southport, so Einstein comes under
the original charter provisions. Dr. Feldman was forced by charter
provisions to protect the good name of his Lobby by undertaking any
necessary surgery in Einstein."

He waited until Matthews had scanned that book, then took it back and
began packing a big bag. Doc saw that his possessions and the microscope
were already in the bag. The old man paid no attention to the arguments
of Matthews before the bench.

Abruptly Wilson pounded his gavel. "This court finds that Dr. Daniel
Feldman is qualified to practice all the arts and skills of the medical
profession on Mars and that he acted ethically in the performance of his
duties in the case of the deceased Harriet Lynn," he ruled. "The costs
of the case shall be billed to Medical Lobby of Southport."

He took off his robe and moved rapidly toward his private quarters.
Court was closed.

Doc got up shakily, not daring to believe fully what he had heard. He
started toward Jake, trying to avoid bumping into Chris. But she would
not be avoided. She stood in front of him, screaming accusations and
threats that reminded him of the only fight they'd ever had during their
brief marriage.

When she ran down, he finally met her eyes. "You're a helluva doctor,"
he told her harshly. "You spend all your time fighting me when there's a
plague out there that may be worse than any disease we've ever known.
Take a look at what lies under the black specks on your corpses. You'll
find the first Martian disease. And maybe if you begin working on that
now, you can learn to be a real doctor in time to do something about it.
But I doubt it."

She fell back from him then. "Research! You've been doing unauthorized
research!"

"Prove it," he suggested. "But you'd be a lot smarter to try some
yourself, and to hell with your precious rules."

He followed Jake out to the tractor.

Surprisingly, the old man was sweating now. He shook his head at Doc's
look, and his grin was uncertain.

"Matthews is an incompetent," he said. "They could have had you, Doc.
That charter is so sloppy a man can prove anything by it, and building a
hospital here did bring in Earth rules. Wilson went out on a limb in
letting you go. But I guess we got away with it. Let's get out of here."

Doc climbed into the tractor more soberly. They had escaped this time.
But there would be another time, and he was pretty sure that would be
Chris' round. He had no intention of giving up his research.




VII

Plague


Dr. Feldman leaned back from his microscope and lighted another bracky
weed. He glanced about the room and sighed wearily. Maybe he'd been
better off when he had no friends and couldn't risk the safety of others
in an effort to do research that was the highest crime on two worlds.

The evidence of his work was hidden thirty feet beyond his former
laboratory in Jake's village, with a tunnel that led from another
root-cellar. The theory was the old one that the best place to avoid
discovery was where you had already been discovered. If their spies had
identified his former hangout, they'd never expect to have him set up
research nearby. It was a nice theory, but he wasn't sure of it.

Jake looked up from a cot where he'd been watching the improvised
culture incubator. "Stop tearing yourself to bits, Doc. We know the
danger and we're still darned glad to have you here working on this."

"I'm trying to put myself together into a whole man," Doc told him. "But
I seem to come out wholly a fool."

"Yeah, sure. Sometimes it takes a fool to get things done; wise men wait
too long for the right time. How's the bug hunt?"

Doc grunted in disgust and swung back to the microscope. Then he gave up
as his tired eyes refused to focus. "Why don't you people revolt?"

"They tried it twice. But they were just a bunch of pariahs shipped here
to live in peonage. They couldn't do much. The first time Earth cut off
shipments and starved them. Next time the villages had the answer to
that but the cities had to fight for Earth or starve, so they whipped
us. And there's always the threat that Earth could send over unmanned
war rockets loaded with fissionables."

"So it's hopeless?"

"So nothing! The Lobbies are poisoning themselves, like cutting off
Medical service until they cut themselves out of a job. It's just a
matter of time. Go back to the bugs, Doc."

Doc sighed and reached for his notes. "I wish I knew more Martian
history. I've been wondering whether this bug may not have been what
killed off the old Martians. Something had to do it, the way they
disappeared. I wish I knew enough to make an investigation of those
ruins out there."

"Durwood!" Jake had propped himself on an elbow, staring at Doc in
surprise.

Doc scowled. "Clive Durwood, you mean? The archeologist who dug up what
little we know about the ruins?"

"Yeah, before he went back to Earth and started living off his lectures.
He came here again three years ago and dropped dead in Edison on the way
to some other ruins. Heart failure, they called it, though it was more
like the two old farmers who ran themselves to death last month. I saw
him when they buried him. His face looked funny, and I think he had
those little specks, though I may remember wrong." He grimaced. "Mars is
tough, Doc; it has to be. Some of the plant seeds Durwood found in the
ruins grew! Maybe your bugs waited a million years till we came along."

"What about the farmers? Did they meet Durwood?"

Jake nodded. "Must have. He lived in their village most of the time."

Doc went through his notes. He'd asked for reports on all deaths, and he
finally found the account. The two old men had been nervous and fidgety
for weeks. They were twins, living by themselves, and nobody paid much
attention. Then one morning both were seen running wildly in circles.
The village managed to tie them up, but they died of exhaustion shortly
after.

It wasn't a pretty picture. The disease might have an incubation period
of nearly fifteen years, judging by the length of time it had taken to
hit Durwood. It must spread from person to person during an early
contagious stage, leaving widening circles behind Durwood and those
first infected. When matured, any other sickness would set it off, with
few symptoms of its own. But without help, it still killed its victims,
apparently driving them madly toward frenzied physical effort.

He studied the culture on a slide again. He'd tried Koch's method to get
a pure strain, splattering the bugs onto a native starchy root and
plucking off individual colonies. About twenty specimens had been
treated with every chemical he could find. So far he'd found a few
things that seemed to stop their growth, but nothing that killed them,
except stuff far too harsh to use in living tissue.

He had nearly forty cases of deaths that showed symptoms now, and he
went back over them, looking for anything in common that went back ten
to twenty years before death. There were no rashes nor blisters. A few
had had apparent colds, but such were too common to mean anything.

Only one thing appeared, about fourteen years before their deaths. The
people interviewed about the victims might be vague about most things,
but they remembered the time when "Jim had the jumping headache."

"Jake," Doc called, "what's jumping headache? Most people seem to have
it some time or other, but I haven't run across a case of it."

"Sure you have, Doc. Mamie Brander's little girl a few weeks ago. Feels
like your pulse is going to rip your skull off, right here. Can't eat
because chewing drives you crazy. Back of your head, neck and shoulders
swell up for about a week. Then it goes away."

Then it goes away--for fourteen years, until it comes back to kill!

Doc stared at his charts in sudden horror. It was a new disease--thought
to be some virus, but not considered dangerous. Selznik's migraine,
according to medical usage; you treated it with hot pads and anodyne,
and it went away easily enough.

He'd seen hundreds of such cases on Earth. There must be millions who
had been hit by it. The patent-medicine branch of the Lobby had even
brought out something called Nograine to use for self-treatment.

"Something important?" Jake wanted to know.

Feldman nodded. "How much weight do you swing in other villages, Jake?"

"People sort of do me favors when I ask," Jake admitted. "Like swiping
those medical journals from Northport for you, or like Molly Badger
getting that job as maid to spy on Chris Ryan. Name it and I'll do my
best."

Doc had a vague idea of village politics, but he had more important
things to think of. Most of his foul mood had disappeared with the clue
he'd stumbled on, and his chief worry now was to clinch the facts.

Feldman considered the problem. "I want a report on every case of
jumping headache in every village--who had it, when, and how old they
were. This place first, but every village you can reach. And I'll want
someone to take a letter to Chris Ryan."

Jake frowned at that, but went out to issue instructions. Doc sat down
at a battered old typewriter. Writing Chris might do no good, but some
warning had to be gotten through to Earth, where the vast resources of
Medical Lobby could be thrown into the task of finding the cause and
cure of the disease. The connection with Selznik's migraine had to be
reported. If something could blast the Lobby into action, it wouldn't
matter quite so much what they did to him. He wasn't foolish enough to
expect gratitude from them, but he was getting used to the idea that his
days were numbered. The plague was more important than what happened to
him.

The letter had been dispatched by the time Jake returned. "Here's the
dope for this village. Everybody accounted for except you."

"Never had it, Jake." Feldman went down the list. "Most of it fourteen
years ago. That fits. About the only exceptions are the kids who seem to
get it between the ages of two and three. Eighty-seven out of
ninety-one!"

He stared at the figures sickly. Most of the village not only had the
plague but must be near the end of the incubation period. It looked as
if most of the village would be dead before another year passed.

"Bad?" Jake asked.

"The first symptom of Martian fever."

The old man whistled, the lines around his eyes tightening. "Must be
me," he decided. "I'm the guy who must have brought it here, then. I
used to spend a lot of time with Durwood at his diggings!"

There was a constant commotion all that day and the next as runners went
out to the villages and came back with reports. The variation from
village to village was only slight. Most of Mars seemed to have advanced
cases of Martian fever.

Without animals for investigation and study, real research was
difficult. Doc also needed an electron microscope. He was reasonably
sure that the disease must travel through the nerves, but he had found
no proof beyond the hard lump at the base of the neck. There it was a
fair-sized organism. Elsewhere he could find nothing, until the black
specks developed.

His eyes ached from trying to see more than was visible in the
microscope. The tantalizing suggestions of filaments around the nuclei
might be the form of plague that was contagious. They might even be the
true form of the bug, with the bigger cell only a transition stage.
There were a number of diseases that involved complicated changes in the
organisms that caused them. But he couldn't be sure.

He finally buried his head in his hands, trying to do by pure thought
what he couldn't do in any other way. And even there, he lacked
training. He was a doctor, not a xenobiologist. Research training had
been taboo in school, except for a favored few.

The reports continued to come in, confirming the danger. They seemed to
have the worst plague on their hands in all human history; and nobody
who could do anything about it even knew of it.

"Molly reports that your letter got some results," Jake reported. "Chris
Ryan brought home one of the electron microscopes and a bunch of
equipment from the hospital pathology room. Think she'll get anywhere?"

Doc doubted it. Damn it, he hadn't meant for her to try it, though she
might have authority for routine experiments. But it was like her to
refuse to pass on the word without trying to prove her own suspicion of
him first.

He tried to comfort himself with the fact that some men were immune, or
seemed so; about three out of a hundred showed no signs. If that
immunity was hereditary, it might save the race. If not....

Jake came in at twilight with a grim face. "More news from Molly. The
Lobby is starting out to comb every village with a fault-finder,
starting here. And this hole will show up like a sore thumb. Better
start packing. We gotta be out of here in less than an hour!"




VIII

Fool


Three days later, Doc saw his first runner.

The tractor was churning through the sand just before sundown, heading
toward another one-night stand at a new village. Lou was driving, while
Doc and Jake brooded silently in the back, paying no attention to the
colors that were blazoned over the dunes. The cat-and-mouse game was
getting to Doc. There was no real assurance that the village they were
approaching might not be the target the Lobby had chosen for the next
investigation.

Lou braked the tractor to a sudden halt, and pointed.

A figure was running frantically over one of the low dunes with the
little red sun behind him. He seemed headed toward them, but as he drew
nearer they could see that he had no definite direction. He simply ran,
pumping his legs frantically as if all the devils of hell were after
him. His body swayed from side to side in exhaustion, but his arms and
legs pumped on.

"Stop him!" Jake ordered, and Lou swung the tractor. It halted squarely
in the runner's path, and the figure struck against it and toppled.

The legs went on pumping, digging into the dirt and gravel, but the man
was too far gone to rise. Jake and Lou shoved him through the doors into
the tractor and Doc yanked off his aspirator.

The man was giving vent to a kind of ululating cry, weakened now almost
to a whine that rose and fell with the motion of his legs. Sweat had
once streaked his haggard face, but it was dry and blanched to a pasty
gray.

Doc injected enough narcotic to quiet a maddened bull. It had no effect,
except to upset the rhythm of the arms and legs. It took five more
minutes for the man to die.

The specks were larger this time--the size of periods in twelve-point
type. The lump at the base of the skull was as big as a small hen's egg.

"From Edison, like the others so far. Jack Kooley," Jake answered Doc's
question. "Durwood spent a lot of time here on his first expedition, so
it's getting the worst of it."

Doc pulled the aspirator mask back over the man's face and they carried
him out and laid him on a low dune. They couldn't risk returning the
corpse to its people.

This was only the primary circle of infection, direct from Durwood. The
second circle could be ten times as large, as the infection spread from
one to a few to many. So far it was localized. But it wouldn't stay that
way.

Doc climbed slowly out of the tractor, lugging his small supplies of
equipment, while Jake made arrangements for them to spend the night in a
deserted house. But the figure of the runner and his own failures to
find more about the disease kept haunting Doc. He began setting up his
equipment grimly.

"Better get some sleep," Jake suggested. "You're a mite more tired than
you think. Anyhow, I thought you told me you couldn't do any more with
what you've got."

Feldman looked at the supplies he had spread out, and shook his head
wearily. He'd been over every chemical and combination a dozen times,
without results that showed in the limited magnification of the optical
mike.

He snapped the case shut and hit the rude table with the heel of his
