
"English aristocrats?" repeated Jack. "Are any here?"

"Sure. There's a lot of them burned out. Lord Peckham was stoppin' at
the hotel with a big crowd of people, an' their apartments was all
destroyed. Some of 'em went to the police station."

The boys followed their uniformed guide through the streets of Easton,
and were soon at the station house. There they were received by the
sergeant in charge, while the matron gave them each a cup of hot coffee,
a large pot of the beverage having been brewed.

"I'll have to give you boys one bed between you," said the sergeant.
"We're rather crowded for room to-night."

"Anything will do us," said Jack with a laugh.

Just then there was some excitement at the entrance of the police
station.

"I tell you they're in here! I will see them!" a voice exclaimed. "I
want them arrested at once!"

"Go easy now," counseled the doorman as he tried to hold back a short,
stout, excited man who was pushing his way into the station.

"There they are!" exclaimed the man, pointing to Jack and Mark.

"Why those boys are from the burned hotel," said the doorman.

"I know it! They are the very ones I want!"

"What do you of us?" spoke up Mark. He recognized the man as the one who
had called to him as he and Jack were escaping.

"I charge you with being sons of James Darrow, the notorious English
anarchist!" cried the little man, pointing his finger at the boys, "and
I accuse you of trying to kill Lord Peckham with a bomb, the explosion
of which set fire to the hotel!"

For a moment the surprising charge so astonished every one that not a
word was said. Then the little man, advancing toward the boys went on:

"I arrest you in the name of His Royal Highness, Edward VII, King of
England, Scotland and Wales."

He threw back the lapel of his coat and showed a badge.

"King of England, Scotland and Wales, is it!" exclaimed the doorman with
a twinkle in his eye. "An' why didn't ye say Ireland into the bargain."

"Ireland, of course," went on the little man. "I'm an officer of His
Most Gracious Majesty," he added, "and I demand the assistance of the
United States authorities in general and the police of Easton in
particular in taking these desperate criminals into custody!"

"Hold your horses," advised the desk-sergeant. "Those boys are not
liable to run away. They're to stay here over night, and if you have any
charge to make against them why you'll have to come and see the judge
in the morning."

"But they are sons of an anarchist! They are anarchists themselves!"
exclaimed the man, "I must arrest them!"

"You're not going to arrest anybody," said the sergeant, "until you get
a warrant from the judge. This isn't England."

"Then I'm going to stay with these boys the rest of the night," insisted
the man. "I can't take any chances on their giving me the slip."

"This place is going to be crowded with people from the burned hotel,"
objected the sergeant. "There will be no room for you. Besides, how do I
know these boys are anarchists?"

"Look in their valise," cried the stranger. "It is filled with bombs."

"You can't look in this satchel," exclaimed Jack, for he remembered the
valise contained parts of the professor's secret machines.

"What did I tell you?" cried the Englishman with triumph in his tones.
"They are the guilty ones. They are afraid to open their valise."

"We are, but not because it has bombs in it," said Mark. "It has parts
of an unpatented machine and the owner does not want any one to see
them," for Mark remembered Mr. Henderson's strict injunctions to let no
one but the mechanist to whom they had gone catch a glimpse of the
parts that were to be duplicated. The machinist was sworn to secrecy.

"It's none of our affair," said the sergeant, though he seemed a little
impressed by the Englishman's words and the reluctance Mark and Jack
showed to letting the valise be opened. "The boys will be here until
morning, and then you can see the judge. Now you'll have to get out. You
boys get to bed."

Muttering threats, the stranger went from the station house, and Mark
and Jack, in response to a nod from the doorman, followed him upstairs
to a part of the police station used to detain witnesses. They were
shown to a small room with a single bed.

"Are ye really anarchists?" asked the doorman.

"Not a bit," replied Jack, and he told as much of their story as he
dared.

"I was kind-of hopin' ye was," said the officer with a twinkle in his
eye. "It wouldn't do any harm to scare that uppish Englishman a bit.
Sure he an' his kind have done enough to poor old Ireland."

"I'm sorry we can't oblige you," said Mark with a laugh.

"I guess ye're all right," went on the doorman. "I hope ye sleep good
the rest of the night."

Then he left them alone. What with the excitement of the fire and the
startling accusation against them, the boys' brains were too excited to
let them sleep much. They had a few fitful naps throughout the remainder
of the night.

It was just getting daylight when Mark was awakened by some one shaking
him.

"What is it?" he asked. "Another fire?"

"Not this time," replied a voice, and Mark, now that his eyes were fully
opened, saw the doorman bending over him.

"What's the matter?" asked Jack waking up in his turn.

"Easy!" exclaimed the doorman in a whisper. "I happened to think ye
might want to be leavin'."

"Leaving?" asked Mark in bewilderment.

"Yes. Ye know that Englishman is liable to be back any minute, an' he
may make trouble for ye. I know ye're innocent lads, an' I'd hate to see
ye mixed up in a mess with that fellow. So I slips up here early, an' ye
can leave by the back door if ye want to, an' the officer of His
Imperial Majesty, King Edward VII, will never know a thing about it."

"It looks like running away," objected Jack.

"Sure there's no charge agin ye," went on the doorman. "Ye're free to
come an' go as far as we're concerned, an' ye'd better go whilst ye have
the chance."

Jack reflected. It was true that the charge of the Englishman, baseless
as it was, might make trouble for them, and cause them endless delays in
getting back to Professor Henderson. Suddenly Jack made up his mind.

"Come on Mark," he said.




CHAPTER VI

ON A RUNAWAY TROLLEY


"Are you going to leave?" asked Mark.

"Certainly. There is no use staying here and getting mixed up in
something that Englishman thinks we have done. It's easier to go away
quietly and let him find out his mistake."

"All right," agreed Mark. "I wonder who he is, anyhow?"

"He thinks he owns the earth, whoever he is," returned Jack.

"He's some sort of a special detective traveling with Lord Peckham's
party," explained the doorman. "He told us a lot about himself last
night after you boys went to bed. He came back to inquire how early the
judge would be here.

"He went on to tell how some English anarchists have vowed to kill Lord
Peckham because he foreclosed a lot of mortgages on some poor people in
Ireland where he owned property," added the doorman. "There was some
sort of explosions in the hotel, near where Lord Peckham had his rooms.
Maybe it was a bomb and, maybe ag'in it was only the boiler. Anyhow,
this detective jumped to the conclusion that anarchists had done it, and
he thinks you are responsible. But you'd better be goin' now. It's
gettin' daylight."

So Mark and Jack, with what scanty clothes they had, and carrying their
valise, went quietly out of the back door of the police station.

"We'd better go to the machine shop for the rest of the stuff,"
suggested Mark, "and then we can take the first trolley we see and get
back to the professor."

Through quiet side streets the boys made their way toward the machine
shop. They were somewhat amused to think how they had fooled the
detective, but they would not have felt so jolly had they seen the
roughly dressed man who had darted after them as soon as they left the
police station.

"I'll get you yet," the man muttered. "You needn't think to escape with
the aid of these bloomin' American police."

The lads found the machinist just opening his shop though it was quite
early. The pieces of apparatus were finished and, after paying for them
Mark put the parts in the valise.

"Quite a fire in town," observed the machinist.

"Yes," answered Mark, not wishing to get into a long conversation.

"Heard the hotel was blowed up by anarchists and that the police are
after 'em," proceeded the man.

"I believe I did hear something like that," admitted Mark. "I guess
we'll be going."

He signalled to Jack, and the two hurried out of the shop. As they did
so, the trampish-looking man glided from behind a tree where he had been
hiding and took after them.

"Say," exclaimed Jack, "I forgot we haven't had any breakfast yet."

"That's so," said Mark, rubbing his stomach and making a wry face.

Near by was a bakery, and there the lads got some coffee and rolls which
tasted fine. When they finished their simple meal a trolley came past
and they ran to catch it. So did the man who had been following them,
but this person bore no resemblance to the spruce little detective who
had wanted to arrest the boys.

"A couple of hours now and we'll be back at the cabin," spoke Mark. "My,
but I must say we have had strenuous times since we started away!"

There were few passengers on the trolley so early in the morning and not
many stops to make, so the motorman turned on the power full and made
the vehicle speed along.

Mile after mile was covered and finally the car reached the top of a
long hill. At the foot of this the line came to an end, and the boys had
a two mile tramp before them to reach the lonely spot where the
_Porpoise_ was docked.

Down the hill the car started. The motorman shut off the electricity and
let the vehicle run by its weight.

Faster and faster it ran, the dust flying in a cloud about it.

"Better put the brakes on a bit," called the conductor. "It's gettin'
kinder speedy, Hank!"

The motorman twisted the handle. There was a grinding noise as the shoes
took hold on the wheels. Then a chain snapped and the car seemed to leap
ahead.

"The brake's busted! I can't stop the car!" yelled the motorman.

Vainly he twisted at the handle. Then, seeing he could not stop the
trolley car he made a desperate jump off the vehicle and landed in a
heap on the side of the road, rolling over and over.

"Reverse the current!" cried one of the passengers, to the conductor.
"That ought to stop her!"

The conductor made his way to the front platform and turned the
reversing lever. Then he applied the current. But it was no use. With a
blinding flash and a report like that of a gun a fuse blew out, and that
crippled the car completely so far as the electric current was
concerned.

"Everybody jump!" cried the conductor. "There's a curve at the foot of
the hill, and we'll all be killed if we stay on!"

One by one the passengers leaped from the car. Several were badly hurt
by the falls they got. Meanwhile the trolley was tearing down the hill
at a terrific rate of speed.

"Shall we jump?" asked Mark of Jack.

"We'll be killed if we do," was Jack's answer.

"And we'll be killed if we stay aboard," said Mark.

"Not if I can help it," cried Jack as he started for the rear platform.

"What are you going to do?" asked Mark.

"Put on the other brake. They never thought to try this one! Maybe it
will work and stop the car!"

Then Mark saw what Jack was up to and went to help him. The shabbily
dressed man seemed undecided what to do. He stood up, holding to the
straps to prevent himself from being tossed from side to side as the
runaway trolley swayed. He watched the boys curiously.

The lads, reaching the rear platform, twisted at the brake handle with
all their strength. They could feel that the chain was still intact. But
would the shoes grip the wheels with force sufficient to stop the car?

There was a shrill screech as the brakes were applied by the boys. With
all their might they turned the handle, winding the chain up tighter and
tighter. At last they could not budge it another inch. Then they waited
anxiously.

The car never slackened its speed. So great was the momentum that had
both sets of brakes been in working order it is doubtful whether they
would have stopped the vehicle. The speed was so great now that one of
the journals became hot and the oily waste that was packed in it caught
fire, making what railroad men term a "hot box".

"I guess we're done for," groaned Mark.

"We certainly haven't checked the speed any," Jack admitted. "But wait a
minute."

He began stamping on the floor of the platform.

"What you doing?" cried Mark, for he had to shout to make his voice
heard above the roar and rattle of the car.

"Putting on the sand," replied Jack, as he kicked at the plunger which,
being depressed, let a stream of fine gravel out on the rails. "The
wheels are gripped I think, and are slipping on the rails. This may help
some."

"Let me give you a hand," exclaimed a voice, and the boys turned to see
the shabby man standing with them on the platform. He grasped the brake
handle, and gave it an additional turn. His strength seemed remarkable
for so small a man.

The speed of the car was checked a little, but the vehicle was still
speeding along at a rate that would soon bring it to destruction if not
halted before the curve was reached.

"That's a little better," observed Mark. "It's a good thing you were
here."

"Good for me, not so good for you," said the man with a peculiar smile.

"What do you mean?" asked Mark.

"I mean that I shall have to place you under arrest for attempting to
assassinate Lord Peckham!" exclaimed the man. "I am Detective Ducket, of
Scotland Yard!"

He stripped off a false beard he had donned, and threw back his coat,
displaying his shield. He was the same man who had attempted to arrest
the boys in the police station at Easton.

"I've got you just where I want you now," Detective Ducket went on.
"There are none of those blooming American police to interfere."

The next instant the car gave a sudden lurch. Then it seemed to rise up
in the air. Jack felt himself flying through space, and he observed
Mark, who was clinging to the valise, following him.

There was a terrific crash, a ripping, tearing splintering sound, and
the runaway trolley smashed into a big oak tree at the foot of the hill.
The vehicle had completely jumped the track at the sharp curve.

Jack's eyes grew dim, and he seemed to be sinking down in some dark pool
of water. He heard a splashing beside him and began to strike out,
trying to swim. He seemed to be choking. Then the blessed air and
daylight came to him, and he found he was floating on the surface of a
pond.

He dashed the water from his eyes and saw, over on the bank, the wreck
of the trolley. Then he noticed that Mark was swimming beside him.

"What happened?" asked Jack.

"A little of everything," panted Mark. "Lucky we weren't killed. We must
have been flung off the rear platform into this duck pond."

The boys soon made their way to shore, unhurt except for the wetting.
