ship, or as near as the great space coil would permit.

The smaller power units for vertical lift, and for steering, were in the
side walls, hidden under heavy walls of relux.

"The projectors for throwing molecular and heat rays are on the outside
of course. Both of these projectors are protected. The walls of the ship
are made of an outer wall of heavy lux metal, a vacuum between, and an
inner wall of heavy relux. The lux is stronger than relux, and is
therefore used for an outer shell. The inner shell of relux will reflect
any dangerous rays and serve to hold the heat in the ship, since a
perfect reflector is a perfect non-radiator. The vacuum wall is to
protect the occupants of the ship against any undue heat. If we should
get within the atmosphere of a sun, it would be disastrous if the
physical conduction of heat were permitted, for though the relux will
turn out any radiated heat, it is a conductor of heat, and we would
roast almost instantly. These artificial metals are both absolutely
infusible and non-volatile. The ship has actually been in the limb of a
star tremendously hotter than your sun or mine.

"Now you see why it is we need not fear a collision with a small sun,
meteor or such like. Since we are in our own, artificial space, we are
alone, and there is nothing in space to run into. But, if we enter a
huge sun, the terrific gravitational field of the mass of matter would
be enough to pull the energy of our coil away from us. That actually
happened the time we made our first intergalactic exploration. But it is
almost impossible to fall into a large star--they are too brilliant. We
won't be worrying about it," grinned Morey.

"But how did the ship we captured operate?" asked Zezdon Afthen.

"It was a very ingenious system, very closely related to ours, really.

"We distort space and change the velocity characteristics; in other
words, we distort the rate of motion through distance characteristics of
normal space. The Thessian ships work on the principle of distorting the
rate of progress through time instead of through space.

"_Velocity_ is really 'units of travel through space per unit of travel
through time.' Now if we make the time unit twice as great, and the
units traveled through space are not changed, the _velocity_ is twice as
great. That is, if we are moving five light years per second, make the
second twice as long and we are moving ten light years per
double-second. Make it ten thousand times as long, and we are traveling
fifty thousand light years per ten-thousand-seconds. This is the
principle--but there is a drawback. We might increase the velocity by
slowing time passage, that is, if it takes me a year for one heartbeat,
two years to raise my arm thus, and six months to turn, my head, if all
my body processes are slowed down in this way, I will be able to live a
tremendous length of time, and though it takes me two hundred years to
go from one star to another, so low is my time rate that the two hundred
years will seem but a few minutes. I can then make a trip to a distant
star--one five light years distant, let us say, in three minutes to me.
I then will say, looking at my chronometer (which has been similarly
slowed) 'I have gone five light years in three minutes, or five thirds
light years per minute. I have exceeded the speed of light.'

"But people back on Earth would say, he has taken two hundred years to
go five light years, therefore he has gone at a speed one fortieth of
that of light, which would be true--for their time rate.

"But suppose I can also speed up time. That is, I can live a year in a
minute or two. Then everyone else will be exceedingly slow. The ideal
thing would be to combine these two effects, arranging that space about
your ship will have a very rapid time rate, ten thousand times that of
normal space. Then the speed of radiation through that space will be
1,860,000,000 miles per second, and a speed of 1,000,000,000 miles per
second would be possible, but still you, too, will be affected, so that
though the people back home will say you are going far faster than
light, you will say 'No, I am going only 100,000 miles per second.'

"But now imagine that your ship and surrounding space for one mile is at
a time rate 10,000 times normal, and you, in a space of one hundred feet
within your ship, are affected by a time rate 1/10,000 that, or normal,
due to a second, reversing field. The two fields will not fight, or be
mutually antagonistic; they will merely compound their effects. Result:
you will agree that you are exceeding the speed of light!

"Do you understand? That is the principle on which your ship operated.
There were two time-fields, overlapping time-fields. Remember the
terrible speed with which your ship landed, and yet there was no
appreciable jar according to the men? The answer of course was, that
their time rate had been speeded enough, due to the fact that one field
had been completely shut off, the other had not.

"That is the principle. The system is so complex, naturally, that we
have not yet learned the actual method of working the process. We must
do a great deal of mathematical and physical research.

"Wish we had it done--we could use it now," mused the terrestrian.

"We have some other weapons, none as important, of course, as the
molecular ray and the heat ray. Or none that have been. But, if the
enemy have ray shields, then perhaps these others also will be
important. There are molecular motion guns, metal tubes, with molecular
director apparatus at one end. A metal shell is pulling the power turned
on, and the shell leaps out at a speed of about ten miles per
second--since it has been super-heated--and is very accurately aimed, as
there is no terrific shock of recoil to be taken up by the gun.

"But a more effective weapon, if these men are as I expect them to be,
will be a peculiarly effective magnetic field concentrator device, which
will project a magnetic field as a beam for a mile or more. How useful
it will be--I don't know. We don't know what the enemy will turn against
_us_!"




Chapter V

ORTOL


After Morey's explanation of the ship was completed, Wade took Arcot's
place at the controls, while Morey and Arcot retired to the calculating
room to do some of the needed mathematics on the time-field
investigation.

Their work continued here, while the Ortolians prepared a meal and
brought it to them, and to Wade. When at last the sun of Ortol was
growing before them, Arcot took over controls from Wade once more.
Slowing their speed to less than fifty times that of light, they drove
on. The attraction of the giant sun was draining the energy from the
coils so rapidly now, that at last Arcot was forced to get into normal
space, while the planet was still close to a million miles from them.
Morey was showing the Ortolians the operation of the telectroscope and
had it trained now on the rapidly approaching planet. The planet was
easily enlarged to a point where the features of continents were
visible. The magnification was increased till cities were no longer
blurs, but truly cities.

Suddenly, as city after city was brought under the action of the
machine, the Ortolians recognizing them with glad exclamations, one
swept into view--and as they watched, it leapt into the air, a vast
column of dust, then twisting, whirling, it fell back in utter, chaotic
ruin.

Zezdon Fentes staggered back from the screen in horror.

"Arcot--drive down--increase your speed--the Thessians are there already
and have destroyed one city," called Morey sharply. The men secured
themselves with heavy belts, as the deep toned hum of the warning echoed
through the ship. A moment later they staggered under an acceleration of
four gravities. Space was dark for the barest instant of time, and then
there was the scream of atmosphere as the ship rocketed through the air
of the planet at nearly fifteen hundred miles per second. The outer wall
was blazing in incandescence in a moment, and the heavy relux screens
seemed to leap into place over the windows as the blasting heat,
radiated from the incandescent walls flooded in. The millions of tons
pressure of the air on the nose of the ship would have brought it to a
stop in an instant, and had it not been that the molecular drive was on
at full power, driving the ship against the air resistance, and still
losing. The ship slowed swiftly, but was shrieking toward the destroyed
city at terrific speed.

"Hesthis--to the--right and ahead. That would be their next attack,"
said the Ortolian. Arcot altered the ship's course, and they shot toward
the distance city of Hesthis. They were slowing perceptibly, and yet,
though the city was half around the world, they reached it in half a
minute. Now Arcot's wizardry at the controls came into play, for by
altering his space field constants, he succeeded in reaching a condition
that slowed the ship almost instantly to a speed of but a mile a second,
yet without apparent deceleration.

High in the white Ortolian sky was a shining point bearing down on the
now-visible city. Arcot slanted toward it, and the approaching ship grew
like an expanding rubber balloon.

A ray of intense, blindingly brilliant light flashed out, and a gout of
light appeared in the center of the city. A huge flame, bright blue,
shot heavenward in roaring heat.

Seeing that a strange ship had arrived was enough for the Thessians, and
they turned, and drove at Arcot instantly. The Thessian ship was built
for a heavy world, and for heavy acceleration in consequence, and, as
they had found from the captured ship, it was stronger than the _Ancient
Mariner_. Now the Thessians were driving at Arcot with an acceleration
and speed that convinced him dodging was useless. Suddenly space was
black around them, the sunlit world was gone.

"Wonder what they thought of _that_!" grinned Arcot. Wade smiled grimly.

"It's not what they thought, but what they'll do, that counts."

Arcot came back to normal space, just in time to see the Thessian ship
spin in a quick turn, under an acceleration that would have crushed a
human to a pulp. Again the pilot dived at the terrestrian ship. Again it
vanished. Twice more he tried these fruitless tactics, seeing the ship
loom before him--bracing for the crash--then it was gone
instantaneously, and though he sailed through the spot he knew it to
have occupied, it was not there. Yet an instant later, as he turned, it
was floating, unharmed, exactly where his ship had passed!

Rushing was useless. He stood, and prepared to give battle. A molecular
ray reached out--and disappeared in flaring ions on a shield utterly
impenetrable in the ionizing atmosphere.

Arcot meanwhile watched the instrument of his shield. The Thessian
shield would have been impenetrable, but his shield, fed by less
efficient tubes, was not, and he knew it. Already the terrific energy of
the Thessian ray was noticeably heating the copper plates of the tube.
The seal would break soon.

Another ray reached out, a ray of flaring light. Arcot, watching through
the "eyes" of his telectroscope viewplates, saw it for but an instant,
then the "eyes" were blasted, and the screen went blank.

"He won't do anything with that but burn out eyes," muttered the
terrestrian. He pushed a small button when his instruments told him the
rays were off. Another scanner came into action, and the viewplate was
alive again.

Arcot shot out a cosmic ray himself, and swept the Thessian with it
thoroughly. For the instant he needed the enemy ship was blinded.
Immediately the _Ancient Mariner_ dove, and the automatic ray-finders
could no longer hold the rays on his ship. As soon as he was out of the
deadly molecular ray he shut off his screen, and turned on all his
molecular rays. The Thessian ship, their own ray on, had been unable to
put up their screen, as Arcot was unable to use his ray with the enemy's
ray forcing him to cover with a shield.

Almost at once the relux covering of the Thessian ship shone with
characteristic iridescence as it changed swiftly to lux metal. The
molecular ray blinked out, and a ray screen flashed out instead. The
Thessians were covering up. Their own rays were useless now. Though
Arcot could not hope to destroy their ray shield, they could no longer
attack his, for their rays were useless, and already they had lost so
much of the protective relux, that they would not be so foolhardy as to
risk a second attack of the ray.

Arcot continued to bathe the ship in energy, keeping their "eyes"
closed. As long as he could hold his barrage on them, they would not
damage him.

"Morey--get into the power room, strap onto the board. Throw all the
power-coil banks into the magnets. I may burn them out, but I have
hopes--" Arcot already had the generators going full power, charging the
power coils.

Morey dived. Almost simultaneously the Thessians succeeded in the
maneuver they had been attempting for some time. There were a dozen rays
flaring wildly from the ship, searching blindly over the sky and ground,
hoping to stumble on the enemy ship, while their own ship dived and
twisted. Arcot was busily dodging the sweeping rays, but finally one hit
his viewplates, and his own ship was blind. Instantly he threw the ray
screen out, cutting off his own molecular ray. His own cosmics he set
rotating in cones that covered the three dimensions--save below, where
the city lay. Immediately the Thessian had retreated to this one segment
where Arcot did not dare throw his own rays. The Thessian cosmics
continued to make his relux screens necessary, and his ship remained
blind.

His ray screen was showing signs of weakening. The Thessians got a third
ray into position for operation, and opened up. Almost at once the tubes
heated terrifically. In an instant they would give way. Arcot threw his
ship into space, and let the tubes cool under the water jacket. Morey
reported the coils ready as soon as he came out of space.

Arcot cut in the new set of eyes, and put up his molecular ray screen
again. Then he cut the energy back to the coils.

Half a mile below the enemy ship was vainly scurrying around an empty
sky. Wade laughed at the strange resemblance to a puppy chasing its
tail. The _Ancient Mariner_ was utterly lost to them.

"Well, here goes the last trick," said Arcot grimly. "If this doesn't
work, they'll probably win, for their tubes are better than ours, and
they can maneuver faster. By win I mean force us to let them attack
Ortol. They can't really attack us; artificial space is a perfect
defense."

Arcot's molecular ray apprized the Thessians of his presence. Their
screen flared up once more. Arcot was driving straight toward their ship
as they turned. He snapped the relux screens in front of his eyes an
instant before the enemy cosmics reached his ship. Immediately the thud
of four heavy relays rang through the ship. The quarter of a million ton
ship leaped forward under a terrific acceleration, and then, as the four
relays cut out again, the acceleration was gone. The screen regained
life as Arcot opened the shutters. Before them, still directly in their
path, was the huge Thessian ship. But now its screen was down, the relux
iridescent in decomposition. It was falling, helplessly falling to the
rocky plateau seven miles below. Its rays reached out even yet--and
again the _Ancient Mariner_ staggered under the terrific pull of some
acceleration. The Thessian ship lurched upward, and a terrific
concussion came, and the entire neighborhood of that projector
disappeared in a flash of radiation.

Arcot drove the _Ancient Mariner_ down beneath the Thessian ship in its
long fall, and with a powerful molecular beam ripped a mighty chasm in
the deserted plateau. The Thessian ship fell into a quarter mile rift in
the solid rock, smashing its way through falling debris. A moment later
it was buried beneath a quarter mile of broken rock as Arcot swept a
molecular beam about with the grace of a mine foreman filling breaks.

An instant later, a heat ray followed the molecular in dazzling
brilliance. A terrific gout of light appeared in the barren rocks. In
ten minutes the plateau was a white hot cauldron of molten rocks,
glowing now against a darkening sky. Night was falling.

"That ship," said Arcot with an air of finality, "will never rise
again."




Chapter VI

THE SECOND MOVE


"What happened to him, though?" asked Wade, bewildered. "I haven't yet
figured it out. He went down in a heap, and he didn't have any power. Of
course, if he had his power he could have pulled out again. He could
just melt and burn all the excess rock off, and he would be all set. But
his rays all went dead. And why the explosion?"

"The magnetic beam is the answer. In our boat we have everything
magnetically shielded, because of the enormous magnetic flux set up by
the current flowing from the storage coils to the main coil. But--with
so many wires heavily charged with current, what would have happened if
they had not been shielded?

"If a current cuts across a magnetic field, a side thrust is developed.
What do you suppose happened when the terrific magnetic field of the
beam and the currents in the wires of their power-board were mutually
opposed?"

"Lord, it must have ripped away everything in the ship. It'd tear loose
even the lighting wires!" gasped Wade in amazement.

"But if all the power of the ship was destroyed in this way, how was it
that one of their rays was operating as they fell?" asked Zezdon Afthen.

"Each ray is a power plant in itself," explained Arcot, "and so it was
able to function. I do not know the cause of the explosion, though it
might well have been that they had light-bombs such as the Kaxorians of
Venus have," he added, thoughtfully.

They landed, at Zezdon's advice, in the city that their arrival had been
able to save. This was Ortol's largest city, and their industrial
capital. Here, too, was the University at which Afthen taught.

They landed, and Arcot, Morey and Wade, with the aid of Zezdon Afthen
and Zezdon Fentes worked steadily for two of their days of fifty hours
each, teaching men how to make and use the molecular ships, and the rays
and screens, heat beams, and relux. But Arcot promised that when he
returned he would have some weapon that would bring them certain and
easy salvation. In the meantime other terrestrians would follow him.

They left the morning of their third day on the planet. A huge crowd had
come to cheer them on their way as they left, but it was the "silent
cheer" of Ortol, a telepathic well-wishing.

"Now," said Arcot as their ship left the planet behind, "we will have to
make the next move. It certainly looks as though that next move would be
to the still-unknown race that lives on world 3769-37, 478, 326, 894-6.
Evidently we will have to have some weapon they haven't, and I think
that I know what it will be. Thanks to our trip out to the Islands of
Space."

"Shall we go?"

"I think it would be wise," agreed Morey.

"And I," said Wade. The Ortolians agreed, and so, with the aid of the
photographic copies of the Thessian charts that Arcot had made, they
started for world 3769-37, 478, 326, 894-6.

"It will take approximately twenty-two hours, and as we have been
putting off our sleep with drugs, I think that we had better catch up.
Wade, I wish you'd take the ship again, while Morey and I do a little
concentrated sleeping. We have by no means finished that calculation,
and I'd very much like to. We'll relieve you in five hours."

Wade took the ship, and following the course Arcot laid out, they sped
through the void at the greatest safe speed. Wade had only to watch the
view-screen carefully, and if a star showed as growing rapidly, it was
proof that they were near, and nearing rapidly. If large, a touch of a
switch, and they dodged to one side, if small, they were suddenly
plunged into an instant of unbelievable radiation as they swept through
it, in a different space, yet linked to it by radiation, not light, that
were permitted in.

Zezdon Afthen had elected to stay with him, which gave him an
opportunity he had been waiting for. "If it's none of my business, just
