
  A much larger but rarer form is the water net (Fig. 11, _G_), in
  which the colony has the form of a hollow net, the spaces being
  surrounded by long cylindrical cells placed end to end. Other common
  forms belong to the genus _Scenedesmus_ (Fig. 11, _F_), of which
  there are many species.


ORDER II.--_Confervaceae_.

Under this head are included a number of forms of which the simplest
ones approach closely, especially in their younger stages, the
_Protococcaceae_. Indeed, some of the so-called _Protococcaceae_ are
known to be only the early stages of these plants.

A common member of this order is _Cladophora_, a coarse-branching
alga, growing commonly in running water, where it forms tufts,
sometimes a metre or more in length. By floating out a little of it in
a saucer, it is easy to see that it is made up of branching filaments.

  The microscope shows (Fig. 13, _A_) that these filaments are rows of
  cylindrical cells with thick walls showing evident stratification.
  At intervals branches are given off, which may in turn branch,
  giving rise to a complicated branching system. These branches begin
  as little protuberances of the cell wall at the top of the cell.
  They increase rapidly in length, and becoming slightly contracted at
  the base, a wall is formed across at this point, shutting it off
  from the mother cell.

  The protoplasm lines the wall of the cell, and extends in the form
  of thin plates across the cavity of the cell, dividing it up into a
  number of irregular chambers. Imbedded in the protoplasm are
  numerous flattened chloroplasts, which are so close together as to
  make the protoplasm appear almost uniformly green. Within the
  chloroplasts are globular, glistening bodies, called "pyrenoids."
  The cell has several nuclei, but they are scarcely evident in the
  living cell. By placing the cells for a few hours in a one per cent
  watery solution of chromic acid, then washing thoroughly and
  staining with borax carmine, the nuclei will be made very evident
  (Fig. 13, _B_). Such preparations may be kept permanently in dilute
  glycerine.

[Illustration: FIG. 13.--_Cladophora._ _A_, a fragment of a plant,
x 50. _B_, a single cell treated with chromic acid, and stained with
alum cochineal. _n_, nucleus. _py._ pyrenoid, x 150. _C_, three stages
in the division of a cell. i, 1.45 p.m.; ii, 2.55 p.m.; iii,
4.15 p.m., x 150. _D_, a zooespore x 350.]

  If a mass of actively growing filaments is examined, some of the
  cells will probably be found in process of fission. The process is
  very simple, and may be easily followed (Fig. 13, _C_). A ridge of
  cellulose is formed around the cell wall, projecting inward, and
  pushing in the protoplasm as it grows. The process is continued
  until the ring closes in the middle, cutting the protoplasmic body
  completely in two, and forms a firm membrane across the middle of
  the cell. The protoplasm at this stage (_C_ iii.) is somewhat
  contracted, but soon becomes closely applied to the new wall. The
  whole process lasts, at ordinary temperatures (20 deg.-25 deg. C.), from
  three to four hours.

  At certain times, but unfortunately not often to be met with, the
  contents of some of the cells form, by internal division, a large
  number of small, naked cells (zooespores) (Fig. 13, _D_), which
  escape and swim about actively for a time, and afterwards become
  invested with a cell wall, and grow into a new filament. These cells
  are called zooespores, from their animal-like movements. They are
  provided with two cilia, closely resembling the motile cells of the
  _Protococcaceae_ and _Volvocineae_.

There are very many examples of these simple _Confervaceae_, some like
_Conferva_ being simple rows of cells, others like _Stigeoclonium_
(Fig. 14, _A_), _Chaetophora_ and _Draparnaldia_ (Fig. 14, _B_, _C_),
very much branched. The two latter forms are surrounded by masses of
transparent jelly, which sometimes reach a length of several
centimetres.

[Illustration: FIG. 14.--_Confervaceae_. _A_, _Stigeoclonium_. _B_,
_Draparnaldia_, x 50. _C_, a piece of _Draparnaldia_, x 2. _D_, part
of a filament of _Conferva_, x 300.]

Among the marine forms related to these may be mentioned the sea
lettuce (_Ulva_), shown in Figure 15. The thin, bright-green,
leaf-like fronds of this plant are familiar to every seaside student.

[Illustration: FIG. 15.--A plant of sea lettuce (_Ulva_). One-half
natural size.]

Somewhat higher than _Cladophora_ and its allies, especially in the
differentiation of the reproductive parts, are the various species of
_OEdogonium_ and its relatives. There are numerous species of
_OEdogonium_ not uncommon in stagnant water growing in company with
other algae, but seldom forming masses by themselves of sufficient size
to be recognizable to the naked eye.

  The plant is in structure much like _Cladophora_, except that it is
  unbranched, and the cells have but a single nucleus (Fig. 16, _E_).
  Even when not fruiting the filaments may usually be recognized by
  peculiar cap-shaped structures at the top of some of the cells.
  These arise as the result of certain peculiarities in the process of
  cell division, which are too complicated to be explained here.

  There are two forms of reproduction, non-sexual and sexual. In the
  first the contents of certain cells escape in the form of large
  zooespores (Fig. 16, _C_), of oval form, having the smaller end
  colorless and surrounded by a crown of cilia. After a short period
  of active motion, the zooespore comes to rest, secretes a cell wall
  about itself, and the transparent end becomes flattened out into a
  disc (_E_, _d_), by which it fastens itself to some object in the
  water. The upper part now rapidly elongates, and dividing repeatedly
  by cross walls, develops into a filament like the original one. In
  many species special zooespores are formed, smaller than the ordinary
  ones, that attach themselves to the filaments bearing the female
  reproductive organ (ooegonium), and grow into small plants bearing
  the male organ (antheridium), (Fig. 16, _B_).

[Illustration: FIG. 16.--_A_, portion of a filament of _OEdogonium_,
with two ooegonia (_og._). The lower one shows the opening. _B_, a
similar filament, to which is attached a small male plant with an
antheridium (_an._). _C_, a zooespore of _OEdogonium_. _D_, a similar
spore germinating. _E_, base of a filament showing the disc (_d_) by
which it is attached. _F_, another species of _OEdogonium_ with a ripe
spore (_sp._). _G_, part of a plant of _Bulbochaete_. _C_, _D_, x 300;
the others x 150.]

  The sexual reproduction takes place as follows: Certain cells of a
  filament become distinguished by their denser contents and by an
  increase in size, becoming oval or nearly globular in form (Fig. 16,
  _A_, _B_). When fully grown, the contents contract and form a naked
  cell, which sometimes shows a clear area at one point on the
  surface. This globular mass of protoplasm is the egg cell, or female
  cell, and the cell containing it is called the "ooegonium." When the
  egg cell is ripe, the ooegonium opens by means of a little pore at
  one side (Fig. 16, _A_).

  In other cells, either of the same filament or else of the small
  male plants already mentioned, small motile cells, called
  spermatozoids, are formed. These are much smaller than the egg cell,
  and resemble the zooespores in form, but are much smaller, and
  without chlorophyll. When ripe they are discharged from the cells in
  which they were formed, and enter the ooegonium. By careful
  observation the student may possibly be able to follow the
  spermatozoid into the ooegonium, where it enters the egg cell at the
  clear spot on its surface. As a result of the entrance of the
  spermatozoid (fertilization), the egg cell becomes surrounded by a
  thick brown wall, and becomes a resting spore. The spore loses its
  green color, and the wall becomes dark colored and differentiated
  into several layers, the outer one often provided with spines
  (Fig. 16, _F_). As these spores do not germinate for a long time,
  the process is only known in a comparatively small number of
  species, and can hardly be followed by the ordinary student.

[Illustration: FIG. 17.--_A_, plant of _Coleochaete_, x 50. _B_, a few
cells from the margin, with one of the hairs.]

Much like _OEdogonium_, but differing in being branched, is the genus
_Bulbochaete_, characterized also by hairs swollen at the base, and
prolonged into a delicate filament (Fig. 16, _G_).

The highest members of the _Confervaceae_ are those of the genus
_Coleochaete_ (Fig. 17), of which there are several species found in
the United States. These show some striking resemblances to the red
seaweeds, and possibly form a transition from the green algae to the
red. The commonest species form bright-green discs, adhering firmly
to the stems and floating leaves of water lilies and other aquatics.
In aquaria they sometimes attach themselves in large numbers to the
glass sides of the vessel.

  Growing from the upper surface are numerous hairs, consisting of a
  short, sheath-like base, including a very long and delicate filament
  (Fig. 17, _B_). In their methods of reproduction they resemble
  _OEdogonium_, but the reproductive organs are more specialized.




CHAPTER V.

GREEN ALGAE--_Continued_.


ORDER III.--POND SCUMS (_Conjugatae_).

The _Conjugatae_, while in some respects approaching the _Confervaceae_
in structure, yet differ from them to such an extent in some respects
that their close relationship is doubtful. They are very common and
familiar plants, some of them forming great floating masses upon the
surface of every stagnant pond and ditch, being commonly known as
"pond scum." The commonest of these pond scums belong to the genus
_Spirogyra_, and one of these will illustrate the characteristics of
the order. When in active growth these masses are of a vivid green,
and owing to the presence of a gelatinous coating feel slimy, slipping
through the hands when one attempts to lift them from the water.
Spread out in water, the masses are seen to be composed of slender
threads, often many centimetres in length, and showing no sign of
branching.

[Illustration: FIG. 18.--_A_, a filament of a common pond scum
(_Spirogyra_) separating into two parts. _B_, a cell undergoing
division. The cell is seen in optical section, and the chlorophyll
bands are omitted, _n_, _n'_, the two nuclei. _C_, a complete cell.
_n_, nucleus. _py._ pyrenoid. _D_, _E_, successive stages in the
process of conjugation. _G_, a ripe spore. _H_, a form in which
conjugation takes place between the cells of the same filament. All
x 150.]

  For microscopical examination the larger species are preferable.
  When one of these is magnified (Fig. 18, _A_, _C_), the unbranched
  filament is shown to be made up of perfectly cylindrical cells, with
  rather delicate walls. The protoplasm is confined to a thin layer
  lining the walls, except for numerous fine filaments that radiate
  from the centrally placed nucleus (_n_), which thus appears
  suspended in the middle of the cell. The nucleus is large and
  distinct in the larger species, and has a noticeably large and
  conspicuous nucleolus. The most noticeable thing about the cell is
  the green spiral bands running around it. These are the
  chloroplasts, which in all the _Conjugatae_ are of very peculiar
  forms. The number of these bands varies much in different species of
  _Spirogyra_, but is commonly two or three. These chloroplasts, like
  those of other plants, are not noticeably different in structure
  from the ordinary protoplasm, as is shown by extracting the
  chlorophyll, which may be done by placing the plants in alcohol for
  a short time. This extracts the chlorophyll, but a microscopic
  examination of the decolored cells shows that the bands remain
  unchanged, except for the absence of color. These bands are
  flattened, with irregularly scalloped margins, and at intervals have
  rounded bodies (pyrenoids) imbedded in them (Fig. 18, _C_, _py._).
  The pyrenoids, especially when the plant has been exposed to the
  light for some time, are surrounded by a circle of small granules,
  which become bluish when iodine is applied, showing them to be
  starch. (To show the effect of iodine on starch on a large scale,
  mix a little flour, which is nearly all starch, with water, and add
  a little iodine. The starch will immediately become colored blue,
  varying in intensity with the amount of iodine.) The cells divide
  much as in _Cladophora_, but the nucleus here takes part in the
  process. The division naturally occurs only at night, but by
  reducing the temperature at night to near the freezing point (4 deg. C.,
  or a little lower), the process may be checked. The experiment is
  most conveniently made when the temperature out of doors approaches
  the freezing point. Then it is only necessary to keep the plants in
  a warm room until about 10 P.M., when they may be put out of doors
  for the night. On bringing them in in the morning, the division will
  begin almost at once, and may be easily studied. The nucleus divides
  into two parts, which remain for a time connected by delicate
  threads (Fig. 18, _B_), that finally disappear. At first no nucleoli
  are present in the daughter nuclei, but they appear before the
  division is complete.

  New filaments are formed by the breaking up of the old ones, this
  sometimes being very rapid. As the cells break apart, the free ends
  bulge strongly, showing the pressure exerted upon the cell wall by
  the contents (Fig. 18, _A_).

Spores like those of _OEdogonium_ are formed, but the process is
somewhat different. It occurs in most species late in the spring, but
may sometimes be met with at other times. The masses of fruiting
plants usually appear brownish colored. If spores have been formed
they can, in the larger species at least, be seen with a hand lens,
appearing as rows of dark-colored specks.

  Two filaments lying side by side send out protuberances of the cell
  wall that grow toward each other until they touch (Fig. 18, _D_). At
  the point of contact, the wall is absorbed, forming a continuous
  channel from one cell to the other. This process usually takes place
  in all the cells of the two filaments, so that the two filaments,
  connected by tubes at regular intervals, have the form of a ladder.

  In some species adjoining cells of the same filament become
  connected, the tubes being formed at the end of the cells (Fig. 18,
  _H_), and the cell in which the spore is formed enlarges.

  Soon after the channel is completed, the contents of one cell flow
  slowly through it into the neighboring cell, and the protoplasm of
  the two fuses into one mass. (The union of the nuclei has also been
  observed.) The young spore thus formed contracts somewhat, becoming
  oval in form, and soon secretes a thick wall, colorless at first,
  but afterwards becoming brown and more or less opaque. The
  chlorophyll bands, although much crowded, are at first
  distinguishable, but later lose the chlorophyll, and become
  unrecognizable. Like the resting spores of _OEdogonium_ these require
  a long period of rest before germinating.

[Illustration: FIG. 19.--Forms of _Zygnemaceae_. _A_, _Zygnema_. _B_,
_C_, _D_, _Mesocarpus_. All x 150.]

There are various genera of the pond scums, differing in the form of
the chloroplasts and also in the position of the spores. Of these may
be mentioned _Zygnema_ (Fig. 19, _A_), with two star-shaped
chloroplasts in each cell, and _Mesocarpus_ (Fig. 19, _B_, _D_), in
which the single chloroplast has the form of a thin median plate. (B
shows the appearance from in front, _C_ from the side, showing the
thickness of the plate.) _Mesocarpus_ and the allied genera have the
spore formed between the filaments, the contents of both the uniting
cells leaving them.

[Illustration: FIG. 20.--Forms of Desmids. _A_, _B_, _Closterium_.
_C_, _D_, _D'_, _Cosmarium_. _D_, and _D'_ show the process of
division. _E_, _F_, _Staurastrum_; _E_ seen from the side, _F_ from
the end.]

Evidently related to the pond scums, but differing in being for the
most part strictly unicellular, are the desmids (Fig. 20). They are
confined to fresh water, and seldom occur in masses of sufficient size
to be seen with the naked eye, usually being found associated with
pond scums or other filamentous forms. Many of the most beautiful
forms may be obtained by examining the matter adhering to the leaves
and stems of many floating water plants, especially the bladder weed
(_Utricularia_) and other fine-leaved aquatics.

  The desmids include the most beautiful examples of unicellular
  plants to be met with, the cells having extremely elegant outlines.
  The cell shows a division into two parts, and is often constricted
  in the middle, each division having a single large chloroplast of
  peculiar form. The central part of the cell in which the nucleus
  lies is colorless.

  Among the commonest forms, often growing with _Spirogyra_, are
  various species of _Closterium_ (Fig. 20, _A_, _B_), recognizable at
  once by their crescent shape. The cell appears bright green, except
  at the ends and in the middle. The large chloroplast in each half is
  composed of six longitudinal plates, united at the axis of the cell.
  Several large pyrenoids are always found, often forming a regular
  line through the central axis. At each end of the cell is a vacuole
  containing small granules that show an active dancing movement.

The desmids often have the power of movement, swimming or creeping
slowly over the slide as we examine them, but the mechanism of these
movements is still doubtful.

In their reproduction they closely resemble the pond scums.


ORDER IV.--_Siphoneae_.

The _Siphoneae_ are algae occurring both in fresh and salt water, and
are distinguished from other algae by having the form of a tube,
undivided by partition walls, except when reproduction occurs. The
only common representatives of the order in fresh water are those
belonging to the genus _Vaucheria_, but these are to be had almost
everywhere. They usually occur in shallow ditches and ponds, growing
on the bottom, or not infrequently becoming free, and floating where
the water is deeper. They form large, dark green, felted masses, and
are sometimes known as "green felts." Some species grow also on the
wet ground about springs. An examination of one of the masses shows it
to be made up of closely matted, hair-like threads, each of which is
an individual plant.

  In transferring the plants to the slide for microscopic examination,
  they must be handled very carefully, as they are very easily
  injured. Each thread is a long tube, branching sometimes, but not
  divided into cells as in _Spirogyra_ or _Cladophora_. If we follow
  it to the tip, the contents here will be found to be denser, this
  being the growing point. By careful focusing it is easy to show that
  the protoplasm is confined to a thin layer lining the wall, the
  central cavity of the tube being filled with cell sap. In the
  protoplasm are numerous elongated chloroplasts (_cl._). and a larger
  or smaller number of small, shining, globular bodies (_ol._). These
  latter are drops of oil, and, when the filaments are injured,
  sometimes run together, and form drops of large size. No nucleus can
  be seen in the living plant, but by treatment with chromic acid and
  staining, numerous very small nuclei may be demonstrated.

[Illustration: FIG. 21.--_A_, _C_, successive stages in the
development of the sexual organs of a green felt (_Vaucheria_). _an._
antheridium. _og._ ooegonium. _D_, a ripe ooegonium. _E_, the same after
it has opened. _o_, the egg cell. _F_, a ripe spore. _G_, a species in
which the sexual organs are borne separately on the main filament.
_A_, _F_, x 150. _G_, x 50. _cl._ chloroplasts. _ol._ oil.]

  When the filaments are growing upon the ground, or at the bottom of
  shallow water, the lower end is colorless, and forms a more or less
  branching root-like structure, fastening it to the earth. These
  rootlets, like the rest of the filament, are undivided by walls.

  One of the commonest and at the same time most characteristic
