
"Then suppose you ride in with me in my car. We'll talk about it on the
way in, and go see General Maith at once."


Bluelake was peaceful as they flew in over it, but it was an uneasy
peace. They began running into military contragravity twenty miles
beyond the open farmlands--they were the chlorophyll green of Terran
vegetation--and the natives at work in the fields were being watched by
more military and police vehicles. The carniculture plants, where
Terran-type animal tissue was grown in nutrient-vats, were even more
heavily guarded, and the native city was being patroled from above and
the streets were empty, even of the hordes of native children who
usually played in them.

The Terran city had no streets. Its dwellers moved about on
contragravity, and tall buildings rose, singly or in clumps, among the
landing-staged residences and the green transplanted trees. There was a
triple wire fence around it, the inner one masked by vines and the
middle one electrified, with warning lights on. Even a government
dedicated to the betterment of the natives and unwilling to order
military action against them was, it appeared, unwilling to take too
many chances.

Major General Denis Maith, the Federation Army commander on Kwannon, was
considerably more than willing to find a temporary home for his witch
doctors, now numbering close to two hundred. He did insist that they be
kept under military guard, and on assigning his aide, Captain Travis, to
co-operate on the project. Beyond that, he gave Miles a free hand.

Miles and Travis got very little rest in the next ten hours. A
half-company of engineer troops was also kept busy, as were a number of
Kwannon Planetwide News technicians and some Terran and native mechanics
borrowed from different private business concerns in the city. Even the
most guarded hints of what he had in mind were enough to get this last
co-operation; he had been running a news-service in Bluelake long enough
to have the confidence of the business people.

He tried, as far as possible, to keep any intimation of what was going
on from Government House. That, unfortunately, hadn't been far enough.
He found that out when General Maith was on his screen, in the middle of
the work on the fourth and fifth floors of the Suzikami Building.

"The governor general just screened me," Maith said. "He's in a tizzy
about our shoonoon. Claims that keeping them in the Suzikami Building
will endanger the whole Terran city."

"Is that the best he can do? Well, that's rubbish, and he knows it.
There are less than two hundred of them, I have them on the fifth floor,
twenty stories above the ground, and the floor's completely sealed off
from the floor below. They can't get out, and I have tanks of sleep-gas
all over the place which can be opened either individually or all
together from a switch on the fourth floor, where your sepoys are
quartered."

"I know, Mr. Gilbert; I screen-viewed the whole installation. I've seen
regular maximum-security prisons that would be easier to get out of."

"Governor general Kovac is not objecting personally. He has been
pressured into it by this Native Welfare government-within-the-Government.
They don't know what I'm doing with those shoonoon, but whatever it is,
they're afraid of it."

"Well, for the present," Maith said, "I think I'm holding them off. The
Civil Government doesn't want the responsibility of keeping them in
custody, I refused to assume responsibility for them if they were kept
anywhere else, and Kovac simply won't consider releasing them, so that
leaves things as they are. I did have to make one compromise, though."
That didn't sound good. It sounded less so when Maith continued: "They
insisted on having one of their people at the Suzikami Building as an
observer. I had to grant that."

"That's going to mean trouble."

"Oh, I shouldn't think so. This observer will observe, and nothing else.
She will take no part in anything you're doing, will voice no
objections, and will not interrupt anything you are saying to the
shoonoon. I was quite firm on that, and the governor general agreed
completely."

"She?"

"Yes. A Miss Edith Shaw; do you know anything about her?"

"I've met her a few times; cocktail parties and so on." She was young
enough, and new enough to Kwannon, not to have a completely indurated
mind. On the other hand, she was EETA which was bad, and had a master's
in sociography from Adelaide, which was worse. "When can I look for
her?"

"Well, the governor general's going to screen me and find out when
you'll have the shoonoon on hand."

Doesn't want to talk to me at all, Miles thought. Afraid he might say
something and get quoted.

"For your information, they'll be here inside an hour. They will have to
eat, and they're all tired and sleepy. I should say 'bout
oh-eight-hundred. Oh, and will you tell the governor general to tell
Miss Shaw to bring an overnight kit with her. She's going to need it."


He was up at 0400, just a little after Beta-rise. He might be a
civilian big-wheel in an Army psychological warfare project, but he
still had four newscasts a day to produce. He spent a couple of hours
checking the 0600 'cast and briefing Harry Walsh for the indeterminate
period in which he would be acting chief editor and producer. At 0700,
Foxx Travis put in an appearance. They went down to the fourth floor, to
the little room they had fitted out as command-post, control room and
office for Operation Shoonoo.

There was a rectangular black traveling-case, initialed E. S., beside
the open office door. Travis nodded at it, and they grinned at one
another; she'd come early, possibly hoping to catch them hiding
something they didn't want her to see. Entering the office quietly, they
found her seated facing the big viewscreen, smoking and watching a
couple of enlisted men of the First Kwannon Native Infantry at work in
another room where the pickup was. There were close to a dozen
lipstick-tinted cigarette butts in the ashtray beside her. Her private
face wasn't particularly happy. Maybe she was being earnest and
concerned about the betterment of the underpriviledged, or the satanic
maneuvers of the selfish planters.

Then she realized that somebody had entered; with a slight start, she
turned, then rose. She was about the height of Foxx Travis, a few inches
shorter than Miles, and slender. Light blond; green suit costume. She
ditched her private face and got on her public one, a pleasant and
deferential smile, with a trace of uncertainty behind it. Miles
introduced Travis, and they sat down again facing the screen.

It gave a view, from one of the long sides and near the ceiling, of a
big room. In the center, a number of seats--the drum-shaped cushions the
natives had adopted in place of the seats carved from sections of tree
trunk that they had been using when the Terrans had come to
Kwannon--were arranged in a semicircle, one in the middle slightly in
advance of the others. Facing them were three armchairs, a
remote-control box beside one and another Kwann cushion behind and
between the other two. There was a large globe of Kwannon, and on the
wall behind the chairs an array of viewscreens.

"There'll be an interpreter, a native Army sergeant, between you and
Captain Travis," he said. "I don't know how good you are with native
languages, Miss Shaw; the captain is not very fluent."

"Cushions for them, I see, and chairs for the lordly Terrans," she
commented. "Never miss a chance to rub our superiority in, do you?"

"I never deliberately force them to adopt our ways," he replied. "Our
chairs are as uncomfortable for them as their low seats are for us.
Difference, you know, doesn't mean inferiority or superiority. It just
means difference."

"Well, what are you trying to do, here?"

"I'm trying to find out a little more about the psychology back of
these frenzies and swarmings."

"It hasn't occurred to you to look for them in the economic wrongs these
people are suffering at the hands of the planters and traders, I
suppose."

"So they're committing suicide, and that's all you can call these
swarmings, and the fire-frenzies in the south, from economic motives,"
Travis said. "How does one better oneself economically by dying?"

She ignored the question, which was easier than trying to answer it.


"And why are you bothering to talk to these witch doctors? They aren't
representative of the native people. They're a lot of cynical
charlatans, with a vested interest in ignorance and superstition--"

"Miss Shaw, for the past eight centuries, earnest souls have been
bewailing the fact that progress in the social sciences has always
lagged behind progress in the physical sciences. I would suggest that
the explanation might be in difference of approach. The physical
scientist works _with_ physical forces, even when he is trying, as in
the case of contragravity, to nullify them. The social scientist works
_against_ social forces."

"And the result's usually a miserable failure, even on the
physical-accomplishment level," Foxx Travis added. "This storm shelter
project that was set up ten years ago and got nowhere, for instance.
Ramon Gonzales set up a shelter project of his own seventy-five hours
ago, and he's half through with it now."

"Yes, by forced labor!"

"Field surgery's brutal, too, especially when the anaesthetics run out.
It's better than letting your wounded die, though."

"Well, we were talking about these shoonoon. They are a force among the
natives; that can't be denied. So, since we want to influence the
natives, why not use them?"

"Mr. Gilbert, these shoonoon are blocking everything we are trying to do
for the natives. If you use them for propaganda work in the villages,
you will only increase their prestige and make it that much harder for
us to better the natives' condition, both economically and
culturally--"

"That's it, Miles," Travis said. "She isn't interested in facts about
specific humanoid people on Kwannon. She has a lot of high-order
abstractions she got in a classroom at Adelaide on Terra."

"No. Her idea of bettering the natives' condition is to rope in a lot of
young Kwanns, put them in Government schools, overload them with
information they aren't prepared to digest, teach them to despise their
own people, and then send them out to the villages, where they behave
with such insufferable arrogance that the wonder is that so few of them
stop an arrow or a charge of buckshot, instead of so many. And when that
happens, as it does occasionally, Welfare says they're murdered at the
instigation of the shoonoon."

"You know, Miss Shaw, this isn't just the roughneck's scorn for the
egghead," Travis said. "Miles went to school on Terra, and majored in
extraterrestrial sociography, and got a master's, just like you did. At
Montevideo," he added. "And he spent two more years traveling on a Paula
von Schlicten Fellowship."


Edith Shaw didn't say anything. She even tried desperately not to look
impressed. It occurred to him that he'd never mentioned that fellowship
to Travis. Army Intelligence must have a pretty good _dossier_ on him.
Before anybody could say anything further, a Terran captain and a native
sergeant of the First K.N.I. came in. In the screen, the four sepoys who
had been fussing around straightening things picked up auto-carbines and
posted themselves two on either side of a door across from the pickup,
taking positions that would permit them to fire into whatever came
through without hitting each other.

What came through was one hundred and eighty-four shoonoon. Some wore
robes of loose gauze strips, and some wore fire-dance cloaks of red and
yellow and orange ribbons. Many were almost completely naked, but they
were all amulet-ed to the teeth. There must have been a couple of miles
of brass and bright-alloy wire among them, and half a ton of bright
scrap-metal, and the skulls, bones, claws, teeth, tails and other
components of most of the native fauna. They debouched into the big
room, stopped, and stood looking around them. A native sergeant and a
couple more sepoys followed. They got the shoonoon over to the
semicircle of cushions, having to chase a couple of them away from the
single seat at front and center, and induced them to sit down.

