and heard at the Red Spark tallied with his words.

He went on swiftly, "The attack, of whatever nature it may be, is
impending at once. Not next month, or next week, but now. Lord, Gregg,
I don't blame you for staring like that. You don't know what's been
going on for the past two days on Earth, and Venus and Mars. It's all
been suppressed. Neither did I, until I heard it here tonight. The
U.S.W., the Martian Union, the Venus Free State, are all preparing for
war. Every government spaceship on Earth is being commissioned. We're
not going to sit around and wait for invaders to land; the war won't
be fought on Earth if we can help it."

We stared. Snap asked, "What makes them so sure?"

"That war is coming? Plenty. This new planet has sent out spaceships.
The planet itself is hovering sixty million miles away from us, about
forty million miles from Mars and close to ninety million from Venus.
Perhaps its leaders think that's the most strategic spot.

"Then it sent out spaceships, three of them. One is hovering close to
Venus. Another is near Mars, and the third is some 200,000 miles off
Earth. Several of our interplanetary freighters are overdue; it seems
now that they must have encountered these invading ships and been
destroyed.

"Still more, and worse: these three hovering ships have already landed
the enemy on Mars and Venus. The helio-reports mention mysterious
encounters in Ferrok-Shahn and Grebhar. For three or four days, Mars
has been in a panic of apprehension; Venus almost as bad. And some
have landed here. Not many, perhaps; but one has been captured. A
thing--God, it's almost beyond description."

We could well agree with that, since Snap and I had just seen one.

"They've got it here," Grantline was saying. "They've tried to make it
talk. They can't but they're going to try again."

He jumped to his feet and went to the door. "They're bringing it in."
Upon his face was a look of awed horror.

We stood crowding the small door-oval. It gave onto a darkened balcony
of the conclave hall. The girders of the city roof were over us. There
were a few official spectators sitting up here in the dark on the
balcony, but none noticed us.

The lower floor of the hall was lighted. Around the polished oblong
tables perhaps a hundred scientists and high governmental officials of
the three worlds were seated. Near the center of the hall was a small
dais-platform. On a table there, someone had just placed a circular
black box, similar to the one we had seen previously.

The hall was hushed and tense. On the dais stood a group of Earth
officials. One of them spoke. "Here it is, gentlemen. And this time,
by God, we'll make it speak."

Grantline whispered, "That's the War Secretary from Greater London."

I recognized him: Brayley, Commander in Chief of the land, air, water
and space armies of the United States of the World. He was gigantic in
stature, with a great shock of gray-white hair. A commanding figure,
if there ever was one.

Beside him, Nippor, the Japanese representative in Greater New York,
seemed a pigmy. The acoustics of the silent hall carried his soft
voice up to us. "I would be afraid of drugs. Will we use force? It is
vital."

"Yes, by God! Anything."

It seemed that everyone in the hall must be shuddering: I could feel
it like an aura pounding up at me. Brayley lifted the box-lid, reached
in and raised the horrible thing. He held it up, a two-foot ball of
palpitating gray-white membrane. Another living brain.

"Now, damn you, you're going to talk to us! Understand that? We're
going to make you talk. Get that box out of the way."

They flung the box to the floor, and Brayley placed the brain on the
table.

A glare of light, focussed on it, showed beneath the stretched taut
membrane the convolutions of the brain, like tangled purple worms. The
blood-vessels seemed distended almost to bursting now. The gruesome
face, with popping eyes and that gaping mouth, showed a horrible
travesty of terror. From where its ears should have been, a crooked
little arm of flabby, gray-white flesh came down, one on each side and
braced the table. And I saw now that it had a shriveled body, or at
least little legs, bent, almost crushed under by its weight.

"Now, damn you," Brayley said, rubbing off his hands on a rough towel,
"for the last time: will you talk?"

The goggling eyes held a terrified but baleful gaze upon Brayley's
face. Did it understand? The eyes were fronted our way, and suddenly
their glance swung up so that I seemed for an instant to see down into
them. And it struck me then: this was a thing of greater intelligence
than my own. A humanoid, with brain so developed that through myriad
generations the body was shriveled, almost gone. A mind was housed
here, an intelligence housed in this monstrous brain.

Were these the beings of the new planet which had come to attack us?
But how could this helpless creature, incapable of almost everything,
obviously, save thought, do the work of its world?

Then I recalled again that insulated room of the Red Spark Cafe: the
thin, ten-foot hooded shape which was carrying the box. Was that,
perhaps, an opposite type of being with the brain submerged, dwarfed,
and the body paramount? Were there, on this mysterious planet, two
co-existing types, each a specialist, one for the physical work and
the other for the mental?

I stood with Snap and Grantline in that dark balcony doorway, gazing
down to where the giant brain stood braced upon its shriveled arms and
legs, and realized why we of Earth and Venus and Mars are all cast in
the same mould we call human. It is a little family of planets, here
in our solar system; for countless eons we have been close neighbors.
The same sunlight, the same general conditions of life, the same
seed, were strewn here by a wise Creator. A man from the Orient is
different from an Anglo-Saxon; a man of Mars differs a little more.
But basically they are the same.

Yet, confronting us now was a new type, from realms of interstellar
space, far beyond our solar system.

"For the last time, will you talk?" snapped Brayley.

There was another interval of silence. The eyes of the brain were very
watchful. Its gaze roved the hall as though it were seeking for help.
It shifted its little arms on the table, seemingly exhausted from the
physical effort of supporting itself.

Brayley's voice came again. "Doubtless you can feel pain acutely. We
shall see."

With what effort of will to overcome his revulsion we may only guess,
he reached forward and pinched the little arm. The result was
electrifying. From the upended slit of mouth in that goggling face,
came a scream. It pierced the heavy tense silence of the hall, ghastly
in its timbre, like nothing any of us had ever heard before. And in it
was conveyed agony as though Brayley had not merely pinched that
flabby arm, but had thrust a red-hot knife into its vitals.

The brain could feel pain indeed. It crouched with stiffened arms and
legs. The membrane of its great head seemed to bulge with greater
distension; the knotted blood-vessels were gorged with purple blood.
The eyes rolled. Then it closed its mouth. Its gaze steadied upon
Brayley's face, so baleful a gaze that as I could see the reflection
of its luminous purple glow a shudder of fear and revulsion swept me.

"So you did not like that?" Brayley steadied his voice. "If you don't
want more, you had better speak. How did you get here on Earth? What
are you trying to do here?"

There seemed an interminable silence; then Nippor took a menacing step
forward. "Speak! We will force it from you!"

And then it spoke. "Do--not--touch--me--again."

Indescribable voice! Human, animal or monster no one could say. But
the words were clear, precise; and for all their terror, they seemed
to hold an infinite command.

A wave of excitement swept the hall, but Brayley's gesture silenced
it. He leaped forward and bent low over the palpitating brain.

"So you can talk. You came as an enemy. We have given you every
chance today for friendship, and you have refused. What are you trying
to do to us?"

It only glared.

"Speak!"

"I will not tell you anything."

"Oh, yes, you will."

"No!"

All the men on the platform were crowding close to it now.

"Speak!" ordered Brayley again. "Here in Greater New York is a hiding
place. Where is it?"

No answer.

"Where is it? You are perhaps a leader of your world. I lead ours, and
I'm going to master you now. Where is this hiding place?"

The thing suddenly laughed, a gruesome, eerie cackle. "You will know
when it is too late. I think it is too late already."

"Too late for what?"

"To save your world. Doomed, your three worlds! Don't touch--me!"

It ended with a scream of apprehension as Nippor grasped the crooked
little arm. "Tell us!"

"No!" It screamed again. "Let--me--go!"

"Tell us!" Nippor strengthened his squeezing grip. The thing was
writhing, the thin ball of membrane palpitating, heaving. And suddenly
it burst. Over all its purpled surface, blood came with a gush.

Nippor and Brayley staggered backward. The scream of the brain ended
in a choking gurgle. The little legs and tiny body wilted under it;
the round ball of membrane sank to the table. It rolled sidewise upon
one arm and ear, and in a moment its palpitation ceased. A purple-red
mass of blood, it lay deflated and flabby.

It was dead.




4


"But see here," I said, "did they mention the Martian, Molo, at all?"

"They were discussing Molo before you arrived," Grantline told us.

We had drawn back from the doorway. The conference, with the dead
thing removed, was proceeding. Snap and I had momentarily forgotten
Anita and Venza; but now we were in a panic to get back to the Red
Spark.

"But you can't go," said Grantline. "Brayley ordered you here. He'll
want to see you in a moment."

"Well, why doesn't he see us now?" Snap protested. "I'm not going to
cool myself off sitting here."

"Oh yes, you are."

Grantline sent word to Brayley that we were here. In a moment the
answer came. We were to wait a short time; he would want to see us.

We swiftly told Grantline what had happened at the Red Spark, and
found that already he knew. Francis had relayed it to the conference,
and Halsey was in constant communication with the officials here.

"Then what is happening?" I demanded. "Where are the girls? Has Halsey
heard from them?"

Again Grantline went to a nearby room.

"Anita sent a message," he said, when he returned. "They are with
Molo. Halsey is ordering a squad of men to be ready."

Grantline told us what had been happening in the Red Spark. Anita and
Venza, simulating drunkenness with a skill for acting which I knew
both of them possessed, had joined Molo's party. Perhaps if Meka had
been there she would have seen through them.

But Molo did not. And they have since told me that the Martian himself
was far from sober, although he was probably not aware of it. He
yielded to their demands to leave the restaurant with him. He wanted,
as we know, to leave unobtrusively; and Venza threatened a scene
unless she could go.

He took them, leaving openly in a public fare-car. Doubtless he at
first intended to de-rail them somewhere, but they convinced him that
he was not being followed. Twice he used his detector, and Anita and
Halsey were clever enough to throw off their rays in time to avoid it.
Then Halsey lost connection with the fleeing car, and after that Molo
changed his mind about ditching the girls.

"But where are they now?" I demanded.

"You," said Grantline sternly, "are out of it. Do you think that
Halsey, under Brayley's orders, will neglect any chance to find out
where Molo is hiding? Something is about to happen. This conference is
wrestling with it. In Grebhar and Ferrok-Shahn they're striving to
find out what it is. Something impending _now_. Helios are pouring in
here from Venus and Mars. They're mobilizing their spaceships, just as
we are."

Grantline at last was letting out all his apprehensions on us, with
this burst. "Halsey didn't tell you that the entire resources of his
organization are out upon this thing tonight. Here at this conclave
there's a room of information-sorters. That's just where I came from a
moment ago. Every country on our Earth is making ready--for what,
nobody knows!

"He's had two fragmentary calls from Anita. He has a hundred men ready
to rush to their aid, and to capture Molo's lair. He expects another
message from Anita any moment. This conference here knows every
movement that is being made, within ten or twenty seconds of its
making. Perhaps upon Anita and Venza the whole outcome of this thing
may hang."

We had no answer to that. "Do you know who Molo is? He's an
interplanetary pirate; his ship is the _Star-Streak_."

"Good Lord!"

We had heard of him. For five years past, a gray spaceship, with a
base supposedly hidden in the Polar deserts of Mars, had been
terrorizing interplanetary shipping.

"They think," Grantline went on, "that Molo was cruising with his
pirate ship. He has, as you know, a band of criminals drawn from all
the three worlds. There are about fifty of them, commanded by his
sister and himself. We think that Molo encountered the three ships
which that new planet sent out. The _Star-Streak_ was captured,
perhaps destroyed. Molo and his band, joined with this new enemy, to
save themselves, and because they have been promised rewards."

"But why should these brains want their help?" Snap demanded.

"Wouldn't you say it was because, in Ferrok-Shahn, Grebhar and here in
Greater New York, simultaneously tonight, something has to be
accomplished, something the brains themselves could not do? Molo and
his band know all three cities. How they landed here in Greater New
York nobody knows; the enemy spaceship is 200,000 miles out. Obviously
they came from it, landed secretly with some smaller ship somewhere on
Earth and made their way here."

A buzzer sounded beside us. A voice commanded: "Grantline, bring Gregg
Haljan and Daniel Dean to room six at once."

       *       *       *       *       *

In room six we stood before the War Secretary, who had arrived there a
moment ahead of us.

"Ah, Haljan and Dean. I'm glad to see you."

