grew softer and slower, until his deep and regular breathing showed that
he was sound asleep. She stopped playing and sat watching him intently,
her violin in readiness to play again, if he should show the least sign
of waking, but there was no such sign. Freed from the tyranny of the
mighty brain which had been driving it so unmercifully, his body was
making up for many hours of lost sleep.

Assured that he was really asleep, Dorothy tip-toed to her father's
study and quietly went in.

"Daddy, Dick is asleep out there in the chair. What shall we do with
him?"

"Good work, Dottie Dimple. I heard you playing him to sleep--you almost
put me to sleep as well. I'll get a blanket and we'll put him to bed
right where he is."

"Dear old Dad," she said softly, sitting on the arm of his chair and
rubbing her cheek against his. "You always did understand, didn't you?"

"I try to, Kitten," he answered, pulling her ear. "Seaton is too good a
man to see go to pieces when it can be prevented. That is why I
signalled you to keep the talk off the company and his work. One of the
best lawyers I ever knew, a real genius, went to pieces that same way.
He was on a big, almost an impossible, case. He couldn't think of
anything else, didn't eat or sleep much for months. He won the case, but
it broke him. But he wasn't in love with a big, red-headed beauty of a
girl, and so didn't have her to fiddle him to sleep.

"Well, I'll go get the blanket," he concluded, with a sudden change in
his tone.

In a few moments he returned and they went into the living-room
together. Seaton lay in exactly the same position, only the regular
lifting of his powerful chest showing that he was alive.

"I think we had better...."

"Sh ... sh," interrupted the girl in an intense whisper. "You'll wake
him up, Daddy."

"Bosh! You couldn't wake him up with a club. His own name might rouse
him, particularly if you said it; no other ordinary sound would. I
started to say that I think we had better put him to bed on the
davenport. He would be more comfortable."

"But that would surely wake him. And he's so big...."

"Oh, no, it wouldn't, unless I drop him on the floor. And he doesn't
weigh much over two hundred, does he?"

"About ten or eleven pounds."

"Even though I am a lawyer, and old and decrepit, I can still handle
that much."

With Dorothy anxiously watching the proceeding and trying to help,
Vaneman picked Seaton up out of the chair, with some effort, and carried
him across the room. The sleeping man muttered as if in protest at being
disturbed, but made no other sign of consciousness. The lawyer then
calmly removed Seaton's shoes and collar, while the girl arranged
pillows under his head and tucked the blanket around him. Vaneman bent a
quizzical glance upon his daughter, under which a flaming blush spread
from her throat to her hair.

"Well," she said, defiantly, "I'm going to, anyway."

"My dear, of course you are. If you didn't, I would disown you."

As her father turned away, Dorothy knelt beside her lover and pressed
her lips tightly to his.

"Good night, sweetheart," she murmured.

"'Night," he muttered in his sleep, as his lips responded faintly to her
caress.

Vaneman waited for his daughter, and when she appeared, the blush again
suffusing her face, he put his arm around her.

"Dorothy," he said at the door of her room, using her full name, a very
unusual thing for him, "the father of such a girl as you are hates to
lose her, but I advise you to stick to that boy. Believe in him and
trust him, no matter what happens. He is a real man."

"I know it, Dad ... thank you. I had a touch of the blues today, but I
never will again. I think more of his little finger than I do of all the
other men I ever knew, put together. But how do you know him so well? I
know him, of course, but that's different."

"I have various ways of getting information. I know Dick Seaton better
than you do--better than he knows himself. I have known all about every
man who ever looked at you twice. I have been afraid once or twice that
I would have to take a hand, but you saw them right, just as you see
Seaton right. For some time I have been afraid of the thought of your
marrying, the young men in your social set are such a hopeless lot, but
I am not any more. When I hand my little girl over to her husband next
October I can be really happy with you, instead of anxious for you.
That's how well I know Richard Seaton.... Well, good night, daughter
mine."

"Good night, Daddy dear," she replied, throwing her arms around his
neck. "I have the finest Dad a girl ever had, and the finest ... boy.
Good night."

       *       *       *       *       *

It was three o'clock the following afternoon when Seaton appeared in the
laboratory. His long rest had removed all the signs of overwork and he
was his alert, vigorous self, but when Crane saw him and called out a
cheery greeting he returned it with a sheepish smile.

"Don't say anything, Martin--I'm thinking it all, and then some. I made
a regular fool of myself last night. Went to sleep in a chair and slept
seventeen hours without a break. I never felt so cheap in my life."

"You were worn out, Dick, and you know it. That sleep put you on your
feet again, and I hope you will have sense enough to take care of
yourself after this. I warn you now, Dick, that if you start any more of
that midnight work I will simply call Dorothy over here and have her
take charge of you."

"That's it, Mart, rub it in. Don't you see that I am flat on my back,
with all four paws in the air? But I'm going to sleep every night. I
promised Dottie to go to bed not later than twelve, if I have to quit
right in the middle of an idea, and I told her that I was coming out to
see her every other evening and every Sunday. But here's the dope. I've
got that missing factor in my theory--got it while I was eating
breakfast this afternoon."

"If you had eaten and slept regularly here and kept yourself fit you
would have seen it before."

"Yes, I guess that's right, too. If I miss a meal or a sleep from now on
I want you to sand-bag me. But never mind that. Here's the explanation.
We doped out before, you know, that the force is something like
magnetism, and is generated when the coil causes the electrons of this
specially-treated copper to vibrate in parallel planes. The knotty point
was what could be the effect of a weak electric current in liberating
the power. I've got it! It shifts the plane of vibration of the
electrons!"

"It is impossible to shift that plane, Dick. It is fixed by physical
state, just as speed is fixed by temperature."

"No, it isn't. That is, it usually is, but in this case it may be
shifted. Here's the mathematical proof."

So saying, Seaton went over to the drafting table, tacked down a huge
sheet of paper, and sketched rapidly, explaining as he drew. Soon the
two men were engaged in a profound mathematical argument. Sheet after
sheet of paper was filled with equations and calculations, and the table
was covered with reference books. After two hours of intense study and
hot discussion Crane's face took on a look of dawning comprehension,
which changed to amazement and then to joy. For the first time in
Seaton's long acquaintance with him, his habitual calm was broken.

"By George!" he cried, shaking Seaton's hand in both of his. "I think
you have it! But how under the sun did you get the idea? That calculus
isn't in any of the books. Where did you get it? Dick, you're a wonder!"

"I don't know how I got the idea, it merely came to me. But that Math is
right--it's _got_ to be right, no other conclusion is possible. Now, if
that calc. is right, and I know it is, do you see how narrow the
permissible limits of shifting are? Look at equation 236. Believe me, I
sure was lucky, that day in the Bureau. It's a wonder I didn't blow up
the whole works. Suppose I hadn't been working with a storage cell that
gave only four amperes at two volts? That's unusually low, you know, for
that kind of work."

       *       *       *       *       *

Crane carefully studied the equation referred to and figured for a
moment.

"In that case the limit would be exactly eight watts. Anything above
that means instant decomposition?"

"Yes."

Crane whistled, a long, low whistle.

"And that bath weighed forty pounds--enough to vaporize the whole
planet. Dick, it cannot be possible."

"It doesn't seem that way, but it is. It certainly makes me turn cold
all over, though, to think of what might have happened. You know now why
I wouldn't touch the solution again until I had this stuff worked out?"

"I certainly do. You should be even more afraid of it now. I don't mind
nitroglycerin or T.N.T., but anything like that is merely a child's
plaything compared to this. Perhaps we had better drop it?"

"Not in seven thousand years. The mere fact that I was so lucky at first
proves that Fate intended this thing to be my oyster. However, I'll not
tempt the old lady any farther. I'm going to start with one millionth of
a volt, and will use a piece of copper visible only under a microscope.
But there's absolutely no danger, now that we know what it is. I can
make it eat out of my hand. Look at this equation here, though. That
being true, it looks as though you could get the same explosive effect
by taking a piece of copper which had once been partially decomposed and
subjecting it to some force, say an extremely heavy current. Again under
the influence of the coil, a small current would explode it, wouldn't
it?"

"It looks that way, from those figures."

"Say, wouldn't that make some bullet? Unstabilize a piece of copper in
that way and put it inside a rifle bullet, arranged to make a short
circuit on impact. By making the piece of copper barely visible you
could have the explosive effect of only a few sticks of dynamite--a
piece the size of a pea would obliterate New York City. But that's a
long way from our flying-machine."

"Perhaps not so far as you think. When we explore new worlds it might be
a good idea to have a liberal supply of such ammunition, of various
weights, for emergencies."

"It might, at that. Here's another point in equation 249. Suppose the
unstabilized copper were treated with a very weak current, not strong
enough to explode it? A sort of borderline condition? The energy would
be liberated, apparently, but in an entirely new way. Wonder what would
happen? I can't see from the theory--have to work it out. And here's
another somewhat similar condition, right here, that will need
investigating. I've sure got a lot of experimental work ahead of me
before I'll know anything. How're things going with you?"

"I have the drawings and blue-prints of the ship itself done, and
working sketches of the commercial power-plant. I am working now on the
details, such as navigating instruments, food, water, and air supplies,
special motors, and all of the hundred and one little things that must
be taken into consideration. Then, as soon as you get the power under
control, we will have only to sketch in the details of the power-plant
and its supports before we can begin construction."

"Fine, Mart, that's great. Well, let's get busy!"




CHAPTER IV

Steel Liberates Energy--Unexpectedly


DuQuesne was in his laboratory, poring over an abstruse article in a
foreign journal of science, when Scott came breezily in with a newspaper
in his hand, across the front page of which stretched great headlines.

"Hello, Blackie!" he called. "Come down to earth and listen to this tale
of mystery from that world-renowned fount of exactitude and authority,
the _Washington Clarion_. Some miscreant has piled up and touched off a
few thousand tons of T.N.T. and picric acid up in the hills. Read about
it, it's good."

DuQuesne read:


     MYSTERIOUS EXPLOSION!

     MOUNTAIN VILLAGE WIPED OUT OF EXISTENCE!
     TWO HUNDRED DEAD, NONE INJURED!

     FORCE FELT ALL OVER WORLD. CAUSE UNKNOWN.
     SCIENTISTS BAFFLED.

     HARPER'S FERRY. March 26.--At 10: 23 A.M. today, the village of
     Bankerville, about thirty miles north of this place, was totally
     destroyed by an explosion of such terrific violence that
     seismographs all over the world recorded the shock, and that
     windows were shattered even in this city. A thick pall of dust and
     smoke was observed in the sky and parties set out immediately. They
     found, instead of the little mountain village, nothing except an
     immense, crater-like hole in the ground, some two miles in diameter
     and variously estimated at from two to three thousand feet deep. No
     survivors have been found, no bodies have been recovered. The
     entire village, with its two hundred inhabitants, has been wiped
     out of existence. Not so much as a splinter of wood or a fragment
     of brick from any of the houses can be found. Scientists are unable
     to account for the terrific force of the explosion, which far
     exceeded that of the most violent explosive known.

"Hm ... m. That sounds reasonable, doesn't it?" asked DuQuesne,
sarcastically, as he finished reading.

"It sure does," replied Scott, grinning. "What'd'you suppose it was?
Think the reporter heard a tire blow out on Pennsylvania Avenue?"

"Perhaps. Nothing to it, anyway," as he turned back to his work.

As soon as the visitor had gone a sneering smile spread over DuQuesne's
face and he picked up his telephone.

"The fool did it. That will cure him of sucking eggs!" he muttered.
"Operator? DuQuesne speaking. I am expecting a call this afternoon.
Please ask him to call me at my house.... Thank you."

"Fred," he called to his helper, "if anyone wants me, tell them that I
have gone home."

He left the building and stepped into his car. In less than half an hour
he arrived at his house on Park Road, overlooking beautiful Rock Creek
Park. Here he lived alone save for an old colored couple who were his
servants.

In the busiest part of the afternoon Chambers rushed unannounced into
Brookings' private office. His face was white as chalk.

"Read that, Mr. Brookings!" he gasped, thrusting the _Clarion_ extra
into his hand.

Brookings read the news of the explosion, then looked at his chief
chemist, his face turning gray.

"Yes, sir, that was our laboratory," said Chambers, dully.

"The fool! Didn't you tell him to work with small quantities?"

"I did. He said not to worry, that he was taking no chances, that he
would never have more than a gram of copper on hand at once in the whole
laboratory."

"Well ... I'll ... be ... damned!" Slowly turning to the telephone,
Brookings called a number and asked for Doctor DuQuesne, then called
another.

"Brookings speaking. I would like to see you this afternoon. Will you be
at home?... I'll be there in about an hour. Good bye."

       *       *       *       *       *

When Brookings arrived he was shown into DuQuesne's study. The two men
shook hands perfunctorily and sat down, the scientist waiting for the
other to speak.

"Well, DuQuesne, you were right. Our man couldn't handle it. But of
course you didn't mean the terms you mentioned before?"

DuQuesne's lips smiled; a hard, cold smile.

"You know what I said, Brookings. Those terms are now doubled, twenty
thousand and ten million. Nothing else goes."

"I expected it, since you never back down. The Corporation expects to
pay for its mistakes. We accept your terms and I have contracts here for
