



TOOL FOR DRIVING AND CLINCHING NAILS.


A novel method of making a nail hole and driving and clinching the nail
is shown in the annexed engraving. The instrument for making the hole
has a notched end which leaves a ridge in the center of the hole at the
bottom. The nail driving tool consists of a socket provided with a
suitable handle, and containing a follower which rests upon the head of
the nail to be driven, and receives the blows of the hammer in the
operation of driving the nail. The nail is split for one half its
length, and the two arms thus formed are slightly separated at the
point, so that when they meet the ridge at the bottom of the hole they
will be still further separated and will clinch in the body of the wood.

[Illustration: TOOL FOR DRIVING AND CLINCHING NAILS.]

This invention was recently patented by Mr. Charles P. Ball, of
Danville, Ky.

       *       *       *       *       *




AUTOMATIC BALANCE ATTACHMENT FOR VALVES.


It is well known that in all air compressors and water pumps the
pressure in cylinder of air compressors or in working barrel or cylinder
of pumps is much greater at the point of opening the delivery valves
than the actual pressure in the air receivers of compressors or in water
column of pumps because of the difference in area between the top and
bottom of delivery valves. In some air compressors a hundred and
twenty-five pounds pressure to the square inch is required in the
cylinder to eighty pounds in the receiver, and in some instances a
hundred pounds pressure is required in the cylinder to eighty pounds
pressure in the receiver or column.

The engraving shows an invention designed to remedy this defect in air
compressors and pumps, to provide a device which will enable the
compressors and pumps to operate with equal pressure on both sides of
the delivery valve.

The invention consists of an auxiliary valve arranged outside of the
cylinder, where it is not subjected to back pressure, and connected with
the delivery valve by a hollow valve stem.

In the engraving, which is a sectional view, the cylinder of an air
compressor is represented, on the end of which there is a ring
containing delivery ports, through which the air from the cylinder is
forced into a receiver or conducting pipe. This ring is provided with an
inner flange or valve seat on which rests the delivery valve. These
parts are similar to those seen in some of the air compressors in common
use, and with this construction and arrangement one hundred pounds
pressure to the square inch in the cylinder is required to open the
valve against eighty pounds pressure in the receiver or in the
conducting pipes.

[Illustration: AUTOMATIC BALANCE ATTACHMENT FOR DELIVERY VALVES OF AIR
COMPRESSORS AND WATER PUMPS.]

A drum having an open end is connected with the cylinder head by
inclined standards, and contains a piston connected with the valve by
means of a rod that extends centrally through the cylinder head. On the
outer end of this rod is screwed an adjusting nut, by means of which the
piston may be adjusted. This rod is bored longitudinally, establishing
communication between the compressor cylinder and the drum containing
the piston.

It will be seen that the upper face of the piston is exposed so as to be
subjected to atmospheric pressure only, and when the compressor is in
operation a portion of the air in the compressor cylinder passes through
the hollow rod into the space beneath the piston, and there exerts
sufficient pressure, in combination with the pressure on the inner face
of the valve, to open the valve against an equal pressure in the
receiver or conducting pipes, so that when the pressure in the cylinder
equals the pressure in the receivers the valve is opened and held in
place until the piston in the cylinder starts on the return stroke, when
the pressure under the piston is immediately relieved through the hollow
rod and the main valve closes.

The space between the valve and its seat is made as shallow as possible,
so that the space may be quickly filled and exhausted. The piston may be
adjusted to regulate this space. This invention was recently patented by
Messrs. Samuel B. Connor and Henry Dods, of Virginia City, Nevada.

       *       *       *       *       *




IMPROVED SAFETY VALVE.


In the annexed cut we have represented a steam safety valve, which is
the invention of M. Schmidt, M. E., of Zurich, Switzerland. It consists
of a lever terminating in two prongs, one of which extends downward and
rests upon the cap, closing the top of the tube through which the steam
escapes. The other prong extends upward and catches under a projection
of the steam tube, and forms the fulcrum for the lever. The opposite end
of this lever is provided with an adjustable screw pressing upon a plate
that rests on the top of a spiral spring, which keeps the valve closed
by pressing the outer end of the lever upward. As soon as the pressure
of the steam overcomes the pressure of the spiral spring the valve will
be raised, permitting the steam to escape. The apparatus is contained in
a case having a central aperture for the escape of steam.

[Illustration: IMPROVED SAFETY VALVE.]

       *       *       *       *       *




RAISING SUNKEN VESSELS.


An experiment recently took place in the East India Dock Basin,
Blackwall, London, by permission of Mr. J. L. du Plat Taylor, the
secretary of the Dock Company, for the purpose of testing and
illustrating the mode of raising sunken ships by means of the apparatus
patented by Mr. William Atkinson, naval engineer, of Sheffield. The
machinery employed consists of the necessary number and size, according
to the power required, of oval or egg-shaped buoys constructed of sheet
iron, having an internal valve of a simple and effective character.
Captain Hales Dutton, the dock master, who assisted during the
operations, had placed his small yacht at the inventor's service for the
occasion. The vessel was moored in the basin, and a set of four buoys
were attached to it, one on each side near the bow and the stern. Air
was supplied from a pump on the quay by a pipe communicating with a
small copper globe resting on the deck of the vessel, and from which
place proceeded four other flexible tubes, one to each buoy, thus
distributing the air to each one equally. The vessel being flooded and
in a sinking condition, the buoys were attached and the valves opened;
they rapidly filled with water, and the vessel immediately sank in about
30 feet. Upon the first attempt an air chamber in the stern had been
lost sight of, causing the vessel to come up to the surface stern
uppermost; this being rectified, the vessel was again sent to the
bottom, and allowed to remain a short time to allow her to settle down.
When the order was given to work the pump, the vessel was brought to the
surface, perfectly level, in about three minutes. The apparatus used,
although only models, and on a comparatively diminutive scale (the buoys
measuring 3 feet 4 inches in height and 2 feet 6 inches in diameter),
was estimated to be capable of lifting a weight of nearly 20 tons, and
that it needed, as represented by the patentee, only a corresponding
increase in the lifting power to deal successfully with vessels of any
tonnage.

       *       *       *       *       *




NEW HAND POWER BAND SAW.


The engraving shows a new hand power band saw made by Frank & Co., of
Buffalo, N. Y., and designed to be used in shops where there is no power
and where a larger machine would be useless. It is calculated to meet
the wants of a large class of mechanics, including carpenters and
builders, cabinet makers, and wagon makers. It is capable of sawing
stuff six inches thick, and has a clear space of thirty inches between
the saw and the frame. The upper wheel is adjusted by a screw pressing
against a rubber spring which compensates for the expansion and
contraction of the saw.

The machine has a very complete device for raising, lowering, and
adjusting the wheel, and all of the parts are made with a view to
obtaining the best results in the simplest and most desirable way.

The machine is six feet wide and five feet high, and weighs 380 lb. The
wheels are covered with pure rubber bands well cemented.

[Illustration: HAND POWER BAND SAW.]

Further particulars may be obtained by addressing Messrs. Frank & Co.,
176 Terrace street, Buffalo, N. Y.

       *       *       *       *       *




THE HARBOR OF MONTREAL.


A plan for the improvement of the harbor of Montreal, Canada, has been
submitted to the City Board of Trade by James Shearer, a well known
citizen. Mr. Shearer's plan is to divert the current of the St. Lawrence
opposite the city into the channels between St. Helen's Island and the
southern shore, and by having various obstructions removed from the
channel, and running a dam, or "peninsula," as he calls it, built from
Point St. Charles, in the west end of the city, to St. Helen's Island,
midway in the river, thus stopping the current from running through the
present main channel between the city and St. Helen's Island.

Among the practical advantages that will accrue to the city and harbor
from the carrying out of this project, Mr. Shearer sets forth the
following: The dam will prevent the shoring of ice opposite the city,
and the consequent flooding of the Griffintown district, which is
annually very destructive to property, and will make a still harbor,
where vessels may lie during the winter. It is estimated that the
construction of the dam, which would be 2,700 feet long and 900 feet
broad, would raise the water two feet in the river and lower it ten feet
in the harbor. This would give a head of twenty-five feet for mills,
elevators, and factories, and the transportation of freight. The dam
would afford a roadway across the river, upon the construction of a
bridge from St. Helen's Island to St. Lambert, thus removing the
necessity of a tunnel. The roadway could be utilized for a railway, a
road for carriages and foot passengers. The estimated cost of the
improvement is $7,000,000.

       *       *       *       *       *




APPARATUS FOR REMOVING ICE FROM RAILROADS.


The engraving shows an improved apparatus for removing snow and ice from
railroads and streets by means of heat. The invention consists of a
double furnace mounted on wheels, which are incased in the fire boxes of
the furnace, so that in use the entire apparatus, including the wheels,
will become highly heated, so that the snow and ice will not only be
melted by radiant heat, but by the actual contact of the hot surfaces of
the furnace and wheels. This apparatus was recently patented by the late
E. H. Angamar, of New Orleans, La.

[Illustration: APPARATUS FOR REMOVING ICE FROM RAILROADS.]

       *       *       *       *       *




ERICSSON'S NEW SUBMARINE GUN.


The protracted trials conducted on board the Destroyer to test its
submarine gun terminated last week. Having, says the _Army and Navy
Journal_, in a previous issue described this novel type of naval
artillery, it will suffice to remind our readers that its caliber is 16
inches, length of bore 30 feet, and that it is placed at the bottom of
the vessel, the muzzle passing through an opening formed in the wrought
iron stem.

We have hitherto, in discussing the properties of the Destroyer,
referred to its offensive weapon as a "torpedo," a term not altogether
inappropriate while it was actuated by compressed air. But Capt.
Ericsson having in the meantime wholly abolished compressed air in his
new system of naval attack, substituting guns and gunpowder as the means
of producing motive energy, it will be proper to adopt the constructor's
term, _projectile_. It will not surprise those who are acquainted with
the laws of hydrostatics and the enormous resistance offered to bodies
moving swiftly through water, that the determination of the proper form
of projectile for the submarine gun has demanded protracted experiments,
commencing at the beginning of June and continued up to last week, as
before stated. The greater portion of these experiments, it should be
observed, has been carried out with a gun 30 feet long, 15 inches
caliber--not a breech-loader, however, as in the Destroyer, but a
muzzle-loader, suspended under the bottom of two wrecking scows, the gun
being lifted above the water, after each shot, by shears and suitable
tackle. The present projectile of the Destroyer is the result of the
extended trials referred to; its length is 25 feet 6 inches, diameter 16
inches, and its weight 1,500 pounds, including 250 pounds of explosive
materials. We are not at liberty at present to describe its form, but we
may mention that the great length of the body and the absence of all
internal machinery enable the constructor to carry the stated enormous
quantity of explosive matter. With minimum charge of powder in the
chamber of the gun, the speed attained by the projectile reaches 310
feet in the first three seconds.

The question may be asked, in view of these facts, whether the boasted
costly steam ram is not superseded by the cheap aggressive system
represented by the Destroyer. Evidently the most powerful of the English
steam rams could not destroy an armored ship as effectually as the
projectile from the submarine gun, the explosion of which is capable of
shattering any naval structure.

It should be borne in mind, also, that being protected by heavy inclined
transverse armor, the Destroyer, attacking bows on, can defy ordnance of
all calibers. Again, the carrier of the submarine gun, in addition to
the swiftness of its projectile, can outrun ironclad ships.

       *       *       *       *       *




RECENT INVENTIONS.


Mr. Francis M. Osborn, of Port Chester, N. Y., has patented a covering
for a horse that protects him from the weather and from chafing. The
blanket has a band, also stays and straps, the use of which does away
