explanations. This stuff is DEKON--short for Decontaminant, Complete;
Compound, Adsorbent, and Chelating, Type DCQ-429.' Used soon enough, it
takes care of radiation. Rub it in good, all over you--like this." He
set the foam-gun down on the floor and went vigorously to work. "Yes,
hair, too. Every square millimeter of skin and mucous membrane. Yes,
into your eyes. It stings 'em a little, but that's a lot better than
going blind. And your mouth. Swallow six good big mouthfuls--it's
tasteless and goes down easy.

"Now the soles of your feet--O. K. The last will hurt plenty, but we've
_got_ to get some of it into your lungs and we can't do it the hospital
way. So when I slap a gob of it over your mouth and nose inhale hard and
deep. Just once is all anybody can do, but that's enough. And don't
fight. Any ordinary woman I could handle, but I can't handle you fast
enough. So if you don't inhale deep I'll have to knock you cold.
Otherwise you die of lung cancer. Will do?"

"Will do, sweetheart. Good and deep. No fight," and she emptied her
lungs.

He slapped it on. She inhaled, good and deep; and went into convulsive
paroxysms of coughing. He held her in his arms until the worst of it was
over; but she was still coughing hard when she pulled herself away from
him.

"But ... how ... about ... you?" She could just barely talk; her voice
was distorted, almost inaudible. "Let ... me ... help ... you ...
quick!"

"No need, darling. Two other men out there. The old man probably won't
need it--I think I got him into the safe quick enough--the other guy and
I will help each other. So lie down there on the bunk and take it easy
until I come back here and help you get the gunkum off. So-long for half
an hour, pet."

Forty-five minutes later, while all four were still cleaning up the
messes of foam, something began to buzz sharply. Deston stepped over to
the board and flipped a switch. The communicator came on. Since
everything aboard a starship is designed to fail safe, they were, of
course, in normal space. On the visiplates hundreds of stars blazed in
vari-colored points of hard, bright light.

"Baby Two acknowledging," Deston said. "First Officer Deston and three
passengers. Deconned to zero. Report, please."

"Baby Three. Second Officer Jones and four passengers. Deconned to----"

"Thank God, Herc!" Formality vanished. "With _you_ to astrogate us, we
may have a chance. But how'd you make it? I'd've sworn a flying saucer
couldn't've got down from the Top in the time we had."

"Same thing right back at you, Babe. I didn't have to come down. We were
in Baby Three when it happened." Full vision was on; a big,
square-jawed, lean, tanned face looked out at them from the screen.

"Huh? How come? And who's 'we'?"

"My wife and I." Second Officer Theodore "Hercules" Jones was somewhat
embarrassed. "I got married, too, day before yesterday. After the way
the old man chewed you out, though, I knew he'd slap irons on me
without saying a word, so we kept it dark and hid out in Baby Three.
These three are all we could find before our meters went high red. I
deconned Bun, then----"

"Bun?" Barbara broke in. "Bernice Burns? How _wonderful_!"

"Formerly Bernice Burns." The face of a platinum-blonde beauty appeared
on the screen beside Jones'. "And _am_ I glad to see _you_, Barbara,
even if I did just meet you yesterday! I didn't know whether I'd ever
see another girl's face or not!"

"Let's cut the chat," Deston said then. "Herc, give me course, blast,
and time for rendezvous ... hey! My watch stopped!"

"So did mine," Jones said. "So just hold one gravity on eighteen dash
forty-seven dash two seventy-one and I'll correct you as necessary."

After setting course, and still thinking of his watch, Deston said; "But
it's nonmagnetic. It never stopped before."

The gray-haired man spoke. "It was never in such a field before. You
see, those two observations of fact invalidate twenty-four of the
thirty-eight best theories of hyper-space. But tell me--am I correct in
saying that none of you were in direct contact with the metal of the
ship when it happened?"

"We avoid it in case of trouble. You? Name and job?" Deston jerked his
head at the younger stranger.

"I know _that_ much. Henry Newman. Crew-chief, normal space jobs,
unlimited."

"Your passengers, Herc?"

"Vincent Lopresto, financier, and his two bodyguards. They were sleeping
in their suits, on air-mattresses. Grounders. Don't like subspace--or
space, either."

"Just so." The gray-haired man nodded, almost happily. "We survivors,
then, absorbed the charge gradually----"

"But what the----" Deston began.

"One moment, please, young man. You perhaps saw some of the bodies. What
were they like?"

"They looked ... well, not exactly as though they had exploded, but----"
he paused.

"Precisely." Gray-Hair beamed. "That eliminates all the others except
three--Morton's, Sebring's, and Rothstein's."

"You're a specialist in subspace, then?"

"Oh, no, I'm not a specialist at all. I'm a dabbler, really. A
specialist, you know, is one who learns more and more about less and
less until he knows everything about nothing at all. I'm just the
opposite. I'm learning less and less about more and more; hoping in time
to know nothing at all about everything."

"In other words, a Fellow of the College. I'm glad you're aboard, sir."

"Oh, a Theoretician?" Barbara's face lit up and she held out her hand.
"With dozens of doctorates in everything from Astronomy to Zoology?
I've never met ... I'm _ever_ so glad to meet you, Doctor----?"

"Adams. Andrew Adams. But I have only eight at the moment. Earned
degrees, that is."

"But what were you doing in this lifecraft? No, let me guess. You were
X-ray-eying it and fine-toothing it for improvements made since your
last trip, and storing the details away in your eidetic memory."

"Not eidetic, by any means. Merely very good."

"And how many metric tons of apparatus have you got in the hold?" Deston
asked.

"Less than six. Just what I _must_ have in order to----"

"Babe!" Jones' voice cut in. "Course change. Stay on alpha eighteen.
Shift beta to forty-four and gamma to two sixty-five."

       *       *       *       *       *

Rendezvous was made. Both lifecraft hung motionless relative to the
_Procyon_'s hulk. No other lifecraft had escaped. A conference was held.

Weeks of work would be necessary before Deston and Jones could learn
even approximately what the damage to the _Procyon_ had been.
Decontamination was automatic, of course, but there would be literally
hundreds of hot spots, each of which would have to be sought out and
neutralized by hand. The passengers' effects would have to be listed and
stored in the proper cabins. Each body would have to be given velocity
away from the ship. And so on. Every survivor would have to work, and
work hard.

The two girls wanted to be together. The two officers almost _had_ to be
together, to discuss matters at unhampered length and to make decisions.
Each was, of course, almost as well versed in engineering as he was in
his own specialty. All ships' officers from First to Fifth had to be.
And, as long as they lived or until the _Procyon_ made port, all
responsibility rested: First, upon First Officer Deston; and second,
upon Second Officer Jones. Therefore Theodore and Bernice Jones came
aboard Lifecraft Two, and Deston asked Newman to flit across to
Lifecraft Three.

"Not me; I like the scenery here better." Newman's eyes raked Bernice's
five-feet-eight of scantily-clad sheer beauty from ankles to coiffure.
"If you're too crowded--I know a lifecraft carries only fifty people--go
yourself."

"As a crew-chief, you know the law." Deston spoke quietly--too quietly,
as the other man should have known. "I am in command."

"You ain't in command of _me_, pretty boy!" Newman sneered. "You can
play God when you're on sked, with a ship-full of trained dogs to bite
for you, but out here where nobody has ever come back from I make my own
law--with _this_!" He patted his side pocket.

"Draw it, then!" Deston's voice now had all the top-deck rasp of his
rank. "Or crawl!"

The First Officer had not moved; his right hand still hung quietly at
his side. Newman glanced at the girls, both of whom were frozen; at
Jones, who smiled at him pityingly; at Adams, who was merely interested.
"I ... my ... yours is right where you can get at it," he faltered.

"You should have thought of that sooner. But, this once, I won't move a
finger until your hand is in your pocket."

"Just wing him, Babe," Jones said then. "He looks strong enough, except
for his head. We can use him to shovel out the gunkum and clean up."

"Uh-uh. I'll have to kill him sometime, and the sooner the better.
Square between the eyes. Do you want a hundred limit at ten bucks a
millimeter on how far the hole is off dead center?"

The two girls gasped; stared at each other and at the two officers in
horror; but Jones said calmly, without losing any part of his smile: "I
don't want a dime's worth of that. I've lost too much money that way
already." At which outrageous statement both girls knew what was going
on and smiled in relief.

And Newman misinterpreted those smiles completely; especially Bernice's.
The words came hard, but he managed to say then. "I crawl."

"Crawl, what?"

"I crawl, sir. You'll want my gun----"

