near-familiar, mellow-weathered crags. They waited.

"Take her up," said the Captain. "Put her in orbit at two hundred kilos.
I'm not giving up this easily."

Ives swatted Johnny's broad shoulder. "That's a take-off _and_ a
landing, if I know the Old Man. Go to it, Jets."


Johnny's wide white grin flashed and he strode to the control chair.
"Gentlemen, be seated."

"I'll take mine lying down," said Ives, and spread his bulk out on the
acceleration couch. The others went to their take-off posts.

"On automatics," said the Captain, "Fire away!"

"Fire away!" said Johnny cheerfully. He reached forward and pressed the
central control.

Nothing happened.

Johnny put his hand toward the control again. It moved as if there were
a repellor field around the button. The hand moved more and more slowly
the closer it got, until it hovered just over the control and began to
tremble.

"On manual," barked the Captain. "Fire!"

"Manual, sir," said Johnny reflexively. His trembling hand darted up to
an overhead switch, pulled it. He grasped the control bars and dropped
the heels of his hands heavily on the firing studs. From somewhere came
a muted roar, a whispering; a subjective suggestion of the thunder of
reaction motors.

A frown crossed Paresi's face. The rocket noise was gone as the mind
reached for it, like an occluded thought. The motors were silent; there
wasn't a tremor of vibration. Yet somewhere a ghost engine was warming
up, preparing a ghost ship for an intangible take-off into nothingness.

He snapped off the catch of his safety belt and crossed swiftly and
silently to the console. Johnny sat raptly. A slow smile of satisfaction
began to spread over his face. His gaze flicked to dials and gauges; he
nodded very slightly, and brought both hands down like an organist
playing a mighty chord. He watched the gauges. The needles were still,
lying on their zero pins, and where lights should have flickered and
flashed there was nothing. Paresi glanced at Anderson and met a worried
look. Hoskins had his head cocked to one side, listening, puzzled. Ives
rose from the couch and came forward to stand beside Paresi.

Johnny was manipulating the keys firmly. His fingers began to play a
rapid, skillful, silent concerto. His face had a look of intense
concentration and of complete self-confidence.

"Well," said Ives heavily. "That's a bust, too."

Paresi spun to him. "_Shh!_" It was done with such intensity that Ives
recoiled. With a warning look at him, Paresi walked to the Captain,
whispered in his ear.

"My God," said Anderson. "All right, Doctor." He came forward to the
pilot's chair. Johnny was still concentratedly, uselessly at work.
Anderson glanced inquiringly at Paresi, who nodded.

"That does it," said the Captain, loudly. "Nice work, Johnny. We're
smack in orbit. The automatics couldn't have done it better. For once it
feels good to be out in space again. Cut your jets now. You can check
for correction later."

"Aye, sir," said Johnny. He made two delicate adjustments, threw a
master switch and swung around. "Whew! That's work!"

Facing the four silent men, Johnny thumbed out a cigarette, put it in
his mouth, touched his lighter to it, drew a long slow puff.

"Man, that goes good...."

The cigarette was not lighted. Hoskins turned away, an expression of
sick pity on his face. Ives reached abruptly for his own lighter, and
the doctor checked him with a gesture.

"Every time I see a hot pilot work I'm amazed," Paresi said
conversationally. "Such concentration ... you must be tuckered, Johnny."

Johnny puffed at his unlit cigarette. "Tuckered," he said. "Yeah." There
were two odd undertones to his voice suddenly. They were fatigue, and
eagerness. Paresi said, "You're off-watch, John. Go stretch out."

"Real tired," mumbled Johnny. He lumbered to his feet and went aft,
where he rolled to the couch and was almost instantly asleep.


The others congregated far forward around the controls, and for a long
moment stared silently at the sleeping pilot.

"I don't get it," murmured Ives.

"He really thought he flew us out, didn't he?" asked Hoskins.

Paresi nodded. "Had to. There isn't any place in his cosmos for machines
that don't work. Contrary evidence can get just so strong. Then, for
him, it ceased to exist. A faulty cigarette lighter irritated him, a
failing airlock control made him angry and sullen and then hysterical.
When the drive controls wouldn't respond, he reached his breaking point.
Everyone has such a breaking point, and arrives at it just that way if
he's pushed far enough."

"Everyone?"

Paresi looked from face to face, and nodded somberly. Anderson asked,
"What knocked him out? He's trained to take far more strain than that."

"Oh, he isn't suffering from any physical or conscious mental fatigue.
The one thing he wanted to do was to get away from a terrifying
situation. He convinced himself that he flew out of it. The next best
thing he could do to keep anything else from attacking him was to sleep.
He very much appreciated my suggestion that he was worn out and needed
to stretch out."

"I'd very much appreciate some such," said Ives. "Do it to me, Nick."

"Reach your breaking point first," said the doctor flatly, and went to
place a pillow between Johnny's head and a guard-rail.

Hoskins turned away to stare at the peaceful landscape outside. The
Captain watched him for a moment, then: "Hoskins!"

"Aye."

"I've seen that expression before. What are you thinking about?"

The engineer looked at him, shrugged, and said mildly, "Chess."

"What, especially?"

"Oh, a very general thing. The reciprocity of the game. That's what
makes it the magnificent thing it is. Most human enterprises can gang up
on a man, slap him with one disaster after another without pause. But
not chess. No matter who your opponent might be, every time he does
something to you, _it's your move_."

"Very comforting. Have you any idea of how we move now?"

Hoskins looked at him, a gentle surprise on his aging face. "You missed
my point, Skipper. _We_ don't move."

"Oh," the Captain whispered. His face tautened as it paled, "I ... I
see. We pushed the airlock button to get out. Countermove: It wouldn't
work. We tried the manual. Countermove: It broke off. And so on. Now
we've tried to fly the ship out. Oh, but Hoskins--Johnny broke. Isn't
that countermove enough?"

"Maybe. Maybe you're right. Maybe the move wasn't trying the drive
controls, though. Maybe the move was to do what was necessary to knock
Johnny out." He shrugged again. "We'll very soon see."

The Captain exhaled explosively through his nostrils. "We'll find out if
it's our move by moving," he gritted. "Ives! Paresi! We're going to go
over this thing from the beginning. First, try the port. You, Ives."

Ives grunted and went to the ship's side. Then he stopped.

"_Where is the port?_"

Anderson and Paresi followed Ives' flaccid, shocked gaze to the bulkhead
where there had been the outline of the closed port, and beside it the
hole which had held the axle of the manual wheel, and which now was a
smooth, seamless curtain of impenetrable black. But Hoskins looked at
the Captain first of all, and he said "_Now_ it's our move," and only
then did he turn with them to look at the darkness.




                    III

    _The unfamiliar, you say, is the unseen, the completely new and
    strange? Not so. The epitome of the unfamiliar is the familiar
    inverted, the familiar turned on its head. View a familiar place
    under new conditions--a deserted and darkened theater, an empty
    night club by day--and you will find yourself more influenced by
    the emotion of strangeness than by any number of unseen places.
    Go back to your old neighborhood and find everything changed.
    Come into your own home when everyone is gone, when the lights
    are out and the furniture rearranged--there I will show you the
    strange and frightening ghosts that are the shapes left over
    when reality superimposes itself upon the images of memory. The
    goblins lurk in the shadows of your own room...._
        Owen Miller
        Essays on Night and the Unfamiliar


For one heart-stopping moment the darkness had seemed to swoop in upon
them like the clutching hand of death. Instinctively they had huddled
together in the center of the room. But when the second look, and the
third, gave them reassurance that the effect was really there, though
the cause was still a mystery, then half the mystery was gone, and they
began to drift apart. Each felt on trial, and held tight to himself and
the picture of himself he empathized in the others' eyes.

The Captain said quietly, "It's just ... there. It doesn't seem to be
spreading."

Hoskins gazed at it critically. "About half a meter deep," he murmured.
"What do you suppose it's made of?"

"Not a gas," said Paresi. "It has a--a sort of surface."

Ives, who had frozen to the spot when first he saw the blackness on his
way to the port, took another two steps. The hand which had been half
lifted to touch the control continued upward relievedly, as if glad to
have a continuous function even though its purpose had changed.

"Don't touch it!" rapped the Captain.

Ives turned his head to look at the Captain, then faltered and let the
hand drop. "Why not?"

"Certainly not a liquid," Paresi mused, as if there had been no
interruption. "And if it's a solid, where did that much matter come
from? Through the hull?"

Hoskins, who knew the hull, how it was made, how fitted, how treated
once it was in place, snorted at the idea.

"If it was a gas," said Paresi, "there'd be diffusion. _And_ convection.
If it were poisonous, we'd all be dead. If not, the chances are we'd
smell it. And the counter's not saying a thing--so it's not
radioactive."

"You trust the counter?" asked Ives bitterly.

"I trust it," said Paresi. His near-whisper shook with what sounded like
passion. "A man must have faith in something. I hold that faith in every
single function of every part of this ship until each and every part is
separately and distinctly proved unworthy of faith!"

"Then, by God, you'll understand my faith in my own two hands and what
they feel," snarled Ives. He stepped to the bulkhead and brought his
meaty hand hard against it.

"_Touche_," murmured Hoskins, and meant either Ives' remark or the flat,
solid smack of the hand against the blackness.


In his sleep, Johnny uttered a high, soft, careless tinkle of youthful,
happy laughter.

"Somebody's happy," said Ives.

"Paresi," said the Captain, "what happens when he wakes up?"

Paresi's eyebrows shrugged for him. "Practically anything. He's reached
down inside himself, somewhere, and found a way out. For him--not for
any of the rest of us. Maybe he'll ignore what we see. Maybe he'll think
he's somewhere else, or in some other time. Maybe he'll _be_ someone
else. Maybe he won't wake up at all."

"Maybe he has the right idea," said Ives.

"That's the second time you've made a crack like that," said Paresi
levelly. "Don't do it again. You can't afford it."

"We can't afford it," the Captain put in.

"All right," said Ives, with such docility that Paresi shot him a
startled, suspicious glance. The big communications man went to his
station and sat, half-turned away from the rest.

