identified the swarm--it has a regular path of its own about the sun,
though the orbit is so cockeyed that spaceships hardly ever even see the
things. Anyway, knowing the orbit of the meteors and that of the
_Waikiki_ at the time, he could calculate where the disaster must have
taken place--which gave us a lead in searching for the hulk. We found it
after a lot of investigation, moved it here, and built the station up
around it. Very handy. And completely secret."

Lancaster had always suspected that Security was a little mad. Now he
knew it. Oh, well--

       *       *       *       *       *

His room was small and austere, but privacy was nice. The lab crew ate
in a common refectory. Beyond the edge of their territory, great
bulkheads blocked off three-fourths of the space station. Lancaster was
sure that many people and several Martians lived there, for in the days
that followed he saw any number of strangers appearing and disappearing
in the region allowed him. Most of these were workmen of some kind or
other, called in to help the lab crew as needed, but all of them were
tight-lipped. They must have been cautioned not to speak to the guest
more than was strictly necessary.

Living was Spartan in the station. It rotated fast enough to give
weight, but even on the outer skin that was only one-half Earth gravity.
A couple of silent Martians prepared undistinguished meals and did
housework in the quarters. There were no films or other organized
recreation, though Lancaster was told that the forbidden sector included
a good-sized room for athletics.

But the crew he worked with didn't seem to mind. They had their own
large collections of books and music wires, which they borrowed from
each other. They played chess and poker with savage skill. Conversation
was, at first, somewhat restrained in Lancaster's presence, and most of
the humor had so little reference to things he knew that he couldn't
follow it, but he became aware that they talked with more animation and
intelligence than his friends on Earth. Manners were utterly informal,
and it wasn't long before even Lancaster was being addressed by his
first name; but cooperation was smooth and there seemed to be none of
the intrigue and backbiting of a typical Project crew.

And the work filled their lives. Lancaster was caught up in it the "day"
after his arrival, realized at once what it meant, and was plunged into
the fascination of it. Berg hadn't lied; this was big!

The perfect dielectric.

Such, at least, was the aim of the project. It was explained to
Lancaster that one Dr. Sophoulis had first seen the possibilities and
organized the research. It had gone ahead slowly, hampered by a lack of
needed materials and expert personnel. When Sophoulis died, none of his
assistants felt capable of carrying on the work at any decent rate of
speed. They were all competent in their various specialties, but it
takes more than training to do basic research--a certain inborn,
intuitive flair is needed. So they had sent to Earth for a new
boss--Lancaster.

The physicist scratched his head in puzzlement. It didn't seem right
that something so important should have to take the leavings of
technical personnel. Secrecy or not, the most competent men on Earth
should have been tapped for this job, and they should have been given
everything they needed to carry it through. Then he forgot his
bewilderment in the clean chill ecstasy of the work.

       *       *       *       *       *

Man had been hunting superior dielectrics for a long time now. It was
more than a question of finding the perfect electrical insulator, though
that would be handy too. What was really important was the sort of
condensers made possible by a genuinely good dielectric material. Given
that, you could do fantastic things in electronics. Most significant of
all was the matter of energy storage. If you could store large amounts
of electricity in an accumulator of small volume, without appreciable
leakage loss, you could build generators designed to handle average
rather than peak load--with resultant savings in cost; you could build
electric motors, containing their own energy supply and hence
portable--which meant electric automobiles and possibly aircraft; you
could use inconveniently located power sources, such as remote
waterfalls, or dilute sources like sunlight, to augment--maybe
eventually replace--the waning reserves of fuel and fissionable
minerals; you could.... Lancaster's mind gave up on all the
possibilities opening before him and settled down to the immediate task
at hand.

"The original mineral was found on Venus, in the Gorbu-vashtar country,"
explained Karen Marek. "Here's a sample." She gave him a lump of rough,
dense material which glittered in hard rainbow points of light. "It was
just a curiosity at first, till somebody thought to test its electrical
properties. Those were slightly fantastic. We have all chemical and
physical data on this stuff already, of course, as well as an excellent
idea of its crystal structure. It's a funny mixture of barium and
titanium compounds with some rare earths and--well, read the report for
yourself."

Lancaster's eyes skimmed down the sheaf of papers she handed him. "Can't
make very good condensers out of this," he objected. "Too brittle--and
look how the properties vary with temperature. A practical dielectric
has to be stable in every way, at least over the range of conditions you
intend to use it in."

She nodded.

"Of course. Anyway, the mineral is very rare on Venus, and you know how
tough it is to search for anything in Gorbu-vashtar. What's important is
the lead it gave Sophoulis. You see, the dielectric constant of this
material isn't constant at all. It _increases_ with applied voltage.
Look at this curve here."

Lancaster whistled. "What the devil--but that's impossible! That much
variability means a crystal structure which is--uh--flexible, damn it!
But you've got a brittle substance here--"

According to the accepted theory of dielectricity, this couldn't be.
Lancaster realized with a thumping behind his veins that the theory
would have to be modified. Rather, this was an altogether different
phenomenon from normal insulation.

He supposed some geological freak had formed the mineral. Venus was a
strange planet anyway. But that didn't matter. The important thing now
was to get to know this process. He went off into a happy mist of
quantum mechanics, oscillation theory, and periodic functions of a
complex variable.

Karen and Isaacson exchanged a slow smile.

       *       *       *       *       *

Sophoulis and his people had done heroic work under adverse conditions.
A tentative theory of the mechanism involved had already been
formulated, and the search had started for a means to duplicate the
super-dielectricity in materials otherwise more suitable to man's needs.
But as he grew familiar with the place and the job, Lancaster wondered
just how adverse the conditions really were.

True, the equipment was old and cranky, much of it haywired together,
much of it invented from scratch. But Rakkan the Martian, for all his
lack of formal education, was unbelievably clever where it came to
making apparatus and making it behave, and Friedrichs was a top-flight
designer. The lab had what it needed--wasn't that enough?

The rest of Lancaster's crew were equally good. The Dufreres were
physical chemists _par excellence_, Isaacson a brilliant
crystallographer with an unusual brain for mathematics, Hwang an expert
on quantum theory and inter-atomic forces, Karen an imaginative
experimenter. None of them quite had the synthesizing mentality needed
for an overall picture and a fore-vision of the general direction of
work--that had been Sophoulis' share, and was now Lancaster's--but they
were all cheerful and skilled where it came to detail work and could
often make suggestions in a theoretical line.

Then, too, there was no Security snooping about, no petty scramble for
recognition and promotion, no red tape. What was more important,
Lancaster began to realize, was the personal nature of the whole
affair. In a Project, the overall chief set the pattern, and it was
followed by his subordinates with increasingly less latitude as you
worked down through the lower ranks. You did what you were told,
produced results or else, and kept your mouth shut outside your own
sector of the Project. You had only the vaguest idea of what actually
was being created, and why, and how it fitted into the broad scheme of
society.

Hwang and Rakkan commented on that, one "evening" at dinner when they
had grown more relaxed in Lancaster's presence. "It was inevitable, I
suppose, that scientific research should become corporate," said the
Chinese. "So much equipment was needed, and so many specialties had to
be coordinated, that the solitary genius with only a few assistants
hadn't a chance. Nevertheless, it's a pity. It's destroyed initiative in
many promising young men. The top man is no longer a scientist at
all--he's an administrator with some technical background. The lower
ranks do have to exercise ingenuity, yes, but only along the lines they
are ordered to follow. If some interesting sideline crops up, they can't
investigate it. All they can do is submit a memorandum to the chief, and
most likely if anything is done it will be carried out by someone else."

"What would you do about it?" shrugged Lancaster. "You just admitted
that the old-time genius in a garret can't compete."

"No--but the small team of creative specialists, each with an excellent
understanding of the others' fields, and each working in a loose,
free-willed cooperation with the rest, can. Indeed, the results will be
much better. It was tried once, you may know. The early cybernetics men,
back in the last century, worked that way."

"I wish we could co-opt some biologists and psychologists into this,"
murmured Rakkan. His English was good, though indescribably accented by
his vocal apparatus. "The cellular and neural implications of
dielectricity look--promising. Maybe later."

"Well," said Lancaster defensively, "a large Project can be made more
secure--less chance of leakage."

