
"Yes, sir," Pember said, adjusting the burden on his shoulder.

       *       *       *       *       *

They reached the car.

A dozen of the orange-red globes now floated above the plant.
They were circling slowly, in widening arcs, toward the limits of
the factory grounds.

"Searching for human beings," Taylor decided, watching them.

Orkins clutched Taylor's coat tails.

"They're coming out!" he cried. "There's hell to pay."

Taylor took Orkins' arm and forced him down on the running board
of the car, where Norden already was coming out of his daze.

"Keep quiet!" Taylor ordered. "They'll discover us."

"They'll find us anyway!" Orkins said, frantic with fear. He
groaned loudly.

"Okay. He asked for it," Masters said.

There was a splatting sound as Masters' fist landed. Masters made
a face over a distasteful duty done and turned to Pember:

"Put them both in the car." He indicated Norden. "Here's
handcuffs. Lock them together."

Taylor and Masters watched the circling spheres. Suddenly one
darted down. From its pulsating body shot a flash of flame. A
human scream rent the air.

"It's the darnedest thing I ever saw," Masters said with a
shudder. "Those fireballs squirt heat-electricity out at a guy
and roast him!"

"Yes," Taylor said with a nod, "and that isn't all. Those spheres
act as though they were alive. When that one went out above the
opening of the tunnel, I thought I saw a pair of eyes."

Masters studied the assertion, then spoke:

"Captain, I may look dumb, but I've been in the secret service
long enough to be found out if I really am. I've a hunch you
killed that sphere."

"I've thought of that, but how could I? I didn't touch him."

"Maybe you don't have to touch 'em to kill 'em. We don't know
what they are, except they're different--"

"We don't know the real natures of anything, as far as that
goes. Man's a mixture of chemicals, but that doesn't explain him.
The spheres are a mixture of energies--we can observe that much,
but it still doesn't explain them. Where are they from? Why did
they come here? What are their primary objectives?"

"Primary objectives? That's a military term, ain't it?"

"Partly military, and partly scientific. We know the secondary
objective of the spheres. It's the same as man's or any other
living creature. The spheres are alive and their objective is to
keep on living, but that isn't their primary motif. The primary
objective is the difference between a good man and a bad one.
Whatever is more important to a man than life itself is his
primary objective."

"Life's pretty important," Masters said, solemnly.

"Yes, but life isn't everything. Any man, no matter how yellow or
mean he is, has some ideal he's willing to die for--or at least
he's willing to risk dying to attain. Look at Norden. He's hard,
cold-blooded and he doesn't think twice about putting a bomb in a
plant to wipe out scores of lives. He dared me to kill him,
rather than help us. His code as a spy is his primary objective.
Look at Pember. He must have been frightened by the spheres, but
we had to force him to leave his post. We've shown him that his
duty now is with us--he realizes that the spheres are the
immediate enemy of his country and he'll do his best fighting
them. And you and I have ideals--we know each other too well to
list them."

"I getcha so far, but what about Orkins?"

"The man's not afraid of death, but afraid of the unknown. Men
like him commit suicide rather than face reality. He wants
security. He's afraid of uncertainty. He lives in an unreal,
imaginary world and when uncertainty, which is reality, intrudes,
he is completely lost."

"You make me feel sorry for the poor devil."

"That's because you understand why he's funky. Primary objectives
make men do what they do--but understanding Orkins doesn't solve
our problem."

"No. What are the spheres? Are they alive? If so, they must want
something. What do they want?"

"A conquest of the human race?" Taylor pondered. "Maybe. But it
isn't likely. They can't gain much by conquering us. It wouldn't
do man any good to stage a conquest of earthworms and swordfish,
since neither could pay taxes. The spheres are as different from
man as man from an angle-worm. Are we a menace to the spheres?
Apparently the only time we really menace them is when we crawl
into a hole like a rabbit--maybe there's something in that that
will help us, but I don't think that's why they kill us. Are we a
nuisance? If so, why? Are we a food? There is energy in sunlight
and chemicals in the human body. A creature of energy would feed
on something like sunlight, not chemicals. His menu would be
electric wires, storage batteries--"

"Great Scott, Captain!" Masters interrupted. "Let's get away from
this car. There's a battery in it--food for the spheres!"

Masters looked nervously up at the circling globes. Taylor, deep
in thought, did not stir. Instead, he continued his speculation:

"Maybe they kill us for sport."

He was thinking of small boys torturing frogs; of Roman emperors
at the circus; of sportsmen exterminating game; of the mob
watching the guillotine on the streets of Paris. It was
Zarathustra who said that when gazing at tragedies, bull fights
and crucifixions, man has felt his happiest; and when man
invented hell, he made hell his heaven on earth. Couldn't this be
a characteristic of all life? Couldn't the spheres be cruel and
ruthless, too?

Man, the mighty hunter, had become the prey.

A sphere detached itself from the group and circled toward the
car.

"I guess you're right, Masters," Taylor decided as he watched the
spheres. "We'd better move."




CHAPTER IV

PREY


Masters unlocked the handcuffs of the two men in the car. He
disposed of his short-wave set in a ditch, for it, too, had
batteries which might attract the spheres.

"Get out of the car, Orkins," he ordered.

"Watch him, Masters," Taylor warned. "If he starts yelling, choke
him."

"But not too hard," Masters added. "If we're going to be rabbits,
human values will change. Men who run into holes will live to eat
turnips, those who bare their teeth won't. Orkins might be the
forefather of a new race--a helluva race. Come on, Orkins. Get
out. Hurry up, Father Abraham, or I'll drag you out."

Orkins, cringing, emerged.

Taylor took charge of Norden, who followed Orkins out of the
machine.

"I hate your guts, Norden," he said. "You're a dirty, lousy rat
and you ought to be shot. But after all, you're a man. You've
courage and I admire it, as much as I hate the way you use it.
Overseas there's a war between countries. Here there's another
war between humanity and a species of alien monsters. Whether we
like it or not, we're allies."

Norden's undershot jaw moved in a grin.

"I know about the spheres, Captain," Norden replied. "I overheard
your remarks to Mr. Masters. I've listened to Orkins' babble."

"Will you help us?"

"I will bargain with you."

"For your life? You know I can't do anything about that. I'll do
my best--I'll speak a good word at your trial, try to save you
from the firing squad, but I'm only a captain. That's all I can
do. I haven't the power to do anything more."
