almost fanatical refusal to give up.

Even so, thought Hudson, they had figured well enough. There had
been many chances to make blunders and they'd made relatively few.
All they lacked, in the last analysis, was backing.

Take the helicopter, for example. It was the one satisfactory
vehicle for time traveling. You had to get up in the air to clear
whatever upheavals and subsidences there had been through geologic
ages. The helicopter took you up and kept you clear and gave you a
chance to pick a proper landing place. Travel without it and,
granting you were lucky with land surfaces, you still might
materialize in the heart of some great tree or end up in a swamp
or the middle of a herd of startled, savage beasts. A plane would
have done as well, but back in this world, you couldn't land a
plane--or you couldn't be certain that you could. A helicopter,
though, could land almost anywhere.

In the time-distance they had traveled, they almost certainly had
been lucky, although one could not be entirely sure just how great
a part of it was luck. Wes had felt that he had not been working
as blindly as it sometimes might appear. He had calibrated the
unit for jumps of 50,000 years. Finer calibration, he had said
realistically, would have to wait for more developmental work.

Using the 50,000-year calibrations, they had figured it out. One
jump (conceding that the calibration was correct) would have
landed them at the end of the Wisconsin glacial period; two jumps,
at its beginning. The third would set them down toward the end of
the Sangamon Interglacial and apparently it had--give or take ten
thousand years or so.

They had arrived at a time when the climate did not seem to vary
greatly, either hot or cold. The flora was modern enough to give
them a homelike feeling. The fauna, modern and Pleistocenic,
overlapped. And the surface features were little altered from the
twentieth century. The rivers ran along familiar paths, the hills
and bluffs looked much the same. In this corner of the Earth, at
least, 150,000 years had not changed things greatly.

Boyhood dreams, Hudson thought, were wondrous. It was not often
that three men who had daydreamed in their youth could follow it
out to its end. But they had and here they were.

Johnny was on watch, and it was Hudson's turn next, and he'd
better get to sleep. He closed his eyes, then opened them again
for another look at the unfamiliar stars. The east, he saw, was
flushed with silver light. Soon the Moon would rise, which was
good. A man could keep a better watch when the Moon was up.

He woke suddenly, snatched upright and into full awareness by the
marrow-chilling clamor that slashed across the night. The very air
seemed curdled by the savage racket and, for a moment, he sat
numbed by it. Then, slowly, it seemed--his brain took the noise
and separated it into two distinct but intermingled categories,
the deadly screaming of a cat and the maddened trumpeting of a
mastodon.

The Moon was up and the countryside was flooded by its light.
Cooper, he saw, was out beyond the watchfires, standing there and
watching, with his rifle ready. Adams was scrambling out of his
sleeping bag, swearing softly to himself. The cooking fire had
burned down to a bed of mottled coals, but the watchfires still
were burning and the helicopter, parked within their circle,
picked up the glint of flames.

"It's Buster," Adams told him angrily. "I'd know that bellowing of
his anywhere. He's done nothing but parade up and down and bellow
ever since we got here. And now he seems to have gone out and
found himself a saber-tooth."

Hudson zipped down his sleeping bag, grabbed up his rifle and
jumped to his feet, following Adams in a silent rush to where
Cooper stood.

Cooper motioned at them. "Don't break it up. You'll never see the
like of it again."

Adams brought his rifle up.

Cooper knocked the barrel down.

"You fool!" he shouted. "You want them turning on us?"

Two hundred yards away stood the mastodon and, on his back, the
screeching saber-tooth. The great beast reared into the air and
came down with a jolt, bucking to unseat the cat, flailing the air
with his massive trunk. And as he bucked, the cat struck and
struck again with his gleaming teeth, aiming for the spine.

Then the mastodon crashed head downward, as if to turn a
somersault, rolled and was on his feet again, closer to them now
than he had been before. The huge cat had sprung off.

For a moment, the two stood facing one another. Then the tiger
charged, a flowing streak of motion in the moonlight. Buster
wheeled away and the cat, leaping, hit his shoulder, clawed wildly
and slid off. The mastodon whipped to the attack, tusks slashing,
huge feet stamping. The cat, caught a glancing blow by one of the
tusks, screamed and leaped up, to land in spread-eagle fashion
upon Buster's head.

Maddened with pain and fright, blinded by the tiger's raking
claws, the old mastodon ran--straight toward the camp. And as he
ran, he grasped the cat in his trunk and tore him from his hold,
lifted him high and threw him.

"Look out!" yelled Cooper and brought his rifle up and fired.

For an instant, Hudson saw it all as if it were a single scene,
motionless, one frame snatched from a fantastic movie epic--the
charging mastodon, with the tiger lifted and the sound track one
great blast of bloodthirsty bedlam.

Then the scene dissolved in a blur of motion. He felt his rifle
thud against his shoulder, knowing he had fired, but not hearing
the explosion. And the mastodon was almost on top of him, bearing
down like some mighty and remorseless engine of blind destruction.

He flung himself to one side and the giant brushed past him. Out
of the tail of his eye, he saw the thrown saber-tooth crash to
Earth within the circle of the watchfires.

He brought his rifle up again and caught the area behind Buster's
ear within his sights. He pressed the trigger. The mastodon
staggered, then regained his stride and went rushing on. He hit
one of the watchfires dead center and went through it, scattering
coals and burning brands.

Then there was a thud and the screeching clang of metal.

"Oh, no!" shouted Hudson.

Rushing forward, they stopped inside the circle of the fires.

The helicopter lay tilted at a crazy angle. One of its rotor
blades was crumpled. Half across it, as if he might have fallen as
he tried to bull his mad way over it, lay the mastodon.

Something crawled across the ground toward them, its spitting,
snarling mouth gaping in the firelight, its back broken, hind legs
trailing.

Calmly, without a word, Adams put a bullet into the head of the
saber-tooth.




V


General Leslie Bowers rose from his chair and paced up and down
the room. He stopped to bang the conference table with a knotted
fist.

"You can't do it," he bawled at them. "You can't kill the project.
I _know_ there's something to it. We can't give it up!"

"But it's been ten years, General," said the secretary of the
army. "If they were coming back, they'd be here by now."

The general stopped his pacing, stiffened. Who did that little
civilian squirt think he was, talking to the military in that tone
of voice!

"We know how you feel about it, General," said the chairman of the
joint chiefs of staff. "I think we all recognize how deeply you're
involved. You've blamed yourself all these years and there is no
need of it. After all, there may be nothing to it."

"Sir," said the general, "I _know_ there's something to it. I
thought so at the time, even when no one else did. And what we've
turned up since serves to bear me out. Let's take a look at these
three men of ours. We knew almost nothing of them at the time, but
we know them now. I've traced out their lives from the time that
they were born until they disappeared--and I might add that, on
the chance it might be all a hoax, we've searched for them for
years and we've found no trace at all.

"I've talked with those who knew them and I've studied their
scholastic and military records. I've arrived at the conclusion
that if any three men could do it, they were the ones who could.
Adams was the brains and the other two were the ones who carried
out the things that he dreamed up. Cooper was a bulldog sort of
man who could keep them going and it would be Hudson who would
figure out the angles.

"And they knew the angles, gentlemen. They had it all doped out.

"What Hudson tried here in Washington is substantial proof of
that. But even back in school, they were thinking of those angles.
I talked some years ago to a lawyer in New York, name of
Pritchard. He told me that even back in university, they talked
of the economic and political problems that they might face if
they ever cracked what they were working at.

"Wesley Adams was one of our brightest young scientific men. His
record at the university and his war work bears that out. After
the war, there were at least a dozen jobs he could have had. But
he wasn't interested. And I'll tell you why he wasn't. He had
something bigger--something he wanted to work on. So he and these
two others went off by themselves--"

"You think he was working on a temporal--" the army secretary cut
in.

"He was working on a time machine," roared the general. "I don't
know about this 'temporal' business. Just plain 'time machine' is
good enough for me."
