"Then we saw three little greenish spots of luminosity in the dusk to
our left. We stood staring at them, and suddenly they all shifted at
once. Leroy yelled '_Ce sont des yeux!_' and they were! They were eyes!

"Well, we stood frozen for a moment, while Leroy's yell reverberated
back and forth between the distant walls, and the echoes repeated the
words in queer, thin voices. There were mumblings and mutterings and
whisperings and sounds like strange soft laughter, and then the
three-eyed thing moved again. Then we broke for the door!

"We felt better out in the sunlight; we looked at each other sheepishly,
but neither of us suggested another look at the buildings inside--though
we _did_ see the place later, and that was queer, too--but you'll hear
about it when I come to it. We just loosened our revolvers and crept on
along that ghostly street.

"The street curved and twisted and subdivided. I kept careful note of
our directions, since we couldn't risk getting lost in that gigantic
maze. Without our thermo-skin bags, night would finish us, even if what
lurked in the ruins didn't. By and by, I noticed that we were veering
back toward the canal, the buildings ended and there were only a few
dozen ragged stone huts which looked as though they might have been
built of debris from the city. I was just beginning to feel a bit
disappointed at finding no trace of Tweel's people here when we rounded
a corner and there he was!

"I yelled 'Tweel!' but he just stared, and then I realized that he
wasn't Tweel, but another Martian of his sort. Tweel's feathery
appendages were more orange hued and he stood several inches taller than
this one. Leroy was sputtering in excitement, and the Martian kept his
vicious beak directed at us, so I stepped forward as peace-maker. I said
'Tweel?' very questioningly, but there was no result. I tried it a dozen
times, and we finally had to give it up; we couldn't connect.

"Leroy and I walked toward the huts, and the Martian followed us. Twice
he was joined by others, and each time I tried yelling 'Tweel' at them
but they just stared at us. So we ambled on with the three trailing us,
and then it suddenly occurred to me that my Martian accent might be at
fault. I faced the group and tried trilling it out the way Tweel himself
did: 'T-r-r-rwee-r-rl!' Like that.

"And that worked! One of them spun his head around a full ninety
degrees, and screeched 'T-r-r-rweee-r-rl!' and a moment later, like an
arrow from a bow, Tweel came sailing over the nearer huts to land on his
beak in front of me!

"Man, we were glad to see each other! Tweel set up a twittering and
chirping like a farm in summer and went sailing up and coming down on
his beak, and I would have grabbed his hands, only he wouldn't keep
still long enough.

"The other Martians and Leroy just stared, and after a while, Tweel
stopped bouncing, and there we were. We couldn't talk to each other any
more than we could before, so after I'd said 'Tweel' a couple of times
and he'd said 'Tick,' we were more or less helpless. However, it was
only mid-morning, and it seemed important to learn all we could about
Tweel and the city, so I suggested that he guide us around the place if
he weren't busy. I put over the idea by pointing back at the buildings
and then at him and us.

"Well, apparently he wasn't too busy, for he set off with us, leading
the way with one of his hundred and fifty-foot nosedives that set Leroy
gasping. When we caught up, he said something like 'one, one, two--two,
two, four--no, no--yes, yes--rock--no breet!' That didn't seem to mean
anything; perhaps he was just letting Leroy know that he could speak
English, or perhaps he was merely running over his vocabulary to refresh
his memory.

"Anyway, he showed us around. He had a light of sorts in his black
pouch, good enough for small rooms, but simply lost in some of the
colossal caverns we went through. Nine out of ten buildings meant
absolutely nothing to us--just vast empty chambers, full of shadows and
rustlings and echoes. I couldn't imagine their use; they didn't seem
suitable for living quarters, or even for commercial purposes--trade and
so forth; they might have been all right as power-houses, but what could
have been the purpose of a whole city full? And where were the remains
of the machinery?

"The place was a mystery. Sometimes Tweel would show us through a hall
that would have housed an ocean-liner, and he'd seem to swell with
pride--and we couldn't make a damn thing of it! As a display of
architectural power, the city was colossal; as anything else it was just
nutty!

"But we did see one thing that registered. We came to that same building
Leroy and I had entered earlier--the one with the three eyes in it.
Well, we were a little shaky about going in there, but Tweel twittered
and trilled and kept saying, 'Yes, yes, yes!' so we followed him,
staring nervously about for the thing that had watched us. However, that
hall was just like the others, full of murmurs and slithering noises and
shadowy things slipping away into corners. If the three-eyed creature
were still there, it must have slunk away with the others.

"Tweel led us along the wall; his light showed a series of little
alcoves, and in the first of these we ran into a puzzling thing--a very
weird thing. As the light flashed into the alcove, I saw first just an
empty space, and then, squatting on the floor, I saw--it! A little
creature about as big as a large rat, it was, gray and huddled and
evidently startled by our appearance. It had the queerest, most devilish
little face!--pointed ears or horns and satanic eyes that seemed to
sparkle with a sort of fiendish intelligence.

"Tweel saw it, too, and let out a screech of anger, and the creature
rose on two pencil-thin legs and scuttled off with a half-terrified,
half defiant squeak. It darted past us into the darkness too quickly
even for Tweel, and as it ran, something waved on its body like the
fluttering of a cape. Tweel screeched angrily at it and set up a shrill
hullabaloo that sounded like genuine rage.

"But the thing was gone, and then I noticed the weirdest of imaginable
details. Where it had squatted on the floor was--a book! It had been
hunched over a book!

"I took a step forward; sure enough, there was some sort of inscription
on the pages--wavy white lines like a seismograph record on black sheets
like the material of Tweel's pouch. Tweel fumed and whistled in wrath,
picked up the volume and slammed it into place on a shelf full of
others. Leroy and I stared dumbfounded at each other.

"Had the little thing with the fiendish face been reading? Or was it
simply eating the pages, getting physical nourishment rather than
mental? Or had the whole thing been accidental?

"If the creature were some rat-like pest that destroyed books, Tweel's
rage was understandable, but why should he try to prevent an intelligent
being, even though of an alien race, from _reading_--if it _was_ reading? I
don't know; I did notice that the book was entirely undamaged, nor did I
see a damaged book among any that we handled. But I have an odd hunch
that if we knew the secret of the little cape-clothed imp, we'd know the
mystery of the vast abandoned city and of the decay of Martian culture.

"Well, Tweel quieted down after a while and led us completely around
that tremendous hall. It had been a library, I think; at least, there
were thousands upon thousands of those queer black-paged volumes printed
in wavy lines of white. There were pictures, too, in some; and some of
these showed Tweel's people. That's a point, of course; it indicated
that his race built the city and printed the books. I don't think the
greatest philologist on earth will ever translate one line of those
records; they were made by minds too different from ours.

"Tweel could read them, naturally. He twittered off a few lines, and
then I took a few of the books, with his permission; he said 'no, no!'
to some and 'yes, yes!' to others. Perhaps he kept back the ones his
people needed, or perhaps he let me take the ones he thought we'd
understand most easily. I don't know; the books are outside there in the
rocket.
