ninety-five, plus tax.

"In the exact same manner, Calsobisidine clings to the lining of your
stomach and intestines, giving positive relief from burning pain and
acid indigestion."

This puzzled Boswellister, and he remarked in a voice that seemed
overloud, "But who has glass insides?"

The women giggled and turned away.

The pitchman's scowl was a menace; his voice bitter: "Go on, scram. You
queered my tip."

Boswellister slipped away while the pitchman started to collect a new
crowd. He popped into the entrance of the drugstore, and as always stood
momentarily amazed by the bewildering variety of merchandise. Gardening
implements, paper goods, dishes and glassware, whiskey, Calsobisidine, a
huge display of baby dolls that performed every human function but
reproduction....

Then he gasped and walked towards the inside demonstration. There,
presided over by a fake medical man, dressed in operating room regalia,
including mask, rubber gloves and stethoscope; there, right in the
middle of the block-long drugstore, a demonstration of the newest
educational doll was taking place. The doll, stretched out on a
miniature hospital delivery table, was being delivered of a replica
new-born infant.

Again and again the "doctor" performed the delivery, alternately
inserting the doll-baby into the doll-mamma and removing it.

Boswellister flushed and walked quickly away. He had no doubt of the
toy's educational value, but nevertheless--he sighed deeply.

When Boswellister reached the corner of Ventura and Laurel Canyon, he
made his stand on the southeast corner, facing the hills over which the
Ipplinger starship would come to hover over the intersection and be
revealed by him.

He contacted control and ordered the halo focus for his head. He reached
up and felt the circle, planted firmly over his brow. He smiled to
himself and went into his pitch.

       *       *       *       *       *

"People of Earth," he began in a quavering voice, then he remembered the
Calsobisidine demonstrator, firmed up his tones and started again.
"People of Earth! Listen to the message from the stars!"

"Selling horoscopes," a woman answered her child's question.

"What's a horrorscope, mamma?"

"A bunch of hooey," she snapped in reply, scowled at Boswellister and
jerked her child complainingly down the street behind her.

"People of Earth!" Boswellister stated commandingly. He grasped a man's
arm, saying, "Stand still a moment, friend, and hear the promise of
Ippling. Glory beyond your imagination can be yours with the ascendancy
of Ippling in this world of tears and sorrows."

The man jerked away. "What the hell, Mac!" He looked searchingly at
Boswellister and muttered, "Geez, a nut." He stood back from
Boswellister to listen, smilingly superior, tolerantly waiting to be
entertained. A woman dragging a toddler stopped, then several other
people stopped to see until Boswellister had about ten people standing
around him.

"People of Earth!" he started in again, but he was interrupted by a
cackling voice from the rear.

"Where else?"

The small crowd laughed and started to move away, but Boswellister stood
straight and commanded them. "Listen! Wait for a moment and learn your
glorious destiny.

"Now," he said quietly into the lapel pickup, and the great doughnut
circle of the Ipplinger starship sailed in close over the hills. A line
of brush fire followed the starship.

Boswellister held up his hands and pointed. "Behold the glory of
Ippling that can be yours!" He held onto the halo, trying to get them to
follow the symbolism. "Look upwards!" He screamed at them, but they
watched the brush fire that swept the hill top. It was a goodie. It
would wipe out a number of homes.

He grabbed a boy by the arm and demanded, "Look at the Ipplinger
starship. Behold the glory of Ippling!"

The ten-year-old sneered. "Yah! That's the new 1993 Lockheed X69-P37
experimental ship. I got a model last week."

"No, no, lad! The Ipplinger starship, come to Earth to bring the
blessings of Ippling's culture to this backwards planet. Ippling will
save you from wars and ills, from poverty and hatred. Ippling will be
your destiny. Follow me, Boswellister! Ippling will lead you to the
stars! Glory for all!" Boswellister patted the boy on the head.

"Keep your hands off me, you big stiff!"
