
"I know it, silly. I'm just negotiating."

"No," he grumped, ready to be angry with her. He got up and strode
around the studio. "The dog catcher! We will not lie to that snake!"

Judy dropped the idea. "I've just now thought of another one. Here's an
ultimatum we could give him and mean it, too. No more writing until we
reach an agreement, or we will take away all his writing paper and
reading matter for good!"

"I'd thought of doing that," Jean conceded. "But isn't that a monstrous
way to treat a literary genius?"

"Not at all!" she protested. "By taking on a work that will require more
time than his lifetime, he is defeating himself."

"There's that way of looking at it," agreed the artist. "All right,
Droozle," he called. "You heard us talking and you know we mean it. No
more writing until we reach an agreement--or else!"

Droozle quit writing at once. While the girl and the young artist
watched anxiously, Droozle first wandered about uncertainly for a few
minutes and then curled up on a newspaper and went to sleep.

He slept all evening.

       *       *       *       *       *

"He has beaten us again," Jean Lanni told Judy Stokes resignedly when
she arrived at his studio the following evening. He watched Droozle
fascinatedly as the snake moved his restless tail over the margins of
newspapers spread on the floor. "He doesn't know yet that I know. I
discovered the fraud only by the merest accident."

"He isn't writing?" she asked, perusing the newspapers for signs of
Droozle's elegant script.

"He most certainly is."

"Where?"

"Look at him!" Jean exclaimed, ignoring her question. "He's doing it
again!"

Droozle had ceased wriggling for the moment and lay there shaking
violently, as though he had malaria. Then the paroxysm passed and he
took up his restless movements again.

"The poor genius," mourned Judy. "He must be sick with frustration."

"Sick, my eye! That snake has learned to centrifuge part of his blood
while it is in his body, so that the hemoglobin is separated out. The
result is--invisible ink!"

"Why, I'll tell that Droozle off!" raved Judy. "Here I sat feeling sorry
for the little crumb!"

Droozle did not mind. While she ranted, he brazenly began writing in
visible ink once more.

"How did you catch him at it?" she asked.

"I used a piece of his newspaper to pick up a hot saw blade. The heat
turned the invisible ink brown."

"Droozle," said the girl passionately, looking down at the writer, "you
know your master is in great need of funds. _Where_ is your sense of
loyalty and self-sacrifice for the one who has cared for you?"

Droozle wrote poetically, "Is there Joy or any other good thing in
Abnegation? Is there Beauty in Sacrifice? What Handsome purpose do these
serve a being in his race with Time? His Days will soon be spent and
they will come no more; thus my Criterion: Is This the most Joy
gathering, Awareness touching, Beauty sensing act of which he is
capable? None other is worthy of his time!"

"Men are not so selfish," objected Jean.
