had learned the operation of the communications equipment, he became
hysterical and I could find out precisely nothing.

By this time, it was raining violently. There was a high wind. Several
trees had been blown down and lightning was frequent. A flood was
starting down the mountainside toward the village, threatening severe
damage. It was quite apparent that crops, such as they were, would be
almost completely destroyed.

At the time, I could do little to remedy the situation. I re-established
contact with the cruiser, informed Captain Klorantel of the situation,
and requested that he stand by. I then turned on my viewsphere to keep
watch on the village from the communications room. Since Elwar had been
in the room on several previous occasions, I saw no reason for excluding
him. On the contrary, I thought it would be advisable to keep him with
me, since I felt that he would be seriously injured if he were turned
loose in the village. I do not believe he would have survived the fury
of the villagers, who had taken shelter, and were watching the
destruction of their crops.

The flood had become a torrent, which overflowed the banks of the
village brook, tore at the bridge, and swept through the lanes. In the
fields, grain was beaten into the ground and it was clear that the
villagers would have little or no harvest to celebrate during the
approaching festival. The wind grew in force, lashing at the tall
festival pole, which bent, crashed down in the village square, and
partially demolished the front of the inn.

During this period, there was no human activity, since everyone had
taken what shelter he could find.

At 0448, the rain slackened, the wind died down, and people started
gathering in the square. For a time, they milled about, wading through
the ebbing flood. They examined the damage, then they gathered in
groups, talking earnestly.

The dry wind came up at 0510, and by 0550, the entire village was on the
march toward my station. Their intentions were quite easy to determine.
They were armed with pitchforks, scythes, axes, and other tools which
could be converted to offensive use. I established a protective screen,
but realized that to set up a permanent defense would be impractical and
even harmful. I therefore called the cruiser, requesting evacuation for
myself and for young Forell. Prior to evacuation, I demolished all my
fixed equipment, so that the only things left for the villagers to find
when they entered the station were damaged remains of those things
normal for a recluse scholar of their era.

                                        Franz Jaeger
                                        Observer 2/c


INFORMAL MEMO

                                                            130-265

 From: Evaluations Officer
 To: Explorations Officer
 Subject: Interrogation

Enclosed is a digest of the interrogation of one, Elwar Forell, who was
evacuated from forty-eight seventy-one, in company with Guardsman
Jaeger. This boy was abjectly terrified and had to be calmed several
times during questioning. He was pitiably hysterical when recalling his
conversation with Captain Klorantel, who, you will remember, is a
capriform humanoid.

The subject appears to be an intelligent specimen of his race, and when
he had conquered his hysteria, was extremely co-operative, showing
active interest in his surroundings. I believe he would be able to
assimilate training, and would make a valuable addition to the Stellar
Guard. I recommend his retention and training.

If Elwar is a typical "son of a simple peasant," and if the planet from
which he comes has any considerable number of "simple peasants" with
sons like him, I can foresee some strangely interesting problems in
connection with further dealings on that planet.

                                        FONZEC
 1 enclosure


DIGEST

Interrogation of Elwar Forell, native of Planet 3-G3-9/4871.

"My Masters, I did mean no harm, but only good. I have long known that
my master was possessed of power denied to most men. When I was
apprenticed to him five years ago, I thought I would one day learn some
of the dark secrets of the hidden worlds, but never did my master
mention aught of those secrets he so surely knew. He taught me only of
those things known to the scholars. He told me of reading, of writing,
and of ciphering, and taught me many facts of our world which are known
to the learned. I wished to know of many other things, but of these he
was silent. Even so, I am grateful for his teachings, for how else could
the son of a simple peasant gain the knowledge of the scholars?

"I saw that my master often repaired to a room which I was never allowed
to enter. This room he cleaned himself. And he always entered in the
greatest of secrecy, being quite cross with me when I once betrayed
curiosity. I remained curious, however, and fell at last to watching him
in secret as he opened the door.

"He slid aside a secret panel, then turned a wheel this way and that,
finally pushing a handle. I watched, at last learning to what numbers he
did turn the wheel, and how he pushed the handle. During his absences, I
went sometimes to that room of magic, and I read the books of power,
though there was much I could not read, since much of the writing was in
strange tongues and I dared not ask my master the meanings of the
strange words. But for his own convenience, my master had written many
instructions plainly. And these, I read.

"I did learn that there were powers beyond those of men. I learned that
these strange instruments on the table did have strange ability to call
forth demons and spirits, but never until that day did I dare touch
other than the books and papers. And those I took great care to restore
to their original condition.

"For three months past, my father's land and the fields of his neighbors
have been dry. During this time, there has been no rain, nor hint of
rain, and the peasants have cried out for relief. They have appealed
even to my master, who has told them that he has no strange powers--that
he can do naught to call up rain. But they did not believe him, nor did
I, Elwar, who knew better than this. I had seen the books of power, and
I knew the demons could cause the skies to deliver water if rightly
asked. So, I visited the room of magic upon the occasions of my master's
absence. And I tried to decipher his writings that I might find the
means to ask for the skies to open. Always, when I felt my master's
presence approaching, I left the room, taking care to properly lock the
door and to hide all evidence of my entry.

"On that day of direful events, I found a paper in my master's hand. It
mentioned fire in the forests. It mentioned rain. And it had on it words
of power.

