hole in the ground from which a diny had appeared or into which one
vanished. They were superior to traps. They did not have to be set or
emptied. They did not need bait. They were self-maintaining and even
self-reproducing--except that snakes when overfed tend to be less
romantic than when hungry. In ten years a story began--encouraged by
the Ministry of Information--to the effect that St. Patrick had
brought the snakes to Eire, and it was certain that if they didn't
wipe out the dinies, they assuredly kept the dinies from wiping out
the colony. And the one hope of making Eire into a splendid new
center of Erse culture and tradition--including a reverence for St.
Patrick--lay in the belief that some day the snakes would gain a
permanent upper hand.

Out near the spaceport there was an imported monument to St. Patrick.
It showed him pointing somewhere with his bishop's staff, while looking
down at a group of snakes near his feet. The sculptor intended to
portray St. Patrick telling the snakes to get the hell out of Eire. But
on Eire it was sentimentally regarded as St. Patrick telling the snakes
to go increase and multiply.

But nobody dared tell that to Sean O'Donohue! It was past history, in a
way, but also it was present fact. On the day of the emergency cabinet
meeting it was appalling fact. Without snakes the planet Eire could not
continue to be inhabited, because of the little dinies. But the
Republic of Eire on Earth would indignantly disown any colony that had
snakes in it. And the colony wasn't ready yet to be self-supporting.
The cabinet discussed the matter gloomily. They were too dispirited to
do more. But Moira--the darlin'--did research.

It was strictly college-freshman-biology-lab research. It didn't
promise much, even to her. But it gave her an excuse to talk anxiously
and hopefully to the president when he took the Dail Committee to
McGillicuddy Island to look at the big dinies there, while the populace
tried to get the snakes out of sight again.

                     *      *      *      *      *

Most of the island lay two miles off the continent named for County
Kerry back on Earth. At one point a promontory lessened the distance
greatly, and at one time there'd been a causeway there. It had been
built with great pains, and with pains destroyed.

The president explained as the boat bearing the committee neared the
island.

"The big dinies," he said sadly, "trampled the fences and houses and
ate up the roofs and tractors. It could not be borne. They could be
driven away with torches, but they came back. They could be killed, but
the people could only dispose of so many tons of carcasses. Remember,
the big males run sixty feet long, and the most girlish females run
forty. You wouldn't believe the new-hatched babies! They were a great
trial, in the early days!"

[Illustration]

Sean O'Donohue snorted. He bristled. He and the other two of the
committee had been dragged away from the city of Tara. He suspected
shenanigans going on behind his back. They did. His associates looked
bleary-eyed. They'd been treated cordially, and they were not
impassioned leaders of the Erse people, like the O'Donohue. One of them
was a ship builder and the other a manufacturer of precision machinery,
elected to the Dail for no special reason. They'd come on this junket
partly to get away from their troubles and their wives. The shortage of
high-precision tools was a trouble to both of them, but they were
forgetting it fully.

"So the causeway was built," explained President O'Hanrahan. "We drove
the big beasts over, and rounded up all we could find--drivin' them
with torches--and then we broke down the causeway. So there they are on
McGillicuddy Island. They don't swim."

The boat touched ground--a rocky, uninviting shore. The solicitor
general and the Chancellor of the Exchequer hopped ashore. They
assisted the committee members to land. They moved on. The president
started to follow but Moira said anxiously:

"Wait a bit. I've something to tell you. I ... said I'd experiment with
the dinies. I did. I learned something."

"Did you now?" asked the president. His tone was at once admiration and
despair. "It's a darlin' you are, Moira, but----"

"I ... wondered how they knew where iron was," said Moira hopefully,
"and I found out. They smell it."

"Ah, they do, do they!" said the president with tender reverence. "But
I have to tell you, Moira, that----"

"And I proved it!" said Moira, searching his face with her eyes. "If
you change a stimulus and a specimen reacts, then its reaction is to
the change. So I made the metal smell stronger."

President O'Hanrahan blinked at her.

"I ... heated it," said Moira. "You know how hot metal smells. I heated
a steel hairpin and the dinies came out of holes in the wall, right
away! The smell drew them. It was astonishing!"

The president looked at her with a strange expression.

"That's ... that's all I had time to try," said Moira. "It was
yesterday afternoon. There was an official dinner. I had to go. You
remember! So I locked up the dinies----"

"Moira darlin'," said President O'Hanrahan gently, "you don't lock up
dinies. They gnaw through steel safes. They make tunnels and nests in
electric dynamos. You don't lock up dinies, darlin'!"

"But I did!" she insisted. "They're still locked up. I looked just
before we started for here!"

The president looked at her very unhappily.

"There's no need for shenanigans between us, Moira!" Then he said:
"Couldn't ye be mistaken? Keepin' dinies locked up is like bottlin'
moonlight or writin' down the color of Moira O'Donohue's eyes or----"
He stopped. "How did ye do it?"

"The way you keep specimens," she told him. "When I was in college we
did experiments on frogs. They're cold-blooded just like dinies. If you
let them stay lively, they'll wear themselves out trying to get away.
So you put them in a refrigerator. In the vegetable container. They
don't freeze there, but they do ... get torpid. They just lay still
till you let them warm up again. To room temperature."

The president of the planet Eire stared. His mouth dropped open. He
blinked and blinked and blinked. Then he whooped. He reached forward
