sharply, "It's only sound." The doctor stopped; he examined the
label of his bottle of whiskey very carefully. A good brand of
whiskey. "He seems quite happy in the storeroom. You know,
Captain, what puzzled me at first? He can't read. He can't read
anything, not even the instruments in that ship. In fact he shows
no interest in his rocket at all."

The captain sat down now. He sat at the desk and faced the doctor.
"At least _they_ had the courage to send a man, not a mouse.
Doctor, a man."

The doctor stared at the captain, his hand squeezing and
unsqueezing on the whiskey bottle. "A man who can't read his own
instruments?" The doctor laughed. "Perhaps you too have failed to
see the point? Like that stupid general who sits out there waiting
for the men from somewhere to invade?"

"Don't you think it's a possibility?"

The doctor nodded. "A very good possibility, Captain, but they
will not be men." The doctor seemed to pause and lean forward.
"That rocket, Captain, is a test rocket. A test rocket _just like
ours_!"

Then the doctor picked up his whiskey bottle at last and poured
two glasses.

"Perhaps a drink, Captain?"

The captain was watching the sky outside the window.


THE END





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Test Rocket!, by Jack Douglas

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK TEST ROCKET! ***

***** This file should be named 23651.txt or 23651.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/2/3/6/5/23651/

Produced by Greg Weeks, dpcfmander, and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
