
"No," said the accused soldier. "Why should I? It's mine. Rightfully
mine. I fought for it. I found it. I kept it. It's mine." He glanced to
either side, towards the two guards who flanked him, then looked back at
the commander.

The commander ran an idle finger through the pound or so of golden
trinkets that Hernan had spilled from the bag. He knew what the trooper
was thinking. A man had a right to what he had earned, didn't he?

The commander picked up one of the heavier bits of primitive jewelry and
tossed it in his hand. Then he stood up and looked around the town
square.

The company had occupied the town for several weeks. The stored grains
in the community warehouse, plus the relaxation the men had had, plus
the relative security of the town, had put most of the men back into
condition. One had died from a skin infection, and another from wounds
sustained in the assault on the town, but the remainder were in good
health.

And all of them, with the exception of the sentries guarding the town's
perimeter, were standing in the square, watching the court-martial.
Their eyes didn't seem to blink, and their breathing was soft and
measured. They were waiting for the commander's decision.

The commander, still tossing the crude golden earring, stood tall and
straight, estimating the feeling of the men surrounding him.

"Gold," he said finally. "Gold. That's what we came here for, and that's
what we're going to get. Five hundred pounds of the stuff would make any
one of you wealthy for the rest of his life. Do you think I blame any
one of you for wanting it? Do you think I blame this man here? Of course
not." He laughed--a short, hard bark. "Do I blame myself?"

[Illustration]

He tossed the bauble again, caught it. "But wanting it is one thing;
getting it, holding it, and taking care of it wisely are something else
again.

"I gave orders. I have expected--and still expect--that they will be
obeyed. But I didn't give them just to hear myself give orders. There
was a reason, and a good one.

"Suppose we let each man take what gold he could find. What would
happen? The lucky ones would be wealthy, and the unlucky would still be
poor. And then some of the lucky ones would wake up some morning without
the gold they'd taken because someone else had relieved them of it while
they slept.

"And others wouldn't wake up at all, because they'd be found with their
throats cut.

"I told you to bring every bit of the metal to me. When this thing is
over, every one of you will get his share. If a man dies, his share will
be split among the rest, instead of being stolen by someone else or lost
because it was hidden too well."

He looked at the earring in his hand, then, with a convulsive sweep of
his arm, he tossed it out into the middle of the square.

"There! Seven ounces of gold! Which of you wants it?"

Some of the men eyed the circle of metal that gleamed brightly on the
sunlit ground, but none of them made any motion to pick it up.

"So." The commander's voice was almost gentle. He turned his eyes back
toward the accused. "You know the orders. You knew them when you hid
this." He gestured negligently toward the small heap of native-wrought
metal. "Suppose you'd gotten away with it. You'd have ended up with your
own share, _plus_ this, thereby cheating the others out of--" He glanced
at the pile. "Hm-m-m--say, twenty-five each. And that's only a little
compared with what we'll get from now on."

He looked back at the others. "Unless the shares are taken care of _my_
way, the largest shares will go to the dishonest, the most powerful, and
the luckiest. Unless the division is made as we originally agreed, we'll
end up trying to cut each other's heart out."

There was hardness in his voice when he spoke to the accused, but there
was compassion there, too.

"First: You have forfeited your share in this expedition. All that you
have now, and all that you might have expected will be divided among the
others according to our original agreement.

"Second: I do not expect any man to work for nothing. Since you will not
receive anything from this expedition, there is no point in your
assisting the rest of us or working with us in any way whatsoever.

"Third: We can't have anyone with us who does not carry his own weight."

He glanced at the guards. "Hang him." He paused. "Now."

As he was led away, the commander watched the other men. There was
approval in their eyes, but there was something else there, too--a
wariness, a concealed fear.

The condemned man turned suddenly and began shouting at the commander,
but before he could utter more than three syllables, a fist smashed him
down. The guards dragged him off.

"All right, men," said the commander carefully, "let's search the
village. There might be more gold about; I have a hunch that this isn't
all he hid. Let's see if we can find the rest of it." He sensed the
relief of tension as he spoke.

The commander was right. It was amazing how much gold one man had been
able to stash away.




IX


They couldn't stay long in any one village; they didn't have the time to
sit and relax any more than was necessary. Once they had reached the
northern marches of the native empire, it was to the commander's
advantage to keep his men moving. He didn't know for sure how good or
how rapid communications were among the various native provinces, but he
had to assume that they were top notch, allowing for the limitations of
a barbaric society.

The worst trouble they ran into on their way was not caused by the
native warriors, but by disease.

The route to the south was spotted by great strips of sandy barrenness,
torn by winds that swept the grains of sand into the troopers' eyes and
crept into the chinks of their armor. Underfoot, the sand made a
treacherous pathway; carriers and men alike found it heavy going.

The heat from the sun was intense; the brilliant beams from the primary
seemed to penetrate through the men's armor and through the insulation
underneath, and made the marching even harder.

Even so, in spite of the discomfort, the men were making good time until
the disease struck. And that stopped them in their tracks.

What the disease was or how it was spread is unknown and unknowable at
this late date. Virus or bacterium, amoeba or fungus--whatever it was,
it struck.

Symptoms: Lassitude, weariness, weakness, and pain.

Signs: Great, ulcerous, wartlike, blood-filled blisters that grew
rapidly over the body.

A man might go to sleep at night feeling reasonably tired, but not ill,
and wake up in the morning to find himself unable to rise, his muscles
too weak to lift him from his bed.

If the blisters broke, or were lanced, it was almost impossible to stop
the bleeding, and many died, not from the toxic effect of the disease
itself, but from simple loss of blood.

But, like many epidemics, the thing had a fairly short life span. After
two weeks, it had burned itself out. Most of those who got it recovered,
and a few were evidently immune.

Eighteen men remained behind in shallow graves.

The rest went on.




X


No man is perfect. Even with four decades of training behind him,
Commander Frank couldn't call the turn every time. After the first few
villages, there were no further battles. The natives, having seen what
the invaders could do, simply showed up missing when the commander and
his men arrived. The villages were empty by the time the column reached
the outskirts.

Frater Vincent, the agent of the Universal Assembly, complained in no
uncertain terms about this state of affairs.

"As you know, commander," he said frowningly one morning, "it's no use
trying to indoctrinate a people we can't contact. And you can't subject
a people by force of arms alone; the power of the Truth--"

"I know, Frater," the commander interposed quickly. "But we can't deal
with these savages in the hinterlands. When we get a little farther into
this barbarian empire, we can take the necessary steps to--"

"The Truth," Frater Vincent interrupted somewhat testily, "is for all
men. It works, regardless of the state of civilization of the society."

The commander looked out of the unglazed window of the native hut in
which he had established his temporary headquarters, in one of the many
villages he had taken--or, rather, walked into without a fight because
it was empty. "But you'll admit, Frater, that it takes longer with
savages."

"True," said Frater Vincent.

"We simply haven't the time. We've got to keep on the move. And,
besides, we haven't even been able to contact any of the natives for
quite a while; they get out of our way. And we have taken a few
prisoners--" His voice was apologetic, but there was a trace of
irritation in it. He didn't want to offend Frater Vincent, of course,
but dammit, the Assemblyman didn't understand military tactics at all.
Or, he corrected himself hastily, at least only slightly.

"Yes," admitted Frater Vincent, "and I've had considerable success with
the prisoners. But, remember--we're not here just to indoctrinate a few
occasional prisoners, but to change the entire moral and philosophical
viewpoint of an entire race."

"I realize that, Frater," the commander admitted. He turned from the
window and faced the Assemblyman. "We're getting close to the Great Bay
now. That's where our ship landed on the second probing expedition. I
expect we'll be more welcome there than we have been, out here in the
countryside. We'll take it easy, and I think you'll have a chance to
work with the natives on a mass basis."

The Frater smiled. "Excellent, commander. I ... uh ... want you to
understand that I'm not trying to tell you your business; you run this
campaign as you see fit. But don't lose sight of the ultimate goal of
life."

"I won't. How could I? It's just that my methods are not, perhaps, as
refined as yours."

Frater Vincent nodded, still smiling. "True. You are a great deal more
direct. And--in your own way--just as effective. After all, the Assembly
could not function without the military, but there were armies long
before the Universal Assembly came into being."

The commander smiled back. "Not any armies like this, Frater."

Frater Vincent nodded. The understanding between the two men--at least
on that point--was tacit and mutual. He traced a symbol in the air and
left the commander to his thoughts.

Mentally, the commander went through the symbol-patterns that he had
learned as a child--the symbol-patterns that brought him into direct
contact with the Ultimate Power, the Power that controlled not only the
spinning of atoms and the whirling of electrons in their orbits, but the
workings of probability itself.

Once indoctrinated into the teachings of the Universal Assembly, any man
could tap that Power to a greater or lesser degree, depending on his
mental control and ethical attitude. At the top level, a first-class
adept could utilize that Power for telepathy, psychokinesis, levitation,
teleportation, and other powers that the commander only vaguely
understood.

