and a reduced atmospheric gravity, Dick."

"It's just our so-called statesmen, always yapping about the budget. But
this time we have the cost problem licked, too. For a year and a half
the ore they send up from Rythar has paid for our entire operation."

"I didn't know that."

"We've kept it under wraps, so the politicians wouldn't cut our
appropriations."

Their glass tubes were full, and they turned toward the door. "It isn't
right," the woman persisted, "for them not to send a piloted shuttle
after you, Dick. It isn't dignified. You're our assistant medical
director and--"

Her words were cut off as the door slid shut behind them. Mryna tried to
fit this new information into what she already knew--or thought she
knew--about the Earth-god. It didn't add up to a pretty picture. She had
once asked for a definition of illness, and it was apparent to her that
this place which they called the Guardian Wheel was an expensive
hospital for Earthmen. It was paid for by the sacrificial ores mined on
Rythar. In a sense, Rythar was being enslaved and exploited by Earth.
True, it was not difficult to dig out the ore, but Mryna resented the
fact that the kids on Rythar had not been told the truth. She had long
ago lost her awe of the man called god; now she lost her respect as
well.

Mryna was glad she had not seen him, glad no one knew she was aboard the
Guardian Wheel. She would return to Rythar. After she told the others
what she knew, Rythar would send up no more sacrifice ores. Let the
Earthmen come down and mine it for themselves!


Very cautiously she pulled the door open. The rim corridor was empty.
She moved toward one of the intersecting corridors. When she heard
footsteps, she hid in another dormitory room.

This was different from the others. It showed more evidence of permanent
occupation. She guessed it was a dormitory for the people who took care
of the sick. Pictures were fastened to the curved, metal walls. Personal
articles cluttered the shelves hung beside the bunks. On a writing desk
she saw a number of typed reports. Five freshly laundered uniforms,
identical to the one she had lost in the antiseptic wash, hung on a rack
behind the door. Mryna stripped off the makeshift she was wearing and
put on one of the uniforms; she found boots under the desk. When she was
dressed, she stood admiring herself in the polished surface of the metal
door.

She was a handsome woman, and she was very conscious of that. Her face
was tanned by the mist-filtered sunlight of Rythar; her lips were red
and sensuous; her long, platinum-colored hair fell to her shoulders. She
compared herself to the small, hard-faced female she had seen in the
supply room. Was that a typical Earthwoman? Mryna's lips curled in a
scornful smile. Let the gods come down to Rythar, then, and discover
what a real female was like in the lush, green, Rytharian paradise.

Mryna went to the desk and glanced at the typed reports. They had been
written by a man who signed himself "Commander in Charge, Guardian
Wheel," and they were addressed to the Congress of the world government.
One typed document was a supply inventory; a second, still unfinished,
was a budget report. (_You won't show a profit next time_, Mryna thought
vindictively, _when we stop sending you the sacrifice ore_.) Another
report dealt with Rythar, and Mryna read it with more interest.

One paragraph caught her attention,

"We have asked for soil samples to be taken from an area covering ten
thousand square miles. Our chemical analysis has been thorough, and we
find nothing that could be remotely harmful to human life. Atmospheric
samples produce the same negative results. On the other hand, we have
direct evidence that no animal life has ever evolved on Rythar; the life
cycle is exclusively botanical."

The soil samples, Mryna realized, would be the vials of Earth which the
Earth-god had requested so often. Were the Earthmen planning to move
their hospital down to Rythar? That idea disturbed her. Mryna did not
want her garden world cluttered up with a lot of sick, old men discarded
by Earth.

She turned to the second page of the report. "The original colony
survived for a year. The Sickness in the Old Village developed only
after the first harvest of Rytharian-grown food. It is more and more
evident that the botanical cycle of Rythar must be examined before we
find the answer. To do that adequately, we shall have to send survey
teams to the surface; that requires much larger appropriations for
research than we have had in the past. The metal immunization suits,
which must, of course, be destroyed after each expedition--"

"And what, may I ask, is the meaning of this?"


Mryna dropped the report and swung toward the door. She saw a woman
standing there--another hard-faced Earthwoman, with a starched, white
cap perched on her graying hair.

"I must have come to the wrong room," Mryna said in a small voice.

"Indeed! Everyone knows this is command headquarters. Who are you?" The
woman put her hand on Mryna's arm, and the fingers bit through the
uniform into Mryna's flesh.

Mryna pulled away, drawing her shoulders back proudly. Why should she
feel afraid? She stood a head taller than this dried up stranger; she
knew the Earthwoman's strength would be no match for hers.

"My name is Mryna Brill," she said quietly. "I came up in a god-car from
Rythar."

"Rythar?" The woman's mouth fell open. She whispered the word as if it
were profanity. Suddenly she turned and ran down the rim corridor,
screaming in terror.

