Voorhis visibly flinched and began to acquire a ruddy hue.

"And, finally, on the fuel load, the cost price of three hundred
thousand. Of course, Judge, there are detailed clauses as to normal use
of fuel. He was actually insured against defects, premature explosions,
accidental loss, et cetera."

Mayne did some addition in his head.

"So your company," he said aloud, "is prepared to pay two and a half
million for the loss sustained by Captain Voorhis. What seems to be
wrong with that?"

Both men began to talk but Melin, struggling less with temper, got the
lead.

"Actually," he said, "we feel liable for only three hundred thousand."

_Now it will get tough_, thought Mayne. He silently awaited elucidation.

The combined stares of all parties, including the enigmatic glance of
Eemakh, calmed the spluttering Voorhis. Melin continued.

"In the first place, the true value of the ship, even if we consider her
to be incapacitated--which we do not--is only about one hundred and
fifty thousand."

"She's worth more than that as scrap!" bellowed Voorhis.

"No, captain, just about that. It is exactly how we valued her. Do you
have any idea, Judge, of how old that crock is?"

"Let's not go into that just yet," suggested Mayne.

"As to the fuel," said Melin, "I am willing, as a gesture of good will,
to stick my company's neck out--and mine with it, you may be sure--and
honor a full claim."

"Even though he used about half the fuel getting here?" asked Mayne.

"We'll ignore that. We admit that he is out of fuel, and we want to--"

"You want to give me a moon and take a star," said Voorhis.

"Just a minute!" Mayne held up his hand. "That's the ship and the fuel.
What about the cargo?"

"Why, as to that, Judge, we do not admit that it is lost. It is right
over there, easily accessible. We consider it more the job of the Space
Force to restore rightful possession than it is the responsibility of
the company to reimburse Captain Voorhis for the inflated value he sets
upon it."

"I begin to see," murmured Mayne. "You can't stick each other, so you're
out to slip _me_ the bill."

That aroused a babble of denials. Mayne eventually made himself heard
and demanded to know how the spacer's evaluation differed from Melin's.
Voorhis pulled himself together, glowering at the insurance man.

       *       *       *       *       *

"In the first place," he growled, "I don't want his lousy payment for
fuel. I said I'd take the blame for that, an' I will. On the ship ...
well, maybe she ain't worth two million. Maybe she ain't been for a few
years now--"

Melin made a show of counting on his fingers.

"... But they charged me premiums by that figure an' I say they oughta
pay by that figure."

"But can you prove she's a total loss, captain?" asked Mayne.

Voorhis grimaced and spat upon the ground.

"Try to get near her, Judge! You'll get proof fast enough!"

"Well ... about the cargo, then?"

"_That's_ where he's gouging me!" exploded Voorhis. "The idea of using
the cost as of loading on Rigel IX! Hell, you know the margin of profit
there is in trading on these new planets, twenty to one at least. I
figured to lift off with four million worth of ores, gems, curios, and
whatnot."

"So your point is that the mere transportation of the goods through
space to this planet increased their value. What about that, Mr. Melin?"

Melin shifted uncomfortably on his bench. Mayne would have liked to
change his own position, but feared splinters.

"There is an element of truth in that," admitted Melin. "Still, it would
be rash to expect such a return every time a tramp spaceship lands to
swap with some aboriginal easy marks."

"I suppose," said Mayne, "that our orange-eyed friends speak no Terran?"

"I hope not!" exclaimed Voorhis.

"Well, anyway," Melin said after a startled pause, "how can we be
expected to pay off on hopes? He wants the paper figure for the ship;
but he refuses the paper figure for the cargo."

Mayne shrugged. He turned to Haruhiku.

"If Captain Voorhis and Mr. Melin don't mind, lieutenant, I'd like to
get the chief's view of all this."

"Hah!" grunted Voorhis, clapping both hands to his head.

Melin contented himself with rolling his eyes skyward.

With Haruhiku translating, Mayne began to get acquainted with the
Kappans. The visitor from the neighboring city chose mostly to listen
attentively, but Igrillik, the priest, occasionally leaned over to
whisper sibilantly into Eemakh's recessed ear. Mayne fancied he saw a
resemblance between the two, despite Igrillik's professional
trappings--a long robe of rough material that had been dyed in stripes
and figures of several crude colors, and a tall cap to which were
attached a number of pairs of membraneous wings.

[Illustration]

The first thing that Mayne learned was that the _Gemsbok_ was not a
spaceship; it was a symbol, a sign sent to the Kappans by the great god
