minutes later he was descending, hand over hand, on a swaying emergency
ladder.

"Tough-fibered Davie goes down to look around," he grumbled.

He was conscious that he was flirting with danger. The air outside was
breathable, but would the diffuse, unorthodox gases injure his lungs? He
didn't know, couldn't be sure. But he had to admit that he felt all
right _so far_. He was seventy feet below the ship and not at all dizzy.
When he looked down he could see the purple domed summits of mountains
between gaps in the fleecy cloud blanket.

He couldn't see the Atlantic Ocean--yet. He descended the last thirty
feet with mounting confidence. At the end of the ladder he braced
himself and let go.

He fell about six feet, landing on his rump on a spongy surface that
bounced him back and forth. He was vaguely incredulous when he found
himself sitting in the sky staring through his spread legs at clouds and
mountains.

He took a deep breath. It struck him that the sensation of falling could
be present without movement downward through space. He was beginning to
experience such a sensation. His stomach twisted and his brain spun.

He was suddenly sorry he had tried this. It was so damnably unnerving he
was afraid of losing all emotional control. He stared up, his eyes
squinting against the sun. Far above him the gleaming, wedge-shaped bulk
of the Perseus loomed colossally, blocking out a fifth of the sky.

Lowering his right hand he ran his fingers over the invisible surface
beneath him. The surface felt rubbery, moist.

He got swayingly to his feet and made a perilous attempt to walk through
the sky. Beneath his feet the mysterious surface crackled, and little
sparks flew up about his legs. Abruptly he sat down again, his face
ashen.

From the emergency 'chute opening far above a massive head appeared.
"You all right, sir," Slashaway called, his voice vibrant with concern.

"Well, I--"

"You'd better come right up, sir. Captain's orders."

"All right," Lawton shouted. "Let the ladder down another ten feet."

Lawton ascended rapidly, resentment smouldering within him. What right
had the skipper to interfere? He had passed the buck, hadn't he?

                *       *       *       *       *

Lawton got another bad jolt the instant he emerged through the 'chute
opening. Captain Forrester was leaning against a parachute rack gasping
for breath, his face a livid hue.

Slashaway looked equally bad. His jaw muscles were twitching and he was
tugging at the collar of his gym suit.

Forrester gasped: "Dave, I tried to move the ship. I didn't know you
were outside."

"Good God, you didn't know--"

"The rotaries backfired and used up all the oxygen in the engine room.
Worse, there's been a carbonic oxide seepage. The air is contaminated
throughout the ship. We'll have to open the ventilation valves
immediately. I've been waiting to see if--if you could breathe down
there. You're all right, aren't you? The air _is_ breathable?"

Lawton's face was dark with fury. "I was an experimental rat in the sky,
eh?"

"Look, Dave, we're all in danger. Don't stand there glaring at me.
Naturally I waited. I have my crew to think of."

"Well, think of them. Get those valves open before we all have
convulsions."

A half hour later charcoal gas was mingling with oxygen outside the
ship, and the crew was breathing it in again gratefully. Thinly
dispersed, and mixed with oxygen it seemed all right. But Lawton had
misgivings. No matter how attenuated a lethal gas is it is never
entirely harmless. To make matters worse, they were over the Atlantic
Ocean.

Far beneath them was an emerald turbulence, half obscured by eastward
moving cloud masses. The bubble was holding, but the morale of the crew
was beginning to sag.

Lawton paced the control room. Deep within him unsuspected energies
surged. "We'll last until the oxygen is breathed up," he exclaimed.
"We'll have four or five days, at most. But we seem to be traveling
faster than an ocean liner. With luck, we'll be in Europe before we
become carbon dioxide breathers."

"Will that help matters, Dave?" said the captain wearily.

"If we can blast our way out, it will."

The Captain's sagging body jackknifed erect. "Blast our way out? What do
you mean, Dave?"

"I've clamped expulsor disks on the cosmic ray absorbers and trained
them downward. A thin stream of accidental neutrons directed against the
bottom of the bubble may disrupt its energies--wear it thin. It's a
long gamble, but worth taking. We're staking nothing, remember?"

Forrester sputtered: "Nothing but our lives! If you blast a hole in the
bubble you'll destroy its energy balance. Did that occur to you? Inside
a lopsided bubble we may careen dangerously or fall into the sea before
we can get the rotaries started."

"I thought of that. The pilots are standing by to start the rotaries the
instant we lurch. If we succeed in making a rent in the bubble we'll
break out the helicoptic vanes and descend vertically. The rotaries
