will form, such as an electron. Duvall called these sub-particles
'lems'.

"Busch says he was told that a field of a special nature could be
generated so as to make the individual lems in the particles of matter
rotate in a special way that would introduce a 'polarization field', as
Duvall called it. This field seems to be connected somehow with gravity,
but Busch wasn't told how.

"The upshot is that matter in the _initial_ presence of the field is
affected so that it is able to pass through ordinary matter--"

"Hold on," interrupted Max. "If a device can do that, then the user
would immediately fall towards the center of the Earth."

"Just _you_ hold on. You didn't let me finish. A single plane of atoms,
at the base of the treated object is the point of contact. It remains
partially unaffected because it is closest to the 'gravetostatic field
center', which I guess is the Earth's center of attraction. This plane
of 'semi-treated' atoms can be forced through an object, if it is moved
horizontally, but its 'untreated' aspect prevents the subject wearing
the device from falling through the floor.

"Busch demonstrated this device to me, turning it on and strolling
through various objects in this room. Think of it! No soldier could be
killed or held prisoner. And--"

"Now hang on," objected Max. "Let's not run away with ourselves. He may
have perfected a device that would enable a soldier to avoid capture,
but there would certainly be other ways to kill him than by bullets.
Let's see now: suppose that the enemy shot a flamethrower at him. The
burning materials might pass through him, but he would be cooked anyway.
Or poison gas--"

"Hm-m-m. As far as gas goes, I suppose a gas mask would be necessary.
Busch doesn't know about the breathing mechanism, except that he had to
take breaths. But as far as fire or radiation goes, the man's protected.
If the radiation is either harmful by nature or by amount, the field
merely reflects it. It is something called the 'lemic stress' of the
field that causes the phenomenon.

"That's why we need your help."

Max scratched his head thoughtfully. "I don't understand."

Garvers looked pained. "When Busch had finished his demonstration, he
carelessly tossed the device on my desk. The thing skidded and hit my
paperweight so that the switch was thrown on again. So now the device
and my desk are both untouchable.

"Go over to the desk and try to touch it," said Garvers dryly.

His friend got up and ambled over to the desk. There he saw a small
black box resting near a paperweight. Its toggle switch was at the "on"
position, and it was lying on its side. He tried to pick the box up, but
his hand slid effortlessly through it as if it were so much air.

"_Well_!" Max said. He passed his hand through the desk again. "Well,
well. Are you sure Busch told you everything?"

"Busch! He honestly wants to help and we have taken him through the
mill. Pentathol, scopolamine and the like; hypnotism and the polygraph.
We've dug that man deeper than we have ever dug anybody before."

"And have you conducted any experiments of your own?"
