focused on the fleeting _now_--you know, in an academic sort of way,
that things are moving fast, you are moving fast yourself, but there
seems plenty of time to make decisions, to look things over and decide
what has to be done, to move precisely, with minimum effort and maximum
effect.

Whatever the thing at his feet was, it was out of the picture now--it
had not even twitched after the heavy bullet tore through it. There was
a stomping rush in the little thicket he had been watching. Ed took two
long quick steps to one side to clear a couple of trees, threw up the
gun and fired as something flashed across a thin spot in the brush. He
heard the whack of the bullet in flesh and fired again. Ordinarily he
did not like to shoot at things he could not see clearly, but this did
not seem the time to be overly finicky. There was no further movement in
the brush.

He stood there several long moments, listening, and there was no further
movement anywhere. He eased the hammer down, fed in three rounds to
replace those he had used, and walked slowly back to the first thing he
had shot.

At that range, the bullet had not opened up, but it had not needed to.
It had practically exploded the creature anyway--the .450 has two tons
of striking energy at the muzzle. From what was left, Ed deduced a
smallish, rabbit-sized thing, smooth-skinned, muscular, many-legged,
flattish, mottled to camouflage perfectly in the leaves. There was a
head at one end, mostly undamaged since it had been at the end of a long
muscular neck, with a pair of glazing beady eyes and a surprisingly
small mouth. When Ed pressed on the muscles at the base of the skull,
the mouth gaped roundly and a two-inch long spine slid smoothly out of
an inconspicuous slot just below it.

At middling distances or better, Ed could still see as well as ever, but
close up he needed help. He got out his pocket magnifier and studied the
spine. It looked hollow, grooved back for a distance from the point. A
drop of milky looking substance trembled on its tip.

Ed nodded thoughtfully to himself. This was what had made him uneasy, he
was pretty sure. What was the thing in the brush, then? Innocent
bystander? He got stiffly to his feet, conscious now of the ache in his
wrist that had taken most of the recoil of the first shot, the torn web
between his right thumb and forefinger where the hammer spur had bitten
in; and walked over to the thicket.

       *       *       *       *       *

The thing in the brush was larger, quite a bit larger, and the bullets
had not torn it up so badly. It lay sprawled with three of its eight
legs doubled under it, a bear-sized animal with a gaping, cavernous,
toothless mouth out of all proportion to the slender body which seemed
designed mainly as a frame for the muscular legs. It was not quite dead.
As Ed came up it struggled feebly to get up, but one of the heavy slugs
had evidently hit the spine, or whatever carried communications to the
hindquarters. It fell back, shuddering convulsively, and suddenly
regurgitated a small, furry animal.

Ed stepped back quickly to bring his rifle to bear, but the newest
arrival was obviously already dead.

He turned his attention back to the larger animal. It, too, was dead
now. There was an obvious family resemblance to the smaller one he had
shot in the leaves. Both were smooth-skinned, many-legged, and now that
he looked closely he could see this one had two mouths, a small one just
under the nostrils, purse-lipped and tiny in its huge face but quite
like that of the other creature. Neither looked even remotely like
anything he had ever seen before.

He laid down his rifle and took out his knife.

Ten minutes later, he knew quite a bit about the thing, but what he knew
did not make much sense. In the first place, its blood _was_ green, a
yellowish pussy green. In the second place, the larger mouth, complete
with jaws and impressive musculature, opened not into a digestive
system, but into a large closed pouch which comprised most of the
animal's torso. There was no proper digestive system at all, only a
rudimentary gut, heavily laced with blood vessels, terminating at one
end in the small second mouth, at the other in an even smaller anus.
Otherwise, the thing had no insides except a good pair of lungs and a
stout heart--none at all. Bone, muscle, lung, heart--plus the
ridiculously inadequate gut--that was it.

What about the small, furry, animal then; the one the other had been
carrying in its pouch? There was nothing much out-of-the-way about it--a
feline sort of carnivore, something like a marten. The fur looked
interesting, and he skinned it out, casing the hide. On the left ham,
the skin was punctured and there was a swollen, bluish area--about the
sort of wound that would be made by the fang of the first thing he had
shot. Ed squatted back on his heels, studying it and putting two and two
together. What two and two made was pretty hard to believe, but it
fitted the evidence.

He wiped his knife carefully on the grass, put it back in its sheath,
and got to his feet. Suddenly, the feeling that he was not alone
recurred. He looked quickly around.

Back where he had shot the first thing, a man in forest-green whipcord
trousers and jacket was leaning over, hands on knees, looking at the
remains. The man looked up and met Ed's eyes. He nodded casually and
walked over to the second thing, prodded it with his toe. After a long
moment he nodded again to Ed, smiled briefly, and winked out.

Ed stared at the empty air where the other man had been, mouth open. It
was just a little too much. A lot of things had happened to him in the
last few days, he had been able to take most of them more or less as
they came along, but after all, he wasn't a chicken any more, he was
pushing sixty, and there is a limit to what a man should have to put up
with at that age. The thought of his snug cabin, with a good fire going,
moosemeat bubbling in the pot, the gas lantern hissing, and the bottle
of Hudson's Bay rum he had tucked under the eaves against just such an
occasion as this, was suddenly very appealing.

Besides, it was getting late, and he didn't think he cared to be
stumbling around this world in the dark.

He elbowed his pack up, hooked the left shoulder strap, and headed for
home, staying off the trail in ordinary caution and watching his
footing, but moving pretty fast just the same.

Actually, he need not have been so careful.

The Harn had been surprised and shocked by the explosive violence of the
man's reaction to a routine harvesting maneuver. It was a relatively
young Harn, but it retained memories of its own world, where there were
also nasty, violent things which killed Harn. It was not pleasant to
think that it might have evoked some such monster in this hitherto
peaceful place.

Then, to top that, there had been the sudden appearance of the Warden.
The Harn, of course, saw the Warden not as a man, but in its true
aspect, which was not at all friendly.

All in all, this did not seem the moment to start any new adventures.
The Harn pulled in all its mobile units, including the stinger it had
left at the hole into the other world. It huddled protectively together
in its nest, considering these new developments.

       *       *       *       *       *

By ten that evening, Ed, in conference with old Tom and the bottle of
Hudson's Bay, had done considerable hard thinking, pro and con.

Of course, he didn't _have_ to go into the other world, just because the
hole was there. He could block it off, seal it up with timbers and
forget it.

He sat there and thought about this, absently smoothing the strange fur
on his knee. For an old-timer like himself, things weren't too hot in
