"Rocket ships!" Court was jarred out of his icy calm.

"You mean spaceships?" cried the doctor.

"Yes, Slade, they do," murmured the warden.

"Precisely," Lansing said. "When it looked as if the cold war would get
rather warm, the allied governments faced up to the fact that our
venerable planet might become a ... ah, a battle casualty. So, in
carefully selected regions, rather extensive preparations were made for
a hurried departure from this sector of the universe."

"Oh, come to the point!" Knox exploded. "All you people need to know is
that one of those regions is this area of the Rocky Mountains, that the
ships are built and ready to go, and that you're to get aboard. Fast!"

"That," nodded Lansing, "is it."

       *       *       *       *       *

The four prison officials looked at each other. Halloran and Court sat
quiet; Goldsmid slowly dropped his eyes to the ground and his lips
moved. Slade scratched his chin.

"Going to Mars, hey?" he asked abruptly.

"That's our destination."

The doctor chuckled. "Comic-book stuff," he chortled.

"No, it isn't," Halloran said. "We've been expecting something like this
for a long time. Haven't we?"

"Indeed we have," Goldsmid said. "Expecting, but not quite believing."

Halloran looked thoughtfully at the physicist. "Dr. Lansing, these ships
of yours ... they're pretty big, I take it?"

"Not as big as we like. They never are. But they'll do. Why?"

"I should remind you that we have well over two thousand inmates here."

"Inmates!" barked the general. "Who the devil said anything about your
inmates? Think we'll take a lot of convicts to Mars! Populate it with
killers, thieves--"

"Who does go, then?" Halloran did not raise his voice but Knox looked
suddenly uneasy.

"Why ... uh, your operating personnel," he replied gruffly. "Your
guards, clerks ... hell, man, it's obvious, isn't it?"

"I'm afraid that is out," Goldsmid said. "For me, that is." He stood up,
a heavy-shouldered middleweight running a little to fat. "Excuse me,
warden, my counseling period's coming up."

"Sit down, Pete," Halloran said quietly. "We haven't finished this
conference."

"I admire your sentiments, Rabbi," Lansing said hurriedly, "but surely
you realize that we can't take any criminal elements to ... ah, what
will be our new world. And we do have a special need for you. We've
plenty of your co-religionists among our various personnel, but we don't
have an ordained minister for them. They're your responsibility."

"Afraid my first responsibility is here." Goldsmid's voice was quite
matter-of-fact.

"So's mine," grunted Slade. "Warden, even if the world ends tomorrow,
I've got to get Squeaker Hanley's gall bladder out today. No point in my
hanging around any longer is there?"

"Of course there is," Halloran answered. He took a package of cigarettes
from his pocket, selected one, and lit it. He exhaled smoke and looked
speculatively at Lansing. The scientist felt himself blushing and looked
away.

Halloran turned to Court.

"Quite a problem, isn't it, Alfred," he said. "I suppose these gentlemen
are right in keeping the inmates off their ships. At any rate, _we_
can't argue the matter--so let's do what we're asked. I think you'd
better plan to get the guards out of here tonight, at shift change.
Might pass the word to their wives now, so they can start packing a few
essentials. Doc," he turned to Slade, "before you get your greedy hands
on Squeaker's gall bladder, you'd better round up your staff and have
them make the proper arrangements."

"O.K., I'll put it up to them."

"You'll _not_ put it up to them," the warden said sharply. "You'll
_order_ them to be ready when the general, here, wants them."

"I'll give no orders," Slade said grimly.

"Just a minute," interposed Court. "Sir, aren't you going?"

"Of course not. But that's neither here nor there--"

The loud clangor of a bell pealed through the room. The two visitors
jumped.

"What's that?" cried Knox.

"Yard time," Halloran smiled. "The men are allowed two hours out in the
yard, now. They exercise, play games, or just sit around and talk."

"Oh."

"Did I understand you correctly, Warden Halloran?" Lansing's bony face
was pale now. "Do you refuse to come with us?"

       *       *       *       *       *

When the bell rang, Joe Mario had been standing near the door to the
warden's office, ostensibly filing reports. Now, he closed the drawer
with a bang, stretched, and started toward the outside door.

"Where are you going?" the guard asked suspiciously.

"The yard. Where else?"

"Not a word," Mario added virtuously. "I was too busy doin' my work.
Anyway, you gotta let me out. My team's got a ball game set for this
afternoon."

"Oh ... all right." He looked at the typists. "How about you two? Want
out?"

The two men glanced quickly at each other, then shoved back their chairs
and got up from their desks.

"Sure," one of them grinned, "I guess we'll take a little air."

       *       *       *       *       *

Lansing had the feeling he used to have occasionally, back in his
university days when he lectured on freshman physics--as if he were
talking to a class of deaf students. For, like the hapless freshmen,
Warden Halloran was quite obviously not listening to him. But the
