time they led him through the door. They seemed glad to get away.

"The Blackout," the TK said musingly to me. "You hear about it, and the
Psiless cringe when they think it might happen to them. But you don't
see it every day. You're in the Lodge, of course?" he added.

"Of course," I said coldly.

"Please," he said, waving a hand at me. "Don't take it so big. So am I."
From five feet apart we exchanged the grip, the tactile password
impossible for the Psiless to duplicate--just a light tug at each
other's ear lobes, but perfect identification as TK's. "I'm Fowler
Smythe," he said. "Twenty-fifth degree," he added, flexing his TK
muscles. "What is it, buster? You on Crap Patrol?"

I paused before I answered. Twenty-fifth degree? Since when could a
gambling casino afford a full-time Twenty-fifth? TK's in the upper
degrees come high. I had already figured my fee at a hundred thousand a
day, if I straightened out the casino's losses to the cross-roader.

"Wally Bupp," I said at last, deciding there was no point to trying some
cover identity. My gimpy right wing was a dead giveaway. "Thirty-_third_
degree," I added.

He had a crooked grin, out of place beneath his scholarly glasses. "I've
heard of Wally Bupp," he admitted. Well, he should have. There aren't so
many Thirty-thirds hanging around. "And you are young, smug and snotty
enough to play the part," he concluded without heat. "Still, that's all
it might be, just play-acting, with Barney going through the motions of
being blind. You could be outside the Lodge, sonny. Any cross-roader who
can tip dice the way you were working them can twitch an ear. Let's see
some credentials."

He scuffed through the sawdust to the bar and took a stack of silver
dollars from his apron. He held them, dealerwise, in the palm of his
hand, with his fingertips down, so that they were a column surrounded by
a fence of fingers.

"How many?" he asked.

I shrugged. "The whole stack, Smythe," I told him. His eyebrows went
halfway up his tall, tall forehead. But he put them all down on the bar
top, about twenty-five silver dollars. "Show me," I said.

He ran his fingertips down the side of the stack of silver. Another
tactile. Well, he certainly wasn't much of a perceptive, or he would
have been able to handle the Blackout himself. He closed his eyes for
the hard lift. Some do that. The coins came up off the mahogany an inch
or so, and made a solid smack when the lift broke and he dropped them
back. Not very impressive work for a Twenty-fifth degree. The coins
spilled over.

       *       *       *       *       *

I used the excuse of straightening up the stack to get a touch, myself.
I could have done it visually, of course, or I could have straightened
them up with TK, but touch helps my grip. I took a good look at the door
to the main casino, a heavy job of varnished native cedar. Just to show
him, I turned my back on the bar, leaning against it with one foot on
the brass rail. The lift was as clean as I've ever managed. Anger, fear,
any strong emotion, is a big help. They came up all together, staying in
a stack, and I could perceive that they hung in the air behind me, a
good foot clear of the bar, and about twenty feet from the door to the
casino. In a smug show of control, I dealt the cartwheels off the top of
the stack, one at a time, and fired them hard. Each one snapped away
from the hovering stack, like a thrown discus. My perception was of the
best. Each coin knifed into the soft cedar of the door, burying itself
about halfway. My best sustained lift, I suppose is about two hundred
times the weight of a silver dollar. But with the lift split by the need
to keep the stack together, about twenty gees was all the shove I gave
the cartwheels. Still, you might figure out how fast those cartwheels
were traveling after moving twenty feet across the bar at an
acceleration of twenty gees.

Smythe gasped. I doubted he had ever seen better, even in the controlled
conditions of Lodge Meeting. "A little something to remember me by," I
said, as I opened the silver-studded door. "Now let's see the boss."

"You're a TK bruiser," he said, impressed. "If you hit Barney's eyes
like that, he's a Blind Tom for fair."

"Hardly," I sniffed. "You ought to know that no respectable TK would lay
a lift on a retina. I just squeezed off a couple of small arteries. He's
back in business already, I'd say."

Had I mentioned the rustic _decor_ of the Sky Hi Club? When Las Vegas
had deteriorated to the point where it would turn most stomachs, the
better clubs migrated up among the tall pines, along the shores of Lake
Tahoe. And in place of the dated chromium glitter of Vegas, they had
reached way back to the "Good old days" for styling. The Sky Hi Club was
typical. The outside was all hand-hewn logs. The inside had a low,
rough-beamed ceiling, and a sure-enough genuine wood floor. The planks
were random-width, tree nailed to the joists. Even the help was dressed
up like a lot of cow-pokes, whatever cow-pokes were.

This ersatz ranch-house was owned by two completely unlovelies. Peno
Rose, who had used his political leverage to get me on the job, I had
known since he'd been a policy number runner on the lower East Side. His
partner, Simonetti, was something else, but somehow I wasn't looking
forward to meeting him any more than I was to seeing Rose again.

I guess it's the filth within these croupier types that makes them
surround themselves with the aseptic immaculacy of iridium and glass.
Their office was in a penthouse perched on the slanting roof shakes of
the casino. It was big as a squash court, and as high and as square.
Every wall was glass. It couldn't have been in greater contrast to the
contrived hominess of the casino if they'd thought about it for a year.
Then, for the last twist, the furnishings were straight out of the old
Southwest--Navajo rugs, heavy, Spanish oak desks, and a pair of matching
couches or divans of whole steer leather stretched over oak frames.

       *       *       *       *       *

Peno Rose came quickly toward me the moment Fowler Smythe showed me into
the office, spurs jingling. "Hey! There he is! The boy they had to rule
off the track! How's a boy, Lefty? Long time no see." He had his hand
stuck way out ahead of him. His sharp, dried-out features repelled me
twice as much as they had ten years before. That hatchet face of his was
gashed with what he thought was a smile. I've seen sharks with a
pleasanter gape. Naturally, I didn't take his hand.

"Hi, Peno," I said. He jerked his hand back and straightened up. He
snapped the hole in his face shut.

"My partner," he said, waving his hand at the dark-skinned gent standing
over against one of the fumed oak desks. "Sime, meet Lefty Bupp, the
hottest TK artist with dice in the whole damned country!"

Simonetti leaned against the desk. He drew a zipper open in his fancy
blouse, dragged out the Bull Durham and started to roll his own. They
watch too much TV. It makes terrible hams of them all. He spat on the
floor.

"A living doll," I said. I took a better look at this honey. Face it, he
was an oily snake, cleaned up as much as possible, but not enough. No
amount of dude ranch duds, gold spurs or Indian jewelry could hide his
stiletto mentality. He was just a Tenderloin hoodlum with some of the
scum scraped off. Well, I should know. So was I.

Simonetti finished licking the seam of his roach. He came forward as he
lit it and blew too much smoke in my face. "What you doing here?" he
said in a husky voice. "I told Rose no dice. We need another TK like we
need a hole in the head."

"You think I _want_ to be in this trap?" I snapped at him. "Say the
word, Tex, and I'm gone."

"You're fired," he said huskily. "Scram!"

I started for the door, glad to be rid of the lot of them. Peno Rose
beat me to it. He showed me several rows of teeth, the way sharks will.
"Half of this joint is mine," he snarled, holding a hand lightly against
my chest. He knew me better than to push. "_My_ half is hiring you."

The whiff of garlic over my shoulder told me that Simonetti had followed
me, too. He didn't have any reservations about grabbing me and twisting
me around and giving me a real face-full.

"If you know what's good for you, you'll get out of here."

"Freak?" I said, laying it on his mitral valve. After his heart had
missed about eight beats, he started to sink, and I quit the lift. "Be
polite, Simonetti," I said to the panic in his yellowish face. "Next
time I'll pinch down tight. The coroner will call it heart failure.
Tough."

He wanted his stiletto. He needed it. He was sorry he had ever quit
carrying it. A couple seconds of reflection told him I was too tough for
him. He went for his partner, his face darkening with rage now that his
heart could get some blood to it. He had his hands out, for Rose's
throat, I guess. For my dough it took guts to put fingers that close to
all those teeth. But he never got a chance to try it. An ashtray, one of
those things with a shot-loaded cloth bag under it, flew off a desk,
smacked him in the back of the head, and dropped to the floor with a
thump.
