the phrase a dozen times and each time Brandon acknowledged, swore and
acknowledged again. Finally, in desperation, he switched off the
tele-talkie.

He snapped open the back of the unit and studied the maze of
transistors, resistors, and capacitators. If there was something wrong
it was subtle, like a burned out resistor or a shorted condenser.
Whatever it was, it was beyond emergency repair. He dropped the
tele-talkie behind the seat and examined the gauge on his oxygen tank.
There was enough to last the night but not much more.

He sat down in the capsule to think. The first thing they'd locate is
the burning ship, he decided. Then they would probably start searching
in ever-widening circles. But would they see him in the faint light of
the ice moons?

He looked back at the nylon chute again. Another thought ran through his
mind. Suppose they don't spot me in the dark. When the sun--Sirius, I
mean--comes up, there's a good chance they'll spot the parachute and
search for him.

He slid the canopy open and looked down at the red soil of Sirius Three.
He hesitated for a moment, then swung his feet over the side and dropped
to the ground.

"At least I'll have that satisfaction," he said, grinning under his
oxygen mask.

Very much aware of gravity after years of weightlessness, he walked to
the canopy of the chute and spread it out on the flat ground in a full
circle. It billowed in the wind. He searched around, found some glassy
black rocks and anchored down the chute.

Then he looked at the orange glow that marked the funeral pyre of the
ship. He had a decision to make; stay here with the capsule or head for
the fire.

Couldn't be more than a thousand yards away, he decided. Charging a
walk-around oxygen bottle, he transferred his oxygen hose to it. He
snapped the survival kit to his belt and picked up the tele-talkie.

The ship was more than a thousand yards away. The first mile was across
flat desert. He picked his way cautiously, his boots churning up clouds
of powdery dust. He remembered the Russian reports of the weird and
deadly creatures they had encountered in the Martian deserts.

But aside from a few gray patches of brush there seemed to be no sign of
life. After all, he thought, the Earth held no life for the better part
of its existence. And Towers had selected this planet because it bore
relatively the same relationship to the brighter, hotter Sirius as did
the Earth to the sun. While farther away it should have approximately
the same conditions as did the Earth. And it had seas, not as large as
on Earth, but seas, nevertheless.


Yet there was a fallacy in the argument. Presumably all of the stars in
the outer arms of the Milky Way and their planets were about the same
age. With similar conditions as the Earth, life must have been born and
walked out of the seas of Sirius Three just as it did on Earth.

Something scurried into a wisp of brush, as if to bear out Brandon's
realization. He froze, his eyes on the brush, his hand reaching for his
hydro-static shock pistol. He could hear nothing but the wind hollowing
his ears. He stood for a long moment, then cautiously skirted the brush,
and continued on toward the burning ship. There was an odd clicking
sound and he stopped. It sounded again. Brandon realized he was
perspiring despite the chill of the desert night. Again he moved on, the
sound fading in the distance behind him.

The next mile brought him to a great sheet of ancient lava laid bare by
the elements. He climbed to the top. The fire still seemed to be about a
thousand yards ahead, beyond a ridge of low hills.

A distant flare lit up the sky ahead of him. It glowed for a few moments
and died. They've found the ship, he thought. After four years, I had
completely forgotten about the store of photo-flash flares.

He watched for awhile but saw no more flares. Finally he scrambled down
the other side of the lava sheet and continued on toward the wreck,
moving slowly but steadily.

The third mile brought him to the scene of the crash. A smoking cylinder
of fused metal lay in a gully. Parts were strewn along the bottom. A
wing, untouched by the fire, was leaning tip down against the edge of
another lava sheet some distance away.

He sat down. Another flare flashed in the sky behind him silhouetting a
row of grotesque trees. I'm over here, you fools, he thought. He watched
until the flare flickered out, then turned his head back toward the
remains of the ship. There wasn't much of a glow to it now. It would be
hard to see unless Astro was right on top of it.
