_magnesia_, and afterwards dissipated by the fire, seem to have carried
off a small part of the fixed earth of this substance. This is probably
the reason, why calcined _magnesia_ is saturated with a quantity of
acid, somewhat less than what is required to dissolve it before
calcination: and the same may be assigned as one cause which hinders us
from restoring the whole of its original weight, by solution and
precipitation.

I took care to dilute the vitriolic acid, in order to avoid the heat and
ebullition which it would otherwise have excited in the water; and I
chose a Florentine flask, on account of its lightness, capacity, and
shape, which is peculiarly adapted to the experiment; for the vapours
raised by the ebullition circulated for a short time, thro' the wide
cavity of the vial, but were soon collected upon its sides, like dew,
and none of them seemed to reach the neck, which continued perfectly dry
to the end of the experiment.

We now perceive the reason, why crude and calcined _magnesia_, which
differ in many respects from one another, agree however in composing the
same kind of salt, when dissolved in any particular acid; for the crude
_magnesia_ seems to differ from the calcined chiefly by containing a
considerable quantity of air, which air is unavoidably dissipated and
lost during the dissolution.

From our experiments, it seems probable, that the increase of weight
which some metals acquire, by being first dissolved in acids, and then
separated from them again by alkalis, proceeds from air furnished by the
alkalis. And that in the _aurum fulminans_, which is prepared by the
same means, this air adheres to the gold in such a peculiar manner,
that, in a moderate degree of heat, the whole of it recovers its
elasticity in the same instant of time; and thus, by the violent shock
which it gives to the air around, produces the loud crack or fulmination
of this powder. Those who will imagine the explosion of such a minute
portion of fixed air, as can reside in the _aurum fulminans_, to be
insufficient for the excessive loudness of the noise, will consider,
that it is not a large quantity of motion communicated to the air, but
rather a smart stroke which produces sound, and that the explosion of
but a few particles of fixed air may be capable of causing a loud noise,
provided they all recover their spring suddenly, and in the same
instant.

The above experiments lead us also to conclude, that volatile alkalis,
and the common absorbent earths, which lose their air by being joined to
acids, but shew evident signs of their having recovered it, when
separated from them by alkalis, received it from these alkalis which
lost it in the instant of their joining with the acid.

The following are a few experiments upon three of the absorbent earths,
made in order to compare them with one another, and with _magnesia_.

Suspecting that _magnesia_ might possibly be no other than a common
calcarious earth, which had changed its nature, by having been
previously combined with an acid, I saturated a small quantity of chalk
with the muriatic acid, separated the acid from it again by means of a
fixed alkali, and carefully washed away the whole of the salt.

The chalk when dryed was not found to have suffered any alteration; for
it effervesced with the vitriolic acid, but did not dissolve in it; and
when exposed to a violent fire, was converted into a quick-lime, in all
respects similar to that obtained from common chalk.

In another experiment of the same kind, I used the vitriolic acid with
the same event.

Any calcarious matter reduced to a fine powder, and thrown into a warm
solution of alum, immediately raises a brisk effervescence. But the
powder is not dissolved; it is rather increased in bulk: and if the
addition be repeated until it is no longer accompanied with
effervescence, the liquor loses all taste of the alum, and yields only a
very light cloud upon the admixture of an alkali.

From this experiment we learn, that acids attract the calcarious earths
more strongly than they do the earth of alum; and as the acid in this
salt is exactly the same with the vitriolic, it composes with the
calcarious earth a neutral substance, which is very difficultly soluble
in water, and therefore falls down to the bottom of the vessel along
with the earth of alum which is deprived of its acid. The light cloud
formed by the alkali proceeds from the minute portion of the calcarious
compound which saturates the water.

The earth of animal bones, when reduced to a fine powder and thrown into
a diluted vitriolic acid, gradually absorbs the acid in the same manner
as the calcarious earths, but without any remarkable effervescence. When
it is added to the nitrous or to the muriatic acid, it is slowly
dissolved. The compound liquor thence produced is extremely acrid, and
still changes the colour of the juice of violets to a red, even after it
is fully saturated with the absorbent. Distilled vinegar has little or
no effect upon this earth; for after a long digestion it still retains
its sour taste, and gives only a light cloud upon the addition of an
alkali.

By dropping a dissolved fixed alkali into a warm solution of alum, I
obtained the earth of this salt, which, after being well washed and
dried, was found to have the following properties.

It is dissolved in every acid but very slowly, unless assisted by heat.
The several solutions, when thoroughly saturated, are all astringent
with a slight degree of an acid taste, and they also agree with a
solution of alum in this, that they give a red colour to the infusion of
turnsol.

Neither this earth, nor that of animal bones, can be converted into
quick-lime by the strongest fire, nor do they suffer any change worth
notice. Both of them seem to attract acids but weakly, and to alter
their properties less when united to them than the other absorbents.




PART II.


In reflecting afterwards upon these experiments, an explication of the
nature of lime offered itself, which seemed to account, in an easy
manner, for most of the properties of that substance.

It is sufficiently clear, that the calcarious earths in their native
state, and that the alkalis and magnesia in their ordinary condition,
contain a large quantity of fixed air, and this air certainly adheres to
them with considerable force, since a strong fire is necessary to
separate it from magnesia, and the strongest is not sufficient to expel
it entirely from fixed alkalis, or take away their power of effervescing
with acid salts.

These considerations led me to conclude, that the relations between
fixed air and alkaline substances was somewhat similar to the relation
between these and acids; that as the calcarious earths and alkalis
attract acids strongly and can be saturated with them, so they also
attract fixed air, and are in their ordinary state saturated with it:
and when we mix an acid with an alkali or with an absorbent earth, that
the air is then set at liberty, and breaks out with violence; because
the alkaline body attracts it more weakly than it does the acid, and
because the acid and air cannot both be joined to the same body at the
same time.

I also imagined, that, when the calcarious earths are exposed to the
action of a violent fire, and are thereby converted into quick-lime,
they suffer no other change in their composition than the loss of a
small quantity of water and of their fixed air. The remarkable acrimony
which we perceive in them after this process, was not supposed to
proceed from any additional matter received in the fire, but seemed to
be an essential property of the pure earth, depending on an attraction
for those several substances which it then became capable of corroding
or dissolving, which attraction had been insensible as long as the air
adhered to the earth, but discovered itself upon the separation.

This supposition was founded upon an observation of the most frequent
consequences of combining bodies in chemistry. Commonly when we join two
bodies together, their acrimony or attraction for other substances
becomes immediately either less perceivable or entirely insensible;
altho' it was sufficiently strong and remarkable before their union, and
may be rendered evident again by disjoining them. A neutral salt, which
is composed of an acid and alkali, does not possess the acrimony of
either of its constituent parts. It can easily be separated from water,
has little or no effect upon metals, is incapable of being joined to
inflammable bodies, and of corroding and dissolving animals and
vegetables; so that the attraction both of the acid and alkali for these
several substances seems to be suspended till they are again separated
from one another.

Crude lime was therefore considered as a peculiar acrid earth rendered
mild by its union with fixed air: and quick-lime as the same earth, in
which, by having separated the air, we discover that acrimony or
attraction for water, for animal, vegetable, and for inflammable
substances.

That the calcarious earths really lose a large quantity of air when they
are burnt to quick-lime, seems sufficiently proved by an experiment of
Mr. _Margraaf_,[6] an exceedingly accurate and judicious Chemist. He
subjected eight ounces of _osteocolla_ to distillation in an earthen
retort, finishing his process with the most violent fire of a
reverberatory, and caught in the receiver only two drams of water, which
by its smell and properties shewed itself to be slightly alkaline. He
does not tell us the weight of the _osteocolla_ remaining in the retort,
and only says, that it was converted into quick-lime; but as no
calcarious earth can be converted into quick-lime, or bear the heat
which he applied without losing above a third of its weight, we may
safely conclude, that the loss in his experiment was proportional, and
proceeded chiefly from the dissipation of fixed air.

According to our theory, the relation of the calcarious earth to air and
water appeared to agree with the relation of the same earth to the
vitriolic and vegetable acids. As chalk for instance has a stronger
attraction for the vitriolic than for the vegetable acid, and is
dissolved with more difficulty when combined with the first, than when
joined to the second: so it also attracts air more strongly than water,
and is dissolved with more difficulty when saturated with air than when
