warily, "I don't understand."

"Genoa, if you'll pardon the use of this name to signify the planet upon
which we reside, will never advance until trade has been freed from
these bandits who call themselves lords and barons."

Eyebrows reached for hairlines.

Olderman's eyes darted about the room, went to the doors. "Please," he
said, "the servants."

"My servants are safe," Mayer said.

One of his guests was smiling without humor. "You seem to forget,
Honorable Mayer, that I carry the title of baron."

Mayer shook his head. "No, Baron Leonar. But neither do you disagree
with what I say. The businessman, the merchant, the manufacturer on
Genoa today, is only tolerated. Were it not for the fact that the barons
have no desire to eliminate such a profitable source of income, they
would milk us dry overnight."

Someone shrugged. "That is the way of things. We are lucky to have
wrested, bribed and begged as many favors from the lords as we have. Our
twenty cities all have charters that protect us from complete
despoilation."

Mayer twisted excitedly in his chair. "As of today, things begin to
change. Jerry, that platen press."

Jerry Kennedy left the room momentarily and returned with Martin Gunther
and two of the servants. While the assembled merchants looked on, in
puzzled silence, Mayer's assistants set up the press and a stand holding
two fonts of fourteen-point type. Jerry took up a printer's stick and
gave running instructions as he demonstrated. Gunther handed around
pieces of the type until all had examined it, while his colleague set up
several lines. Kennedy transposed the lines to a chase, locked it up and
placed the form to one side while he demonstrated inking the small
press, which was operated by a foot pedal. He mounted the form in the
press, took a score of sheets of paper and rapidly fed them, one by one.
When they were all printed, he stopped pumping and Gunther handed the
still wet finished product around to the audience.

Olderman stared down at the printed lines, scowled in concentration, wet
his lips in sudden comprehension.

But it was merchant Russ who blurted, "This will revolutionize the
inscribing of books. Why, it can well take it out of the hands of the
Temple! With such a machine I could make a hundred books--"

Mayer was beaming. "Not a hundred, Honorable, but a hundred thousand!"

The others stared at him as though he was demented. "A hundred
thousand," one said. "There are not that many literate persons on the
continent."

"There will be," Mayer crowed. "This is but one of our levers to pry
power from the barons. And here is another." He turned to Russ.
"Honorable Russ, your city is noted for the fine quality of its steel,
of the swords and armor you produce."

Russ nodded. He was a small man fantastically rich in his attire. "This
is true, Honorable Mayer."

Mayer said, tossing a small booklet to the other, "I have here the plans
for a new method of making steel from pig iron. The Bessemer method,
we'll call it. The principle involved is the oxidation of the impurities
in the iron by blowing air through the molten metal."

Amschel Mayer turned to still another. "And your town is particularly
noted for its fine textiles." He looked to his assistants. "Jerry, you
and Gunther bring in those models of the power loom and the spinning
jenny."

While they were gone, he said, "My intention is to assist you to speed
up production. With this in mind, you'll appreciate the automatic flying
shuttle that we'll now demonstrate."

Kennedy and Gunther re-entered accompanied by four servants and a mass
of equipment. Kennedy muttered to Amschel Mayer, "I feel like the
instructor of a handicrafts class."

Half an hour later, Kennedy and Gunther wound up passing out pamphlets
to the awed merchant guests. Kennedy said, "This booklet will give
details on construction of the equipment and its operation."

Mayer pursed his lips. "Your people will be able to assimilate only so
fast, so we won't push them. Later, you'll be interested in introducing
the mule spinning frame, among other items."

He motioned for the servants to remove the printing press and textile
machinery. "We now come to probably the most important of the devices I
have to introduce to you today. Because of size and weight, I've had
constructed only a model. Jerry!"

Jerry Kennedy brought to the heavy table a small steam engine, clever in
its simplicity. He had half a dozen attachments for it. Within moments
he had the others around him, as enthusiastic as a group of youngsters
with a new toy.

"By the Supreme," Baron Leonar blurted, "do you realize this device
could be used instead of waterpower to operate a mill to power the loom
demonstrated an hour ago?"

Honorable Russ was rubbing the side of his face thoughtfully. "It might
even be adapted to propel a coach. A coach without horses.
Unbelievable!"

Mayer chuckled in excitement and clapped his hands. A servant entered
with a toy wagon which had been slightly altered. Martin Gunther lifted
the small engine, placed it in position atop the wagon, connected it
quickly and threw a lever. The wagon moved smoothly forward, the first
engine-propelled vehicle of Genoa's industrial revolution.

Martin Gunther smiled widely at Russ. "You mean like this, Honorable?"

Half an hour later they were re-seated, before each of them a small pile
of pamphlets, instructions, plans, blueprints.

Mayer said, "I have just one more device to bring to your attention at
this time. I wish it were unnecessary but I am afraid otherwise."

He held up for their inspection, a forty-five-caliber bullet. Jerry
Kennedy handed around samples to the merchants. They fingered them in
puzzlement.

"Honorables," Mayer said, "the barons have the use of gunpowder. Muskets
and muzzleloading cannon are available to them both for their wars
against each other and their occasional attacks upon our supposedly
independent cities. However, this is an advancement on their weapons.
This unit includes not only the bullet's lead, but the powder and the
cap which will explode it."

They lacked understanding, and showed it.

Mayer said, "Jerry, if you'll demonstrate."

Jerry Kennedy said, "The bullet can be adapted to various weapons,
however, this is one of the simplest." He pressed, one after another, a
full twenty rounds into the gun's clip.

"Now, if you'll note the silhouette of a man I've drawn on the wooden
frame at the end of the room." He pressed the trigger, sent a single
shot into the figure.

Olderman nodded. "An improvement in firearms. But--"

Kennedy said, "However, if you are confronted with more than one of the
bad guys." He grinned and flicked the gun to full automatic and in a
Gotterdammerung of sound in the confines of the room, emptied the clip
into his target sending splinters and chips flying and all but
demolishing the wooden backdrop.

His audience sat back in stunned horror at the demonstration.

Mayer said now, "The weapon is simple to construct, any competent
gunsmith can do it. It is manifest, Honorables, that with your people so
equipped your cities will be safe from attack and so will trading
caravans and ships."

Russ said shakily, "Your intention is good, Honorable Mayer, however it
will be but a matter of time before the barons have solved the secrets
of your weapon. Such cannot be held indefinitely. Then we would again be
at their mercy."

"Believe me, Honorable," Mayer said dryly, "by that time I will have new
weapons to introduce, if necessary. Weapons that make this one a very
toy in comparison."

Olderman resumed his office as spokesman. "This demonstration has
astounded us, Honorable Mayer, but although we admire your abilities it
need hardly be pointed out that it seems unlikely all this could be the
product of one brain."

"They are not mine," Mayer admitted. "They are the products of many
minds."

"But where--?"

The Earthman shook his head. "I don't believe I will tell you now."

"I see." The Genoese eyed him emotionlessly. "Then the question
becomes, _why_?"

Mayer said, "It may be difficult for you to see, but the introduction of
each of these will be a nail in feudalism's coffin. Each will increase
either production or trade and such increase will lead to the overthrow
of feudal society."

Baron Leonar, who had remained largely silent throughout the afternoon,
now spoke up. "As you said earlier, although I am a lord myself, my
interests are your own. I am a merchant first. However, I am not sure I
want the changes these devices will bring. Frankly, Honorable Mayer, I
am satisfied with my world as I find it today."

Amschel Mayer smiled wryly at him. "I am afraid you _must_ adapt to
these new developments."

The baron said coldly, "Why? I do not like to be told I must do
something."

"Because, my dear baron, there are three continents on the planet of
Genoa. At present there is little trade due to inadequate shipping. But
the steam engine I introduce today will soon propel larger craft than
you have ever built before."

Russ said, "What has this to do with our being forced to use these
devices?"

"Because I have colleagues on the other continents busily introducing
them. If you don't adapt, in time competitors will invade your markets,
capture your trade, drive you out of business."

Mayer wrapped it up. "Honorables, modernize or go under. It's each man
for himself and the devil take the hindmost, if you'll allow a saying
from another era."

They remained silent for a long period. Finally Olderman stated bluntly,
"The barons are not going to like this."

Jerry Kennedy grinned. "Obviously, that's why we've introduced you to
the tommy gun. It's not going to make any difference if they like it or
not."

Russ said musingly, "Pressure will be put to prevent the introduction of
this equipment."

"We'll meet it," Mayer said, shifting happily in his seat.

Russ added, "The Temple is ever on the side of the barons. The monks
will fight against innovations that threaten to disturb the present
way."

Mayer said, "Monks usually do. How much property is in the hands of the
Temple?"

Russ admitted sourly, "The monks are the greatest landlords of all. I
would say at least one third of the land and the serfs belong to the
Temple."

"Ah," Mayer said. "We must investigate the possibilities of a
Reformation. But that can come later. Now I wish to expand on my reason
for gathering you.

"Honorables, Genoa is to change rapidly. To survive, you will have to
move fast. I have not introduced these revolutionary changes without
self-interest. Each of you are free to use them to his profit, however,
I expect a thirty per cent interest."

There was a universal gasp.

Olderman said, "Honorable Mayer, you have already demonstrated your
devices. What is there to prevent us from playing you false?"

Mayer laughed. "My dear Olderman, I have other inventions to reveal as
rapidly as you develop the technicians, the workers, capable of building
and operating them. If you cheat me now, you will be passed by next
time."

Russ muttered, "Thirty per cent! Your wealth will be unbelievable."

"As fast as it accumulates, Honorables, it shall be invested. For
instance, I have great interest in expanding our inadequate
universities. The advances I expect will only be possible if we educate
the people. Field serfs are not capable of running even that simple
steam engine Jerry demonstrated."

Baron Leonar said, "What you contemplate is mind-shaking. Do I
understand that you wish a confederation of all our cities? A joining
together to combat the strength of the present lords?"

Mayer was shaking his head. "No, no. As the barons lose power, each of
your cities will strengthen and possibly expand to become nations.
Perhaps some will unite. But largely you will compete against each other
and against the nations of the other continents. In such competition
you'll have to show your mettle, or go under. Man develops at his
fastest when pushed by such circumstance."

The Earthling looked off, unseeing, into a far corner of the room. "At
least, so is my contention. Far away from here a colleague is trying to
prove me wrong. We shall see."




V.


Leonid Plekhanov returned to the _Pedagogue_ with a certain ceremony. He
was accompanied by Joe Chessman, Natt Roberts and Barry Watson of his
original group, but four young, hard-eyed, hard-faced and armed Tulans
were also in the party. Their space lighter swooped in, nestled to the
_Pedagogue's_ hull in the original bed it had occupied on the trip from
Terra City, and her port opened to the corridors of the mother ship.

Plekhanov, flanked by Chessman and Watson, strode heavily toward the
ship's lounge. Natt Roberts and two of the Tulans remained with the
small boat. Two of the other natives followed, their eyes darting here,
there, in amazement, in spite of their efforts to appear grim and
untouched by it all.

Amschel Mayer was already seated at the officer's dining table. His face
displayed his irritation at the other's method of presenting himself.
"Good Heavens, Plekhanov, what is this, an invasion?"

The other registered surprise.

Mayer indicated the Texcocans. "Do you think it necessary to bring armed
men aboard the _Pedagogue_? Frankly, I have not even revealed to a
single Genoese the existence of the ship."

Jerry Kennedy was seated to one side, the only member of Mayer's team
who had accompanied him for this meeting. Kennedy winked at Watson and
Chessman. Watson grinned back but held his peace.

Plekhanov sank into a chair, rumbling, "We hold no secrets from the
Texcocans. The sooner they advance to where they can use our libraries
and laboratories, the better. And the fact these boys are armed has no
significance. My Tulans are currently embarked on a campaign to unite
the planet. Arms are sometimes necessary, and Tula, my capital, is
somewhat of an armed camp. All able-bodied men--"

Mayer broke in heatedly, "And is this the method you use to bring
civilization to Texcoco? Is this what you consider the purpose of the
Office of Galactic Colonization? An armed camp! How many persons have
you slaughtered thus far?"

"Easy," Joe Chessman growled.

Amschel Mayer spun on him. "I need no instruction from you, Chessman.
Please remember I'm senior in charge of this expedition and as such rank
you."

Plekhanov thudded a heavy hand on the table. "I'll call my assistants to
order, Mayer, if I feel it necessary. Admittedly, when this expedition
left Terra City you were the ranking officer. Now, however, we've
divided--at your suggestion, please remember. Now there are two
independent groups and you no longer have jurisdiction over mine."

"Indeed!" Mayer barked. "And suppose I decide to withhold the use of the
_Pedagogue's_ libraries and laboratories to you? I tell you,
Plekhanov--"

Leonid Plekhanov interrupted him coldly. "I would not suggest you
attempt any such step, Mayer."

Mayer glared but suddenly reversed himself. "Let's settle down and
become more sensible. This is the first conference of the five we have
scheduled. Ten years have elapsed. Actually, of course, we've had some
idea of each other's progress since team members occasionally meet on
trips back here to the _Pedagogue_ to consult the library. I am afraid,
my dear Leonid, that your theories on industrialization are rapidly
being proven inaccurate."

"Nonsense!"

Mayer said smoothly, "In the decade past, my team's efforts have more
than tripled the Genoese industrial potential. Last week one of our
steamships crossed the second ocean. We've located petroleum and the
first wells are going down. We've introduced a dozen crops that had
disappeared through misadventure to the original colonists. And, oh yes,
our first railroad is scheduled to begin running between Bari and Ronda
next spring. There are six new universities and in the next decade I
