
"Because I had cancer of the larynx, and I'd never have been able to
talk again. I'd be less than a man."

"You are less than a man now." There was a long period of no exchange.
Bart decided he had not made himself clear. "I didn't want to live
without being able to communicate with other men and women."

"Communicate. Communicate. There are a million ways to communicate.
Michelangelo communicated, Bach, Beethoven, yes, Elvis Presley
communicates. Hemingway, Martha Graham, actors, dancers, even a baby
communicates!"

"But speech ..."

"Speech is the least dependable method of all. Few people can explain
their love, their pain, their innermost feelings in words. And often a
man speaks his thoughts, and having spoken them, finds he really thinks
the opposite. No, this is second-rate expression and my opinion of you
has not been altered by your feeble argument."

The other fellow's thoughts came over the wall, pounding against Bart's
sub-conscious. "You consider yourself a man of great intelligence," it
went on, "but your lack of imagination makes you less than mediocre. And
as for your mind-power, well, you see you cannot cross my mental
barrier."

"That's not entirely conclusive. There may be a catalyst here in this
area which works in conjunction with your thought-processes and not
mine. You're familiar with conditions here, while I only know the
earth."

"You are hardly a challenge to me. However, to satisfy you that you have
practically no control, let us make a test on your home ground."

"All right. You propose the test."

"Let us see ... if you can re-enter your former body while I am willing
you to stay here, on the other side of that wall."

"Ahah. You're trying to trick me."

"I knew before I proposed my plan you would make exactly that excuse in
order to escape my challenge. Even in excuses you lacked imagination."

"Okay, it's a deal." Bart was mad. "Start concentrating. I'll show you
the power of my mind, both now and after I resume that shell." Bart was
furious. He tried to leave the place by the wall. He seemed stuck. There
were waves like laughter vibrating against the glass. Bart strained and
saw that he had come away a little. He tried again and again. There was
a little more distance gained. He tried to build the picture of the
operating-room in his mind and while he was doing this a flash of Vivian
exploded his mind. With that quick image, he felt himself free to drift
downward.

There indeed was the hospital. Bart hurried to the operating-room,
hovering near the ceiling light, watching the operating team below.

"He's gone, doctor." The anesthetist looked at Jonas. "Respiration's
stopped altogether."

_No_, thought Bart. _Don't close me out now._

"Let's open the chest and massage the heart."

_Yes. Yes._

