and brass-flamed astonishers into the clouds. A soft fog of snow makes
fuzzy smears of the pinwheels, of the children racing, sparklers in
both hands, across the frozen lawn. Dad lights the strings of
cannon-crackers--at our house they used to dangle from a wire strung
across the porch, like clusters of giant phlox--and they convulse into
life, jumping and banging and scattering their red skins onto the snow,
filling the air with the spice of gunpowder.

       *       *       *       *       *

"The high-school kids come home from their Potlatch Parties ..."

"Wreckage and mayhem," MacHenery grunted. "We used to throw the same
kind of parties when I was a tad, but they were against the law, back
then. We called 'em chicken-runs."

"But nowadays, sir, those Potlatch Parties contribute to the general
prosperity," Winfree explained. "Used-car lots used to border all the
downtown streets, anchors on progress. Now those dated cars are
smashed, and used for scrap. The high-school drivers work off their
aggressions ramming them together. And there's no mayhem, Mr. MacHenery;
the BSG-man assigned to Potlatch Parties strap the kids in safe and make
sure their crash-helmets fit tight. It's all clean fun."

"Morally," MacHenery said, "Potlatch Parties are still chicken-runs."

       *       *       *       *       *

Peggy came back, as sleek and crisp as though cooking were an expensive
sort of beauty treatment. "Supper will be ready in five minutes," she
said. "If you tigers will wash up ..."

"We'll drink up, first," her father said. "This man of yours has been
feeding me BSG propaganda. I'm not sure I have any appetite left."

"What started you hating the Bureau of Seasonal Gratuities, Mr.
MacHenery?" Winfree said.

MacHenery poured them each a drink. "You ever read Suetonius, Wes?" he
asked.

"No, sir."

"Yours is a generation of monoglots," MacHenery sighed. "It figures,
though. There's no profit in having today's youth read the clinical
record of another civilization that died of self-indulgence, that went
roistering to its doom in a carnival of bloat."

"Doom?" Winfree asked.

"Doom richly deserved," MacHenery said. "Old Suetonius describes, for
example, an instrument that accompanied dinner-parties during the reigns
of the last few Caesars. It was a device that accomplished, two thousand
years ago, the function of our proud Bureau of Seasonal Gratuities. A
feather, my boy. A simple goose-quill."

"I don't understand," Winfree said.

"I'd be hurt if you did, Captain," MacHenery said. "I've set my mind on
explaining the point. Now you see, Wes, the late Caesars were pretty
good consumers of everything but petroleum, we having that edge on them.
They spread a mighty fine table. A gourmet would bring to Rome caviar
from the Caucasus, peaches from Majorca, and, for all I know, kippers
from Britain. Picture it, Wesley: cherries served in golden bowls,
heaped on the snow trotted down from mountain-tops by marathons of
slaves. A dish called The Shield of Minerva was one of their greatest
delights; this being an Irish stew compounded of lamprey-milt,
pike-livers, flamingo-tongues, and the tiny, tasty brains of pheasants
and peacocks; eaten while viewing the floor-show of strip-teasing
Circassian girls or--Galba's invention, this--elephants walking
tight-rope. Grand, Wes. No meals like that at the supermarket; no shows
like that even on the television."

"But the feather?" Winfree prompted.

"Ah, yes," MacHenery said. "The moment our noble Roman had eaten his
fill he'd pick up the feather next to his plate and, excusing himself,
adjourn to the adjoining vomitorium. A few tickles of the palate, and
his first meal would be only a lovely memory. He'd saunter back to his
bench by the table again, ready to set to with another helping of
Minerva's Shield."

"Disgusting," Winfree said.

"Yes, indeed," MacHenery agreed, smiling and fitting his fingertips
together. "Now attend my simile, Captain. Unlike those feathered Romans
of the Decadence, we moderns settle for one meal at a sitting, and let
it digest in peace. We have instead our more sophisticated greeds,
whetted by subtle persuasions and an assurance that it's really quite
moral to ransom our future for today's gimmicks."

"Prosperity requires the cooperation of every citizen," Captain Winfree
said, quoting an early slogan of the BSG.

"Your artificial prosperity requires us, the moment we're sated with
chrome chariots and miracle-fiber dressing-gowns and electronic magics,
the minute our children have toys enough to last them through the age of
franchise, to take in hand the feather forced upon us by regulation of
the Bureau of Seasonal Gratuities and visit the parish Potlatch Pyre,
our modern vomitorium, to spew up last year's dainties to make
belly-room for a new lot," MacHenery said.

"Daddy!" Peggy MacHenery protested from the living-room doorway. "What
sort of table-talk is that?"

"Truth is the sweetest sauce, Peggy," MacHenery said, getting up from
his chair. "What delights have you cooked up for us, child?"

"Your favorite dish, Daddy," Peggy said, grinning at him. "Peacock
brains on toast."

       *       *       *       *       *

The next two weeks were too busy for Captain Winfree to partner Kevin
MacHenery on the fencing-mat. He was double-busy, in fact; planning the
biggest Potlatch Day in twenty years at the same time he started the
wheels of his project to make birthdays Gratuity Days for every consumer
in his District.

The girls, assisted by two of the male sergeants, had decorated the
District Headquarters till it glittered like a child's dream of the
North Pole. Against one wall they'd placed the Xmas tree, its branches
bearing dozens of dancing elves, Japanese swordsmen, marching squads of
BSG-recruits, prancing circus-ponies; all watch-work figures busy with
movement, flashing with microscopic lights, humming little melodies that
matched their motions. A giant replica of the Bureau's cap-emblem--the
Federal eagle clutching between his talons a banderole bearing the
motto, _'Tis More Blessed to Give Than Receive_--had been mounted on the
