he said aloud. "I'll drown the Lord High Executioner." He laughed. Then
his mind cleared. He remembered where he was.

       *       *       *       *       *

Alan trembled. For the first time in his life he understood what it was
to live, because for the first time he realized that he would sometime
die. In other times and circumstances he might put it off for a while,
for months or years, but eventually, as now, he would have to watch,
still and helpless, while death came creeping. Then, at thirty, Alan
became a man.

"Dammit, no law says I have to flame-out _now_!" He forced himself to
rise, forced his legs to stand, struggling painfully in the shin-deep
ooze. He worked his way to the bank and began to dig frenziedly, chest
high, about two feet below the edge.

His arm where the black thing had been was swollen and tender, but he
forced his hands to dig, dig, dig, cursing and crying to hide the pain,
and biting his lips, ignoring the salty taste of blood. The soft earth
crumbled under his hands until he had a small cave about three feet deep
in the bank. Beyond that the soil was held too tightly by the roots from
above and he had to stop.

       *       *       *       *       *

The air crackled blue and a tree crashed heavily past Alan into the
stream. Above him on the bank, silhouetting against the moons, the
killer robot stopped and its blaster swivelled slowly down. Frantically,
Alan hugged the bank as a shaft of pure electricity arced over him,
sliced into the water, and exploded in a cloud of steam. The robot shook
for a second, its blaster muzzle lifted erratically and for an instant
it seemed almost out of control, then it quieted and the muzzle again
pointed down.

Pressing with all his might, Alan slid slowly along the bank inches at a
time, away from the machine above. Its muzzle turned to follow him but
the edge of the bank blocked its aim. Grinding forward a couple of feet,
slightly overhanging the bank, the robot fired again. For a split second
Alan seemed engulfed in flame; the heat of hell singed his head and
back, and mud boiled in the bank by his arm.

Again the robot trembled. It jerked forward a foot and its blaster swung
slightly away. But only for a moment. Then the gun swung back again.

Suddenly, as if sensing something wrong, its tracks slammed into
reverse. It stood poised for a second, its treads spinning crazily as
the earth collapsed underneath it, where Alan had dug, then it fell with
a heavy splash into the mud, ten feet from where Alan stood.

Without hesitation Alan threw himself across the blaster housing,
frantically locking his arms around the barrel as the robot's treads
churned furiously in the sticky mud, causing it to buck and plunge like
a Brahma bull. The treads stopped and the blaster jerked upwards
wrenching Alan's arms, then slammed down. Then the whole housing whirled
around and around, tilting alternately up and down like a steel-skinned
water monster trying to dislodge a tenacious crab, while Alan, arms and
legs wrapped tightly around the blaster barrel and housing, pressed
fiercely against the robot's metal skin.

Slowly, trying to anticipate and shift his weight with the spinning
plunges, Alan worked his hand down to his right hip. He fumbled for the
sheath clipped to his belt, found it, and extracted a stubby hunting
knife. Sweat and blood in his eyes, hardly able to move on the wildly
swinging turret, he felt down the sides to the thin crack between the
revolving housing and the stationary portion of the robot. With a quick
prayer he jammed in the knife blade--and was whipped headlong into the
mud as the turret literally snapped to a stop.

The earth, jungle and moons spun in a pinwheeled blur, slowed, and
settled to their proper places. Standing in the sticky, sweet-smelling
ooze, Alan eyed the robot apprehensively. Half buried in mud, it stood
quiet in the shadowy light except for an occasional, almost spasmodic
jerk of its blaster barrel. For the first time that night Alan allowed
himself a slight smile. "A blade in the old gear box, eh? How does that
feel, boy?"

He turned. "Well, I'd better get out of here before the knife slips or
the monster cooks up some more tricks with whatever it's got for a
brain." Digging little footholds in the soft bank, he climbed up and
stood once again in the rustling jungle darkness.

"I wonder," he thought, "how Pete could cram enough brain into one of
those things to make it hunt and track so perfectly." He tried to
visualize the computing circuits needed for the operation of its
tracking mechanism alone. "There just isn't room for the electronics.
You'd need a computer as big as the one at camp headquarters."
