got something on the radiation detectors."

"Good work, what did you find?"

"Slight radioactivity, typical of interstellar drive mechanisms,
somewhere off to our right. Can't tell exactly where, though."

"How far away is it?"

"I don't know, sir."

Heselton's hands dropped to his sides. "Thanks," he said, "for the
help."

His desk tv flashed into life with a picture of the smiling alien
commander. "This is the linguistics section, Admiral. The aliens
understand a fairly common galactic symbology, I believe we can
translate simple messages for you now."

"Ask him where the hell he is," Heselton snapped without thinking, then
instantly regretted it as the alien's face showed unmistakable surprise.

The alien's smile grew into an almost unbelievable grin. He turned
sideways to speak to someone out of sight of the camera and suddenly
burst into a series of roaring cackles. "He's laughing, sir." The
translator commented unnecessarily.

The joke was strictly with the aliens. Heselton's face whitened in quick
realization. "Rogers! They _didn't know_ that we can't see them!"

"Look, sir." The navigator pointed to the tv screen and a brilliantly
clear image of Big Joe shimmering against the galaxy, lit by millions of
stars. Every missile port, even the military numerals along her nose
were clearly visible.

"They're rubbing it in, Rogers. Showing us what we look like to them."
Heselton's face was chalk. "They could blast Big Joe apart, piece by
piece--the most powerful ship in the galaxy."

"Maybe," said Rogers, "the second most powerful."

Without answering, Heselton turned and looked out again at empty space
and millions of steady, unwinking stars. His mind formed an image of a
huge, ethereal spaceship, missile ports open, weapons aimed directly at
Big Joe.

The speaker interrupted his nightmare. "This is fire control, Admiral.
With your permission I'll scatter a few C-bombs ..."

Heselton leaped for the microphone. "Are you out of your mind? We
haven't the slightest idea of the forces that guy has. We might be in
the center of a whole blooming fleet. Ever think of that?"

The alien's face, still smirking, appeared again on the screen. "He
says," said the interpreter, "that he finds the presence of our armed
ship very annoying."

Heselton knew what he had to do. "Tell him," he said, swallowing hard,
"that we apologize. This part of the galaxy is strange to us."

"He says he is contemplating blasting us out of the sky."

Heselton said nothing, but he longed to reach out and throttle the
grinning, alien face.

"However," the interpreter continued, "he will let us go safely if we
leave immediately. He says to send an unarmed, diplomatic vessel next
time and maybe his people will talk to us."

"Thank him for his kindness." Heselton's jaws clenched so tightly they
