said....

A small haw-apple tree near them suddenly began to grow at an amazing
rate of speed. It doubled its size in three minutes, put forth fruit
and dropped it to the ground.

"These are only a few of the things I'll give to your planet," she said.

At her words, they were back in the bedroom. This time she had been
thoughtful. Montcalm was still clad in wet pajamas.

"I don't know what sort of hypnosis this is," he began aggressively,
"but you can't fool me, young lady, into believing ..."

       *       *       *       *       *

Millie came into the room. She had donned a robe over her nightgown.

"Richard, where have you been with this woman?" she demanded.

"Why, my dear ..."

"You've been roaming around the house somewhere with her. I came in here
a moment ago and you were gone. Now, Richard, I want you to do something
about her and stop fooling around. I can't keep the children in their
room all day."

It hadn't been hypnosis then! Liz was for real. A vision rose before
Montcalm of mankind given wonders, powers, benefits representing
advances of thousands of years. The world could become a paradise with
the things she offered to teach.

"Millie, this woman _is_ from another planet!" he exclaimed excitedly,
and turned to Liz. "Why did you choose me to contact on Earth?"

"Why, I happened to land near your house," she answered. "I know how
your primitive social organization is set up, but isn't one human being
just as good as another to lead me to the proper authorities?"

"Yes," he said joyfully, visualizing black headlines and his picture in
the papers.

Millie stood to one side, puzzled and grim at once. Montcalm picked up
the house dress he had taken from the closet earlier.

"Now, Miss," he said, "if you'll just put this on, I'll take you to the
mayor and he can get in touch with Washington at once."

"I told you," said Liz, "I don't want to adopt your custom of wearing
clothing."

"But you can't go out in public like that!" said the dismayed Montcalm.
"If you're going to move among Earth people, you must dress as we do."

"My people wouldn't demand that Earth people disrobe to associate with
us," she countered reasonably.

Millie had had enough. She went into action.

"You can argue with this hussy all you like, Richard, but I'm going to
call the police," she said, and left the room with determination in her
eye.

The next fifteen minutes were agonizing for Montcalm as he tried
futilely to get Liz to dress like a decent person. He was torn between
realization of what the things she offered would mean to the world and
his own sense of the fitness of things. His children, the children of
Traskmore, the children of the world ... what would be the effect on
