the Under-Ministry for Emigration. The state, as a state, sponsors no
colonies and makes no establishments except for the few staging bases
which are maintained for the use of the Survey Corps. We have not yet
found any need for the institution of an offensive service analogous to
a planetary army, nor do we expect to. War in space is possible only
under extraordinary conditions, and we foresee no such contingency.

"All our colonization is carried out by private citizens who apply to
Mr. Mead, here, for options on suitable unoccupied planets. Mr. Mead's
function is to act as a consultant in these cases. He maintains a roster
of surveyed human-habitable planets, and either simply assigns the
requested planet or recommends one to fit specified conditions. The cost
of the option is sufficient to cover the administrative effort involved,
together with sufficient profit to the government to finance further
surveys.

"The individual holding the option is then referred to Emigration, which
provides copies of a prospectus taken from the General Survey report,
and advertises the option holder's asking prices on subdivisions. Again,
there is a reasonable fee of a nature similar to ours, devoted to the
same purposes.

"The state then ceases to have any voice in the projected colonization
whatsoever. It is a totally private enterprise--a simple real estate
operation, if you will, with the state acting only as an advertising
agency, and, occasionally, as the lessor of suitable transportation from
Earth to the new planet. The colonists, of course, are under our
protection, maintaining full citizenship unless they request
independence, which is freely granted.

"If you would like to see it for purposes of clarification, you're
welcome to examine our file on Martin Holliday, a citizen who is fairly
typical of these real estate operators, and who has just filed an option
on his second planet." Smiling, Marlowe extended the folder.

"Thank you, I should like to," ud Klavan said, and took the file from
Marlowe. He leafed through it rapidly, pausing, after asking Marlowe's
leave, to make notes on some of the information, and then handed it
back.

"Most interesting," ud Klavan observed. "However, if you'll enlighten
me--This man, Martin Holliday; wouldn't there seem to be very little
incentive for him, considering his age, even if there is the expectation
of a high monetary return? Particularly since his first attempt, while
not a failure, was not an outstanding financial success?"

Marlowe shrugged helplessly. "I tend to agree with you thoroughly, ud
Klavan, but--" he smiled, "you'll agree, I'm sure, that one Earthman's
boredom is another's incentive? We are not a rigorously logical race, ud
Klavan."

"Quite," the Dovenilid replied.


V.

Marlowe stared at his irrevocable clock. His interphone light flickered,
and he touched the switch absently.

"Yes, Mary?"

"Will there be anything else, Mr. Secretary?"

"No, thank you, Mary. Good night."

"Good night, sir."

There was no appeal. The day was over, and he had to go home.

He stared helplessly at his empty office, his mind automatically
counting the pairs of departing footsteps that sounded momentarily as
clerks and stenographers crossed the walk below his partly-open window.
Finally he rolled his chair back and pushed himself to his feet.
Disconsolate, he moved irresolutely to the window and watched the people
leave.

Washington--aging, crowded Washington, mazed by narrow streets, carrying
the burden of the severe, unimaginative past on its grimy
architecture--respired heavily under the sinking sun.

The capital ought to be moved, he thought as he'd thought every night at
this time. Nearer the heart of the empire. Out of this steamy bog. Out
of this warren.

His heavy lips moved into an ironical comment on his own thoughts. No
one was ever going to move the empire's traditional seat. There was too
much nostalgia concentrated here, along with the humidity. Some day,
when the Union was contiguous with the entire galaxy, men would still
call Washington, on old, out-of-the-way Earth, their capital. Man was
not a rigorously logical race, as a race.

The thought of going home broke out afresh, insidiously avoiding the
barriers of bemusement which he had tried to erect, and he turned
abruptly away from the window, moving decisively so as to be able to
move at all. He yanked open a desk drawer and stuffed his jacket pockets
with candy bars, ripping the film from one and chewing on its end while
he put papers in his brief case.

Finally, he could not delay any longer. Everyone else was out of the
building, and the robots were taking over. Metal treads spun along the
corridors, bearing brooms, and the robot switchboards guarded the
communications of the Ministry. Soon the char-robots would be bustling
into this very office. He sighed and walked slowly out, down the empty
halls where no human eye could see him waddling.

       *       *       *       *       *

He stepped into his car, and as he opened the door the automatic
recording said "Home, please," in his own voice. The car waited until he
was settled and then accelerated gently, pointing for his apartment.

The recording had been an unavoidable but vicious measure of his own.
He'd had to resort to it, for the temptation to drive to a terminal, to
an airport, or rocket field, or railroad station--_anywhere_--had become
excruciating.

The car stopped for a pedestrian light, and a sports model bounced
jauntily to a stop beside it. The driver cocked an eyebrow at Marlowe
and chuckled. "Say, Fatso, which one of you's the Buick?" Then the light
changed, the car spurted away, and left Marlowe cringing.

He would not get an official car and protect himself with its license
number. He would not be a coward. He _would_ not!

His fingers shaking, he tore the film from another candy bar.

       *       *       *       *       *

Marlowe huddled in his chair, the notebook clamped on one broad thigh by
his heavy hand, his lips mumbling nervously while his pencil-point
checked off meter.

"Dwell in aching discontent," he muttered. "No. Not that." He stared
down at the floor, his eyes distant.

"Bitter discontent," he whispered. He grunted softly with breath that
had to force its way past the constricting weight of his hunched chest.
"Bitter dwell." He crossed out the third line, substituted the new one,
and began to read the first two verses to himself.

    "_We are born of Humankind--
    This our destiny:
    To bitter dwell in discontent
    Wherever we may be._

    "_To strangle with the burden
    Of that which heels us on.
    To stake our fresh beginnings
    When frailer breeds have done._"

He smiled briefly, content. It still wasn't perfect, but it was getting
closer. He continued:

    "_To pile upon the ashes
    Of races in decease
    Such citadels of our kind's own
    As fortify no--_"

"What are you doing, David?" his wife asked over his shoulder.

Flinching, he pulled the notebook closer into his lap, bending forward
in an instinctive effort to protect it.

The warm, loving, sawing voice went on. "Are you writing another poem,
David? Why, I thought you'd given that up!"

"It's ... it's nothing, really, uh ... Leonora. Nothing much. Just a ...
a thing I've had running around my head. Wanted to get rid of it."

His wife leaned over and kissed his cheek clumsily. "Why, you old big
