to go to the AutoMart and pick it up!"

"What are you trying to say?"

"That _you_ made this mess!"

For a while he listened, dully unresponsive, but eventually the
vituperation became too bitter and he came back at her with equal vigor.
Until, weeping, she rushed upstairs once more.

That was the first of many arguments. Anything could bring them on,
instructions for Max that she chose to consider erroneous, a biting
statement from him that she was deliberately making herself physically
unattractive. More and more Rhoda took to going into the city while he
killed time making crude, tentative adjustments on Max. What the devil,
he occasionally wondered, could she be doing there?

But most of the time he did not bother about it; he had found a
consolation of his own. At first it had been impossible to make the
slightest changes in Max, even those that permitted the robot to remain
conscious and give advice. Again and again his mind strained toward
Central until the icy-edged truth cut into his brain--there was no line.

Out of boredom, though, he plugged away, walked past the
disdainfully-staring eyes of neighbors to the village library, and
withdrew dusty microfiles on robotry. Eventually he had acquired a
little skill at contemplating what, essentially, remained a mystery to
his easily-tired mind. It was not completely satisfactory but it would
be enough to get him a better-than-average menial job when he had
finally accepted his new condition.

At long last a letter came from Ted on Mars. It said:

    Guilty by association, that's what I am! When it first happened I
    was furious with the two of you but resignation has its own
    consolations and I've given up the ranting. Of course, I've lost my
    job and my new one will keep me from Earth a longer time but the
    real loss is not being able to think on Earth Central once a day. As
    you know, it's a funny civilization here anyway. As yet, there's no
    local telepathic Central but all Active Communicators are permitted
    to think in on Earth Central once a day--except for the big shots
    who can even telepath social engagements to each other by way of
    Earth! Privileged but a pretty dull crowd anyway.

    Oh yes, another exception to the general ration, Suspendeds like me.
    Funny thing about that, seems to me there are more Suspended from
    the Earth System all the time. Maybe I'm imagining it.

    As lovingly as ever, your son, Ted. (NO. _More_ than ever!)

Rhoda really went to pieces for a while after that letter but, oddly
enough, all recriminations soon stopped. She began going into the city
every day and after each visit seemed a little calmer for having done
so.

       *       *       *

Finally Connor could no longer remain silent about it. But by now all
conversations had to be broached by tactful beating around the bush so
he began by saying he had decided to take a lower level job in the
metropolis.

Rhoda was not surprised. "I know. A good idea but I think you should
wait a while longer and do something else first."

That made him suspicious. "Are you developing a new kind of unblockable
ESP? How'd you know?"

"No," she laughed. "Some day we will maybe and people will use it better
this time. But right now I'm just going by what I see. You've been
studying Max and I knew you were bound to get restless." She became
thoughtful. "What you really want to know, though, is what I've been
doing in the city. Well, at first I did very little. I kept ending up in
theatres where we Suspendeds can go. That gave a little relief. But
since Ted's letter it's been different. I finally got up the courage to
see Dr. Newbridge."

"Newbridge!"

"Connor, he's a great man. You should see him too."

"My mind may have smaller scope outside the System but what's left of it
isn't cracking, Rhoda." Working himself into a spasm of righteous rage,
he stalked out into the garden and tried to convince himself he was
calmly studying the rose bushes' growth. But Sheila and Tony Williams
came down the lane that skirted the garden and, as their eyes moved
haughtily past him, his rage shifted its focus. He came back into the
house and remained in sullen silence.

Rhoda went on as if there had been no interruption. "I still say Dr.
Newbridge is a great man. He dropped out of the System of his own free
will and that certainly took courage!"

"He willingly gave up his advantages and privileges?"

"Yes. And he's explained why to me. He felt it was destroying every
Subscriber's ability to think and that it could not last. Some day we
would be without anything to do our thinking and he wanted out."

Connor sat down and stared thoughtfully out the window. Max had just
lumbered into the garden and, having unscrewed one hand to replace it
with a flexible spade, was starting on the evening schedule for turning
over the soil at the base of the plants. He would go methodically down
one flower bed, then up the next one, until all had been worked over,
then would start all over again unless ordered to stop. "Are we to end
up the same way?" Connor shuddered. He slapped his knee. "All right,
I'll go with you tomorrow. I've got to see what he's like--a man who'd
voluntarily surrender ninety percent of his powers!"

       *       *       *       *       *

The next morning they rode into the city together and went to the Harker
Building. It was in an area dense with non-telepaths each one showing
that telltale cleft of anxiety in his forehead but briskly going about
his business as if anxiety were actually a liveable quality. Newbridge
had the same look but there was a nonetheless reassuring ease to the way
he greeted them. He was tall and white-haired and his face frequently
assumed an abstracted look as if his mind were reaching far away.

"You've come here," he said, "for two reasons. The first is
dissatisfaction with your life. More precisely, you're dissatisfied with
your attitude toward life but you wouldn't be willing to put it that
way, not yet. Secondly, you want to know why anyone would willingly
leave the System."
