Chase was there--toying with the seals of a thin, brown envelope. "I
have to open this in the presence of at least two officers," he said
nodding at Allyn who came in behind me. "You two are senior on the ship
and have the first right to know." He slid a finger through the flap.

"Effective 12, Eightmonth, GY2964," he read, "USN 'Lachesis' will
proceed on offensive mission against enemy vessels as part of advance
covering screen Fleet Four for major effort against enemy via sectors YD
274, YD 275, and YD 276. Entire Scouting Force IV quadrant will be
grouped as Fleet Four Screen Unit under command Rear Admiral SIMMS.
Initial station 'Lachesis' coordinates X 06042 Y 1327 Betelgeuse-Rigel
baseline. ETA Rendezvous point 0830 plus or minus 30, 13/8/64.

"A. Evars, Fleet Admiral USN Commanding."

There it was! I could see Allyn stiffen as a peculiar sick look crossed
Chase's dry face. And suddenly I heard all the ugly little
nicknames--Subspace Chase, Gutless Gus, Cautious Charley--and the dozen
others. For Chase was afraid. It was so obvious that not even the gray
mask of his face could cover it.

Yet his voice when he spoke was the same dry, pedantic voice of old.
"You have the rendezvous point, Mr. Marsden. Have Mr. Esterhazy set the
course and speed to arrive on time." He dismissed us with the
traditional "That's all, gentlemen," and we went out separate ways. I
didn't want to look at the triumphant smile on Allyn's face.

We hit rendezvous at 0850, picked up a message from the Admiral at 0853,
and at 0855 were on our way. We were part of a broad hemispherical
screen surrounding the Cruiser Force which englobed the Line and supply
train--the heavies that are the backbone of any fleet. We were headed
roughly in the direction of the Rebel's fourth sector, the one top-heavy
with metals industries. Our exact course was known only to the brass and
the computers that planned our interlock. But where we were headed
wasn't important. The "Lachesis" was finally going to war! I could feel
the change in the crew, the nervousness, the anticipation, the adrenal
responses of fear and excitement. After a year in the doldrums, Fleet
was going to try to smash the Rebels again. We hadn't done so well last
time, getting ambushed in the Fifty Suns group and damn near losing our
shirts before we managed to get out. The Rebs weren't as good as we
were, but they were trickier, and they could fight. After all, why
shouldn't they be able to? They were human, just as we were, and any one
of a dozen extinct intelligent races could testify to our fighting
ability, as could others not-quite-extinct. Man ruled this section of
the galaxy, and someday if he didn't kill himself off in the process
he'd rule all of it. He wasn't the smartest race but he was the
hungriest, the fiercest, the most adaptable, and the most unrelenting.
Qualities which, by the way, were exactly the ones needed to conquer a
hostile universe.

But mankind was slow to learn the greatest lesson, that they _had_ to
cooperate if they were to go further. We were already living on borrowed
time. Before the War, ten of eleven exploration ships sent into the
galactic center had disappeared without a trace. Somewhere, buried deep
in the billions of stars that formed the galactic hub, was a race that
was as tough and tricky as we were--maybe even tougher. This was common
knowledge, for the eleventh ship had returned with the news of the
aliens, a story of hairbreadth escape from destruction, and a pattern of
their culture which was enough like ours to frighten any thinking man.
The worlds near the center of humanity's sphere realized the situation
at once and quickly traded their independence for a Federal Union to
pool their strength against the threat that might come any day.

But as the Union Space Navy began to take shape on the dockyards of
Earth and a hundred other worlds, the independent worlds of the
periphery began to eye the Union with suspicion. They had never believed
the exploration report and didn't want to unite with the worlds of the
center. They thought that the Union was a trick to deprive them of their
fiercely cherished independence, and when the Union sent embassies to
invite them into the common effort, they rejected them. And when we
suggested that in the interests of racial safety they abandon their
haphazard colonization efforts that resulted in an uncontrolled series
of jumps into the dark, punctuated by minor wars and clashes when
colonists from separate origins landed, more or less simultaneously, on
a promising planet, they were certain we were up to no good.

Although we explained and showed them copies of the exploration ship's
report, they were not convinced. Demagogues among them screamed about
manifest destiny, independence, interference in internal affairs, and a
thousand other things that made the diplomatic climate between Center
and Periphery unbearably hot. And their colonists kept moving outward.

Of course the Union was not about to cooperate in this potential race
suicide. We simply couldn't allow them to give that other race knowledge
of our whereabouts until we were ready for them. So we informed each of
the outer worlds that we would consider any further efforts at
colonizing an unfriendly act, and would take steps to discourage it.

That did it.

       *       *       *       *       *

We halted a few colonizing ships and sent them home under guard. We
uprooted a few advance groups and returned them to their homeworlds. We
established a series of observation posts to check further
expansion--and six months later we were at war.

The outer worlds formed what they called a defensive league and with
characteristic human rationality promptly attacked us. Naturally, they
didn't get far. We had a bigger and better fleet and we were organized
while they were not. And so they were utterly defeated at the Battle of
Ophiuchus.

It was then that we had two choices. We could either move in and take
over their defenseless worlds, or we could let them rebuild and get
strong, and with their strength acquire a knowledge of cooperation--and
take the chance that they would ultimately beat us. Knowing this, we
wisely chose the second course and set about teaching our fellow men a
lesson that was now fifteen years along and not ended yet.

By applying pressure at the right places we turned their attention
inward to us rather than to the outside, and by making carefully timed
sorties here and there about the periphery we forced them through sheer
military necessity to gradually tighten their loosely organized League
into tightly centralized authority, with the power to demand and
obtain--to meet our force with counterforce. By desperate measures and
straining of all their youthful resources they managed to hold us off.
And with every strain they were welded more tightly together. And
slowly they were learning through war what we could not teach through
peace.

Curiously enough, they wouldn't believe our aims even when captured
crews told them. They thought it was some sort of tricky mental
conditioning designed to frustrate their lie detectors. Even while they
tightened their organization and built new fleets, they would not
believe that we were forcing them into the paths they must travel to
avoid future annihilation.

It was one of the ironies of this war that it was fought and would be
fought with the best of intentions. For it was obvious now that we could
never win--nor could they. The Rebels, as we called them, were every
whit as strong as we, and while we enjoyed the advantages of superior
position and technology they had the advantage of superior numbers. It
was stalemate,--the longest, fiercest stalemate in man's bloody history.
But it was stalemate with a purpose. It was a crazy war--a period of
constant hostilities mingled with sporadic offensive actions like the
one we were now engaged in--but to us, at least, it was war with a
purpose--the best and noblest of human purposes--the preservation of the
race.
