with it. Of course, you will have to be rather clever to find it. In the
first place, the people putting it there will have it under cover and
just as soon as the mischief is done they will remove it."

"It is nothing like that," laughed Professor Wilson, almost in scorn.
"These are New York rats. It will take more than a little music to lead
them from their usual haunts. But Rastell and I will start in at once.
Give us the address of the buildings and the authority to use them. How
shall we know when the rats are going to come?"

"They will appear within seven days after you stop the racket money.
Suppose we adjourn the meeting? I want a few words in private with Mr.
Crawford. You other gentlemen can get all the rest of the details from
my secretary. He will arrange your salary and expense account. Good
night."

He took Mr. Crawford into his bedroom.

"Do you really believe that story, Crawford?"

"I positively do. And the people believe it. The Piper walked down the
Bungen-Strasse and to this day no music is ever played in that street.
They even date time in that town from the day the children disappeared."

"Then, there must be something in it. Suppose we go over to Europe and
find out something about that tune, the tune that drew the rats out of
Hamelin?"

       *       *       *       *       *

Rastell and Wilson followed out their programme. They went to the
grocery warehouse and made a rat survey. There were a few rodents there
but not many. Then they issued orders that the weekly payment of five
thousand dollars be stopped. After that they spent their nights in the
warehouse. On the fifth night the rats came by the thousands. They
appeared to be hunting for something, but in the meantime, they ate and
soiled whatever came their way. The local cats fought heroically, but
were soon killed and eaten. The rats came up from the cellar through the
elevator shafts, up the steps, through the cracks in the floor, up and
up till they started to run around the roof. Then, at four in the
morning, they started to leave, running down the steps in close
formation, seemingly panic-stricken at their own temerity and anxious
only to return to their safe, dark haunts. The two scientists, in their
wire observation cage, closed their note book, opened the door of the
cage, and started to make a careful search of the building. It revealed
nothing but the bones of cats and much spoiled food.

For the next two days they worked carefully through every part of the
building, hunting for something to explain the conduct of the rats. They
found nothing. All that they were sure of was the fact that the rats had
been there, and that they had not come back.

The following week they repeated the experiment in the laundry. The
course of events was the same. The payment was refused, then the rats
came, devoured and destroyed, stayed a night and left. Nothing was
found. They decided to go and have a conference with Winifred Willowby,
but he could not be located. The two scientists were left to their own
resources. Having no other plausible plan of action, they selected the
small hotel for their next experiment. This time they set a hundred wire
traps and caught several hundred living rats. These they subjected to
every known experiment, and at the end were forced to acknowledge that
all they had learned left them in ignorance as to why the rats came just
for one night in such enormous numbers.

Two months later their employer sent for them. It appeared that he had
just returned from Europe. He listened to their story, smiled kindly at
their perplexity, suggested that they take a vacation and forget about
rats for a while, paid all their bills, and discharged them. He even
went so far as to say that he was uninterested in rats, that it had just
been a passing hobby and that just at present he was working on other
matters. So, he asked them to pass out of his life. But he and Carol
Crawford went into the wilds of Pike County and did some experimenting
on his own account.

Meantime, things were going from bad to worse in New York City. The rat
racketeers were becoming bolder, and started to reach after larger game.
There were rumors that the Pennsylvania Railroad was paying to protect
its terminal and that the Interurban was being bled white to keep the
rats out of the subway. Of course, much of this was rumor and none of it
reached the newspapers, but there is no doubt about the fact that eight
million people were becoming rat-conscious and rat-afraid. It was
growing into a worth-while racket, and those behind it were rapidly
acquiring more than riches; they were growing so powerful that they felt
able to control the city government.

More than one business tried to resist and more than one business awoke
to find that it owned nothing but ruins. Rat protection was worthless
when the enemy came by the hundred thousand and even million. The only
worth-while defense against the multitudinous enemy was the payment of
the weekly tribute, small enough each week, but in the course of the
year taking the profits from most of the firms compelled to pay. Within
a year the average business in the city was working for the gangsters
and content to, at least, be permitted to stay in business.

Then the racket was transferred to other cities, slowly and on a small
scale at first; then more boldly. Chicago, Philadelphia and Washington
began to feel the pressure. The profits were divided, but always the
main share went to New York. For that was where the Big Boys were. And
ruling the Big Boys was the Old Man, who was so little known and so
seldom seen that his very existence was questioned by some of the
smaller gangsters. No one knew how he had obtained his power, but no one
was brave enough to deny it. The fact remained that he simply ruled;
reigned like a Caesar; dictated like a Napoleon. From back-stage he
pulled the wires to make his puppets dance.

It was this man who aroused the interest of Winifred Willowby. In other
times, in former generations, in far-passed centuries, they might have
ruled Rome together, or split it in two ways over their dying bodies.
But in 1935 the short sword had been replaced by the ballot box and
civil war by the primary election. Neither man had much that the other
craved for, yet both prevented the other from the full enjoyment of
life. But it was the blue-blooded patrician who at last gave in and
secretly asked for an interview.

The conference was held on a fallen log on the shore of Porter's Pond in
Pike County, Pa. Someone said that if Mark Hopkins sat on one end of a
log and a student on the other end, it was a University; but, with
Willowby on one end of the log and the Old Man on the other, it became
nothing more than a conspiracy against the existence and the very life
of the nation.

