from out the depths of space to the interplanetary craft. Then patiently
they waited for the rest of the machine men to open the side of their
space ship and bring in the queer, elongated cylinder.

"Put it under the penetration ray!" ordered 25X-987. "Then we shall see
what it contains!"

The entire group of Zoromes were assembled about the long cylinder,
whose low nickel-plated sides shone brilliantly. With interest they
regarded the fifteen-foot object which tapered a bit towards its base.
The nose was pointed like a bullet. Eight cylindrical protuberances were
affixed to the base while the four sides were equipped with fins such as
are seen on aerial bombs to guide them in a direct, unswerving line
through the atmosphere. At the base of the strange craft there projected
a lever, while in one side was a door which, apparently opened outward.
One of the machine men reached forward to open it but was halted by the
admonition of the commander.

"Do not open it up yet!" he warned. "We are not aware of what it
contains!"

Guided by the hand of one of the machine men, a series of lights shone
down upon the cylinder. It became enveloped in a haze of light which
rendered the metal sides of the mysterious space craft dim and
indistinct while the interior of the cylinder was as clearly revealed as
if there had been no covering. The machine men, expecting to see at
least several, perhaps many, strange creatures moving about within the
metal cylinder, stared aghast at the sight they beheld. There was but
one creature, and he was lying perfectly still, either in a state of
suspended animation or else of death. He was about twice the height of
the mechanical men of Zor. For a long time they gazed at him in a
silence of thought, and then their leader instructed them.

"Take him out of the container."

The penetration rays were turned off, and two of the machine men stepped
eagerly forward and opened the door. One of them peered within at the
recumbent body of the weird-looking individual with the four appendages.
The creature lay up against a luxuriously upholstered interior, a strap
affixed to his chin while four more straps held both the upper and lower
appendages securely to the insides of the cylinder. The machine man
released these, and with the help of his comrade removed the body of the
creature from the cosmic coffin in which they had found it.

"He is dead!" pronounced one of the machine men after a long and careful
examination of the corpse. "He has been like this for a long time."

"There are strange thought impressions left upon his mind," remarked
another.

One of the machine men, whose metal body was of a different shade than
that of his companions, stepped forward, his cubic body bent over that
of the strange, cold creature who was garbed in fantastic accoutrements.
He examined the dead organism a moment, and then he turned to his
companions.

"Would you like to hear his story?" he asked.

"Yes!" came the concerted reply.

"You shall, then," was the ultimatum. "Bring him into my laboratory. I
shall remove his brain and stimulate the cells into activity once more.
We shall give him life again, transplanting his brain into the head of
one of our machines."

With these words he directed two of the Zoromes to carry the corpse into
the laboratory.

As the space ship cruised about in the vicinity of this third planet
which 25X-987 had decided to visit on finding the metal cylinder with
its queer inhabitant, 8B-52, the experimenter, worked unceasingly in his
laboratory to revive the long-dead brain cells to action once more.
Finally, after consummating his desires and having his efforts crowned
with success, he placed the brain within the head of a machine. The
brain was brought to consciousness. The creature's body was discarded
after the all-important brain had been removed.




CHAPTER III

_Recalled to Life_


As Professor Jameson came to, he became aware of a strange feeling. He
was sick. The doctors had not expected him to live; they had frankly
told him so--but he had cared little in view of the long, happy years
stretched out behind him. Perhaps he was not to die yet. He wondered how
long he had slept. How strange he felt--as if he had no body. Why
couldn't he open his eyes? He tried very hard. A mist swam before him.
His eyes had been open all the time but he had not seen before. That was
queer, he ruminated. All was silent about his bedside. Had all the
doctors and nurses left him to sleep--or to die?

Devil take that mist which now swam before him, obscuring everything in
line of vision. He would call his nephew. Vainly he attempted to shout
the word "Douglas," but to no avail. Where was his mouth? It seemed as
if he had none. Was it all delirium? The strange silence--perhaps he had
lost his sense of hearing along with his ability to speak--and he could
see nothing distinctly. The mist had transferred itself into a confused
jumble of indistinct objects, some of which moved about before him.

He was now conscious of some impulse in his mind which kept questioning
him as to how he felt. He was conscious of other strange ideas which
seemed to be impressed upon his brain, but this one thought concerning
his indisposition clamored insistently over the lesser ideas. It even
seemed just as if someone was addressing him, and impulsively he
attempted to utter a sound and tell them how queer he felt. It seemed as
if speech had been taken from him. He could not talk, no matter how hard
he tried. It was no use. Strange to say, however, the impulse within his
mind appeared to be satisfied with the effort, and it now put another
question to him. Where was he from? What a strange question--when he was
at home. He told them as much. Had he always lived there? Why, yes, of
course.

The aged professor was now becoming more astute as to his condition. At
first it was only a mild, passive wonderment at his helplessness and the
strange thoughts which raced through his mind. Now he attempted to
arouse himself from the lethargy.

Quite suddenly his sight cleared, and what a surprise! He could see all
the way around him without moving his head! And he could look at the
ceiling of his room! His room? Was it his room! No-- It just couldn't
be. Where was he? What were those queer machines before him? They moved
on four legs. Six tentacles curled outward from their cubical bodies.
One of the machines stood close before him. A tentacle shot out from the
object and rubbed his head. How strange it felt upon his brow.
Instinctively he obeyed the impulse to shove the contraption of metal
from him with his hands.

His arms did not rise, instead six tentacles projected upward to force
back the machine. Professor Jameson gasped mentally in surprise as he
gazed at the result of his urge to push the strange, unearthly looking
machine-caricature from him. With trepidation he looked down at his own
body to see where the tentacles had come from, and his surprise turned
to sheer fright and amazement. His body was like the moving machine
which stood before him! Where was he? What ever had happened to him so
suddenly? Only a few moments ago he had been in his bed, with the
doctors and his nephew bending over him, expecting him to die. The last
words he had remembered hearing was the cryptic announcement of one of
the doctors.

"He is going now."

But he hadn't died after all, apparently. A horrible thought struck him!
Was this the life after death? Or was it an illusion of the mind? He
became aware that the machine in front of him was attempting to
