
Aku nodded slightly, avoiding his eyes. "You take it well."

"But it takes more than hope, Commander. We need some assurance, also,
that our children will be all right." He took an involuntary step nearer
the alien, whose facial muscles never moved, and who turned away
slightly, refusing to meet Rothwell's eyes.

"Commander, you and your lieutenant are the only members of your race
that we have ever seen, and then only on official business. We would
like very much to meet the others. Why don't you land your ships and
give the crews liberty, so that we can meet them informally and they can
get to know us, also? That way it won't seem as if we are giving our
kids over to complete strangers."

Without turning his head, Aku said flatly, "That is impossible. Do you
want reasons?"

"No," Rothwell said quietly. "If you don't want to do something, it's
easy enough to think up reasons." He ached to reach out and grab the
alien neck, to shake some expression into that frozen face. "Look,
Commander, surely the friendship of a doomed race can't bring any harm
to your crew!"

Aku faced him now. "What you ask is impossible."

Ashamed of the desperate note that crept inadvertently into his voice,
Rothwell said, "Commander, will you let me, alone, briefly enter your
ship, so that I can tell my people what it is like?"

Aku and the lieutenant traded a long, silent look, then the lieutenant
almost imperceptibly shrugged his shoulders. Without moving, turned
partly away from Rothwell, Aku said, simply, "No." The two started to
walk back to the ship.

"Commander!"

They stopped, but didn't turn.

"Commander Aku, if you have any sort of God in your empire, or any sort
of honor that your race swears by, please tell me one thing--tell me
that our children will be safe, I won't ask you anything else."

The two aliens stood still, facing away from him, towards their ship.
Minutes passed. Rothwell stood quietly, looking at their backs, human
appearing, but hiding unguessable thoughts. Neither of them moved, or
said a word. Finally, he turned and walked away, back towards his heli.

He leaned back in the little heli's bucket seat and ran a large hand
through unruly yellow hair that was already flecked with white. The
first evening lights of Brooklyn and Queens and, off to the left,
Manhattan, moved unseen beneath him as the craft headed towards his
home. Dammit, he thought, is it that Aku just doesn't care what we
think, or that he cares very much what we would think if we knew
whatever it is he's hiding?

He banged his fists together in frustration. How the hell can anyone
guess what goes on in an alien mind? His whole damn brain is probably
completely different! Maybe to him a poker face is friendly. Maybe he's
honestly not hiding anything at all. He looked out as the heli slowly
started its descent. No evidence, he thought. Not a shred, except a
suspicious mind and, he glanced at the dirt on his trousers, and a shell
exploding in my face.

He slapped his hat back on and whirled to the surprised pilot. "Dammit,
I don't make the decisions, I'm just in charge of loading, and if the
President says it's okay, then it's okay with me!" He stepped out onto
the grass of his yard, and quashed a little shriek of conscience
somewhere in the back of his mind.

       *       *       *       *       *

Blinding lights pinned him in mid-stride. A familiar voice sprang out of
the glare, "Here he is now viewers, General James Rothwell, commander of
the western armies, and head of the Earth evacuation project. General,
International-TV cameras have been waiting secretly in your yard for
hours for your return."

As his eyes adjusted, Rothwell distinguished a camera crew, their small
portable instrument, and a young, smooth-talking announcer that he had
seen several times on television. He forced the annoyance out of his
eyes. This, he thought, is all I need.

"What the general doesn't know," the announcer went on, "is that earlier
this evening it was announced by Moscow Central that the computers had
picked his son as one of the evacuees!"

The shock was visible on 150,000,000 TV sets. Completely unexpected, the
surprise of the announcement hit Rothwell like a physical blow; his eyes
widened, his chin dropped, and for an instant the world's viewers read
in his face the frank emotions of a father, unshielded by military
veneer. Then years of training took command, and he faced the camera,
apparently calm, though churning internally. The odds, he thought
confusedly, the odds must be at least ten thousand to one! Then he
realized that someone was talking to him, waving a microphone.

"Er, I'm sorry, I didn't quite catch ..." he mumbled at the camera.

The announcer laughed amiably. "Certainly can't blame you, this must be
a really big night! How does it feel, General, for your son to be one of
the evacuees?"

Something in the back of his mind twisted the question. How does it
feel, General, to turn your only son over to a poker-faced alien who
shoots when you walk near his ship? "I'm not sure," he said, "how I
feel."
