
As he watched, petrified by the spectacle, the servant stepped forward
and, with a flip, tossed the little dog into the blue light. The animal
could be discerned for a moment through the light and then it
disappeared.

"Look in the globe!" shouted the old man; and Henry jerked his eyes from
the column of light to the half-globe atop the machine.

He gasped. In the globe, deep within its milky center, glowed a picture
that made his brain reel as he looked upon it. It was a scene such as no
man could have imagined unaided. It was a horribly distorted projection
of an eccentric landscape, a landscape hardly analogous to anything on
Earth.

       *       *       *       *       *

"That's the fourth dimension, sir," said the servant.

"That's not the fourth dimension," the old man corrected him. "That's a
third-dimensional impression of the fourth dimension. It is no more the
fourth dimension than a shadow is three-dimensional. It, like a shadow,
is merely a projection. It gives us a glimpse of what the fourth plane
is like. It is a shadow of that plane."

Slowly a dark blotch began to grow in the landscape. Slowly it assumed
definite form. It puzzled the reporter. It looked familiar. He could
have sworn he had seen it somewhere before. It was alive, for it had
moved.

"That, sir, is the dog," George volunteered.

"That was the dog," Dr. White again corrected him. "God knows what it is
now."

He turned to the newspaperman.

"Have you seen enough?" he demanded.

Henry nodded.

The other slowly began to return the lever to its original position.
The roaring subsided, the light faded, the projection in the half-globe
grew fainter.

"How are you going to use it?" asked the newspaperman.

"I have ninety-eight men who have agreed to be projected into the fourth
dimension to seek out the entities that are attacking us and attack them
in turn. I shall send them out in an hour."

"Where is there a phone?" asked the newspaperman.

"In the next room," replied Dr. White.

As the reporter dashed out of the door, the light faded entirely from
between the two disks and on the lower one a little dog crouched,
quivering, softly whimpering.

       *       *       *       *       *

The old man stepped from the controls and approached the disk. He
scooped the little animal from where it lay into his arms and patted the
silky head.

"Good dog," he murmured; and the creature snuggled close to him,
comforted, already forgetting that horrible place from which it had just
returned.

"Is everything ready, George?" asked the old man.

"Yes, sir," replied the servant. "The men are all ready, even anxious to
go. If you ask me, sir, they are a tough lot."

"They are as brave a group of men as ever graced the Earth," replied the
scientist gently. "They are adventurers, every one of whom has faced
danger and will not shrink from it. They are born fighters. My one
regret is that I have not been able to secure more like them. A thousand
men such as they should be able to conquer any opponent. It was
impossible. The others were poor soft fools. They laughed in my face.
They thought I was an old fool--I, the man who alone stands between them
and utter destruction."

His voice had risen to almost a scream, but it again sank to a normal
tone.

"I may be sending ninety-eight brave men to instant death. I hope not."

"You can always jerk them back, sir," suggested George.

"Maybe I can, maybe not," murmured the old man.

Henry Woods appeared in the doorway.

"When do we start?" he asked.

"We?" exclaimed the scientist.

"Certainly, you don't believe you're going to leave me out of this. Why,
man, it's the greatest story of all time. I'm going as special war
correspondent."

"They believed it? They are going to publish it?" cried the old man,
clutching at the newspaperman's sleeve.

"Well, the editor was skeptical at first, but after I swore on all sorts
of oaths it was true, he ate it up. Maybe you think that story didn't
stop the presses!"

"I didn't expect them to. I just took a chance. I thought they, too,
would laugh at me."

"But when do we start?" persisted Henry.

"You are really in earnest? You really want to go?" asked the old man,
unbelievingly.

"I am going. Try to stop me."

Dr. White glanced at his watch.

"We will start in exactly thirty-four minutes," he said.

       *       *       *       *       *

"Ten seconds to go." George, standing with watch in hand, spoke in a
precise manner, the very crispness of his words betraying the excitement
under which he labored.

The blue light, hissing, drove from disk to disk; the room thundered
with the roar of the machine, before which stood Dr. White, his hand on
the lever, his eyes glued on the instruments before him.

In a line stood the men who were to fling themselves into the light to
be warped into another dimension, there to seek out and fight an unknown
enemy. The line was headed by a tall man with hands like hams, with a
weather-beaten face and a wild mop of hair. Behind him stood a
belligerent little cockney. Henry Woods stood fifth in line. They were a
motley lot, adventurers every one of them, and some were obviously
afraid as they stood before that column of light, with only a few
seconds of the third dimension left to them. They had answered a weird
advertisement, and had but a limited idea of what they were about to do.
Grimly, though, they accepted it as a job, a bizarre job, but a job.
They faced it as they had faced other equally dangerous, but less
unusual, jobs.

"Five seconds," snapped George.

The lever was all the way over now. The half-globe showed, within its
milky interior, a hideously distorted landscape. The light had taken on
a hard, brittle appearance and its hiss had risen to a scream. The
machine thundered steadily with a suggestion of horrible power.

"Time up!"

The tall man stepped forward. His foot reached the disk; another step
and he was bathed in the light, a third and he glimmered momentarily,
then vanished. Close on his heels followed the little cockney.

With his nerves at almost a snapping point, Henry moved on behind the
fourth man. He was horribly afraid, he wanted to break from the line and
run, it didn't matter where, any place to get away from that steady,
steely light in front of him. He had seen three men step into it, glow
for a second, and then disappear. A fourth man had placed his foot on
the disk.

Cold sweat stood out on his brow. Like an automaton he placed one foot
on the disk. The fourth man had already disappeared.

"Snap into it, pal," growled the man behind.
