
"Hang on, Lieutenant. Keep him under observation as long as you can.
What're your exact coordinates?"

Don gave them to him and waited.

A few minutes later the Admiral returned to him. "Let's take a look at
it, Lieutenant."

Don Mathers adjusted the screen to relay the Kraden cruiser. His palms
were moist now, but everything was going to plan. He wished that he
could take another drink.

The Admiral said, "Miro class, all right. Don't get too close,
Lieutenant. They'll blast you to hell and gone. We've got a task force
within an hour of you. Just hang on."

"Yes, sir," Don said. An hour. He was glad to know that. He didn't have
much time in which to operate.

He let it go another five minutes, then he said, "Sir, they're
increasing speed."

"Damn," the Admiral said, then rapid fired some more into his other
screens, barking one order after another.

Don said, letting his voice go very flat, "I'm going in, sir. They're
putting on speed. In another five minutes they'll be underway to the
point where I won't be able to follow. They'll get completely clear."

The Admiral looked up, startled. "Don't be a fool."

"They'll get away, sir." Knowing that the other could see his every
motion, Don Mathers hit the cocking lever of his flakflak gun with the
heel of his right hand.

The Admiral snapped, "Let it go, you fool. You won't last a second."
Then, his voice higher, "That's an order, Lieutenant!"

Don Mathers flicked off his screen. He grimaced sourly and then
descended on the Kraden ship, his flakflak gun beaming it. He was going
to have to expend every erg of energy in his Scout to burn the other
ship up to the point where his attack would look authentic, and to
eliminate all signs of previous action.

       *       *       *       *       *

The awarding of the Galactic Medal of Honor, as always, was done in the
simplest of ceremonies.

Only the President and Captain Donal Mathers himself were present in the
former's office in the Presidential Palace.

However, as they both knew, every screen in the Solar System was tuned
into the ceremony.

Don Mathers saluted and stood to attention.

The President read the citation. It was very short, as Medal of Honor
citations were always.

_... for conspicuous gallantry far and beyond the call of duty, in which
you single-handedly, and against unbelievable odds, attacked and
destroyed an enemy cruiser while flying a Scout armed only with a
short-beam flakflak gun ..._

He pinned a small bit of ribbon and metal to Don Mathers' tunic. It was
an inconspicuous, inordinately ordinary medal, the Galactic Medal of
Honor.

Don said hoarsely, "Thank you, sir."

The President shook hands with him and said, "I am President of the
United Solar System, Captain Mathers, supposedly the highest rank to
which a man can attain." He added simply, "I wish I were you."

       *       *       *       *       *

Afterwards, alone in New Washington and wanting to remain alone, Don
Mathers strolled the streets for a time, bothered only occasionally when
someone recognized his face and people would stop and applaud.

He grinned inwardly.

He had a suspicion already that after a time he'd get used to it and
weary to death of it, but right now it was still new and fun. Who was
the flyer, way back in history, the one who first flew the Atlantic in a
propeller-driven aircraft? His popularity must have been something like
this.

He went into O'Donnell's at lunch time and as he entered the orchestra
broke off the popular tune they were playing and struck up the
Interplanetary Anthem. The manager himself escorted him to his table and
made suggestions as to the specialties and the wine.

When he first sat down the other occupants of the restaurant, men and
women, had stood and faced him and applauded. Don flushed. There could
be too much of a good thing.

After the meal, a fantastic production, Don finished his cigar and asked
the head waiter for his bill, reaching for his wallet.

The other smiled. "Captain, I am afraid your money is of no value in
O'Donnell's, not for just this luncheon but whenever you honor us." The
head waiter paused and added, "in fact, Captain, I doubt if there is a
restaurant in the Solar System where your money holds value. Or that
there will ever be."

Don Mathers was taken aback. He was only beginning to realize the
ramifications of his holding his Galactic Medal of Honor.

       *       *       *       *       *

At Space Command Headquarters, Third Division, Don came to attention
before the Commodore's desk and tossed the other a salute.

The Commodore returned it snappily and leaned back in his chair. "Take
a seat, Captain. Nice to see you again." He added pleasantly, "Where in
the world have you been?"

Don Mathers slumped into a chair, said wearily, "On a bust. The bust to
end all busts."

The Commodore chuckled. "Don't blame you," he said.

"It was quite a bust," Don said.

"Well," the Commodore chuckled again, "I don't suppose we can throw you
in the guardhouse for being A.W.O.L. Not in view of your recent
decoration."

There was nothing to say to that.

"By the way," the Commodore said, "I haven't had the opportunity to
congratulate you on your Kraden. That was quite a feat, Captain."

"Thank you, sir," Don added, modestly, "rather foolish of me, I
suppose."

"Very much so. On such foolishness are heroic deeds based, Captain." The
Commodore looked at him questioningly. "You must have had incredible
luck. The only way we've been able to figure it was that his detectors
were on the blink. That may be what happened."

"Yes, sir," Don nodded quickly. "That's the way I figure it. And my
first blast must have disrupted his fire control or something."

The Commodore said, "He didn't get in any return fire at all?"

"A few blasts. But by that time I was in too close and moving too fast.
Fact of the matter is, sir, I don't think they ever recovered from my
first beaming of them."

"No, I suppose not," the Commodore said musingly. "It's a shame you had
to burn them so badly. We've never recovered a Kraden ship in good
enough shape to give our techs something to work on. It might make a
basic difference in the war, particularly if there was something aboard
that'd give us some indication of where they were coming from. We've
been fighting this war in our backyard for a full century. It would help
if we could get into _their_ backyard for a change. It's problematical
how long we'll be able to hold them off, at this rate."

Don Mathers said uncomfortably, "Well, it's not as bad as all that, sir.
We've held them this far."

His superior grunted. "We've held them this far because we've been able
to keep out enough patrol ships to give us ample warning when one of
their task forces come in. Do you know how much fuel that consumes,
Captain?"

"Well, I know it's a lot."

"So much so that Earth's industry is switching back to petroleum and
coal. Every ounce of radioactives is needed by the Fleet. Even so, it's
just a matter of time."

Don Mathers pursed his lips. "I didn't know it was that bad."

The Commodore smiled sourly at him. "I'm afraid I'm being a wet blanket
thrown over your big bust of a celebration, Captain. Tell me, how does
it feel to hold the system's highest award?"

       *       *       *       *       *

Don shook his head, marveling. "Fantastic, sir. Of course, like any
member of the services I've always known of the Medal of Honor, but ...
