
The other man nodded; but just then the giant moved again, and they
waited and watched.

With the utmost caution the titanic shape changed position. Gradually,
one great foot, over thirty feet in length, soared up from the street
and lowered farther away, and then the other distant foot changed its
position; and the leviathan came gently to rest against the tallest
building bordering the Square, and once more folded his arms and stood
quiet. The enormous body appeared to waver slightly as a breath of wind
washed against it: obviously it was not gaining weight as it grew.
Almost, now, it appeared to float in the air. Swiftly it grew another
twenty-five feet, and the gray expanse of its clothes shimmered
strangely as a ripple ran over its colossal bulk.

A change of feeling came gradually over the watching multitude. The
face of the giant was indeed that of a god in the noble, irony-tinged
serenity of his calm features. It was if a further world had opened, and
one of divinity had stepped down; a further world of kindness and
fellow-love, where were none of the discords that bring conflicts and
slaughterings to the weary people of Earth. Spiritual peace radiated
from the enormous face under the silvery hair, peace with an undertone
of sadness, as if the giant knew of the sorrows of the swarm of dwarfs
beneath him, and pitied them.

From all the roofs and the towers of the city, for miles and miles
around, men saw the mammoth shape and the kindly smile grow more and
more tenuous against the clear blue sky. The figure remained quietly in
the same position, his feet filling two empty streets, and under the
spell of his smile all fear seemed to leave the nearer watchers, and
they became more quiet and controlled.

       *       *       *       *       *

The group of policemen and the janitor made a dash for the house from
which the giant had come. They ascended the steps, went in, and found
the door of the laboratory locked. They broke the door down. The
sergeant looked in.

"Anyone in here?" he cried. Nothing disturbed the silence, and he
entered, the others following.

A long, wide, dimly-lit room met their eyes, and in its middle the
remains of a great mass of apparatus that had dominated it.

The apparatus was now completely destroyed. Its dozen rows of tubes were
shattered, its intricate coils of wire and machinery hopelessly smashed.
Fragments lay scattered all over the floor. No longer was there the
least shape of meaning to anything in the room; there remained merely a
litter of glass and stone and scrap metal.

Conspicuous on the floor was a large hammer. The sergeant walked over to
pick it up, but, instead, paused and stared at what lay beyond it.

"A body!" he said.

A sprawled out dead man lay on the floor, his dark face twisted up, his
sightless eyes staring at the ceiling, his temple crushed as with a
hammer. Clutched tight in one stiff hand was an automatic. On his chest
was a sheet of paper.

The captain reached down and grasped the paper. He read what was written
on it, and then he read it to the others:

       *       *       *       *       *

    There was a fool who dreamed the high dream of the pure scientist,
    and who lived only to ferret out the secrets of nature, and harness
    them for his fellow men. He studied and worked and thought, and in
    time came to concentrate on the manipulation of the atom, especially
    the possibility of contracting and expanding it--a thing of greatest
    potential value. For nine years he worked along this line, hoping to
    succeed and give new power, new happiness, a new horizon to mankind.
