_and_ other institutions of like qualifications, and you'll scrap that
insane Index--"

Baker tapped the desk placatingly. "The grant to Clearwater, yes. As for
the Index, if it should fail in its applicability to this clear-cut
Ellerbee case I would be the first to want to know why. But I assure you
there is no flaw in the Index. It has been tried too many thousands of
times."

       *       *       *       *       *

Ellerbee's place was in Virginia, in a dairying area in the hills. The
last ten miles of the road were not the kind to attract visitors. The
road was steep and narrow in places that turned sharply around the
hillsides. No guardrails blocked the descent into the steep gullies. It
was definitely a region for people who liked solitude. The farms that
lay in the valleys of the hills were neat and well-cared for, however.
The people Fenwick passed on the road didn't look like the recluse type.

Ellerbee's farm was one of the best looking in the vicinity. It had the
look of being cared for by a man who could do everything. The huge barn
and the corrals were as neat as a garden, and the large white frame
farmhouse stood out like a monument against the green pasture.

A woman and two children were in the garden beside the house as Fenwick
drove up. "May I help you? I'm Mrs. Ellerbee," the woman said.

Fenwick explained who he was and his purpose in coming. "Jim's been
expecting you," the woman said. "His laboratory is the long white
building back of the house. He's out there now."

Jim Ellerbee met him at the door. "You didn't bring Dr. Baker," he said
almost accusingly.

"Later," said Fenwick. "I came, as I promised. Dr. Baker wants my report
on your facilities and production methods. Then he will come up to make
his own inspection."

There was doubt in Ellerbee's eyes, as if he was used to such stories.
"Maybe it would be best if I marketed the crystals in any form I can,"
he said.

He led Fenwick through a number of rooms of expensive, precision
electronic equipment. Then they passed through a set of double doors,
which Fenwick observed acted as a thermal lock between the crystal
growing room and the rest of the building. It reminded him of George
Durrant's laboratory at Clearwater.

"This is where the crystals are grown," said Ellerbee. "I suppose you're
familiar with such processes. Here we must use a very precisely
controlled sequence of co-crystallization to get layers of desired
thickness--"

Fenwick wasn't listening. He had suddenly observed the second man in the
room, a rather small, swarthy man, who moved with quiet precision among
a row of tanks on the far side of the room. There was a startling
quality about the man that Fenwick was unable to define, a strangeness.

Ellerbee caught the direction of his glance. "Oh," he said. "You must
meet my neighbor, Sam Atkins. Sam is in this as deep or even deeper than
I am. I think perhaps he's more responsible for the communicator
crystals."

The man turned as his name was mentioned, and came toward them. "You
were the one who developed the crystals," he said in a soft, persuasive
voice, to Jim Ellerbee.

"This is my setup," Ellerbee explained with a wave of his hand to
indicate the laboratory surroundings. "But Sam has been working with me
for about a year on this thing. When Sam moved in, we found we were both
radio hams and electronic bugs. I'd been fooling around with crystal
growing, trying to design some new type transistors. Then Sam suggested
some experiments in co-crystallization--using different chemicals that
will crystallize in successive layers in one crystal.

"We stumbled on one combination that made a terrific amplifier. Then we
found it would actually radiate to a distant point all by itself.
Finally, we discovered that its radiation was completely
nonelectromagnetic. There is no way we have yet found of detecting the
radiation from the crystal--except by means of another piece of the same
crystal.

"I know it's against all the rules in the books. It just doesn't make
sense. But there it is. It works."

Sam Atkins had turned away for a moment to attend to one of the tanks,
but Fenwick found himself intensely aware of the man's presence. There
was nothing he could put his finger on. He just knew, with such intense
certainty, that Sam Atkins was _there_.

"What does Mr. Atkins do?" Fenwick asked. "Does he have a dairy farm,
too?"

Ellerbee nodded. "His place is right next to mine. Since we started this
project Sam has practically lived here, however. He's a bachelor, and so
he takes most of his meals with us."

"Seems strange--" Fenwick mused, "two men like you, way out here in the
country, doing work on a level with that of the best crystal labs in the
country. I should think you'd both rather be in academic or industrial
work."

Ellerbee smiled and looked up through the windows to the meadows beyond.
"We're _free_ out here," he said.

Fenwick thought of Baker. "You are that," he said.

"You said you wanted to investigate the whole production process. We'll
start here, if you like, and I'll show you every step in our process.
This tank contains an ordinary alum solution. We start building on a
seed crystal of alum and continue until we reach a precise thickness.
Here is a solution of chrome alum. You'll note the insulated tanks. Room
temperature is maintained within half a degree. The solutions are held
to within one-tenth of a degree. Crystal dimensions must be held to
tolerances of little more than the thickness of a molecule--"

       *       *       *       *       *

The gimmick to fool him and cheat him. Where was it? Fenwick asked
himself. Baker was sure it was here. If so, where could it be? There was
no trickery in the crystal laboratory--unless it was the trickery of
precision refinement of methods. Only men of great mechanical skill
could accomplish what Ellerbee and his friend were doing. Genius behind
the milking machine! Fenwick could almost sympathize with Baker in his
hiding behind the ridiculous Index. Without some such protection a man
could encounter shocks.

The crackpot fringe.

Where else would credence have been given to the phenomenon of a crystal
that seemed to radiate in a nonelectromagnetic way?

But, of course, it couldn't actually be doing that. All the books, all
the authorities, and the known scientific principles said it couldn't
happen. Therefore, it wouldn't have happened--outside the crackpot
fringe.

If Ellerbee and Atkins weren't trying to foist a deliberate deception,
where were they mistaken? It was possible for such men as these to make
an honest mistake. That would more than likely turn out to be the case
here. But how could there be a mistake in the production of a phenomenon
such as Fenwick had witnessed? How could that be produced through some
error when it couldn't even be done by known electronic methods--not
just as Fenwick had seen it.

Throughout the morning Ellerbee led him down the rows of tanks,
explaining at each step what was happening. Sometimes Sam Atkins offered
a word of explanation also, but always he stayed in the background. The
two farmers showed Fenwick how they measured crystal size down to the
thickness of a molecule while the crystals were growing.

A sudden suspicion crossed Fenwick's mind. "If those dimensions are so
critical, how did you determine them in the first place?"

"Initially, it was a lucky accident," said Sam Atkins.

"Very lucky," said Fenwick, "if you were able to accidentally obtain a
crystal of fifteen layers or so and have each layer even approximately
correct."

Sam smiled blandly. "Our first crystals were not so complex, you
understand. Only three layers. We thought we were building transistors,
then. Later, our mathematics showed us the advantage of additional
layers and gave us the dimensions."

The mathematics that Baker said a kid could poke holes in. Fenwick
didn't know. He hadn't checked the math.

Where was the gimmick?

In the afternoon they took him out for field tests again. A rise behind
the barn was about a mile from a similar rise on Sam Atkins' place. They
communicated across that distance in all the ways, including various
kinds of codes, that Fenwick could think of to find some evidence of
hoax. Afterwards, they returned to the laboratory and sawed in two the
crystals they had just used. Then they showed him the tests they had
devised to determine the nature of the radiation between the crystals.

He did not find the gimmick.

By the end of the day Ellerbee seemed beat, as if he'd been under a
heavy strain all day long. And then Fenwick realized that was actually
the case. Ellerbee wanted desperately to have someone believe in him,
believe in his communication device. Not only had he used all the
reasoning power at his command, he had been straining physically to
induce Fenwick to believe.

Through it all, however, Sam Atkins seemed to remain bland and utterly
at ease, as if it made absolutely no difference to him, whatever.

"I guess we've just about shot our wad," said Ellerbee. "That's about
all we've got to show you. If we haven't convinced you by now that our
communicator works, I don't know how we can accomplish it."

Had they convinced him? Fenwick asked himself. Did he believe what he
had seen or didn't he? He had been smug in front of Baker after the
first demonstration, but now he wondered how much he had been covered by
the same brush that had tarred Baker.

It wasn't easy for him to admit the possibility of nonelectromagnetic
radiation from these strange crystals, radiation which could carry sight
and sound from one point to another without any transducers but the
crystals themselves.

"You have to step out of the world you've grown accustomed to," said Sam
Atkins very quietly. "This is what we have had to do. It's not hard now
to comprehend that telepathic forces of the mind can be directed by this
means. This is a new pattern. Think of it as such. Don't try to cram it
into the old pattern. Then it's easy."

A new pattern. That was the trouble, Fenwick thought. There couldn't
really be any new patterns, could there? There was only one basic
pattern, in which all the phenomena of the universe fit. He readily
admitted that very little was known about that pattern, and many things
believed true were false. But the Second Law of Thermodynamics. _That_
had to be true--invariably true--didn't it?

If there was a hoax, Baker would have to find it.

"I'll be back with Dr. Baker in a couple of days," Fenwick said. "After
that, the one final evidence we'll need will be to construct these
crystals in our own laboratories, entirely on our own, based on your
instructions."

Ellerbee nodded agreement. "That would suit us just fine."

       *       *       *       *       *

"Hypnotism," said Baker. "It sounds like some form of hypnotism, and I
don't like that kind of thing. It could merit criminal prosecution."

"There's no possible way I could have been hypnotized," said Fenwick.

"These crystals--obviously it has something to do with them. But I
wonder what their game is, anyway? It's hard to see where they can think
they're headed."

"I don't know," said Fenwick. "But you promised to show me the gimmick
if I couldn't find it in half a day. I spent a whole day out there
without finding anything."

Baker slapped the desk in exasperation. "You're not really going to make
me go out there and look at this fool thing, are you? I know I made a
crazy promise, but I was sure you could find where they were hoaxing you
if you took one look at their setup. It's probably so obvious you just
stumbled right over it without even seeing it was there."

"Possibly. But you're going to have to show me."

"John, look--"

"Or, I _might_ be willing to take that Clearwater research grant without
any more questions on either side."

Baker thought of the repercussions that would occur in his own office,
let alone outside it, if he ever approved such a grant. "All right," he
sighed. "You've got me over a barrel. I'll drive my car. I may have to
stop at some offices on the other side of town."

"I might be going on, rather than coming back to town," said Fenwick. "I
ought to have my car, too. Suppose I meet you out there?"

"Good enough. Say one o'clock. I'm sure that will give us more time than
we need."

       *       *       *       *       *

Baker was prompt. He arrived with an air of
let's-get-this-over-as-quick-as-possible. He nodded perfunctorily as
Ellerbee introduced his wife. He scarcely looked at Sam Atkins.

"I hope you've got your demonstration all set up," he said. He glanced
at the darkening sky. "It looks like we might get some heavy rain this
afternoon."

"We're all ready," said Ellerbee. "Sam will drive over to that little
hill on his farm, and we'll go out behind the barn."

On the knoll, Baker accepted the crystal cube without looking at it.
Clenching it in his fist, he put his hand in his pocket. Fenwick guessed
he was trying to avoid any direct view and thus avoid the possibility of
hypnotic effects. This seemed pretty farfetched to Fenwick.

Through field glasses Sam Atkins was seen to get out of his car and walk
to the top of the knoll. He stood a moment, then waved to signal his
readiness.

"Press the crystal in your hand," Ellerbee said to Baker. "Direct your
attention toward Sam Atkins."

Each of them had a cube of the same crystal. It was like a party line.
Fenwick pressed his only slightly. He had learned it didn't take much.
He saw Baker hesitate, then purse his lips as if in utter disgust, and
follow instructions.

In a moment the image of Sam Atkins appeared before them. Regardless of
their position, the image gave the illusion of standing about four feet
in front of them.

"Good afternoon, Dr. Baker," Sam Atkins said.

Fenwick thought Baker was going to collapse.

The director just stood for a moment, like a creature that had been
pole-axed. Then his color began to deepen and he turned with robot
stiffness. "Did you men hear anything? Fenwick ... did you hear ... did
you see?"

"Sure," said Fenwick, grinning broadly. "Sam Atkins said good afternoon
to you. It would be polite if you answered him back."

The image of Sam Atkins was still before them. He, too, was grinning
broadly. The grins infuriated Baker.

"Mr. Atkins," said Baker.

"Yes, Dr. Baker," said Sam Atkins.

"If you hear me, wave your hands. I will observe you through the field
glasses."

"The field glasses won't be necessary."

Both the image before them, and the distant figure on the knoll were
seen to wave arms and gyrate simultaneously. For good measure, Sam
Atkins turned a cartwheel.

Baker seemed to have partly recovered. "There seems to be a very
remarkable effect present here," he said cautiously.

"Dr. Baker," Jim Ellerbee spoke earnestly, "I know you're skeptical. You
don't think the crystals do what I say they do. Even though you see it
with your own eyes you doubt that it is happening. I will do anything
possible to test this device to your satisfaction. Name the test that
will dispel your doubts and we will perform it!"

"It's not entirely a question of demonstration, Mr. Ellerbee," said
Baker. "There are the theoretical considerations as well. The
mathematics you have submitted in support of your claim are not, to put
it mildly, sound."

"I know. Sam keeps telling me that. He says we need an entirely new math
to handle it. Maybe we'll get around to that. But the important thing is
that we've got a working device."

"Your mathematical basis _must_ be sound!" Baker's fervor returned.
Fenwick felt a sudden surge of pity for the director.

The demonstration was repeated a dozen times more. Fenwick went over on
Sam Atkins' hill. He and Baker conversed privately.

[Illustration: ... _"Presence," with the crystals, was not a physical
thing_ ...]

"Do you see it yet?" Fenwick asked.

"No, I'm afraid I don't!" Baker was snappish. "This is one of the most
devilish things I've ever come across!"

"You don't think it's working the way Jim and Sam say it is?"

