And my confessor. And now you."

She shook her head, bewildered. She felt no doubt that what he was
telling her was true. The pain in his face was like that of a man who
had stripped his very skin off to reveal himself to her. It tore at her
heart to see him suffering so much.

"But how could this happen, Simon?"

"It is too long a tale for today. Perhaps one day I can tell you all of
it. But do you believe me now? Truly there is no barrier of family
between you and me, Sophia. Unless you set one there, knowing that I
am--I am a bastard and an impostor. Could you think of marrying me?"

The tears she had been holding back, for an hour it seemed, burst
suddenly from her eyes, as sobs welled up in her throat. And yet, she
wanted to laugh as well, at the irony of it. To think that he was
ashamed of his pretense. If he had any idea of _her_ pretense, and
David's, he would probably kill her on the spot.

His face, coming nearer and nearer. All his finery was a red and purple
blur before her tear-filled eyes. His hands were reaching for her.

_He loves me. He really loves me. He really does want to marry me._

If he had taken that strange Saracen sword of his out and run her
through with it, he could not have hurt her more. She had been thinking
about sending David to kill him, and he had just entrusted all of
himself, his family, everything he possessed, his body and his soul, to
her.

If David went after him, this time one of them--Simon or David--would
surely die. The luck of the Monaldeschi palace encounter could not
protect both a second time.

She felt Simon's hands on her shoulders. She pulled away from him.

"Sophia!" She heard the anguish in his voice.

Tartars and Muslims were a thousand leagues away. If Christians and
Tartars were destined to join forces and destroy Islam, it would happen.
She willed herself to believe that. And if it was not destined, it would
not happen.

David and Simon were here. To say anything to David about Simon's
mission to France was to doom one man, perhaps both. It might be the man
who loved her, or it might be the man she loved. And she did not want
either to die.

"Sophia, I beg you, speak to me! Are you turning against me?"

She wiped her streaming eyes to see Simon standing before her, his arms
hanging at his sides, his face agonized.

_I cannot doom this young man._

She took deep breaths to calm herself enough to speak to him.

"Simon, I pray that God will bless and protect you." She stifled a sob.
"I cannot marry you. You must forget me."

He scrambled to his feet, his arms outstretched. "Do not turn from me,
Sophia. I would rather have you kill me."

"No!" It came out of her as a scream. She turned and started to run,
holding up the hem of her long skirt to keep from tripping. Her anguish
was like a giant's hand that had seized her heart and was crushing it.

She ran like a hunted animal, tripping on rocks, turning her ankle in
hollow places. She could only hope she was running toward the road.

"Sophia!"

She looked back over her shoulder. He was following her out of the
forest, but at a distance. He was walking, staggering like a wounded
man.

"Forgive me, Simon!" She ran on.

A pine branch struck her across the face, and she cried out in pain. But
she felt that she deserved it. She ducked under the branch and kept
running, seeing brighter light among the dark rows of tree trunks now.
The road must be that way.

She forced her way through a tangle of shrubbery and was out on the
road. Simon's scudiero, standing with their string of horses, stared at
her wide-eyed. The huge Riccardo, Sophia's escort, was with him,
talking. They were standing with their backs to a roadside statue of the
Virgin in a little protective shed.

At the sight of Sophia, Riccardo rushed to her, looming over her
protectively. "Madonna! What has happened to you? Dio mio! Did he--"

His eyes were wide with outrage, but there was anxiety in his face too.
He must be wondering whether he would have to fight a nobleman.

"I am not hurt--he did nothing. He did nothing!" Sophia babbled, choking
down sobs. "Mount quickly, Riccardo, and let us go from here."

He held her horse, and she threw herself into the saddle. She spurred on
without waiting to see if Riccardo was ready to follow.

When they came to a turning in the road, she looked back once. The
scudiero stood alone with the horses. Simon had not yet emerged from the
pine forest. She started to cry again. The pain in her chest was worse
than ever. She silenced Riccardo's questions.

"I cannot talk about it. He did no wrong to me. No harm. That is all you
need to know."

_I cannot talk to anyone about it, ever. I am going to betray David. I
pray God I never see Simon de Gobignon again._




XLVIII


Just as Sophia and Riccardo arrived at the Porta Maggiore in the city
wall of Orvieto, the air around them seemed to glow and crackle. A cold
wind blew across the road leading up to the gate. Sophia spurred her
bay, but the horse hardly needed encouragement to gallop the last few
paces to the shelter of the gatehouse. A shaft of lightning dazzled
Sophia, and a mighty thunderclap, loud enough to shake the rock on which
Orvieto stood, deafened her. She and Riccardo were in the shelter of the
gatehouse before the first fat drops began to fall, making craters in
the dust of the road.

They identified themselves to the guards without dismounting. Clerks
were no longer posted at the gates to interrogate and record the name of
every person entering and leaving Orvieto. Evidently the podesta had
given up on that.

Sophia, Daoud, and Ugolini had, even so, been chilled by a polite letter
from d'Ucello to Ugolini requesting that "His Eminence's distinguished
guest from Trebizond" not leave Orvieto without the podesta's
permission. Sophia, on the other hand, seemed free to come and go as she
pleased.

The thought crossed Sophia's mind that she would be soaked as she rode
from the gate to Ugolini's mansion. But the meeting with Simon had left
her in misery, and the storm suited her mood. David knew that she was
meeting Simon outside the town. Now what would she tell David about
where Simon was going?

She was about to ride on into the city streets when a man stepped out of
the crowd that had gathered for shelter under the gateway arch. He
raised a hand.

"Madonna!" It was Sordello. "A private word, I beg of you."

She saw fear in his face, but in his bloodshot eyes burned another
feeling she could not identify. She disliked the man and did not want to
talk to him, especially not now, carrying secrets as she was. But he
served David, and his disturbed look suggested that what he had to say
might be important. Sighing, she dismounted, gave the reins of her
horse to Riccardo, and walked beside Sordello to an unoccupied corner of
the gatehouse.

"You know that Messer David has set me to find the informer among us,
and he says he will kill me if I fail." He had backed her into the
corner and pressed uncomfortably close to her. His breath smelled of
onions, and he was altogether repellent.

"What do you want of me?"

"The one person who might give me a clue is the Count de Gobignon, and
he has disappeared. No one at the Monaldeschi palace will tell me
anything about why he left."

_Does he know that I just met with Simon?_

"Why ask me?"

"I know that it is Messer David's wish that you allow de Gobignon to
court you. If he has left Orvieto, perhaps you have heard where he is
going." He smiled, showing a gap in his upper front teeth. And now she
realized what the hidden feeling was. It was lust. She was disgusted,
and pushed past him to give herself room.

He said, "I saw you ride out earlier today, and I waited here at the
gatehouse for you to come back. You must have met with the count.
Madonna, I do not know what to do. And Messer David will kill me if I do
not tell him something."

She desperately wanted to get away. "I am going to Messer David myself
to tell him that Count Simon has left for Perugia. Where the pope is
going. He is recruiting more guards and preparing a refuge for the
Tartar ambassadors. You'll gain nothing with Messer David by telling him
the same thing."

Sordello frowned thoughtfully. "No, but I might try to catch Count Simon
on the road and talk to him."

Sophia's heart leapt with alarm and seemed to lodge in her throat. What
if Sordello followed Simon and discovered he was on his way to France
and came back and reported _that_ to Daoud?

"You needn't go to all that trouble," she said, keeping a grip on her
voice. "We will all be going to Perugia shortly, and you can question
Count Simon there."

He nodded, as if satisfied with that, and she felt a little better.

He bowed again and again. "Thank you, Madonna, thank you."

In a moment she was on her horse again and riding into the rain. She
wanted nothing more to do with Sordello.

But the encounter had helped her in one way, and now she felt more
confident about talking to David about Simon. Rehearsing the lie with
Sordello had helped.

       *       *       *       *       *

"He is leaving the Tartars behind? After I came so close to killing
them?"

"They will be closely guarded. I do not think you will be able to get at
them again."

There was a bitterness in the small smile that quirked David's thin
lips. "I do not intend to try until the Sienese arrive here. When I seek
their lives again, a whole army of guards will not be enough to stop
me."

What would David do, Sophia wondered, if he learned that the alliance he
had fought so hard to prevent would soon be sealed in France by Simon de
Gobignon?

She looked at David's eyes, the color of the thunderclouds outside. Her
hatred for herself struck her heart with hammer blows.

He stood by the window of his room, straight and broad-shouldered,
wearing a belted gown of black silk with a broad red stripe at the
bottom. His wound no longer required a poultice, and it was almost
healed. The strange Saracen treatment he had prescribed for himself had
worked.

She saw pain in his eyes, a pain of the heart. "No doubt you will miss
the count," he said in a low voice. He turned to look out the window.

He had pulled the leaded pane of glass slightly inward on its hinge,
letting into the room the cold breeze stirred up by the storm. Locks of
his blond hair fluttered around his forehead. She studied his profile,
the nose long and straight, the chin sharp, the brows seeming to frown
even when relaxed.

"You wanted me to make love to him," she said softly.

He kept his face turned. "Yes."

"You did not want me to make love to him."

"Yes."

She stood in the center of the room, about ten paces from him, her hands
clasped before her. Her shawl and her gown were cold and wet. A net of
small pearls held her hair in place, but her hair, too, was sodden with
rain. She felt on the verge of shivering, but she held herself very
still.

White light filled the room. David's body jerked, and his lips
tightened. A long, rolling peal of thunder followed the lightning,
ending in a crash so loud it hurt her head.

He was afraid of thunderstorms. She had noticed that before. There was
little rain in the part of the world where he had grown up. He was
afraid of nothing else, as far as she could see. There was nothing he
would not do, nothing he _could_ not do. If only he were Greek, what a
fighter for the Polis he would be.

But when he winced away from the lightning, she wanted to cradle his
blond head against her breasts.

The rain beat down on the walls and roof of Ugolini's mansion with
redoubled intensity. She saw a small pool of water on the wood floor,
rain blown in through the open window.

"I never did make love to him," she said, raising her voice to be heard
over the wind and rain.

"I know that." He took a step toward her.

_I am doing worse than that now_, she thought with a stab of guilt. _I
am keeping from David something he would badly want to know._

"He put his arms around me and kissed me many times," she said.

David turned fully to look at her, saying nothing.

"Whenever he took me in his arms, I thought of you."

He closed his eyes.

When she was with David she never grieved over the turns her life had
taken. She never felt sorry for herself, as she did with Simon, because
she had not married and could not marry. Simon had actually said he
wanted to marry her, and in the end she had believed him. That seemed
like a dream now. A pleasant dream, but an impossible one.

For an instant she tried to picture herself, a woman of Constantinople
wed to a Frankish lord and living in a castle in the north of France. If
such a preposterous thing should come about, she would be enormously
wealthy and powerful--though she had not really thought about that when
she was with Simon. She was not herself when she was with Simon. And
now, when she _was_ herself and able to see things clearly, the wealth
and power still did not matter, because they would give her no pleasure
if she had to live among barbarians.

When she was with David she never worried or even thought about her
future, what life would be like for her when she was older. With David
she thought only of now.

He had opened his eyes and was staring at her. She looked at him,
standing tall and fair.

_I love you, David. I want you so._

Why had it not happened? Soon it would be a year since they had met at
Lucera, and she had long known that she wanted him, and believed that he
wanted her as well. But something had always held him back.

Her body grew warm inside her cold garments.

_It is not because of me that we have waited this long._

There was a question in his eyes, and she felt something inside her
pulling her toward him. She took a faltering step across the tile floor.
Then another, surer one.

He held out his arms, his harsh mouth softening as his lips parted
slightly.

"Come to me," he said.

       *       *       *       *       *

He watched her walking toward him one step at a time, and he thought she
looked like a woman in a trance. Her head was lifted to receive his
kiss.

"How like rose petals your lips are," he said in Greek. He had never
spoken Greek to her before. She stopped her slow march toward him and
gave a long, shuddering sigh.

Then she ran the last few steps and threw herself into his arms. Joy
flooded his chest as he pulled her against him.

_At last, at last, at last!_

He had wanted to hold her like this for so long, and much of the time
had not even been aware that he wanted it.

He had not wanted to be aware of it, he thought, knowing that he must
use her against his enemy. And how he had hated Simon de Gobignon simply
because Simon was to have Sophia.

_I should have known then that my hatred for de Gobignon was a measure
of my love for her._

But he had not wanted to know that either, because Blossoming Reed, the
daughter of the sultan, awaited him in El Kahira, and he had sworn to be
faithful to her all his life.

_Take as many women as you like. But love always and only me._

He felt a chill, and realized that he was feeling cold not merely
because of the memory of Blossoming Reed's warning, but because Sophia
was rain-wet against him. She had ridden through the storm still
thundering away outside, and he felt a cold dampness soaking through his
gown.

"Your clothes are wet," he said, continuing to speak Greek.

She rubbed herself against him. "I am wet to the skin. I need to take
these clothes off."

"Yes. Why not do that?"

Without hesitation she stepped out of the circle of his arms and undid
the brooch that held her printed shawl around her shoulders. She would
not be shy, he realized. There had not been time, in the life she had
led, for hesitation with men. Only, he hoped that she would not, like
some of the experienced women he had known, show little feeling herself
while she let him use her in any way that pleased him.

_She is not that sort. I know it._

Foolish of him to even think it. But some part of him needed to doubt.
This moment was too good to be true.

And too frightening. Because what they were about to do was not just
satisfy their bodies' hungers; it would seal the bond of love between
them. And then he would not be able to send Sophia like a falcon to
strike at his enemies. He would not be the same man when he went back to
Blossoming Reed. What they were about to do would change both their
lives.

Standing in the crumpled heap of orange and green silk that was her
shawl, she turned her back to him.

"Help me with the laces," she said. He saw that her gown laced down the
back.

"One small moment," he said, running his hand caressingly over her back.
He walked to the door. There was still pain in his right thigh when he
moved quickly, but now it was overwhelmed by his body's yearning to have
this woman. He felt the swelling and pressure of arousal in his loins.

He opened the door of his room partway and looked up and down the
shadowy corridor. There was no one in sight. He closed the door firmly
and slid home the heavy iron bolt that would guarantee their privacy.

She was standing where he had left her, watching him, her amber eyes
warm. He went quickly to her and untied the knot in the laces at her
back, marveling at the slenderness of her neck. She could have unlaced
the dress herself, he saw, but she wanted him to.

She wore no belt, and the dress fell away. Under it was a white silk
chemise without sleeves. Still standing behind her, he dropped his hands
gently on her small, square shoulders and slid the chemise down. His
eyes followed its fall, savoring her delicate shoulder blades, the
shadowed hollow of her back. All that remained now were light green hose
attached to a wisp of silk that girdled her hips.

Sophia shivered, and he knew it was not the cold, though the storm was
blowing a strong, moist breeze through the partly opened window.

He put his hands on her shoulders, firmly now, and turned her around.
She threw back her head and laughed as he stared at her breasts and bit
his lower lip.

What Daoud carried under his black gown felt as big and heavy as a mace.

He dropped to one knee before her. He reached around to her buttocks,
his palms tingling at their cool firmness, and he slid down the last of
her garments. She stood, all exposed, before him.

"Will I not see you naked?" she said with a throaty chuckle. "Is that
the Turkish way, for the man to remain clothed?"

"You will soon learn what the Turkish way is, my lady." He leaned
forward, still genuflecting, and dropped a dozen light kisses on her
belly and thighs, and then buried his face in the rich triangle of hair
between her legs and kissed her deeply.

She cried out in surprise and pleasure.

Suddenly he stood up and swung her up in his arms like a Bedouin
chieftain carrying his bride to his tent. She laughed delightedly. She
felt as light as a child. He strode across the room to the bed and laid
her down.

He wrestled his black silk gown over his head and threw it off. Quickly
he pulled off the locket Blossoming Reed had given him and dropped it on
the gown. He stood over her, looking down at her, and letting her look
her fill at him.

"The blond Turk," she said in Greek with a small smile, and moved her
hips from side to side.

Slowly she reached up to her head and pulled free the net of pearls
woven into her hair. Long locks, black as raven's wings, spread out
around her head on the pillow.

"I must look like Medusa," she said.

"Who?"

"A woman with snakes for hair. Men who saw her were turned to stone."

He remembered now: In a bazaar at El Kahira he had listened to the story
of the she-monster.

"The sight of you would bring a stone to life," he said.

"Ah, but part of you is already hard as stone. How long are you going to
stand there? I want you." The yearning in her voice made something
vibrate inside him, as if she had plucked a taut string in his very
soul. He was seized by a violent urge to throw himself upon her and take
her at once. And she would welcome it, too, he knew.

But this moment was too precious to be allowed to pass so quickly.

He sank to his knees and reached out to pull her hips to the edge of the
bed. She squirmed across the bed to help him.

       *       *       *       *       *

Just after he grew out of boyhood, when he was very wild and afraid of
nothing, Ayesha, the youngest wife of Emir Faruk abu Husain, discovered
that he existed, and showed him a way to come to her in abu Husain's
harem. He knew he would die writhing on a spike if the emir's slaves
caught him, but he was also quite certain that such a thing could never
really happen to him.

With a boy's eagerness and excitability, he had spent himself an instant
after he joined Ayesha in the darkness on her couch.

"The emir is very old and has many wives," she purred. "Rarely can we
slip a beautiful young man like you past the harem guards. So we must
learn how to pleasure each other. There are many things that will
delight a woman's body besides a man's rumh. Shall I show you?"

He was curious, and at his whispered agreement she pushed his head down
between her legs and told him what to do.

"And put your fingers _here_ at the same time. Ah, that feels very
good."

       *       *       *       *       *

He looked at Sophia lying open before him and said again, "How like a
flower." He saw dew on this flower, and he bent to taste.

He did to her the things he had learned from Ayesha and later on from
other harem women.

As he worked upon Sophia the magic of the harem, he listened to her
breathing as it grew faster and faster. He watched her breasts rise and
fall, her chestnut-color nipples standing up.

She groaned and tossed her head from side to side, the groans turning to
screams as she reached a pinnacle. He brought her to another, and
another.

Panting, almost crying, she put her hand on his head. "No more. This way
of the Turks is wonderful, but I want you inside me now."

He stretched himself full length beside her, put his face, wet with her
own sweet liquor, against hers and kissed her with lips and tongue. She
seized his shoulders, her nails digging into his muscles, and pulled him
over on top of her.

The way was so well prepared that he was within her in an instant. He
knew that he could not hold himself back very long, and he gave himself
up to the floodtide of pleasure. He raised his head a little so that he
could look down into her wide amber eyes, and so that she could see into
his soul at the moment when he gave all his force to her.

Almost at the same moment the muscles in her face tensed and her neck
corded. Through clenched teeth she cried out again and again and again.

Their bodies relaxed together. Daoud felt that now, in the aftermath of
frenzy, their flesh was melting and flowing together and becoming one.

They lay in silence, and a distant growl of thunder told him that the
storm outside had passed. He had not noticed its dying away. He felt a
cool breeze blowing through the windows.

It seemed as if hours passed while they lay there in silence, arms
around each other, legs entwined, and he listened to her breathing
slowly grow calmer.

She stroked his cheek and played with the blond hairs on his chest. "Is
anything changed now?"

"For us, I think, much is changed."

She kissed him lightly on the cheek. "I love you. Does love mean
anything to you Muslims?"

He laughed softly. "Of course it does. _In this world, women and perfume
are dearest to me._ So spoke our Prophet, may God commend and salute
him."

She shook her head and ran her finger down his forehead and nose. "I am
glad I am as dear to you as perfume. You say 'our Prophet,' lying there
looking more French than Simon de Gobignon. Of course, that is why your
sultan sent you here. If I, who know what you are, still find it hard to
accept you as a Saracen, those who do not know would never suspect."

As she spoke the name de Gobignon, he felt a twinge of anger. Just his
name, mentioned in their bed, was an intrusion. Her eyes flickered
momentarily away from his, as if she, too, realized it was an error.
Best, he thought, to say nothing about it.

"Yes, I am truly a Muslim, and Muslims know more of love, I believe,
than most Christians." But now he thought of Blossoming Reed.

_Why must these ghosts hover over us?_

She reached out to touch the little leather capsule tied by a thong
around his neck, the only thing he was wearing at the moment. "What is
that?"

"It is called a tawidh. Inside are numbers written on a scroll. It
protects me from death by wounding and causes any wounds I do receive to
heal quickly."

"Tawidh?" She mimicked exactly the Arabic pronunciation. "How can
numbers on a scroll protect from wounds?"

He did not fully understand himself the Sufi belief that all things are
numbers, and that numbers written by a holy man could control objects
and events.

"One must be of my faith to understand it," he said briefly.

She looked at him earnestly. "It is so hard to think of you as a
Mohammedan, David."

"Not Mohammedan--Muslim. And David is not my name. My true name is
Arabic. Shall I tell it to you?"

"Oh, yes, please. I will use it with you when we are alone together."

"I am called Daoud ibn Abdallah. Daoud is Arabic for David."

"Then your name _is_ David."

"No, it is Daoud," he said. "The sound matters a great deal. It is the
sound that God hears."

"You believe that God speaks Arabic?"

"It is the language most pleasing to Him. Did He not give His message to
the Prophet--may God praise and salute him--in Arabic?"

She pulled herself closer to him. "Ah, David--Daoud--do not talk to me
of religion now. Here and now, let us think not of religions and empires
and wars, but only of you and me." She paused and looked at him a little
anxiously. "Do you think the servants or anyone else heard me
screaming?"

"I saw no one outside. Most of them probably suspect that we have been
lovers for a long time. But suspicion is one thing. To confirm it by our
outward behavior could be dangerous. We must continue to act as if this
never happened."
