you no esteem for your own dignity? Man, look at your clothes. You are
garbed like a herdsman, and you have not a gaud or a jewel to brighten
you."

"I eat," I said coldly, "when my hunger bids me, and I carry this one
robe upon my person till it is worn out and needs replacement. The
grossness of excessive banqueting, and the effeminacy of many clothes
are attainments that never met my fancy. But I think we have talked here
over long, and there seems little chance of our finding agreement. You
have changed, Tatho, with the years, and perhaps I have changed also.
These alterations creep imperceptibly into one's being as time advances.
Let us part now, and, forgetting these present differences, remember
only our friendship of twenty years agone. That for me, at any rate, has
always had a pleasant savour when called up into the memory."

Tatho bowed his head. "So be it," he said.

"And I would still charge myself upon your bounty for that ship. Dawn
cannot be far off now, and it is not decent that the man who has ruled
here so long, should walk in daylight through the streets on the morning
after his dismissal."

"So be it," said Tatho. "You shall have my poor navy. I could have
wished that you had asked me something greater."

"Not the navy, Tatho; one small ship. Believe me, more is wasted."

"Now, there," said Tatho, "I shall act the tyrant. I am viceroy here
now, and will have my way in this. You may go naked of all possessions:
that I cannot help. But depart for Atlantis unattended, that you shall
not."

And so, in fine, as the choice was set beyond me, it was in the "Bear,"
Tatho's own private ship, with all the rest of his navy sailing in
escort, that I did finally make my transit.

But the start was not immediate. The vessels lay moored against the
stone quays of the inner harbour, gutted of their stores, and with crews
exhausted, and it would have been suicide to have forced them out then
and there to again take the seas.

So the courtesies were fulfilled by the craft whereon I abode hauling
out into the entrance basin, and anchoring there in the swells of the
fairway; and forthwith she and her consorts took in wood and water,
cured meat and fish ashore, and refitted in all needful ways, with all
speed attainable.

For myself there came then, as the first time during twenty busy years,
a breathing space from work. I had no further connection with the
country of my labours; indeed, officially, I had left it already. Into
the working of the ship it was contrary to rule that I should make
any inspection or interest, since all sea matters were the exclusive
property of the Mariners' Guild, secured to them by royal patent, and
most jealously guarded.

So there remained to me in my day, hours to gaze (if I would) upon the
quays, the harbours, the palaces, and the pyramids of the splendid city
before me which I had seen grow stone by stone from its foundations; or
to roam my eye over the pastures and the grain lands beyond the walls,
and to look longingly at the dense forests behind, from which field by
field we had so tediously ripped our territory.

Would Tatho continue the work so healthily begun? I trusted so, even in
spite of his selfish words. And at all hours, during the radiance of
our Lord the Sun, or under the stars of night, I was free to pursue
that study of the higher mysteries, on which we of the Priests' Clan are
trained to set our minds, without aid of book or instrument, of image or
temple.

The refitting of the navy was gone about with speed. Never, it is said,
had ships been reprovisioned and caulked, and remanned with greater
speed for the over-ocean voyage. Indeed, it was barely over a month from
the day that they brought up in the harbour, they put out beyond the
walls, and began their voyage eastward over the hills and dale of the
ocean.

Rowing-slaves from Europe for this long passage of sea are not taken
now, owing to the difficulty in provisioning them, for modern humanity
forbids the practice of letting them eat one another according to the
home custom of their continent; sails alone are but an indifferent stand
by; but modern science has shown how to extract force from the Sun, when
He is free from cloud, and this (in a manner kept secret by mariners) is
made to draw sea-water at the forepart of the vessel, and eject it with
such force at the stern that she is appreciably driven forward, even
with the wind adverse.

In another matter also has navigation vastly improved. It is not
necessary now, as formerly, to trust wholly to a starry night (when
beyond sight of land) to find direction. A little image has been made,
and is stood balanced in the forepart of every vessel, with an arm
outstretched, pointing constantly to the direction where the Southern
Cross lies in the Heavens. So, by setting an angle, can a just course be
correctly steered. Other instruments have they also for finding a true
position on the ocean wastes, for the newer mariner, when he is at sea,
puts little trust in the Gods, and confides mightily in his own thews
and wits.

Still, it is amusing to see these tarry fellows, even in this modern
day, take their last farewell of the harbour town. The ship is stowed,
and all ready for sea, and they wash and put on all their bravery of
attire. Ashore they go, their faces long with piety, and seek some
obscure temple whose God has little flavour with shore folk, and here
they make sacrifice with clamour and lavish outlay. And, finally, there
follows a feast in honour of the God, and they arrive back on board, and
put to sea for the most part drunken, and all heavy and evil-humoured
with gluttony and their other excesses.

The voyage was very different to my previous sea-going. There was no
creeping timorously along in touch with the coasts. We stood straight
across the open gulf in the direction of home, came up with the band of
the Carib Islands, and worked confidently through them, as though they
had been signposts to mark the sea highway; and stopped only twice
to replenish with wood, water, and fruit. These commodities, too, the
savages brought us freely, so great was their subjection, and in
neither place did we have even the semblance of a fight. It was a great
certificate of the growing power of Atlantis and her finest over-sea
colony.

Then boldly on we went across the vast ocean beyond, with never a
sacrifice to implore the Gods that they should help our direction. One
might feel censure towards these rugged mariners for their impiety, but
one could not help an admiration for their lusty skill and confidence.

The dangers of the desolate sea are dealt out as the Gods will, and man
can only take them as they come. Storms we encountered, and the mariners
fought them with stubborn endurance; twice a blazing stone from Heaven
hissed into the sea beside us, though without injuring any of our ships;
and, as was unavoidable, the great beasts of the sea hunted us with
their accustomed savagery. But only once did we suffer material loss
from these last, and that was when three of the greater sea lizards
attacked the "Bear," the ship whereon I travelled, at one and the same
time.

The hour of their onset was during the blazing midday heat, and the Sun
being at the full of His power, our machines were getting full force
from Him. The vessel was travelling forward faster than a man on dry
land could walk. But for the power escape she might as well have been
standing still when the beasts sighted her. There were three of them,
as I have said, and we saw them come up over the curve of the horizon,
beating the sea into foam with their flappers, and waving their great
necks like masts as they swam. Our navy was spread out in a long line
of ships, and in olden days each of the beasts would have selected a
separate prey, and proceeded for it; but, like man, these beasts have
learned the necessities of warfare, and they hunt in pack now and do not
separate their forces.

It was plain they were making for our ship, and Tob, the captain, would
have had me go into the after-castle, and there be secure from their
marauding. He was responsible to the Lord Tatho, he said, for my safe
conduct; it was certain that the beasts would contrive to seize some of
the ship's company before they were satiated; and if the hap came to the
Lord Deucalion, he (the captain) would have to give himself voluntarily
to the beasts then, to escape a very painful death at Tatho's hands
later on.

However, my mind was set. A man can never have too much experience in
fighting enemies, whether human or bestial, and the attack of these
creatures was new to me, and I was fain to learn its method. So I gave
the captain a letter to Tatho, saying how the matter lay (and for which,
it may be mentioned, the rude fellow seemed little enough grateful), and
stayed in my chair under the awning.

The beasts surged up to us with champing jaws, and all the shipmen
stood armed on their defence. They came up alongside, two females (the
smaller) on the flank of the ship, the giant male by himself on the
other. Their great heads swooped about, as high as the yards that held
the sails, and the reek from them gave one physical sickness.

The shipmen faced the monsters with a sturdy courage. Arrows were
useless against the smooth, bull-like hides. Even the throwing fire
could not so much as singe them; nothing but twenty axe blows delivered
on an attacking head together could beat it back, and even these
succeeded only through sheer weight of metal, and did not make so much
as the scratch of a wound.

During all time beasts have disputed with man the mastery of the earth,
and it is only in Atlantis and Egypt and Yucatan that man has dared to
hold his own, and fight them with a mind made strong by many previous
victories. In Europe and mid-Africa the greater beasts hold full
dominion, and man admits his puny number and force, and lives in earth
crannies and the higher tree-tops, as a fugitive confessed. And upon the
great oceans, the beasts are lords, unchecked.

Still here, upon this desolate sea, although the giant lizards were new
to me, it was a pleasure to pit my knowledge of war against their brute
strength and courage. Ever since the first men did their business upon
the great waters, they fulfilled their instincts in fighting the beasts
with desperation. Hiding coward-like in a hold was useless, for if this
enemy could not find men above decks to glut them, they would break
a ship with their paddles, and so all would be slain. And so it was
recognised that the fight should go forward as desperately as might be,
and that it could only end when the beasts had got their prey and had
gone away satisfied.

It was in a one-sided conflict after this fashion then, that I found
myself, and felt the joy once more to have my thews in action. But after
my axe had got in some dozen lusty blows, which, for all the harm they
did, might have been delivered against some city wall, or, indeed,
against the ark of the Mysteries itself, I sought about me till I found
a lance, and with that made very different play.

The eyes of these lizards are small, and set deep in a bony socket, but
I judged them to be vulnerable, and it was upon the eyes of the beast
that I made my attack. The decks were slippery with the horrid slime of
them. The crew surged about in their battling, and, moreover, constantly
offered themselves as a rampart before me by reason of Tob, the
captain's threats. But I gave a few shrewd progues with the lance to
show that I did not choose my will to be overridden, and presently was
given room for manoeuvre.

Deliberately I placed myself in the sight of one of the lizards, and
offered my body to its attack. The challenge was accepted. It swooped
like a dropping stone, and I swerved and drove in the lance at its oozy
eye.

I thanked the Gods then that I had been trained with the lance till
certain aim was a matter of instinct with me. The blade went true to
its mark and stuck there, and the shaft broke in my hand. The beast drew
off, blinded and bellowing, and beating the sea with its paddles. In a
great cataract of foam I saw it bend its great long neck, and rub its
head (with the spear still fixed) against its back, thereby enduring new
agonies, but without dislodging the weapon. And then presently, finding
this of no avail, it set off for the place from which it came with
extraordinary quickness, and rapidly grew smaller against the horizon.

The male and the other female lizard had also left us, but not in
similar plight. Tob, the captain, seeing my resolve to take hazards,
deliberately thrust a shipman into the jaws of each of the others,
so that they might be sated and get them gone. It was clear that Tob
dreaded very much for his own skin if I came by harm, and I thought with
a warming heart of the threats that Tatho must have used in his kind
anxiety for my safety. It is pleasant when one's old friends do not omit
to pay these little attentions.




3. A RIVAL NAVY


Now, when we came up with the coasts of Atlantis, though Tob, with
the aid of his modern instruments, had made his landfall with most
marvellous skill and nearness, there still remained some ten days' more
journey in which we had to retrace our course, till we came to that arm
of the sea up which lies the great city of Atlantis, the capital.

The sight of the land, and the breath of earth and herbage which came
off from it with the breezes, were, I believe, under the Gods, the
means of saving the lives of all of us. For, as is necessary with long
cross-ocean voyages, many of our ships' companies had died, and still
more were sick with scurvy through the unnatural tossing, or (as some
have it) through the salt, unnatural food inseparable from shipboard.
But these last, the sight and the smells of land heartened up in
extraordinary fashion, and from being helpless logs, unable to move even
under blows of the scourge, they became active again, able to help in
the shipwork, and lusty (when the time came) to fight for their lives
and their vessels.

From the moment that I was deposed in Yucatan, despite Tatho's
assurances, there had been doubts in my mind as to what nature would
be my reception in Atlantis. But I had faced this event of the future
without concern: it was in the hands of the Gods. The Empress Phorenice
might be supreme on earth; she might cause my head to be lopped from its
proper shoulders the moment I set foot ashore; but my Lord the Sun was
above Phorenice, and if my head fell, it would be because He saw best
that it should be so. On which account, therefore, I had not troubled
myself about the matter during the voyage, but had followed out my calm
study of the higher mysteries with an unloaded mind.

But when our navy had retraced sufficiently the course that had been
overrun, and came up with the two vast headlands which marked the
entrance to the inland waters, there, a bare two days from the Atlantis
capital, we met with another navy which was, beyond doubt, waiting to
give us a reception. The ships were riding at anchor in a bay which lent
them shelter, but they had scouts on the high land above, who cried
the alarm of our approach, and when we rounded the headland, they were
standing out to dispute our passage.

Of us there were now but five ships, the rest having been lost in
storms, or fallen behind because all their crews were dead from the
scurvy; and of the strangers there were three fine ships, and three
galleys of many oars apiece. They were clean and bright and black; our
ships were storm-ragged and weather-worn, and had bottoms that were foul
with trailing ocean weed. Our ships hung out the colours and signs of
Tatho and Deucalion openly and without shame, so that all who looked
might know their origin and errand; but the other navy came on without
banner or antient, as though they were some low creatures feeling shame
for their birth.

Clear it seemed also that they would not let us pass without a fight,
and in this there was nothing uncommon; for no law carries out over the
seas, and a brother in one ship feels quite free to harry his brother
in another vessel if he meets him out of earshot of the beach--more
especially if that other brother be coming home laden from foray or
trading tour. So Tob, with system and method, got our vessel into
fighting trim, and the other four captains did the like with theirs,
and drew close in to us to form a compact squadron. They had no wish to
smell slavery, now that the voyage had come so near to its end.

Our Lord the Sun shone brilliantly, giving full speed to the machines,
as though He was fully willing for the affair to proceed, and the two
navies approached one another with quickness, the three galleys holding
back to stay in line with their consorts. But when some bare hundred
ship-lengths separated us, the other navy halted, and one of the
galleys, drawing ahead, flew green branches from her masts, seeking for
a parley.

The course was unusual, but we, in our sea-battered state, were no navy
to invite a fight unnecessarily. So in hoarse sea-bawls word was passed,
and we too halted, and Tob hoisted a withered stick (which had to do
duty for greenery), to show that we were ready for talk, and would
respect the person of an ambassador.

The galley drew on, swung round, and backed till its stern rasped on our
shield rail, and one of her people clambered up and jumped down upon
our decks. He was a dandily rigged-out fellow, young and lusty, and all
healthy from the land and land victual, and he looked round him with a
sneer at our sea-tatteredness, and with a fine self-confidence. Then,
seeing Tob, he nodded as one meets an acquaintance. "Old pot-mate," he
said, "your woman waits for you up by the quay-side in Atlantis yonder,
with four youngsters at her heels. I saw her not half a month ago."

"You didn't come out here to tell me home news," said Tob; "that I'll be
sworn. I've drunk enough pots with you, Dason, to know your pleasantries
thoroughly."

"I wanted to point out to you that your home is still there, with your
wife and children ready to welcome you."

"I am not a man that ever forgets it," said Tob grimly; "and because
I've got them always at the back of my mind, I've sailed this ship over
the top of more than one pirate, when, if I'd been a single man, I might
