water on the edge of her glass. Jan clenched his hands together
nervously, blinking rapidly.

"You three are the ones the Leiter was after," Thacher said softly. "You
are the destroyers, the saboteurs. But their lie detector-- Why didn't
it trap you? How did you get by that? And now you're safe, outside the
check-station." He grinned, staring around at them. "I'll be damned! And
I really thought you were a salesman, Erickson. You really fooled me."

Erickson relaxed a little. "Well, Mr. Thacher, it's in a good cause. I'm
sure you have no love for Mars, either. No Terran does. And I see you're
leaving with the rest of us."

"True," Thacher said. "You must certainly have an interesting account to
give, the three of you." He looked around the table.

"We still have an hour or so of travel. Sometimes it gets dull, this
Mars-Terra run. Nothing to see, nothing to do but sit and drink in the
lounge." He raised his eyes slowly. "Any chance you'd like to spin a
story to keep us awake?"

Jan and Mara looked at Erickson. "Go on," Jan said. "He knows who we
are. Tell him the rest of the story."

"You might as well," Mara said.

Jan let out a sigh suddenly, a sigh of relief. "Let's put the cards on
the table, get this weight off us. I'm tired of sneaking around,
slipping--"

"Sure," Erickson said expansively. "Why not?" He settled back in his
chair, unbuttoning his vest. "Certainly, Mr. Thacher. I'll be glad to
spin you a story. And I'm sure it will be interesting enough to keep you
awake."

       *       *       *       *       *

They ran through the groves of dead trees, leaping across the sun-baked
Martian soil, running silently together. They went up a little rise,
across a narrow ridge. Suddenly Erick stopped, throwing himself down
flat on the ground. The others did the same, pressing themselves against
the soil, gasping for breath.

"Be silent," Erick muttered. He raised himself a little. "No noise.
There'll be Leiters nearby, from now on. We don't dare take any
chances."

Between the three people lying in the grove of dead trees and the City
was a barren, level waste of desert, over a mile of blasted sand. No
trees or bushes marred the smooth, parched surface. Only an occasional
wind, a dry wind eddying and twisting, blew the sand up into little
rills. A faint odor came to them, a bitter smell of heat and sand,
carried by the wind.

Erick pointed. "Look. The City-- There it is."

They stared, still breathing deeply from their race through the trees.
The City was close, closer than they had ever seen it before. Never had
they gotten so close to it in times past. Terrans were never allowed
near the great Martian cities, the centers of Martian life. Even in
ordinary times, when there was no threat of approaching war, the
Martians shrewdly kept all Terrans away from their citadels, partly from
fear, partly from a deep, innate sense of hostility toward the
white-skinned visitors whose commercial ventures had earned them the
respect, and the dislike, of the whole system.

"How does it look to you?" Erick said.

The City was huge, much larger than they had imagined from the drawings
and models they had studied so carefully back in New York, in the War
Ministry Office. Huge it was, huge and stark, black towers rising up
against the sky, incredibly thin columns of ancient metal, columns that
had stood wind and sun for centuries. Around the City was a wall of
stone, red stone, immense bricks that had been lugged there and fitted
into place by slaves of the early Martian dynasties, under the whiplash
of the first great Kings of Mars.

An ancient, sun-baked City, a City set in the middle of a wasted plain,
beyond groves of dead trees, a City seldom seen by Terrans--but a City
studied on maps and charts in every War Office on Terra. A City that
contained, for all its ancient stone and archaic towers, the ruling
group of all Mars, the Council of Senior Leiters, black-clad men who
governed and ruled with an iron hand.

The Senior Leiters, twelve fanatic and devoted men, black priests, but
priests with flashing rods of fire, lie detectors, rocket ships,
intra-space cannon, many more things the Terran Senate could only
conjecture about. The Senior Leiters and their subordinate Province
Leiters-- Erick and the two behind him suppressed a shudder.

"We've got to be careful," Erick said again. "We'll be passing among
them, soon. If they guess who we are, or what we're here for--"

He snapped open the case he carried, glancing inside for a second. Then
he closed it again, grasping the handle firmly. "Let's go," he said. He
stood up slowly. "You two come up beside me. I want to make sure you
look the way you should."

       *       *       *       *       *

Mara and Jan stepped quickly ahead. Erick studied them critically as the
three of them walked slowly down the slope, onto the plain, toward the
towering black spires of the City.

"Jan," Erick said. "Take hold of her hand! Remember, you're going to
marry her; she's your bride. And Martian peasants think a lot of their
brides."

Jan was dressed in the short trousers and coat of the Martian farmer, a
knotted rope tied around his waist, a hat on his head to keep off the
sun. His skin was dark, colored by dye until it was almost bronze.

"You look fine," Erick said to him. He glanced at Mara. Her black hair
was tied in a knot, looped through a hollowed-out yuke bone. Her face
was dark, too, dark and lined with colored ceremonial pigment, green and
orange stripes across her cheeks. Earrings were strung through her ears.
On her feet were tiny slippers of perruh hide, laced around her ankles,
and she wore long translucent Martian trousers with a bright sash tied
around her waist. Between her small breasts a chain of stone beads
rested, good-luck charms for the coming marriage.

"All right," Erick said. He, himself, wore the flowing grey robe of a
Martian priest, dirty robes that were supposed to remain on him all his
life, to be buried around him when he died. "I think we'll get past the
guards. There should be heavy morning traffic on the road."

They walked on, the hard sand crunching under their feet. Against the
horizon they could see specks moving, other persons going toward the
City, farmers and peasants and merchants, bringing their crops and goods
to market.

"See the cart!" Mara exclaimed.

They were nearing a narrow road, two ruts worn into the sand. A Martian
hufa was pulling the cart, its great sides wet with perspiration, its
tongue hanging out. The cart was piled high with bales of cloth, rough
country cloth, hand dipped. A bent farmer urged the hufa on.

"And there." She pointed, smiling.

A group of merchants riding small animals were moving along behind the
cart, Martians in long robes, their faces hidden by sand masks. On each
