in the hens of various breeds. In Polish fowls both sexes are ornamented with
a topknot, that of the male being formed of hackle-like feathers, and this is
a new male character in the genus Gallus. On the whole, as far as I can judge,
new characters are more apt to appear in the males of our domesticated animals
than in the females (14/29. I have given in my 'Descent of Man' 2nd edition
page 223 sufficient evidence that male animals are usually more variable than
the females.), and afterwards to be inherited exclusively or more strongly by
the males. Finally, in accordance with the principle of inheritance as limited
by sex, the preservation and augmentation of secondary sexual characters in
natural species offers no especial difficulty, as this would follow through
that form of selection which I have called sexual selection.

INHERITANCE AT CORRESPONDING PERIODS OF LIFE.

This is an important subject. Since the publication of my 'Origin of Species'
I have seen no reason to doubt the truth of the explanation there given of one
of the most remarkable facts in biology, namely, the difference between the
embryo and the adult animal. The explanation is, that variations do not
necessarily or generally occur at a very early period of embryonic growth, and
that such variations are inherited at a corresponding age. As a consequence of
this the embryo, even after the parent-form has undergone great modification,
is left only slightly modified; and the embryos of widely-different animals
which are descended from a common progenitor remain in many important respects
like one another and probably like their common progenitor. We can thus
understand why embryology throws a flood of light on the natural system of
classification, as this ought to be as far as possible genealogical. When the
embryo leads an independent life, that is, becomes a larva, it has to be
adapted to the surrounding conditions in its structure and instincts,
independently of those of its parents; and the principle of inheritance at
corresponding periods of life renders this possible.

This principle is, indeed, in one way so obvious that it escapes attention. We
possess a number of races of animals and plants, which, when compared with one
another and with their parent-forms, present conspicuous differences, both in
their immature and mature states. Look at the seeds of the several kinds of
peas, beans, maize, which can be propagated truly, and see how they differ in
size, colour, and shape, whilst the full-grown plants differ but little.
Cabbages, on the other hand, differ greatly in foliage and manner of growth,
but hardly at all in their seeds; and generally it will be found that the
differences between cultivated plants at different periods of growth are not
necessarily closely connected together, for plants may differ much in their
seeds and little when full-grown, and conversely may yield seeds hardly
distinguishable, yet differ much when full-grown. In the several breeds of
poultry, descended from a single species, differences in the eggs and chickens
whilst covered with down, in the plumage at the first and subsequent moults,
as well as in the comb and wattles, are all inherited. With man peculiarities
in the milk and second teeth (of which I have received the details) are
inheritable, and longevity is often transmitted. So again with our improved
breeds of cattle and sheep, early maturity, including the early development of
the teeth, and with certain breeds of fowl the early appearance of secondary
sexual characters, all come under the same head of inheritance at
corresponding periods.

Numerous analogous facts could be given. The silk-moth, perhaps, offers the
best instance; for in the breeds which transmit their characters truly, the
eggs differ in size, colour, and shape: the caterpillars differ, in moulting
three or four times, in colour, even in having a dark-coloured mark like an
eyebrow, and in the loss of certain instincts;--the cocoons differ in size,
shape, and in the colour and quality of the silk; these several differences
being followed by slight or barely distinguishable differences in the mature
moth.

But it may be said that, if in the above cases a new peculiarity is inherited,
it must be at the corresponding stage of development; for an egg or seed can
resemble only an egg or seed, and the horn in a full-grown ox can resemble
only a horn. The following cases show inheritance at corresponding periods
more plainly, because they refer to peculiarities which might have supervened,
as far as we can see, earlier or later in life, yet are inherited at the same
period at which they first appeared.

[In the Lambert family the porcupine-like excrescences appeared in the father
and sons at the same age, namely, about nine weeks after birth. (14/30.
Prichard 'Phys. Hist. of Mankind' 1851 volume 1 page 349.) In the
extraordinary hairy family described by Mr. Crawfurd (14/31. 'Embassy to the
Court of Ava' volume 1 page 320. The third generation is described by Capt.
Yule in his 'Narrative of the Mission to the Court of Ava' 1855 page 94.),
children were produced during three generations with hairy ears; in the father
the hair began to grow over his body at six years old; in his daughter
somewhat earlier, namely, at one year; and in both generations the milk teeth
appeared late in life, the permanent teeth being afterwards singularly
deficient. Greyness of hair at an unusually early age has been transmitted in
some families. These cases border on diseases inherited at corresponding
periods of life, to which I shall immediately refer.

It is a well-known peculiarity with almond-tumbler pigeons, that the full
beauty and peculiar character of the plumage does not appear until the bird
has moulted two or three times. Neumeister describes and figures a brace of
pigeons in which the whole body is white except the breast, neck, and head;
but in their first plumage all the white feathers have coloured edges. Another
breed is more remarkable: its first plumage is black, with rusty-red wing-bars
and a crescent-shaped mark on the breast; these marks then become white, and
remain so during three or four moults; but after this period the white spreads
over the body, and the bird loses its beauty. (14/32. 'Das Ganze der
Taubenzucht' 1837 s. 24 tab. 4 figure 2 s. 21 tab. 1 figure 4.) Prize canary-
birds have their wings and tail black: "this colour, however, is only retained
until the first moult, so that they must be exhibited ere the change takes
place. Once moulted, the peculiarity has ceased. Of course all the birds
emanating from this stock have black wings and tails the first year." (14/33.
Kidd 'Treatise on the Canary' page 18.) A curious and somewhat analogous
account has been given (14/34. Charlesworth 'Mag. of Nat. Hist.' volume 1 1837
page 167.) of a family of wild pied rooks which were first observed in 1798,
near Chalfont, and which every year from that date up to the period of the
published notice, viz., 1837 "have several of their brood particoloured, black
and white. This variegation of the plumage, however, disappears with the first
moult; but among the next young families there are always a few pied ones."
These changes of plumage, which are inherited at various corresponding periods
of life in the pigeon, canary-bird, and rook, are remarkable, because the
parent-species passes through no such change.

Inherited diseases afford evidence in some respects of less value than the
foregoing cases, because diseases are not necessarily connected with any
change in structure; but in other respects of more value, because the periods
have been more carefully observed. Certain diseases are communicated to the
child apparently by a process like inoculation, and the child is from the
first affected; such cases may be here passed over. Large classes of diseases
usually appear at certain ages, such as St. Vitus's dance in youth,
consumption in early mid-life, gout later, and apoplexy still later; and these
are naturally inherited at the same period. But even in diseases of this
class, instances have been recorded, as with St. Vitus's dance, showing that
an unusually early or late tendency to the disease is inheritable. (14/35. Dr.
Prosper Lucas 'Hered. Nat.' tome 2 page 713.) In most cases the appearance of
any inherited disease is largely determined by certain critical periods in
each person's life, as well as by unfavourable conditions. There are many
other diseases, which are not attached to any particular period, but which
certainly tend to appear in the child at about the same age at which the
parent was first attacked. An array of high authorities, ancient and modern,
could be given in support of this proposition. The illustrious Hunter believed
in it; and Piorry (14/36. 'L'Hered. dans les Maladies' 1840 page 135. For
Hunter see Harlan 'Med. Researches' page 530.) cautions the physician to look
closely to the child at the period when any grave inheritable disease attacked
the parent. Dr. Prosper Lucas (14/37. 'L'Hered. Nat.' tome 2 page 850.), after
collecting facts from every source, asserts that affections of all kinds,
though not related to any particular period of life, tend to reappear in the
offspring at whatever period of life they first appeared in the progenitor.

As the subject is important, it may be well to give a few instances, simply as
illustrations, not as proof; for proof, recourse must be had to the
authorities above quoted. Some of the following cases have been selected for
the sake of showing that, when a slight departure from the rule occurs, the
child is affected somewhat earlier in life than the parent. In the family of
Le Compte blindness was inherited through three generations, and no less than
twenty-seven children and grandchildren were all affected at about the same
age; their blindness in general began to advance about the fifteenth or
sixteenth year, and ended in total deprivation of sight at the age of about
twenty-two. (14/38. Sedgwick 'Brit. and For. Med.-Chirurg. Review' April 1861
page 485. In some accounts the number of children and grandchildren is given
as 37; but this seems to be an error judging from the paper first published in
the 'Baltimore Med. and Phys. Reg.' 1809 of which Mr. Sedgwick has been so
kind as to send me a copy.) In another case a father and his four children all
became blind at twenty-one years old; in another, a grandmother grew blind at
thirty-five, her daughter at nineteen, and three grandchildren at the ages of
thirteen and eleven. (14/39. Prosper Lucas 'Hered. Nat.' tome 1 page 400.) So
with deafness, two brothers, their father and paternal grandfather, all became
deaf at the age of forty. (14/40. Sedgwick ibid July 1861 page 202.)

Esquirol gives several striking instances of insanity coming on at the same
age, as that of a grandfather, father, and son, who all committed suicide near
their fiftieth year. Many other cases could be given, as of a whole family who
became insane at the age of forty. (14/41. Piorry page 109; Prosper Lucas tome
2 page 759.) Other cerebral affections sometimes follow the same rule,--for
instance, epilepsy and apoplexy. A woman died of the latter disease when
sixty-three years old; one of her daughters at forty-three, and the other at
sixty-seven: the latter had twelve children, who all died from tubercular
meningitis. (14/42. Prosper Lucas tome 2 page 748.) I mention this latter case
because it illustrates a frequent occurrence, namely, a change in the precise
nature of an inherited disease, though still affecting the same organ.

Asthma has attacked several members of the same family when forty years old,
and other families during infancy. The most different diseases, such as angina
pectoris, stone in the bladder, and various affections of the skin, have
appeared in successive generations at nearly the same age. The little finger
of a man began from some unknown cause to grow inwards, and the same finger in
his two sons began at the same age to bend inwards in a similar manner.
Strange and inexplicable neuralgic affections have caused parents and children
to suffer agonies at about the same period of life. (14/43. Prosper Lucas tome
3 pages 678, 700, 702; Sedgwick ibid April 1863 page 449 and July 1863 page
162. Dr. J. Steinan 'Essay on Hereditary Disease' 1843 pages 27, 34.)

I will give only two other cases, which are interesting as illustrating the
disappearance as well as the appearance of disease at the same age. Two
brothers, their father, their paternal uncles, seven cousins, and their
paternal grandfather, were all similarly affected by a skin-disease, called
pityriasis versicolor; "the disease, strictly limited to the males of the
family (though transmitted through the females), usually appeared at puberty,
and disappeared at about the age of forty or forty-five years." The second
case is that of four brothers, who when about twelve years old suffered almost
every week from severe headaches, which were relieved only by a recumbent
position in a dark room. Their father, paternal uncles, paternal grandfather,
and granduncles all suffered in the same way from headaches, which ceased at
the age of fifty-four or fifty-five in all those who lived so long. None of
the females of the family were affected. (14/44. These cases are given by Mr.
Sedgwick on the authority of Dr. H. Stewart in 'Med.-Chirurg. Review' April
1863 pages 449, 477.)]

It is impossible to read the foregoing accounts, and the many others which
have been recorded, of diseases coming on during three or even more
generations in several members of the same family at the same age, especially
in the case of rare affections in which the coincidence cannot be attributed
to chance, and to doubt that there is a strong tendency to inheritance in
disease at corresponding periods of life. When the rule fails, the disease is
apt to come on earlier in the child than in the parent; the exceptions in the
other direction being very much rarer. Dr. Lucas (14/45. 'Hered. Nat.' tome 2
page 852.) alludes to several cases of inherited diseases coming on at an
earlier period. I have already given one striking instance with blindness
during three generations; and Mr. Bowman remarks that this frequently occurs
with cataract. With cancer there seems to be a peculiar liability to earlier
inheritance: Sir J. Paget, who has particularly attended to this subject, and
tabulated a large number of cases, informs me that he believes that in nine
cases out of ten the later generation suffers from the disease at an earlier
period than the previous generation. He adds, "In the instances in which the
opposite relation holds, and the members of later generations have cancer at a
later age than their predecessors, I think it will be found that the non-
cancerous parents have lived to extreme old ages." So that the longevity of a
non-affected parent seems to have the power of influencing the fatal period in
the offspring; and we thus apparently get another element of complexity in
inheritance.

The facts, showing that with certain diseases the period of inheritance
occasionally or even frequently advances, are important with respect to the
general descent-theory, for they render it probable that the same thing would
occur with ordinary modifications of structure. The final result of a long
series of such advances would be the gradual obliteration of characters proper
to the embryo and larva, which would thus come to resemble more and more
closely the mature parent-form. But any structure which was of service to the
embryo or larva would be preserved by the destruction at this stage of growth
of each individual which manifested any tendency to lose its proper character
at too early an age.

Finally, from the numerous races of cultivated plants and domestic animals, in
which the seeds or eggs, the young or old, differ from one another and from
those of the parent-species;--from the cases in which new characters have
appeared at a particular period, and afterwards been inherited at the same
period;--and from what we know with respect to disease, we must believe in the
truth of the great principle of inheritance at corresponding periods of life.

SUMMARY OF THE THREE PRECEDING CHAPTERS.

Strong as is the force of inheritance, it allows the incessant appearance of
new characters. These, whether beneficial or injurious,--of the most trifling
importance, such as a shade of colour in a flower, a coloured lock of hair, or
a mere gesture,--or of the highest importance, as when affecting the brain, or
an organ so perfect and complex as the eye,--or of so grave a nature as to
deserve to be called a monstrosity,--or so peculiar as not to occur normally
in any member of the same natural class,--are often inherited by man, by the
lower animals, and plants. In numberless cases it suffices for the inheritance
of a peculiarity that one parent alone should be thus characterised.
Inequalities in the two sides of the body, though opposed to the law of
symmetry, may be transmitted. There is ample evidence that the effects of
mutilations and of accidents, especially or perhaps exclusively when followed
by disease, are occasionally inherited. There can be no doubt that the evil
effects of the long-continued exposure of the parent to injurious conditions
are sometimes transmitted to the offspring. So it is, as we shall see in a
future chapter, with the effects of the use and disuse of parts, and of mental
habits. Periodical habits are likewise transmitted, but generally, as it would
appear, with little force.

Hence we are led to look at inheritance as the rule, and non-inheritance as
the anomaly. But this power often appears to us in our ignorance to act
capriciously, transmitting a character with inexplicable strength or
feebleness. The very same peculiarity, as the weeping habit of trees, silky
feathers, etc., may be inherited either firmly or not at all by different
members of the same group, and even by different individuals of the same
species, though treated in the same manner. In this latter case we see that
the power of transmission is a quality which is merely individual in its
attachment. As with single characters, so it is with the several concurrent
slight differences which distinguish sub-varieties or races; for of these,
some can be propagated almost as truly as species, whilst others cannot be
relied on. The same rule holds good with plants, when propagated by bulbs,
offsets, etc., which in one sense still form parts of the same individual, for
some varieties retain or inherit through successive bud-generations their
character far more truly than others.

Some characters not proper to the parent-species have certainly been inherited
from an extremely remote epoch, and may therefore be considered as firmly
fixed. But it is doubtful whether length of inheritance in itself gives
fixedness of character; though the chances are obviously in favour of any
character which has long been transmitted true or unaltered still being
transmitted true as long as the conditions of life remain the same. We know
that many species, after having retained the same character for countless
ages, whilst living under their natural conditions, when domesticated have
varied in the most diversified manner, that is, have failed to transmit their
original form; so that no character appears to be absolutely fixed. We can
sometimes account for the failure of inheritance by the conditions of life
being opposed to the development of certain characters; and still oftener, as
with plants cultivated by grafts and buds, by the conditions causing new and
slight modifications incessantly to appear. In this latter case it is not that
inheritance wholly fails, but that new characters are continually superadded.
In some few cases, in which both parents are similarly characterised,
inheritance seems to gain so much force by the combined action of the two
parents, that it counteracts its own power, and a new modification is the
result.

In many cases the failure of the parents to transmit their likeness is due to
the breed having been at some former period crossed; and the child takes after
his grandparent or more remote ancestor of foreign blood. In other cases, in
which the breed has not been crossed, but some ancient character has been lost
through variation, it occasionally reappears through reversion, so that the
parents apparently fail to transmit their own likeness. In all cases, however,
we may safely conclude that the child inherits all its characters from its
parents, in whom certain characters are latent, like the secondary sexual
characters of one sex in the other. When, after a long succession of bud-
generations, a flower or fruit becomes separated into distinct segments,
having the colours or other attributes of both parent-forms, we cannot doubt
that these characters were latent in the earlier buds, though they could not
then be detected, or could be detected only in an intimately commingled state.
So it is with animals of crossed parentage, which with advancing years
occasionally exhibit characters derived from one of their two parents, of
which not a trace could at first be perceived. Certain monstrosities, which
resemble what naturalists call the typical form of the group in question,
apparently come under the same law of reversion. It is assuredly an
astonishing fact that the male and female sexual elements, that buds, and even
full-grown animals, should retain characters, during several generations in
the case of crossed breeds, and during thousands of generations in the case of
pure breeds, written as it were in invisible ink, yet ready at any time to be
evolved under certain conditions.

What these conditions precisely are, we do not know. But any cause which
disturbs the organisation or constitution seems to be sufficient. A cross
certainly gives a strong tendency to the reappearance of long-lost characters,
both corporeal and mental. In the case of plants, this tendency is much
stronger with those species which have been crossed after long cultivation and
which therefore have had their constitutions disturbed by this cause as well
as by crossing, than with species which have always lived under their natural
conditions and have then been crossed. A return, also, of domesticated animals
and cultivated plants to a wild state favours reversion; but the tendency
under these circumstances has been much exaggerated.

When individuals of the same family which differ somewhat, and when races or
species are crossed, the one is often prepotent over the other in transmitting
its character. A race may possess a strong power of inheritance, and yet when
crossed, as we have seen with trumpeter-pigeons, yield to the prepotency of
every other race. Prepotency of transmission may be equal in the two sexes of
the same species, but often runs more strongly in one sex. It plays an
important part in determining the rate at which one race can be modified or
wholly absorbed by repeated crosses with another. We can seldom tell what
makes one race or species prepotent over another; but it sometimes depends on
the same character being present and visible in one parent, and latent or
potentially present in the other.

Characters may first appear in either sex, but oftener in the male than in the
female, and afterwards be transmitted to the offspring of the same sex. In
this case we may feel confident that the peculiarity in question is really
present though latent in the opposite sex! hence the father may transmit
through his daughter any character to his grandson; and the mother conversely
to her granddaughter. We thus learn, and the fact is an important one, that
transmission and development are distinct powers. Occasionally these two
powers seem to be antagonistic, or incapable of combination in the same
individual; for several cases have been recorded in which the son has not
directly inherited a character from his father, or directly transmitted it to
his son, but has received it by transmission through his non-affected mother,
and transmitted it through his non-affected daughter. Owing to inheritance
being limited by sex, we see how secondary sexual characters may have arisen
under nature; their preservation and accumulation being dependent on their
service to either sex.

At whatever period of life a new character first appears, it generally remains
latent in the offspring until a corresponding age is attained, and then is
developed. When this rule fails, the child generally exhibits the character at
an earlier period than the parent. On this principle of inheritance at
corresponding periods, we can understand how it is that most animals display
from the germ to maturity such a marvellous succession of characters.

Finally, though much remains obscure with respect to Inheritance, we may look
at the following laws as fairly well established.

FIRSTLY, a tendency in every character, new and old, to be transmitted by
seminal and bud generation, though often counteracted by various known and
unknown causes.

SECONDLY, reversion or atavism, which depends on transmission and development
being distinct powers: it acts in various degrees and manners through both
seminal and bud generation.

THIRDLY, prepotency of transmission, which may be confined to one sex, or be
common to both sexes.

FOURTHLY, transmission, as limited by sex, generally to the same sex in which
the inherited character first appeared; and this in many, probably most cases,
depends on the new character having first appeared at a rather late period of
life.

FIFTHLY, inheritance at corresponding periods of life, with some tendency to
the earlier development of the inherited character.

In these laws of Inheritance, as displayed under domestication, we see an
ample provision for the production, through variability and natural selection,
of new specific forms.


CHAPTER 2.XV.

ON CROSSING.

FREE INTERCROSSING OBLITERATES THE DIFFERENCES BETWEEN ALLIED BREEDS.
WHEN THE NUMBERS OF TWO COMMINGLING BREEDS ARE UNEQUAL, ONE ABSORBS THE OTHER.
THE RATE OF ABSORPTION DETERMINED BY PREPOTENCY OF TRANSMISSION, BY THE
CONDITIONS OF LIFE, AND BY NATURAL SELECTION.
ALL ORGANIC BEINGS OCCASIONALLY INTERCROSS; APPARENT EXCEPTIONS.
ON CERTAIN CHARACTERS INCAPABLE OF FUSION; CHIEFLY OR EXCLUSIVELY THOSE WHICH
HAVE SUDDENLY APPEARED IN THE INDIVIDUAL.
ON THE MODIFICATION OF OLD RACES, AND THE FORMATION OF NEW RACES BY CROSSING.
SOME CROSSED RACES HAVE BRED TRUE FROM THEIR FIRST PRODUCTION.
ON THE CROSSING OF DISTINCT SPECIES IN RELATION TO THE FORMATION OF DOMESTIC
RACES.

In the two previous chapters, when discussing reversion and prepotency, I was
necessarily led to give many facts on crossing. In the present chapter I shall
consider the part which crossing plays in two opposed directions,--firstly, in
obliterating characters, and consequently in preventing the formation of new
races; and secondly, in the modification of old races, or in the formation of
new and intermediate races, by a combination of characters. I shall also show
that certain characters are incapable of fusion.

The effects of free or uncontrolled breeding between the members of the same
variety or of closely allied varieties are important; but are so obvious that
they need not be discussed at much length. It is free intercrossing which
chiefly gives uniformity, both under nature and under domestication, to the
individuals of the same species or variety, when they live mingled together
and are not exposed to any cause inducing excessive variability. The
prevention of free crossing, and the intentional matching of individual
animals, are the corner-stones of the breeder's art. No man in his senses
would expect to improve or modify a breed in any particular manner, or keep an
old breed true and distinct, unless he separated his animals. The killing of
inferior animals in each generation comes to the same thing as their
separation. In savage and semi-civilised countries, where the inhabitants have
not the means of separating their animals, more than a single breed of the
same species rarely or never exists. In former times, even in the United
States, there were no distinct races of sheep, for all had been mingled
together. (15/1. 'Communications to the Board of Agriculture' volume 1 page
367.) The celebrated agriculturist Marshall (15/2. 'Review of Reports, North
of England' 1808 page 200.) remarks that "sheep that are kept within fences,
as well as shepherded flocks in open countries, have generally a similarity,
if not a uniformity, of character in the individuals of each flock;" for they
breed freely together, and are prevented from crossing with other kinds;
whereas in the unenclosed parts of England the unshepherded sheep, even of the
same flock, are far from true or uniform, owing to various breeds having
mingled and crossed. We have seen that the half-wild cattle in each of the
several British parks are nearly uniform in character; but in the different
parks, from not having mingled and crossed during many generations, they
differ to a certain small extent.

We cannot doubt that the extraordinary number of varieties and sub-varieties
of the pigeon, amounting to at least one hundred and fifty, is partly due to
their remaining, differently from other domesticated birds, paired for life
once matched. On the other hand, breeds of cats imported into this country
soon disappear, for their nocturnal and rambling habits render it hardly
possible to prevent free crossing. Rengger (15/3. 'Saugethiere von Paraguay'
1830 s. 212.) gives an interesting case with respect to the cat in Paraguay:
in all the distant parts of the kingdom it has assumed, apparently from the
effects of the climate, a peculiar character, but near the capital this change
has been prevented, owing, as he asserts, to the native animal frequently
crossing with cats imported from Europe. In all cases like the foregoing, the
effects of an occasional cross will be augmented by the increased vigour and
fertility of the crossed offspring, of which fact evidence will hereafter be
given; for this will lead to the mongrels increasing more rapidly than the
pure parent-breeds.

When distinct breeds are allowed to cross freely, the result will be a
heterogeneous body; for instance, the dogs in Paraguay are far from uniform,
and can no longer be affiliated to their parent-races. (15/4. Rengger
'Saugethiere' etc. s. 154.) The character which a crossed body of animals will
ultimately assume must depend on several contingencies,--namely, on the
relative members of the individuals belonging to the two or more races which
are allowed to mingle; on the prepotency of one race over the other in the
transmission of character; and on the conditions of life to which they are
exposed. When two commingled breeds exist at first in nearly equal numbers,
the whole will sooner or later become intimately blended, but not so soon,
both breeds being equally favoured in all respects, as might have been
expected. The following calculation (15/5. White 'Regular Gradation in Man'
page 146.) shows that this is the case: if a colony with an equal number of
black and white men were founded, and we assume that they marry
indiscriminately, are equally prolific, and that one in thirty annually dies
and is born; then "in 65 years the number of blacks, whites, and mulattoes
would be equal. In 91 years the whites would be 1-10th, the blacks 1-10th, and
the mulattoes, or people of intermediate degrees of colour, 8-10ths of the
whole number. In three centuries not 1-100th part of the whites would exist."

When one of two mingled races exceed the other greatly in number, the latter
will soon be wholly, or almost wholly, absorbed and lost. (15/6. Dr. W.F.
Edwards in his 'Caracteres Physiolog. des Races Humaines' page 24 first called
attention to this subject, and ably discussed it.) Thus European pigs and dogs
have been largely introduced in the islands of the Pacific Ocean, and the
native races have been absorbed and lost in the course of about fifty or sixty
years (15/7. Rev. D. Tyerman and Bennett 'Journal of Voyages' 1821-1829 volume
1 page 300.); but the imported races no doubt were favoured. Rats may be
considered as semi-domesticated animals. Some snake-rats (Mus alexandrinus)
escaped in the Zoological Gardens of London "and for a long time afterwards
the keepers frequently caught cross-bred rats, at first half-breds, afterwards
with less of the character of the snake-rat, till at length all traces of it
disappeared." (15/8. Mr. S.J. Salter 'Journal Linn. Soc.' volume 6 1862 page
71.) On the other hand, in some parts of London, especially near the docks,
where fresh rats are frequently imported, an endless variety of intermediate
forms may be found between the brown, black, and snake rat, which are all
three usually ranked as distinct species.

How many generations are necessary for one species or race to absorb another
by repeated crosses has often been discussed (15/9. Sturm 'Ueber Racen, etc.'
1825 s. 107. Bronn 'Geschichte der Natur' b. 2 s. 170 gives a table of the
proportions of blood after successive crosses. Dr. P. Lucas 'L'Heredite Nat.'
tome 2 page 308.); and the requisite number has probably been much
exaggerated. Some writers have maintained that a dozen or score, or even more
generations, are necessary; but this in itself is improbable, for in the tenth
generation there would be only 1-1024th part of foreign blood in the
offspring. Gartner found (15/10. 'Bastarderzeugung' s. 463, 470.), that with
plants, one species could be made to absorb another in from three to five
generations, and he believes that this could always be effected in from six to
seven generations. In one instance, however, Kolreuter (15/11. 'Nova Acta
Petrop.' 1794 page 393: see also previous volume.) speaks of the offspring of
Mirabilis vulgaris, crossed during eight successive generations by M.
longiflora, as resembling this latter species so closely, that the most
scrupulous observer could detect "vix aliquam notabilem differentiam" or, as
he says, he succeeded, "ad plenariam fere transmutationem." But this
expression shows that the act of absorption was not even then absolutely
complete, though these crossed plants contained only the 1-256th part of M.
vulgaris. The conclusions of such accurate observers as Gartner and Kolreuter
are of far higher worth than those made without scientific aim by breeders.
The most precise account which I have met with is given by Stonehenge (15/12.
'The Dog' 1867 pages 179-184.) and is illustrated by photographs. Mr. Hanley
crossed a greyhound bitch with a bulldog; the offspring in each succeeding
generation being recrossed with first-rate greyhounds. As Stonehenge remarks,
it might naturally be supposed that it would take several crosses to get rid
of the heavy form of the bulldog; but Hysterics, the gr-gr-granddaughter of a
bulldog, showed no trace whatever of this breed in external form. She and all
of the same litter, however, were "remarkably deficient in stoutness, though
fast as well as clever." I believe clever refers to skill in turning.
Hysterics was put to a son of Bedlamite, "but the result of the fifth cross is
not as yet, I believe, more satisfactory than that of the fourth." On the
other hand, with sheep, Fleischmann (15/13. As quoted in the 'True Principles
of Breeding' by C.H. Macknight and Dr. H. Madden 1865 page 11.) shows how
persistent the effects of a single cross may be: he says "that the original
coarse sheep (of Germany) have 5500 fibres of wool on a square inch; grades of
the third or fourth Merino cross produced about 8000, the twentieth cross
27,000, the perfect pure Merino blood 40,000 to 48,000." So that common German
sheep crossed twenty times successively with Merino did not by any means
acquire wool as fine as that of the pure breed. But in all cases, the rate of
absorption will depend largely on the conditions of life being favourable to
any particular character; and we may suspect that there would be a constant
tendency to degeneration in the wool of Merinos under the climate of Germany,
unless prevented by careful selection; and thus perhaps the foregoing
remarkable case may be explained. The rate of absorption must also depend on
the amount of distinguishable difference between the two forms which are
crossed, and especially, as Gartner insists, on prepotency of transmission in
the one form over the other. We have seen in the last chapter that one of two
French breeds of sheep yielded up its character, when crossed with Merinos,
very much more slowly than the other; and the common German sheep referred to
by Fleischmann may be in this respect analogous. In all cases there will be
more or less liability to reversion during many subsequent generations, and it
is this fact which has probably led authors to maintain that a score or more
of generations are requisite for one race to absorb another. In considering
the final result of the commingling of two or more breeds, we must not forget
that the act of crossing in itself tends to bring back long-lost characters
not proper to the immediate parent-forms.

With respect to the influence of the conditions of life on any two breeds
which are allowed to cross freely, unless both are indigenous and have long
been accustomed to the country where they live, they will, in all probability,
be unequally affected by the conditions, and this will modify the result. Even
with indigenous breeds, it will rarely or never occur that both are equally
well adapted to the surrounding circumstances; more especially when permitted
to roam freely, and not carefully tended, as is generally the case with breeds
allowed to cross. As a consequence of this, natural selection will to a
certain extent come into action, and the best fitted will survive, and this
will aid in determining the ultimate character of the commingled body.

How long a time it would require before such a crossed body of animals would
assume a uniform character within a limited area, no one can say; that they
would ultimately become uniform from free intercrossing, and from the survival
of the fittest, we may feel assured; but the characters thus acquired would
rarely or never, as may be inferred from the previous considerations, be
exactly intermediate between those of the two parent-breeds. With respect to
the very slight differences by which the individuals of the same sub-variety,
or even of allied varieties, are characterised, it is obvious that free
crossing would soon obliterate such small distinctions. The formation of new
varieties, independently of selection, would also thus be prevented; except
when the same variation continually recurred from the action of some strongly
predisposing cause. We may therefore conclude that free crossing has in all
cases played an important part in giving uniformity of character to all the
members of the same domestic race and of the same natural species, though
largely governed by natural selection and by the direct action of the
surrounding conditions.

ON THE POSSIBILITY OF ALL ORGANIC BEINGS OCCASIONALLY INTERCROSSING.

But it may be asked, can free crossing occur with hermaphrodite animals and
plants? All the higher animals, and the few insects which have been
domesticated, have separate sexes, and must inevitably unite for each birth.
With respect to the crossing of hermaphrodites, the subject is too large for
the present volume, but in the 'Origin of Species' I have given a short
abstract of the reasons which induce me to believe that all organic beings
occasionally cross, though perhaps in some cases only at long intervals of
time. (15/14. With respect to plants, an admirable essay on this subject (Die
Geschlechter-Vertheilung bei den Pflanzen: 1867) has been published by Dr.
Hildebrand who arrives at the same general conclusions as I have done. Various
other treatises have since appeared on the same subject, more especially by
Hermann Muller and Delpino.) I will merely recall the fact that many plants,
though hermaphrodite in structure, are unisexual in function;--such as those
called by C.K. Sprengel DICHOGAMOUS, in which the pollen and stigma of the
same flower are matured at different periods; or those called by me
RECIPROCALLY DIMORPHIC, in which the flower's own pollen is not fitted to
fertilise its own stigma; or again, the many kinds in which curious mechanical
contrivances exist, effectually preventing self-fertilisation. There are,
however, many hermaphrodite plants which are not in any way specially
constructed to favour intercrossing, but which nevertheless commingle almost
as freely as animals with separated sexes. This is the case with cabbages,
radishes, and onions, as I know from having experimented on them: even the
peasants of Liguria say that cabbages must be prevented "from falling in love"
with each other. In the orange tribe, Gallesio (15/15. 'Teoria della
Riproduzione Vegetal' 1816 page 12.) remarks that the amelioration of the
various kinds is checked by their continual and almost regular crossing. So it
is with numerous other plants.

On the other hand, some cultivated plants rarely or never intercross, for
instance, the common pea and sweet-pea (Lathyrus odoratus); yet their flowers
are certainly adapted for cross fertilisation. The varieties of the tomato and
aubergine (Solanum) and the pimenta (Pimenta vulgaris?) are said (15/16.
Verlot 'Des Varietes' 1865 page 72.) never to cross, even when growing
alongside one another. But it should be observed that these are all exotic
plants, and we do not know how they would behave in their native country when
visited by the proper insects. With respect to the common pea, I have
ascertained that it is rarely crossed in this country owing to premature
fertilisation. There exist, however, some plants which under their natural
conditions appear to be always self-fertilised, such as the Bee Ophrys (Ophrys
apifera) and a few other Orchids; yet these plants exhibit the plainest
adaptations for cross-fertilisation. Again, some few plants are believed to
produce only closed flowers, called cleistogene, which cannot possibly be
crossed. This was long thought to be the case with the Leersia oryzoides
(15/17. Duval Jouve 'Bull. Soc. Bot. de France' tome 10 1863 page 194. With
respect to the perfect flowers setting seed see Dr. Ascherson in 'Bot.
Zeitung' 1864 page 350.), but this grass is now known occasionally to produce
perfect flowers, which set seed.

Although some plants, both indigenous and naturalised, rarely or never produce
flowers, or if they flower never produce seeds, yet no one doubts that
phanerogamic plants are adapted to produce flowers, and the flowers to produce
seed. When they fail, we believe that such plants under different conditions
would perform their proper function, or that they formerly did so, and will do
so again. On analogous grounds, I believe that the flowers in the above
specified anomalous cases which do not now intercross, either would do so
occasionally under different conditions, or that they formerly did so--the
means for affecting this being generally still retained--and will again
intercross at some future period, unless indeed they become extinct. On this
view alone, many points in the structure and action of the reproductive organs
in hermaphrodite plants and animals are intelligible,--for instance, the fact
of the male and female organs never being so completely enclosed as to render
access from without impossible. Hence we may conclude that the most important
of all the means for giving uniformity to the individuals of the same species,
namely, the capacity of occasionally intercrossing, is present, or has been
formerly present, with all organic beings, except, perhaps, some of the
lowest.

[ON CERTAIN CHARACTERS NOT BLENDING.

When two breeds are crossed their characters usually become intimately fused
together; but some characters refuse to blend, and are transmitted in an
unmodified state either from both parents or from one. When grey and white
mice are paired, the young are piebald, or pure white or grey, but not of an
intermediate tint; so it is when white and common collared turtle-doves are
paired. In breeding Game fowls, a great authority, Mr. J. Douglas, remarks, "I
may here state a strange fact: if you cross a black with a white game, you get
birds of both breeds of the clearest colour." Sir R. Heron crossed during many
years white, black, brown, and fawn-coloured Angora rabbits, and never once
got these colours mingled in the same animal, but often all four colours in
the same litter. (15/18. Extract of a letter from Sir R. Heron 1838 given me
by Mr. Yarrell. With respect to mice see 'Annal. des Sc. Nat.' tome 1 page
180; and I have heard of other similar cases. For turtle-doves Boitard and
Corbie 'Les Pigeons' etc. page 238. For the Game fowl 'The Poultry Book' 1866
page 128. For crosses of tailless fowls see Bechstein 'Naturges. Deutsch.' b.
3 s. 403. Bronn 'Geschichte der Natur' b. 2 s. 170 gives analogous facts with
horses. On the hairless condition of crossed South American dogs see Rengger
'Saugethiere von Paraguay' s. 152; but I saw in the Zoological Gardens
mongrels, from a similar cross, which were hairless, quite hairy, or hairy in
patches, that is, piebald with hair. For crosses of Dorking and other fowls
see 'Poultry Chronicle' volume 2 page 355. About the crossed pigs, extract of
letter from Sir R. Heron to Mr. Yarrell. For other cases see P. Lucas
'L'Hered. Nat.' tome 1 page 212.) From cases like these, in which the colours
of the two parents are transmitted quite separately to the offspring, we have
all sorts of gradations, leading to complete fusion. I will give an instance:
a gentleman with a fair complexion, light hair but dark eyes, married a lady
with dark hair and complexion: their three children have very light hair, but
on careful search about a dozen black hairs were found scattered in the midst
of the light hair on the heads of all three.

When turnspit dogs and ancon sheep, both of which have dwarfed limbs, are
crossed with common breeds, the offspring are not intermediate in structure,
but take after either parent. When tailless or hornless animals are crossed
with perfect animals, it frequently, but by no means invariably, happens that
the offspring are either furnished with these organs in a perfect state, or
are quite destitute of them. According to Rengger, the hairless condition of
the Paraguay dog is either perfectly or not at all transmitted to its mongrel
offspring; but I have seen one partial exception in a dog of this parentage
which had part of its skin hairy, and part naked, the parts being distinctly
separated as in a piebald animal. When Dorking fowls with five toes are
crossed with other breeds, the chickens often have five toes on one foot and
four on the other. Some crossed pigs raised by Sir R. Heron between the solid-
hoofed and common pig had not all four feet in an intermediate condition, but
two feet were furnished with properly divided, and two with united hoofs.

Analogous facts have been observed with plants: Major Trevor Clarke crossed
the little, glabrous-leaved, annual stock (Matthiola), with pollen of a large,
red-flowered, rough-leaved, biennial stock, called cocardeau by the French,
and the result was that half the seedlings had glabrous and the other half
rough leaves, but none had leaves in an intermediate state. That the glabrous
seedlings were the product of the rough-leaved variety, and not accidentally
of the mother-plant's own pollen, was shown by their tall and strong habit of
growth. (15/19. 'Internat. Hort. and Bot. Congress of London' 1866.) in the
succeeding generations raised from the rough-leaved crossed seedlings, some
glabrous plants appeared, showing that the glabrous character, though
incapable of blending with and modifying the rough leaves, was all the time
latent in this family of plants. The numerous plants formerly referred to,
which I raised from reciprocal crosses between the peloric and common
Antirrhinum, offer a nearly parallel case; for in the first generation all the
plants resembled the common form, and in the next generation, out of one
hundred and thirty-seven plants, two alone were in an intermediate condition,
the others perfectly resembling either the peloric or common form. Major
Trevor Clarke also fertilised the above-mentioned red-flowered stock with
pollen from the purple Queen stock, and about half the seedlings scarcely
differed in habit, and not at all in the red colour of the flower, from the
mother-plant, the other half bearing blossoms of a rich purple, closely like
those of the paternal plant. Gartner crossed many white and yellow-flowered
species and varieties of Verbascum; and these colours were never blended, but
the offspring bore either pure white or pure yellow blossoms; the former in
the larger proportion. (15/20. 'Bastarderzeugung' s. 307. Kolreuter 'Dritte
Fortsetszung' s. 34, 39 however, obtained intermediate tints from similar
crosses in the genus Verbascum. With respect to the turnips see Herbert
'Amaryllidaceae' 1837 page 370.) Dr. Herbert raised many seedlings, as he
informed me, from Swedish turnips crossed by two other varieties, and these
never produced flowers of an intermediate tint, but always like one of their
parents. I fertilised the purple sweet-pea (Lathyrus odoratus), which has a
dark reddish-purple standard-petal and violet-coloured wings and keel, with
pollen of the painted lady sweet-pea, which has a pale cherry-coloured
standard, and almost white wings and keel; and from the same pod I twice
raised plants perfectly resembling both sorts; the greater number resembling
the father. So perfect was the resemblance, that I should have thought there
had been some mistake, if the plants which were at first identical with the
paternal variety, namely, the painted-lady, had not later in the season
produced, as mentioned in a former chapter, flowers blotched and streaked with
dark purple. I raised grandchildren and great-grandchildren from these crossed
plants, and they continued to resemble the painted-lady, but during later
generations became rather more blotched with purple, yet none reverted
completely to the original mother-plant, the purple sweet-pea. The following
case is slightly different, but still shows the same principle: Naudin (15/21.
'Nouvelles Archives du Museum' tome 1 page 100.) raised numerous hybrids
between the yellow Linaria vulgaris and the purple L. purpurea, and during
three successive generations the colours kept distinct in different parts of
the same flower.

From cases such as the foregoing, in which the offspring of the first
generation perfectly resemble either parent, we come by a small step to those
cases in which differently coloured flowers borne on the same root resemble
both parents, and by another step to those in which the same flower or fruit
is striped or blotched with the two parental colours, or bears a single stripe
of the colour or other characteristic quality of one of the parent-forms. With
hybrids and mongrels it frequently or even generally happens that one part of
the body resembles more or less closely one parent and another part the other
parent; and here again some resistence to fusion, or, what comes to the same
thing, some mutual affinity between the organic atoms of the same nature,
apparently comes into play, for otherwise all parts of the body would be
equally intermediate in character. So again, when the offspring of hybrids or
mongrels, which are themselves nearly intermediate in character, revert either
wholly or by segments to their ancestors, the principle of the affinity of
similar, or the repulsion of dissimilar atoms, must come into action. To this
principle, which seems to be extremely general, we shall recur in the chapter
on pangenesis.

It is remarkable, as has been strongly insisted upon by Isidore Geoffroy St.
Hilaire in regard to animals, that the transmission of characters without
fusion occurs very rarely when species are crossed; I know of one exception
alone, namely, with the hybrids naturally produced between the common and
hooded crow (Corvus corone and cornix), which, however, are closely allied
species, differing in nothing except colour. Nor have I met with any well-
ascertained cases of transmission of this kind, even when one form is strongly
prepotent over another, when two races are crossed which have been slowly
formed by man's selection, and therefore resemble to a certain extent natural
species. Such cases as puppies in the same litter closely resembling two
distinct breeds, are probably due to superfoetation,--that is, to the
influence of two fathers. All the characters above enumerated, which are
transmitted in a perfect state to some of the offspring and not to others,--
such as distinct colours, nakedness of skin, smoothness of leaves, absence of
horns or tail, additional toes, pelorism, dwarfed structure, etc.,--have all
been known to appear suddenly in individual animals and plants. From this
fact, and from the several slight, aggregated differences which distinguish
domestic races and species from one another, not being liable to this peculiar
form of transmission, we may conclude that it is in some way connected with
the sudden appearance of the characters in question.]

ON THE MODIFICATION OF OLD RACES AND THE FORMATION OF NEW RACES BY CROSSING.
