
An hour.... A day.... A week.... Who shall try and describe what Lee
Anthony beheld during that weird outward journey?... For a brief time,
after they swept past the orbit of Mars, the great planets of Jupiter
and Saturn were almost in a line ahead of the plunging, expanding globe.
A monstrous thing now--with electronically charged gravity-plates so
that it plunged onward by its own repellant force--the repellant force
of the great star-field beneath it.

       *       *       *       *       *

Lee stared at Jupiter, a lead-colored world with its red spot like a
monster's single glaring eye. With the speed of light Jupiter was
advancing, swinging off to one side with a visible flow of movement, and
dropping down into the lower void as the globe went past it. Yet, as it
approached, visually it had not grown larger. Instead, there was only a
steady dwindling. A dwindling of great Saturn, with its gorgeous,
luminous rings came next. These approaching planets, seeming to shrink!
Because, with Lee's expanding viewpoint, everything in the vast scene
was shrinking! Great distances here, in relation to the giant globe,
were dwindling! These millions of miles between Saturn and Jupiter had
shrunk into thousands. And then were shrinking to hundreds.

Abruptly, with a startled shock to his senses, Lee's viewpoint changed.
Always before he had instinctively conceived himself to be his normal
six foot earthly size. The starry Universe was vast beyond his
conception. And in a second now, that abruptly was altered. He conceived
the vehicle as of actuality it was--a globe as large as the ball of
Saturn itself! And simultaneously he envisaged the present reality of
Saturn. Out in the inky blackness it hung--not a giant ringed world
millions of miles away, but only a little ringed ball no bigger than the
spaceship--a ringed ball only eight or ten times as big as Lee himself.
It hung there for an instant beside them--only a mile or so away
perhaps. And as it went past, with both distance and size-change
combining now, it shrank with amazing rapidity! A ball only as big as
this room.... Then no larger than Lee it hung, still seemingly no
further away than before. And then in a few minutes more, a mile out
there in the shrinking distance, it was a tiny luminous point, vanishing
beyond his vision.

Uranus, little Neptune--Pluto, almost too far away in its orbit to be
seen--all of them presently were dwindled and gone. Lee had a glimpse of
the Solar system, a mere bunch of lights. The Sun was a tiny spot of
light, holding its little family of tiny planets--a mother hen with her
brood. It was gone in a moment, lost like a speck of star-dust among the
giant starry worlds.

Another day--that is a day as it would have been on Earth. But here was
merely a progressing of human existence--a streaming forward of human
consciousness. The Light-year dial pointers were all in movement. By
Earth standards of size and velocity, long since had the globe's
velocity reached and passed the speed of light. Lee had been taught--his
book-learning colored by the Einstein postulates--that there could be no
speed greater than the speed of light--by Earth standards--perhaps, yes.
The globe--by comparison with its original fifty-foot earth-size--might
still be traveling no more than a few hundred thousand miles an hour.
But this monster--a thing now as big as the whole Solar System
doubtless--was speeding through a light-year in a moment!

Futile figures! The human mind can grasp nothing of the vastness of
inter-stellar space. To Lee it was only a shrinking inky void--an
emptiness crowded with whirling little worlds all dwindling.... This
crowded space! Often little points of star-dust had come whirling at the
globe--colliding, bursting into pin-points of fire. Each of them might
have been bigger than the Earth.

There was a time when it seemed that beneath the globe all the tiny
stars were shrinking into one lens-shaped cluster. The Inter-stellar
Universe--all congealed down there into a blob, and everywhere else
there was just nothingness.... But then little distant glowing nebulae
were visible--luminous, floating rings, alone in the emptiness....
Distant? One of them drifted past, seemingly only a few hundred feet
away--a luminous little ring of star-dust. The passage of the monstrous
globe seemed to hurl it so that like a blown smoke ring it went into
chaos, lost its shape, and vanished.

Then at last all the blobs--each of them, to Earth-size conception, a
monstrous Universe--all were dwindled into one blob down to one side of
Lee's window. And then they were gone....

       *       *       *       *       *

Just darkness now. Darkness and soundless emptiness. But as he stared at
intervals through another long night of his human consciousness, Lee
seemed to feel that the emptiness out there was dwindling--a finite
emptiness. He noticed, presently, that the size-change pointers had
stopped their movement; the ultimate size of the globe had been reached.
The figures of the Light-year dials were meaningless to his
comprehension. The velocity was meaningless. And now another little set
of dials were in operation. A thousand--something--of distance. There
was a meaningless word which named the unit. A thousand Earth-miles, if
he had been in his former size? The pointer marked nine hundred in a
moment. Was it, perhaps, the distance now from their destination?

Vivian was beside him. "Lee, what's gonna happen to us? Won't this come
to an end some time? Lee--you won't let anybody hurt me?"

She was like a child, almost always clinging to him now. And suddenly
she said a very strange thing. "Lee, I been thinkin'--back there on
Earth I was doin' a lot of things that maybe were pretty rotten--anglin'
for his money for instance--an' not carin' much what I had to do to get
it." She gestured at the sullen Franklin who was sitting on the couch.
"You know--things like that. An' I been thinkin'--you suppose, when we
get where we're goin' now, that'll be held against me?"

What a queer thing to say! She was like a child--and so often a child
has an insight into that which is hidden from those more mature!

"I--don't know," Lee muttered.

From the couch, Franklin looked up moodily. "Whispering about me again?
I know you are--damn you both. You and everybody else here."

"We're not interested in you," Vivian said.

"Oh, you're not? Well you were, back on Earth. I'm not good enough for
you now, eh? He's better--because he's big--big and strong--that the
idea? Well if I ever had the chance--"

"Don't be silly," Lee said.

       *       *       *       *       *

The sullen Franklin was working himself into a rage. Lee seemed to
understand Franklin better now. A weakling. Inherently, with a complex
of inferiority, the vague consciousness of it lashing him into baffled
anger.

"You, Anthony," Franklin burst out, "don't think you've been fooling me.
You can put it over that fool girl, but not me. I'm onto you."

"Put what over?" Lee said mildly.

"That you don't know anything about this affair or these men who've got
us--you don't know who they are, do you?"

"No. Do you?" Lee asked.

Franklin jumped to his feet. "Don't fence with me. By God, if I was
bigger I'd smash your head in. They abducted us, because they wanted
you. That fellow said as much near the start of this damned trip. They
won't talk--afraid I'll find out. And you can't guess what it's all
about! The hell you can't."

Lee said nothing. But there was a little truth in what Franklin was
saying, of course.... Those things that the dying old Anna Green had
told him--surely this weird voyage had some connection.

He turned away; went back to the window. There was a sheen now. A vague
outline of something vast, as though the darkness were ending at a great
wall that glowed a little.

It seemed, during the next time-interval, as though the globe might have
turned over, so that now it was dropping down upon something tangible.
Dropping--floating down--with steadily decreasing velocity, descending
to a Surface. The sheen of glow had expanded until now it filled all the
lower hemisphere of darkness--a great spread of surface visually coming
up. Then there were things to see, illumined by a faint half-light to
which color was coming; a faint, pastel color that seemed a rose-glow.

"Why--why," Vivian murmured, "say, it's beautiful, ain't it? It looks
like fairyland--or Heaven. It does--don't it, Lee?"

"Yes," Lee murmured. "Like--like--"

The wall-slide rasped. The voice of one of their captors said, "We will
arrive soon. We can trust you--there must be no fighting?"

"You can trust us," Lee said.

It was dark in the little curving corridor of the globe, where with
silent robed figures around them, they stood while the globe gently
landed. Then they were pushed forward, out through the exit port.

The new realm. The World Beyond. What was it? To Lee Anthony then came
the feeling that there was a precise scientific explanation of it, of
course. And yet, beyond all that pedantry of science, he seemed to know
that it was something else, perhaps a place that a man might mould by
his dreams. A place that would be what a man made of it, from that which
was within himself.

Solemn with awe he went with his companions slowly down the incline.




CHAPTER III

_Realm of Mystery_


"We wish nothing of you," the man said, "save that you accept from us
what we have to offer. You are hungry. You will let us bring you food."

It was a simple rustic room to which they had been brought--a room in a
house seemingly of plaited straw. Crude furnishings were here--table and
chairs of Earth fashion, padded with stuffed mats. Woven matting was on
the floor. Through a broad latticed window the faint rose-light
outside--like a soft pastel twilight--filtered in, tinting the room with
a gentle glow. Thin drapes at the window stirred in a breath of
breeze--a warm wind from the hills, scented with the vivid blooms which
were everywhere.

