space-radio. "S-W-A ... S-W-A ... S-W-A...." The general attention
signal for all Earth's far-flung outposts from Jupiter to Mercury! The
signal was coming from "M-I-T-A," the Earth company's home station on
the Moon, outside the Heaviside layer. "S-W-A ... S-W-A ... M-I-T-A ...
M-I-T-A." Again the signal rose and fell.

       *       *       *       *       *

Jim reached for the sending key and pounded out his acknowledgement:
"K; M-E-R ... K; M-E-R ... K; M-E-R." He listened again, heard Venus
answer, and Jupiter. Across five hundred million miles of space ITA
men were responding to the roll-call of Earth. A reminiscent smile
crossed Jim's face as he recognized the stuttering fist of Rade
Perrin, on Eros. Rade always sent as if he were afraid the instrument
would snap at his fingers.

M-I-T-A was signalling again, and now came the message: "S-W-A. All
trading posts, mines and colonies are warned to prepare for possible
attack. The Earth Government has just announced the receipt of an
ultimatum from--" A raucous howl cut across the message and drowned it
out. The siren blast howled on and on, mocking Jim's straining ears.
"Well I'll be--Interference! Deliberate blanketing! The rats! The--"
He blazed into a torrent of profanity whose imaginativeness was
matched only by its virulence.

Mac was clutching his shoulder, stirred for once out of his vaunted
"deegnity." "What is it, mon, what is it?"

"War, you bloody Scotchman, war! That's what it is!"

"War! Foosh, man, 'tis eempossible!"

"The hell it's impossible! Damn, and Darl not here! Take over, Mac;
I've got to go up an' get him!"

       *       *       *       *       *

In the meantime Thomas' helpless journey had come to an end. After an
interminable descent in what to him had been pitch darkness, the giant
who was carrying him halted. Darl had heard the whistling inrush of
air into some lock, then the clanging of a door. He felt himself
hurled to the ground. Fumbling hands tugged at him, drew off his space
suit.

The dim light of the cavern, as the helmet was dragged from his head,
hurt Darl's eyes. Salt sweat stung them. It was hot, hotter than the
Dome, hot as it was in the surta mine, where only the nerveless
Venusians could work for any length of time.

Darl struggled to focus his eyes on a blurred blue form that towered
above him. He felt sharp claws scratch at him and realized that cords
were being passed around his limp body. They cut tightly into his legs
and his arms. Then he was staring at a tube in the hand of his captor.
Its end glowed with a brilliant purple light, and he felt a flood of
reawakened energy warm him. His head jerked up, he strained against
the taut, strong fibers binding him. The paralysis was gone, but he
was still helpless.

A husky, rumbling voice broke the silence. "I wouldn't struggle,
Earthman, if I were you. Even should you get free I still have my
ray-tube. And my little friends would ask nothing better than your
body to play with."

Darl writhed to a sitting posture. Now he could see his mysterious
abductor clearly. This eight-foot, blue-feathered individual, with
curved beak and beady eyes glittering from his naked, repulsively
wrinkled head, was a Martian! Despite the human shape of his body,
despite his jointed limbs and thumbed hands, this denizen of the red
planet resembled a vulture far more than he did any other Earth
creature.

       *       *       *       *       *

The Earthman's pride of race came to his rescue. "What's the game?" he
growled. "Looking for trouble?" There was nothing in Darl's voice to
show the fear that chilled him. Behind the Martian he could see
vaguely a group of little yellow Mercurians.

"I'll ask all the questions here. And you'll answer them, too, if
you're wise. Even your dull mind should comprehend that you are in my
power."

Darl decided to proceed more cautiously. "What do you want from me?"
he asked.

"I want," the Martian answered, "the recognition signal of Earth's
space-ships."

"What!" The ejaculation burst from Darl's throat. This alien wanted
the secret code, the watch-word that distinguished Earth's space
ships, that gained for them free admittance to ITA's armed posts on
the outer planets! This could mean only one thing, that the long
rivalry, the ancient dispute between Earth and Mars was about to flare
into open war. Any friendly visit from a foreign flier would be
heralded by word from M-I-T-A. Thomas' face became a stony mask,
covering the tumult of his mind.

"You understood. I want the Earth recognition signal at once--and
after that, the surrender of the Dome." The very calmness of the husky
tones was a threat.

"Never!"

"I warn you, Darl Thomas. It would be the better part of wisdom for
you to yield willingly what I ask. You will give in eventually, and
the means of persuasion I shall use will not be exactly--pleasant."

"You'll get nothing from me!"

The outlander's lidless eyes were filmed with a gray membrane. His
head thrust forward, the feathered ruff beneath it bristled. Darl
braced himself to withstand the swooping pounce that seemed imminent,
the slash of the sharp beak. A burring rattle broke the momentary
hush. The Martian relaxed, turned to the Mercurian from whom the sound
had come and replied with staccato vibrance.

       *       *       *       *       *

As the cave filled with a whirring tumult Darl had a chance to examine
the Mercurian natives crowding around his prostrate body. They were
little yellow midgets, ranging from eighteen inches to two feet in
height. Half of their small stature was taken up by snouted heads,
with saucer-like, crimson eyes, and long white tusks jutting from
foam-flecked mouths. The trunks were globular. The spindling legs and
thin arms ended in sharp claws. There was an impression of animal
ferocity about these tiny beings that stamped them as utter savages.

His captor was speaking to the Earthman again, his horny beak parted
in what might have been a grim smile. "My friends remind me that I
promised you to them. They have not forgotten how you and your fellows
drove them from their burrows."

Darl was suddenly cold, though the sweat still streamed from his bound
body. An uncontrollable shudder took him as he saw what the diminutive
claws of the midgets held. While the Dome was still an unfinished
framework one of the Terrestrian artisans had somehow been isolated
from his fellows. Thomas had been of the party that found what was
left of him, and the memory was still a throbbing nightmare.

"Once more! Will you give me the recognition signal?"

Darl shook his head, and prayed for sudden death. The Martian spoke to
the dwarfs. They started forward, saliva drooling from their tusks.
