sustain life if the vitamins are absent from the diet. Goat's milk
contains these important substances in greater abundance than any other
animal food.

+The Goat Reacts Like Human.+ The goat alone among mammals reacts to
poisons almost identically as human beings react, and the poison gases
of the war had precisely the same effect upon him as upon the soldiers.
So 1,500 goats did their bit in the war in an experimental way. These
points in his favor, and other similarities to man, are the reasons
which led me to select the goat as the best possible material in this
work. Goat-glands alone seemed to be harmonious and sympathetic when
transplanted into the human body. In other words, the hormones of goat
and man agree.

We still know less about the causes of hormones than the effects. On
account of the mutual tolerance of goat and human hormones the goat
gland speedily attaches a blood supply in the human body, and cell by
cell is replaced so that it soon functions as the original gland would
had it been present and normal. The new gland is also exceptional in
that it does not have to be placed near or at the location of the proper
human gland. It can be inserted in any place where it is not liable to
injury, even in the hip in men.[*]

It should be noted that I do not claim to make old men young again, or
that I have discovered the secret fountain of youth. I am engaged in the
practical work of giving health, normality and progeny to men and women
who have been cheated out of their natural heritage. I have named the
process "re-creative gland operation" in accordance with the belief now
general among genetists and anatomists that if the clock of time is ever
to be turned back for humanity it can only be through glandular
transplantations. Glands have proved much superior to any animal extract
or serum in this class of cases. Often in serums the poison elements are
retained, but not the nutritive. We use the whole goat gland, as a rule,
because we do not know in what part of it the hormones hide. The
attempted transplantations of kidneys have thus far failed because the
kidney product is waste matter, not live cells as in the case of the
interstitial glands.

    [Footnote: Author's Note.--The date of this interview is more than
    one year old, March, 1920. Today Dr. Brinkley implants the male
    glands by incision in the acrotum of the man, and in no other
    place whatever, having found this method of operation the most
    sure in results. Today he uses only the male goat-glands for the
    man, and only the female goat's ovaries for the woman.]


  (From The Chicago Tribune, of date February 1, 1920.)

  +GOAT GLANDS GIVE BABIES TO CHILDLESS.+

  +Woman and Three Men Become Parents After
  Transplantation.+

Milford, Kansas.--A surgeon in this little Kansas town has lifted from
womanhood the curse of sterility.

He is Dr. J. R. Brinkley, chief surgeon of the Brinkley-Jones Hospital
of Milford.

For several years Dr. Brinkley has made a study of the transplantation
of the interstitial glands and its results. Two years ago he performed
his first operation upon a human being. Since then he has circumvented
nature four times, making it possible for three men and one woman to
become parents. He is awaiting results hopefully in four other cases.

The most remarkable case is that of the woman. She is a young married
woman of Milford, who had been married several years and had despaired
of bearing children. About a year and a half ago she heard of Dr.
Brinkley and his success with interstitial gland operations. She went to
him and asked him if he could cure her sterility. Dr. Brinkley made no
promises--he never does. But he told her the operation was a simple one,
and that it would improve her health, even if it failed to give her a
child. She gladly submitted to the operation.

Dr. Brinkley removed an interstitial gland from a live male goat. He
made a slight incision in the woman's abdomen, inserted the gland and
stitched it in. In a week the patient was about her household duties
again. Six months ago she gave birth to a healthy baby. It was a boy.
The mother was the happiest woman in Kansas.

The surgeon had treated six other cases similarly, but all were men--men
who loved children and yearned for parenthood. Three of the men are now
fathers of healthy children.

In each case Dr. Brinkley had used male goat glands--and all the babies
were boys.

Then this occurred to him:--

"If I transplant female goat glands maybe the babies will be girls!" He
decided to try it, and two months ago his opportunity arrived. A woman
came to him just as his first woman patient had come. She was 28 years
old, had been married six years, and was childless. Dr. Brinkley
performed the operation, using the glands of a female goat. He is now
awaiting results. "I do not say this woman will have a girl baby," said
Dr. Brinkley today, "but I am experimenting. It may be merely a
coincidence that all the babies so far have been boys. So far as I know,
I am the first surgeon to experiment with gland implantation in women.
I am also the first to use goat glands in preference to others.

"Unquestionably I have cured sterility in one woman, and I have utmost
faith that it can be cured in any other, so long as all of her organs
are not missing. The operation is a little more difficult than it is in
the case of men, but no more serious. Where a man recovers, and can get
about, in two or three days, a woman recovers in a week.

"All of my patients are much improved in their general health as a
result of the operation. I wouldn't say that this operation holds the
secret of eternal youth. I don't know. All my patients have been between
the ages of 32 and 48, so that I cannot speak from experience.
I believe, however, that the operation will prolong life; I know that it
improves the health in every way. But I cannot say that it will restore
the bloom of youth to an old man's cheek. I am considering, however, an
operation upon a man 80 years old who came to me and asked for the
operation. Whether he would be able to have children as a result of it I
do not know."

None of Dr. Brinkley's patients had been parents until they came to him.
Now the oldest of the babies is 13 months; another is 8 months and a
third is 6. Dr. Brinkley does not claim to be a specialist in gland
implantation; he is merely a practicing surgeon who has made a study of
the subject and is doing what he can to help unfortunate people. The
doctor's modesty until now has hidden his remarkable discovery from the
world, but he is now writing a report on his results.


  (From the San Diego, Cal., +Union+, of date,
  February 7, 1920.)

Scientists who formerly ignored Dr. Brinkley's letters are now writing
to him asking him for exhaustive reports of his work. The sarcastic
attitude came largely heretofore from those who were unwilling to
believe that such operations of the highest scientific importance, were
being performed in an out of the way village that couldn't be found on a
railway map.

Dr. Brinkley, who was graduated from the Medical Department of Loyola
University, and who has traveled over all the world, explained his
residence in Milford. After leaving the army he sought a location in a
small town, selecting Milford as the result of a newspaper
advertisement, and going there, found it to consist of less than 200
inhabitants. But the surrounding territory was rich and the farmers
prosperous, and in the isolated location he saw the chance of continuing
experiments begun at Bellevue Hospital, New York. Later he found himself
compelled to build his own hospital to care for the patients that
arrived, attracted by the news of the goat-gland operations. Dr.
Brinkley is 35 years old and has been a skilled surgeon for more than 15
years. He is a member of the American Association for the Advancement of
Science, the American Medical Association, the Missouri Valley Medical
Association, the Kansas Medical Association, and a Fellow of the
Clinical Congress of Internal Medicine. He is also a 32nd Degree Mason.

In the treatment of pneumonia and influenza Dr. Brinkley uses serums of
his own invention. In the treatment of his cases of influenza last year
the reports of the health authorities of Geary County, Kansas, show that
Dr. Brinkley didn't lose a single case. Milford is in Geary County, and
Geary County swears by Dr. Brinkley.




CHAPTER V

A YEAR OF DEVELOPMENT


The intention in offering for your perusal the preceding newspaper
accounts of Dr. Brinkley's work in the opening months of the year 1920
was to show you what his views at that time were regarding the value of
the gland operation which he has since made his life-work. The Chicago
Tribune speaks of it as incidental to his general work as a surgeon. Dr.
Brinkley himself speaks of shortly beginning an experiment upon an old
man of 80. A year later he looked back upon a record of achievement of
the most astounding results in operations performed upon men of 75, 80,
and even 81. During this past year he has perfected his technique,
implants the male glands exclusively into men and the female glands or
ovaries into women, and has definitely selected the scrotum of the man
as the only right place in which to introduce the goat-glands for the
transplantation. You are here viewing the development of a great
scientific discovery from the beginning of its employment upon human
beings. Nor is there any reason to suppose that the year 1922 will
produce no embellishment of value in the form of a wider application of
the method. Some very striking limitations have been established during
the past year's work. For instance:

If the blood examination shows a positive Wasserman test for syphilis it
is useless to transplant the glands, because they will certainly slough
out. Active syphilis is antagonistic to the goat-tissue. Even latent
syphilis, showing a negative Wasserman, is likely to produce a slough of
the glands. Nothing should be concealed from the doctor, of course, and
yet it has happened at the hospital at Milford that a patient on being
questioned in advance of the operation has emphatically stated that he
had never contracted syphilis, and three days later, after the
transplantation, when the sloughing of the new glands had shown
something definitely wrong with the blood, this patient admitted that he
had not spoken the truth in the matter, but had contracted the disease
many years previously. On the other hand, in Locomoter Ataxia, in which
there is invariably a history of syphilis, the goat-glands take hold
without exception, the efficacy of the transplantation in this disease,
hitherto incurable by any means known to man, being due to the power of
the new glands to cause a dissolving of scar-tissue, in the opinion of
Dr. Abrams of San Francisco, who investigated the remarkable results
attained by Dr. Brinkley in his cures of Locomoter Ataxia by the
goat-gland operation.

If the goat-glands are transplanted into members of the Hebrew race
there follows invariably a high temperature persisting for several days,
after which the cure proceeds normally without any untoward occurrence.
Glands transplanted into a negro will slough, or, at least, they did so
in the one case on which Dr. Brinkley performed the operation, for no
apparent reason other than a supposed racial antagonism to goat-tissue.
No experiments have yet been conducted upon Japanese, Chinese, Hindus,
or our native Indians. When the blood count shows high in white
(leucocytes) and low in red, the glands will slough, but the reverse
condition does not hold true. And now let us consider the case of Mr.
Ernst, of Morganville, Kansas, who is over 77 years of age, and who
permits the use of his name and address. One of the most curious
features of his case is that when he came for the operation his hair,
white as snow, was thin on the scalp, the color of the skin of the scalp
showing through the hair, as it frequently does in the aged. That was
almost a year ago. Mr. Ernst's hair is now turning black all over the
head, the scalp shows a thickening in the growth, or an increase in the
quantity of hair, and you cannot now see the scalp through the hair. Mr.
Ernst wrote an excellent letter to Dr. Brinkley two months ago, and
states that he has no objection at all to its reproduction. When a
personal story of this kind is offered for use it is as well to use it
in its original form, but this so rarely happens in this work that for
its uniqueness alone it would be worth while to put it before you. With
some notable exceptions, the men patients who have been operated upon by
Dr. Brinkley feel ashamed of the fact. Not for anything would they let
their friends or acquaintances know anything about it. The veil of
secrecy is, of course, never lifted by the doctor. The women patients
have none of this false shame, apparently, but enjoy discussing the
results of the operation with their friends. It is, perhaps, natural
that a United States Senator, two of whom have been operated on with
much advantage to themselves, should shrink from the jocose remarks of
friend or foe and the curiosity of acquaintances. There is good reason,
in the case of a public man, for avoidance of notice in the matter, and
that is one of the advantages of having the hospital located in the tiny
village of Milford. If freedom from observation is the wish it is
certainly gratified there. Agreeing, therefore, on the whole, with the
reticence of the public man in this matter, we yet feel a certain
satisfaction in the robust avowals of Mr. Ernst. Follows his letter of
January, 1921:

"I am 77 years old, employed as commercial salesman by one of the
largest manufacturing companies of its kind in the world, and command a
good salary and the confidence of my employers. Since my operation at
Dr. Brinkley's hospital I am now their free lance salesman, opening up
new territory and making good money. Any doubting Thomas may send me a
self-addressed envelope if he questions the genuineness of what I say
here about myself, and I will take time to answer him. First, the
operation is absolutely painless. For a number of years I was a martyr
to Sciatica and Muscular Rheumatism. I used every Patent Medicine I
could hear of, besides Osteopathy and Chiropractic, and innumerable
prescriptions from physicians, and received no benefit at all. The
sciatic trouble was bad enough, but to this you must add loss of memory,
hydrocele, kidney trouble, constipation, no appetite, and insomnia. Most
nights two hours sleep was the most I could get, for the pains were
incessant. I read in ... the +Kansas City Post+ last Spring about Dr.
Brinkley's Goat-Gland operation, and decided to try it right away. I was
in such misery I would have tried +anything+. Now I want to tell you, in
the fewest words, that the amazing truth is that I have not had a twinge
of pain of any kind at all since the operation, and have only a memory
of my former suffering. This is a marvelous thing. I have the feeling of
a youth. Whenever you want to hear from me I will write again and tell
you what changes have taken place in me as the result of this operation.
If I was asked to put a cash value upon the operation in my own case I
could not do it, but I can say that all I possess in cash would be a
poor equivalent for the difference the operation has made in my life.
What is the difference in cash value between a life that is worth living
and one that is constant misery? I don't know how you would fix that
value, but that is the difference the operation has made in me.

  S. H. ERNST."

Dr. Brinkley has kept in close touch with Mr. Ernst, and received other
letters, not for publication, in which the old gentleman went frankly
into details of the change that had been wrought in him by the operation
