Service, and the yellow flimsy Kane held out to him. It read simply:

"Shipwrecked. Am ashore at--" There followed grid coordinate map
readings. "Come at once, prepared to fly me to Washington." It was
signed "Kleig."

"Kane," said Kleig, "I did not send this message!"

What more was there to be said? Horror looked out of the eyes of Prester
Kleig, and was reflected in those of Carlos Kane. Both men turned,
peering out across the tumbled welter of waters.

Somewhere out there, tight-locked in the gloomy archives of the
Atlantic, was the secret of the message which had brought Carlos Kane to
Prester Kleig--and the agency which had sent it.




CHAPTER III

_Wings of To-morrow_


As Prester Kleig climbed into the enclosed passenger pit of the
monoplane--a Mayther--his ears seemed literally to be ringing with the
drumming, mighty voice of Moyen. But now that voice, instead of merely
speaking, rang with sardonic laughter. He had never heard the laughter
of Moyen, but he could guess how it would sound.

That airplane of the slanted wings, the bulbous, almost bulletlike
fuselage, what of it? It was simple, as Kleig looked back at his
memoried glimpse of it. The submarine was a metal fish made with human
hands; the airplane aped the birds. The strange ship which had caused
the destruction of the _Stellar_, was a combination fish and bird--which
merely aped nature a bit further, as anyone who had ever traversed
tropical waters would have instantly recognized.

But what did it portend? What ghastly terrors of Moyen roamed the deeps
of the Atlantic, of the Pacific, the oceans of the world? How close
were some of these to the United States?

The pale eyes of Moyen, he was sure, were already turned toward the
West.

       *       *       *       *       *

Prester Kleig sighed as he seated himself beside Carlos Kane. Then Kane
pressed one of the myriad of buttons on the dash, and Kleig lifted his
eyes to peer through the skylight, to where that single press of a
button had set in motion the intricate machinery of the helicopter.

A four-bladed fan lifted on a slender pedestal, sufficiently high above
the surface of the wing for the vanes to be free of the central
propeller. Then, automatically, the vanes became invisible, and the
Mayther lifted from the sandy beach as lightly, and far more straightly,
than any bird.

As the ship climbed away for the skies, and through the transparent
floor the beach and the Atlantic fell away below the ship, a sigh of
relief escaped Kleig. This was living! Up here one was free, if only for
a moment, and the swift wind of flight brushed all cobwebs from the
tired human brain. He watched the slender needle of the altimeter, as it
moved around the face of the dial as steadily as the hands of a clock,
around to thirty thousand, thirty-five, forty.

Then Carlos Kane, every movement as effortless as the flight of the
silvery winged Mayther, thrust forth his hand to the dash again, pressed
another button. Instantly the propellers vanished into a blur as the
vanes of the helicopter dropped down the slender staff and the vanes
themselves fitted snugly into their appointed notches atop the wing.

       *       *       *       *       *

For a second Carlos Kane glanced at the tiny map to the right of the
dash, and set his course. It was a matter of moments only, but while
Kane worked, Prester Kleig studied the instruments on the dash, for it
had been months since he had flown, save for his recent half-dreamlike
experience. There was a button which released the mechanism of the
deadly guns, fired by compressed air, all operated from the noiseless
motor, whose muzzles exactly cleared the tips of Mayther's wings, two
guns to each wing, one on the entering edge, one on the trailing edge,
fitted snugly into the adamant rigging.

Four guns which could fire to right or left, twin streams of lead, the
number of rounds governed only by the carrying power of the Mayther.
Prester Kleig knew them all: the guns in the wings, the guns which fired
through the three propellers, and the guns set two and two in the
fuselage, to right and left of the pits, which could be fixed either up
or down--all by the mere pressing of buttons. It was marvelous,
miraculous, yet even as Kleig told himself that this was so, he felt,
deep in the heart of him, that Moyen knew all about ships like these,
and regarded them as the toys of children.

Kane touched Kleig on the shoulder, signaling, indicating that the
atmosphere in the pits had been regulated to their new height, and that
they could remove their helmets and oxygen tanks without danger.

       *       *       *       *       *

With a sigh Prester Kleig sat back, and the two friends turned to face
each other.

"You certainly look done in, Kleig," said Kane sympathetically. "You
must have been through hell, and then some. Tell me about this Moyen;
that is, if you think you care to talk about him."

"Talk about him!" repeated Kleig. "Talk about him? It will be a relief!
There has been nothing, and nobody, on my mind save Moyen for weary
months on end. If I don't talk to someone about him, I'll go mad, if I'm
not mad already. Moyen? A monster with the face of an angel! What else
can one say about him? A devil and a saint, a brute whose followers
would go with him into hell's fire, and sing him hosannas as they were
consumed in agony! The greatest mob psychologist the world has ever
seen. He's a genius, Kane, and unless something is done, the Western
world, all the world, is doomed to sit at the feet, listen to the
commands, of Moyen!

"He isn't an Oriental; he isn't a European; he isn't negroid or Indian;
but there is something about him that makes one thing of all of these,
singly and collectively. His body is twisted and grotesque, and when one
looks at his face, one feels a desire to touch him, to swear eternal
fealty to him--until one looks into his pale eyes, eyes almost milky in
their paleness--and gets the merest hint of the thoughts which actuate
him. If he has a failing I did not find it. He does not drink,
gamble...."

"And women?" queried Kane, softly.

       *       *       *       *       *

Kleig was madly in love with the sister of Kane, Charmion, and this
thing touched him nearest the heart, because Charmion was one of her
country's most famous beauties, about whom Moyen must already have
heard.

"Women?" repeated Kleig musingly, his black eyes troubled, haunted. "I
scarcely know. He has no love for women, only because he has no capacity
for any love save self-love. But when I think of him in this connection
I seem to see Moyen, grown to monster proportions, sitting on a mighty
throne, with nude women groveling at his feet, bathed in tears, their
long hair in mantles of sorrow, hiding their shamed faces! That sounds
wild, doesn't it? But it's the picture I get of Moyen when I think of
Moyen and of women. Many women will love him, and have, perhaps. But
while he has taken many, though I am only guessing here, he has given
_himself_ to none. Another thing: His followers--well, he sets no limits
to the lusts of his men, requiring only that every soldier be fit for
duty, with a body strong for hardship. You understand?"

Kane understood; and his face was very pale.

"Yes," he said, his voice almost a whisper, "I understand, and as you
speak of this man I seem to see a city in ruins, and hordes of men
marching, bloodstained men entering houses ... from which, immediately
afterward, come the screams of women ... terror-stricken women...."

He shuddered and could not go on for the very horror of the vision that
had come to him.

But Kleig stared at him as though he saw a ghost.

"Great God, Carl!" he gasped. "The same identical picture has been in my
mind, not once but a thousand times! I wonder...."

Was it an omen of the future for the West?

Deep in his soul Prester Kleig fancied he could hear the sardonic
laughter of the half-god, Moyen.

       *       *       *       *       *

A tiny bell rang inside the dash, behind the instruments. Kane had set
direction finders, had pressed the button which signaled the
Washington-control Station of the National Radio, thus automatically
indicating the exact spot above land, by grid-coordinates, where the
Mayther should start down for the landing.

An hour later they landed on the flat roof of the new Capitol Building,
sinking lightly to rest as a feather, nursed to a gentle landing by the
whirring vanes of the helicopter.

Prester Kleig, surrounded by uniformed guards who tried to shield him
from the gaze of news-gatherers crowded there on the roof-top, hurried
him to the stairway leading into the executive chambers, and through
these to the Secret Chamber which only a few men knew, and into which
not even Carlos Kane could follow Prester Kleig--yet.

But one man, one news-gatherer, had caught a glimpse of the face of
Kleig, and already he raced for the radio tower of his organization, to
blazon to the Western world the fact that Kleig had come back.




CHAPTER IV

_A Nation Waits in Dread_


As Prester Kleig, looking twice his forty years because of fatigue, and
almost nameless terrors through which he had passed, went to his
rendezvous, the news-gatherer, who shall here remain nameless, raced for
the Broadcasting Tower.

As Prester Kleig entered the Secret Room and at a signal all the many
doors behind him, along that interminable stairway, swung shut and were
tightly locked, the news-gatherer raced for the microphone and gave the
"priority" signal to the operator. Millions of people would not only
hear the words of the news-gatherer, but would see him, note the
expressions which chased one another across his face. For television was
long since an accomplished, everyday fact.

"Prester Kleig, of this government's Secret Service, has just returned
to the United Americas! Your informer has just seen him step from the
monoplane of Carlos Kane, atop the Capitol Building, and repair at once
to the Secret Room, closely guarded. But I saw his face, and though he
is under forty, he seems twice that. And you know now what this country
has only guessed at before--that he has seen Moyen. Moyen the half-man,
half-god, the enigma of the ages. What does Prester Kleig think of this
man? He doesn't say, for he dares not speak, yet. But your informer saw
his face, and it is old and twisted with terror! And--"

       *       *       *       *       *

That ended the discourse of the news-gatherer, and it was many hours
before the public really understood. For, with a new sentence but half
completed, the picture of the news-gatherer faded blackly off the
screens in a million homes, and his voice was blotted out by a humming
that mounted to a terrific appalling shriek! Some terrible agency, about
which people who knew their radio could only guess, had drowned out the
words of the news-gatherer, leaving the public stunned and bewildered,
almost groping before a feeling of terror which was all the more
unbearable because none could give it a name.

And the public had heard but a fraction of the truth--merely that Kleig
had come back. It had been the intention of the government to deny the
public even this knowledge, and it had; but knowledge of the denial
itself was public property, which filled the hearts of men and women all
through the Western Hemisphere with nameless dread. And over all this
abode of countless millions hovered the shadow of Moyen.

The government tried to correct the impression which the news-gatherer
had given out.

"Prester Kleig is back," said the radio, while the government speaker
tried, for the benefit of those who could see him, to smile
reassuringly. "But there is nothing to cause anyone the slightest
concern. He has seen Moyen, yes, and has heard him speak, but still
there is nothing to distress anyone, and the whole story will be given
to you as soon as possible. Kleig has gone into the Secret Room, yes,
but every operative of the government, when discussing business
connected with diplomatic relations with foreign powers, is received in
the Secret Room. No cause for worry!"

       *       *       *       *       *

It was so easy to say that, and the speaker realized it, which was why
he could but with difficulty make his smile seem reassuring.

"Tell us the truth, and tell us quickly," might have been the voiceless
cries of those who listened and saw the face and fidgeting form of the
speaker. But the words were not spoken, because the people sensed a
hovering horror, a dread catastrophe beyond the power of words to
express--and so looked at one another in silence, their eyes wide with
dread, their hearts throbbing to suffocation with nameless foreboding.

So eyes were horror-haunted, and men walked, flew, and rode in fear and
trembling--while, down in the Secret Room, Prester Kleig and a dozen old
men, men wise in the ways of science and invention, wise in the ways of
men and of beasts, of Nature and the Infinite Outside, decided the fate
of the Nation.

That Secret Room was closed to every one. Not even the news-gatherers
could reach it; not even the all-seeing eye of the telephotograph
emblazoned to the world its secrets.

But _was_ it secret?

Perhaps Moyen, the master mobster, smiled when he heard men say so, men
who knew in their hearts that Moyen regarded other earthlings as
earthlings regard children and their toys. Did the eyes of Moyen gaze
even into the depths of the Secret Room, hundreds of feet below even the
documentary-treasure vaults of the Capitol?

       *       *       *       *       *

No one knew the answer to the question, but the radio, reporting the
return of Kleig, had given the public a distorted vision of an embodied
fear, and in its heart the public answered "Yes!" And what had drowned
out the voice of the radio-reporter?

No wonder that, for many hours, a nation waited in fear and trembling,
eyes filled with dread that was nameless and absolute, for word from the
Secret Room. Fear mounted and mounted as the hours passed and no word
came.

In that room Prester Kleig and the twelve old men, one of whom was the
country's President, held counsel with the man who had come back. But
before the spoken counsel had been held, awesome and awe-inspiring
pictures had flashed across the screen, invented by a third of the old
men, from which the world held no secrets, even the secrets of Moyen.

With this mechanism, guarded at forfeit of the lives of a score of men,
the men of the Secret Room could peer into even the most secret places
of the world. The old men had peered, and had seen things which had
blanched their pale cheeks anew. And when they had finished, and the
terrible pictures had faded out, a voice had spoken suddenly, like an
explosion, in the Secret Room.

"Well, gentlemen, are you satisfied that resistance is futile?"

Just the voice; but to one man in the Secret Room, and to the others
when his numbing lips spoke the name, it was far more than enough. For
not even the wisest of the great men could explain how, as they knew,
having just seen him there, a man could be in Madagascar while his voice
spoke aloud in the Secret Room, where even radio was barred!

The name on the lips of Prester Kleig!

"Moyen! Moyen!"




CHAPTER V

_Monsters of the Deep_


"Gentlemen," said Prester Kleig as he entered the Secret Room, where sat
the scientists and inventive geniuses of the Americas, "we haven't much
time, and I shall waste but little of it. Moyen is ready to strike, if
he hasn't already done so, as I believe. We will see in a matter of
seconds. Professor Maniel, we shall need, first of all, your apparatus
for returning the vibratory images of events which have transpired
within the last thirty-six hours.

"I wish to show those of you who failed to see it the sinking of the
