
Phobar sat down, the titan flicked the controls--and nothing happened.

Phobar sensed that something was radically wrong. He felt the surprise
of his gigantic companion. He did not know it then, but the fate of the
solar system hung on that incident.

"Come!"

       *       *       *       *       *

Abruptly the giant stooped, and Phobar shrank back, but a flowing mass
of cold, insensate metal swept around him, lifted him fifty feet in the
air. Dizzy, sick, horrified, he was hardly conscious of the whirlwind
motion into which the giant suddenly shot. He had a dim impression of
machines racing by, of countless other giants, of a sudden opening in
the walls of the immense building, and then a rush across the surface of
metal land. Even in his vertigo he had enough curiosity to marvel that
there was no vegetation, no water, only the dull black metal everywhere.
Yet there was air.

And then a city loomed before them. To Phobar it seemed a city of gods
or giants. Fully five miles it soared toward space, its fantastic angles
and arcs and cubes and pyramids mazing in the dimensions of a totally
alien geometry. Tier by tier the stupendous city, hundreds of miles
wide, mounted toward a central tower like the one in the building he had
left.

Phobar never knew how they got there, but his numbed mind was at
last forced into clarity by a greater will. He stared about him. His
captor had gone. He stood in a huge chamber circling to a dome far
overhead. Before him, on a dais a full thousand feet in diameter,
stood--sat--rested, whatever it might be called--another monster, far
larger than any he had yet seen, like a mountain of pliant thinking,
living metal. And Phobar knew he stood in the presence of the ruler.

       *       *       *       *       *

The metal Cyclops surveyed him as Phobar might have surveyed an ant.
Cold, deadly, dispassionate scrutiny came from something that might have
been eyes, or a seeing intelligence locked in a metal body.

There was no sound, but inwardly to Phobar's consciousness from the
peak of the titan far above him came a command:

"What are you called?"

Phobar opened his lips--but even before he spoke, he knew that the thing
had understood his thought: "Phobar."

"I am Garboreggg, ruler of Xlarbti, the Lord of the Universes."

"Lord of the _Universes_?"

"I and my world come from one of the universes beyond the reach of your
telescopes." Phobar somehow felt that the thing was talking to him as he
would to a new-born babe.

"What do you want of me?"

"Tell your Earth that I want the entire supply of your radium ores mined
and placed above ground according to the instructions I give, by seven
of your days hence."

A dozen questions sprang to Phobar's lips. He felt again that he was
being treated like a child.

"Why do you want our radium ores?"

"Because they are the rarest of the elements on your scale, are absent
on ours, and supply us with some of the tremendous energy we need."

"Why don't you obtain the ores from other worlds?"

"We do. We are taking them from all worlds where they exist. But we need
yours also."

Raiders of the universe! Looting young worlds of the precious radium
ores! Piracy on a cosmic scale!

"And if Earth refuses your demand?"

       *       *       *       *       *

For answer, Garboreggg rippled to a wall of the room and pressed a
button. The wall dissolved, weirdly, mysteriously. A series of vast
silver plates was revealed, and a battery of control levers.

"This will happen to all of your Earth unless the ores are given us."

The titan closed a switch. On the first screen flashed the picture of a
huge tower such as Phobar had seen in the metal city.

Garboreggg adjusted a second control that was something like a
range-finder. He pressed a third lever--and from the tower leaped a
surge of terrific energy, like a bolt of lightning a quarter of a mile
broad. The giant closed another switch--and on the second plate flashed
a picture of New York City.

Then--waiting. Seconds, minutes drifted by. The atmosphere became tense,
nerve-cracking. Phobar's eyes ached with the intensity of his stare.
What would happen?

Abruptly it came.

A monstrous bolt of energy streaked from the skies, purple-blue death in
a pillar a fourth of a mile broad crashed into the heart of New York
City, swept up and down Manhattan, across and back, and suddenly
vanished.

In fifteen seconds, only a molten hell of fused structures and
incinerated millions of human beings remained of the world's first city.

Phobar was crushed, appalled, then utter loathing for this soulless
thing poured through him. If only--

"It is useless. You can do nothing," answered the ruler as though it had
grasped his thought.

"But why, if you could pick me off the Earth, do you not draw the radium
ores in the same way?" Phobar demanded.

"The orange-ray picks up only loose, portable objects. We can and will
transport the radium ores here by means of the ray after they have been
mined and placed on platforms or disks."

"Why did you select me from all the millions of people on Earth?"

"Solely because you were the first apparent scientist whom our cosmotel
chanced upon. It will be up to you to notify your Earth governments of
our demand."

"But afterwards!" Phobar burst out aloud. "What then?"
