Mantor leaned across the desk, his eyes as hard and cold as chips of
duratite. "And if you won't, there's going to be trouble and you'll be
it--you and your friend here."

Marc sat impassively, meeting the hard-eyed gaze. "That warehouse is
government property," he said. "So far, there's only piracy against you.
But if you raid that building you're going to be the personal problem of
the Navy. If I were you I'd leave it alone."

"You let me worry about that," said Mantor.

"Besides," Marc went on, "I don't see what good the stuff in that
warehouse can be to you. There's little of cash value in there. And I
doubt if you can use any of the parts on your ship."

"That could be," Mantor replied. "But on the other hand, maybe we can
find a market for certain items." He smiled coldly. Watching, Lee knew
he referred to Venus. She sat perfectly still, praying for him not to
notice her.

Mantor spread his hands on the desk, a look of hatred and ferocity on
his face. "What I want to know is--are you or are you not going to
cooperate? And I want to know fast."

"Don't get me wrong," Marc said softly. "I'm not telling you what to do
or what not to do. But that warehouse is the thing I'm here to protect.
And if I were to agree to help you, the Navy would be after me, too. So
I've got to say to hell with you."

John Mantor rocked back on his heels, hooking his thumbs in his belt. A
slow smile spread over his face. "Okay," he said. "I think I get what
you mean. So I guess we got to work you over. And we'll do it where
there aren't any outside witnesses."

Marc grinned back at him.

Lee was puzzled. It took her a moment to realize that the grins sealed a
contract between the two men. Marc would cooperate if he were beaten up
enough first to satisfy a later investigation--but not too severely for
his own comfort!

Lee found it difficult to hide her contempt. She stared at her hands,
clenched in her lap, and waited for Mantor to leave.

The looting and destruction were well under way an hour later when a
couple of Mantor's men joined their chief, who stood with a somewhat
bruised Marc Polder and an unharmed but furious Lee Treynor. Between
them they carried a small, obviously heavy box.

"You know what this stuff is, boss?" one of the men asked. "They got a
hundred or a hundred-fifty boxes like this in there." He nodded at the
Navy warehouse.

They set the box down and Mantor flung back its lid. It was filled with
small grey pellets. Mantor picked up a handful and stood fingering them.

"Looks like rocket fuel," he said. "Only I've never seen any this color.
And it's too heavy, also." He turned to the comptroller. "_You_ tell me
what it is."

Marc shrugged. "I don't know. It's a Navy secret."

Mantor's eyes glinted. Without warning his fist flew out, sent the
comptroller sprawling in the dust where he lay stunned. Lee's hands flew
to her mouth barely in time to suppress a cry.

After a few moments Marc rolled over slowly and pushed himself painfully
to a sitting position. He looked up at Mantor who stood watching him
coldly, his fist flexing.

The comptroller licked his lips and looked around at the several men who
stood watching, their faces impassive. "Okay," he said in a
none-too-steady voice. "I'll tell you. You'd find out anyway from the
files."

"Cut the alibis and give," Mantor growled.

"Keep your shirt on." Marc's voice indicated he was regaining control of
himself. "It's H.D.T.--Hyper-Degenerate-Thorium--the stuff the
destroyers use to get extra push."

Mantor roared his glee. "Pack it aboard, boys--_all_ of it! And put it
