and confidential. "If you'll just look around you...."

"Eh?" Mandleco followed Beardsley's gesture, and for the first time he
seemed to see the room in total. Shards of glass lay everywhere. A great
tangle of wire was strewn half the length of ECAIAC, and a bank of
transistors reposed against the far wall in pitiful ruin. The techs had
already started a strip-down, their tools and units across the floor
adding to the general confusion.

Mandleco said, "Well? What is it you--" His words stopped as if sliced
in two by his teeth. "Yes. Yes, by God, I see what you mean!"

"Can you really conceive of operation in two hours? _Two hours_," Arnold
said. "Two days, maybe. More likely in two weeks!"

Mandleco groaned as if in pain, staring around.

Beardsley pressed his point. "You'll pardon my saying it, sir, but I
_do_ realize what the Carmack Case means--to you personally. So much
build-up and publicity, and the people demanding a verdict ... why, if
the case were to snag now--"

"Unthinkable!" A shudder touched Mandleco's long, lean frame. "Out with
it, man! What are you trying to say?"

Beardsley was suddenly sweating. He felt as if a long tube were inside
of him, hot and throbbing, reaching up with a surge of pulse to his
temples. _It had to be now. He had to say it._

"Well," he gulped. "Just this, sir. I think the case can be cracked
right now. Today. _Without_ ECAIAC."

"Nonsense! Without ECAIAC? Why, that's--"

"Sure. You think it's crazy. But I tell you _I_ can do it!" Beardsley's
words came fast and urgent. "I've followed this case from the beginning,
I processed it, I'm familiar with every angle. I tell you, _I can
deliver the killer_. Give me permission to try!"

Mandleco stared at Beardsley as if he were some queer specimen under a
microscope; his mouth opened to speak, then he clamped his teeth tightly
and strode away.

He turned back abruptly. "So you think you have the solution. You
actually--do--think it!" His eyes narrowed down, no longer amused, as he
fixed the little serologist with a peculiar gaze. "Go on, Beardsley.
Your suggestion at least has the novelty of imagination!"

"The novelty of experience," Beardsley said bitterly. "_With your
permission and co-operation_ I can solve this case, together with
positive evidence that will hold up in any court! What's more, I'll do
it today. A guarantee," Beardsley said pointedly, "which I dare say you
no longer have from ECAIAC."

       *       *       *       *       *

Mandleco stood quite motionless, trying to recall something. "Now I
remember! You were with New York Homicide, weren't you, before promotion
to Cooerdinates in '60? I recall passing on your record. Top record, too,
for those days."

Beardsley gestured impatiently. "How about it, sir? I know every
pertinent fact of this case, plus a few of my own which haven't been
tested in a dozen years. Not indexes and tubes and tapes--just facts!
Fact and method! Let me apply them!"

"I'm afraid it's not as simple as that, Beardsley. There _is_ ECAIAC,
and public confidence must not be allowed--"

"The public be damned," Beardsley caught himself. "All right--for
appearance sake you can say the solution _came_ from ECAIAC. Let ECAIAC
verify me later if you wish. I'm not after headlines and glory ... by
heaven, sir, I'm offering you an _out_!"

Mandleco pondered that. He glanced again at the confusion across the
room, and realization seemed to hit him. Quite suddenly, then, he threw
back his head and roared with laughter.

"An out. And by heaven, Beardsley, I'm offering you a try! The idea
appeals to me! Beardsley versus ECAIAC ... socio-archaism opposed to the
_machina-ratiocinatrix_. Why, it's delicious!" He subsided to a rumble
of mirth and wiped tears from his eyes. "So! Just what do you propose?"

Beardsley saw nothing amusing. "I propose first, sir, that we reach an
understanding. I'm to conduct the investigation my own way, without
interference?"

"You have my word! I never violate it."

"Good. Then start using your word right now. There are three persons I
want placed in temporary custody; they are to be brought over here at
once for questioning."

       *       *       *       *       *

Mandleco looked appalled. "Questioning? _Here?_"

"Yes, right here. Immediately! The three I want are Mrs. Carmack--I
happen to know she's still in the city. And Brook Pederson--you should
reach him easily at Central News Bureau. The third--"

"Would that be Professor Losch?" Mandleco smugly asked. "Sorry, but
Losch happens to be in Bermuda right now."

Beardsley said sharply: "How did you know that?"

"Why, I--I'm acquainted with Losch, you know. He was planning a
vacation, and he mentioned Bermuda--"

"No. I don't mean that. _How did you know Losch was my third person?_"

Mandleco bristled a little, his face reddening as he groped for an
answer. "Never mind," Beardsley waved it aside. "If Losch is in Bermuda
at present we'll reach him by tele-stat right now!" He was suddenly
crisp as he propelled the Minister of Justice toward Jeff Arnold's
office.

Mandleco stared at this little man, wondering if it were the same person
he had been talking to just minutes before. "Now see here, Beardsley--"
But he was interrupted.

"I thought we had an understanding! Of course, if you'd prefer to count
on ECAIAC--"

"Very well," Mandleco nodded grimly, "I gave you my word. But the
instant Arnold repairs the breakdown, your little experiment is over! Do
you understand that?"

Beardsley nodded. He understood very well.

"In the meantime, Beardsley, I warn you. I'll have no brow-beating of
these citizens, no--what was it called--third-degreeing tactics! I
understand that sort of thing used to be pretty prevalent."

Beardsley snorted, as if that were beneath comment, and closed the
office door behind them. Mandleco hit him with a cagey glance. "The
Logicals and the Primes, eh? I suppose you know that I happen to be one
of those Primes."

Beardsley looked straight at him. "Yes, I'm aware of it. My own approach
will be individualistic, of course, but I promise you won't be
over-looked!"

       *       *       *       *       *

It might have been fatal--but Beardsley had judged his man well.
Mandleco took it as a challenge. He was silent as he approached the
tele-stat, and he no longer seemed amused.

He put through the directive to have Mrs. Sheila Carmack and Mr. Brook
Pederson brought in. "As my guests, that is," Mandleco told his
operative. "_Be sure they understand that._ They are to be brought to
Crime-Central, Mechanical Division, at once ... yes, I said Mechanical
Division! At once means _now_."

Beardsley nodded approval. "And now Professor Losch, please?"

Without a waste of motion, Mandleco put through to Bermuda on priority
beam. While they waited he gave Beardsley a look of puzzlement and new
respect. "Ah--I'm not implying that it's against protocol, of course,
but I assume you've already made some investigation along lines of your
own?"

"Superficial only," Beardsley said.

"I see. Well then, would you mind giving me some ... you know, just an
idea of how you plan to proceed?"

Beardsley said bluntly: "Yes, I would mind."

"Oh." Mandleco frowned and persisted. "Psychologic deduction. Wasn't
that your _forte_? I seem to recall--"

Beardsley grunted. "I'll tell you this much, there are implications
about this case that fascinate me!"

"Oh?" Mandleco found himself a chair, sat upon it and edged forward. "I
don't just quite--"

"Look. To begin with, the case is unique; so much so that your entire
structure of approach is wrong. I mean top-heavy! Top-heavy with
gadgetry and assumption."

"Assumption?" Mandleco bristled a little. "You of all people should know
better. Not _once_ in the past dozen years has ECAIAC failed to arrive
at a conclusive and pin-point solution based on correlative factors!"

Beardsley smiled thinly. "Ah, yes. But we were speaking of the _Carmack_
case. I repeat, it's not only unique but untenable; it became untenable
the moment you assigned ECAIAC the task of solving the murder of its own
creator! That," he said grimly, "is a mistake we wouldn't have made even
in '60...."

       *       *       *       *       *

Mandleco thought that over, shook his head and frowned. It was obvious
he missed the connotation. "So?" he urged.

"So look at the murder itself. The _pattern_. You'll admit it does seem
odd and misplaced for these times--or hadn't you noticed?" Beardsley
leaned forward sharply. "But it strikes a familiar note with me!
Absolutely nothing in the way of material clues; not even the weapon;
and the _modus operandi_ is one I haven't seen employed in years, the
old idea of the most direct and simple murder being the safest!"

"I--I guess I just don't follow you."

"I mean the _way_ Carmack was struck down. Nothing cute and fancy, no
frills or improvisation--just the proverbial blunt instrument, after
which the killer simply walked out of there. Believe me, I know about
these things. The very simplicity is the killer's protection. You can
bet no trace will ever be found of that blunt instrument, and naturally
he left no evidence coming or going. But then," Beardsley said
obliquely, "your so-called 'Survey' men made a horrible botch of the
scene. In '60 we'd have sent them back to patrolling the freeways!"

Mandleco started to protest, then closed his mouth quickly. "I see, I
see."

"I can understand," Beardsley murmured, "how emphasis on basic
groundwork has become minimized. So much reliance on Indexes and
thalamic-imbalance and chart-sifts! It was only a matter of time until a
criminal, a really _clever_ one, saw through the system--and reverted."
His fingers drummed the chair arm, then he looked up sharply. "And yet
of all places, I'd say that Carmack's estate was _least_ ideally
situated for this type of murder; you know what I mean? You've been
there?"

"Well, I--there have been occasions. Yes."

Beardsley nodded. "I refer to Carmack's elaborate system against
invasion of his privacy. To put it bluntly, he had enemies, and his
estate was designed as a refuge against those enemies; electronic
barriers pitched at ultra-frequency to respond only to certain neural
vibrations. Must have taken years of research to come up with that!"

Mandleco shifted impatiently. "Of course, but look here, Beardsley--"

"So it leaves me right where I started, doesn't it? And yet I know this:
it was no _emotional_ killing. It was all coldly planned. The killer was
someone Carmack trusted enough to have in his home; they were probably
having a quiet little chat together. And then precisely--on a
predetermined minute--the killer rose from his chair and struck."

Mandleco lifted his heavy hands and then, as if conscious of them, let
them fall limply across the desk. "But--come now, Beardsley! Psychologic
deduction is all very well, but how can you possibly know that?"

Beardsley gazed calmly at the Minister of Justice. For a moment he said
nothing. Mandleco seemed more alert than startled, more annoyed than
either.

"That," said Beardsley softly, "I am not prepared to tell you."

Mandleco seemed about to pursue the point, but there came an
interruption. Both men turned abruptly as the stat-screen gave its
warning blip.

"Code C-C-Five!" came the remote voice. "Bermuda to Washington,
Priority. This is Priority. C-C-Five ... your party is ready now, sir!"

       *       *       *       *       *

It was a pool-side scene, with hotel and tropical palms against an
unbelievable blue sky. Professor Emil Losch loomed on the screen; he was
in swimming trunks, a small gray man who seemed hard as nails, his lean
tanned body belying his years.

"Hello?" Losch peered sharply and then pulled away, almost upsetting an
expensive decanter of liquor on the table beside him. He seemed to
blanch as he recognized the Minister of Justice. "Mandleco!"

The latter raised a hand in greeting. "Don't be alarmed, Professor, this
is not official. Just a social call."

"I want to correct that," Beardsley said bluntly as he thrust himself
into range. "Professor Losch, this _is_ official; furthermore, I wish to
advise you that this stat is monitor-taped for both vis and audio, and
the resulting record is therefore admissible in any Court of Law. Being
so advised, is there any objection on your part to answering a brief
series of questions pertaining to the Carmack Case? I have been duly
authorized by George Mandleco, Minister of Justice," he added for the
record.

Losch glanced bewilderedly from Beardsley to Mandleco, and seemed to
take courage from the latter.

"Objection?" he said. "This is a bit unusual, but ... of course, I have
no objection."

"Very well. I shall make a series of statements, and give you
opportunity to refute them either in part or _in toto_. Professor Losch,
some years ago you were engaged privately, in magnetronic cybernetic
research along similar lines to those later developed by Amos Carmack.
Shortly thereafter you claimed that Carmack had thwarted you,
out-maneuvered you, _out-stolen_ you at every turn; I believe those are
pretty much your own words, as revealed by court records--"
