communicator would not pick up at all, and which therefore might be used
by men in hiding.

He worked for a long time. Then he shrugged and gave it up. He'd
repeated to absolute tedium the facts that any Darians--blueskins--on
Orede ought to know. There'd been no answer. And it was all too likely
that if he'd been received, that those who heard him took his message
for a trick to discover if there were any hearers.

He clicked off at last and stood up, shaking his head. Suddenly the Med
Ship seemed empty. Then he saw Murgatroyd staring at the exit-port. The
inner door of that small airlock was closed. The tell-tale said the
outer was not locked. Someone had gone out, quietly. The girl. Of
course. Calhoun said angrily;

"How long ago, Murgatroyd?"

"_Chee!_" said Murgatroyd indignantly.

It wasn't an answer, but it showed that Murgatroyd was vexed that he'd
been left behind. He and the girl were close friends, now. If she'd left
Murgatroyd in the ship when he wanted to go with her, she wasn't coming
back.

Calhoun swore. Then he made certain. She was not in the ship. He flipped
the outside-speaker switch and said curtly into the microphone;

"Coffee! Murgatroyd and I are having coffee. Will you come back,
please?"

He repeated the call, and repeated it again. Multiplied as his voice was
by the speakers, she should hear him within a mile. She did not appear.
He went to a small and inconspicuous closet and armed himself. A Med
Ship man was not ever expected to fight, but there were blast-rifles
available for extreme emergency.

When he'd slung a power-pack over his shoulder and reached the airlock,
there was still no sign of his late stowaway. He stood in the airlock
door for long minutes, staring angrily about. Almost certainly she
wouldn't be looking in the mountains for men of Dara come here for
cattle. He used a pair of binoculars, first at low-magnification to
search as wide an area down-valley as possible, and then at highest
power to search the most likely routes.

He found a small, bobbing speck beyond a far-away hillcrest. It was her
head. It went down below the hilltop.

He snapped a command to Murgatroyd, and when the _tormal_ was on the
ground outside, he locked the port with that combination that nobody but
a Med Ship man was at all likely to discover or use.

"She's an idiot!" he told Murgatroyd sourly. "Come along! We've got to
be idiots too!"

He set out in pursuit.

The girl had a long start. Twice Calhoun came to places where she could
have chosen either of two ways onward. Each time he had to determine
which she'd followed. That cost time. Then the mountains ended,
abruptly, and a vast undulating plain stretched away to the horizon.
There were at least two large masses and many smaller clumps of what
could only be animals gathered together. Cattle.

But here the girl was plainly in view. Calhoun increased his stride. He
began to gain on her. She did not look behind.

Murgatroyd said "_Chee!_" in a complaining tone.

"I should have left you behind," agreed Calhoun dourly, "but there was
and is a chance I won't get back. You'll have to keep on hiking."

He plodded on. His memory of the terrain around the mining settlement
told him that there was no definite destination in the girl's mind. But
she was in no such despair as to want deliberately to be lost. She'd
guessed, Calhoun believed, that if there were Darians on the planet,
they'd keep the landing-grid under observation. If they saw her leave
that area and could see that she was alone, they should intercept her to
find out the meaning of the Med Ship's landing. Then she could identify
herself as one of them and give them the terribly necessary warning of
Weald's suspicions.

"But," said Calhoun sourly, "if she's right, they'll have seen me
marching after her now, which spoils her scheme. And I'd like to help
it, but the way she's going is too dangerous!"

       *       *       *       *       *

He went down into one of the hollows of the uneven plain. He saw a clump
of a dozen or so cattle a little distance away. The bull looked up and
snorted. The cows regarded him truculently. Their air was not one of
bovine tranquility.

He was up the farther hillside and out of sight before the bull worked
himself up to a charge. Then Calhoun suddenly remembered one of the
items in the data about cattle he'd looked into just the other day. He
felt himself grow pale.

"Murgatroyd!" he said sharply. "We've got to catch up! Fast! Stay with
me if you can, but ..." He was jog-trotting as he spoke--"even if you
get lost I have to hurry!"

He ran fifty paces and walked fifty paces. He ran fifty and walked
fifty. He saw her, atop a rolling of the ground. She came to a full
stop. He ran. He saw her turn to retrace her steps. He flung to the
safety of the blast-rifle and let off a roaring blast at the ground for
her to hear.

Suddenly she was fleeing desperately, toward him. He plunged on. She
vanished down into a hollow. Horns appeared over the hillcrest she'd
just left. Cattle appeared. Four--a dozen--fifteen--twenty. They moved
ominously in her wake. He saw her again, running frantically over
another upward swell of the prairie. He let off another blast to guide
her. He ran on at top speed with Murgatroyd trailing anxiously behind.
From time to time Murgatroyd called "_Chee-chee-chee!_" in frightened
pleading not to be abandoned.

More cattle appeared against the horizon. Fifty or a hundred. They came
after the first clump. The first-seen group of a bull and his harem were
moving faster, now. The girl fled from them, but it is the instinct of
beef-cattle on the open range--Calhoun had learned it only two days
before--to charge any human they find on foot. A mounted man to their
dim minds is a creature to be tolerated or fled from, but a human on
foot is to be crushed and stamped and gored.

       *       *       *       *       *

Those in the lead were definitely charging now, with heads bent low. The
bull charged furiously with shut eyes, as bulls do, but the
many-times-more-deadly cows charged with their eyes wide open and
wickedly alert, and with a lumbering speed much greater than the girl
could manage.

She came up over the last rise, chalky-white and gasping, her hair
flying, in the last extremity of terror. The nearest of the pursuing
cattle were within ten yards when Calhoun fired from twenty yards
beyond. One creature bellowed as the blast-bolt struck. It went down and
others crashed into it and swept over it, and more came on. The girl saw
Calhoun, now, and ran toward him, panting, and he knelt very
deliberately and began to check the charge by shooting the leading
animals.

He did not succeed. There were more cattle following the first, and more
and more behind them. It appeared that all the cattle on the plain
joined in the blind and senseless charge. The thudding of hooves became
a mutter and then a rumble and then a growl. Plunging, clumsy figures
rushed past on either side. But horns and heads heaved up over the mound
of animals Calhoun had shot. He shot them too. More and more cattle came
pounding past the rampart of his victims, but always, it seemed, some
elected to climb the heap of their dead and dying fellows, and Calhoun
shot and shot.

But he split the herd. The foremost animals had been charging a sighted
human enemy. Others had followed because it is the instinct of cattle to
join their running fellows in whatever crazed urgency they feel. There
was a dense, pounding, horrible mass of running bulls and cows and
calves; bellowing, wailing, grunting, puffing, raising thick and
impenetrable clouds of dust which had everything but galloping beasts
going past on either side.

It lasted for minutes. Then the thunder of hooves diminished. It ended
abruptly, and Calhoun and the girl were left alone with the gruesome
pile of animals which had divided the charging herd into two parts. They
could see the rears of innumerable running animals, stupidly continuing
the charge--hardly different, now, from a stampede--whose original
objective none now remembered.

Calhoun thoughtfully touched the barrel of his blast-rifle and winced at
its scorching heat.

       *       *       *       *       *

"I just realized," he said coldly, "that I don't know your name. What is
it?"

"M-maril," said the girl. She swallowed. "Th-thank you--."

"Maril," said Calhoun, "you are an idiot! It was half-witted at best to
go off by yourself! You could have been lost! You could have cost me
days of hunting for you, days badly needed for more important matters!"
He stopped and took breath. "You may have spoiled what little chance
I've got to do something about the plans Weald's already making!"

He said more bitterly still;

"And I had to leave Murgatroyd behind to get to you in time! He was
right in the path of that charge!"

He turned away from her and said dourly;

"All right! Come on back to the ship. We'll go to Dara. We'd have to,
anyhow. But Murgatroyd--"

Then he heard a very small sneeze. Out of a rolling wall of
still-roiling dust, Murgatroyd appeared forlornly. He was dust-covered,
and draggled, and his tail drooped, and he sneezed again. He moved as if
he could barely put one paw before another, but at the sight of Calhoun
he sneezed yet again and said, "_Chee!_" in a disconsolate voice. Then
he sat down and waited for Calhoun to pick him up.

When Calhoun did so, Murgatroyd clung to him pathetically and said,
"_Chee-chee!_" and again "_Chee-chee!_" with the intonation of one
telling of incredible horrors and disasters endured.

Calhoun headed back for the valley, the settlement and the Med Ship.
Murgatroyd clung to his neck. The girl Maril followed visibly shaken.

Calhoun did not speak to her again. He led the way. A mile back toward
the mountains, they began to see stragglers from the now-vanished herd.
A little further, those stragglers began to notice them. And it would
have been a matter of no moment if they'd been domesticated
dairy-cattle, but these were range-cattle gone wild. Twice, Calhoun had
to use his blast-rifle to discourage incipient charges by irritated
bulls or even more irritated cows. Those with calves darkly suspected
Calhoun of designs upon their offspring.

It was a relief to enter the valley again. But it was two miles more to
the landing-grid with the Med Ship beside it and the reek of carrion in
the air.

They were perhaps two hundred feet from the ship when a blast-rifle
crashed and its bolt whined past Calhoun so close that he felt the
monstrous heat. There had been no challenge. There was no warning. There
was simply a shot which came horribly close to ending Calhoun's career
in a completely arbitrary fashion.




CHAPTER 4


Five minutes later Calhoun had located one would-be killer behind a mass
of splintered planking that once had been a wall. He set the wood afire
by a blaster-bolt and then viciously sent other bolts all around the man
it had sheltered when he fled from the flames. He could have killed him
ten times over, but it was more desirable to open communication. So he
missed, intentionally.

Maril had cried out that she came from Dara and had word for them, but
they did not answer. There were three men with heavy-duty blast-rifles.
One was the one Calhoun had burned out of his hiding-place. That man's
rifle exploded when the flames hit it. Two remained. One--so Calhoun
presently discovered--was working his way behind underbrush to a shelf
from which he could shoot down at Calhoun. Calhoun had dropped into a
hollow and pulled Maril to cover at the first shot. The second man
happily planned to get to a point where he could shoot him like a fish
in a barrel. The third man had fired half a dozen times and then
disappeared. Calhoun estimated that he intended to get around to the
rear, in hope there was no protection from that direction for Calhoun.
It would take some time for him to manage it.

So Calhoun industriously concentrated his fire on the man trying to get
above him. He was behind a boulder, not too dissimilar to Calhoun's
breastwork. Calhoun set fire to the brush at the point at which the
other man aimed. That, then, made his effort useless. Then Calhoun sent
a dozen bolts at the other man's rocky shield. It heated up. Steam rose
in a whitish mass and blew directly away from Calhoun. He saw that
antagonist flee. He saw him so clearly that he was positive that there
was a patch of blue pigment on the right-hand side of the back of his
neck.

He grunted and swung to find the third. That man moved through thick
undergrowth, and Calhoun set it on fire in a neat pattern of spreading
flames. Evidently, these men had had no training in battle-tactics with
blast-rifles. The third man also had to get away. He did. But something
from him arched through the smoke. It fell to the ground directly upwind
from Calhoun. White smoke puffed up violently.

It was instinct that made Calhoun react as he did. He jerked the girl
Maril to her feet and rushed her toward the Med Ship. Smoke from the
flung bomb upwind barely swirled around him and missed Maril altogether.
Calhoun, though, got a whiff of something strange, not scorched or
burning vegetation at all. He ceased to breathe and plunged onward. In
clear air he emptied his lungs and refilled them. They were then halfway
to the ship, with Murgatroyd prancing on ahead.

But then Calhoun's heart began to pound furiously. His muscles twitched
and tense. He felt extraordinary symptoms like an extreme of agitation.
Calhoun was familiar enough with tear-gas, used by police on some
planets. But this was different and worse. Even as he helped and urged
Maril onward, he automatically considered his sensations, and had it.
Panic gas! Police did not use it because panic is worse than rioting.
Calhoun felt all the physical symptoms of fear and of gibbering terror.
A man whose mind yields to terror experiences certain physical
sensations, wildly beating heart, tensed and twitching muscles, and a
frantic impulse to convulsive action. A man in whom those physical
sensations are induced by other means will--ordinarily--find his mind
yielding to terror.

Calhoun couldn't combat his feelings, but his clinical attitude enabled
him to act despite them. The three from Weald reached the base of the
Med Ship. One of their enemies had lost his rifle and need not be
counted. Another had fled from flames and might be ignored for some
moments, anyhow. But a blast-bolt struck the ship's metal hull only feet
from Calhoun, and he whipped around to the other side and let loose a
staccato of fire which emptied the rifle of all its charges.

Then he opened the airlock door, hating the fact that he shook and
trembled. He urged the girl and Murgatroyd in. He slammed the outer
airlock door just as another blaster-bolt hit.

"They--they don't realize," said Maril desperately. "If they only
knew--."

"Talk to them, if you like," said Calhoun. His teeth chattered and he
raged, because the symptom was of terror he denied.

He pushed a button on the control-board. He pointed to a microphone. He
got at an oxygen-bottle and inhaled deeply. Oxygen, obviously, should be
an antidote for panic, since the symptoms of terror act to increase the
oxygenation of the blood-stream and muscles, and to make superhuman
exertion possible if necessary. Breathing ninety-five per cent oxygen
produced the effect the terror-inspiring gas strove for, so his heart
slowed nearly to normal and his body relaxed. He held out his hand and
it did not tremble.

       *       *       *       *       *

He turned to Maril. She hadn't spoken into the mike yet.

"They--may not be from Dara!" she said shakily. "I just thought! They
could be somebody else--maybe criminals who planned to raid the mine for
a shipload of its ore ..."

"Nonsense!" said Calhoun. "I saw one of them clearly enough to be sure.
But they're skeptical characters. I'm afraid there may be more on the
way here wherever they keep themselves. Anyhow, now we know some of them
are in hearing! I'll take advantage of that and we'll go on."

He took the microphone. Instants later his voice boomed in the stillness
outside the ship, cutting through the thin shrill of invisible small
creatures.

"This is the Med Ship Aesclipus Twenty," said Calhoun's voice, amplified
to a shout. "I left Weald four days ago, one day after the cargo-ship
from here arrived with everybody on board dead. On Weald they don't know
how it happened, but they suspect blueskins. Sooner or later they'll
search here. Get away! Cover up your tracks! Hide all signs that you've
ever been here! Get the hell away, fast! One more warning! There's talk
of fusion-bombing Dara. They're scared! If they find your
traces, they'll be more scared still! So cover up your tracks
and--get--away--from--here!"

The many-times-multiplied voice rolled and echoed among the hills. But
it was very clear. Where it could be heard it could be understood, and
it could be heard for miles.

But there was no response to it. Calhoun waited a reasonable time. Then
he shrugged and seated himself at the control-board.

"It isn't easy," he observed, "to persuade desperate men that they've
out-smarted themselves! Hold hard, Murgatroyd!"

[Illustration]

The rockets bellowed. Then there was a tremendous noise to end all
noises, and the ship began to climb. It sped up and up and up. By the
time it was out of atmosphere it had velocity enough to coast to clear
space and Calhoun cut the rockets altogether. He busied himself with
those astrogational chores which began with orienting oneself to
galactic directions after leaving a planet which rotates at its own
individual speed. Then one computes the overdrive course to another
planet, from the respective coordinates of the world one is leaving and
the one one aims for. Then,--in this case at any rate--there was the
very finicky task of picking out a fourth-magnitude star of whose
planets one was his destination. He aimed for it with ultra-fine
precision.

"Overdrive coming," he said presently. "Hold on!"

Space reeled. There was nausea and giddiness and a horrible sensation of
falling in a wildly unlikely spiral. Then stillness, and solidity, and
the blackness of the Pit outside the Med Ship. The little craft was in
overdrive again.

After a long while, the girl Maril said uneasily.

"I don't know what you plan now--."

"I'm going to Dara," said Calhoun. "On Orede I tried to get the
blueskins there to get going, fast. Maybe I succeeded. I don't know. But
this thing's been mishandled! Even if there's a famine, people shouldn't
do things out of desperation!"

"I know now that I was--very foolish--."

"Forget it," commanded Calhoun. "I wasn't talking about you. Here I run
into a situation that the Med Service should have caught and cleaned up
generations ago! But it's not only a Med Service obligation, it's a
current mess! Before I could begin to get at the basic problem, those
idiots on Orede--. It'd happened before I reached Weald! An emotional
explosion triggered by a ship full of dead men that nobody intended to
kill."

Maril shook her head.

       *       *       *       *       *

"Those Darian characters," said Calhoun annoyedly, "shouldn't have gone
to Orede in the first place. If they went there, they should at least
have stayed on a continent where there were no people from Weald digging
a mine and hunting cattle for sport on their off days! They could be
spotted! I believe they were! And again, if it had been a long way from
the mine installation, they could probably have wiped out the people who
sighted them before they could get back with the news! But it looks like
miners saw men hunting, and got close enough to see they were blueskins,
and then got back to the mine with the news!"

She waited for him to explain.

"I know I'm guessing, but it fits!" he said distastefully. "So something
had to be done. Either the mining settlement had to be wiped out or the
story that blueskins were on Orede had to be discredited. The blueskins
tried for both. They used panic-gas on a herd of cattle and it made them
crazy and they charged the settlement like the four-footed lunatics they
are! And the blueskins used panic-gas on the settlement itself as the
cattle went through. It should have settled the whole business nicely.
After it was over every man in the settlement would believe he'd been
out of his head for a while, and he'd have the crazy state of the
settlement to think about, and he wouldn't be sure of what he'd seen or
heard beforehand. They might try to verify the blueskin story later, but
they wouldn't believe anything certainly! It should have worked!"

Again she waited. So Calhoun said very wrily indeed;

"Unfortunately, when the miners panicked, they stampeded into the ship.
Also unfortunately, panic-gas got into the ship with them. So they
stayed panicked while the astrogator--in panic!--took off and headed for
Weald and threw on the overdrive--which would be set for Weald
anyhow--because that would be the fastest way to run away from whatever
he imagined he feared. But he and all the men on the ship were still
crazy with panic from the gas they were re-breathing until they died!"

Silence. After a long interval, Maril asked;

"You don't think the--Darians intended to kill?"

"I think they were stupid!" said Calhoun angrily. "Somebody's always
urging the police to use panic-gas in case of public tumult. But it's
too dangerous. Nobody knows what one man will do in a panic. Take a
hundred or two or three and panic them all, and there's no limit to
their craziness! The whole thing was handled wrong!"

"But you don't blame them?"

"For being stupid, yes," said Calhoun fretfully. "But if I'd been in
their place, perhaps ..."

"Where were you born?" asked Maril suddenly.

Calhoun jerked his head around. He said;

"No! Not where you're guessing--or hoping. Not on Dara. Just because I
act as if Darians were human doesn't mean I have to be one! I'm a Med
Service man, and I'm acting as I think I should." His tone became
exasperated. "Dammit, I'm supposed to deal with health situations,
actual and possible causes of human deaths! And if Weald thinks it finds
proof that blueskins are in space again and caused the death of
Wealdians it won't be healthy! They're halfway set anyhow to drop
fusion-bombs on Dara to wipe it out!"

Maril said fiercely;

"They might as well drop bombs. It'll be quicker than starvation, at
least!"

Calhoun looked at her more exasperatedly than before.

"It is a crop failure again?" he demanded. When she nodded he said
bitterly; "Famine conditions already?" When she nodded again he said
drearily; "And of course famine is the great-grandfather of health
problems! And that's right in my lap with all the rest!"

He stood up. Then he sat down again.

"I'm tired!" he said flatly. "I'd like to get some sleep."

Maril understood. She picked up a book and went into the other cabin.

       *       *       *       *       *
