
Jon began to explain to the man that the notice had requested his
specialty, but he was waved to silence. As the interviewer handed back
the tag he slipped a card out from under the desk blotter and held it in
front of Jon's eyes. He held it there for only an instant, knowing that
the written message was recorded instantly by the robot's photographic
vision and eidetic memory. The card dropped into the ash tray and flared
into embers at the touch of the man's pencil-heater.

Jon stuffed the ID tag back into the slot and read over the message on
the card as he walked down the stairs to the street. There were six
lines of typewritten copy with no signature.

    _To Venex Robot: You are urgently needed on a top secret company
    project. There are suspected informers in the main office, so you
    are being hired in this unusual manner. Go at once to 787 Washington
    Street and ask for Mr. Coleman._

Jon felt an immense sensation of relief. For a moment there, he was sure
the job had been a false lead. He saw nothing unusual in the method of
hiring. The big corporations were immensely jealous of their research
discoveries and went to great lengths to keep them secret--at the same
time resorting to any means to ferret out their business rivals'
secrets. There might still be a chance to get this job.

       *       *       *       *       *

The burly bulk of a lifter was moving back and forth in the gloom of the
ancient warehouse stacking crates in ceiling-high rows. Jon called to
him, the robot swung up his forklift and rolled over on noiseless tires.
When Jon questioned him he indicated a stairwell against the rear wall.

"Mr. Coleman's office is down in back, the door is marked." The lifter
put his fingertips against Jon's ear pick-ups and lowered his voice to
the merest shadow of a whisper. It would have been inaudible to human
ears, but Jon could hear him easily, the sounds being carried through
the metal of the other's body.

"He's the meanest man you ever met--he hates robots so be _ever_ so
polite. If you can use 'sir' five times in one sentence you're perfectly
safe."

Jon swept the shutter over one eye tube in a conspiratorial wink, the
large mech did the same as he rolled away. Jon turned and went down the
dusty stairwell and knocked gently on Mr. Coleman's door.

Coleman was a plump little individual in a conservative
purple-and-yellow business suit. He kept glancing from Jon to the Robot
General Catalog checking the Venex specifications listed there.
Seemingly satisfied he slammed the book shut.

"Gimme your tag and back against that wall to get measured."

Jon laid his ID tag on the desk and stepped towards the wall. "Yes, sir,
here it is, sir." Two "sir" on that one, not bad for the first sentence.
He wondered idly if he could put five of them in one sentence without
the man knowing he was being made a fool of.

He became aware of the danger an instant too late. The current surged
through the powerful electromagnet behind the plaster flattening his
metal body helplessly against the wall. Coleman was almost dancing with
glee.

"We got him, Druce, he's mashed flatter than a stinking tin-can on a
rock, can't move a motor. Bring that junk in here and let's get him
ready."

Druce had a mechanic's coveralls on over his street suit and a tool box
slung under one arm. He carried a little black metal can at arm's
length, trying to get as far from it as possible. Coleman shouted at him
with annoyance.

"That bomb can't go off until it's armed, stop acting like a child. Put
it on that grease-can's leg and _quick_!"

Grumbling under his breath, Druce spot-welded the metal flanges of the
bomb onto Jon's leg a few inches above his knee. Coleman tugged at it to
be certain it was secure, then twisted a knob in the side and pulled out
a glistening length of pin. There was a cold little click from inside
the mechanism as it armed itself.

Jon could do nothing except watch, even his vocal diaphragm was locked
by the magnetic field. He had more than a suspicion however that he was
involved in something other than a "secret business deal." He cursed his
own stupidity for walking blindly into the situation.

The magnetic field cut off and he instantly raced his extensor motors to
leap forward. Coleman took a plastic box out of his pocket and held his
thumb over a switch inset into its top.

"Don't make any quick moves, junk-yard, this little transmitter is keyed
to a receiver in that bomb on your leg. One touch of my thumb, up you go
in a cloud of smoke and come down in a shower of nuts and bolts." He
signalled to Druce who opened a closet door. "And in case you want to be
heroic, just think of him."

Coleman jerked his thumb at the sodden shape on the floor; a filthily
attired man of indistinguishable age whose only interesting feature was
the black bomb strapped tightly across his chest. He peered unseeingly
from red-rimmed eyes and raised the almost empty whiskey bottle to his
mouth. Coleman kicked the door shut.

"He's just some Bowery bum we dragged in, Venex, but that doesn't make
any difference to you, does it? He's human--and a robot can't kill
_anybody_! That rummy has a bomb on him tuned to the same frequency as
yours, if you don't play ball with us he gets a two-foot hole blown in
his chest."

Coleman was right, Jon didn't dare make any false moves. All of his
early mental training as well as Circuit 92 sealed inside his brain case
would prevent him from harming a human being. He felt trapped, caught by
these people for some unknown purpose.

Coleman had pushed back a tarpaulin to disclose a ragged hole in the
concrete floor, the opening extended into the earth below. He waved Jon
over.

"The tunnel is in good shape for about thirty feet, then you'll find a
fall. Clean all the rock and dirt out until you break through into the
storm sewer, then come back. And you better be alone. If you tip the
cops both you and the old stew go out together--now move."

The shaft had been dug recently and shored with packing crates from the
warehouse overhead. It ended abruptly in a wall of fresh sand and stone.
Jon began shoveling it into the little wheelbarrow they had given him.

He had emptied four barrow loads and was filling the fifth when he
uncovered the hand, a robot's hand made of green metal. He turned his
