O'Donnell's sunburned face grew firm. "But I can't have a team of
longhairs poking around this thing for the next month, holding me up. My
job is to destroy it, by any means in my power, and at once. I am going
to do just that."

"I don't think you'll find it that easy," Micheals said.

"That's what I want you for," O'Donnell said. "Tell me why and I'll
figure out a way of doing it."

"Well, as far as I can figure out, the leech is an organic mass-energy
converter, and a frighteningly efficient one. I would guess that it has
a double cycle. First, it converts mass into energy, then back into mass
for its body. Second, energy is converted directly into the body mass.
How this takes place, I do not know. The leech is not protoplasmic. It
may not even be cellular--"

"So we need something big against it," O'Donnell interrupted. "Well,
that's all right. I've got some big stuff here."

"I don't think you understand me," Micheals said. "Perhaps I'm not
phrasing this very well. _The leech eats energy._ It can consume the
strength of any energy weapon you use against it."

"What happens," O'Donnell asked, "if it keeps on eating?"

"I have no idea what its growth-limits are," Micheals said. "Its growth
may be limited only by its food source."

"You mean it could continue to grow probably forever?"

"It could possibly grow as long as it had something to feed on."

"This is really a challenge," O'Donnell said. "That leech can't be
totally impervious to force."

"It seems to be. I suggest you get some physicists in here. Some
biologists also. Have them figure out a way of nullifying it."

The general put out his cigarette. "Professor, I cannot wait while
scientists wrangle. There is an axiom of mine which I am going to tell
you." He paused impressively. "Nothing is impervious to force. Muster
enough force and anything will give. _Anything._

"Professor," the general continued, in a friendlier tone, "you shouldn't
sell short the science you represent. We have, massed under North Hill,
the greatest accumulation of energy and radioactive weapons ever
assembled in one spot. Do you think your leech can stand the full force
of them?"

"I suppose it's possible to overload the thing," Micheals said
doubtfully. He realized now why the general wanted him around. He
supplied the trappings of science, without the authority to override
O'Donnell.

"Come with me," General O'Donnell said cheerfully, getting up and
holding back a flap of the tent. "We're going to crack that leech in
half."

       *       *       *       *       *

After a long wait, rich food started to come again, piped into one side
of it. First there was only a little, and then more and more.
Radiations, vibrations, explosions, solids, liquids--an amazing variety
of edibles. It accepted them all. But the food was coming too slowly for
the starving cells, for new cells were constantly adding their demands
to the rest.

The ever-hungry body screamed for more food, faster!

Now that it had reached a fairly efficient size, it was fully awake. It
puzzled over the energy-impressions around it, locating the source of
the new food massed in one spot.

Effortlessly it pushed itself into the air, flew a little way and
dropped on the food. Its super-efficient cells eagerly gulped the rich
radioactive substances. But it did not ignore the lesser potentials of
metal and clumps of carbohydrates.

       *       *       *       *       *

"The damned fools," General O'Donnell said. "Why did they have to panic?
You'd think they'd never been trained." He paced the ground outside his
tent, now in a new location three miles back.

The leech had grown to two miles in diameter. Three farming communities
had been evacuated.

Micheals, standing beside the general, was still stupefied by the
memory. The leech had accepted the massed power of the weapons for a
while, and then its entire bulk had lifted in the air. The Sun had been
blotted out as it flew leisurely over North Hill, and dropped. There
should have been time for evacuation, but the frightened soldiers had
been blind with fear.

Sixty-seven men were lost in Operation Leech, and General O'Donnell
asked permission to use atomic bombs. Washington sent a group of
scientists to investigate the situation.

"Haven't those experts decided yet?" O'Donnell asked, halting angrily in
front of the tent. "They've been talking long enough."

"It's a hard decision," Micheals said. Since he wasn't an official
member of the investigating team, he had given his information and left.
"The physicists consider it a biological matter, and the biologists seem
to think the chemists should have the answer. No one's an expert on
this, because it's never happened before. We just don't have the data."

"It's a military problem," O'Donnell said harshly. "I'm not interested
in what the thing is--I want to know what can destroy it. They'd better
give me permission to use the bomb."

Micheals had made his own calculations on that. It was impossible to say
for sure, but taking a flying guess at the leech's mass-energy
absorption rate, figuring in its size and apparent capacity for growth,
an atomic bomb _might_ overload it--if used soon enough.

He estimated three days as the limit of usefulness. The leech was
growing at a geometric rate. It could cover the United States in a few
months.

"For a week I've been asking permission to use the bomb," O'Donnell
grumbled. "And I'll get it, but not until after those jackasses end
their damned talking." He stopped pacing and turned to Micheals. "I am
going to destroy the leech. I am going to smash it, if that's the last
thing I do. It's more than a matter of security now. It's personal
pride."

