Greek, but she passed out before we found out what happened.

Somebody wanted to know what was wrong with the kid's face--Bauer, I
think it was, after he came back to the table.

"Compression and decompression," the kid said. "You're all the time
climbing into your suit and out of your suit. Inboard air's thin to
start with. You get a few redlines--that's these ruptured blood
vessels--and you say the hell with the money; all you'll make is just
one more trip. But, God, it's a lot of money for anybody my age! You
keep saying that until you can't be anything but a spacer. The eyes are
hard-radiation scars."

"You like dot all ofer?" asked Oswiak's wife politely.

"All over, ma'am," the kid told her in a miserable voice. "But I'm going
to quit before I get a Bowman Head."

"I don't care," said Maggie Rorty. "I think he's cute."

"Compared with--" Paddy began, but I kicked him under the table.

       *       *       *       *       *

We sang for a while, and then we told gags and recited limericks for a
while, and I noticed that the kid and Maggie had wandered into the back
room--the one with the latch on the door.

Oswiak's wife asked me, very puzzled: "Doc, w'y dey do dot flyink by
planyets?"

"It's the damn govermint," Sam Fireman said.

"Why not?" I said. "They got the Bowman Drive, why the hell shouldn't
they use it? Serves 'em right." I had a double scotch and added: "Twenty
years of it and they found out a few things they didn't know. Redlines
are only one of them. Twenty years more, maybe they'll find out a few
more things they didn't know. Maybe by the time there's a bathtub in
every American home and an alcoholism clinic in every American town,
they'll find out a whole _lot_ of things they didn't know. And every
American boy will be a pop-eyed, blood-raddled wreck, like our friend
here, from riding the Bowman Drive."

"It's the damn govermint," Sam Fireman repeated.

"And what the hell did you mean by that remark about alcoholism?" Paddy
said, real sore. "Personally, I can take it or leave it alone."

So we got to talking about that and everybody there turned out to be
people who could take it or leave it alone.

       *       *       *       *       *

It was maybe midnight when the kid showed at the table again, looking
kind of dazed. I was drunker than I ought to be by midnight, so I said I
was going for a walk. He tagged along and we wound up on a bench at
Screwball Square. The soap-boxers were still going strong. Like I said,
it was a nice night. After a while, a pot-bellied old auntie who didn't
give a damn about the face sat down and tried to talk the kid into going
to see some etchings. The kid didn't get it and I led him over to hear
the soap-boxers before there was trouble.

One of the orators was a mush-mouthed evangelist. "And, oh, my friends,"
he said, "when I looked through the porthole of the spaceship and beheld
the wonder of the Firmament--"

"You're a stinkin' Yankee liar!" the kid yelled at him. "You say one
damn more word about can-shootin' and I'll ram your spaceship down your
lyin' throat! Wheah's your redlines if you're such a hot spacer?"

The crowd didn't know what he was talking about, but "wheah's your
redlines" sounded good to them, so they heckled mush-mouth off his box
with it.

