
They'd left him an old car that wasn't worth shipping to the stars. How
long it would last was anybody's guess. The government hadn't been
deliberately illiberal in leaving him such a shabby vehicle; if there
had been any way to ensure a continuing supply of fuel, they would
probably have left him a reasonably good one. But, since only a little
could be left, allowing him a good car would have been simply an example
of conspicuous waste, and the government had always preferred its waste
to be inconspicuous.

He drove slowly through the broad boulevards of Long Island, savoring
the loneliness. New York as a residential area had been a ghost town for
years, since the greater part of its citizens had been among the first
to emigrate to the stars. However, since it was the capital of the world
and most of the interstellar ships--particularly the last few--had
taken off from its spaceports, it had been kept up as an official
embarkation center. Thus, paradoxically, it was the last city to be
completely evacuated, and so, although the massive but jerry-built
apartment houses that lined the streets were already crumbling, the
roads had been kept in fairly good shape and were hardly cracked at all.

Still, here and there the green was pushing its way up in unlikely
places. A few more of New York's tropical summers, and Long Island would
soon become a wilderness.

The streets were empty, except for the cats sunning themselves on
long-abandoned doorsteps or padding about on obscure errands of their
own. Perhaps their numbers had not increased since humanity had left the
city to them, but there certainly seemed to be more--striped and solid,
black and grey and white and tawny--accepting their citizenship with
equanimity. They paid no attention to Johnson--they had long since
dissociated themselves from a humanity that had not concerned itself
greatly over their welfare. On the other hand, neither he nor the
surface car appeared to startle them; the old ones had seen such before,
and to kittens the very fact of existence is the ultimate surprise.

The Queensborough Bridge was deadly silent. It was completely empty
except for a calico cat moving purposefully toward Manhattan. The
structure needed a coat of paint, Johnson thought vaguely, but of course
it would never get one. Still, even uncared for, the bridges should
outlast him--there would be no heavy traffic to weaken them. Just in
case of unforeseeable catastrophe, however--he didn't want to be trapped
on an island, even Manhattan Island--he had remembered to provide
himself with a rowboat; a motorboat would have been preferable, but then
the fuel difficulty would arise again....

How empty the East River looked without any craft on it! It was rather a
charming little waterway in its own right, though nothing to compare
with the stately Hudson. The water scintillated in the sunshine and the
air was clear and fresh, for no factories had spewed fumes and smoke
into it for many years. There were few gulls, for nothing was left for
the scavenger; those remaining were forced to make an honest living by
catching fish.

In Manhattan, where the buildings had been more soundly constructed, the
signs of abandonment were less evident ... empty streets, an occasional
cracked window. Not even an unusual amount of dirt because, in the
past, the normal activities of an industrial and ruggedly individual
city had provided more grime than years of neglect could ever hope to
equal. No, it would take Manhattan longer to go back than Long Island.
Perhaps that too would not happen during his lifetime.

Yet, after all, when he reached Fifth Avenue he found that Central Park
had burst its boundaries. Fifty-ninth Street was already half jungle,
and the lush growth spilled down the avenues and spread raggedly out
into the side streets, pushing its way up through the cracks it had made
in the surface of the roads. Although the Plaza fountain had not flowed
for centuries, water had collected in the leaf-choked basin from the
last rain, and a group of grey squirrels were gathered around it,
shrilly disputing possession with some starlings.

Except for the occasional cry of a cat in the distance, these voices
were all that he heard ... the only sound. Not even the sudden blast of
a jet regaining power ... he would never hear that again; never hear the
stridor of a human voice piercing with anger; the cacophony of a hundred
television sets, each playing a different program; the hoot of a horn;
off-key singing; the thin, uncertain notes of an amateur musician ...
these would never be heard on Earth again.

He sent the car gliding slowly ... no more traffic rules ... down Fifth
Avenue. The buildings here also were well-built; they were many
centuries old and would probably last as many more. The shop windows
were empty, except for tangles of dust ... an occasional broken,
discarded mannequin.... In some instances the glass had already cracked
or fallen out. Since there were no children to throw stones, however,
others might last indefinitely, carefully glassing in nothingness. Doors
