
"'68," the U.P. man said faintly. "It didn't happen in '68, not '67."

The A.P. man smashed a fist into the palm of his hand and swore.
"_God_-damn," he said. "Some day I'd like to--" He broke off and was
bitterly silent.

The U.P. man must have been a little dislocated with shock and quite
drunk to talk the way he did. "Me too," he said. "Like to tell the
story. Maybe it was '67 not '68. I'm not sure now. Can't write it down
so the details get lost and then after a while it didn't happen at all.
Revolution'd be good deal. But it takes people t' make revolution.
_People._ With eyes 'n ears. 'N memories. We make things not-happen an'
we make people not-see an' not-hear...." He slumped back against the
corridor wall, nursing his burned hand. The others were watching him,
very scared.

Then the A.P. man caught sight of the Secretary of Defense striding down
the corridor, flanked by Secret Servicemen. "Mr. Steiner!" he called.
"What's the picture?"

Steiner stopped, breathing heavily, and said: "Slocum's barricaded in
the Oval Study. They don't want to smash in. He's about the only one
left. There were only fifty or so. The Acting President's taken charge
at the Study. You want to come along?"

They did, and even hauled the U.P. man after them.

The Acting President, who would be President Folsom XXV as soon as the
Electoral College got around to it, had his father's face--the petulant
lip, the soft jowl--on a hard young body. He also had an auto-rifle
ready to fire from the hip. Most of the Cabinet was present. When the
Secretary of Defense arrived, he turned on him. "Steiner," he said
nastily, "can you explain why there should be a rebellion against the
Republic in your department?"

"Mr. President," Steiner said, "Slocum was retired on my recommendation
two years ago. It seems to me that my responsibility ended there and
Security should have taken over."

The President Elect's finger left the trigger of the auto-rifle and his
lip drew in a little. "Quite so," he said curtly, and, turned to the
door. "Slocum!" he shouted. "Come out of there. We can use gas if we
want."

       *       *       *       *       *

The door opened unexpectedly and a tired-looking man with three stars on
each shoulder stood there, bare-handed. "All right," he said drearily.
"I was fool enough to think something could be done about the regime.
But you fat-faced imbeciles are going to go on and on and--"

The stutter of the auto-rifle cut him off. The President Elect's
knuckles were white as he clutched the piece's forearm and grip; the
torrent of slugs continued to hack and plow the general's body until the
magazine was empty. "Burn that," he said curtly, turning his back on it.
"Dr. Barnes, come here. I want to know about my father's passing."

The doctor, hoarse and red-eyed from the whiff of phosphorus smoke,
spoke with him. The U.P. man had sagged drunkenly into a chair, but the
other newsmen noted that Dr. Barnes glanced at them as he spoke, in a
confidential murmur.

"Thank you, Doctor," the President Elect said at last, decisively. He
gestured to a Secret Serviceman. "Take those traitors away." They went,
numbly.

The Secretary of State cleared his throat. "Mr. President," he said, "I
take this opportunity to submit the resignations of myself and fellow
Cabinet members according to custom."

"That's all right," the President Elect said. "You may as well stay on.
I intend to run things myself anyway." He hefted the auto-rifle. "You,"
he said to the Secretary of Public Opinion. "You have some work to do.
Have the memory of my father's--artistic--preoccupations obliterated as
soon as possible. I wish the Republic to assume a war-like posture--yes;
what is it?"

A trembling messenger said: "Mr. President, I have the honor to inform
you that the College of Electors has elected you President of the
Republic--unanimously."

       *       *       *       *       *

Cadet Fourth-Classman Thomas Grayson lay on his bunk and sobbed in an
agony of loneliness. The letter from his mother was crumpled in his
hand: "--prouder than words can tell of your appointment to the Academy.
Darling, I hardly knew my grandfather but I know that you will serve as
brilliantly as he did, to the eternal credit of the Republic. You must
be brave and strong for my sake--"

He would have given everything he had or ever could hope to have to be
back with her, and away from the bullying, sneering fellow-cadets of the
Corps. He kissed the letter--and then hastily shoved it under his
mattress as he heard footsteps.

He popped to a brace, but it was only his roommate Ferguson. Ferguson
was from Earth, and rejoiced in the lighter Lunar gravity which was
punishment to Grayson's Io-bred muscles.

"Rest, mister," Ferguson grinned.

"Thought it was night inspection."

"Any minute now. They're down the hall. Lemme tighten your bunk or
you'll be in trouble--" Tightening the bunk he pulled out the letter and
