The Crew was soon going to get one devil of a jolt!

He put the ship into a close orbit around the planet. It seemed nothing
but a fearsome forest of oxydized spikes rising in corrosive silence,
with here and there a lean slash of valley. There was no indication of
life, no vegetation visible or revealed by the scopes. One of the
valleys had a thin mouth of water stretching down the length of its
face. Kelly set the speed and the controls and ran for the bunkroom and
the shock-absorbent cushions. He strapped himself in and waited.

It was done. As long as the thing had gone so far, Kelly decided, the
truth should never be revealed because that would lessen the therapeutic
value of his action. He would wreck the ship. Not too badly. Not so
badly that all of the bodies, distinct, separate individual bodies
again, couldn't put the ship back together, as in the old days. And that
would keep them in their bodies gladly for a while where they belonged!
Where the good Lord had intended for them to stay.

They would not be rocked away to apathy in a phony metal mother womb,
thinking the ship was going to take care of _them_!

The more Kelly thought about it, the better he felt. He stretched inside
the straps. He felt his slightly atrophied muscles luxuriate over the
tissues and bones of his big frame.

Any body, no matter what its shape, should be proud of itself. That was
Kelly's belief, and this thing that had happened seemed somewhat
blasphemous. Without bodies and their complex sensory recording
apparatus, the rich consciousness enjoyed by the Crew could not exist,
would never have been created at all. The Crew was living off the
largesse of experience built up by their bodies. The Crew was just
narcotized enough that it did not realize that the body banks had to be
replenished.

Metal shrieked.

Kelly yelled feebly. He fought, he grappled with the threatening
blackout like a man fighting an invisible opponent on an endless flight
of stairs.

The grinding rolling terror of the sound, the ripping, twisting, tearing
scream of it cried on and on. Kelly knew one thing then.

He had not figured it right. His calculations were off. _The ship had
hit too damn hard._

       *       *       *       *       *

Later, when he managed to get the straps off and tried to move, he fell
painfully onto the tilted deck. One of his eyes felt sticky. He rubbed
at it and his hand was smeared with blood.

He shuffled around in a stumbling circle. Minor damages could have been
repaired. But this--the ship was peeled open in glaring strips like a
breakfast cannister. A cold wind moaned through the ship that was now
nothing but a metal sieve. A hazy light filtered down and ran off the
metal like cold flour rust.

Kelly fell to his knees. "Kew," he whispered. "Lljub, Urdaz--Lakrit...."

The Venusian flower lady was sliced down the middle like a cabbage, and
the nitrate bowl was shattered and Kew was dead in a pool of fading
green blood.

Smashed into the bulkhead was Lakrit's sulphuric bathtub, and his
atmosphere had already filtered away with the wind to wherever it was
going. Lljub's pale glow was out for good, and his crystalline heart was
as opaque as a dead eye. Only a few pieces of Urdaz's tank were visible,
and Urdaz himself had already turned to a powdery food that the wind ate
slowly in long trailing streamers.

"What--what in the name of God have I done?" Kelly whispered.

All dead--

No! He slammed at the bulkhead until the warped metal gave and he ran to
the control room. The Crew--the Crew--

He stared at the tank.

Through a jagged opening in the ship's walls, the wind whined and
plucked at Kelly's red hair. The wind was colder now. He kept on looking
at the tank. He reached out and touched the big transparent curve of it
and then jerked his hand back with a whimper in his breath.

There was nothing in the tank, nothing but a blob of slowly drying
slime. He pressed his nose to the tank. "Crew--" he whispered.

There was no life in the slime. When he pounded on the tank, the stuff
