plans for the way-station. Where are they?"

"I don't know anything about any plans and I don't know anything about a
way-station. I tried to tell the girl: it's all a crazy mistake."

"We will see," said Hafitz. He pressed a button on the arm of his
wheelchair and two bruisers appeared through the walls, in the abrupt
way people had of materializing here. Bruisers was the only way they
could be described. They were human brutes, all muscle and malevolence.

"Take them," said Hafitz, indicating the unconscious girl and the young
man. "Take them and search them for a small packet. If you do not find
it, search this room. If you do not find it still, hurt the male animal.
They persuade well with pain here, I understand. But do not kill him. I
will be in the communications room."

He sped off, through a wall opening.

One of the bruisers picked up the girl, roughly, and disappeared with
her. The other grabbed the young man and hauled him off in a third
direction. The young man hastily snatched up his coat, shirt and tie en
route.

They ended up in a cell of a room, about seven feet in all directions,
in which the bruiser stripped him, methodically went through each piece
of clothing, and then satisfied himself that he didn't have the packet
anywhere on his body.

The muscle-man then raised a fist.

"Wait," his prospective victim said. He thought back quickly. "Hafitz
didn't say you could bat me around till you searched the room, too."

The other spoke for the first time. "You say the truth." He put his arm
down.

The young man watched intently as the bruiser went through the wall of
the cell-like room.

He dressed fast. By placing his fingers in exactly the same position as
the other had done, was able to make the wall open for him.

The silver-metal corridor had two directions. He went to the right.
After many turnings, at each of which he reconnoitered carefully, he
came to a passageway that was damp. Why it was damp he couldn't tell,
but there in the wetness were tracks which could have been made by a
wheelchair.

He followed them, feeling the throb of giant engines underfoot.

       *       *       *       *       *

The wheelchair tracks abruptly made a ninety-degree turn and ended at a
blank wall. Somewhere beyond it must be the communications room.

He retreated and waited.

In time the wall snapped open and Hafitz sped out. The young man
retreated into the maze of corridors and hoped chance would be on his
side. It was. Hafitz went another way.

The young man ran back to the wall and used his fingers on it in the
combination he had learned. It opened for him.

He closed it behind him and blinked at the huge instrument panel which
filled almost the entire room.

One of the instruments was a color vision screen, tuned in to a room in
which there was a mahogany desk, at which was seated a man in uniform.
Behind him was a map of the United States.

The man in uniform was a major general in the Air Force. An aide, a
lieutenant colonel, was leaning over the desk. He had a sheaf of papers
in his hand. The men's conversation was audible.

"Messages have been coming in from all over Europe," the colonel was
saying. "Here's the way it reconstructs:

"Our agent was en route to the rendezvous when he was intercepted by
Naomi. That's the only name we have for her. She's a spy. She's worked
for half a dozen countries and her present employer could be any one of
them. They were spotted as they crossed the frontier between Italy and
France. Their car went into a barn and we thought we had them. But the
barn turned out to be a spaceship in disguise. It took off."

_So I'm their agent, Paul Asher thought. So that's what it's all about.
I'm a secret agent for the United States, but they didn't tell me
anything about it. This is real George, this is ... He expected to hear
a faint click and leaned forward experimentally, but nothing happened.
He leaned backward. Still nothing._

The colonel was answering a question from the general. "We don't know
who they are, Sir. They're not from Earth, obviously. And the best
scientific minds go still further--they're not even from our solar
system. Whoever they are, it's clear that they don't want us to build a
