
In the darkness I reached for his hand; I found it and shook it
solemnly--a gesture of Earth which it is hard to explain. It means
many things.

"Go, then, Andy," I said softly. "But do not stay long. An hour at the
longest. If you are not back in that length of time, we'll come after
you, and whatever else may happen, you can be sure that you will be
well avenged. The _Ertak_ has not lost her stinger."

"Thank you, John," he replied. "Remember that I shall wear my menore.
If I adjust it to full power, and you do likewise, and stand without
the shelter of the _Ertak's_ metal hull, I shall be able to
communicate with you, should there be any danger." He pressed my hand
again, and strode through the exit out into the darkness, which was
lit only by a few distant stars.

The long, slim legs closed in around him; like a pigmy guarded by the
skeletons of giants he was led quickly away.

       *       *       *       *       *

The minutes dragged by. There was a nervous tension on the ship, the
like of which I have experienced not more than a dozen times in all my
years.

No one spoke aloud. Now and again one man would matter uneasily to
another; there would be a swift, muttered response, and silence again.
We were waiting--waiting.

Ten minutes went by. Twenty. Thirty.

Impatiently I paced up and down before the exit, the guards at their
posts, ready to obey any orders instantly.

Forty-five minutes. I walked through the exit; stepped out onto the
cold, hard earth.

I could see, behind me, the shadowy bulk of the _Ertak_. Before me, a
black, shapeless blot against the star-sprinkled sky, was the great
administrative building of the Chisee. And in there, somewhere, was
Anderson Croy. I glanced down at the luminous dial of my watch. Fifty
minutes. In ten minutes more--

"John Hanson!" My name reached me, faintly but clearly, through the
medium of my menore. "This is Croy. Do you understand me?"

"Yes," I replied instantly. "Are you safe?"

"I am safe. All is well. Very well. Will you promise me now to receive
what I am about to send, without interruption?"

"Yes," I replied, thoughtlessly and eagerly. "What is it?"

       *       *       *       *       *

"I have had a long conference with the chief or head of the Chisee,"
explained Croy rapidly. "He is very intelligent, and his people are
much further advanced than we thought.

"Through some form of communication, he has learned of the fight with
the weird birds; it seems that they are--or were--the most dreaded of
all the creatures of this dark world. Apparently we got the whole
brood of them, and this chief, whose name, I gather, is Wieschien, or
something like that, is naturally much impressed.

"I have given him a demonstration or two with my atomic pistol and the
flashlight--these people are fairly stricken by a ray of light
directly in the eyes--and we have reached very favorable terms.

"I am to remain here as chief bodyguard and adviser, of which he has
need, for all is not peaceful, I gather, in this kingdom of darkness.
In return, he is to give up his plans to subjugate the rest of Antri;
he has sworn to do this by what is evidently, to him, a very sacred
oath, witnessed solemnly by the rest of his council.

"Under the circumstances, I believe he will do what he says; in any
case, the great canal will be filled in, and the Antrians will have
plenty of time to erect a great series of disintegrator ray stations
along the entire twilight zone, using the broad fan rays to form a
solid wall against which the Chisee could not advance even did they,
at some future date, carry out their plans. The worst possible result
then would be that the people in the sunlit portion would have to
migrate from certain sections, and perhaps would have day and night,
alternately, as do other worlds.

"This is the agreement we have reached; it is the only one that will
save this world. Do you approve, sir?"

"No! Return immediately, and we will show the Chisee that they cannot
hold an officer of the Special Patrol as a hostage. Make haste!"

       *       *       *       *       *

"It's no go, sir," came the reply instantly. "I threatened them first.
I explained what our disintegrator rays would do, and Wieschien
laughed at me.

"This city is built upon great subterranean passages that lead to many
hidden exits. If we show the least sign of hostility the work will be
resumed on the canal, and, before we can locate the spot, and stop the
work, the damage will be done.

"This is our only chance, sir, to make this expedition a complete
success. Permit me to judge this fact from the evidence I have before
me. Whatever sacrifice there is to make, I make gladly. Wieschien asks
that you depart at once, and in peace, and I know this is the only
course. Good-by, sir; convey my salutations to my other friends upon
the old _Ertak_, and elsewhere. And now, lest my last act as an
officer of the Special Patrol Service be to refuse to obey the
commands of my superior officer, I am removing the menore. Good-by!"

I tried to reach him again, but there was no response.

Gone! He was gone! Swallowed up in darkness and in silence!

       *       *       *       *       *

Dazed, shaken to the very foundation of my being, I stood there
between the shadowy bulk of the _Ertak_ and the towering mass of the
great silent pile that was the seat of government in this strange land
of darkness, and gazed up at the dark sky above me. I am not ashamed,
now, to say that hot tears trickled down my cheeks, nor that as I
turned back to the _Ertak_, my throat was so gripped by emotion that I
could not speak.

I ordered the exit closed with a wave of my hand; in the navigating
room I said but four words: "We depart at once."

At the third meal of the day I gathered my officers about me and told
them, as quickly and as gently as I could, of the sacrifice one of
their number had made.

It was Kincaide who, when I had finished, rose slowly and made reply.

"Sir," he said quietly, "We had a friend. Some day, he might have
died. Now he will live forever in the records of the Service, in the
memory of a world, and in the hearts of those who had the honor to
serve with him. Could he--or we--wish more?"

Amid a strange silence he sat down again, and there was not an eye
among us that was dry.

       *       *       *       *       *

I hope that the snappy young officer who visited me the other day
reads this little account of bygone times.

Perhaps it will make clear to him how we worked, in those nearly
forgotten days, with the tools we had at hand. They were not the
perfect tools of to-day, but what they lacked, we somehow made up.

That fine old motto of the Service, "Nothing Less Than Complete
Success," we passed on unsullied to those who came after us.

I hope these youngsters of to-day may do as well.




                         _IN THE NEXT ISSUE_


                       THE TENTACLES FROM BELOW

      _A Complete Novelette of An American Submarine's Dramatic
         Raid on Marauding "Machine-Fish" of the Ocean Floor_

                          By Anthony Gilmore


                         PHALANXES OF ATLANS

               _Beginning a Thrilling Two-Part Novel of
                    a Strange Hidden Civilisation_

                          By F. V. W. Mason


                            THE BLACK LAMP

               _Another of Dr. Bird's Amazing Exploits_

                        By Captain S. P. Meek


                          THE PIRATE PLANET

            _The Conclusion of the Splendid Current Novel_

                         By Charles W. Diffin


                            _AND OTHERS!_




[Illustration: _They tilted her rudders and dove to the abysm below._]

The Sunken Empire

_By H. Thompson Rich_

    Concerning the strange adventures of Professor Stevens with
    the Antillians on the floors of the mysterious Sargasso Sea.


"Then you really expect to find the lost continent of Atlantis,
Professor?"

Martin Stevens lifted his bearded face sternly to the reporter who was
interviewing him in his study aboard the torpedo-submarine _Nereid_, a
craft of his own invention, as she lay moored at her Brooklyn wharf,
on an afternoon in October.

"My dear young man," he said, "I am not even going to look for it."

The aspiring journalist--Larry Hunter by name--was properly abashed.

"But I thought," he insisted nevertheless, "that you said you were
going to explore the ocean floor under the Sargasso Sea?"

"And so I did." Professor Stevens admitted, a smile moving that gray
beard now and his blue eyes twinkling merrily. "But the Sargasso, an
area almost equal to Europe, covers other land as well--land of far
more recent submergence than Atlantis, which foundered in 9564 B. C.,
according to Plato. What I am going to look for is this newer lost
continent, or island rather--namely, the great island of Antillia, of
which the West Indies remain above water to-day."

"Antillia?" queried Larry Hunter, wonderingly. "I never heard of it."

Again the professor regarded his interviewer sternly.

"There are many things you have never heard of, young man," he told
him. "Antillia may be termed the missing link between Atlantis and
America. It was there that Atlantean culture survived after the
appalling catastrophe that wiped out the Atlantean homeland, with its
seventy million inhabitants, and it was in the colonies the Antillians
established in Mexico and Peru, that their own culture in turn
survived, after Antillia too had sunk."

"My Lord! You don't mean to say the Mayas and Incas originated on that
island of Antillia?"

"No, I mean to say they originated on the continent of Atlantis, and
that Antillia was the stepping stone to the New World, where they
built the strange pyramids we find smothered in the jungle--even as
thousands of years before the Atlanteans established colonies in Egypt
and founded the earliest dynasties of pyramid-building Pharaohs."

       *       *       *       *       *

Larry was pushing his pencil furiously.

"Whew!" he gasped. "Some story, Professor!"

"To the general public, perhaps," was the reply. "But to scholars of
antiquity, these postulates are pretty well known and pretty well
accepted. It remains but to get concrete evidence, in order to prove
them to the world at large--and that is the object of my expedition."

More hurried scribbling, then:

"But, say--why don't you go direct to Atlantis and get the real dope?"

"Because that continent foundered so long ago that it is doubtful if
any evidence would have withstood the ravages of time," Professor
Stevens explained, "whereas Antillia went down no earlier than 200 B.
C., archaeologists agree."

"That answers my question," declared Larry, his admiration for this
doughty graybeard rising momentarily. "And now, Professor, I wonder if
you'd be willing to say a few words about this craft of yours?"

"Cheerfully, if you think it would interest anyone. What would you
care to have me say?"

"Well, in the first place, what does the name _Nereid_ mean?"

"Sea-nymph. The derivation is from the Latin and Greek, meaning
daughter of the sea-god Nereus. Appropriate, don't you think?"

"Swell. And why do you call it a torpedo-submarine? How does it differ
from the common or navy variety?"

       *       *       *       *       *

Professor Stevens smiled. It was like asking what was the difference
between the sun and the moon, when about the only point of resemblance
they had was that they were both round. Nevertheless, he enumerated
some of the major modifications he had developed.

Among them, perhaps the most radical, was its motive power, which was
produced by what he called a vacuo-turbine--a device that sucked in
the water at the snout of the craft and expelled it at the tail, at
the time purifying a certain amount for drinking purposes and
extracting sufficient oxygen to maintain a healthful atmosphere while
running submerged.

Then, the structure of the _Nereid_ was unique, he explained,
permitting it to attain depths where the pressure would crush an
ordinary submarine, while mechanical eyes on the television principle
afforded a view in all directions, and locks enabling them to leave
the craft at will and explore the sea-bottom were provided.

This latter feat they would accomplish in special suits, designed on
the same pneumatic principle as the torpedo itself and capable of
sustaining sufficient inflation to resist whatever pressures might be
encountered, as well as being equipped with vibratory sending and
receiving apparatus, for maintaining communication with those left
aboard.

       *       *       *       *       *

All these things and more Professor Stevens outlined, as Larry's
pencil flew, admitting that he had spent the past ten years and the
best part of his private fortune in developing his plans.

"But you'll get it all back, won't you? Aren't there all sorts of
Spanish galleons and pirate barques laden with gold supposed to be
down there?"

"Undoubtedly," was the calm reply. "But I am not on a treasure hunt,
young man. If I find one single sign of former life, I shall be amply
rewarded."

Whereupon the young reporter regarded the subject of his interview
with fresh admiration, not unmingled with wonder. In his own hectic
world, people had no such scorn of gold. Gee, he'd sure like to go
along! The professor could have his old statues or whatever he was
looking for. As for himself, he'd fill up his pockets with Spanish
doubloons and pieces of eight!

Larry was snapped out of his trance by a light knock on the door,
which opened to admit a radiant girl in creamy knickers and green
cardigan.

"May I come in, daddy?" she inquired, hesitating, as she saw he was
not alone.

"You seem to be in already, my dear," the professor told her, rising
from his desk and stepping forward.

Then, turning to Larry, who had also risen, he said:

"Mr. Hunter, this is my daughter, Diane, who is also my secretary."

"I am pleased to meet you, Miss Stevens," said Larry, taking her hand.

And he meant it--for almost anyone would have been pleased to meet
Diane, with her tawny gold hair, warm olive cheeks and eyes bluer even
than her father's and just as twinkling, just as intelligent.

"She will accompany the expedition and take stenographic notes of
everything we observe," added her father, to Larry's amazement.

"What?" he declared. "You mean to say that--that--"
