phrasing--shut the Tube off again. But that would certainly involve
some extremely disastrous phenomena at three different points of our
globe."

"Explosions?" Barney asked.

"Weee-ll," McAllen said judiciously, "implosions might come a little
closer to describing the effect. The exact term isn't contained in our
vocabulary, and I'd prefer it _not_ to show up there, at least in my
lifetime. But you see my dilemma, don't you? If I asked for help, I
revealed the existence of the Tube. Once its existence was known, the
research that produced it could be duplicated. As you concluded, it
isn't really too difficult a device to construct. And even with the
present problem solved, the McAllen Tube is just a little too
dangerous a thing to be at large in our world today."

"You feel the problem can be solved?"

"Oh, yes." McAllen took off his glasses and rubbed his eyes. "That
part of it's only a matter of time. At first I thought I'd have
everything worked out within three or four years. Unfortunately I
badly underestimated the expense of some of the required
experimentation. That's what's delayed everything."

"I see. I had been wondering," Barney admitted, "why a man with
something like this on his mind would be putting in _quite_ so much
time fishing."

McAllen grinned. "Enforced idleness. It's been very irritating really,
Mr. Chard. I've been obliged to proceed in the most inexpensive manner
possible, and that meant--very slowly."

Barney said, "If it weren't for that question of funds, how long would
it take to wind up the operation?"

"A year--perhaps two years." McAllen shrugged. "It's difficult to be
too exact, but it certainly wouldn't be longer than two."

"And what would be the financial tab?"

McAllen hesitated. "A million is the bottom figure, I'm afraid. It
should run closer to a million and a half."

"Doctor," Barney said, "let me make you a proposition."

       *       *       *       *       *

McAllen looked at him. "Are you thinking of financing the experiments,
Mr. Chard?"

"In return," Barney said, "for a consideration."

"What's that?" McAllen's expression grew wary.

"When you retired," Barney told him, "I dropped a nice piece of money
as a consequence. It was the first beating I'd taken, and it hurt. I'd
like to pick that money up again. All right. We're agreed it can't be
done on the McAllen Tube. The Tube wouldn't help make the world a
safer place for Barney Chard. But the Tube isn't any more remarkable
than the mind that created it. Now I know a company which could be top
of the heap in electronics precision work--one-shot specialties is
what they go in for--if it had your mind as technical advisor. I can
buy a controlling interest in that company tomorrow, doctor. And you
can have the million and a half paid off in not much more time than
you expect to take to get your monster back under control and shut
down. Three years of your technical assistance, and we're clear."

McAllen's face reddened slowly. "I've considered hiring out, of
course," he said. "Many times. I need the money very badly. But aren't
you overlooking something?"

"What?"

"I went to considerable pains," said McAllen, "to establish myself as
a lunatic. It was distasteful, but it seemed necessary to discourage
anyone from making too close an investigation of some of my more
recent lines of research. If it became known now that I was again in
charge of a responsible project--"

Barney shook his head. "No problem, doctor. We'd be drawing on outside
talent for help in specific matters--very easy to cover up any leads
to you personally. I've handled that general sort of thing before."

McAllen frowned thoughtfully. "I see. But I'd have--There wouldn't be
so much work that--"

"No," Barney said. "I guarantee that you'll have all the time you want
for your own problem." He smiled. "Considering what you told me, I'd
like to hear that one's been solved myself!"

McAllen grinned briefly. "I can imagine. Very well. Ah ... when can
you let me have the money, Mr. Chard?"

       *       *       *       *       *

The sun was setting beyond the little lake as Barney drew the shades
over the cabin window again. Dr. McAllen was half inside the built-in
closet at the moment, fitting a pair of toggle switches to the
concealed return device in there.

"Here we go," he said suddenly.

Three feet from the wall of the room the shadowy suggestion of another
wall, and of an open door, became visible.

Barney said dubiously, "We came out of _that_?"

McAllen looked at him, sad, "The appearance is different on the exit
side. But the Tube's open now--Here, I'll show you."

He went up to the apparition of a door, abruptly seemed to melt into
it. Barney held his breath, and followed. Again there was no sensory
reaction to passing through the Tube. As his foot came down on
something solid in the shadowiness into which he stepped, the living
room in Sweetwater Beach sprang into sudden existence about him.

"Seems a little odd from that end, the first time through, doesn't
it?" McAllen remarked.

Barney let out his breath.

"If I'd been the one who invented the Tube," he said honestly, "I'd
never have had the nerve to try it."

McAllen grinned. "Tell you the truth, I did need a drink or two the
first time. But it's dead-safe if you know just what you're doing."

Which was not, Barney felt, too reassuring. He looked back. The door
through which they had come was the one by which they had left. But
beyond it now lay a section of the entrance hall of the Sweetwater
Beach house.

"Don't let that fool you," said McAllen, following his gaze. "If you
tried to go out into the hall at the moment, you'd find yourself right
back in the cabin. Light rays passing through the Tube can be shunted
off and on." He went over to the door, closed and locked it, dropping
the key in his pocket. "I keep it locked. I don't often have visitors,
but if I had one while the door was open it could be embarrassing."

"What about the other end?" Barney asked. "The door appeared in the
cabin when you turned those switches. What happens now? Suppose
someone breaks into the cabin and starts prowling around--is the door
still there?"

McAllen shook his head. "Not unless that someone happened to break in
within the next half-minute." He considered. "Let's put it this way.
The Tube's permanently centered on its two exit points, but the effect
ordinarily is dissipated over half a mile of the neighborhood at the
other end. For practical purposes there is no useful effect. When I'm
going to go through, I bring the exit end down to a focus point ...
does that make sense? Very well. It remains focused for around sixty
or ninety seconds, depending on how I set it; then it expands again."
He nodded at the locked door. "In the cabin, that's disappeared by
now. Walk through the space where it's been, and you'll notice nothing
unusual. Clear?"

Barney hesitated. "And if that door were still open here, and somebody
attempted to step through after the exit end had expanded--"

"Well," McAllen said, moving over to a wall buzzer and pressing it,
"that's what I meant when I said it could be embarrassing. He'd get
expanded too--disastrously. Could you use a drink, Mr. Chard? I know I
want one."

       *       *       *       *       *

The drinks, served by Fredericks, were based on a rather rough grade
of bourbon, but Barney welcomed them. There was an almost sick
fascination in what was a certainty now: he was going to get the Tube.
That tremendous device was his for the taking. He was well inside
McAllen's guard; only carelessness could arouse the old man's
suspicions again, and Barney was not going to be careless. No need to
hurry anything. He would play the reserved role he had selected for
himself, leave developments up to the fact that McAllen had carried
the burden of his secret for twelve years, with no more satisfactory
confidant than Fredericks to trust with it. Having told Barney so
much, McAllen wanted to tell more. He would have needed very little
encouragement to go on talking about it now.

Barney offered no encouragement. Instead, he gave McAllen a cautiously
worded reminder that it was not inconceivable they had an audience
here, at which McAllen reluctantly subsided. There was, however, one
fairly important question Barney still wanted answered today. The
nature of the answer would tell him the manner in which McAllen should
now be handled.

He waited until he was on his feet and ready to leave before
presenting it. McAllen's plump cheeks were flushed from the two
highballs he had put away; in somewhat awkward phrases he had been
expressing his gratitude for Barney's generous help, and his relief
that because of it the work on the Tube now could be brought to an
end.

"Just one thing about that still bothers me a little, doctor," Barney
said candidly.

McAllen looked concerned. "What's that, Mr. Chard?"

"Well ... you're in good health, I'd say." Barney smiled. "But suppose
something did happen to you before you succeeded in shutting the
McAllen Tube down." He inclined his head toward the locked door.

"That thing would still be around waiting for somebody to open it and
step through...."

McAllen's expression of concern vanished. He dug a forefinger
cheerfully into Barney's ribs. "Young man, you needn't worry. I've
been aware of the possibility, of course, and believe me I'm keeping
_very_ careful notes and instructions. Safe deposit boxes ... we'll
talk about that tomorrow, eh? Somewhere else? Had a man in mind, as a
matter of fact, but we can make better arrangements now. You see, it's
really so ridiculously _easy_ at this stage."

Barney cleared his throat. "Some other physicist--?"

"_Any_ capable physicist," McAllen said decidedly. "Just a matter, you
see of how reliable he is." He winked at Barney. "Talk about that
tomorrow too--or one of these days."

Barney stood looking down, with a kind of detached surprise, at a man
who had just pronounced sentence of death casually on himself, and on
an old friend. For the first time in Barney's career, the question of
deliberate murder not only entered an operation, but had become in an
instant an unavoidable part of it. Frank Elby, ambitious and
money-hungry, could take over where McAllen left off. Elby was highly
capable, and Elby could be controlled. McAllen could not. He could
only be tricked; and, if necessary, killed.

It was necessary, of course. If McAllen lived until he knew how to
shut the Tube down safely, he simply would shut it down, destroy the
device and his notes on it. A man who had gone to such extreme
lengths to safeguard the secret was not going to be talked out of his
conviction that the McAllen Tube was a menace to the world.
Fredericks, the morose eavesdropper, had to be silenced with his
employer to assure Barney of his undisputed possession of the Tube.

Could he still let the thing go, let McAllen live? He couldn't, Barney
decided. He'd dealt himself a hand in a new game, and a big one--a
fantastic, staggering game when one considered the possibilities in
the Tube. It meant new interest, it meant life for him. It wasn't in
his nature to pull out. The part about McAllen was cold necessity. A
very ugly necessity, but McAllen--pleasantly burbling something as
they walked down the short hall to the front door--already seemed a
little unreal, a roly-poly, muttering, fading small ghost.

In the doorway Barney exchanged a few words--he couldn't have repeated
