_14. And the living creatures ran and returned as the appearance of a
flash of lightning._

This might mean that they moved swiftly, but more than likely it means
that they sparkled and shined on all sides, and this was visible as
they moved about.

This ends the description for a while. There are two later verses of
description, but we will take this when we come to it. It is
surprising that Ezekiel has organized his material so well. It reads
like a scientific report. If he had headed the section that we just
covered, "Description," we would not have been too surprised to find
the following section headed, "Action":


_15. Now as I beheld the living creatures, behold one wheel upon the
earth by the living creatures, with his four faces._

If we read Ezekiel correctly and the creatures did have helicopter
attachments on their backs, we can assume that one of them now
started his helicopter, which would appear as a "wheel" to Ezekiel,
and probably surprised him greatly.


_16. The appearance of the wheels and their work was like unto the
colour of Beryl: and they four had one likeness: and their appearance
and their work was as it were a wheel in the middle of a wheel._

Here we must digress in order to put ourselves into the life and time
of this man because he has mentioned the wheel. A wheel did not have
quite the same meaning for him as it does for you and I, living in a
mechanical age. The wheel in 600 B.C. in the area around the eastern
end of the Mediterranean, the most civilized part of the world at that
time, had only a few very limited uses.

One use, old even in Ezekiel's time was the potter's wheel; a simple
platform mounted on crude vertical bearings so that it could be turned
with one hand while the clay was worked with the other. From this the
grindstone and the lapidary wheel developed for working metal and
stone. These early machines probably employed some form of foot
treadle but even these could not turn the wheel very fast. If the
stone had a large enough diameter, it was possible to get the speed at
the outer edge high enough to produce sparks when grinding hard
material. The "work" took place at some distance from the axis,
usually at the edge of the stone.

The wheel we usually associate with ancient times is the cart wheel.
In its earliest form it was a solid wheel, like those still in use in
primitive sections of Mexico. Even with the cart wheel, ancient man
would associate the edge of the wheel with the "work" of the wheel.
This was the part that left a track in the mud and dust, crushed an
occasional rock and fractured an occasional toe.

In order to increase the efficiency of military chariots it was
necessary to build a wheel that was lighter, yet just as strong as the
solid model. This was first done by cutting out "lightening holes"
between the hub and rim. Pressing this invention to the ultimate
produced a spoked wheel. The Egyptians used a six-spoked chariot wheel
thousands of years before Ezekiel's time, and the Greeks and others
had four-spoke models. This was quite an invention and in addition to
its useful aspects, it produced some rather unusual, even magical
side-effects. As every child knows, if you turn your tricycle
upside-down and spin the wheel, the spokes seem to vanish. All that
can be seen is the rim and the parts of the hub near the center of
rotation. No matter what shape the hub actually is, it too looks round
like a wheel. It is very likely that such an effect was referred to as
"a wheel within a wheel."

In verse 16 Ezekiel says that, "wheels and their work was the colour
of beryl ...", a blue-green color. This sounds like the emphasis is on
the color at the _edge_ of the wheel. This could be from a flame
coming from jets on the tips of the rotors.

All of the creatures must have started their rotors. ("... they four
had one likeness.") They looked like "... a wheel in the middle of a
wheel." Or the spinning spokes of a wheel. Notice also that he never
mentions "wings" and "wheels" at the same time, for when one appears
the other vanishes.


_17. When they went, they went upon their four sides: and they turned
not when they went._

If four men were standing fairly close together on the ground with
running helicopters, they would tend to spread out as they left the
ground, so as to not run into each other. Moreover, with a helicopter,
it is not necessary to _face_ the direction you intend to go. This
sounds like four men lifting off the ground, spreading out slightly
and starting up and away, in formation.


_18. As for their rings, they were so high that they were dreadful;
and their rings were full of eyes round about them four._

The four creatures are now high in the air above Ezekiel, a dreadful
and awe-inspiring sight for a man of Ezekiel's time. Their "rings"
obviously are the flames from their tip-jets, seen from below--the
only part of the wheel now visible from far below. And the rings
_would_ be full of eyes. When a jet or rocket motor is operating there
is a shock wave generated in the tailpipe which tends to cut the
exhaust gas into segments. Time exposures of jet aircraft at night
often show this. When a tip-jet is operating, these bright, evenly
spaced spots give it the appearance of a string of pearls, "... full
of eyes round about them...."


_19. And when the living creatures went, the wheels went up by them:
and when the living creatures were lifted up from the earth, the
wheels were lifted up._

Ezekiel makes it clear that he does not know whether the men are
lifting the wheels or the wheels lifting the men, but both went up
together.


_20. Withersoever the spirit was to go, they went, thither was their
spirit to go; and the wheels were lifted over against them: for the
spirit of the living creatures was in the wheels._

This is a most sophisticated opinion. Although Ezekiel was describing
only what he saw, he could not help but have some opinions about the
creatures. In verse nineteen he makes it clear that he does not know
whether man is lifting the machine, or the other way around, but here
