travel and trade with other planets. And their ideas on peace and their
feelings towards their fellow men. All are very important.

"Actually, when a planet once enters the Federation the people are the
ones to decide on peace and war. So if the majority of the people on a
planet are peace-loving that planet is ready to enter the Federation."

"But how do you find out all these things?" I asked. "When a man finds
out what you are trying to prove he may lie because he wants to get into
space."

His eyes held a mischievous glint as he answered. "Simple, the art of
telepathy has been highly developed among my race. I have your thoughts
on everything I've mentioned. Later, when all the data from thousands of
similar interviews is in it will be evaluated and the decision made as
to whether your world will be allowed to reach space. We have the means
of keeping you from it if we decide you aren't yet ready."

He stood up and I followed suit. "I must be going now," he sighed. "This
work keeps me on the run and I have many more interviews to make.
Believe me, it was a pleasure meeting you. I hope we meet again--later."
We shook hands and he strolled over the hill into the valley.

Perhaps I should have followed him, but it wouldn't have done any good,
really. Because a few moments later I saw something shimmering over the
top of the hill. It was big and disc-shaped and shot into the sky with a
speed that was unbelievable.

I still don't know what to think about him or what we talked about. I'm
going to keep watching the papers though, and hoping he got the right
answers. If we reach the Moon I'll know he did....




Transcriber's Note:

    This etext was produced from _Imagination_ May 1954. Extensive
    research did not uncover any evidence that the U.S. copyright on
    this publication was renewed. Minor spelling and typographical
    errors have been corrected without note.





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Prelude to Space, by Robert W. Haseltine

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK PRELUDE TO SPACE ***

***** This file should be named 30381.txt or 30381.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/3/0/3/8/30381/

Produced by Greg Weeks, Stephen Blundell and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net

