fabulous array of electronic equipment.

When Wayne still didn't say anything, the Cirissin closed the door.
"Batter blan," he announced. "Wheeze india buck terth. Cup girlish ear.
Torch herf youdon brink high dragon bump."

Wayne said, "Huh?"

"Flow me." O'Reilly led Wayne and Sheilah through a maze of corridors,
tunnels and hatchways, stopping at last to throw open a door and let
Wayne peer into the control cabin of a miniature space ship.

O'Reilly jumblingly explained that it was a reconnaissance ship, used
for visiting the surface of a planet when it was impractical to land the
mother ship.

The control board was simple: a few dials, one or two buttons, several
switches and a view plate. It looked too simple.

Wayne said, "Now, wait. Let's see if I have this straight. You want me
to take this ship to earth and swipe you a high dragon bump. And you're
going to keep Sheilah here and torture her if I don't deliver the goods,
huh?"

The Cirissin said that was right. "Kwiger butter. Jus bush piggest
putton. Token ley tours gutther."

"I see. And what about communications?" Wayne asked. "Is the boat
equipped with radio? How can I let you know when I have your high dragon
bump?"

O'Reilly said, "Can't. Combundlecations Cirissin only."

From his further explanation Wayne gathered that communications between
the two ships was on the basis of some sort of amplified brain waves,
and could carry only the brain waves of Cirissins.

Wayne considered the situation.

Two hours to get to earth. No radio. The big Cirissin ship was circling
earth at an unknown distance, unknown speed and unknown direction. And
although the ship was enormous, it would be impossible to spot it from
earth unless you knew exactly where to look.

He said, "It would really be better, wouldn't it, if I could make the
high dragon bump right here?"

O'Reilly agreed that it would be better.

"Well, let me try. You've got a good lab, and we have plenty of time.
Twenty-four hours, you said? Well, give me about ten hours in the
laboratory. If I can't produce a high dragon bump in that time I'll take
the small ship down and get you one. Okay?"

While the Cirissin thought it over in meditative silence Wayne was aware
of Sheilah watching him with cold, hostile eyes. He wished he could
explain things to her, but he didn't dare try.

Finally O'Reilly said, "Hokum. Tenners in lab. Thistle."

"It'll be enough," Wayne assured him.

       *       *       *       *       *

Sheilah was taken back to the room where Wayne had met her and the
Cirissin instructed her to stay there. He closed the door but did not
lock it. Then he took Wayne back to the lab.

"Neediest hulp?" he asked.

"Hulp? Help? Uh ... Why, no. No, thanks. I can manage fine by myself. In
fact I'd rather work alone. Fewer distractions the better, you know."

"Hack saw lent. Wheel buzzy preparation. In trol room few deriding hulp
needed." Then O'Reilly floated out the door.

Wayne was astounded. He'd taken it for granted that the Cirissin would
insist on supervising him, and he'd been evolving elaborate plans for
escaping his attention.

But Wayne thought he had the explanation for the Cirissins' idiotic
behavior.

This ship and everything about it indicated an extremely high
intelligence and an advanced culture.

Everything, that is, but the Cirissins themselves.

The idea of kidnapping him from earth to provide them with a weapon to
destroy earth; kidnapping Sheilah to seduce him; the idea of even
expecting him to be _able_ to produce such a weapon--it was all idiotic.

There was only one explanation that he could see.

The Cirissins _were_ idiots.

Some other race had produced this ship. These cosmic degenerates had
somehow gotten hold of it and were on a mad binge through the universe,
destroying all the worlds they didn't like.

He wondered how many they'd already wiped out. They had to be stopped.

Wayne immediately started constructing a radio transmitter from
convenient materials in the laboratory. It was fairly simple.

