rather._

_I know_, Lenny replied. _That's why I figured I could take time off for a
go at the ponies._

_I wonder why they're in such a fuss, then?_ Rafe thought.

_I'll let you know when I find out_, Lenny said. _Go back to sleep and
don't worry._

[Illustration]

       *       *       *       *       *

In a small office in the Pentagon, Colonel Julius T. Spaulding cradled the
telephone on his desk and looked at the Secretary of Defense. "That was
the airfield. Poe will be here shortly. We'll get to the bottom of this
pretty quickly."

"I hope so, Julius," the Secretary said heavily. "The president is
beginning to think we're both nuts."

The colonel, a lean, nervous man with dark, bushy eyebrows and a mustache
to match, rolled his eyes up toward the ceiling. "I'm beginning to agree
with him."

The Defense Secretary scowled at him. "What do you mean?"

"Anybody who takes telepathy seriously is considered a nut," said the
colonel.

"True," said the Secretary, "but that doesn't mean we _are_ nuts."

"Oh, yeah?" The colonel took the cigar out of his mouth a gestured with
it. "Anybody who'd do something that convinces all his friends he's nuts
must be nuts."

The Secretary smiled wanly. "I wish you wouldn't be so logical. You almost
convince me."

"Don't worry," said the colonel. "I'm not ready to have this room measured
for sponge-rubber wallpaper just yet. Operation Mapcase has helped a lot
in the past few months, and it will help even more."

"All you have to do is get the bugs out of it," said the Secretary.

"If we did that," Colonel Spaulding said flatly, "the whole operation
would fold from lack of personnel."

"Just carry on the best you can," the Secretary said gloomily as he got
up to leave. "I'll let you handle it."

"Fine. I'll call you later."

       *       *       *       *       *

Twenty minutes after the Defense Secretary had gone, Lenny Poe was shown
into Colonel Spaulding's office. The agent who had brought him in closed
the door gently, leaving him alone with the colonel.

"I told you I'd be back this evening. What were you in such a hurry
about?"

"You're supposed to stay in touch," Colonel Spaulding pointed out. "I
don't mind your penchant for ponies particularly, but I'd like to know
where to find you if I need you."

"I wouldn't mind in the least, colonel. I'd phone you every fifteen
minutes if that's what you wanted. Except for one thing."

"What's that?"

Lenny jerked a thumb over his shoulder. "Your linguistically talented
flatfeet. Did you ever try to get into a floating crap game when you were
being followed by a couple of bruisers who look more like cops than cops
do?"

"Look, Poe, I can find you plenty of action right here in Washington, if
it won't offend your tender sensibilities to shoot crap with a senator or
two. Meanwhile, sit down and listen. This is important."

Lenny sat own reluctantly. "O.K. What is it?"

"Dr. Davenport and his crew are unhappy about that last batch of drawings
you and I gave 'em."

"What's the matter? Don't they like the color scheme? I never thought
scientists had any artistic taste, anyway."

"It's got nothing to do with that. The--"

The phone rang. Colonel Spaulding scooped it up and identified himself.
Then: "What? Yeah. All right, send him in."

He hung up and looked back at Lenny. "Davenport. We can get his story
firsthand. Just sit there and look important."

Lenny nodded. He knew that Dr. Amadeus Davenport was aware that the source
of those drawings was Soviet Russia, but he did not know how they had been
obtained. As far as he knew, it was just plain, ordinary spy work.

He came in briskly. He was a tall, intelligent-looking man with a rather
craggy face and thoughtful brown eyes. He put a large brief case on the
floor, and, after the preliminaries were over, he came right to the point.

"Colonel Spaulding, I spoke to the Secretary of Defense, and he agreed
that perhaps this situation might be cleared up if I talked directly with
you."

"I hope so," the colonel said. "Just what is it that seems to be bothering
you?"

"These drawings," Davenport said, "don't make any sense. The device
they're supposed to represent couldn't do anything. Look; I'll show you."

He took from his brief case photostatic copies of some of the drawings
Lenny had made. Five of them were straight blueprint-type drawings; the
sixth was a copy of Lenny's near-photographic paintings of the device
itself.

"This component, here," he said, gesturing at the set of drawings, "simply
baffles us. We're of the opinion that your agents are known to the Soviet
government and have been handed a set of phony plans."

"What's it supposed to do?" Lenny asked.

"We don't know what it's _supposed_ to do," the scientist said, "but it's
doubtful that it would _actually_ do anything." He selected one of the
photocopies. "See that thing? The one shaped like the letter Q with an
offset tail? According to the specifications, it is supposed to be painted
emerald green, but there's no indication of what it is."

       *       *       *       *       *

Lenny Poe reached out, picked up the photocopy and looked at it. It
was--or had been--an exact copy of the drawing that was used by Dr. Sonya
Malekrinova. But, whereas the original drawing has been labeled entirely
in Cyrillic characters, these labels were now in English.

The drawings made no sense to Lenny at all. They hadn't when he'd made
them. His brother was a scientist, but Lenny understood none of it.

"Who translated the Russian into English?" he asked.

"A Mr. Berensky. He's one of our best experts on the subject. I assure you
the translations are accurate, Dr. Davenport said.

"But if you don't know what that thing is," the colonel objected, "how
can you say the device won't work? Maybe it would if that Q-shaped thing
was--"

"I know what you mean," Davenport interrupted. "But that's not the only
part of the machine that doesn't make any sense."

He went on to explain other discrepancies he had detected in the drawings,
but none of it penetrated to Lenny, although Colonel Spaulding seemed to
be able to follow the physicist's conversation fairly readily.

"Well, what's you suggestion, doctor?" the colonel asked at last.

"If you agents could get further data," the physicist said carefully, "it
might be of some use. At the same time, I'd check up on the possibility
that your agents are known to the NKVD."

"I'll see what can be done," said the colonel. "Would you mind leaving
those copies of the drawings with me for a while?"

"Go right ahead," Davenport said. "One other thing. If we assume this
device is genuine, then it must serve some purpose. It might help if we
knew what the device is supposed to _do_."

"I'll see what can be done," Colonel Spaulding repeated.

When Davenport had gone, Spaulding looked at Poe. "Got any explanation for
that one?"

"No," Lenny admitted. "All I can do is check with Rafe. He won't be awake
for a few hours yet. I'll check on it and give you an answer in the
morning."

       *       *       *       *       *

Early next morning, Colonel Spaulding walked through his outer office. He
stopped at the desk where the pretty brunette WAC sergeant was typing
industriously, leaned across the desk, and gave her his best leer. "How
about a date tonight, music lover?" he asked, "'_Das Rheingold_' is
playing tonight. A night at the opera would do you good."

"I'm sorry, sir," she said primly, "you know enlisted women aren't allowed
to date officers."

"Make out an application for OCS. I'll sign it."

She smiled at him. "But then I wouldn't have any excuse for turning you
down. And then what would my husband say?"

"I'll bribe him. I'll send _him_ to OCS."
