like that before."

"Um-m-m," I said, as she fooled around getting her hair in some sort
of shape with a clip. It was straight hair, and not much could be done
with it. "Were you right, though?"

"Yes," she said, convinced. "I was very sure. Lefty, I _want_ to do
it, for you!"

"Sure," I said. "Let's go."

The Lodge has good food, but you get tired of hanging around with a
bunch of Psi's, so we went on the town and found a good spot for
dinner. What with rubber-necking at the big city, it was some after
ten o'clock before we got back to the Chapter House and rode up to her
apartment.

Pheola was bubbling happily about our evening. As she keyed open her
door, I pushed her into her place and came in with her.

"For a couple who are going to get married," I said, grinning at her,
"it's time we made a little love, Pheola."

She squinted myopically at me, not sure if I were serious. "I thought
you weren't going...." she started.

"I'm not," I assured her. "I'm talking about our special kind of love.
Know what I mean?"

She shook her head doubtfully as I took her wrap and hung it in the
closet.

"Let's face a couple facts," I said, as I led her to the sofa and we
sat down. She squeezed up close to me, so that our knees were
touching. "I believe in you. I've told you that I have seen you
predict the future. More than that, I have felt you cure me. But
precognition is hard to prove, and if we are going to get you into the
Lodge, I think we had better stick to Maragon's advice and work on
your healing powers. It's Maragon you'll have to convince. He's the
last word."

"I know," she said, wriggling her skinny knees against me. "And it
scares me."

       *       *       *       *       *

"Maybe it should," I said, trying to draw away a bit. "Your life won't
be your own once your have been admitted to one of the degrees. But
life in a Psi society has its compensations.

"Now, look at it this way," I went on. "Whether you meant to or not,
you have staked your reputation as a PC on a prediction that our Grand
Master will suffer a heart attack."

"He _will_!" she cut in.

"Sure. I even know a PC who agrees with you, in a misty sort of way.
Now, think. You're a healer. If you can heal what you predict, it
would make a big hit. Can you?"

Pheola's pointed features focused in a frown. "I'm sorry, Lefty," she
admitted, "I don't even know what a heart attack is."

"That's what I thought," I said, getting up to switch on the hi-fi. It
gave out soft music--lover's music, I guess it was meant to be. "But
I'm a surgeon, you know that, don't you? And I can teach you something
about hearts. The question in my mind is whether you can learn to
handle what you know."

"I don't understand, Lefty," she said, holding out a hand to draw me
back to her side on the sofa. I let her have me back.

"That's what I meant by our kind of love," I grinned at her. "Remember
when you cured my arm the other night? You said you found a weak place
in my head."

"That's what I did, darlin'."

"Can you find that place again, now that it's not weak?"

"Maybe," she decided.

"Try to," I suggested. I swung my feet around on the sofa and lay with
my head in her lap. Pheola bent down over me and stroked my forehead
with her fingers.

"Darlin' Billy!" she whispered. "Yes! _Yes!_ I _can_ feel it!"

I'll say she could. My thrashing right arm pretty near knocked her
buck teeth out, and she retreated from my nervous system.

"You know what you did?" I asked, when the pain inside my head
subsided.

"Not really, Lefty," she admitted.

"You have a kind of telekinesis. It's the lightest touch of all, but
you applied it directly to my nerves. Perhaps you have some
unconscious way of stimulating my synapses, making my nerve centers
fire. I can't figure it out exactly. But my question is this, can you
feel your way all around inside my body?"

She recoiled a little. "That sounds awful," she said.

"I thought you were in love with me," I insisted, looking up at her
down-bent features. "Do you really have reservations about me?"

"No, Lefty. I love all of you."

"All right," I said, reaching up to stroke her cheek in time with the
music. "See if you can feel your way--lightly, now--down the same path
in my left arm."

She could, but not quite as lightly as I would have liked. We played
with it until nearly midnight, by which time she had used what I can
only call her sense of perception to feel her way through a good part
of my nerves and viscera. Some of it was exquisitely painful, but from
observing my flinching when she hurt me, Pheola pretty quickly found
out how to ignore the synapses that fired pain through my brain.

At last I raised my head from her lap. "You're doing great," I said.
"Do you feel tired?"

She shook her head. "Just excited," she breathed. "What a funny way to
get to know you!"

"Then we'll try one more thing, baby," I said. "Come on next door to
my place. There's some stuff over there I want you to work with."

       *       *       *       *       *

I thought Pheola might boggle about going into my apartment, but she
came readily enough. I guess a PC has some pretty strong notions about
what is going to happen next.

Just to keep the mood the same, I turned on my hi-fi and drew the
loveseat up in front of the desk in my study. Pheola found a way to
sit closer to me than I would have imagined possible while I fished a
set of weights out of a drawer and laid them on the polished teak.

"Here's how it goes," I said to her, and TK'd the weights off the wood
one at a time. Anybody else would have gotten bug-eyed, but Pheola
just squinted to see better. Finally I made the big weight cross the
room, go behind us, and then come back to its place on the desk. She
had never seen a demonstration of trained ability, and to her it was
so much magic.

"You've been doing the same thing, Pheola," I told her as I put an arm
around her shoulder. "Only you've been doing it first to my nerves and
later to my insides. Now let me see you do it to this little ball."

She looked at the little sphere of pith, similar to the ones that
Evaleen Riley had used for practice, but nothing happened.

"I can't feel it," she protested, "It ... It isn't you, Lefty. I'll
never feel anything that isn't _you_!"

"Don't get mystical," I snapped. "You did some healing before you met
me, and I don't suppose you were in love with every one you helped,
were you?"

"Of course not."

"Try again."

"Nothing," she said, and the pith ball did not budge.

"Now watch this," I said, and popped the little ball into my mouth.
"Feel for it," I insisted, pushing it into one cheek where it did not
interfere with my speech.

She closed her eyes. "Where is it?" she demanded. "Did you swallow it,
Lefty?"

"I either swallowed it or I kept it in my mouth," I said. "Feel for
it!"

"There!" she gasped. "It's in your mouth!"

I rolled the piece of pith on to the top surface of my tongue and
opened my mouth so that she could see it. "Agh!" I said, pointing at
my tongue. I gestured again, and her face paled as the little ball
left my tongue and floated in the air before my face. Suddenly her
lift broke and it fell wetly onto my hand, in my lap.

I leaned over, put an arm around behind her neck and kissed her. It
was a most sedate embrace. "There," I said, "that performance alone
will get you into the Lodge. Now do you believe you're a TK?"

She gave a little shriek. A ladylike "Eek!"

"It's not that awful," I said. "A lot of Psi's can do it."

"You _kissed_ me!" she said, paying no attention to my question.

"Sure," I agreed. "And you managed your first lift." I picked the
pith ball up in my fingers, showed it to her, and laid it on my palm.

"Feel my hand first," I suggested. "Then lift it over onto the desk."

