hurried around the car and hopped into his place. The car glided off
toward Spencer's personal planetship, waiting for him at a nearby
field.

"Don't forget to assign an officer to Dr. Leoh," the commander
muttered to his aide. Then he turned and watched the unmatchable
beauty of an Earthly sunset.

       *       *       *       *       *

The aide did not forget the assignment. That night, as Sir Harold's
ship spiraled out to a rendezvous with a starship, the aide dictated
the necessary order into a autodispatcher that immediately beamed it
to the Star Watch's nearest communications center, on Mars.

The order was scanned and routed automatically and finally beamed to
the Star Watch unit commandant in charge of the area closest to the
Acquataine Cluster, on the sixth planet circling the star Perseus
Alpha. Here again, the order was processed automatically and routed
through the local headquarters to the personnel files. The automated
files selected three microcard dossiers that matched the requirements
of the order.

The three microcards and the order itself appeared simultaneously on
the desktop viewer of the Star Watch personnel officer. He looked at
the order, then read the dossiers. He flicked a button that gave him
an updated status report on each of the three men in question. One was
due for leave after an extensive period of duty. The second was the
son of a personal friend of the local commandant. The third had just
arrived a few weeks ago, fresh from the Star Watch Academy on Mars.

The personnel officer selected the third man, routed his dossier and
Sir Harold's order back into the automatic processing system, and
returned to the film of primitive dancing girls he had been watching
before this matter of decision had arrived at his desk.


VI

The space station orbiting around Acquatainia--the capital planet of
the Acquataine Cluster--served simultaneously as a transfer point from
starships to planetships, a tourist resort, meteorological station,
communications center, scientific laboratory, astronomical
observatory, medical haven for allergy and cardiac patients, and
military base. It was, in reality, a good-sized city with its own
markets, its own local government, and its own way of life.

Dr. Leoh had just stepped off the debarking ramp of the starship from
Szarno. The trip there had been pointless and fruitless. But he had
gone anyway, in the slim hope that he might find something wrong with
the dueling machine that had been used to murder a man.

[Illustration]

A shudder went through him as he edged along the automated customs
scanners and paper-checkers. What kind of people could these men of
Kerak be? To actually kill a human being in cold blood; to plot and
plan the death of a fellow man. Worse than barbaric. Savage.

He felt tired as he left customs and took the slideway to the
planetary shuttle ships. Halfway there, he decided to check at the
communications desk for messages. That Star Watch officer that Sir
Harold had promised him a week ago should have arrived by now.

The communications desk consisted of a small booth that contained the
output printer of a communications computer and an attractive young
dark-haired girl. Automation or not, Leoh thought smilingly, there
were certain human values that transcended mere efficiency.

A lanky, thin-faced youth was half-leaning on the booth's counter,
trying to talk to the girl. He had curly blond hair and crystal blue
eyes; his clothes consisted of an ill-fitting pair of slacks and
tunic. A small traveler's kit rested on the floor at his feet.

"So, I was sort of, well, thinking ... maybe somebody might, uh, show
me around ... a little," he was stammering to the girl. "I've never
been, uh, here ..."

"It's the most beautiful planet in the galaxy," the girl was saying.
"Its cities are the finest."

"Yes ... well, I was sort of thinking ... that is, I know we just, uh,
met a few minutes ago ... but, well, maybe ... if you have a free day
or so coming up ... maybe we could, uh, sort of--".

She smiled coolly. "I have two days off at the end of the week, but
I'll be staying here at the station. There's so much to see and do
here, I very seldom leave."

"Oh--"

"You're making a mistake," Leoh interjected dogmatically, "If you have
such a beautiful planet for your homeworld, why in the name of the
gods of intellect don't you go down there and enjoy it? I'll wager you
haven't been out in the natural beauty and fine cities you spoke of
since you started working here on the station."

"Why, you're right," she said, surprised.

"You see? You youngsters are all alike. You never think further than
the ends of your noses. You should return to the planet, young lady,
and see the sunshine again. Why don't you visit the University at the
capital city? Plenty of open space and greenery, lots of sunshine and
available young men!"

Leoh was grinning broadly, and the girl smiled back at him. "Perhaps I
will," she said.

"Ask for me when you get to the University. I'm Dr. Leoh. I'll see to
it that you're introduced to some of the girls and gentlemen of your
own age."

"Why ... thank you, doctor. I'll do it this week end."

"Good. Now then, any messages for me? Anyone aboard the station
looking for me?"

The girl turned and tapped a few keys on the computer's console. A row
of lights flicked briefly across the console's face. She turned back
to Leoh:

"No, sir, I'm sorry. No message and no one has asked for you."

"Hm-m-m. That's strange. Well, thank you ... and I'll expect to see
you at the end of this week."

The girl smiled a farewell. Leoh started to walk away from the booth,
back toward the slideway. The young man took a step toward him,
stumbled on his own traveling kit, and staggered across the floor for
a half-dozen steps before regaining his balance. Leoh turned and saw
that the youth's face bore a somewhat ridiculous expression of mixed
indecision and curiosity.

"Can I help you?" Leoh asked, stopping at the edge of the moving
slideway.

"How ... how did you do that, sir?"

"Do what?"

"Get that girl to agree to visit the university. I've been talking to
her for half an hour, and, well, she wouldn't even look straight at
me."

Leoh broke into a chuckle. "Well, young man, to begin with, you were
much too flustered. It made you appear overanxious. On the other hand,
I am at an age where I can be strictly platonic. She was on guard
against you, but she knows she has very little to fear from me."

"I see ... I think."

"Well," Leoh said, gesturing toward the slideway, "I suppose this is
where we go our separate ways."

"Oh, no, sir. I'm going with you. That is, I mean, you _are_ Dr. Leoh,
aren't you?"

"Yes, I am. And you must be--" Leoh hesitated. _Can this be a Star
Watch officer?_ he wondered.

The youth stiffened to attention and for an absurd flash of a second,
Leoh thought he was going to salute. "I am Junior Lieutenant Hector,
sir; on special detached duty from the cruiser SW4-J188, home base
Perseus Alpha VI."

"I see," Leoh replied. "Um-m-m ... is Hector your first name or your
last?"

"Both, sir."

_I should have guessed_, Leoh told himself. Aloud, he said, "Well,
lieutenant, we'd better get to the shuttle before it leaves without
us."

       *       *       *       *       *

They took to the slideway. Half a second later, Hector jumped off and
dashed back to the communications desk for his traveling kit. He
hurried back to Leoh bumping into seven bewildered citizens of various
descriptions and nearly breaking both his legs when he tripped as he
ran back onto the moving slideway. He went down on his face, sprawled
across two lanes moving at different speeds, and needed the assistance
of several persons before he was again on his feet and standing beside
Leoh.

"I ... I'm sorry to cause all that, uh, commotion, sir."

"That's all right. You weren't hurt, were you?"

"Uh, no ... I don't think so. Just embarrassed."

Leoh said nothing. They rode the slideway in silence through the busy
station and out to the enclosed berths where the planetary shuttles
were docked. They boarded one of the ships and found a pair of seats.

"Just how long have you been with Star Watch, lieutenant?"

"Six weeks, sir. Three weeks aboard a starship bringing me out to
Perseus Alpha VI, a week at the planetary base there, and two weeks
aboard the cruiser SW4-J188. That is, it's been six weeks since I
received my commission. I've been at the Academy ... the Star Watch
Academy on Mars ... for four years."

"You got through the Academy in four years?"

"That's the regulation time, sir."

"Yes, I know."

The ship eased out of its berth. There was a moment of free-fall, then
the drive engine came on and the grav-field equilibrated.

"Tell me, lieutenant, how did you get picked for this assignment?"

"I wish I knew, sir," Hector said, his lean face twisting into a puzzled
frown. "I was working out a program for the navigation officer ... aboard
the cruiser. I'm pretty good at that ... I can work out computer programs
in my head, mostly. Mathematics was my best subject at the Academy--"

"Interesting."

"Yes, well, anyway, I was working out this program when the captain
himself came on deck and started shaking my hand telling me that I was
being sent on special duty on Acquatainia by direct orders of the
Commander-in-Chief. He seemed very happy ... the captain, that is."

"He was no doubt pleased to see you get such an unusual assignment,"
Leoh said tactfully.

"I'm not sure," Hector said truthfully. "I think he regarded me as
some sort of a problem, sir. He had me on a different duty-berth
practically every day I was on board the ship."

"Well now," Leoh changed the subject, "what do you know about
psychonics?"

"About what, sir?"

"Eh ... electroencephalography?"

Hector looked blank.

"Psychology, perhaps?" Leoh suggested, hopefully, "Physiology?
Computer molectronics?"

"I'm pretty good at mathematics!"

"Yes, I know. Did you, by any chance, receive any training in
diplomatic affairs?"

"At the Star Watch Academy? No, sir."

Leah ran a hand through his thinning hair. "Then why did the Star
Watch select you for this job? I must confess, lieutenant, that I
can't understand the workings of a military organization."

Hector shook his head ruefully, "Neither do I, sir."


VII

The next week was an enervatingly slow one for Leoh, evenly divided
between tedious checking of each component of the dueling machine, and
shameless rouses to keep Hector as far away from the machine as
possible.

The Star Watchman certainly wanted to help, and he actually was little
short of brilliant in doing intricate mathematics completely in his
head. But he was, Leoh found, a clumsy, chattering, whistling,
scatterbrained, inexperienced bundle of noise and nerves. It was
impossible to do constructive work with him nearby.

_Perhaps you're judging him too harshly_, Leoh warned himself. _You
just might be letting your frustrations with the dueling machine get
the better of your sense of balance._

The professor was sitting in the office that the Acquatainians had
given him in one end of the former lecture hall that held the dueling
machine. Leoh could see its impassive metal hulk through the open
office door.

The room he was sitting in had been one of a suite of offices used by
the permanent staff of the machine. But they had moved out of the
building completely, in deference to Leoh, and the Acquatainian
government had turned the other cubbyhole offices into sleeping rooms
for the professor and the Star Watchman, and an auto-kitchen. A
combination cook-valet-handyman appeared twice each day--morning and
evening--to handle any special chores that the cleaning machines and
auto-kitchen might miss.

Leoh slouched back in his desk chair and cast a weary eye on the stack
of papers that recorded the latest performances of the machine.
Earlier that day he had taken the electroencephalographic records of
clinical cases of catatonia and run them through the machine's input
unit. The machine immediately rejected them, refused to process them
through the amplification units and association circuits.

In other words, the machine had recognized the EEG traces as something
harmful to a human being.

_Then how did it happen to Dulaq?_ Leoh asked himself for the
thousandth time. It couldn't have been the machine's fault; it must
have been something in Odal's mind that simply overpowered Dulaq's.

_"Overpowered?" That's a terribly unscientific term_, Leoh argued
against himself.

Before he could carry the debate any further, he heard the main door
of the big chamber slide open and then bang shut, and Hector's off-key
whistle shrilled and echoed through the high-vaulted room.

Leoh sighed and put his self-contained argument off to the back of his
mind. Trying to think logically near Hector was a hopeless prospect.

"Are you in, doctor?" Hector's voice rang out.

"In here."

Hector ducked in through the doorway and plopped his rangy frame on
the office's couch.

"Everything going well, sir?"

Leoh shrugged. "Not very well, I'm afraid. I can't find anything wrong
with the dueling machine. I can't even _force_ it to malfunction."

"Well, that's good, isn't it?" Hector chirped happily.

"In a sense," Leoh admitted, feeling slightly nettled at the youth's
boundless, pointless optimism. "But, you see, it means that Kanus'
people can do things with the machine that I can't."

Hector frowned, considering the problem. "Hm-m-m ... yes, I guess
that's right, too, isn't it?"

"Did you see the girl back to her ship safely?" Leoh asked.

"Yes, sir," Hector replied, bobbing his head vigorously. "She's on her
way back to the communications booth at the space station. She said to
tell you she enjoyed her visit very much."

"Good. It was, eh, very good of you to escort her about the campus. It
kept her out of my hair ... what's left of it, that is."

Hector grinned. "Oh, I liked showing her around, and all that--And,
well, it sort of kept me out of your hair, too, didn't it?"

Leoh's eyebrows shot up in surprise.

Hector laughed. "Doctor, I may be clumsy, and I'm certainly no
