Pierre reached behind it and pulled a cord. The entire tapestry slid
aside like a panel, and Lord Darcy saw that it was supported on a
track some ten feet from the floor. Behind it was what looked at first
like ordinary oak paneling, but Sir Pierre fitted the small key into
an inconspicuous hole and turned. Or, rather, tried to turn.

"That's odd," said Sir Pierre. "It's not locked!"

He took the key out and pressed on the panel, shoving sideways with
his hand to move it aside. It slid open to reveal a closet.

The closet was filled with women's clothing of all kinds, and styles.

Lord Darcy whistled soundlessly.

"Try that blue robe, your lordship," the Privy Secretary said. "The
one with the--Yes, that's the one."

Lord Darcy took it off its hanger. The same buttons. They matched. And
there was one missing from the front! Torn off! "Master Sean!" he
called without turning.

Master Sean came with a rolling walk. He was holding an oddly-shaped
bronze thing in his hand that Sir Pierre didn't quite recognize. The
sorcerer was muttering. "Evil, that there is! Faith, and the
vibrations are all over the place. Yes, my lord?"

"Check this dress and the button when you get round to it. I want to
know when the two parted company."

"Yes, my lord." He draped the robe over one arm and dropped the button
into a pouch at his belt. "I can tell you one thing, my lord. You talk
about an evil miasma, this room has got it!" He held up the object in
his hand. "There's an underlying background--something that has been
here for years, just seeping in. But on top of that, there's a hellish
big blast of it superimposed. Fresh it is, and very strong."

"I shouldn't be surprised, considering there was murder done here
last night--or very early this morning," said Lord Darcy.

"Hm-m-m, yes. Yes, my lord, the death is there--but there's something
else. Something I can't place."

"You can tell that just by holding that bronze cross in your hand?"
Sir Pierre asked interestedly.

Master Sean gave him a friendly scowl. "'Tisn't quite a cross, sir.
This is what is known as a _crux ansata_. The ancient Egyptians called
it an _ankh_. Notice the loop at the top instead of the straight piece
your true cross has. Now, your true cross--if it were properly
energized, blessed, d'ye see--your true cross would tend to dissipate
the evil. The _ankh_ merely vibrates to evil because of the closed
loop at the top, which makes a return circuit. And it's not energized
by blessing, but by another ... um ... spell."

"Master Sean, we have a murder to investigate," said Lord Darcy.

The sorcerer caught the tone of his voice and nodded quickly. "Yes, my
lord." And he walked rollingly away.

"Now where's that secret stairway you mentioned, Sir Pierre?" Lord
Darcy asked.

"This way, your lordship."

He led Lord Dacy to a wall at right angles to the outer wall and slid
back another tapestry.

"Good Heavens," Darcy muttered, "does he have something concealed
behind every arras in the place?" But he didn't say it loud enough for
the Privy Secretary to hear.

       *       *       *       *       *

This time, what greeted them was a solid-seeming stone wall. But Sir
Pierre pressed in on one small stone, and a section of the wall swung
back, exposing a stairway.

"Oh, yes," Darcy said. "I see what he did. This is the old spiral
stairway that goes round the inside of the Keep. There are two
doorways at the bottom. One opens into the courtyard, the other is a
postern gate through the curtain wall to the outside--but that was
closed up in the sixteenth century, so the only way out is into the
courtyard."

"Your lordship knows Castle D'Evreux, then?" Sir Pierre said. The
knight himself was nearly fifty, while Darcy was only in his thirties,
and Sir Pierre had no recollection of Darcy's having been in the
castle before.

"Only by the plans in the Royal Archives. But I have made it a point
to--" He stopped. "Dear me," he interrupted himself mildly, "what is
that?"

"That" was something that had been hidden by the arras until Sir
Pierre had slid it aside, and was still showing only a part of itself.
It lay on the floor a foot or so from the secret door.

Darcy knelt down and pulled the tapestry back from the object. "Well,
well. A .28 two-shot pocket gun. Gold-chased, beautifully engraved,
mother-of-pearl handle. A regular gem." He picked it up and examined
it closely. "One shot fired."

He stood up and showed it to Sir Pierre. "Ever see it before?"

The Privy Secretary looked at the weapon closely. Then he shook his
head. "Not that I recall, your lordship. It certainly isn't one of the
Count's guns."

"You're certain?"

"Quite certain, your lordship. I'll show you the gun collection if you
want. My lord the Count didn't like tiny guns like that; he preferred
a larger caliber. He would never have owned what he considered a toy."

"Well, we'll have to look into it." He called over Master Sean again
and gave the gun into his keeping. "And keep your eyes open for
anything else of interest, Master Sean. So far, everything of interest
besides the late Count himself has been hiding under beds or behind
arrases. Check everything. Sir Pierre and I are going for a look down
this stairway."

The stairway was gloomy, but enough light came in through the arrow
slits spaced at intervals along the outer way to illuminate the
interior. It spiraled down between the inner and outer walls of the
Great Keep, making four complete circuits before it reached ground
level. Lord Darcy looked carefully at the steps, the walls, and even
the low, arched overhead as he and Sir Pierre went down.

After the first circuit, on the floor beneath the Count's suite, he
stopped. "There was a door here," he said, pointing to a rectangular
area in the inner wall.

"Yes, your lordship. There used to be an opening at every floor, but
they were all sealed off. It's quite solid, as you can see."

"Where would they lead if they were open?"

"The county offices. My own office, the clerk's offices, the
constabulary on the first floor. Below are the dungeons. My lord the
Count was the only one who lived in the Keep itself. The rest of the
household live above the Great Hall."

"What about guests?"

"They're usually housed in the east wing. We only have two house
guests at the moment. Laird and Lady Duncan have been with us for four
days."

"I see." They went down perhaps four more steps before Lord Darcy
asked quietly, "Tell me, Sir Pierre, were you privy to _all_ of Count
D'Evreux's business?"

Another four steps down before Sir Pierre answered. "I understand what
your lordship means," he said. Another two steps. "No, I was not. I
was aware that my lord the Count engaged in certain ... er ... shall
we say, liaisons with members of the opposite sex. However--"

He paused, and in the gloom, Lord Darcy could see his lips tighten.
"However," he continued, "I did not procure for my lord, if that is
what you're driving at. I am not and never have been a pimp."

"I didn't intend to suggest that you had, good knight," said Lord
Darcy in a tone that strongly implied that the thought had actually
never crossed his mind. "Not at all. But certainly there is a
difference between 'aiding and abetting' and simple knowledge of what
is going on."

"Oh. Yes. Yes, of course. Well, one cannot, of course, be the
secretary-in-private of a gentleman such as my lord the Count for
seventeen years without knowing something of what is going on, you're
right. Yes. Yes. Hm-m-m."

       *       *       *       *       *

Lord Darcy smiled to himself. Not until this moment had Sir Pierre
realized how much he actually _did_ know. In loyalty to his lord, he
had literally kept his eyes shut for seventeen years.

"I realize," Lord Darcy said smoothly, "that a gentleman would never
implicate a lady nor besmirch the reputation of another gentleman
without due cause and careful consideration. However,"--like the
knight, he paused a moment before going on--"although we are aware
that he was not discreet, was he particular?"

"If you mean by that, did he confine his attentions to those of gentle
birth, your lordship, then I can say, no he did not. If you mean did
he confine his attentions to the gentler sex, then I can only say
that, as far as I know, he did."

"I see. That explains the closet full of clothes."

"Beg pardon, your lordship?"

"I mean that if a girl or woman of the lower classes were to come
here, he would have proper clothing for them to wear--in spite of the
sumptuary laws to the contrary."

"Quite likely, your lordship. He was most particular about clothing.
Couldn't stand a woman who was sloppily dressed or poorly dressed."

"In what way?"

"Well. Well, for instance, I recall once that he saw a very pretty
peasant girl. She was dressed in the common style, of course, but she
was dressed neatly and prettily. My lord took a fancy to her. He said,
'Now there's a lass who knows how to wear clothes. Put her in decent
apparel, and she'd pass for a princess.' But a girl, who had a pretty
face and a fine figure, made no impression on him unless she wore her
clothing well, if you see what I mean, your lordship."

"Did you ever know him to fancy a girl who dressed in an offhand
manner?" Lord Darcy asked.

"Only among the gently born, your lordship. He'd say, 'Look at Lady
So-and-so! Nice wench, if she'd let me teach her how to dress.' You
might say, your lordship, that a woman could be dressed commonly or
sloppily, but not both."

"Judging by the stuff in that closet," Lord Darcy said, "I should say
that the late Count had excellent taste in feminine dress."

Sir Pierre considered. "Hm-m-m. Well, now, I wouldn't exactly say so,
your lordship. He knew _how_ clothes should be worn, yes. But he
couldn't pick out a woman's gown of his own accord. He could choose
his own clothing with impeccable taste, but he'd not any real notion
of how a woman's clothing should go, if you see what I mean. All he
knew was how good clothing should be worn. But he knew nothing about
design for women's clothing."

"Then how did he get that closet full of clothes?" Lord Darcy asked,
puzzled.

Sir Pierre chuckled. "Very simply, your lordship. He knew that the
Lady Alice had good taste, so he secretly instructed that each piece
that Lady Alice ordered should be made in duplicate. With small
variations, of course. I'm certain my lady wouldn't like it if she
knew."

"I dare say not," said Lord Darcy thoughtfully.

"Here is the door to the courtyard," said Sir Pierre. "I doubt that it
