is hardly a trickle. Besides, you have more common sense in your left
little toe than that big mick yonder has on his entire copperplated
head."

They seated themselves in the cobwebby low-gee chairs around Chung's
desk. Blades took out his pipe and filled the bowl with his tobacco
ration for today. Wouldn't it be great, he thought dreamily, if this
old briar turned out to be an Aladdin's lamp, and the smoke condensed
into a blonde she-Canadian--?

"Wake up, will you?" Chung barked.

"Huh?" Blades started. "Oh. Sure. What's the matter? You look like a
fish on Friday."

"Maybe with reason. Did you notice anything unusual with that party
you were escorting?"

"Yes, indeed."

"What?"

"About one hundred seventy-five centimeters tall, yellow hair, blue
eyes, and some of the smoothest fourth-order curves I ever--"

"Mike, stop that!" Avis sounded appalled. "This is serious."

"I agree. She'll be leaving in a few more watches."

The girl bit her lip. "You're too old for that mooncalf rot and you
know it."

"Agreed again. I feel more like a bull." Blades made pawing motions on
the desktop.

"There's a lady present," Chung said.

Blades saw that Avis had gone quite pale. "I'm sorry," he blurted. "I
never thought ... I mean, you've always seemed like--"

"One of the boys," she finished for him in a brittle tone. "Sure.
Forget it. What's the problem, Jimmy?"

Chung folded his hands and stared at them. "I can't quite define
that," he answered, word by careful word. "Perhaps I've simply gone
spacedizzy. But when we called on Admiral Hulse, and later when he
called on us, didn't you get the impression of, well, wariness? Didn't
he seem to be watching and probing, every minute we were together?"

"I wouldn't call him a cheerful sort," Blades nodded. "Stiff as
molasses on Pluto. But I suppose ... supposed he's just naturally that
way."

Chung shook his head. "It wasn't a normal standoffishness. You've
heard me reminisce about the time I was on Vesta with the North
American technical representative, when the Convention was
negotiated."

"Yes, I've heard that story a few times," said Avis dryly.

"Remember, that was right after the Europa Incident. We'd come close
to a space war--undeclared, but it would have been nasty. We were
still close. Every delegate went to that conference cocked and primed.

"Hulse had the same manner."

       *       *       *       *       *

A silence fell. Blades said at length, "Well, come to think of it, he
did ask some rather odd questions. He seemed to twist the conversation
now and then, so he could find things out like our exact layout,
emergency doctrine, and so forth. It didn't strike me as significant,
though."

"Nor me," Chung admitted. "Taken in isolation, it meant nothing. But
these visitors today--Sure, most of them obviously didn't suspect
anything untoward. But that Liebknecht, now. Why was he so interested
in Central Control? Nothing new or secret there. Yet he kept asking
for details like the shielding factor of the walls."

"So did Commander Warburton," Blades remembered. "Also, he wanted to
know exactly when the _Pallas_ is due, how long she'll stay ...
hm-m-m, yes, whether we have any radio linkage with the outside, like
to Ceres or even the nearest Commission base--"

"Did you tell him that we don't?" Avis asked sharply.

"Yes. Shouldn't I have?"

"It scarcely makes any difference," Chung said in a resigned voice.
"As thoroughly as they went over the ground, they'd have seen what we
do and do not have installed so far."

He leaned forward. "Why are they hanging around?" he asked. "I was
handed some story about overhauling the missile system."

"Me, too," Blades said.

"But you don't consider a job complete till it's been tested. And you
don't fire a test shot, even a dummy, this close to a Station.
Besides, what could have gone wrong? I can't see a ship departing
Earth orbit for a long cruise without everything being in order. And
they didn't mention any meteorites, any kind of trouble, en route.
Furthermore, why do the work here? The Navy yard's at Ceres. We can't
spare them any decent amount of materials or tools or help."

Blades frowned. His own half-formulated doubts shouldered to the fore,
which was doubly unpleasant after he'd been considering Ellen Ziska.
"They tell me the international situation at home is O.K.," he
offered.

Avis nodded. "What newsfaxes we get in the mail indicate as much," she
said. "So why this hanky-panky?" After a moment, in a changed voice:
"Jimmy, you begin to scare me a little."

"I scare myself," Chung said.

"Every morning when you debeard," Blades said; but his heart wasn't
in it. He shook himself and protested: "Damnation, they're our own
countrymen. We're engaged in a lawful business. Why should they do
anything to us?"

"Maybe Avis can throw some light on that," Chung suggested.

The girl twisted her fingers together. "Not me," she said. "I'm no
politician."

"But you were home not so long ago. You talked with people, read the
news, watched the 3V. Can't you at least give an impression?"

"N-no--Well, of course the preliminary guns of the election campaign
were already being fired. The Social Justice Party was talking a lot
about ... oh, it seemed so ridiculous that I didn't pay much
attention."

"They talked about how the government had been pouring billions and
billions of dollars into space, while overpopulation produced crying
needs in America's back yard," Chung said. "We know that much, even in
the Belt. We know the appropriations are due to be cut, now the
Essjays are in. So what?"

"We don't need a subsidy any longer," Blades remarked. "It'd help a
lot, but we can get along without if we have to, and personally, I
prefer that. Less government money means less government control."

"Sure," Avis said. "There was more than that involved, however. The
Essjays were complaining about the small return on the investment. Not
enough minerals coming back to Earth."

"Well, for Jupiter's sake," Blades exclaimed, "what do they expect? We
have to build up our capabilities first."

"They even said, some of them, that enough reward never would be
gotten. That under existing financial policies, the Belt would go in
for its own expansion, use nearly everything it produced for itself
and export only a trickle to America. I had to explain to several of
my parents' friends that I wasn't really a socially irresponsible
capitalist."

"Is that all the information you have?" Chung asked when she fell
silent.

"I ... I suppose so. Everything was so vague. No dramatic events. More
of an atmosphere than a concrete thing."

       *       *       *       *       *

"Still, you confirm my own impression," Chung said. Blades jerked his
undisciplined imagination back from the idea of a Thing, with bug eyes
and tentacles, cast in reinforced concrete, and listened as his
partner summed up:

"The popular feeling at home has turned against private enterprise.
You can hardly call a corporate monster like Systemic Developments a
private enterprise! The new President and Congress share that mood. We
can expect to see it manifested in changed laws and regulations. But
what has this got to do with a battleship parked a couple of hundred
kilometers from us?"

"If the government doesn't want the asterites to develop much
further--" Blades bit hard on his pipestem. "They must know we have a
caviar mine here. We'll be the only city in this entire sector."

"But we're still a baby," Avis said. "We won't be important for years
to come. Who'd have it in for a baby?"

"Besides, we're Americans, too," Chung said. "If that were a foreign
ship, the story might be different--Wait a minute! Could they be
thinking of establishing a new base here?"

"The Convention wouldn't allow," said Blades.

"Treaties can always be renegotiated, or even denounced. But first you
have to investigate quietly, find out if it's worth your while."

"Hoo hah, what lovely money that'd mean!"

"And lovely bureaucrats crawling out of every file cabinet," Chung
said grimly. "No, thank you. We'll fight any such attempt to the last
lawyer. We've got a good basis, too, in our charter. If the suit is
tried on Ceres, as I believe it has to be, we'll get a sympathetic
court as well."

"Unless they ring in an Earthside judge," Avis warned.

"Yeah, that's possible. Also, they could spring proceedings on us
without notice. We've got to find out in advance, so we can prepare.
Any chance of pumping some of those officers?"

"'Fraid not," Avis said. "The few who'd be in the know are safely back
on shipboard."

"We could invite 'em here individually," said Blades. "As a matter of
fact, I already have a date with Lieutenant Ziska."

"What?" Avis' mouth fell open.

"Yep," Blades said complacently. "End of the next watch, so she can
observe the _Pallas_ arriving. I'm to fetch her on a scooter." He blew
a fat smoke ring. "Look, Jimmy, can you keep everybody off the porch
for a while then? Starlight, privacy, soft music on the piccolo--who
knows what I might find out?"

"You won't get anything from _her_," Avis spat. "No secrets or, or
anything."

"Still, I look forward to making the attempt. C'mon, pal, pass the
word. I'll do as much for you sometime."

"Times like that never seem to come for me," Chung groaned.

"Oh, let him play around with his suicide blonde," Avis said
furiously. "We others have work to do. I ... I'll tell you what,
Jimmy. Let's not eat in the mess tonight. I'll draw our rations and
fix us something special in your cabin."

       *       *       *       *       *

[Illustration]

A scooter was not exactly the ideal steed for a knight to convey his
lady. It amounted to little more than three saddles and a locker, set
atop an accumulator-powered gyrogravitic engine, sufficient to lift
you off an asteroid and run at low acceleration. There were no
navigating instruments. You locked the autopilot's radar-gravitic
sensors onto your target object and it took you there, avoiding any
bits of debris which might pass near; but you must watch the distance
indicator and press the deceleration switch in time. If the 'pilot was
turned off, free maneuver became possible, but that was a dangerous
thing to try before you were almost on top of your destination.
Stereoscopic vision fails beyond six or seven meters, and the human
organism isn't equipped to gauge cosmic momenta.

Nevertheless, Ellen was enchanted. "This is like a dream," her voice
murmured in Blades' earplug. "The whole universe, on every side of us.
I could almost reach out and pluck those stars."

"You must have trained in powered spacesuits at the Academy," he said
for lack of a more poetic rejoinder.

