darkness of the hall, staring out. Nothing was wrong, so far as he
could see. He had to risk it.

Hawkes shoved past the women on the steps and headed down West End,
trying not to seem in a hurry. His eyes turned up to the roof of the
garage, but he could see nothing there; he'd half-expected that the
slim young man would be parked up on the roof, waiting.

       *       *       *       *       *

Then the fear began, mounting slowly. He jerked around quickly,
scanning the street. For a second, he thought he saw the slim figure,
but it was only a back turned to him, and it disappeared into a
barber-shop. Probably someone else.

The fear mounted a little, and he found his steps quickening. He cut
around the corner, where men were crowded into a little restaurant. He
was heading into a dead-end street, but there was an alley leading
from it. He had to keep off the main streets.

Footsteps sounded behind him.

He moved faster, and the footsteps also speeded up. He slowed, and
they kept on. Then they were nearly behind him, just as he reached the
alley and jerked back into it, grabbing for a broken bottle he had
spotted.

"Will!" It was a gasping wheeze. "Will! For God's sake, it's only me.
I know everything--your amnesia. But let me explain!"

It stopped him. He held the bottle carefully, as the fat figure of an
old man stepped softly around the corner, fear written on every aged
wrinkle. It was the man he'd stumbled into when he dashed out of his
apartment.

But the fear there matched his own so completely that he dropped the
bottle. The other man stood trembling, gasping for breath. Then he
gathered himself together, though his pudgy hands still clenched
tightly, showing white knuckles.

"Will," he repeated. "You must believe me. I know about you. I want to
help you--if there's any help for you, God forgive us both. And God
have mercy on Earth. It's worse than you can believe--and different.
It's...."

Horror washed over the old man's face. He stood, fighting within
himself. Hawkes felt his own back hairs lift, and he drew back. For a
second, the fat man seemed to waver before him, as if his body was
only a projection. Then it quieted.

"It--it almost had me for a second."

He turned back to Hawkes, trying to control the quivering muscles in
his face. But his victory was still incomplete when he suddenly leaped
up.

"Get back, Will. Oh, God, O God!"

He leaped outwards, his fat old legs pumping savagely. Then the air
seemed to quiver.

[Illustration]

Where he had been, there was only a dark cloud of smoke, spreading
outwards in a rough equivalent of his shape. A spurt of steam leaped
upwards savagely, and the smoke seemed darker. It began to drift on
the air, touched a building, and left a spot of smudginess, before it
drifted on, getting thinner with each gust of wind. It was as if every
atom of his body had suddenly disassociated itself from every other
atom.

       *       *       *       *       *

Hawkes found his fingernails cutting his palms, and there was blood
flowing from his bitten tongue. He heard a hacking moan in his throat.
He struggled against something that seemed to be holding him down, and
then leaped at least ten feet, to land running.

The alley was twisted and narrow. He shot down it and around a corner.
An ice-house stood there, and he barely avoided the loading trucks. He
was back near the apartment building where he'd found the girl, and he
doubled to a door that showed. It seemed to be locked, but somehow, he
got through it. He seemed to melt through the door, though he wasn't
sure whether his lunge smashed it or whether his fingers had found
the latch in time.

He ducked around loose-hanging electric wires, under twisted pipes,
and across a pile of coal around a hot-water heater. He twisted and
turned, to come into complete darkness, and halt short, listening.

The fear was going--and there were again no sounds of pursuit. But he
couldn't be sure. He'd heard no sounds when the fat man had leaped
out, but they had been there.

Silently and thickly, he cursed. To find a man who seemed to be his
friend, and who knew about him--and then to have them kill that man
with such horrible efficiency before he could learn what it was all
about!

He gagged in the darkness, almost fainting again.

Then, slowly, it was too much. For the moment, he could run no more,
and nothing seemed to matter. He understood his sudden bravado no
better than the unnatural cowardice that had been riding his
shoulders, but he shrugged, and moved forward.

The dark passage led out to steps, that carried him up to the
sidewalk, in front of the building. Ellen Ibanez--or Bennett--was less
than five feet from him, and her eyes were fixed firmly on his face.


IV

She seemed surprised, but tried to smile. "I thought I left you
asleep, Will," she said, in a tone that was meant to be bantering.
"'Smatter, the fuse blow?"

He accepted the excuse for his presence in the basement. "Yeah, it
did. You left the iron on. I wondered what happened to you?"

"Nothing. Just shopping. There wasn't a bit of food in the place--and
I must say, Will, you aren't much of a housekeeper. I bought pounds of
soap!"

He followed her up the stairs, and his key opened the door. He was
still operating on the general belief that they'd be least likely to
spot him where they had already found him once. If the girl had tipped
them off, then they had it figured out that he had run off, and
probably wouldn't be back.

He hoped so, at any rate.

She was talking too briskly, and she was too careful not to mention
that the iron was cool, with its cord wrapped neatly around the
handle. He offered no explanation, but let her babble on about the
strange coincidence of his being _the_ Will Hawkes, and how she'd
almost forgotten the childhood days.

"How come the Ibanez?" he asked, finally.

"Stage name! I tried to make a go of the musicals, but it wasn't my
line, I found. But the name stuck."

"And where'd you learn how to drug coffee that way?"

She didn't change expression. There was even a touch of a twinkle in
her eye. "Waitress in a combination bar and restaurant. You needed the
sleep, Will. And I guess I still feel as much of a mother to you as I
did when you used to get hurt, so long ago."

She had things out of the bags now, and he saw that she had been doing
a lot of shopping. There had still been time enough to call the slim
young man, though--or, he suddenly realized, the fat man. He had no
more reason to believe her an enemy than a friend. Then he corrected
that. If she'd known enough to call the fat man, and had been his
friend, she could have told him things. She'd denied knowing anything,
though.

He couldn't understand why he trusted her--and yet, somehow, he did.
Even if he knew she'd called them, he would still have to trust her.
He was sure now that she was lying, and that she had been the girl at
the door--but that meant she'd been with the fat man. And the fat man
had seemed to be his friend. Or, had the man been set to lure him out,
but miscalculated, and gotten only what had been meant for him?

His head was spinning, and he gave it up. He was a fool to trust her
simply because the fear feeling subsided around her--but he had
nothing better to do than to follow his hunches, and then try to play
the odds as best he could.

       *       *       *       *       *

"Cigarettes," she said, handing him a pack of his brand. "And for me.
Shoe dye--your shoes need it, and I couldn't find a shoe store. I did
get a shirt though, and a tie. You'll find a hat in that bag. Size
seven and a quarter?"

He nodded gratefully, and went in to change. His old shirt had caught
most of the cat's blood, and he needed a fresh one. There were a
couple of spots on his trousers, but they'd do. And the sports jacket
matched well enough. He daubed the dye onto his shoes--one of the
combined polish and dye things.

"Cold-cuts all right?" she asked, and he called back a vague answer
that seemed to satisfy her. He was staring at the shoe dye.

It worked fairly well, when he experimented. He daubed it onto his
hair with a wisp of cotton. His hair began to mat down, but he found
that combing it out as he went along removed the worst of the wax and
still left some of the color. It worked better than it should have
done.

He found a bottle of something that smelled of alcohol and belonged in
her cosmetics, and began removing most of the mess. By being careful,
he got the wax and most of the dye smell off, while leaving his hair
darker.

"Better wash up," she called.

There was a razor among the things she had bought. He daubed some of
the dye on his upper lip, where the stubble of a mustache was showing.
It was easier there, if it didn't wash off in soap and water.

Some of it did, but when he finished shaving, he felt better. It
wouldn't pass close inspection, but he now seemed to have darker hair,
and the dye had exaggerated the little beginning of a mustache enough
to make some change in his appearance.

He waited for her to comment, but she said nothing. He waited for her
questions about what he was going to do, and her explanations that of
course he couldn't stay there. She merely went on talking idly, while
they ate. It didn't fit.

Finally he stood up and began taking down the rope that was strung up
over one end of the room, to use as a clothes line, he supposed. She
looked up at that. "What--"

"You can fight, if you want to," he told her. "Or you can save
yourself the headache of being knocked out. Take your choice. People
don't pay much attention to screams in a place like this. And I'm not
going to harm you, if you'll take it easily."

"You mean it!" Her eyes were huge in her face, and there was a touch
of fright now. She gulped visibly, and then seemed to go limp. "All
right, Will. In the bedroom?"

He nodded, and she went ahead of him. She didn't struggle, until he
was about to gag her. Then she drew her head aside. "There's money in
my bag, if you're going out."

       *       *       *       *       *

He swore, hotly and sickly. If she'd only act just once as a normal
female should! Maybe Irma had been a hysterical, cold-blooded fool,
but she couldn't have been that much different from other women--even
the books indicated Ellen should be anything but so damned
cooperative!

"If you'll tell me what's going on, I'll still let you go," he
suggested, drawing her hands tighter together.

"I can't, Will. I don't know."

He had to believe her--he knew she was telling the truth, at least to
some extent. And that made it just so much worse. He bound the gag
over her mouth as gently as he could, and closed the door behind him.
Her big eyes haunted him as he turned to the telephone.

The information girl at CCNY could only tell him that Wilbur Hawkes
had resigned abruptly seven months before, and no one knew where he
was--they had heard he was doing government research. He snorted at
that--it was always the excuse, when nobody knew anything.

He tried a few other numbers, and gave up. Nobody knew--and nobody
seemed to react to his name any differently from what they would have
done had he remained a quiet, professorish man, minding his own
business, instead of being chased by....

He couldn't complete that. The idea was still too fantastic. Even if
there were alien life-forms that were subtly invading Earth, why
should they pick on him? What good could a little, unimportant
mathematician do them--particularly if they had the powers he already
knew they possessed? It was a poor answer, though no harder to believe
than that any group on Earth could so suddenly come up with miracles.

Anyhow, men knew enough already to be pretty sure that Mars and Venus
