atomic energy.

With these tools, researchers were not long in accurately identifying
the missing elements 43, 61, 85, and 87 and more--indeed, the list of
new elements, isotopes, and particles now seems endless.

Element 43 was "made" for the first time as a result of bombarding
molybdenum with deuterons in the Berkeley cyclotron. The chemical work
of identifying the element was done by Emilio Segre and others then
working at Palermo, Sicily, and they chose to call it technetium,
because it was the element first made by artificial technical methods.

Element 61 was made for the first time from the fission disintegration
products of uranium in the Clinton (Oak Ridge) reactor. Marinsky and
Glendenin, who did the chemical work of identification, chose to call it
promethium because they wished to point out that just as Prometheus
stole fire (a great force for good or evil) from the hidden storehouse
of the gods and presented it to man, so their newly assembled reactor
delivered to mankind an even greater force, nuclear energy.

Element 85 is called astatine, from the Greek astatos, meaning
"unstable," because astatine _is_ unstable (of course all other elements
having a nuclear charge number greater than 84 are unstable, too).
Astatine was first made at Berkeley by bombarding bismuth with alpha
particles, which produced astatine and released two neutrons. The
element has since been found in nature as a small constituent of the
natural decay of actinium.

The last of the original 92 elements to be discovered was element 87,
francium. It was identified in 1939 by French scientist Marguerite
Perey.

Children have a game in which they pile blocks up to see how high they
can go before they topple over. In medieval times, petty rulers in their
Italian states vied with one another to see who could build the tallest
tower. Some beautiful results of this game still remain in Florence,
Siena, and other Italian hill cities. Currently, Americans vie in a
similar way with the wheelbase and overall length of their cars. After
1934, the game among scientists took the form of seeing who could extend
the length of the periodic system of the elements; as with medieval
towers, it was Italy that again began with the most enthusiasm and
activity under the leadership of Enrico Fermi.

Merely adding neutrons would not be enough; that would make only a
heavier isotope of the already known heaviest elements, uranium.
However, if the incoming neutron caused some rearrangement within the
nucleus and if it were accompanied by expulsion of electrons, that
_would_ make a new element. Trials by Fermi and his co-workers with
various elements led to unmistakeable evidence of the expulsion of
electrons (beta activity) with at least four different rates of decay
(half-lives). Claims were advanced for the creation of elements 93 and
94 and possibly further (the transuranium elements, Table I). Much
difficulty was experienced, however, in proving that the activity really
was due to the formation of elements 93 and 94. As more people became
interested and extended the scope of the experiments, the picture became
more confused rather than clarified. Careful studies soon showed that
the activities did _not_ decay logarithmically--which means that they
were caused by mixtures, not individual pure substances--and the
original four activities reported by Fermi grew to at least nine.

As a matter of fact, the way out of the difficulty had been indicated
soon after Fermi's original announcement. Dr. Ida Noddack pointed out
that no one had searched among the products of Fermi's experiment for
elements _lighter_ than lead, but no one paid any attention to her
suggestion at the time. The matter was finally cleared up by Dr. Otto
Hahn and F. Strassmann. They were able to show that instead of uranium
having small pieces like helium nuclei, fast electrons, and super-hard
x-rays, knocked off as expected, the atom had split into two roughly
equal pieces, together with some excess neutrons. This process is called
nuclear fission. The two large pieces were unstable and decayed further
with the loss of electrons, hence the [beta] activity. This process is
so complicated that there are not, as originally reported, only four
half-lives, but at least 200 different varieties of at least 35
different elements. The discovery of fission attended by the release of
enormous amounts of energy led to feverish activity on the part of
physicists and chemists everywhere in the world. In June 1940, McMillan
and Abelson presented definite proof that element 93 had been found in
uranium penetrated by neutrons during deuteron bombardment in the
cyclotron at the University of California Radiation Laboratory.

The California scientists called the newly discovered element neptunium,
because it lies beyond the element uranium just as the planet Neptune
lies beyond Uranus. The particular isotope formed in those first
experiments was {93}Np<239>; this is read neptunium having a nuclear charge
of 93 and an atomic mass number of 239. It has a half-life of 2.3 days,
during which it gives up another electron ([beta] particle) and becomes
element 94, or plutonium (so called after Pluto, the next planet beyond
Neptune). This particular form of plutonium ({94}Pu<239>) has such a long
half-life (24,000 years) that it could not be detected. The first
isotope of element 94 to be discovered was Pu<238>, made by direct deuteron
bombardment in the Berkeley 60-inch cyclotron by Radiation Laboratory
scientists Seaborg, McMillan, Kennedy, and Wahl; it had an [alpha]-decay
half-life of 86.4 years, which gave it sufficient radioactivity so that
its chemistry could be studied.

Having found these chemical properties in Pu<238>, experimenters knew
{94}Pu<239> would behave similarly. It was soon shown that the nucleus of
{94}Pu<239> would undergo fission in the same way as {92}U<235> when
bombarded with slow neutrons and that it could be produced in the newly
assembled atomic pile. Researchers wished to learn as much as possible
about its chemistry; therefore, during the summer of 1942 two large
