"And get no satisfactory answers."

Pacing the floor, Dirrul asked tensely, "Does everyone in the Movement
know about this?"

"The vote was made unanimously yesterday."

"One of the others must have a vacation leave coming up. Send him.
We're not at war with Vinin. He could take one of the regular space
excursions."

"I can't send a message in writing. It would be picked up by the
customs police. And you're the only one who can carry it verbally,
Eddie. You know the whole background because you worked with Glenna
and Hurd. You've been in the Movement longer than any of the others."

"Why not go yourself, Paul?"

"I can do more for the liberation if I stay here."

"I wish I'd been at the meeting yesterday when the vote was taken. I'd
have liked to discuss it with the others before--"

"Why so many questions, Eddie? Why so many doubts all of a sudden?"
Sorgel stood and faced Dirrul, holding his shoulders in a grip that
hurt. "Are you trying to back out? Maybe it wasn't a good thing to let
you play around with the science boys after all. Be honest with me,
Eddie. If you're not sure where you stand, say so. There's no room in
the Movement for traitors."

When Dirrul said nothing Sorgel added in a voice that rang with
fervor, "You're the only man in the Movement who has had any training
as a space-pilot. It depends on you now--everything you've ever
dreamed of, everything Glenna and Hurd wanted. Can you forget what the
Agronian police did to Glenna? Is your courage any less than hers?"
Again Sorgel paused but still Dirrul said nothing. "The future of your
world depends on you, Eddie--don't let it down."

"I'll go," Dirrul whispered.

As Eddie made up his mind his internal tension relaxed and he was
filled with a sense of well-being. When he thought about it he
couldn't understand why he had hesitated--unless perhaps what Sorgel
suggested was true--that his contact with the Ad-Air faculty had
blunted and nearly perverted his established sense of values.

An hour later Dirrul boarded the battered antiquated space cargo
carrier on the launching rack at Barney's emergency field. At the last
minute Sorgel pressed a curious disk into his hand. Made of a very
light metal and suspended from a short chain it was two inches in
diameter and covered with a complex grid design.

"Put it around your neck before you land, Eddie. Don't remove under
any circumstances until you report. Give it to the Chief then. He'll
know I sent you because it's my own identification activator." Sorgel
clasped Dirrul's hand warmly. "When you land on Vinin take the North
Field below the capital. It's the HQ operational center. Use Wave-code
three-seven-three and they'll know you're friendly."


IV

After the launching space-flight was normally a monotonous routine.
The course was charted by automatic navigators and the vast pattern of
interlocking machinery and safety devices was electronically
controlled by robot relays from the pilot master-panel. The chief
function of a trained space-pilot, aside from his services as a
diplomat, was to handle emergency situations for which automatic
responses could not be built into the machinery.

Dirrul, however, could not depend a great deal upon the robot devices.
He had to avoid the well-traveled and well-charted commercial
space-lanes. He had to be constantly on the alert for the telltale
white of a police cruiser. A cargo carrier was the slowest ship in the
universe--Dirrul could outrun nothing, not even a playboy's sport
jalopy, and inspection by the customs police would have been
disastrous.

He followed a roundabout route, keeping as far from inhabited planets
as he could, and he made good time. In ninety-five days he had reached
the mythical border in space, which divided the territory of the
Planetary Union and the Vininese Confederacy.

He was almost at midpoint in the galaxy. On the glazed screen of his
space-map the mirrored pinpricks of sun systems glittered like
microscopic gems scattered over the curve of a gigantic black saucer.
Dirrul had never been so far from Agron. He felt a stifling sense of
insignificance.

The meaning of time as he understood it was somehow overwhelmed by the
immensity of space. Now and yesterday, today and tomorrow, became a
single unity. Dirrul had a new sense of the past in terms of the
present. His mind groped for word symbols that he understood which
could crystalize the shadowy new concept filling his mind.

New understanding seemed to arise from the space-map. Somewhere among
the glowing points of light was the Place of the Beginning, a single
planet called Earth. In the far-distant past Earthmen had made
themselves rational beings. But for centuries thereafter they had made
no further progress, apparently appalled by the audacity of such
presumptive evolution. They had fought through a long primitive period
of violence, erecting system on system and philosophy upon philosophy
to conceal, destroy and wipe out their own biological machinery.

Then out of a final orgy of death and terror the Earthmen had grasped
the meaning and the responsibility of the Rational Potential. They had
understood the reality of being.

Within a century after that they had conquered space. They had found
peoples like themselves occasionally--but more often races that had
followed different biological adaptations to different environments.
Wherever there seemed to be a spark of primitive rationality the
Earthmen had stayed and patiently taught the Rational Potential of
being, which they had learned for themselves only after such
bloodshed.

The galaxy was theirs, in a sense, for it thought in the patterns of
Earthmen, although long ago their direct influence had waned. They
were a legend and an ideal, lost in the vastness of space, yet bound
fast into the cultures of all peoples.

Yet somewhere the Earthmen must have failed, somewhere there must have
been a flaw in their teaching. Fifty years earlier, as the Agronians
measured time, the galaxy had been torn apart by war. The Agronians
had led one group of planets, the Vininese another. Planet after
planet was seared by deadly new weapons--world after world died in the
orange flame of gaudy atomic disintegration. Slowly the power of Vinin
crept across the sky until the Vininese ruled half the galaxy.

Their first defeat had come unexpectedly. Their great space-armada
swung in on Agron, while the people crowded in terror in their flimsy
raid shelters. But the Vininese ships had vanished high in the air.
Not even debris had fallen on the planet.

It was the first use of the Nuclear Beams. Dirrul had been a schoolboy
when the Agronian scientists announced their discovery. He remembered
the exciting thrill of pride, recalled how he and his schoolmates had
dreamed of destroying the Vininese with the new weapon.

He remembered too the galling bitterness he had felt when the
scientists announced that they had made peace instead.

They had had sound reasons, of course. They said the Beams had a
limited value. They could be used only defensively to girdle a single
planet in the stratospheric level of its atmosphere. Elsewhere they
were harmless. To compound the spectacular timidity, the scientists
had given away the secret to all comers, including the Vininese. They
had an argument for that particular idiocy too--if each planet could
protect itself so easily from all external attack its people could
freely decide for themselves their galactic allegiance or maintain
isolated independence.

The Planetary Union had been formed and members of the Vininese
Confederacy invited to join it. Not a people anywhere in the
Confederacy made even tentative exploration of the offer while five
sun systems of the Union later joined the Vininese. That was the fact
that had ultimately prodded Dirrul into joining the Movement.

Later, when he read the pamphlets brought from Vinin, he had clarified
his purposes. On the one hand lay the waste, the confusion, the
uncertainty of Agron. Scientists who talked forever of hypotheses and
were afraid to stand firm for any absolute truths--moralists who
qualified even the simplest standards of right and wrong--philosophers
who glorified a condition of eternal chaos which they called an open
mind.

On the other hand lay the clean efficiency of Vinin. Scientific
certainty, and the progress that stemmed from it--the Space-dragon
instead of the Safe-sweet candy, a clear social organization in which
the individual was directed by established and inflexible principles.

The whole of it was history as Dirrul had learned it, the chronology
of the past. As he looked on the star map of the galaxy, at midpoint
between the two great unions of planets, the meaning of the past began
to change. The chronology fell into a new perspective.

Against the vast expanse of space time twisted into a new
relationship. Time and space began to equate with an exciting
synonymity. History was not the past, dead and numbered--history was
now. All things, all space, all time, were forever fixed at the
instant of now.

In Dirrul's mind a tumult of facts trembled on the verge of a
startling new order--the atomic structure of all energy and the black
saucer of the galaxy. The violent spasms the Earthmen had suffered
before they found the Rational Potential and the devastation of the
Galactic War.

But before he could assess such new values and verbalize the new
generalization the antiquated warning system of his ship twanged
tinnily. On the control panel screen he saw the trim outline of a
white Agronian police ship. A moment later the voice came over the
speaker, ordering him to state his permit registry and his
destination.

Dragged so suddenly back to reality, Dirrul reacted in panic. It was a
routine inquiry. He might have bluffed his way clear. Instead he put
the cargo ship at top speed toward Vinin and watched helplessly while
the patrol cruiser closed relentlessly in.

"Stand for search!" the voice commanded.

When he did nothing the police shot a warning rocket over his bow. A
second shot struck the rear of the cargo ship and tore away a section
of landing gear. Swearing, Dirrul tried to maneuver out of range, and
to a certain extent he was successful. But piloting skill could not
make up for the cumbersome bulk of his unarmed ship. Two more blasts
hit him, collapsing the forward compartment and knocking out one power
tube.

At the point of triumph, however, the police patrol turned away and
left Dirrul limping alone in space. For a moment he was puzzled. In
another ten minutes they could have boarded the cargo carrier and made
him prisoner. But he understood when he glanced again at the star
map--the Agronian police had pursued him far into Vininese territory.
If Vininese patrols had found them there it might have created an
unpleasant intergalactic incident.

Dirrul made a quick survey of the damage. He had only one power tube
intact--beyond that, the cargo carrier was wrecked and he had on board
nothing with which to make repairs. He could move ahead only at
quarter-speed.

Sorgel had put a time limit of one hundred days on the trip to Vinin.
Headquarters had to know by then of the Plan on Agron. Dirrul had five
days left and as the hours ran out he was still grinding slowly toward
the outer atmosphere of Vinin. Quite aware that proper security
demanded the message be delivered in person, Dirrul nonetheless faced
the alternative of losing everything if he waited.

Logically weighing all factors, he concluded he would not be risking
too much, considering the stakes, if he used the teleray. Agron
monitors could pick it up, of course, and no doubt the outpost
stations were instructed to record all messages emanating from within
the territory of Vinin. But Dirrul knew the Air-Command.

They wallowed in the same luxury and comfort enjoyed by the rest of
the Planetary Union. Outposts personnel, so far from the capital,
