"It's your funeral," I whispered through motionless lips.

He turned away and I left. There was no reason to stay, and our little
talk just might have drawn attention. They could have a probe tuned on
us now. I went down the strip to Otto's and waited. It couldn't have
been more than a half hour later that Redman came by. He was looking
over his shoulder and walking fast. His pockets, I noted, were
bulging. So I went out the back door, cut down the serviceway to the
next radius street, and flagged a cab.

"Where to, mister?" the jockey said.

"The strip--and hurry."

The jockey fed propane to the turbine and we took off like a scorched
zarth. "Left or right?" he asked as the strip leaped at us. I crossed
my fingers, estimated the speed of Redman's walk, and said, "Right."

We took the corner on two of our three wheels and there was Redman,
walking fast toward the south airlock, and behind him, half-running,
came two of Abie's goons.

"Slow down--_fast_!" I yapped, and was crushed against the back of the
front seat as the jock slammed his foot on the brakes. "In here!" I
yelled at Redman as I swung the rear door open.

His reflexes were good. He hit the floor in a flat dive as the purple
streak of a stat blast flashed through the space where he had been.
The jockey needed no further stimulation. He slammed his foot down and
we took off with a screech of polyprene, whipped around the next
corner and headed for the hub, the cops, and safety.

"Figured you was jerking some guy, Cyril," the jockey said over his
shoulder. "But who is he?"

       *       *       *       *       *

Redman picked himself off the floor as I swore under my breath. The
jockey _would_ have to know me. Abie'd hear of my part in this by
morning and my hide wouldn't be worth the price of a mangy rat skin. I
had to get out of town--fast! And put plenty of distance between me
and Marsport. This dome--this planet--wasn't going to be healthy for
quite a while. Abie was the most unforgiving man I knew where money
was concerned, and if the large, coarse notes dripping from Redman's
pockets were any indication, there was lots of money concerned.

"Where to now, Cyril?" the jockey asked.

There was only one place to go. I damned the greed that made me pick
Redman up. I figured that he'd be grateful to the tune of a couple of
kilomunits but what was a couple of thousand if Abie thought I was
mixed up in this? Lucky I had a spaceship even if she was an
unconverted Centaurian. I could stand the cramped quarters a lot
better than I could take a session in Abie's back room. I'd seen what
happened to guys who went in there, and it wasn't pretty. "To the
spaceport," I said, "and don't spare the hydrocarbons."

"Gotcha!" the jock said and the whine of the turbine increased another
ten decibels.

"Thanks, Wallingford," Redman said. "If you hadn't pulled me out I'd
have had to shoot somebody. And I don't like killing. It brings too
many lawmen into the picture." He was as cool as ice. I had to admire
his nerve.

"Thanks for nothing," I said. "I figured you'd be grateful in a more
solid manner."

"Like this?" he thrust a handful of bills at me. There must have been
four thousand in that wad. It cheered me up a little.

"Tell me where you want to get off," I said.

"You said you have a spaceship," he countered.

"I do, but it's a Centaurian job. I might be able to squeeze into it
but I doubt if you could. About the only spot big enough for you
would be the cargo hold, and the radiation'd fry you before we even
made Venus."

He grinned at me. "I'll take the chance," he said.

"Okay, sucker," I thought. "You've been warned." If he came along he'd
damn well go in the hold. I could cut the drives after we got clear of
Mars and dump him out--after removing his money, of course. "Well," I
said aloud, "it's your funeral."

"You're always saying that," he said with chuckle in his voice.

       *       *       *       *       *

We checked out at the airlock and drove out to the spaceport over the
sand-filled roadbed that no amount of work ever kept clean. We cleared
the port office, drew spacesuits from Post Supply, and went out to my
yacht. Redman looked at her, his heart in his eyes. He seemed
overwhelmed by it.

"Lord! she's beautiful!" he breathed, as he looked at the slim
polished length standing on her broad fins, nose pointed skyward.

"Just a Starflite-class yacht," I said.

"Look, Cyril," he said. "Will you sell her?"

"If we get to Venus alive and you still want to buy her, she'll cost
you--" I hesitated, "twenty-five thousand."

"Done!" he said. It came so fast that I figured I should have asked
for fifty.

"The fuel will be extra," I said. "Fifty munits an ounce. There's
maybe ten pounds of it."

"How far will that take me?"

"About ten light-years at cruising speed. Gold is economical."

"That should be far enough," he said with a faint smile.

We drew the boarding ladder down and prepared to squeeze aboard. As I
figured it, we had plenty of time, but I hadn't counted on that nosy
guard at the check station, or maybe that character at the south
airlock of the dome, because I was barely halfway up the ladder to the
hatch when I heard the howl of a racing turbine and two headlights
