Merril could learn nothing of the _Argonaut's_ fate. It was as though
she had dropped through a hole in the fabric of space itself and
vanished from the ken of men. To me he said: "I fear a new weapon." But
to the rest, he kept his peace and let the work of the Compact continue.
There was nothing else to be done. Our Wall Decade was waning, and when
a man or a Compact outlives the age that gave him or it birth, there is
nothing to do but go forward and meet the new day dawning.

So it was with the Compact. We lived on as we had lived before: looting
and killing and draining the wealth of space into our coffers. But in
the back of our minds a shadow was lurking.

On the next raid, the _Lady_ was lost. I saw it happen, as did Merril.
There was nothing we could do to help her, and she died, spilling men
into the void as she ruptured in her last agony.

It was off Hyperion, whence we had come to loot the trove built there by
the prospectors of the Saturnian Moons. And it was a trap.

The _Arrow_, the _Hound_ and the _Lady_ circled the moonlet, swinging
inward to the attack. It was the _Lady_ who was to put aground the
raiding party, and her valves hung open while men readied the
assault-boats. Our radar screens showed nothing of danger. There was
only the bloated giant in the sky, a ringed monster of yellow gold
against the starry velvet of space.

The _Lady_ dropped her boats, the _Hound_ and the _Arrow_ hovering by to
watch over their sister. And suddenly, the jagged moonscape below
erupted--belching streaks of fire that sought us like probing fingers. I
knew in one single instant of terror that this was the new weapon that
had killed the _Argonaut_, for it sliced into the _Lady's_ flanks as
though the steelite hull were cheese.

She bulged, glowing like an ember. There was a sudden nimbus of snow
about her as her air escaped and froze, and then she rolled into her
death-dance, open from bow to stern, spilling scorched corpses into the
void.

The _Arrow_ and the _Hound_ drove off into space like furies leaving the
spinning body of their sister ship behind, not waiting to watch her
crash down onto the rocky face of Hyperion. And now the five of the
Compact were only three, and again there was the sound of weeping among
our women.

       *       *       *       *       *

Two months after that engagement, a single assault-boat returned to
Base. It was the lone survivor of the _Lady's_ landing party. By some
miracle, the three men aboard had escaped the holocaust. They had landed
and been captured and then they had fought their way free and into the
void once more. They were half-dead from starvation and exposure, but
they had brought word to Merril that the wall that had so long protected
us was crumbling.

Merril sought me out, his lean hard face grim and set.

"There was a Russian among the Americans on Hyperion," he said.

"A prisoner?" It was my hope that spoke so, not my sure knowledge of
what was to come.

Merril shook his head slowly. "A technician. They developed the beam
that killed the _Argonaut_ and the _Lady_--together." His voice was
harsh and bleak. Then suddenly he laughed. "We've touched them," he
said, "Touched them on their tender spot--their purses." He bowed low,
filled with bitter mockery. "Behold the diplomats, the men who are
accomplishing the impossible!"

And I knew that his words spelt doom. Doom for the Compact and for the
Wall Decade that was our life.

Yet we did not stint. In that year we raided Dione, Io, Ganymede, and
even the American naval Base on Callisto. We gutted six Russian and four
American rockets filled with treasure. And we ventured sunward as far as
the moons of Mars.

We dared battles with patrol ships and won. We killed the destroyer
_Alexei Tolstoi_ off Europa and we shattered an American monitor over
Syrtis itself, and watched the wreckage rain down on Yakki, the place
where the Compact was born.

And we lost the _Moonmaid_.

       *       *       *       *       *

The radio told us the story. Other new weapons were being developed
against us, and here and there American and Russian spacecraft were seen
in company for the first time in the history of the Age of Space.
Convoys were formed from ships of both flags to protect spatial commerce
from the imagined "great fleet" of the Compact. None knew that only the
_Arrow_ and the _Starhound_, small ships, weary ships, were left to face
the slowly combining might of Earth.

