for human intelligence. But they were certainly real. At his feet he
could feel the pressure of a guard's flippers against him.

He was towed in this fashion for some distance when the pressure of the
flippers suddenly tightened and he was pulled into a deep-angled swoop
toward the sea-bottom below. Previously he had seen his captors' amazing
speed, but now he felt it. Down and down he went, and at last, when it
seemed he must crash into the sea floor, his momentum was quickly
checked, and he found himself standing in the mud, from which position,
lacking support from his guard, he drifted to a horizontal one, face up.
And there, lying helpless on the bottom, he saw the reason for the
sudden dive. Far to the right, piercing faintly through the murk, were
two faint interweaving beams of white that preceded a slowly moving dark
bulk.

The _Narwhal_! Wild hopes of rescue coursed through him.

Dimly, as he watched the beams, he was aware of the rest of the
creatures dropping down, guiding between them the whale's carcass. Then
a firm pressure was applied to his side, and he was rolled over, face
down in the mud. Unable any longer to see his ship, his momentary vision
of rescue vanished.

"Hopeless, I guess," he muttered despairingly. The darkness on the
sea-floor was too thick, the wavering shadows too deceptive. And his
hand-flash and knife were gone--probably knocked from his grasp during
the struggle, he thought.

He realized that the seal-like animals were lying low until the
submarine passed, its size having awed them. The color of the bodies
blended perfectly with the gloom, as did that of his own sea-suit. His
bonds prevented him from making even the slightest movement to attract
attention.

Torturing thoughts raced through the torpooner's brain. He saw, in his
mind's eye, straight above, a hazy bulk, with shimmering columns of
white angling from its nose. His imagination pictured for him the warm,
well-lit interior, and the bunks--the coffee steaming on the fire, the
men at their posts and Streight's anxious, beefy face. He saw it all as
plainly as if he were inside, cracking jokes with one of the engineers.

      *      *      *      *      *

The minutes passed. The _Narwhal_ must now be gone. Ken's cheek muscles
stood out as he pressed his teeth together. "Well, go on!" he exploded
in impotent rage. "What are you waiting for? Kill me! Eat me if you're
going to!" And he cursed the silent forms around him till his ears hurt
from the reverberation.

After the _Narwhal_ had vanished in the gloom, the torpooner's captors
lifted him from the bottom and propelled him leisurely forward again,
the slight, graceful roll of their flippers slipping them along
smoothly.

A dull hopelessness came over him. No longer could he hope that his
submarine would find him. Only one thing was certain, and that was that
death would soon come. For even if his captors did not kill him at once,
he had but thirty-six hours before his air-units would be exhausted.
Certainly, having captured him, the seal-creatures would not release
him. And it was too much to expect them to realize that his sea-unit was
only an artificial covering which enabled him to live underwater, and
not his own flesh and blood.

And as for the chance of breaking loose--the idea was laughable. His
speed was snail-like in comparison with theirs. Even if he did manage
somehow to get away, what good would it do? How could he, a puny,
helpless mite, ever hope to locate the _Narwhal_ in this vast sweep of
Arctic sea? His torpoon was wrecked, and he had no means of
communication.

His situation was quite hopeless.

      *      *      *      *      *

Far ahead, a dark shape grew in the foggy murk, and as they neared,
spread upwards and outwards. They angled up and up; the sea-floor was
higher there. Ken, peering as best he could, made out that the
mountainous, looming bulk was the face of a giant underwater mound,
whose uneven formation indicated that it was the result of some
long-past upheaval. It was the first of a rolling series of such
hillocks, six or seven in all, stretching back into the gloom. Their
rounded peaks reached to within a few feet of the water's ice-sheathed
surface. Surely the creatures' home was among these mounds.

He was skirted round the base of the first hillock and caught a glimpse
of something in its face which was apparently of his captors'
construction. It was a hole, dark, mysterious, perhaps fifteen feet in
diameter, and barring it were three great gray stakes, reaching from top
to bottom. Behind the stakes, Ken got a jumbled impression of a body,
large and sleek, of black streaked with white, that moved restlessly
back and forth in the hole and occasionally seemed to lash out in anger.
He wondered what it was. Before long, he knew.

The party of seal-creatures stopped before the second of the row of
hillocks. In its face, too, was a hole--a well of blackness--but with no
stakes across it. He twisted his head back and saw the carcass of the
killer whale he had slain being guided up to the entrance and shoved
through. Then, from the upper rim of the hole, three stakes similar to
the others he had seen slid down and barred it.

"Storehouses!" he muttered. "Storehouses, I'll bet anything. And killer
whales are their food. They keep 'em in the holes until they're needed.
But I'll swear it was a live whale I saw in the first one--and how in
the dickens could they capture a mighty killer with their dinky spears
and ropes?"

There he had to leave the question, for its answer implied greater
intelligence in the creatures than he would admit.

Intelligence--in seals!

And now he was guided smoothly forward to the third hillock, where the
leaders of the group glided through a V-shaped cleft in its face. His
guards brought him along behind.

A wry smile twisted Kenneth Torrance's lips. To him, the cleft was more
than an entranceway. To him it signified the beginning of the hopeless,
lonely end of his life....

      *      *      *      *      *

The cleft led into a corridor, and the corridor was softly illuminated
with a peculiar light whose source he could not discover. It served to
show him a passageway that was wide rather than tall, and gouged from
the firm, clayey soil by blunt tools that had left uneven marks.
Straight ahead it led, and, as they continued, the mysterious
illumination brightened, until suddenly, rounding a turn, its source
appeared.

Like will-o'-the-wisps, a score of arrows of light flashed softly into
view down the corridor. They were of delicate green and orange and
yellow, glowing and luminous, and hovering like humming birds between
floor and ceiling. Ken looked at them in some alarm until his nearer
approach showed him what they were, and then he exclaimed in amazement:

"Why--they're fish! Living electric bulbs!"

A school of slender, ten-inch fish they were, each one a radiant,
shimmering, lacey-finned gem of orange or green or yellow. In concert
they shot to the ceiling over the party of seal-creatures, who still
swam impassively ahead, paying no attention to them, and from there
scattered in quick darts in all directions, showering the cortege with
washes of spectral luminosity. Then the corridor crooked again, and with
one simultaneous movement they were gone. And the scene that lay
revealed before Kenneth Torrance took his breath from him.

In the passageway he had seen a score of the living jewels; now he
beheld hundreds. He peered up at a shimmering sheet of brilliance,
composed of hundreds of the slender refulgent fish, all swimming in slow
rotation. Below them was a large cavern, which he guessed had been
created by hollowing out one of the underwater hillocks. The sides were
rounded, and pitted with holes that represented other passageways,
showing dark against the luminosity from above. And streaming out from
these dark holes of corridors came dozens of the seal-creatures,
gathering in response to some unheard, unseen signal that had called
them to witness the strange captive their fellows had brought in....

      *      *      *      *      *

Ken's guards gripped him more firmly and he was guided forward and
downward to the smooth black floor of soil.

Scores of large, placid eyes stared at him from the slowly undulating,
brown-skinned bodies packed close about him. The sight was so weird, so
beyond his imagination, that he laughed a little hysterically.

"Dreaming!" he said. "Dreaming! But what a dream!"

Silently, a space cleared in the center of the horde. His bonds were
taken away, the guards released his arms and he righted himself and
stood there on braced legs, the object of a concerted gaze.

This, the torpooner felt, was the crucial period. Something was about to
be decided. If it looked bad he would make a wild--and of course,
