tiptoed away from the genius scientist. By now, the genius was
beginning to exude large drops of sweat.

The door closed behind them, and the Chief dropped the cold soldering
iron with a sigh of relief. He took hold of his tongue, where he must
have been biting into it. He wiped his forehead and fingers with his
breast-pocket handkerchief.

Both the Chief and I heard the party walking down the hall and into
another wing of the building. I still didn't make a sound. It would
never do for the Chief to know he had been observed. After a suitable
time, the Chief, also, tiptoed out of the lab, and he was mumbling to
himself as I have never seen him mumble before.

       *       *       *       *       *

Several days later another thing appeared on Kenzie's work bench. This
time it was a large rectangular glass aquarium. It was filled with
moist earth. Now here was something new in electronics!

We shook our heads. One of the techs, who fancied himself a
psychologist, said the boys were suffering from retrogressive
dementia. They had gone so far back into childhood, they had to play
sand box. The Chief overheard the tech, and spoke up plaintively.

"But I don't see any celluloid spade and bucket," he said. He seemed
relieved when we burst out laughing.

His relief didn't last long, however. It changed to more worry when he
saw the boys carefully sprinkling bread and meat crumbs over the
surface of the sand. Then on top of that they dropped moist bits of
cake icing. When Pringle brought down a marigold plant, all covered
with aphis, and transplanted it in a corner of the aquarium, the
Chief again ran into his office and began to hold his head in his
hands.

More days passed. The gadget became a bristling porcupine of test
clips. By now the boys had forgotten they were working for the Company
and spent practically all their time on the whoozits. The Chief became
so fascinated, in a kind of horror-stricken manner, that he did not
mention the aquarium to Kenzie at all.

The rest of us also kept away from that side of the lab. Ever since
Kenzie had started on the gadget, he had no time for us, or helping us
with our problems. If we spoke to him he snapped back at us, until I
guess all our noses were out of joint. By the time the aquarium
appeared, we were ignoring him and everything he did.

In a few more weeks the aquarium was swarming with ants. It was easy
to see their tunnels running up and down the sides of the glass. I
will say this for the boys. They set it in a huge pan of water. None
of us could legitimately squawk about getting ants mixed up with our
anatomy.

The Chief showed he was mixed with disappointment and elation when the
boys asked clearance to work nights in the lab. Disappointed since he
could no longer stay late and follow the progress; elated because the
boys must really be getting hot.

Annual budget time was getting closer, and we could see the wheels
going around in his mind. It would be a nice thing if he could deliver
the multiwhoozits gadget just before the big fight for appropriations.

As far as we knew, the only interest the General Manager had shown was
the time he asked the Chief in the hall how that multiwhoozits was
coming along. Even in that question, it was evident Old Rock Jaw was
asking out of a rare politeness only--there being no big shots around
to impress.

It was doubtful if the G.M. heard the Chief's vague answer, because
the old boy was mumbling to himself about rising costs and having to
cut down expenses. He waddled on down the hall. He was still mumbling
as he went, but both the Chief and I heard one sentence clearly.

"And certain salaries and bonuses will have to be cut."

The Chief turned pale.

So he granted Kenzie's request with alacrity--and hoped he would
finish the gadget in time.

For two more weeks the Chief waited patiently, or maybe impatiently.
He knew the boys were working every night, because the security police
complained about their pinochle game being interrupted to let Kenzie
and Pringle in and out.

Both the boys began to get a feverish look in their faces. Their
cheeks grew hollow. Their eyes were bloodshot. Their regular work
suffered even more. The Chief thought he was being considerate when he
lifted some of their work and shoved it over to the rest of us.

We were already sore at the boys and we didn't take it too kindly.
Just the same, we didn't let our squawk get beyond the walls of the
lab. No use letting that nosy Personnel Department get an excuse to
start holding hands, patting on the back, and radiating aid and
comfort to all.

Then--a certain Monday came.

       *       *       *       *       *

The Chief came in, a little late as usual. Some of the newer guys
