During all this time, the crew members had been restricted to the
vicinity of the spaceship and by the third day were showing signs of
unrest. They sent Sweets to talk with Bruckner and the captain.

"We'll be leaving here in a few days," Sweets told them. "It's been a
long trip out and it'll be another long trip back. The men feel they're
entitled to some fun before they go."

"That seems like a reasonable request," the captain said. "What do you
think, Mr. Bruckner?"

"It would be risky to let them mingle too freely with the natives,"
Bruckner advised. "We aren't familiar enough with the local customs. One
wrong move might spoil all the good will I've been able to build up so
far."

"Unless you let them have a little fun, you're going to be awfully
unpopular," Sweets said. Without knowing it, he was something of a
psychologist himself.

"Hmmm." Bruckner was thoughtful. "I'm for the men," he said finally.
"One hundred per cent. Let's say we wait until tomorrow evening, though.
We'll have the hold just about filled by that time. Then it won't matter
too much if the natives change their minds about letting us take the
ores. How does that sound to you?"

"Fair enough," Sweets agreed.

       *       *       *       *       *

The next evening, a full-fledged party was held. Permission had been
obtained from Chief Faffin for the crew to visit the village and the
tribesmen were waiting for them when they arrived.

Sweets stayed close to Majesky. For the past couple days, the big
crewman had been drinking--not heavily, but steadily. The irritation of
being restricted to the ship and vicinity, added to the long trip out
from Earth, had gradually built up in him an ugly resentment.

Now as the crew members sat in a circle watching the dancing of a
half-dozen native men, Sweets noted that Majesky was drunk. He sat with
his arms wrapped around his legs, his head resting on his knees, and
glared at the dancers. Outside the circle, a pile of brush burned with
much crackling of wood-pitch.

After the dance was over, the natives sat solemnly watching the
Earthmen. It was soon apparent that they expected their visitors to
furnish the next portion of the entertainment program.

Evidently Bruckner had come prepared for this. He rose impressively from
his throne--on which he had been carried the quarter-mile from the
ship--and said, "We'll have your song now, Billy."

Billy Watts, astrogator of the crew, pulled himself to his feet and, in
a high boyish tenor, sang _I'll Take You Home Again, Kathleen_.

Sweets felt his throat quicken as a wave of homesickness went through
him like a chill. At the song's end, it needed the yip, yip, yip of the
tribesmen's applause to bring him out of his memories of Earth.

The tribesmen continued their applause until Watts rose again. Sweets
wondered if they had any music of their own. The men had danced earlier
without accompaniment and they had made no sound themselves.

Billy Watts sang two more songs and it was the tribesmen's turn again.

Suddenly a native woman ran out from behind one of the round, mud-packed
village huts and into the circle of spectators. She paused on tiptoe,
crouched and sprang upward, twisting and screaming as she rose. She
landed with her legs in driving motion and went through a racing,
energetic series of gyrations. She was almost completely unclothed.

       *       *       *       *       *

For a stunned moment, the men sat motionless in pleased surprise. Then
Sweets caught a movement from the corner of his eye and shifted his head
to look at Majesky. For the first time in many days, Majesky appeared
happy. He had straightened up and his eyes shone with a glow of
approval. He raised his arms in a gesture of encouragement and yelled,
"Swing it, baby!"

The dancer's stride broke and her head turned sharply in Majesky's
direction. Then she ignored the interruption and went on with her dance.

But Majesky was not to be ignored. He climbed to his feet and stood with
his head hunched between his shoulders, watching her. Then he lurched
forward, caught the girl up in his arms and swung her around in a
staggering circle.

