
"They're linin' up," Blackie warned tensely. "You guys ready? Where's
that rope?"

Someone thrust it into his hands. Still squinting at the scene on the
highway, he fumbled for the ends and held one out to Mike. The others
gripped their clubs.

"Now, remember!" ordered Blackie. "Me an' Mike will trip up the last one
in line. You two get in there quick an' wallop him over the head--but
good!"

"Don't go away while we're doin' it," said big Sid. "They won't chase
ya, but they look out fer themselves. I don't wanna get tossed twenty
feet again!"

The eyes of the others flicked toward the jagged white scar running down
behind Sid's right ear and under the collar of his jacket. Then they
swung back to the road.

"Good!" breathed Blackie. "The rollin' stuff's goin' first."

The truck and bulldozers set out toward the city, with the column of
robots marching a fair distance behind. The latter approached the
ambush--drew abreast--began to pass.

Blackie raised himself to a crouch with just the tips of his fingers
steadying him.

       *       *       *       *       *

As the last robot plodded by, he surged out of the brush, joined to Red
Mike by their grips on the twenty feet of rope. They ran up behind the
marching machine, trailed by the others.

In his right hand, Blackie twirled the part of the rope hanging between
him and Mike. On the second swing, he got it over the head of the robot.
He saw Mike brace himself.

The robot staggered. It pivoted clumsily to its left, groping vaguely
for the hindrance. Mike and Blackie tugged again, and the machine wound
up facing them in its efforts to maintain balance. Its companions
marched steadily along the road.

"Switch ends!" barked Blackie.

Alert, Mike tossed him the other end of the rope and caught Blackie's.
They ran past the robot on either side, looping it in. Blackie kept
going until he was above the ditch. He wound a turn of rope about his
forearm and plunged down the bank.

[Illustration: _With skill of long practice, they brought the robot
down._]

A shower of gravel spattered after him as Mike jammed his heels into the
shoulder of the highway to anchor the other end. Then he heard the
booming sound of the robot's fall.

Blackie clawed his way up the bank. Vito and Sid were smashing furiously
at the floundering machine. Mike danced about the melee with bared
teeth, charging in once as if to leap upon the quarry with both feet.
Frustrated by the peril of the whirling two-by-fours, he swept up
handfuls of gravel to hurl.

Blackie turned to run for one of the axes. Just then, Sid struck home to
the head of the robot.

Sparks spat out amid a tinkle of glass. The machine ceased all motion.

"All right!" panted Blackie. "All _right_! That's enough!"

They stepped back, snarls fading. A handful of gravel trickled through
