studying it, comparing it to the wiring diagrams.

"What's the matter?" Gross said.

"These changes. I can't figure out what they're for. The only pattern
I can make out is that for some reason--"

"Let me look," the Pilot said. He squatted down beside Kramer. "You
were saying?"

"See this lead here? Originally it was switch controlled. It closed
and opened automatically, according to temperature change. Now it's
wired so that the central control system operates it. The same with
the others. A lot of this was still mechanical, worked by pressure,
temperature, stress. Now it's under the central master."

"The brain?" Gross said. "You mean it's been altered so that the brain
manipulates it?"

Kramer nodded. "Maybe Professor Thomas felt that no mechanical relays
could be trusted. Maybe he thought that things would be happening too
fast. But some of these could close in a split second. The brake
rockets could go on as quickly as--"

"Hey," Winter said from the control seat. "We're getting near the moon
stations. What'll I do?"

They looked out the port. The corroded surface of the moon gleamed up
at them, a corrupt and sickening sight. They were moving swiftly toward
it.

"I'll take it," the Pilot said. He eased Winter out of the way and
strapped himself in place. The ship began to move away from the moon
as he manipulated the controls. Down below them they could see the
observation stations dotting the surface, and the tiny squares that
were the openings of the underground factories and hangars. A red
blinker winked up at them and the Pilot's fingers moved on the board
in answer.

"We're past the moon," the Pilot said, after a time. The moon had
fallen behind them; the ship was heading into outer space. "Well, we
can go ahead with it."

Kramer did not answer.

"Mr. Kramer, we can go ahead any time."

Kramer started. "Sorry. I was thinking. All right, thanks." He
frowned, deep in thought.

"What is it?" Gross asked.

"The wiring changes. Did you understand the reason for them when you
gave the okay to the workmen?"

Gross flushed. "You know I know nothing about technical material. I'm
in Security."

"Then you should have consulted me."

"What does it matter?" Gross grinned wryly. "We're going to have to
start putting our faith in the old man sooner or later."

The Pilot stepped back from the board. His face was pale and set.
"Well, it's done," he said. "That's it."

"What's done?" Kramer said.

"We're on automatic. The brain. I turned the board over to it--to him,
I mean. The Old Man." The Pilot lit a cigarette and puffed nervously.
"Let's keep our fingers crossed."

       *       *       *       *       *

The ship was coasting evenly, in the hands of its invisible pilot. Far
down inside the ship, carefully armoured and protected, a soft human
brain lay in a tank of liquid, a thousand minute electric charges
playing over its surface. As the charges rose they were picked up and
amplified, fed into relay systems, advanced, carried on through the
entire ship--

Gross wiped his forehead nervously. "So _he_ is running it, now. I
hope he knows what he's doing."

Kramer nodded enigmatically. "I think he does."

"What do you mean?"

"Nothing." Kramer walked to the port. "I see we're still moving in a
straight line." He picked up the microphone. "We can instruct the
brain orally, through this." He blew against the microphone
experimentally.

"Go on," Winter said.

"Bring the ship around half-right," Kramer said. "Decrease speed."

They waited. Time passed. Gross looked at Kramer. "No change.
Nothing."

"Wait."

Slowly, the ship was beginning to turn. The turbines missed, reducing
their steady beat. The ship was taking up its new course, adjusting
itself. Nearby some space debris rushed past, incinerating in the
blasts of the turbine jets.

"So far so good," Gross said.

They began to breathe more easily. The invisible pilot had taken
control smoothly, calmly. The ship was in good hands. Kramer spoke a
few more words into the microphone, and they swung again. Now they
were moving back the way they had come, toward the moon.

"Let's see what he does when we enter the moon's pull," Kramer said.
"He was a good mathematician, the old man. He could handle any kind of
problem."

The ship veered, turning away from the moon. The great eaten-away
globe fell behind them.

Gross breathed a sigh of relief. "That's that."

"One more thing." Kramer picked up the microphone. "Return to the moon
and land the ship at the first space field," he said into it.

"Good Lord," Winter murmured. "Why are you--"

"Be quiet." Kramer stood, listening. The turbines gasped and roared as
the ship swung full around, gaining speed. They were moving back, back
toward the moon again. The ship dipped down, heading toward the great
globe below.

"We're going a little fast," the Pilot said. "I don't see how he can
put down at this velocity."

       *       *       *       *       *

The port filled up, as the globe swelled rapidly. The Pilot hurried
toward the board, reaching for the controls. All at once the ship
jerked. The nose lifted and the ship shot out into space, away from
the moon, turning at an oblique angle. The men were thrown to the
floor by the sudden change in course. They got to their feet again,
speechless, staring at each other.

The Pilot gazed down at the board. "It wasn't me! I didn't touch a
thing. I didn't even get to it."

The ship was gaining speed each moment. Kramer hesitated. "Maybe you
better switch it back to manual."

The Pilot closed the switch. He took hold of the steering controls and
moved them experimentally. "Nothing." He turned around. "Nothing. It
doesn't respond."

No one spoke.

"You can see what has happened," Kramer said calmly. "The old man
won't let go of it, now that he has it. I was afraid of this when I
saw the wiring changes. Everything in this ship is centrally
controlled, even the cooling system, the hatches, the garbage release.
We're helpless."

"Nonsense." Gross strode to the board. He took hold of the wheel and
turned it. The ship continued on its course, moving away from the
moon, leaving it behind.

"Release!" Kramer said into the microphone. "Let go of the controls!
We'll take it back. Release."

"No good," the Pilot said. "Nothing." He spun the useless wheel. "It's
dead, completely dead."

"And we're still heading out," Winter said, grinning foolishly. "We'll
be going through the first-line defense belt in a few minutes. If they
don't shoot us down--"

"We better radio back." The Pilot clicked the radio to _send_. "I'll
contact the main bases, one of the observation stations."

"Better get the defense belt, at the speed we're going. We'll be into
it in a minute."

"And after that," Kramer said, "we'll be in outer space. He's moving
us toward outspace velocity. Is this ship equipped with baths?"

"Baths?" Gross said.

"The sleep tanks. For space-drive. We may need them if we go much
faster."

"But good God, where are we going?" Gross said. "Where--where's he
taking us?"

       *       *       *       *       *

The Pilot obtained contact. "This is Dwight, on ship," he said. "We're
entering the defense zone at high velocity. Don't fire on us."

"Turn back," the impersonal voice came through the speaker. "You're
not allowed in the defense zone."
