held up her book so he could see the title.

"_Hypnotism in Theory and Practice_," he snorted. And Mabel's I/Q was
71! "You've outgrown the comics, Mabel?"

"In a sense, yes, Mr. Elvin."

Elvin was saved from further disorientation by the interruption of an
office messenger with a special bulletin announcing a second period
assembly. By the time he had read it, his anger was under control. He
let the reading go on and spent the rest of the period plodding through
the examinations. There was not an error in any of the papers. From the
prospective of the day's events, Elvin later realized that, however
personally unnerving, his own particular crisis had been a minor one.

       *       *       *       *       *

The first full scale public disaster came during the assembly, when the
entire student body--nearly one hundred and fifty youngsters--was
gathered in the auditorium. The principal, as always, rose to lead them
in the Alma Mater. He was a huge, hatchet-faced, white-haired man, the
terror of evil-doer and faculty members alike. He had a tendency to give
a solemn importance to trivial things and to overlook the great ones;
and there was no mistaking the awed, almost religious fervor with which
he sang the school song--which was, perhaps, only natural, since he had
written it himself.

On that disastrous morning he suddenly burst into a dance as the student
body barrelled into the first chorus. He snatched up the startled girls'
counselor and improvised a little rumba. Slowly the students' voices
fell silent as they watched. Under the sweating leadership of the music
teacher, the school orchestra held the pace for another bar or two,
until one of the players stood up and rendered a discordant hot lick on
his trumpet.

A trio of caretakers carried the struggling principal off the platform
and shouting teachers herded the students on to their next classes.
Thirty minutes later the word-of-mouth information was carefully spread
through the school that the principal had been taken to the hospital for
observation and he was doing nicely. But by that time his fate seemed
unimportant, for the girls' tenth grade gym teacher was having hysterics
on the front lawn, convinced that all her students had turned into fish;
and the boys' glee club teacher had abruptly announced that the nation
was being invaded by Martians. He, too, had been carried off to the
hospital in haste.

The rest of the faculty was badly shaken. When they met at lunch, they
unanimously wanted the school closed for the rest of the day. But the
principal had been too small a man to delegate any of his authority; as
long as he was hospitalized, the teachers could do nothing.

After the ominous activity of the morning, however, most of the
afternoon passed in relative order. True, the counselor gave pick-up
tests to three tenth graders whose earlier I.Q. scores had been so low
the validity had been questioned; and this time the same three outdid an
Einstein. And the tenth grade math teacher was almost driven to
distraction by a classroom discussion of the algebraic symbology
equating matter and time--all of which was entirely over his head.

Nothing really happened until five minutes before the end of the school
day, when Miss Gerkin knocked weakly on Gary Elvin's door. As soon as he
saw her face, he gave his class free reading and joined her in the hall.
Fearfully she showed him a yellow Bunsen burner, which glowed softly in
the afternoon sunlight.

"Do you know what it is, Gary?"

"It's one of those gas burners you have on the lab tables in--"

"The metal, I mean."

"Looks like gold. Aren't these rather expensive for a high school
classroom?"

She sagged against the wall, running her trembling fingers over her thin
lips. "It's that tenth grade, Gary. I have them last period for general
science. Bill Blake and the Schermerhorn twins got to fooling around
with the electro-magnet. They rewired it somehow and added a few--well,
frankly, I don't understand at all! But now when anything--metal, glass,
granite--when anything is put in the magnetic field, it's changed to
gold."

"Transmutation of atomic structure? You know it can't be done!"

"Yes, I know it. But I saw it happen." She began to laugh, but checked
herself quickly.

"It's a trick. I know that bunch better than you do. It's time one of us
had it out with them."

       *       *       *       *       *

He strode along the hall toward the science room, Miss Gerkin following
meekly behind him. "I'm sure you're right, Gary, because the rest of the
class hardly showed any interest in what the boys were doing. I actually
asked Marilyn if she didn't want her necklace turned to gold, and she
said she was too busy to bother. Imagine that, from a high school kid!"

"Busy doing what?"

"Working out the application of the Law of Degravitation, she said."

"The Law of Degravitation? I never heard of it."

Miss Gerkin sniffed righteously. "Neither have I, and I've taught
science all my life."

Gary Elvin flung open the door of the science room. It was one minute
before the end of the period. For a moment he looked in on a peacefully
ideal classroom. Every student was at his bench working industriously.
Then, row by row, they began to float upward toward the ceiling, each of
them holding a tiny coil of thin wires twisted intricately around two
pieces of metal and an electronic tube. The breeze from the open window
gathered them languidly into a kind of huddle above the door.

The bell rang as Miss Gerkin began to scream. Elvin fought to hold on to
his own sanity as he tried to help her, but a degree of her hysteria
transferred itself to him. His mind became a patchwork of yawning blank
spaces interspersed with uncoordinated episodes of reality.

He remembered hearing the bell and the rush of the class out of the
room. He remembered the piercing screams of Miss Gerkin's terror echoing
through the suddenly crowded halls. Beyond one of his black gulfs of
no-memory, he was in the nurse's office helping to hold Miss Gerkin on
the lounge while the school doctor administered a sedative.

Slowly the integrated pattern of his thinking returned when he was
driving back toward the Schermerhorn ranch. It was late in the
afternoon; the sun was setting redly beyond the ridge of mountains. As
Elvin's fear receded, he was able to think with a kind of hazy clarity.
He had seen a metal Bunsen burner that had been turned into gold; he had
seen the crusty principal of the school break into a rumba, and three of
his colleagues driven to hysteria; he had seen a tenth grade class
floating unsupported in the air. All of it manifestly absurd and
impossible.

But it had happened. Elvin could visualize only two plausible
explanations: mass insanity or mass hypnosis. Hypnosis! A sluggish relay
clicked in his mind. He remembered a book. One of the tenth graders had
been reading it--_Hypnotism in Theory and Practice_.

Everything seemed clear after that. The tenth grade was an obstreperous
bunch of unsocial adolescents. Somehow they had stumbled upon hypnotism
and learned how to use it.

The time for an accounting had come. Because of where Elvin lived, he
was admirably situated to break the Schermerhorn twins first; and they
were, perhaps, the weakest members of the group. He would have them
alone, without the support of their peers. It would be easy. After all,
he was a mature adult; they were still children. Once he had a
confession from them, it would only be a minor operation to clear up the
whole mess.

When he reached the Schermerhorn ranch, dinner was on the table. He had
no time to talk to the twins until afterward. Both David and Donald
bolted the meal and rushed back to their workshop behind the garage.
Their usual bad manners, Elvin realized, but what else could be
expected?

       *       *       *       *       *

Elvin finished a leisurely pipe in the living room, and then sauntered
out to the boys' workshop. Surprisingly, the door was locked, the
windows thickly curtained; they had never taken such precautions before.
He knocked and, after a long wait, both David and Donald came outside to
talk to him. They were naked to the waist and their husky, tanned bodies
gleamed with sweat. A smudge of grease was smeared over David's unkempt
blond hair.
