"The biggest ghost town on earth," Frank muttered.

Nora's hand had slipped into Frank's. He squeezed it and neither of them
seemed conscious of the contact.

"I wonder," Nora said. "Maybe this is only one of them. Maybe all the
other big cities are evacuated too."

Jim Wilson and Minna were walking ahead. He turned. "If you two can't
sleep without finding out what's up, it's plenty easy to do."

"You think we could find a battery radio in some store?" Frank asked.

"Hell no! They'll all be gone. But all you'd have to do is snoop around
in some newspaper office. If you can read you can find out what
happened."

It seemed strange to Frank that he had not thought of this. Then he
realized he hadn't tried very hard to think of anything at all. He was
surprised, also, at his lack of fear. He's gone through life pretty much
taking things as they came--as big a sucker as the next man--making more
than his quota of mistakes and blunders. Finding himself completely
alone in a deserted city for the first time in his life, he had
naturally fallen prey to sudden fright. But that had gradually passed,
and now he was able to accept the new reality fairly passively. He
wondered if that wasn't pretty much the way of all people. New
situations brought a surge of whatever emotion fitted the picture. Then
the emotion subsided and the new thing became the ordinary.

This, he decided, was the manner in which humanity survived. Humanity
took things as they came. Pile on enough of anything and it becomes the
ordinary.

Jim Wilson had picked up a garbage box and hurled it through the window
of an electric shop. The glass came down with a crash that shuddered up
the empty darkening street and grumbled off into silence. Jim Wilson
went inside. "I'll see what I can find. You stay out here and watch for
cops." His laughter echoed out as he disappeared.

Minna stood waiting silently, unmoving, and somehow she reminded Frank
of a dumb animal; an unreasoning creature with no mind of her own,
waiting for a signal from her master. Strangely, he resented this, but
at the same time could find no reason for his resentment, except the
feeling that no one should appear as much a slave as Minna.

Jim Wilson reappeared in the window. He motioned to Minna. "Come on in,
baby. You and me's got to have a little conference." His exaggerated
wink was barely perceptible in the gloom as Minna stepped over the low
sill into the store. "Won't be long, folks," Wilson said in high good
humor, and the two of them vanished into the darkness beyond.

Frank Brooks glanced at Nora, but her face was turned away. He cursed
softy under his breath. He said, "Wait a minute," and went into the
store through the huge, jagged opening.

Inside, he could barely make out the counters. The place was larger than
it had appeared from the outside. Wilson and Minna were nowhere about.

Frank found the counter he was looking for and pawed out several
flashlights. They were only empty tubes, but he found a case of
batteries in a panel compartment against the wall.

"Who's there?"

"Me. I came in for some flashlights."

"Couldn't you wait?"

"It's getting dark."

"You don't have to be so damn impatient." Jim Wilson's voice was hostile
and surly.

Frank stifled his quick anger. "We'll be outside," he said. He found
Nora waiting where he'd left her. He loaded batteries into four
flashlights before Jim Wilson and Minna reappeared.

Wilson's good humor was back. "How about the Morrison or the Sherman,"
he said. "Or do you want to get real ritzy and walk up to the Drake?"

"My feet hurt," Minna said. The woman spoke so rarely, Frank Brooks was
startled by her words.

"Morrison's the closest," Jim Wilson said. "Let's go." He took Minna by
the arm and swung off up the street. Frank and Nora fell in behind.

Nora shivered. Frank, holding her arm, asked, "Cold?"

"No. It's just all--unreal again."

"I see what you mean."

"I never expected to see the Loop dark. I can't get used to it."

A vagrant, whispering wind picked up a scrap of paper and whirled it
along the street. It caught against Nora's ankle. She jerked perceptibly
and kicked the scrap away. The wind caught it again and spiralled it
away into the darkness.

"I want to tell you something," she said.

"Tell away."

"I told you before that I slept through the--the evacuation, or whatever
it was. That wasn't exactly true. I did sleep through it, but it was my
fault. I put myself to sleep."

"I don't get it."

"I tried to kill myself. Sleeping tablets. Seven of them. They weren't
enough."

Frank said nothing while they paced off ten steps through the dark
canyon that was Madison Street. Nora wondered if he had heard.

"I tried to commit suicide."

"Why?"

"I was tired of life, I guess."

"What do you want--sympathy?"

The sudden harshness in his voice brought her eyes around, but his face
was a white blur.

"No--no, I don't think so."

"Well, you won't get it from me. Suicide is silly. You can have troubles
and all that--everybody has them--but suicide--why did you try it?"

A high, thin whine--a wordless vibration of eloquence--needled out of
the darkness into their ears. The shock was like a sudden shower of ice
water dashed over their bodies. Nora's fingers dug into Frank's arm, but
he did not feel the cutting nails. "We're--there's someone out there in
the street!"

       *       *       *       *       *

Twenty-five feet ahead of where Frank and Nora stood frozen there burst
the booming voice of Jim Wilson. "What the hell was that?" And the shock
was dispelled. The white circle from Wilson's flash bit out across the
blackness to outline movement on the far side of the street. Then Frank
Brook's light, and Nora's, went exploring.

"There's somebody over there," Wilson bellowed. "Hey, you! Show your
face! Quit sneaking around!"

Frank's light swept an arc that clearly outlined the buildings across
the street and then weakened as it swung westward. There was something
or someone back there, but obscured by the dimness. He was swept by a
sense of unreality again.

"Did you see them?"

Nora's light beam had dropped to her feet as though she feared to point
it out into the darkness. "I thought I saw something."

Jim Wilson was swearing industriously. "There was a guy over there. He
ducked around the corner. Some damn fool out scrounging. Wish I had a
gun."

Frank and Nora moved ahead and the four stood in a group. "Put out your
lights," Wilson said. "They make good targets if the jerk's got any
weapons."

They stood in the darkness, Nora holding tightly to Frank's arm. Frank
said, "That was the damndest noise I ever heard."

"Like a siren?" Frank thought Jim Wilson spoke hopefully, as though
wanting somebody to agree with him.

"Not like any I ever heard. Not like a whistle, either. More of a moan."

"Let's get into that goddam hotel and--"

Jim Wilson's words were cut off by a new welling-up of the melancholy
howling. It had a new pattern this time. It sounded from many places;
not nearer, Frank thought, than Lake Street on the north, but spreading
outward and backward and growing fainter until it died on the wind.

Nora was shivering, clinging to Frank without reserve.

Jim Wilson said, "I'll be damned if it doesn't sound like a signal of
some kind."

"Maybe it's a language--a way of communication."

"But who the hell's communicating?"

"How would I know?"

"We best get to that hotel and bar a few doors. A man can't fight in the
dark--and nothing to fight with."

They hurried up the street, but it was all different now. Gone was the
illusion of being alone; gone the sense of solitude. Around them the
ghost town had come suddenly alive. Sinister forces more frightening
than the previous solitude had now to be reckoned with.

"Something's happened--something in the last few minutes," Nora
whispered.

Frank leaned close as they crossed the street to the dark silent pile
that was the Morrison hotel. "I think I know what you mean."

"It's as though there was no one around and then, suddenly, they came."

"I think they came and went away again."

"Did you actually _see_ anyone when you flashed your light?"

"No--I can't say positively that I did. But I got the impression there
were figures out there--at least dozens of them--and that they moved
back away from the light. Always just on the edge of it."

"I'm scared, Frank."

"So am I."

"Do you think it could all be imagination?"

"Those moans? Maybe the first one--I've heard of people imagining
sounds. But not the last ones. And besides, we all heard them."

Jim Wilson, utterly oblivious of any subtle emanations in the air,
boomed out in satisfaction: "We don't have to bust the joint open. The
revolving door works."

"Then maybe we ought to be careful," Frank said. "Maybe somebody else is
around here."

"Could be. We'll find out."

"Why are we afraid?" Nora whispered.

"It's natural, isn't it?" Frank melted the beam of his light with that
of Jim Wilson. The white finger pierced the darkness inside. Nothing
moved.

"I don't see why it should be. If there are people in there they must be
as scared as we are."

Nora was very close to him as they entered.

The lobby seemed deserted. The flashlight beams scanned the empty chairs
and couches. The glass of the deserted cages threw back reflections.

"The keys are in there," Frank said. He vaulted the desk and scanned the
numbers under the pigeon holes.

"We'd better stay down low," Jim Wilson said. "Damned if I'm going to
climb to the penthouse."

"How about the fourth floor?"
