to the dining room with his back turned. Fred was at his side.

"Why did you leave?" Fred demanded.

"I am not permitted to remain in the company of an uncovered
Earthwoman ... unless she directs me to do so."

While Vicki fled behind the French door to dress herself, Fred asked,
"Are there any other restrictions to your behavior in the presence of
Earthwomen?"

"Many."

"Recount some of them."

"An Earthwoman may not be touched, regardless of her wishes, unless
danger to her life requires it."

"Looks like you wash your own back, Vicki," I chuckled.

"What else?" she asked, poking her head out. "I mean what other things
can't you do?"

"There are many words I may not utter, postures I may not assume, and
certain duties I may not perform. Certain answers to questions may not
be given in the presence of an Earthwoman."

Fred whistled. "The Ollies have mastered more than our language ... I
thought you said they were noted mainly for their linguistic talents,
Cliff."

I was surprised, too. In the space of a few hectic months our alien
visitors had probed deeply into our culture, mores and taboos--and then
had had the genius to instill their compounded discretions into their
Soths.

I said, "Satisfied, Vicki?"

She was still arranging herself. Her lips curled up at the corners
impishly. "I'm almost disappointed," she said. "I do an all-out
striptease, and no one looks but my husband. Of course," she added
thoughtfully, "I suppose that's something...."

       *       *       *       *       *

Fred stayed with us until Sunday evening. I went down to the pier to
smoke a good-night pipe with him, and get his private opinion.

"I'm buying a hundred shares of Worldwide stock tomorrow," he declared.
"That critter is worth his weight in diamonds to every well-heeled
housewife in the country. In fact, put me down for one of your first
models. I wouldn't mind having a laundry sorter and morning
coffee-pourer, myself."

"Think he's safe, do you?"

"No more emotions than that stump over there. And it baffles me. He has
self-awareness, pain-sensitivity and a fantastic vocabulary, yet I
needled him all afternoon with every semantic hypo I could think of
without getting a flicker of emotion out of him." He paused.
"Incidentally, I made him strip for me in my room. You'll be as confused
as I was to learn that he's every inch a man in his format."

"What?" I exclaimed.

"Made me wonder what his duties included back on his home planet ... but
as I said, no emotions. With the set of built-in inhibitions he has,
he'd beat a eunuch out of his job any day of the week."

A few seconds later, Fred dropped into his little two-seater and skimmed
off for home, leaving me with a rather disturbing question in my mind.

I went back to the house and cornered Soth out in the kitchen alone.
Vicki had him polishing all the antique silverware.

"Are there female Soths?" I asked point-blank.

He looked down at me with that relaxed, pink look and said, "No, Mr.
Collins," and went back to his polishing.

The damned liar. He knew what I meant. He justified himself on a
technicality.

       *       *       *       *       *

I left Vicki Monday morning with more confidence than I'd had in ages.
She had slept especially well, and the only thing on her mind was
Clumsy's disappearance. He hadn't shown up since Soth scared the fleas
off him with that hiss.

At the office, I had my girl transcribe my notes and work up a
memorandum to the board of directors. We sent it around before noon, and
shortly after lunch I had calls from all ten of them, including the
chairman. It was not that they considered it such a big thing--they were
just plainly curious. We scheduled a meeting for Tuesday morning, to
talk the thing over.

That night when I got home, all was serene. Soth served us cocktails,
dinner and a late snack, and had the place tidied up by bedtime. He did
all this and managed to remain virtually invisible. He moved so quietly
and with such uncanny anticipation of our demands, it was if he were an
old family retainer, long versed in our habits and customs.

Vicki bragged as she undressed that she had the giant hog-tied and
jumping through hoops.

"We even got half the excavation done for the rock wall," she said
proudly.

On impulse, I went out into the hall and down to Soth's room, where I
found him stretched out slaunchwise across the double bed.

He opened his eyes as I came in, but didn't stir.

"Are you happy here?" I asked bluntly.

He sat up and did something new. He answered my question with a
question. "Are you happy with my services?"

I said, "Yes, of course."

"Then all is well," he replied simply, and lay down again.

It seemed like a satisfactory answer. He radiated a feeling of peace,
and the expression of repose on his heavy features was assuring.

       *       *       *       *       *

It rained hard and cold during the night. I hadn't shown Soth how to
start the automatic heating unit. When I left the house next morning, he
was bringing Vicki her breakfast in bed, a tray on one arm and a handful
of kindling under the other. Only once had he watched me build a fire in
the fireplace, but he proceeded with confidence.

We flew blind through filthy weather all the way to Detroit. I dismissed
Jack with orders to return at eleven with Soth.

"Don't be late," I warned him.

Jack looked a little uneasy, but he showed up on schedule and delivered
Soth to us with rain droplets on his massive bald pate, just ten minutes
after the conference convened.

I had Ollie Johnson there, too, to put Soth through his paces. The
Ollie, in a bedraggled, soggy suit, was so excited that he remained an
almost purplish black for the whole hour.

The directors were charmed, impressed and enthusiastic.

When I finished my personal report on the Soth's tremendous success in
my own household, old Gulbrandson, Chairman of the Board, shined his
rosy cheeks with his handkerchief and said, "I'll take the first three
you produce, Johnson. Our staff of domestics costs me more than a brace
of attorneys, and it turns over about three times a year. Cook can't
even set the timer on the egg-cooker right." He turned to me. "Sure he
can make good coffee, Collins?"

I nodded emphatically.

"Then put me down for three for sure," he said with executive finality.
