with longing. She hadn't been too impressive anyway, maybe, or maybe she
had. It didn't matter now.

He tried to run, tried to get away. He heard Lois' voice, high and
shrill. Figures closed in around him. He fought, desperately. He put a
few temporarily out of the way with the neurogun, but there were always
more. Men, men everywhere. Hundreds of men where there should be no men
at all. Well-groomed, strong, bronzed, ever-smiling men. It gave him
intense pleasure to crack off a few of the smiles. To hurl the gun,
smash with his fists.

Then the men were swarming all over him, the clean faces, the smiling
fragrant men, and he went down under the weight of men.

He tried to move. A blow fell hard and his head smashed against the
rocks. He tried to rise up, and other blows beat him down and he was
glad about the darkness, not because it relieved the pain, but because
it curtained off the faces of men.

       *       *       *       *       *

After a time it was as though he was being carried through a dim
half-consciousness, able to think, too tired to move or open his eyes.
He remembered how the men of Earth had rationalized a long time, making
a joke out of it. Laughing when they hadn't wanted to laugh, but to
hate. It had never been humorous. It had been a war between the sexes,
and the women had finally won, destroying the men psychologically, the
race physically. Somehow they had managed to go on with a culture of
their own.

The war between the sexes had never really been a joke. It had been
deadly serious, right from the beginning of the militant feminist
movements, long before the last big war. There had always been basic
psychological and physiological differences. But woman had refused to
admit this, and had tried to be the "equal" if not the better of men.
For so long woman had made it strictly competitive, and in her
subconscious mind she had regarded men as wonderful creatures, capable
of practically anything, and that woman could do nothing better than to
emulate them in every possible way. There was no such thing as a woman's
role unless it had been the same as a man's. That had gone on a long
time. And it hadn't been a joke at all.

How ironic it was, there at the last! All of man's work through the ages
had been aimed at the stars. And the women had assumed the final phase
of conquest!

For a long time women had been revolting against the masculine symbols,
the levers, pistons, bombs, torpedoes and hammers, all manifestations of
man's whole activity of overt, aggressive power.

The big H-bombs of the last great war had seemed to be man's final
symbol, destructive. And after that, the spaceships, puncturing space,
roaring outward, the ultimate masculine symbol of which men had dreamed
for so long, and which women had envied.

And then only the women could stand the acceleration. It was a
physiological fact. Nothing could change it. Nothing but what they had
done to Bowren.

All of man's evolutionary struggle, and the women had assumed the
climax, assumed all the past wrapped up in the end, usurped the effect,
and thereby psychologically assuming also all the thousands of years of
causation.

For being held down, being made neurotic by frustration and the
impossibility of being the "equal" of men, because they were
fundamentally psychologically and physiologically different, women had
taken to space with an age-old vengeance. Personal ego salvation.

But they hadn't stopped there. What had they done? What about the men? A
man for every woman, yet no men from Earth. That much Bowren knew.
Native Martians? What?

He had been transported somewhere in a car of some kind. He didn't
bother to be interested. He couldn't get away. He was held fast. He
refused to open his eyes because he didn't want to see the men who held
him, the men who had replaced him and every other man on Earth. The men
who were destroying the civilization of Earth.

The gimmicks whereby the women had rejected Earth and left it to wither
and die in neglect and bitter, bitter wonderment.

He was tired, very tired. The movement of the car lulled him, and he
drifted into sleep.

He opened his eyes and slowly looked around. Pretty pastel ceiling. A
big room, beautiful and softly furnished, with a marked absence of
metal, of shiny chrome, of harshness or brittle angles. It was something
of an office, too, with a desk that was not at all business-like, but
still a desk. A warm glow suffused the room, and the air was pleasantly
scented with natural smelling perfumes.

A woman stood in the middle of the room studying him with detached
interest. She was beautiful, but in a hard, mature, withdrawn way. She
was dark, her eyes large, liquid black and dominating her rather small
sharply-sculptured face. Her mouth was large, deeply red. She had a
strong mouth.

He looked at her a while. He felt only a deep, bitter resentment. He
felt good though, physically. He had probably been given something, an
injection. He sat up. Then he got to his feet.

She kept on studying him. "A change of clothes, dry detergent, and hair
remover for your face are in there, through that door," she said.

He said: "Right now I'd rather talk."

"But don't you want to take off that awful--beard?"

"The devil with it! Is that so important? It's natural isn't it for a
man to have hair on his face? I like hair on my face."

She opened her mouth a little and stepped back a few steps.

"And anyway, what could be less important right now than the way I
look?"

"I'm--I'm Gloria Munsel," she said hesitantly. "I'm President of the
City here. And what is your name, please?"

"Eddie Bowren. What are you going to do with me?"

She shrugged. "You act like a mad man. I'd almost forgotten what you men
of Earth were like. I was pretty young then. Well, frankly, I don't know
what we're going to do with you. No precedent for the situation. No laws
concerning it. It'll be up to the Council."

"It won't be pleasant for me," he said, "I can be safe in assuming
that."

She shrugged again and crossed her arms. He managed to control his
emotions somehow as he looked at the smooth lines of her body under the
long clinging gown. She was so damn beautiful! A high proud body in a
smooth pink gown, dark hair streaming back and shiny and soft.

       *       *       *       *       *
