Before the Bp. on Ch. with Na_{2}CO_{3}. Forms an infusible compound
with slight intumescence.

In ignition tube with Na_{2}CO_{3} and Ch. No change. Moisture driven
off.

In flame on platinum wire. No change. Becomes incandescent.

In flame with borax bead. In O. F. dissolves slowly, forming a
colorless glass which remains so on cooling.

With Co(NO_{3})_{2}. Mass becomes blue upon re-ignition.


2. ~Antimony, Sb_{2}O_{3}.~--Before the Bp. on Ch. In O. F. volatilizes
without change. In R. F. is reduced and volatilized. White coating of
antimonious oxide deposited on Ch. Blue tinge imparted to flame.

Before the Bp. on Ch. with Na_{2}CO_{3}. Readily reduced. White brittle
bead. Very volatile, giving characteristic white coating.

In ignition tube with Na_{2}CO_{3} and Ch. Volatilized.

In flame on platinum wire. Volatilized. Colors flame greenish blue.

With borax bead on platinum wire. In O. F. dissolves to a colorless
glass.

With Co(NO_{3})_{2}.____


3. ~Arsenic, As_{2}O_{3}.~--Before the Bp. on Ch. Very volatile. Strong
garlic odor to fumes.

Before the Bp. on Ch. with Na_{2}CO_{3}. Reduced with emission of
arsenical fumes.

In ignition tube with Na_{2}CO_{3} and Ch. Volatilizes, forming a
mirror-like deposit of metallic As in the cooler part of tube.

In flame on platinum wire____

With borax bead on platinum wire____

With Co(NO_{3})_{2}.____


4. ~Bismuth, Bi_{2}O_{3}.~--Before the Bp. on Ch. Yields a
coating--orange-yellow when hot, lemon-yellow when cold. The yellow
coating usually has a white outline.

Before the Bp. on Ch. with Na_{2}CO_{3}. Easily reduced to metallic
bismuth. Yellow bead brittle, but less so than antimony.

In ignition tube with Na_{2}CO_{3} and Ch.____

In flame on platinum wire____

With borax bead on platinum wire. In O. F. small quantity dissolves to a
clear yellow glass, which becomes colorless when cold.

With Co(NO_{3})_{2}____


5. ~Cadmium, CdO.~--Before the Bp. on Ch. Gives a coating on the coal.
Reddish-brown when cold. Very volatile.

Before the Bp. on Ch. with Na_{2}CO_{3}. Readily reduced. The metal
volatilizes easily, giving the characteristic coating.

In ignition tube with Na_{2}CO_{3} and Ch.____

In flame on platinum wire____

With borax bead. In O. F. dissolves to a clear yellowish bead, colorless
when cold.

With Co(NO_{3})_{2}____


6. ~Chromium, Cr_{2}O_{3}.~--Before the Bp. on Ch. No change.

Before the Bp. on Ch. with Na_{2}CO_{3}. Cannot be reduced. Soda sinks
in Ch. and a green colored mass remains.

In ignition tube with Na_{2}CO_{3} and Ch.____

In flame on platinum wire____


~With borax bead.~ Dissolves slowly but colors intensely. Yellow while
hot, green when cold.

With microcosmic salt bead. Colors red when hot, green when cold.

With Co(NO_{3})_{2}____


7. ~Cobalt, CoO.~--Before the Bp. on Ch. In O. F. unchanged. In R. F. is
reduced to the metal and is magnetic.

Before the Bp. on Ch. with Na_{2}CO_{3}. Reduced to a gray magnetic
mass.

In ignition tube with Na_{2}CO_{3} and Ch.____

In flame on platinum wire____

With borax bead on platinum wire. In O. F. colors very intensely blue,
both hot and cold.

With Co(NO_{3})_{2}____


8. ~Copper, CuO.~--Before the Bp. on Ch. Fuses to a black globule, which
can be reduced with some difficulty.

Before the Bp. on Ch. with Na_{2}CO_{3}. Readily reduced to metallic
bead, which is red in color, hard, malleable.

In ignition tube with Na_{2}CO_{3} and Ch.____

In flame on platinum wire. Colors flame emerald-green.

With borax bead on platinum wire. In O. F. green when hot, blue when
cold.

With Co(NO_{3})_{2}____


9. ~Iron, Fe_{2}O_{3}.~--Before the Bp. on Ch. In O. F. unchanged. In R.
F. becomes black and magnetic.

Before the Bp. on Ch. with Na_{2}CO_{3} Reduced to a metallic powder,
magnetic.

In ignition tube with Na_{2}CO_{3} and Ch.____

In flame on platinum wire____

With borax bead on platinum wire. In O. F. red while hot, yellow when
cold.

With Co(NO_{3})_{2}____


10. ~Lead, PbO.~--Before the Bp. on Ch. Easily reduced to the metal, bead
very malleable. Coating yellow, surrounded by white ring.

Before the Bp. on Ch. with Na_{2}CO_{3}. Instantly reduced. Coats the
Ch. upon further blowing.

In ignition tube with Na_{2}CO_{3} and Ch. Reduced to the metal.

In flame on platinum wire. Tinges flame blue.

With borax bead on platinum wire. In O. F. dissolves easily, forming a
limpid glass.

With Co(NO_{3})_{2}____


11. ~Manganese, Mn_{2}O_{3}.~--Before the Bp. on Ch. At high temperature
turns red.

Before the Bp. on Ch. with Na_{2}CO_{3}. Is not reduced.

Before the Bp. in O. F. on platinum foil with Na_{2}CO_{3}. Transparent
green mass when hot. Opaque, bluish-green when cold.

In ignition tube with Na_{2}CO_{3} and Ch. Not reduced.

In flame on platinum wire____

With borax bead on platinum wire. In O. F. violet-red while hot,
amethyst-red when cold.

With Co(NO_{3})_{2}____


12. ~Mercury, HgO.~--Before the Bp. on Ch. Instantly reduced. Very
volatile.

Before the Bp. on Ch. with Na_{2}CO_{3}. Reduced and volatilized.

In ignition tube with Na_{2}CO_{3} and Ch. Sublimes condensing in the
upper part of the tube as a metallic ring which is seen with the lens to
consist of minute globules of mercury.

In flame on platinum wire____

With borax bead on platinum wire____

With Co(NO_{3})_{2}____


13. ~Nickel, NiO.~--Before the Bp. on Ch. In O. F. unchanged. In R. F.
reduced to metal, slightly magnetic.

Before the Bp. on Ch. with Na_{2}CO_{3}. Easily reduced to the metal.

In ignition tube with Na_{2}CO_{3} and Ch.____

In flame on platinum wire____

With borax bead on platinum wire. In O. F. violet while hot,
reddish-brown when cold.

With Co(NO_{3})_{2}____


14. ~Silver, AgO.~--Before the Bp. on Ch. Easily reduced to the metal.
White, malleable, hard bead. Coats the coal dark red near assay.

Before the Bp. on Ch. with Na_{2}CO_{3}. Instantly reduced to metallic
globule.

In ignition tube with Na_{2}CO_{3} and Ch. Reduced to the metal.

In flame on platinum wire____

With borax bead on platinum wire. In O. F. partially dissolved. Bead
becomes milk-white.

With Co(NO_{3})_{2}____


15. ~Tin, SnO_{2}.~--Before the Bp. on Ch. Coats the coal yellow while
hot, dirty white when cool. Not reduced.

Before the Bp. on Ch. with Na_{2}CO_{3}. Reduced to metallic tin. White,
hard, malleable bead. Coating white and close to assay.

In ignition tube with Na_{2}CO_{3} and Ch.____

In flame on platinum wire____

With borax bead on platinum wire. In O. F. small quantity dissolves to
limpid glass.

With Co(NO_{3})_{2}. Greenish-blue color.
