
_Ion Source_

The ion source is a simple arc-type. Hydrogen gas is allowed to leak
into the ion-source enclosure near a tungsten filament, which is heated
to incandescence. Electrons emitted by the filament knock off electrons
from hydrogen atoms, leaving free protons. The protons then escape into
the acceleration chamber through a hole in the ion-source housing. Once
inside, the protons are accelerated by the dee potential.

Deuterons or alpha particles are obtained in a similar fashion using
deuterium or helium gas in place of hydrogen.


_Radiofrequency System_

The 184-inch synchrocyclotron has a single dee instead of the double-dee
arrangement described above for illustrative purposes. The accelerating
electric field is developed between the dee and a dummy dee which is
grounded to the vacuum tank. Using a single dee does not change the
principle of operation, yet it offers the advantage of allowing more
space for auxiliary equipment inside the vacuum tank. Also, the
construction is much simpler. The dummy dee is not essential for
operation, but it does improve performance.

[Illustration: Fig. 5. Radiofrequency cycle for accelerating protons.
Sixty-four such cycles are repeated each second.]

Radiofrequency power is supplied to the dee by a vacuum-tube
oscillator. The frequency of oscillation must decrease during the
acceleration cycle, as indicated above. For protons, the frequency at
the start of acceleration is 36 megacycles (Mc). At the end of
acceleration the frequency is only 18 Mc (see Fig. 5). This change in
frequency is achieved by varying the electrical capacitance in the tuned
circuit of the oscillator. (This is what you do when you dial a
different station on a radio.) This tuned circuit, which is called the
cyclotron resonator, is shown in Fig. 6.

[Illustration: Fig. 6. Cyclotron resonator.]

Because the frequency must change over such a wide range (from 36 to 18
Mc), the electrical capacitance must be varied by a factor of 20 to 1.
This is done by a variable capacitor of unique design. It resembles two
giant tuning forks. As the blades of the tuning forks vibrate, the
capacitance is alternately increased and decreased by the required
amount.

These two tuning forks must be kept in step with great precision. This
is to prevent the oscillator from exciting lateral rf resonances. With a
cyclotron of this size, this is a problem. These resonances, if excited,
would cause loss of beam. The method for keeping the blades moving
together is as follows: The blades are made to vibrate at their resonant
frequency, which is approximately 64 cycles per second. One set of
blades operates at its natural frequency as a tuning-fork oscillator.
The second set of blades is driven from an amplified sample of the
signal from the first; its natural period is adjusted automatically to
equal that of the first. The amplitude of each set is regulated to
within 0.003 in.; the phase angle between the blades is regulated to
within 1 deg.

Ions are accelerated only when the radiofrequency is decreasing (Fig. 5).
The remaining portion of the cycle is "dead time." Thus, 64 pulses, each
of about 500 microseconds' duration, are obtained every second. The
average ion current of a pulsed beam is much less than for a continuous
beam, such as that obtained from a conventional cyclotron (see Table I).
This is part of the price paid for higher energies.


_Internal Targets and Beam Extractor_

The simplest target is one placed inside the vacuum tank where the
circulating beam will strike it. The target may be any substance that
the physicist or chemist wants to irradiate. The target material is
attached to a movable probe. If the experimenter wants to use the
full-energy beam, he places the target at the maximum usable radius of
the circulating beam (82 inches). However, if he desires to use ions
having less than the maximum energy, he inserts the target further into
the cyclotron so that it is intercepted sooner.

TABLE I

=============================================================
   Comparison of external-beam energy and current for a
     synchrocyclotron and a conventional cyclotron
-------------------------------------------------------------

                  184-Inch Synchrocyclotron
                  -------------------------

                          Protons  Deuterons  Alpha particles
                          -------  ---------  ---------------
Beam energy --
  maximum (Mev)              730       460           910

Beam intensity --
  peak current ([mu]a)[6]    120       120            40

Beam intensity --
  average current ([mu]a)   0.75      0.75          0.25

                      60-Inch Cyclotron
                      -----------------
Beam energy --
  maximum (Mev)               12        24            48

Beam intensity --
  peak current ([mu]a)       100       150           100

Beam intensity --
  average current ([mu]a)     70        80            60
-------------------------------------------------------------
    [6] [mu]a = microampere
=============================================================

[Illustration: Fig. 7. Plan view of the cyclotron, showing the method
for obtaining an external beam of protons, deuterons, or alpha
particles.]
