original Ira Haslop, who was stranded here twenty-two Terran years ago.
The other is a synthetic creation of ours--an android, if you like, who
is identical, cell by cell, with the original so far as exterior
likeness is concerned. We could not duplicate the interior without
dissection, which of course was out of the question, so we were forced
to make compromises that--"

Gibbons interrupted him incredulously. "You mean you've created a living
creature, brain and all?"

"Only the body," Gaffa said. "Creation of intelligence is still beyond
us. The brain of the duplicate Haslop is one of our own, transplanted
and conditioned to Haslop's knowledge, memories and ideology."

He paused for a moment, and the waiting circle of Balakians grinned with
him in anticipation.

"Your problem is this," Gaffa said. "If you know yourselves well enough
to merit our help, then you should be able to distinguish readily
between the real and false Haslops. If you fail, we shall have no
alternative but to keep you here on Balak for the rest of your lives,
since to release you would bring other Terrans down on us in force."

And that was it. All we had to do was to take these two identical
twins--who looked alike, thought alike and cursed alike--and determine
which was real and which was bogus.

"For a very pertinent reason which you may or may not discover," Gaffa
said, "the test must be limited to a few hours. You have until sunrise
tomorrow morning, gentlemen."

And with that he crutched away at his skip-a-step walk, taking his
grinning cohorts with him. The two Haslops remained behind, glowering
and grumbling at each other.

       *       *       *       *       *

The situation didn't look too bad at first.

"There are no two things," Captain Corelli declared, "that are exactly
and absolutely identical. And that applies, I should say, especially to
identities."

It had a heartening sound. I've never been long on logic, being a very
ordinary S.E. navigator whose automatic equipment is designed to do
practically everything for him, and Corelli seemed to know what he was
talking about.

Gibbons, being a scientist, saw it differently.

"That's not even good sophistry," he said. "The concept of identity
between two objects has no meaning whatever, Captain, unless we have a
prior identification of one or the other. Aristotle himself couldn't
have told an apple from a coconut if he'd never seen or heard of
either."

"Any fool would know that," one of the Haslops grunted. And the other
added in the same tone: "Hey, if you guys are going at it like that,
we'll be here forever!"

"All right," Corelli said, deflated. "We'll try another tack."

He thought for a minute or two. "How about screening them for background
detail? The real Haslop was a bounty-claimer, which means that he must
have made thousands of planetfalls before crashing here. The bogus one
couldn't remember the details of all those worlds as well as the
original, no matter how many times he'd been told, could he?"

"Won't work," one of the Haslops said disgustedly. "Hell, after
twenty-two years I can't remember those places myself, and I was
_there_."

The other Haslop gave him a dirty look. "You were _here_, fellow--_I_
was _there_."

And to the captain he said, "We're getting nowhere, friend. You're
underestimating these Balakians--they look and act like screwballs, but
they're sharp. In the twenty-two years I've lived with that carbon copy
of myself, he's learned everything I know."

"He's right," Gibbons put in. He blinked a couple of times and turned
pink. "Unless the real Haslop happened to be married, that is. I'm a
bachelor myself, but I'd say there are some memories that a married man
wouldn't discuss, even when marooned."

Captain Corelli stared at him admiringly. "I never gave you enough
credit, Gibbons," he said. "You're right! How about--"

"Don't help any," one of the Haslops said morosely. "I never was
married. And now I never will be if I've got to depend on you jerks to
get me out of this mess."

The sun went down just then and a soft, drowsy darkness fell. I thought
at first that we'd have to finish our investigation in the dark, but the
natives had made provisions for that. A swarm of fireflies as big as
robins sailed in from somewhere and circled around over the court,
lighting it as bright as day. The Balakian houses made a dim row of
flattened shadow-mounds at the outskirts of the circle. A ring of
natives sat tailor-fashion on the ground in front of them--a neat trick
considering that they had three legs each to fold up--and grinned at us.
