process that demanded constant attention from the segment of his mind
devoted to it. For a moment, even that small group of brain cells almost
became involved in his reaction.

It was that which snapped him back into functioning logically. MTR was
Mother. Mother was:


    _Tall_
    _Thin_
    _White_
    _Biped_

   _"In Heaven's name, Doctor, when will this thing be over?"_

    BL was Riya. Riya was:
    _Big brown beast, looming large, looking lonely._
    _BL=MTR_
    _Equation not meaningful, not valid._

       *       *       *       *       *

Almost resolved, only a few traces of the initial conflict remained.
Phildee put the tips of his right fingers to his mouth. He dug his toe
into the ground, gouged a semicircular furrow, and smoothed it over with
his sole.

Riya continued to look at him from where she was standing, two or three
feet away. Haltingly, she reached out her mind again--hesitating not
because of fear of another such reaction on Phildee's part, for that had
been far beyond her capacity to understand, but because even the
slightest rebuff on the part of a child to a gesture as instinctive as a
Terrestrial mother's caress was something that none of the people had
ever encountered before.

While her left-behind intellectual capacity still struggled to reconcile
the feel of childhood with a visual image of complete unfamiliarity, the
warm mind-caress went gently forth again.

Phildee made up his mind. Ordinarily, he was immune to the small
emotional problems that beclouded less rational intellects. He was
unused to functioning in other than a cause/effect universe. Mothers
were usually--though sometimes not--matronly women who spent the greater
part of roughly twenty years per child in conscious pre-occupation with,
and/or subconscious or conscious rejection of, their offspring.

In his special case, Mother was a warm place, a frantic, hysteric voice,
the pressure of the spasmodically contractile musculature linked to her
hyperthyroid metabolism. Mother was a thing from before birth.

Riya--Riya bore a strong resemblance to an intelligent cow. In any
physiological sense, she could no more be his mother than--

The second caress found him not unaccustomed to it. It enfolded his
consciousness, tenderly, protectingly, empathetic.

Phildee gave way to instinct.

       *       *       *       *       *

The fur along the ridge of Riya's spine prickled with a well-remembered
happiness as she felt the hesitant answering surge in Phildee's mind.
Moving surely forward, she nuzzled his face. Phildee grinned. He ran his
fingers through the thick fur at the base of her short neck.

_Big warm wall of brown fur._

_Cool, happy nose._

_Happy, happy, eyes._

Great joy welled up in Riya. No shameful trot across the mountains faced
her now. No hesitant approach to the huddled, suspicious wildlings was
before her. The danger of sharp female hooves to be avoided, of skulking
at the edge of the herd in hope of an anxious male, was a thing no
longer to be half-fearfully approached.

With a nudge of her head, she directed Phildee down the path to the old
range while she herself turned around. She stood motionless for a
sweeping scan of the plain below her. The couples were scattered over
the grass--but couples only, the females as yet unfulfilled.

This, too, was another joy to add to the greatest of all. So many things
