of it in December, from which it is easily inferred that his path, the
ecliptic, is inclined to the equator at an angle of 23°.5, one half of
47°. This angle is called the obliquity of the ecliptic. The student may
recall that in the geographies the torrid zone is said to extend 23°.5
on either side of the earth's equator. Is there any connection between
these limits and the obliquity of the ecliptic? Would it be correct to
define the torrid zone as that part of the earth's surface within which
the sun may at some season of the year pass through the zenith?

EXERCISE 12.--After a half dozen observations of the sun have been
plotted upon the map, find by measurement the rate, in degrees per day,
at which the sun moves along the ecliptic. How many days will be
required for it to move completely around the ecliptic from vernal
equinox back to vernal equinox again? Accurate observations with the
elaborate apparatus used by professional astronomers show that this
period, which is called a _tropical year_, is 365 days 5 hours 48
minutes 46 seconds. Is this the same as the ordinary year of our
calendars?

26. THE PLANETS.--Any one who has watched the sky and who has made the
drawings prescribed in this chapter can hardly fail to have found in the
course of his observations some bright stars not set down on the printed
star maps, and to have found also that these stars do not remain fixed
in position among their fellows, but wander about from one constellation
to another. Observe the motion of one of these planets from night to
night and plot its positions on the star map, precisely as was done for
the moon. What kind of path does it follow?

Both the ancient Greeks and the modern Germans have called these bodies
wandering stars, and in English we name them planets, which is simply
the Greek word for wanderer, bent to our use. Besides the sun and moon
there are in the heavens five planets easily visible to the naked eye
and, as we shall see later, a great number of smaller ones visible only
in the telescope. More than 2,000 years ago astronomers began observing
the motion of sun, moon, and planets among the stars, and endeavored to
account for these motions by the theory that each wandering star moved
in an orbit about the earth. Classical and mediæval literature are
permeated with this idea, which was displaced only after a long struggle
begun by Copernicus (1543 A. D.), who taught that the moon alone of
these bodies revolves about the earth, while the earth and the other
planets revolve around the sun. The ecliptic is the intersection of the
plane of the earth's orbit with the sky, and the sun appears to move
along the ecliptic because, as the earth moves around its orbit, the sun
is always seen projected against the opposite side of it. The moon and
planets all appear to move near the ecliptic because the planes of their
orbits nearly coincide with the plane of the earth's orbit, and a narrow
strip on either side of the ecliptic, following its course completely
around the sky, is called the _zodiac_, a word which may be regarded as
the name of a narrow street (16° wide) within which all the wanderings
of the visible planets are confined and outside of which they never
venture. Indeed, Mars is the only planet which ever approaches the edge
of the street, the others traveling near the middle of the road.

[Illustration: FIG. 14.--The apparent motion of a planet.]

27. A TYPICAL CASE OF PLANETARY MOTION.--The Copernican theory,
enormously extended and developed through the Newtonian law of
gravitation (see Chapter IV), has completely supplanted the older
Ptolemaic doctrine, and an illustration of the simple manner in which it
accounts for the apparently complicated motions of a planet among the
stars is found in Figs. 14 and 15, the first of which represents the
apparent motion of the planet Mars through the constellations Aries and
Pisces during the latter part of the year 1894, while the second shows
the true motions of Mars and the earth in their orbits about the sun
during the same period. The straight line in Fig. 14, with cross ruling
upon it, is a part of the ecliptic, and the numbers placed opposite it
represent the distance, in degrees, from the vernal equinox. In Fig. 15
the straight line represents the direction from the sun toward the
vernal equinox, and the angle which this line makes with the line
joining earth and sun is called the earth's longitude. The imaginary
line joining the earth and sun is called the earth's radius vector, and
the pupil should note that the longitude and length of the radius vector
taken together show the direction and distance of the earth from the
sun--i. e., they fix the relative positions of the two bodies. The same
is nearly true for Mars and would be wholly true if the orbit of Mars
lay in the same plane with that of the earth. How does Fig. 14 show that
the orbit of Mars does not lie exactly in the same plane with the orbit
of the earth?

EXERCISE 13.--Find from Fig. 15 what ought to have been the apparent
course of Mars among the stars during the period shown in the two
figures, and compare what you find with Fig. 14. The apparent position
of Mars among the stars is merely its direction from the earth, and this
direction is represented in Fig. 14 by the distance of the planet from
the ecliptic and by its longitude.

[Illustration: FIG. 15.--The real motion of a planet.]

The longitude of Mars for each date can be found from Fig. 15 by
measuring the angle between the straight line _S V_ and the line drawn
from the earth to Mars. Thus for October 12th we may find with the
protractor that the angle between the line _S V_ and the line joining
the earth to Mars is a little more than 30°, and in Fig. 14 the position
of Mars for this date is shown nearly opposite the cross line
corresponding to 30° on the ecliptic. Just how far below the ecliptic
this position of Mars should fall can not be told from Fig. 15, which
from necessity is constructed as if the orbits of Mars and the earth lay
in the same plane, and Mars in this case would always appear to stand
exactly on the ecliptic and to oscillate back and forth as shown in Fig.
14, but without the up-and-down motion there shown. In this way plot in
Fig. 14 the longitudes of Mars as seen from the earth for other dates
and observe how the forward motion of the two planets in their orbits
accounts for the apparently capricious motion of Mars to and fro among
the stars.

[Illustration: FIG. 16.--The orbits of Jupiter and Saturn.]

28. THE ORBITS OF THE PLANETS.--Each planet, great or small, moves in
its own appropriate orbit about the sun, and the exact determination of
these orbits, their sizes, shapes, positions, etc., has been one of the
great problems of astronomy for more than 2,000 years, in which
successive generations of astronomers have striven to push to a still
higher degree of accuracy the knowledge attained by their predecessors.
Without attempting to enter into the details of this problem we may say,
generally, that every planet moves in a plane passing through the sun,
and for the six planets visible to the naked eye these planes nearly
coincide, so that the six orbits may all be shown without much error as
lying in the flat surface of one map. It is, however, more convenient to
use two maps, such as Figs. 16 and 17, one of which shows the group of
planets, Mercury, Venus, the earth, and Mars, which are near the sun,
and on this account are sometimes called the inner planets, while the
other shows the more distant planets, Jupiter and Saturn, together with
the earth, whose orbit is thus made to serve as a connecting link
between the two diagrams. These diagrams are accurately drawn to scale,
and are intended to be used by the student for accurate measurement in
connection with the exercises and problems which follow.

In addition to the six planets shown in the figures the solar system
contains two large planets and several hundred small ones, for the most
part invisible to the naked eye, which are omitted in order to avoid
confusing the diagrams.

29. JUPITER AND SATURN.--In Fig. 16 the sun at the center is encircled
by the orbits of the three planets, and inclosing all of these is a
circular border showing the directions from the sun of the
constellations which lie along the zodiac. The student must note
carefully that it is only the directions of these constellations that
are correctly shown, and that in order to show them at all they have
been placed very much too close to the sun. The cross lines extending
from the orbit of the earth toward the sun with Roman numerals opposite
them show the positions of the earth in its orbit on the first day of
January (_I_), first day of February (_II_), etc., and the similar lines
attached to the orbits of Jupiter and Saturn with Arabic numerals show
the positions of those planets on the first day of January of each year
indicated, so that the figure serves to show not only the orbits of the
planets, but their actual positions in their orbits for something more
than the first decade of the twentieth century.

The line drawn from the sun toward the right of the figure shows the
direction to the vernal equinox. It forms one side of the angle which
measures a planet's longitude.

[Illustration: FIG. 17.--The orbits of the inner planets.]

EXERCISE 14.--Measure with your protractor the longitude of the earth on
January 1st. Is this longitude the same in all years? Measure the
longitude of Jupiter on January 1, 1900; on July 1, 1900; on September
25, 1906.

Draw neatly on the map a pencil line connecting the position of the
earth for January 1, 1900, with the position of Jupiter for the same
date, and produce the line beyond Jupiter until it meets the circle of
the constellations. This line represents the direction of Jupiter from
the earth, and points toward the constellation in which the planet
appears at that date. But this representation of the place of Jupiter in
the sky is not a very accurate one, since on the scale of the diagram
the stars are in fact more than 100,000 times as far off as they are
shown in the figure, and the pencil mark does not meet the line of
constellations at the same intersection it would have if this line were
pushed back to its true position. To remedy this defect we must draw
another line from the sun parallel to the one first drawn, and its
intersection with the constellations will give very approximately the
true position of Jupiter in the sky.

EXERCISE 15.--Find the present positions of Jupiter and Saturn, and look
them up in the sky by means of your star maps. The planets will appear
in the indicated constellations as very bright stars not shown on the
map.

Which of the planets, Jupiter and Saturn, changes its direction from the
sun more rapidly? Which travels the greater number of miles per day?
When will Jupiter and Saturn be in the same constellation? Does the
earth move faster or slower than Jupiter?

The distance of Jupiter or Saturn from the earth at any time may be
readily obtained from the figure. Thus, by direct measurement with the
millimeter scale we find for January 1, 1900, the distance of Jupiter
from the earth is 6.1 times the distance of the sun from the earth, and
this may be turned into miles by multiplying it by 93,000,000, which is
approximately the distance of the sun from the earth. For most purposes
it is quite as well to dispense with this multiplication and call the
distance 6.1 astronomical units, remembering that the astronomical unit
is the distance of the sun from the earth.

EXERCISE 16.--What is Jupiter's distance from the earth at its nearest
approach? What is the greatest distance it ever attains? Is Jupiter's
least distance from the earth greater or less than its least distance
from Saturn?

On what day in the year 1906 will the earth be on line between Jupiter
and the sun? On this day Jupiter is said to be in _opposition_--i. e.,
the planet and the sun are on opposite sides of the earth, and Jupiter
then comes to the meridian of any and every place at midnight. When the
sun is between the earth and Jupiter (at what date in 1906?) the planet
is said to be in _conjunction_ with the sun, and of course passes the
meridian with the sun at noon. Can you determine from the figure the
time at which Jupiter comes to the meridian at other dates than
opposition and conjunction? Can you determine when it is visible in the
evening hours? Tell from the figure what constellation is on the
meridian at midnight on January 1st. Will it be the same constellation
in every year?


30. MERCURY, VENUS, AND MARS.--Fig. 17, which represents the orbits of
the inner planets, differs from Fig. 16 only in the method of fixing the
positions of the planets in their orbits at any given date. The motion
of these planets is so rapid, on account of their proximity to the sun,
that it would not do to mark their positions as was done for Jupiter and
Saturn, and with the exception of the earth they do not always return to
the same place on the same day in each year. It is therefore necessary
to adopt a slightly different method, as follows: The straight line
extending from the sun toward the vernal equinox, _V_, is called the
prime radius, and we know from past observations that the earth in its
motion around the sun crosses this line on September 23d in each year,
and to fix the earth's position for September 23d in the diagram we have
only to take the point at which the prime radius intersects the earth's
orbit. A month later, on October 23d, the earth will no longer be at
this point, but will have moved on along its orbit to the point marked
30 (thirty days after September 23d). Sixty days after September 23d it
will be at the point marked 60, etc., and for any date we have only to
find the number of days intervening between it and the preceding
September 23d, and this number will show at once the position of the
earth in its orbit. Thus for the date July 4, 1900, we find

    1900, July 4 - 1899, September 23 = 284 days,

and the little circle marked upon the earth's orbit between the numbers
270 and 300 shows the position of the earth on that date.

In what constellation was the sun on July 4, 1900? What zodiacal
constellation came to the meridian at midnight on that date? What other
constellations came to the meridian at the same time?

The positions of the other planets in their orbits are found in the same
manner, save that they do not cross the prime radius on the same date in
each year, and the times at which they do cross it must be taken from
the following table:

                      TABLE OF EPOCHS

  -----------------------------------------------------------
    A. D. | Mercury.   |  Venus.   |   Earth.   |  Mars.
  --------+------------+-----------+------------+------------
  Period  | 88.0 days. |224.7 days.|365.25 days.| 687.1 days.
   1900   | Feb. 18th. | Jan. 11th.| Sept. 23d. | April 28th.
   1901   | Feb. 5th.  | April 5th.| Sept. 23d. |   ...
   1902   | Jan. 23d.  | June 29th.| Sept. 23d. | March 16th.
   1903   | April 8th. | Feb. 8th. | Sept. 23d. |   ...
   1904   | March 25th.| May 3d.   | Sept. 23d. | Feb. 1st.
   1905   | March 12th.| July 26th.| Sept. 23d. | Dec. 19th.
   1906   | Feb. 27th. | March 8th.| Sept. 23d. |   ...
   1907   | Feb. 14th. | May 31st. | Sept. 23d. | Nov. 6th.
   1908   | Feb. 1st.  | Jan. 11th.| Sept. 23d. |   ...
   1909   | Jan. 18th. | April 4th.| Sept. 23d. | Sept. 23d.
   1910   | Jan. 5th.  | June 28th.| Sept. 23d. |   ...
  -----------------------------------------------------------

The first line of figures in this table shows the number of days that
each of these planets requires to make a complete revolution about the
sun, and it appears from these numbers that Mercury makes about four
revolutions in its orbit per year, and therefore crosses the prime
radius four times in each year, while the other planets are decidedly
slower in their movements. The following lines of the table show for
each year the date at which each planet first crossed the prime radius
in that year; the dates of subsequent crossings in any year can be found
by adding once, twice, or three times the period to the given date, and
the table may be extended to later years, if need be, by continuously
adding multiples of the period. In the case of Mars it appears that
there is only about one year out of two in which this planet crosses the
prime radius.

After the date at which the planet crosses the prime radius has been
determined its position for any required date is found exactly as in the
case of the earth, and the constellation in which the planet will appear
from the earth is found as explained above in connection with Jupiter
and Saturn.

The broken lines in the figure represent the construction for finding
the places in the sky occupied by Mercury, Venus, and Mars on July 4,
1900. Let the student make a similar construction and find the positions
of these planets at the present time. Look them up in the sky and see if
they are where your work puts them.

31. EXERCISES.--The "evening star" is a term loosely applied to any
planet which is visible in the western sky soon after sunset. It is easy
to see that such a planet must be farther toward the east in the sky
than is the sun, and in either Fig. 16 or Fig. 17 any planet which
viewed from the position of the earth lies to the left of the sun and
not more than 50° away from it will be an evening star. If to the right
of the sun it is a morning star, and may be seen in the eastern sky
shortly before sunrise.

What planet is the evening star _now_? Is there more than one evening
star at a time? What is the morning star now?

Do Mercury, Venus, or Mars ever appear in opposition? What is the
maximum angular distance from the sun at which Venus can ever be seen?
Why is Mercury a more difficult planet to see than Venus? In what month
of the year does Mars come nearest to the earth? Will it always be
brighter in this month than in any other? Which of all the planets comes
nearest to the earth?

The earth always comes to the same longitude on the same day of each
year. Why is not this true of the other planets?

The student should remember that in one respect Figs. 16 and 17 are not
altogether correct representations, since they show the orbits as all
lying in the same plane. If this were strictly true, every planet would
move, like the sun, always along the ecliptic; but in fact all of the
orbits are tilted a little out of the plane of the ecliptic and every
planet in its motion deviates a little from the ecliptic, first to one
side then to the other; but not even Mars, which is the most erratic in
this respect, ever gets more than eight degrees away from the ecliptic,
and for the most part all of them are much closer to the ecliptic than
this limit.




CHAPTER IV

CELESTIAL MECHANICS


32. THE BEGINNINGS OF CELESTIAL MECHANICS.--From the earliest dawn of
civilization, long before the beginnings of written history, the motions
of sun and moon and planets among the stars from constellation to
constellation had commanded the attention of thinking men, particularly
of the class of priests. The religions of which they were the guardians
and teachers stood in closest relations with the movements of the stars,
and their own power and influence were increased by a knowledge of them.

[Illustration: ISAAC NEWTON (1643-1727).]

Out of these professional needs, as well as from a spirit of scientific
research, there grew up and flourished for many centuries a study of the
motions of the planets, simple and crude at first, because the
observations that could then be made were at best but rough ones, but
growing more accurate and more complex as the development of the
mechanic arts put better and more precise instruments into the hands of
astronomers and enabled them to observe with increasing accuracy the
movements of these bodies. It was early seen that while for the most
part the planets, including the sun and moon, traveled through the
constellations from west to east, some of them sometimes reversed their
motion and for a time traveled in the opposite way. This clearly can not
be explained by the simple theory which had early been adopted that a
planet moves always in the same direction around a circular orbit having
the earth at its center, and so it was said to move around in a small
circular orbit, called an epicycle, whose center was situated upon
and moved along a circular orbit, called the deferent, within which the
earth was placed, as is shown in Fig. 18, where the small circle is the
epicycle, the large circle is the deferent, _P_ is the planet, and _E_
the earth. When this proved inadequate to account for the really
complicated movements of the planets, another epicycle was put on top of
the first one, and then another and another, until the supposed system
became so complicated that Copernicus, a Polish astronomer, repudiated
its fundamental theorem and taught that the motions of the planets take
place in circles around the sun instead of about the earth, and that the
earth itself is only one of the planets moving around the sun in its own
appropriate orbit and itself largely responsible for the seemingly
erratic movements of the other planets, since from day to day we see
them and observe their positions from different points of view.

[Illustration: FIG. 18.--Epicycle and deferent.]

33. KEPLER'S LAWS.--Two generations later came Kepler with his three
famous laws of planetary motion:

I. Every planet moves in an ellipse which has the sun at one of its
foci.

II. The radius vector of each planet moves over equal areas in equal
times.

III. The squares of the periodic times of the planets are proportional
to the cubes of their mean distances from the sun.

These laws are the crowning glory, not only of Kepler's career, but of
all astronomical discovery from the beginning up to his time, and they
well deserve careful study and explanation, although more modern
progress has shown that they are only approximately true.

EXERCISE 17.--Drive two pins into a smooth board an inch apart and
fasten to them the ends of a string a foot long. Take up the slack of
the string with the point of a lead pencil and, keeping the string drawn
taut, move the pencil point over the board into every possible position.
The curve thus traced will be an ellipse having the pins at the two
