then being made at Nuernberg[109]; and the cloudy climate of Ermeland
as well as his own active career prevented him from the
long-continued, painstaking observing, which men like Tycho Brahe were
to carry on later. Despite such handicaps, because of his
dissatisfaction with the complexities and intricacies of the Ptolemaic
system and because of his conviction that the laws of nature were
simple and harmonious, Copernicus searched the writings of the classic
philosophers, as he himself tells us,[110] to see what other
explanation of the universe had been suggested. "And I found first in
Cicero that a certain Nicetas had thought the earth moved. Later in
Plutarch I found certain others had been of the same opinion." He
quoted the Greek referring to Philolaus the Pythagorean, Heraclides of
Pontus, and Ecphantes the Pythagorean.[111] As a result he began to
consider the mobility of the earth and found that such an explanation
seemingly solved many astronomical problems with a simplicity and a
harmony utterly lacking in the old traditional scheme. Unaided by a
telescope, he worked out in part the right theory of the universe and
for the first time in history placed all the then known planets in
their true positions with the sun at the center. He claimed that the
earth turns on its axis as it travels around the sun, and careens
slowly as it goes, thus by these three motions explaining many of the
apparent movements of the sun and the planets. He retained,[112]
however, the immobile heaven of the fixed stars (though vastly farther
off in order to account for the non-observance of any stellar
parallax[113]), the "perfect" and therefore circular orbits of the
planets, certain of the old eccentrics, and 34 new epicycles in place
of all the old ones which he had cast aside.[114] He accepted the
false notion of trepidation enunciated by the Arabs in the 9th century
and later overthrown by Tycho Brahe.[115] His calculations were
weak.[116] But his great book is a sane and modern work in an age of
astrology and superstition.[117] His theory is a triumph of reason and
imagination and with its almost complete independence of authority is
perhaps as original a work as an human being may be expected to
produce.

[Footnote 106: Ibid: II, 64.]

[Footnote 107: Ibid: II, 58-9.]

[Footnote 108: Rheticus: _Narratio Prima_.]

[Footnote 109: Prowe: II, 56.]

[Footnote 110: Copernicus: Dedication, 5-6. See Appendix B.]

[Footnote 111: For a translation of this dedication in full, see
Appendix B.

In the original MS. occurs a reference (struck out) to Aristarchus of
Samos as holding the theory of the earth's motion. (Prowe: II, 507,
note.) The finding of this passage proves that Copernicus had at least
heard of Aristarchus, but his apparent indifference is the more
strange since an account of his teaching occurs in the same book of
Plutarch from which Copernicus learned about Philolaus. But the chief
source of our knowledge about Aristarchus is through Archimedes, and
the editio princeps of his works did not appear till 1544, a year
after the death of Copernicus. C.R. Eastman in _Pop. Sci._ 68:325.]

[Footnote 112: Delambre: _Astr. Mod._ pp. xi-xii.]

[Footnote 113: As the earth moves, the position in the heavens of a
fixed star seen from the earth should differ slightly from its
position observed six months later when the earth is on the opposite
side of its orbit. The distance to the fixed stars is so vast,
however, that this final proof of the earth's motion was not attained
till 1838 when Bessel (1784-1846) observed stellar parallax from
Koenigsberg. Berry: 123-24.]

[Footnote 114: _Commentariolus_ in Prowe: III, 202.]

[Footnote 115: Holden in _Pop. Sci._, 117.]

[Footnote 116: Delambre: _Astr. Mod._, p. xi.]

[Footnote 117: Snyder: 165.]

Copernicus was extremely reluctant to publish his book because of the
misunderstandings and malicious attacks it would unquestionably
arouse.[118] Possibly, too, he was thinking of the hostility already
existing between himself and his Bishop, Dantiscus,[119] whom he did
not wish to antagonize further. But his devoted pupil and friend,
Rheticus, aided by Tiedeman Giese, Bishop of Culm and a lifelong
friend, at length (1542) persuaded him.[120] So he entrusted the
matter to Giese who passed it on to Rheticus, then connected with the
University at Wittenberg as professor of mathematics.[121] Rheticus,
securing leave of absence from Melancthon his superior, went to
Nuernberg to supervise the printing.[122] This was done by Petrejus.
Upon his return to Wittenberg, Rheticus left in charge Johann Schoener,
a famous mathematician and astronomer, and Andreas Osiander, a
Lutheran preacher interested in astronomy. The printed book[123] was
placed in Copernicus's hands at Frauenburg on May 24th, 1543, as he
lay dying of paralysis.[124]

[Footnote 118: Copernicus: Dedication, 3.]

[Footnote 119: Prowe: II, 362-7.]

[Footnote 120: Ibid: II, 406.]

[Footnote 121: Ibid: II, 501.]

[Footnote 122: Ibid: II, 517-20.]

[Footnote 123: Four other editions have since appeared; at Basel,
1566, Amsterdam 1617, Warsaw 1847, and Thorn 1873. For further
details, see Prowe: II, 543-7, and Thorn edition pp. xii-xx. The
edition cited in this study is the Thorn one of 1873.]

[Footnote 124: Prowe: II, 553-4.]

Copernicus passed away that day in ignorance that his life's work
appeared before the world not as a truth but as an hypothesis; for
there had been inserted an anonymous preface "ad lectorem de
hypothesibus huius opera" stating this was but another hypothesis for
the greater convenience of astronomers.[125] "Neque enim necesse est
eas hypotheses esse veras, imo ne verisimiles quidem, sed sufficit hoc
unum, si calculum observationibus congruentem exhibeant."[126] For
years Copernicus was thought to have written this preface to disarm
criticism. Kepler sixty years later (1601) called attention to this
error,[127] and quoted Osiander's letters to Copernicus and to
Rheticus of May, 1541, suggesting that the system be called an
hypothesis to avert attacks by theologians and Aristotelians. He
claimed that Osiander had written the preface; but Kepler's article
never was finished and remained unpublished till 1858.[128] Giese and
Rheticus of course knew that the preface falsified Copernicus's work,
and Giese, highly indignant at the "impiety" of the printer (who he
thought had written it to save himself from blame) wrote Rheticus
urging him to write another "praefatiunculus" purging the book of this
falsehood.[129] This letter is dated July 26, 1543, and the book had
appeared in April. Apparently nothing was done and the preface was
accepted without further challenge.

[Footnote 125: Copernicus: _De Revolutionibus_, I. "To the reader on
the hypotheses of this book."]

[Footnote 126: "For it is not necessary that these hypotheses be true,
nor even probable, but this alone is sufficient, if they show
reasoning fitting the observations."]

[Footnote 127: Kepler: _Apologia Tychonis contra Ursum_ in _Op. Om._:
I, 244-246.]

[Footnote 128: Prowe: II, 251, note.]

[Footnote 129: Ibid: II, 537-9.]

It remains to ask whether people other than Copernicus's intimates had
known of his theory before 1543. Peucer, Melancthon's nephew, declared
Copernicus was famous by 1525,[130] and the invitation from the
Lateran Council committee indicates his renown as early as 1514. In
Vienna in 1873[131] there was found a _Commentariolus_, or summary of
his great work,[132] written by Copernicus for the scholars friendly
to him. It was probably written soon after 1530, and gives a full
statement of his views following a series of seven axioms or theses
summing up the new theory. This little book probably occasioned the
order from Pope Clement VII in 1533 to Widmanstadt to report to him on
the new scheme.[133] This Widmanstadt did in the papal gardens before
the Pope with several of the cardinals and bishops, and was presented
with a book as his reward.

[Footnote 130: Ibid: II, 273.]

[Footnote 131: Ibid: II, 286-7.]

[Footnote 132: A second copy was found at Upsala shortly afterwards,
though for centuries its existence was unknown save for two slight
references to such a book, one by Gemma Frisius, the other by Tycho
Brahe. Prowe: II, 284.]

[Footnote 133: Ibid: II, 273-4.]

In 1536, the Cardinal Bishop of Capua, Nicolas von Schoenberg,
apparently with the intent to pave the way for the theory at Rome,
wrote for a report of it.[134] It is not known whether the report was
sent, and the cardinal died the following year. But that Copernicus
was pleased by this recognition is evident from the prominence he gave
to the cardinal's letter, as he printed it in his book at the
beginning, even before the dedication to the Pope.

[Footnote 134: Prowe: II, 274, note.]

The most widely circulated account at this time, however, was the
_Narratio Prima_, a letter from Georg Joachim of Rhaetia (better known
as Rheticus), written in October, 1539, from Frauenburg to Johann
Schoener at Nuernberg.[135] Rheticus,[136] at twenty-five years of age
professor of mathematics at Wittenberg, had gone uninvited to
Frauenburg early that summer to visit Copernicus and learn for himself
more in detail about this new system. This was rather a daring
undertaking, for not only were Luther and Melancthon outspoken in
their condemnation of Copernicus, but Rheticus was going from
Wittenberg, the headquarters of the Lutheran heresy, into the
bishopric of Ermeland where to the Bishop and the King his overlord,
the very name of Luther was anathema. Nothing daunted, Rheticus
departed for Frauenberg and could not speak too highly of the cordial
welcome he received from the old astronomer. He came for a few weeks,
and remained two years to return to Wittenberg as an avowed believer
in the system and its first teacher and promulgator. Not only did he
write the _Narratio Prima_ and an _Encomium Borussae_, both extolling
Copernicus, but what is more important, he succeeded in persuading him
to allow the publication of the _De Revolutionibus_. Rheticus returned
to his post in 1541, to resign it the next year and become Dean of the
Faculty of Arts. In all probability the conflict was too intense
between his new scientific beliefs and the statements required of him
as professor of the old mathematics and astronomy.

[Footnote 135: Prowe: II, 426-440.]

[Footnote 136: Ibid: II, 387-405.]

His colleague, Erasmus Reinhold, continued to teach astronomy there,
though he, too, accepted the Copernican system.[137] He published a
series of tables (_Tabulae Prutenicae_, 1551) based on the Copernican
calculations to supersede the inaccurate ones by Regiomontanus; and
these were in general use throughout Europe for the next seventy-odd
years. As he himself declared, the series was based in its principles
and fundamentals upon the observations of the famous Nicolaus
Copernicus. The almanacs deduced from these calculations probably did
more to bring the new system into general recognition and gradual
acceptance than did the theoretical works.[138]

[Footnote 137: Ibid: II, 391.]

[Footnote 138: Holden in _Pop. Sci._, 119.]

Opposition to the theory had not yet gathered serious headway. There
is record[139] of a play poking fun at the system and its originator,
written by the Elbing schoolmaster (a Dutch refugee from the
Inquisition) and given in 1531 by the villagers at Elbing (3 miles
from Frauenburg). Elbing and Ermeland were hostile to each other,
Copernicus was well known in Elbing though probably from afar, for
there seems to have been almost no personal intercourse between canons
and people, and the spread of Luther's teachings had intensified the
hostility of the villagers towards the Church and its representatives.
But not until Giordano Bruno made the Copernican system the
starting-point of his philosophy was the Roman Catholic Church
seriously aroused to combat it. Possibly Osiander's preface turned
opposition aside, and certainly the non-acceptance of the system as a
whole by Tycho Brahe, the leading astronomer of Europe at that time,
made people slow to consider it.

[Footnote 139: Prowe: II, 233-244.]




CHAPTER III.

THE LATER DEVELOPMENT AND SCIENTIFIC DEFENSE OF THE COPERNICAN SYSTEM.


Copernicus accomplished much, but even his genius could not far outrun
the times in which he lived. When one realizes that not only all the
astronomers before him, but he and his immediate successor, Tycho
Brahe, made all their observations and calculations unaided by even
the simplest telescope, by logarithms or by pendulum clocks for
accurate measurement of time,[140] one marvels not at their errors,
but at the greatness of their genius in rising above such
difficulties. This lack of material aids makes the work of Tycho
Brahe,[141] accounted one of the greatest observers that has ever
lived,[142] as notable in its way perhaps as that of Copernicus.

[Footnote 140: Burckhardt: 8.]

[Footnote 141: The two standard lives of Tycho Brahe are the _Vita
Tychonis Brahei_ by Gassendi (1655) till recently the sole source of
information, and Dreyer's _Tycho Brahe_ (1890) based not only on
Gassendi but on the documentary evidence disclosed by the researches
of the 19th century. For Tycho's works I have used the _Opera Omnia_
published at Frankfort in 1648. The Danish Royal Scientific Society
has issued a reprint (1901) of the rare 1573 edition of the _De Nova
Stella_.]

[Footnote 142: Bridges: 206.]

His life[143] was a somewhat romantic one. Born of noble family on
December 14th, 1546, at Knudstrup in Denmark, Tyge Brahe, the second
of ten children,[144] was early practically adopted by his father's
brother. His family wished him to become a statesman and sent him in
1559 to the university at Copenhagen to prepare for that career. A
partial eclipse of the sun on August 21st, 1560 as foretold by the
astronomers thrilled the lad and determined him to study a science
that could foretell the future and so affect men's lives.[145] When he
was sent to Leipsic with a tutor in 1562 to study law, he devoted his
time and money to the study of mathematics and astronomy. Two years
later when eighteen years of age, he resolved to perform anew the task
of Hipparchos and Ptolemy and make a catalogue of the stars more
accurate than theirs. His family hotly opposed these plans; and for
six years he wandered through the German states, now at Wittenberg,
now at Rostock (where he fought the duel in which he lost part of his
nose and had to have it replaced by one of gold and silver)[146] or at
Augsburg--everywhere working on his chosen subjects. But upon his
return to Denmark (1570) he spent two years on chemistry and medicine,
till the startling appearance of the New Star in the constellation of
Cassiopaea (November, 1572) recalled him to what became his life
work.[147]

[Footnote 143: Dreyer: 11-84.]

[Footnote 144: Gassendi: 2.]

[Footnote 145: Dreyer: 13.]

[Footnote 146: Gassendi: 9-10.]

[Footnote 147: Dreyer: 38-44.]

Through the interest and favor of King Frederick II, he was given the
island of Hveen near Elsinore, with money to build an observatory and
the pledge of an annual income from the state treasury for his
support.[148] There at Uraniborg from 1576 to 1597 he and his pupils
made the great catalogue of the stars, and studied comets and the
moon. When he was forced to leave Hveen by the hostility and the
economical tendencies of the young king,[149] after two years of
wandering he accepted the invitation of the Emperor Rudolphus and
established himself at Prague in Bohemia. Among his assistants at
Prague was young Johann Kepler who till Tycho's death (on October 24,
1601) was his chief helper for twenty months, and who afterwards
completed his observations, publishing the results in the Rudolphine
Tables of 1627.

[Footnote 148: Ibid: 84.]

[Footnote 149: Ibid: 234-5.]

This "Phoenix among Astronomers"--as Kepler calls him,[150]--was the
father of modern practical astronomy.[151] He also propounded a third
system of the universe, a compromise between the Ptolemaic and the
Copernican. In this the Tychonic system,[152] the earth is motionless
and is the center of the orbits of the sun, the moon, and the sphere
of the fixed stars, while the sun is the center of the orbits of the
five planets.[153] Mercury and Venus move in orbits with radii shorter
than the sun's radius, and the other three planets include the earth
within their circuits. This system was in harmony with the Bible and
accounted as satisfactorily by geometry as either of the other two
systems for the observed phenomena.[154] To Tycho Brahe, the Ptolemaic
system was too complex,[155] and the Copernican absurd, the latter
because to account for the absence of stellar parallax it left vacant
and purposeless a vast space between Saturn and the sphere of the
fixed stars,[156] and because Tycho's observations did not show any
trace of the stellar parallax that must exist if the earth moves.[157]

[Footnote 150: Kepler: _Tabulae Rudolphinae_. Title page.]

[Footnote 151: Dreyer: 317-363.]

[Footnote 152: As stated in his Book on the Comet of 1577 (pub.
