"Suppose not." Millet fiddled with several pipes in a rack beside his
chair, selected one, and began filling it with rough-cut tobacco from a
battered canister. "To business, then. Why the visit?"

Walker cleared his throat and tried to remember the little prefatory
weasel words he had painfully assembled during the flight from Omaha.
"First of all, Dr. Millet, I find myself a little embarrassed. After
all, your parting from government service was not of the happiest nature
for you--"

"Don't be foolish. Happiest day of my life, Walker."

Walker had a sudden sense of being impaled, and the rest of the little
speech was dissipated in the wave of shock which swept over him. He
forced his mouth shut, and gasped, "You're not serious!"

Millet shook out his second match and puffed until the pipe bowl glowed
warmly, edge to edge. "Of course I'm serious." He jabbed his pipe at
Walker. "You like your job?"

"It's a job that has to be done."

Millet smiled and shrugged. "You haven't really answered my question."

Walker, sensing that he had already lost control of the conversation,
waved his hands in dismissal. "Well, that is not really important. The
fact remains, you did leave Weapons Development at the ... ah ...
request of the government."

"Talk on, talk on--you'll get to the point eventually. When you're
through, I'd like to show you around the place. I'm very proud of my
gardens. You're sort of responsible for them, you know."

Walker set his jaw and bored ahead. "However, at the time you left
government service, you were pursuing certain lines of research--"

Millet leaned back and began laughing, his eyes squinted shut. "Walker,
don't tell me they want me _back_!"

It seemed his chance to dominate the discussion again. "I don't think
you'd be allowed back."

"Good," said Millet, looking up, his laughter fading into a smile. "I
was a bit concerned for a moment."

There was silence in the room. Walker began to wish that he were
somewhere else: Millet simply baffled him. He obviously did not care
about his disgrace. Walker felt a resurgence of the old resentment.

Millet's face suddenly became very kindly. "Perhaps, as a fellow
scientist"--Walker almost winced, and knew, furiously, that his response
had shown--"you would be interested in knowing what I've been doing
since my unhappy marriage with bureaucracy ended."

It was a welcome gambit, and Walker accepted it eagerly. "I certainly
would. One of the reasons I came here, as a matter of fact."

Millet waved his pipe. "Good. Afterwards, you can stop beating around
the bush, eh?"

"Yes, of course," mumbled Walker.

"You know," said Millet as he got up and went to a bookcase, "a man's
got to earn a living. Do much reading?"

"Not these days. Used to." He scratched a cigarette on the sole of his
shoe and inhaled hugely. "Not enough time these days for reading."

Millet reached into the bookcase and came out with a stack of magazines.
"Well, that's how I make my living." He handed the stack to Walker.
"Writing. Use a pen name of course." He chuckled. "Write
everything--always happiest doing science fiction, though."

Walker flipped through the magazines; he looked up. "Obviously, you're
doing rather well at it."

"Have been for the last seven or eight years. Lot of fun."

"And this has been your life since you left us?" Walker set the stack of
magazines aside. "Seems a waste of genius, somehow."

"As a matter of fact, this is not my life's work. As I said, a man's got
to earn a living. This is just a lucrative hobby that pays the way. You
see, I've been involved in an expensive research program."

"Ah." Walker sat forward and smashed out his cigarette. "This may be
important."

"Oh, it is, it is. But not, I am afraid, in the way you mean."

"You can never tell. What have you been doing?"

