planet, and, as the result of his labours, he published some months later
the first of a magnificent series of _Memoirs_, bringing to light what
appeared to be a new feature. His drawings not only showed the "lands" and
"seas," that is to say the bright and dark areas, that Green and his
predecessors had drawn, but also a number of fine, narrow, dark lines
crossing the "lands" in every direction. These narrow lines are the
markings which have since been so celebrated as the "canals of Mars," and
the discussion as to the real nature of these canals has focussed
attention upon Mars in a way that, perhaps, nothing else could have done.
Before 1877 the study of planetary markings was left almost entirely to
the desultory labours of amateurs, skilled though many of them were; since
1877, the most powerful telescopes of the great public observatories of
the world have been turned upon Mars, and the most skilful and experienced
of professional astronomers have not been ashamed to devote their time to
it.

There is no need to pass in review the whole of the immense mass of
observations that have been accumulated since Schiaparelli brought out the
first of his great Memoirs. That Memoir gave rise to an immediate
controversy, for many astronomers of skill and experience had observed the
planet in 1877 without detecting the network of lines which Schiaparelli
had revealed, and it was natural that they should feel some reluctance in
accepting results so strange and novel. But little by little this
controversy has passed. We now know that the "canals" vary much in their
visibility, and "curiously enough the canals are most conspicuous, not at
the time the planet is nearest to the Earth and its general features are
in consequence best seen, but as the planet goes away the canals come out.
The fact is that the orbital position and the seasonal epoch conspire to a
masking of the phenomena." This was the chief reason why Schiaparelli's
discoveries seemed at first to stand so entirely without corroboration;
the "canals" did not become conspicuous until after most observers had
desisted from following the planet. Another reason was that, in 1877, Mars
was low down in the sky for northern observatories, and good definition is
an essential for their recognition. But the careful examination of
drawings made in earlier oppositions, especially those made by Dawes and
Green, afforded confirmation of not a few of Schiaparelli's "canals"; even
in 1877 a few of the easiest and most conspicuous had been delineated by
other astronomers before any rumour of Schiaparelli's work had come
abroad, and as Mars came under observation again and again at successive
oppositions, the number of those who were able to verify Schiaparelli's
discoveries increased. It has now long been known that the great Italian
astronomer was not the victim of a mere optical illusion; there were
actual markings on the planet Mars where he had represented them; markings
which, when seen under like conditions and with equal instrumental
equipment, did present the appearance of straight, narrow lines. The
"canals of Mars" are not mere figments of the imagination, but have a real
objective basis.

As this controversy has passed away, another and a very different one has
arisen out of an unfortunate mistranslation of the term chosen by
Schiaparelli to indicate these linear streaks. In conformity with the type
of nomenclature adopted by previous areographers who had divided Mars into
"seas," "continents," "islands," "isthmuses," "straits" and the like,
Schiaparelli had called the narrow lines he detected "_canali_", that is
to say "channels," but without intending to convey the idea of artificial
construction. Indeed, he himself was careful to point out that these
designations "were not intended to prejudge the nature of the spot, and
were nothing but an artifice for helping the memory and for shortening
descriptions." And he added, "We speak in the same way of the lunar seas,
although we well know that there are no true seas on the Moon." But
"_canali_" was unhappily rendered in English as "canals," instead of
"channels." "Channel" would have left the nature of the marking an open
question, but, in English, "canal" means an artificial waterway. Here then
the question as to whether or no Mars is inhabited comes definitely before
us. Have we sufficient grounds for believing that the "canals" are
artificial constructions, or may they be merely natural formations?

In 1894, Mr. Percival Lowell founded at Flagstaff, Arizona, U.S.A., a
well-equipped observatory for the special study of Mars, and he has
continued his scrutiny of the planet from that time to the present with
the most unrelaxing perseverance. The chief results that he has obtained
have been the detection of many new "canals"; the discovery of a number of
dark, round dots, termed by him "oases," at the junctions of the "canals";
and the demonstration that the "canals" and certain of the dusky regions
are subject to strictly seasonal change, as really as the polar caps
themselves. In addition, he has formed the conclusion, which he has
supported with much ingenuity and skill, that the regularity of the
"canals" and "oases" quite precludes the possibility of their being
natural formations. Hence there has arisen the second controversy: that on
the nature of the "canals"; for Mr. Lowell considers that their presence
proves the existence of inhabitants on Mars, who, by means of a Titanic
system of irrigation, are fighting a losing battle against the gradual
desiccation of their planet.

In a paper published in the _International Scientific Review_, "Scientia,"
in January, 1910, Mr. Lowell gave a summary of his argument.

    "Organic life needs water for its existence. This water we see exists
    on Mars, but in very scant amount, so that if life of any sort exists
    there, it must be chiefly dependent on the semi-annual unlocking of
    the polar snows for its supply, inasmuch as there are no surface
    bodies of it over the rest of the planet. Now the last few years,
    beginning with Schiaparelli in 1877, and much extended since at
    Flagstaff, have shown:

    "The surface of the planet to be very curiously meshed by a fine
    network of lines and spots.

    "Now if one considers first the appearance of this network of lines
    and spots, and then its regular behaviour, he will note that its
    geometrism precludes its causation on such a scale by any natural
    process and, on the other hand, that such is precisely the aspect
    which an artificial irrigating system, dependent upon the melting of
    the polar snows, would assume. Since water is only to be had at the
    time it is there unlocked, and since for any organic life it must be
    got, it would be by tapping the disintegrated cap, and only so, that
    it could be obtained. If Mars be inhabited, therefore, it is precisely
    such a curious system we should expect to see, and only by such
    explanation does it seem possible to account for the facts.

    "These lines are the so-called canals of Mars. It is not supposed that
    what we see is the conduit itself. On the contrary, the behaviour of
    these lines indicates that what we are looking at is vegetation. Now,
    vegetation can only be induced by a water-supply. What we see
    resembles the yearly inundation of the Nile, of which to a spectator
    in space the river itself might be too narrow to be seen, and only the
    verdured country on its banks be visible. This is what we suppose to
    be the case with Mars. However the water be conducted, whether in
    covered conduits, which seems probable, or not, science is not able to
    state, but the effects of it are so palpable and so exactly in accord
    with what such a system of irrigation would show, that we are
    compelled to believe that such is indeed its _vera causa_."

Beside the bulky _Memoirs_ in which Prof. Lowell has published the
scientific results obtained at his observatory at Flagstaff, and papers
and articles appearing in various scientific journals, he has brought out
three books of a more popular character: "_Mars_"; "_Mars and its
Canals_"; and "_Mars as the Abode of Life_." In these he shows that to the
assiduity of the astronomer he adds the missionary's zeal and eagerness
for converts as he pleads most skilfully for the acceptance of his chosen
doctrine of the presence of men on Mars. In the last of the three books
mentioned, he deals directly with "Proofs of Life on Mars." The presence
of vegetation may be inferred from seasonal changes of tint, just as an
observer on the Moon might with the naked eye watch effects on the Earth.
But though "vegetable life could thus reveal itself directly, animal life
could not. Not by its body but by its mind would it be known. Across the
gulf of space it could be recognized only by the imprint it had made on
the face of Mars."

    "Confronting the observer are lines and spots that but impress him the
    more, as his study goes on, with their non-natural look. So uncommonly
    regular are they, and on such a scale as to raise suspicions whether
    they can be by nature regularly produced" (p. 188).

    "... Unnatural regularity, the observations showed, betrays itself in
    everything to do with the lines: in their surprising straightness,
    their amazing uniformity throughout, their exceeding tenuity, and
    their immense length" (p. 189).

    "As a planet ages, its surface water grows scarce. Its oceans in time
    dry up, its rivers cease to flow, its lakes evaporate (p. 203)....
    Now, in the struggle for existence, water must be got.... Its
    procuring depends on the intelligence of the organisms that stand in
    need of it.... As a planet ages, any organisms upon it will share in
    its development. They must evolve with it, indeed, or perish. At first
    they change only, as environment offers opportunity, in a lowly,
    unconscious way. But, as brain develops, they rise superior to such
    occasioning.... The last stage in the expression of life upon a
    planet's surface must be that just antecedent to its dying of
    thirst.... With an intelligent population this inevitable end would be
    long foreseen.... Both polar caps would be pressed into service in
    order to utilize the whole available supply and also to accommodate
    most easily the inhabitants of each hemisphere" (pp. 204-11).

    "That intelligence should thus mutely communicate its existence to us
    across the far reaches of space, itself remaining hid, appeals to all
    that is highest and most far-reaching in man himself. More
    satisfactory than strange this; for in no other way could the
    habitation of the planet have been revealed. It simply shows again the
    supremacy of mind.... Thus, not only do the observations we have
    scanned lead us to the conclusion that Mars at this moment is
    inhabited, but they land us at the further one that these denizens are
    of an order whose acquaintance was worth the making" (p. 215).

For the moment, let us leave Prof. Lowell's argument as he puts it.
Whether we accept it or not, it remains that it is a marvellous
achievement of the optician's skill and the observer's devotion that from
a planet so small and so distant as Mars any evidence should be
forthcoming at all that could bear upon the question of the existence of
intelligent organisms upon its surface. But it is of the utmost
significance to note that the whole question turns upon the presence of
water--of water in the liquid state, of water in a sufficient quantity;
and the final decision, for Mr. Lowell's contention, or against it, must
turn on that one point. The search for Life on Mars is essentially a
search for Water; a search for water, not only in the present state of
Mars, but in its past as well. For, without water in sufficient quantities
in the past, life on Mars could not have passed through the evolutionary
development necessary to its attaining its highest expression,--that where
the material living organism has become the tabernacle and instrument of
the conscious intelligent spirit.




CHAPTER VII

THE CONDITION OF MARS


The planet Mars is the debatable ground between two opinions. Here, the
two opposing views join issue; the controversy comes to a focus. The point
in debate is whether certain markings--some linear, some circular--are
natural or artificial. If, it is argued, some are truly like a line,
without curve or break, as if drawn with pen, ink, and ruler; or others,
so truly circular, without deviation or break, as if drawn with pen, ink,
and compass; if, moreover, when we obtain more powerful telescopes,
erected in better climates for observing, these markings become more truly
lines and circles the better we see them; then they are _artificial_, not
natural structures.

But artificial structures imply artificers. And if the structures are so
designed as to meet the needs of a living organism, it implies that the
living organism that designed them must have a reasonable mind lodged in a
natural body. If, then, the "lines" and "circles" that Prof. Lowell and
his disciples assert to be artificial canals and oases are really such,
they premise the order of being that we call Man. But these canals and
oases also premise the liquid that we call Water--water that flows and
water utilized in cultivation. In this chapter we will leave out of count
the first premiss--Man--and only deal with what concerns the second
premiss--Water; with water that flows and is utilized in vegetation.

PLANETARY STATISTICS

  +--------------------------------------------++--------++----------------
  |                                            || Minor  ||          Inner
  |                                            ||Planets.||
  +--------------------------------------------++--------++-------+-------+
  |                                            || Ceres  || Moon  |Mercury|
  +--------------------------------------------++--------++-------+-------+
  |PROPORTIONS OF THE PLANETS:--               ||        ||       |       |
  | Diameter in miles                          ||   477  || 2163  | 3030  |
  |     "    [Symbol] = 1                      ||  0.06  || 0.273 | 0.383 |
  | Surface, [Symbol] = 1                      ||  0.004 || 0.075 | 0.147 |
  | Volume,  [Symbol] = 1                      ||  0.0002|| 0.02  | 0.06  |
  | Density, Water = 1                         ||  2.8 ? || 3.39  | 4.72  |
  |     "    [Symbol] = 1                      ||  0.5 ? || 0.61  | 0.85  |
  | Mass,    [Symbol] = 1                      ||  0.0001|| 0.012 | 0.048 |
  | Gravity at surface, [Symbol] = 1           ||  0.028 || 0.17  | 0.33  |
  | Rate of Fall, Feet in the First Second     ||  0.45  || 2.73  | 5.30  |
  | Albedo                                     ||  0.14  || 0.17  | 0.14  |
  |                                            ||        ||       |       |
  |DETAILS OF ORBIT:--                         ||        ||       |       |
  | Mean Distance from Sun in millions of miles||257.1   ||92.9   |36.0   |
  |      "          "   Earth's distance = 1   ||  2.767 || 1.000 | 0.387 |
  | Period of Revolution, in years             ||  4.60  || 1.00  | 0.24  |
  | Velocity, in miles per second              || 11.1   ||18.5   | 9.7   |
  | Eccentricity                               ||  0.0763|| 0.0168| 0.2056|
  | Aphelion Distance, Perihelion = 1          ||  1.157 || 1.034 | 1.517 |
  | Inclination of Equator to Orbit            ||  (?)   || 1 deg..32'|  (?)  |
  |                                            ||        || d h m |   d   |
  | Rotation period                            ||  (?)   ||27.7.43| 88(?) |
  |                                            ||        ||       |       |
  |ATMOSPHERE, assuming the total mass of the  ||        ||       |       |
  |  atmosphere to be proportional to the mass ||        ||       |       |
  |  of the planet:--                          ||        ||       |       |
  | Pressure at the surface in lb. per sq. in. ||  0.014 || 0.40  | 1.6   |
  |     "       "      "    in "atmospheres"   ||  0.0009|| 0.027 | 0.108 |
  | Level of half surface pressure in miles    ||119.0   ||19.6   |10.1   |
  | Boiling point of water at the surface      ||        || 22 deg.C  | 53 deg.C  |
  |                                            ||        ||       |       |
  |TEMPERATURE:--                              ||        ||       |       |
  | Light and heat received from Sun,          ||        ||       |       |
  |                               [Symbol] = 1 ||  0.13  || 1.00  | 6.67  |
  | Reciprocal of square-root of distance,     ||        ||       |       |
  |                               [Symbol] = 1 ||  0.60  || 1.00  | 1.61  |
  | Equatorial temp. of ideal planet, Absolute ||   188  ||  312 deg. |  502 deg. |
  |     "       "       "       "    Centigrade||   -65  ||  +39  | +229  |
  | Average temp. of ideal planet, Absolute    ||   174  ||  290  |  467  |
  |     "       "       "       "  Centigrade  ||   -99  ||  +17  | +194  |
  | Upper limit under zenith sun, Absolute     ||   248  ||  412  |  664  |
  |     "       "       "       " Centigrade   ||   -25  || +139  | +391  |
  | Average temp. of equivalent disc, Absolute ||   223  ||  371  |  598  |
  |     "       "       "       "    Centigrade||   -50  ||  +98  | +325  |
  |                                            ||        ||       |       |
  +--------------------------------------------++--------++-------+-------+

  ------------------++--------++--------------------------------------+
   Planets.         ||        ||            Outer Planets.            |
                    ||        ||                                      |
  +--------+--------++--------++---------+---------+--------+---------+
  |  Mars  | Venus  || Earth  || Uranus  | Neptune | Saturn | Jupiter |
  +--------+--------++--------++---------+---------+--------+---------+
  |        |        ||        ||         |         |        |         |
  |  4230  |  7700  ||  7918  ||   31900 |   34800 |  73000 |   86500 |
  |  0.534 |  0.972 ||  1.000 ||   4.029 |   4.395 |  9.219 |  10.924 |
  |  0.285 |  0.945 ||  1.000 ||  16.2   |  19.3   | 85.0   | 119.3   |
  |  0.15  |  0.92  ||  1.00  ||  65.    |  85.    |760.    |1304.    |
  |  3.92  |  4.94  ||  5.55  ||   1.22  |   1.11  |  0.72  |   1.32  |
  |  0.71  |  0.89  ||  1.00  ||   0.22  |   0.20  |  0.13  |   0.24  |
  |  0.107 |  0.820 ||  1.000 ||  14.6   |  17.0   | 94.8   | 317.7   |
  |  0.38  |  0.87  ||  1.00  ||   0.90  |   0.89  |  1.18  |   2.65  |
  |  6.11  | 13.99  || 16.08  ||  14.47  |  14.31  | 18.97  |  42.61  |
  |  0.22  |  0.76  ||  0.50? ||   0.60  |   0.52  |  0.72  |   0.62  |
  |        |        ||        ||         |         |        |         |
  |        |        ||        ||         |         |        |         |
  |141.5   | 67.2   || 92.9   ||1781.9   |2791.6   |886.0   | 483.3   |
  |  1.524 |  0.723 ||  1.000 ||  19.183 |  30.055 |  9.539 |   5.203 |
  |  1.88  |  0.62  ||  1.00  ||  84.02  | 164.78  | 29.46  |  11.86  |
  | 15.0   | 21.9   || 18.5   ||   4.2   |   3.4   |  6.0   |   8.1   |
  |  0.0933|  0.0068||  0.0168||   0.0463|   0.0090|  0.0561|   0.0483|
  |  1.207 |  1.013 ||  1.034 ||   1.097 |   1.018 |  1.107 |   1.101 |
  |24 deg..0'  |  (?)   || 23 deg..27'||   (?)   |   (?)   | 26 deg..49'|  3 deg..5'  |
  |h  m  s |        || h  m  s|| h m     |         | h  m   | h  m    |
  |24.37.23|  (?)   || 23.56.4|| 9.30(?) |   (?)   |  10.14+-|  9.55+-  |
  |        |        ||        ||         |         |        |         |
  |        |        ||        ||         |         |        |         |
  |        |        ||        ||         |         |        |         |
  |        |        ||        ||         |         |        |         |
  |  2.1   | 11.1   || 14.7   ||  11.9   |  11.5   | 19.4   | 103.8   |
  |  0.143 |  0.754 ||  1.000 ||   0.81  |   0.78  |  1.32  |   7.06  |
  |  8.8   |  3.8   ||  3.3   ||   3.7   |   3.8   |  2.8   |   1.3   |
  |  53 deg.C  |  92 deg.C  || 100 deg.C  ||  94 deg.C   |  93 deg.C   | 108 deg.C  |  166 deg.C  |
  |        |        ||        ||         |         |        |         |
  |        |        ||        ||         |         |        |         |
  |  0.43  |  1.91  ||  1.00  ||   0.003 |   0.001 |  0.011 |   0.037 |
  |  0.81  |  1.18  ||  1.00  ||   0.23  |   0.18  |  0.32  |   0.44  |
  |   253 deg. |   368 deg. ||   312 deg. ||    71 deg.  |    56 deg.  |   101 deg. |    137 deg. |
  |   -20  |   +95  ||   +39  ||   -202  |   -217  |  -172  |   -136  |
  |   235  |   342  ||   290  ||    66   |    52   |   94   |    127  |
  |   -38  |   +69  ||   +17  ||   -207  |   -221  |  -179  |   -146  |
  |   337  |   486  ||   412  ||    94   |    74   |   133  |    180  |
  |   +64  |  +213  ||  +139  ||   -179  |   -199  |  -140  |    -93  |
  |   300  |   438  ||   371  ||    84   |    67   |   120  |    162  |
  |   +27  |  +165  ||   +98  ||   -189  |   -206  |  -153  |   -111  |
  |        |        ||        ||         |         |        |         |
  +--------+--------++--------++---------+---------+--------+---------+

For in regard to this particular premiss we can do away with hypothesis,
and deal only with certain physical facts that are not controversial and
are not in dispute.

The first of this series of facts concerning Mars about which there can be
no controversy or dispute relates to its size and mass. As the foregoing
Table shows, it comes between the Moon and the Earth in these respects.

The figures show at a glance that Mars ranks in its dimensions between the
Moon and the Earth, and that, on the whole, it is more like to the Moon
than it is to the Earth.

But in what way would this affect Mars as a suitable home for life? In
many ways; and amongst these the distribution of its atmosphere and the
sluggishness of its atmospheric circulation are not the least important.

It was mentioned in Chapter III that at a height of about three and a
third miles the barometer will stand at 15 inches, or half its mean height
at sea level, showing that one half the atmosphere has been passed
through. Mont Blanc, the highest mountain in Europe, is under 3 miles in
height, so that it is not possible, in Europe, to climb to the level of
half-pressure; Mt. Everest, the highest mountain in the world, is not
quite six miles high, so that no part of the solid substance of our planet
reaches up to the level of the quarter pressure. On a very few occasions
daring aeronauts have soared into the empyrean higher than the summits of
even our loftiest mountains, but the excursion has been a dangerous one,
and they have with difficulty brought their life back from so rare and
cold, so inhospitable a region. When Gay-Lussac, in 1804, attained a
height of 23,000 feet above sea level, the thermometer, which on the
ground read 31 deg. C., sank to 9 deg. below zero, and the rare atmosphere was so
dry that paper crumpled up as if it had been placed near the fire, and his
pulse rose to 120 pulsations a minute instead of his normal 66. When Mr.
Glaisher and Mr. Coxwell made their celebrated ascent between 1 and 2
o'clock on the afternoon of September 5, 1861, they found that at a height
of 21,000 feet the temperature sank to -10.4 deg.; at 26,000 feet to -15.2 deg.;
and at 39,000 feet the temperature was down to -16.0 deg. C. At this height
the rarefaction of the air was so great and the cold so intense that Mr.
Glaisher fainted, and Mr. Coxwell's hands being rendered numb and useless
by the cold, he was only able to bring about their descent in time by
pulling the string of the safety valve with his teeth. Yet when they
attained this height they were far above all cloud or mist, and the Sun's
rays fell full upon them. The Sun's rays had all the force that they had
at the surface of the Earth, but in the rare atmosphere of seven miles
above the Earth, the radiation from every particle not in direct sunlight
was so great that while the right hand, exposed to the Sun, might burn,
the left hand, protected from his direct rays, might freeze.

But gravity at the surface of Mars is much feebler than at the surface of
the Earth, and in order to reach the level of half-pressure a Martian
mountaineer would have to climb, not three and a third miles, but eight
and three-quarter miles; that is to say, the distance to be ascended is in
the inverse proportion of the force of gravity at the surface of the
planet. The atmosphere of Mars, therefore, is much deeper than that of the
Earth, and one great cause of precipitation here is much weakened there. A
current of air heavily laden with moisture, if it encounters a range of
mountains, is forced upwards, and consequently expands, owing to the
diminished pressure. The expansion brings about a cooling, and from both
causes the atmosphere is unable to retain as much water-vapour as it
carried before. On Mars, the same relative expansion and cooling would
only follow if the ascent were nearly three times as great, and the feeble
force of gravity has its effect in another way; for just as a weight on
Mars will only fall six feet in the first second as against sixteen on
the Earth, so a dense and heavy column of air will fall with proportionate
slowness and a light column ascend in the same languid manner. An
ascending current on Mars would therefore take 1/0.38 x 1/0.38 = 1/0.145,
or seven times as long to attain the same relative expansion as on the
Earth.

The winds of Mars are therefore sluggish, and precipitation is slight. So
far at least it resembles

  "The island valley of Avilion;
  Where falls not hail, or rain, or any snow,
  Nor ever wind blows loudly;"

and R. A. Proctor, acute and accurate writer on planetary physics as he
was, fell into a mistake when he referred to Mars as being
"hurricane-swept." There are no hurricanes on Mars; its fiercest winds can
never exceed in violence what a sailor would call a "capful."

This holds good for Mars, but it also holds good for every planet where
the force of gravity at the surface is relatively feeble. The greater the
force of gravity the more active the atmospheric circulation, and more
violent its disturbances; the feebler the action of gravity the more
languid the circulation, and the slighter the disturbances.

The atmosphere of Mars is relatively deeper than that of the Earth, so
that we, in observing the details of its surface, are looking down through
an immense thickness of an obscuring medium. And yet the details of the
surface are seen with remarkable distinctness; not as clearly indeed as we
can see those of the Moon, but nearly so. For instance, the "canals"
appear to have a breadth of from 15 to 20 miles, corresponding to 1/16th,
and 1/12th, of a second of arc, at an average opposition. The oases, as a
rule, are about 120 miles in diameter, that is to say about half a second
of arc. These are extraordinarily fine details to be perceived and held,
even if Mars had no atmosphere at all; it would certainly be impossible to
detect them unless the atmosphere were exceedingly thin and transparent.
For we must remember that, though our own atmosphere is a hindrance to our
observing, yet the atmosphere of the planet into which we are looking is a
greater hindrance still. Like the lace curtains of the window of a house,
it is a much greater obstacle to looking inward than to looking outward,
and as the perfect distinctness with which we see the Moon is a proof that
it is practically without an atmosphere, so the great detail visible on
Mars bears unmistakable testimony to the slightness of the atmospheric
veil around that planet.

And when we turn again to the statistics of Mars, we see that this must
inevitably be the case. Of two planets, one heavier than the other, it is
not possible to suppose that the lighter should secure the greater
proportional amount of atmosphere. With planets, as with persons, it is
the most powerful that gets the lion's share: "to him that hath it is
given, and from him that hath not is taken away even that which he seemeth
to have." But if we assume that Mars has acquired an atmosphere
proportional to its mass, then we see from the Table that this must be a
little less than 1/9th of that of the Earth; exactly 0.107. It is
distributed over a smaller surface, 0.285. Consequently the amount of air
above each square inch of Martian surface is 0.107 / 0.285 = 0.38. But
since the force of gravity at the surface of Mars is less than on the
Earth, this column of air will only weigh 0.38 x 0.38 = 0.145; or
one-seventh of the column of air resting on a square inch of the Earth's
surface. The pressure at the surface of Mars will therefore be 2.1 lb.;
and the aneroid barometer would read 4.3 inches. (In order to express the
diminished pressure of the Martian atmosphere, it is necessary to refer it
to the aneroid barometer. The mercury in a mercurial barometer, or the
water in a water barometer would lose in weight in consequence of the
diminished force of gravity in the same proportion as the air would, and
the mercurial barometer would read 11.4 inches.)

But a pressure of 2.1 lb. on the square inch is far less than that
experienced by Coxwell and Glaisher in their great ascent; it is about
one-half the pressure that is experienced on the top of the very highest
terrestrial mountains. But the habitable regions of the Earth do not
extend even so far upward as to the level of a pressure of 7.3 lb. on the
square inch; that is, of half the terrestrial surface pressure. Plant life
dies out before we reach that point, and though birds or men may
occasionally attain greater heights, they cannot domicile there, and are,
indeed, only able thus to ascend in virtue of nourishment which they have
procured in more favoured regions. If we could suppose the conditions of
the whole Earth changed to correspond with those prevailing at the summit
of Mt. Everest, or even at the summit of Mont Blanc, it is clear that the
