
"No!" cried he addressed. "Look! He is up again and the boy still clings
as tightly to him as his own black hide."

"'Tis true," exclaimed another, "but he hath lost what he had gained
upon the halter--he must needs fight it all out again from the
beginning."

And so the battle went on again as before, the boy again drawing the
iron neck slowly to the right--the beast fighting and squealing as
though possessed of a thousand devils. A dozen times, as the head bent
farther and farther toward him, the boy loosed his hold upon the mane
and reached quickly down to grasp the near fore pastern. A dozen times
the horse shook off the new hold, but at length the boy was successful,
and the knee was bent and the hoof drawn up to the elbow.

Now the black fought at a disadvantage, for he was on but three feet
and his neck was drawn about in an awkward and unnatural position. His
efforts became weaker and weaker. The boy talked incessantly to him in
a quiet voice, and there was a shadow of a smile upon his lips. Now
he bore heavily upon the black withers, pulling the horse toward him.
Slowly the beast sank upon his bent knee--pulling backward until his off
fore leg was stretched straight before him. Then, with a final surge,
the youth pulled him over upon his side, and, as he fell, slipped prone
beside him. One sinewy hand shot to the rope just beneath the black
chin--the other grasped a slim, pointed ear.

For a few minutes the horse fought and kicked to gain his liberty, but
with his head held to the earth, he was as powerless in the hands of the
boy as a baby would have been. Then he sank panting and exhausted into
mute surrender.

"Well done!" cried one of the knights. "Simon de Montfort himself never
mastered a horse in better order, my boy. Who be thou?"

In an instant, the lad was upon his feet his eyes searching for the
speaker. The horse, released, sprang up also, and the two stood--the
handsome boy and the beautiful black--gazing with startled eyes, like
two wild things, at the strange intruder who confronted them.

"Come, Sir Mortimer!" cried the boy, and turning he led the prancing but
subdued animal toward the castle and through the ruined barbican into
the court beyond.

"What ho, there, lad!" shouted Paul of Merely. "We wouldst not harm
thee--come, we but ask the way to the castle of De Stutevill."

The three knights listened but there was no answer.

"Come, Sir Knights," spoke Paul of Merely, "we will ride within and
learn what manner of churls inhabit this ancient rookery."

As they entered the great courtyard, magnificent even in its ruined
grandeur, they were met by a little, grim old man who asked them in no
gentle tones what they would of them there.

"We have lost our way in these devilish Derby hills of thine, old man,"
replied Paul of Merely. "We seek the castle of Sir John de Stutevill."

"Ride down straight to the river road, keeping the first trail to the
right, and when thou hast come there, turn again to thy right and ride
north beside the river--thou canst not miss the way--it be plain as the
nose before thy face," and with that the old man turned to enter the
castle.

"Hold, old fellow!" cried the spokesman. "It be nigh onto sunset now,
and we care not to sleep out again this night as we did the last. We
will tarry with you then till morn that we may take up our journey
refreshed, upon rested steeds."

The old man grumbled, and it was with poor grace that he took them in to
feed and house them over night. But there was nothing else for it, since
they would have taken his hospitality by force had he refused to give it
voluntarily.

From their guests, the two learned something of the conditions outside
their Derby hills. The old man showed less interest than he felt, but to
the boy, notwithstanding that the names he heard meant nothing to him,
it was like unto a fairy tale to hear of the wondrous doings of earl and
baron, bishop and king.

"If the King does not mend his ways," said one of the knights, "we will
drive his whole accursed pack of foreign blood-suckers into the sea."

"De Montfort has told him as much a dozen times, and now that all of
us, both Norman and Saxon barons, have already met together and formed
a pact for our mutual protection, the King must surely realize that the
time for temporizing be past, and that unless he would have a civil war
upon his hands, he must keep the promises he so glibly makes, instead of
breaking them the moment De Montfort's back be turned."

"He fears his brother-in-law," interrupted another of the knights, "even
more than the devil fears holy water. I was in attendance on his majesty
some weeks since when he was going down the Thames upon the royal barge.
We were overtaken by as severe a thunder storm as I have ever seen, of
which the King was in such abject fear that he commanded that we land at
the Bishop of Durham's palace opposite which we then were. De Montfort,
who was residing there, came to meet Henry, with all due respect,
observing, 'What do you fear, now, Sire, the tempest has passed?' And
what thinkest thou old 'waxen heart' replied? Why, still trembling, he
said, 'I do indeed fear thunder and lightning much, but, by the hand of
God, I tremble before you more than for all the thunder in Heaven!'"

"I surmise," interjected the grim, old man, "that De Montfort has in
some manner gained an ascendancy over the King. Think you he looks so
high as the throne itself?"

"Not so," cried the oldest of the knights. "Simon de Montfort works for
England's weal alone--and methinks, nay knowest, that he would be first
to spring to arms to save the throne for Henry. He but fights the King's
rank and covetous advisers, and though he must needs seem to defy the
King himself, it be but to save his tottering power from utter collapse.
But, gad, how the King hates him. For a time it seemed that there might
be a permanent reconciliation when, for years after the disappearance
of the little Prince Richard, De Montfort devoted much of his time and
private fortune to prosecuting a search through all the world for the
little fellow, of whom he was inordinately fond. This self-sacrificing
interest on his part won over the King and Queen for many years, but of
late his unremitting hostility to their continued extravagant waste of
the national resources has again hardened them toward him."

The old man, growing uneasy at the turn the conversation threatened,
sent the youth from the room on some pretext, and himself left to
prepare supper.

As they were sitting at the evening meal, one of the nobles eyed the boy
intently, for he was indeed good to look upon; his bright handsome face,
clear, intelligent gray eyes, and square strong jaw framed in a mass
of brown waving hair banged at the forehead and falling about his ears,
where it was again cut square at the sides and back, after the fashion
of the times.

His upper body was clothed in a rough under tunic of wool, stained red,
over which he wore a short leathern jerkin, while his doublet was also
of leather, a soft and finely tanned piece of undressed doeskin. His
long hose, fitting his shapely legs as closely as another layer of skin,
were of the same red wool as his tunic, while his strong leather sandals
were cross-gartered halfway to his knees with narrow bands of leather.

A leathern girdle about his waist supported a sword and a dagger and a
round skull cap of the same material, to which was fastened a falcon's
wing, completed his picturesque and becoming costume.

"Your son?" he asked, turning to the old man.

"Yes," was the growling response.

"He favors you but little, old fellow, except in his cursed French
accent.

"'S blood, Beauchamp," he continued, turning to one of his companions,
"an' were he set down in court, I wager our gracious Queen would he hard
put to it to tell him from the young Prince Edward. Dids't ever see so
strange a likeness?"

"Now that you speak of it, My Lord, I see it plainly. It is indeed a
marvel," answered Beauchamp.

Had they glanced at the old man during this colloquy, they would have
seen a blanched face, drawn with inward fear and rage.

Presently the oldest member of the party of three knights spoke in a
grave quiet tone.

"And how old might you be, my son?" he asked the boy.

"I do not know."

"And your name?"

"I do not know what you mean. I have no name. My father calls me son and
no other ever before addressed me."

At this juncture, the old man arose and left the room, saving he would
fetch more food from the kitchen, but he turned immediately he had
passed the doorway and listened from without.

"The lad appears about fifteen," said Paul of Merely, lowering his
voice, "and so would be the little lost Prince Richard, if he lives.
This one does not know his name, or his age, yet he looks enough like
Prince Edward to be his twin."

"Come, my son," he continued aloud, "open your jerkin and let us have a
look at your left breast, we shall read a true answer there."

"Are you Englishmen?" asked the boy without making a move to comply with
their demand.

"That we be, my son," said Beauchamp.

"Then it were better that I die than do your bidding, for all Englishmen
are pigs and I loathe them as becomes a gentleman of France. I do not
uncover my body to the eyes of swine."

The knights, at first taken back by this unexpected outbreak, finally
burst into uproarious laughter.

"Indeed," cried Paul of Merely, "spoken as one of the King's foreign
favorites might speak, and they ever told the good God's truth. But come
lad, we would not harm you--do as I bid."

"No man lives who can harm me while a blade hangs at my side," answered
the boy, "and as for doing as you bid, I take orders from no man other
than my father."

Beauchamp and Greystoke laughed aloud at the discomfiture of Paul of
Merely, but the latter's face hardened in anger, and without further
words he strode forward with outstretched hand to tear open the boy's
leathern jerkin, but met with the gleaming point of a sword and a quick
sharp, "En garde!" from the boy.

There was naught for Paul of Merely to do but draw his own weapon, in
self-defense, for the sharp point of the boy's sword was flashing in and
out against his unprotected body, inflicting painful little jabs,
and the boy's tongue was murmuring low-toned taunts and insults as it
invited him to draw and defend himself or be stuck "like the English pig
you are."

Paul of Merely was a brave man and he liked not the idea of drawing
against this stripling, but he argued that he could quickly disarm him
without harming the lad, and he certainly did not care to be further
humiliated before his comrades.

But when he had drawn and engaged his youthful antagonist, he discovered
that, far from disarming him, he would have the devil's own job of it to
keep from being killed.

Never in all his long years of fighting had he faced such an agile and
dexterous enemy, and as they backed this way and that about the room,
great beads of sweat stood upon the brow of Paul of Merely, for he
realized that he was fighting for his life against a superior swordsman.

The loud laughter of Beauchamp and Greystoke soon subsided to grim
smiles, and presently they looked on with startled faces in which fear
and apprehension were dominant.

The boy was fighting as a cat might play with a mouse. No sign of
exertion was apparent, and his haughty confident smile told louder than
words that he had in no sense let himself out to his full capacity.

Around and around the room they circled, the boy always advancing, Paul
of Merely always retreating. The din of their clashing swords and the
heavy breathing of the older man were the only sounds, except as they
brushed against a bench or a table.

Paul of Merely was a brave man, but he shuddered at the thought of dying
uselessly at the hands of a mere boy. He would not call upon his friends
for aid, but presently, to his relief, Beauchamp sprang between them
with drawn sword, crying "Enough, gentlemen, enough! You have no
quarrel. Sheathe your swords."

But the boy's only response was, "En garde, cochon," and Beauchamp found
himself taking the center of the stage in the place of his friend. Nor
did the boy neglect Paul of Merely, but engaged them both in swordplay
that caused the eyes of Greystoke to bulge from their sockets.

So swiftly moved his flying blade that half the time it was a sheet of
gleaming light, and now he was driving home his thrusts and the smile
had frozen upon his lips--grim and stern.

Paul of Merely and Beauchamp were wounded in a dozen places when
Greystoke rushed to their aid, and then it was that a little, wiry, gray
man leaped agilely from the kitchen doorway, and with drawn sword took
his place beside the boy. It was now two against three and the three may
have guessed, though they never knew, that they were pitted against the
two greatest swordsmen in the world.

"To the death," cried the little gray man, "a mort, mon fils." Scarcely
had the words left his lips ere, as though it had but waited permission,
the boy's sword flashed into the heart of Paul of Merely, and a Saxon
gentleman was gathered to his fathers.

The old man engaged Greystoke now, and the boy turned his undivided
attention to Beauchamp. Both these men were considered excellent
swordsmen, but when Beauchamp heard again the little gray man's "a mort,
mon fils," he shuddered, and the little hairs at the nape of his neck
rose up, and his spine froze, for he knew that he had heard the sentence
of death passed upon him; for no mortal had yet lived who could vanquish
such a swordsman as he who now faced him.

As Beauchamp pitched forward across a bench, dead, the little old man
led Greystoke to where the boy awaited him.

"They are thy enemies, my son, and to thee belongs the pleasure of
revenge; a mort, mon fils."

Greystoke was determined to sell his life dearly, and he rushed the lad
as a great bull might rush a teasing dog, but the boy gave back not
an inch and, when Greystoke stopped, there was a foot of cold steel
protruding from his back.

Together they buried the knights at the bottom of the dry moat at the
back of the ruined castle. First they had stripped them and, when they
took account of the spoils of the combat, they found themselves richer
by three horses with full trappings, many pieces of gold and silver
money, ornaments and jewels, as well as the lances, swords and chain
mail armor of their erstwhile guests.

But the greatest gain, the old man thought to himself, was that the
knowledge of the remarkable resemblance between his ward and Prince
Edward of England had come to him in time to prevent the undoing of his
life's work.

The boy, while young, was tall and broad shouldered, and so the old
man had little difficulty in fitting one of the suits of armor to
him, obliterating the devices so that none might guess to whom it had
belonged. This he did, and from then on the boy never rode abroad except
in armor, and when he met others upon the high road, his visor was
always lowered that none might see his face.

The day following the episode of the three knights the old man called
the boy to him, saying,

"It is time, my son, that thou learned an answer to such questions as
were put to thee yestereve by the pigs of Henry. Thou art fifteen years
of age, and thy name be Norman, and so, as this be the ancient castle of
Torn, thou mayst answer those whom thou desire to know it that thou art
Norman of Torn; that thou be a French gentleman whose father purchased
Torn and brought thee hither from France on the death of thy mother,
when thou wert six years old.

"But remember, Norman of Torn, that the best answer for an Englishman is
the sword; naught else may penetrate his thick wit."

And so was born that Norman of Torn, whose name in a few short years
was to strike terror to the hearts of Englishmen, and whose power in the
vicinity of Torn was greater than that of the King or the barons.




CHAPTER VI

From now on, the old man devoted himself to the training of the boy in
the handling of his lance and battle-axe, but each day also, a period
was allotted to the sword, until, by the time the youth had turned
sixteen, even the old man himself was as but a novice by comparison with
the marvelous skill of his pupil.

During these days, the boy rode Sir Mortimer abroad in many directions
until he knew every bypath within a radius of fifty miles of Torn.
Sometimes the old man accompanied him, but more often he rode alone.

On one occasion, he chanced upon a hut at the outskirts of a small
hamlet not far from Torn and, with the curiosity of boyhood, determined
to enter and have speech with the inmates, for by this time the natural
desire for companionship was commencing to assert itself. In all his
life, he remembered only the company of the old man, who never spoke
except when necessity required.

The hut was occupied by an old priest, and as the boy in armor pushed
in, without the usual formality of knocking, the old man looked up with
an expression of annoyance and disapproval.

"What now," he said, "have the King's men respect neither for piety nor
age that they burst in upon the seclusion of a holy man without so much
as a 'by your leave'?"

"I am no king's man," replied the boy quietly, "I am Norman of Torn, who
has neither a king nor a god, and who says 'by your leave' to no man.
But I have come in peace because I wish to talk to another than my
father. Therefore you may talk to me, priest," he concluded with haughty
peremptoriness.

"By the nose of John, but it must be a king has deigned to honor me with
his commands," laughed the priest. "Raise your visor, My Lord, I
would fain look upon the countenance from which issue the commands of
royalty."

The priest was a large man with beaming, kindly eyes, and a round jovial
face. There was no bite in the tones of his good-natured retort, and so,
smiling, the boy raised his visor.

"By the ear of Gabriel," cried the good father, "a child in armor!"

"A child in years, mayhap," replied the boy, "but a good child to own as
a friend, if one has enemies who wear swords."

"Then we shall be friends, Norman of Torn, for albeit I have few
enemies, no man has too many friends, and I like your face and your
manner, though there be much to wish for in your manners. Sit down and
eat with me, and I will talk to your heart's content, for be there one
other thing I more love than eating, it is talking."

With the priest's aid, the boy laid aside his armor, for it was heavy
and uncomfortable, and together the two sat down to the meal that was
already partially on the board.
