this went on?"_

_He gazed at her beetling nose, her jutting chin. "A good question," he
muttered thoughtfully._

_He followed her into the house. It was a treasury of antiquities,
filling him with delight. Miss Anna Van Tromp offered him a cup of milk,
which he accepted, thanking her profusely. She talked volubly, eyeing
him all the while with the utmost curiosity, and he gathered presently
that her father had made several attempts to marry her off, disapproving
of her solitary residence so far from the center of the city; but she
had frowned upon one and all of the suitors he had encouraged to call on
her. She was undeniably impressive, almost formidable, he conceded
privately, with a touch of the shrew and harridan. Life with Miss Anna
Van Tromp would not be easy, he reflected. But then, life with his
sister Julie was not easy, either. Miss Anna, however, had not to face
atomic warfare; all she had to look forward to in fourteen years was
surrender to the besieging British, which she would have no trouble in
surviving._

_He settled down to his ingratiating best and succeeded in making a most
favorable impression on Miss Anna Van Tromp before at last he took his
leave, carrying with him a fine, hand-wrought bowl with which the lady
had presented him. He had a hunch he might come back. Of all the times
he had visited since finishing the machine, he knew that old New
Amsterdam in the 1650s was the one period most likely to keep him
contented--provided Miss Van Tromp didn't turn out to be a nuisance. So
he took careful note of the set of his controls, jotting them down so
that he would not be likely to forget them._

_It was late when he found himself back in his own time._

_His sister was waiting up for him. "Two o'clock in the morning!" she
screamed at him. "What are you doing to me? Oh, God, why didn't I marry
when I had the chance, instead of throwing away my life on a worthless
brother!"_

_"Why don't you? It's not too late," he sighed wearily._

_"How can you say that?" she snapped bitterly. "Here I am thirty nearly,
and worn out from working for you. Who would marry me now? Oh, if only I
could have another chance! If I could be young again, and do it all
over, I'd know how to have a better life!"_

_In spite of his boredom with her, Vanderkamp felt the effect of this
cry from a lonely heart. He looked at her pityingly; it was true, after
all, that she had worked faithfully for him, without pay, since their
parents died. "Take a look at this," he said gently, offering her the
bowl._

_"Hah! Can we eat bowls?"_

_He raised his eyes heavenward and went wearily to bed._

       *       *       *       *       *

"I saw Vanderkamp again about a fortnight later," Harrigan went on. "Ran
into him in a tavern on the Bowery. He recognized me and came over.

"'That was some story you did,' he said.

"'Been bothered by cranks?' I asked.

"'Hell, yes! Not too badly, though. They want to ride off somewhere just
to get away. I get that feeling myself sometimes. But, tell me, have you
seen the morning papers?'

"Now, by coincidence, the papers that morning had carried a story from
some local nuclear physicist about the increasing probability that the
atom would be smashed. I told him I'd seen it.

"'What did I tell you?' he said.

"I just smiled and asked where he'd been lately. He didn't hesitate to
talk, perhaps because his sister had been giving him a hard time with
her nagging. So I listened. It appeared, to hear him tell it, that he
had been off visiting the Dutch in New Amsterdam. You could almost
believe what he said, listening to him, except for that wild look he
had. Anyway, he'd been in New Amsterdam about 1650, and he'd brought
back a few trifling souvenirs of the trips. Would I like to see them? I
said I would.

"I figured he'd got his hands on some nice antiques and wanted an
appreciative audience. His sister wasn't home; so he took me around and
showed me his pieces, one by one--a bowl, a pair of wooden candlesticks,
wooden shoes, and more, all in all a fine collection. He even had a
chair that looked pretty authentic, and I wondered where he'd dug up so
many nice things of the New Amsterdam period--though, of course, I had
to take his word as to where they belonged historically; I didn't know.
But I imagine he got them somewhere in the city or perhaps up in the
Catskill country.

"Well, after a while I got another look at his contraption. It didn't
appear to have been moved at all; it was still sitting where it had been
before, without a sign to say that it had been used to go anywhere,
least of all into past time.

"'Tell me,' I said to him at last, 'when you go back in time do you get
younger?'

"'Yes and no,' he said. 'Obviously.'
