League, and--and--who said I was going to marry you, anyway?"

"I did," returned Sy promptly. "Remember? I've been telling you that
since we were kids--and you never once denied it."

Arna made a sound that was partly a sob and partly a laugh. She shook
her head unbelievingly. "With the fate of a galaxy depending on your
abilities and judgment, you drag me across a thousand million miles of
space to prate about marriage."

"Yes," admitted Sy, "but think of how far it might have been. If spatial
distances were actually as great as the old astronomers used to think,
before they learned that light slows down after it travels--"

There was no slightest chance that Arna's small hand would actually
strike Sy. She knew the attempt was futile, but she tried her best--and
uttered a rueful sound when the blow seemed to pass right through his
cheek, while he apparently stood still, grinning. "Some day," she
promised, "I'm going to shoot you in the back--just to see what
happens."

"That sounds more like my cheerful little calc-bird," he said. "But
let's wait till after we're married, huh?" They continued along the
unpaved road.

"I think," Arna said levelly, "there will be no marriage. There will
certainly be none for me until the completion of the unimportant,
completely insignificant Operation Catskin--or," she finished sweetly,
"have you given that any thought lately?"

Sy frowned. A small stone in the road suddenly sped along the ground and
cracked against another; the other snapped away, rolled, slowed,
reversed, shot backward and hit the first one. He spoke thoughtfully.
"Yes, I've given it a great deal of thought. And there's going to
be--uh--a slight change of plan. That's really why I needed you here,
Arna."

The girl stared. "Sy! Have you shorted a circuit? For heaven's sake,
don't you realize this thing has been planned, and calculated, and
re-arranged bit by bit for twenty years? That each of us is merely a
small--no matter how important--cog in a far-reaching activity of
infinite complexity? Don't you understand that everything is in a state
of delicate, constantly shifting balance, with ambassadors, scientists
and agents making each tiny move with precise timing and skill
throughout a hundred worlds? And you want to change things!" Her voice
softened, and she laid a hand on his arm. "Sy," she pleaded, "if you've
run into some insurmountable obstacle, let's report it and try to ease
out without upsetting everything. That's happened three times before,
you know, and it's no disgrace if you can't--"

[Illustration]

"Hell!" said Sy bitterly. "I can do it--I think. And if I can do it at
all, I can go one step better. But I need help."

"But can't you see, Sy, that you can't change the plans now? Why, no one
even knows what you have in mind--and I won't have anything to do with
it!"

The hangars loomed not far ahead. Sy spoke patiently. "Look. As it
stands, Operation Catskin now boils down to installing new engines in
the Sur-Malic fleet, slipping gimmicks into the stabilizer works and
controlling the gimmicks psychokinetically when the League and Alliance
fleets meet for battle. If the Alliance ships operate erratically, they
can't bring their guns to bear, and the League will mop up--even with
our pint-sized fleet and inferior armament. Check?"

"Of course. That's what--"

"Okay. Now suppose we can rig a deal so it won't be necessary to shoot
up the Alliance boats nor kill the poor deluded devils in them? The
League wins the war, gets a brand-new, superior fleet, and hardly anyone
gets smeared."

Arna sighed. "Let's be practical, Sy. All you know about engineering has
been implanted hypnotically just for this job; all I can do is answer
questions of pure math. I wouldn't know how to devise any gadgetry, and
you're in no position to waste time trying--and in war some must be
destroyed that others may survive."

"But suppose I've just about got the thing whipped already? I've learned
enough, since I've been here, to rate Mech C even home."

"Sy, I just won't be a party to anything that might possibly upset
League plans!"

Sy's chest heaved resignedly. "Will you help me with the computational
math needed to finish Operation Catskin?"

"That's better!" Arna squeezed his arm happily. "Of course I will, you
big, bony, restless idealist!"

He smiled fondly at her--at her answer, her young beauty and her
nearness.

       *       *       *       *       *

The weeks passed swiftly--weeks in which the swarming Sur-Malic workmen
ripped from their foundations the massive, cumbersome atomic converters
of the mighty space fleet and replaced them with light, radically
designed engines which would feed eternally upon the all-pervading
cosmic emanations that streaked the universe.

Sy and Arna had worked furiously. Surrounded by a corps of physicists,
mathematicians, engineers, technicians and draftsmen, Arna had
unerringly replied to endless queries as fast as she could speak. Sy had
translated equations, converted values, integrated, correlated and
directed. Subtly, he had inserted certain innocent equations of his own
bit by bit, fed his results into the basic plans and disguised the
all-important device with the cloak of dual function--one of which was
vital to ship performance, the other of which was vulnerable to his
psychokinetic ability to move objects of small mass by mental
concentration alone.

But all things are subject to the vagaries of pure chance. Commandant
Rilth, as chief of the project, continually prowled the immense planning
rooms, workshops and assembly areas, giving of his not-inconsiderable
technical knowledge where needed. And one day he came upon Sy delicately
checking the tiny installation which would spell doom to Alliance
schemes of conquest.

"You have found a flaw, perhaps?" demanded the Sur-Malic officer. He
