somewhere--Madeleine couldn't even tell whether it was real--came a
thought.

"_Madeleine--come back. Come back when you can. And you will find joy._"

Later she knew how she kicked and screamed at them as they dragged her
away. How Mrs. Ericson was embarrassed by the display, and how her
father refused to touch her because of the fear of contamination. And
her mother weeping, later, because of the disgrace and because of what
the other guests would think.

In the shiny antiseptic ward at Martian Haven, the virus was burned out
by a certain number of roentgens of carefully proportioned X-rays, gamma
rays and neutron bombardment. She kept thinking of the old man's eyes,
of the stray thought that promised joy.

She kept seeing the old man lying off the trail among the rocks, how he
had raised himself on his elbow, and how he waggled the blood-clot of
his head in the glaring sun as they dragged Madeleine away.

Occasionally she thought of the whole project--in Mars, Mecca of Earth
tourists, Martian Haven, Dream City of the Solar System--that was so
colorful and impressive and exotic to others, and she wondered if it was
all really as ridiculous as it seemed to her.

She lay there in the dark of the room as evening reached over the dead
sea bottom toward the edifice that was Martian Haven. Out there in the
big amphitheatre, resurrected supposedly from old Martian ruins, Martian
Haven, with all of its rich, efficient facilities and staff, was
preparing the stage, props and guests for the Love Ritual of the Double
Moons.

The core and centerpiece of Martian Haven was a great cubistic hotel,
with the two Martian canals on two sides, renovated, of course, and a
five-mile-long artificial lake on a third side. It was somehow designed,
in the middle of all that vast emptiness of dead sea, sand and eroded
rock, to have a not-ungraceful look of insubstantiality, as though at
any moment it might open great wings of some sort and take off into the
Martian nowhere by which it was so overwhelmingly surrounded. The side
that faced the lake curved in a half-moon, so that it commanded a wide
prospect to the eroded hills that had once been mountains to the west
and to the east thousands of unbroken miles of desert, that had once,
they said, been an ocean.

When Madeleine opened her eyes, it was night. On many a starry night she
had lain inside walls not so different from these, and felt much the
same, she thought, surrounded by a desert of her own. Away off there in
the blackness, Earth shone palely--and she might as well never have left
it at all.

And then again she saw the old hermit's eyes out there in the dark, his
burning eyes where there should be only sterile emptiness in the night.
And his voice calling where there would otherwise have been only the
dusty echoes of an arid past.

Outside now the tourists were gathering in the double moonlight. The
weird extrapolation of Earth music that was supposed to be the strains
of Martian rhythms drifted to her, and lights flickered from burning
tapers where dancers undulated and writhed fitfully. A libidinous
expectancy was as heavy as a thick scent in the night.

Then, only for a moment, she despised herself for not being with the
others, for never having been able to participate in the futile
make-believe. She felt like a child who had never grown beyond the stage
of the most old-fashioned fairy tales. Someone who had gone beyond the
looking-glass and had never been able to get back, but who had never
quite been able to forget the world from which she had come.

She could hear her parents and Don talking in the next room.

"It's a shame for her to miss the ritual of the double moons," Don said.

"She's always been that way," Mr. Ericson said. "Staying by herself."

"We've tried everything," said Mrs. Ericson.

"She's spent half her life on an analyst's couch," said Mr. Ericson.

"She wouldn't even," Mrs. Ericson said, "fall in love with her
_analyst_!"

"She was only in love once," said Mr. Ericson, "and that had to be with
an idiot who was always writing sonnets."

[Illustration]

"A poet," said Don. "There used to be a lot of poets."

"But not in my life," said Mr. Ericson.

"Maybe," Don said, "your daughter expected a little bit too much from
Mars."

"Don," Mrs. Ericson pleaded, "maybe _you_ can do something."

"I'll be glad to try," Don said.

So Madeleine lay there and waited for Don, the perfect host, who could
supply everyone at Martian Haven with whatever was necessary to insure a
pleasant day.

Later, though she did not turn or make any sign of noticing, she knew he
had entered the room and was standing over her. She could see the
periphery of his giant shadow projected by moonlight over the colored
glass.

"Madeleine--we've got a date for the ritual tonight."

"That's odd, Don. I don't remember it."

"But you didn't say you _wouldn't_ attend it with me, when I suggested
it this morning."

"Well, Don, this is an official rejection of your proposal."

