had happened, as planned, and they dashed through the searchlight beam,
into the forest, and ..." She paused. "Anyway, one of them made it. The
other two were caught and killed."

"Huh?" said Let. "Is that all?"

"That's about it," said Petra.

"What do you mean?" Let demanded. Last night's version had contained
detail upon detail of the prisoners' treatment, their efforts to dig a
tunnel, the precautions they took, along with an uncannily vivid
description of the scenery that had made him shiver as though he had
been in the leaky, rotten-walled shacks. "You can't just finish it up
like that," he exclaimed. "How did they get caught? Which one got away?
Was it the chubby one with the freckles? How did they die?"

"Unpleasantly," Petra answered. "No, the chubby one with the freckles
didn't make it. They brought him, and the one with the limp, back that
morning in the rain and dropped them in the mud outside the barracks to
discourage further escape attempts."

"Oh," said Let. "What about the one who did make it?" he asked after a
moment.

Instead of answering, she said, "Let, I want to give you a warning." The
prince stiffened a bit, but she began differently than he expected.
"Let, in a little while, you may be going on quite an adventure, and you
may want to forget some things, because it will be easier. Like being
the prince of Toromon. But don't forget it, Let. Don't."

"What sort of adventure, Petra?"

Again she did not answer his question. "Let, do you remember how I
described the prison to you? What would you do if you were king and
those prisoners were under your rule, with their rotten food, the rats,
their fourteen hours of labor a day in the mines ..."

"Well, I don't know, Petra," he began, feeling as if something were
being asked of him that he was reluctant to give. It was like when his
history teacher expected him to know the answer on a question of
government just because he had been born into it. "I suppose I'd have to
consult the council, and see what Chargill said. It would depend on the
individual prisoners, and what they'd done; and of course how the people
felt about it. Chargill always says you shouldn't do things too
quickly ..."

"I know what Chargill says," said the Duchess quietly. "Just remember
what I've said, will you?"

"What about the third man, the one who escaped?"

"He ... came back to Toron."

"He must have had a lot more adventures. What happened to him, Petra?
Come on, tell me."

"Actually," said Petra, "he managed to bypass most of the adventures. He
came very quickly. Let me see. After they dashed across the searchlit
area, they ducked into the jungle. Almost immediately the three got
separated. The black-haired one got completely turned around, and
wandered in the wrong direction until he had gone past the mines, out of
the forest, and across the rocky stretch of ground beyond a good five
miles. By the time it was light enough to see, he suddenly realized he
had been wandering toward the radiation barrier; because in the
distance, like a black skeleton on the horizon, were the abandoned ruins
of Telphar, the Dead City."

"Shouldn't he have been dead from the radiation?"

"That's exactly what he figured. In fact, he figured if he was close
enough to see the place, he should have been dead a few miles back. He
was tired. The food they'd taken kept him from being hungry. But he was
definitely alive. Finally he decided that he might as well go toward
the city. He took two steps more, when suddenly he heard something."

There was silence over the intercom.

After he had allowed sufficient time for a dramatic pause, Let asked,
"What was it? What did he hear?"

"If you ever hear it," Petra said, "you'll know it."

"Come on, Petra, what was it?"

"I'm quite serious," Petra said. "That's all I know of the story. And
that's all you need to know. Maybe I'll be able to finish it when I come
back from the party tonight."

"Please, Petra ..."

"That's it."

He paused for a minute. "Petra, is the adventure I'm supposed to have,
the war? Is that why you're reminding me not to forget?"

"I wish it were that simple, Let. Let's say that's part of it."

"Oh," said Let.

"Just promise to remember the story, and what I've said."

"I will," said Let, wondering. "I will."

       *       *       *       *       *

Jon walked down a long spiral staircase, nodded to the guard at the
foot, passed into the castle garden, paused to squint at the sun, and
went out the gate. Getting in was a lot more difficult.




CHAPTER III


The Devil's Pot overturned its foul jelly at the city's edge. Thirteen
alleys lined with old stone houses was its nucleus; many of them were
ruined, built over, and ruined again. These were the oldest structures
in Toron. Thick with humanity and garbage, it reached from the
waterfront to the border of the hive houses in which lived the clerks
and professionals of Toron. Clapboard alternated with hastily
constructed sheet-metal buildings with no room between. The metal
rusted; the clapboard sagged. The waterfront housed the temporary
prison, the immigration offices, and the launch service that went out to
the aquariums and hydroponics plants that floated on vast pontoons three
miles away.

At the dock, a frog-like, sooty hulk had pulled in nearly an hour ago.
But the passengers were only being allowed to come ashore now, and that
after passing their papers through the inspection of a row of officials
who sat behind a wooden table. A flimsy, waist-high structure of boards
separated the passengers from the people on the wharf. The passengers
milled.

A few had bundles. Many had nothing. They stood quietly, or ambled
aimlessly. On the waterfront street, the noise was thunderous. Peddlers
hawking, pushcarts trundling, the roar of arguing voices. Some
passengers gazed across the fence at the sprawling slum. Most did not.

As they filed past the officers and onto the dock, a woman with a box of
trinkets and a brown-red birthmark splashed over the left side of her
face pushed among the new arrivals. Near fifty, she wore a dress and
head rag, that were a well-washed, featureless gray.

"And would you like to buy a pair of shoelaces, fine strong ones," she
accosted a young man who returned a bewildered smile of embarrassment.

"I ... I don't got any money," he stammered, though complimented by the
attention.

Rara glanced down at his feet. "Apparently you have no shoes either.
Well, good luck here in the New World, the Island of Opportunity." She
brushed by him and aimed toward a man and woman who carried a bundle
composed of a hoe, a rake, a shovel, and a baby. "A picture," she said,
digging into her box, "of our illustrious majesty, King Uske, with a
real metal frame, hand-painted in miniature in honor of his birthday.
No true cosmopolitan patriot can be without one."

The woman with the baby leaned over to see the palm-sized portrait of a
vague young man with blond hair and a crown. "Is that really the king?"

"Of course it is," declared the birthmarked vendress. "He sat for it in
person. Look at that noble face. It would be a real inspiration to the
little one there, when and if he grows up."

"How much is it?" the woman asked.

Her husband frowned.

"For a hand-painted picture," said Rara, "it's very cheap. Say, half a
unit?"

"It's pretty," said the woman, then caught the frown on the man's face.
She dropped her eyes and shook her head.

Suddenly the man, from somewhere, thrust a half-unit piece into Rara's
hand. "Here." He took the picture and handed it to his wife. As she
looked at it, he nodded his head. "It is pretty," he said. "Yes. It is."

"Good luck here in the New World," commented Rara. "Welcome to the
Island of Opportunity." Turning, she drew out the next gee-gaw her hand
touched, glanced at it long enough to see what it was, and said to the
man she now faced. "I see you could certainly use a spool of fine thread
to good purpose." She pointed to a hole in his sleeve. "There." A brown
shoulder showed through his shirt, further up. "And there."

"I could use a needle too," he answered her. "And I could use a new
shirt, and a bucket of gold." Suddenly he spat. "I've as much chance of
getting one as the other with what I've got in my pocket."

"Oh, surely a spool of fine, strong thread ..."

Suddenly someone pushed her from behind. "All right. Move on, lady. You
can't peddle here."

"I certainly can," exclaimed Rara, whirling. "I've got my license right
here. Just let me find it now...."

"Nobody has a license to peddle in front of the immigration building.
Now move on."

"Good luck in the New Land," she called over her shoulder as the officer
forced her away. "Welcome to the Island of Opportunity!"

Suddenly a commotion started behind the gate. Someone was having trouble
with papers. Then a dark-haired, barefoot boy broke from his place in
line, ran to the wooden gate, and vaulted over. The wooden structure was
flimsy. As the boy landed, feet running, the fence collapsed.

Behind the fence they hesitated like an unbroken wave. Then they came.
At the table the officials stood up, waved their hands, shouted, then
stood on their benches and shouted some more. The officer who had shoved
the vending woman disappeared in the wash of bodies.

Rara clutched her box of trinkets and scurried to the corner, then
melded with the herding crowd for two blocks into the slums.

"Rara!"

She stopped and looked around. "Oh, there you are," she said, joining a
young girl who stood back from the crowd, holding a box of trinkets like
the other woman's.

"Rara, what happened?"

The birthmarked woman laughed. "You are watching the beginning of the
transformation. Fear, hunger, a little more fear, no work, more fear,
and every last one of these poor souls will be a first class, grade-A
citizen of the Devil's Pot. How much did you sell?"

"Just a couple of units worth," the girl answered. She was perhaps
sixteen, with a strange combination of white hair, blue eyes, and skin
that had tanned richly and quickly, giving her the large-eyed look of an
exotic snow-maned animal. "Why are they running?"

"Some boy started a panic. The fence gave way and the rest followed
him." A second surge of people rounded the corner. "Welcome to the New
Land, the Island of Opportunity," Rara called out. Then she laughed.

"Where are they all going to go?" Alter asked.

"Into the holes in the ground, into the cracks in the street. The lucky
men will get into the army. But even that won't absorb them all. The
women, the children...?" She shrugged.

Just then a boy's voice came from halfway down the block. "Hey!"

They turned.

"Why that's the boy that broke the fence down," exclaimed Rara.

"What does he want?"

"I don't know. Before this afternoon I'd never seen him in my life."

He was dark, with black hair; but as he approached, they saw that his
eyes were water-green. "You're the woman who was selling things, huh?"

Rara nodded. "What do you want to buy?"

"I don't want to buy anything," he said. "I want to sell something to
you." He was barefoot; his pants frayed into nothing at mid-calf, and
his sleeveless shirt had no fastenings.

"What do you want to sell?" she asked, her voice deepening with
skepticism.

He reached into his pocket, and brought out a rag of green flannel,
which he unwrapped now in his hand.

They had been polished to a milky hue, some streaked with gold and red,
others run through with warm browns and yellows. Two had been rubbed
down to pure mother-of-pearl, rubbed until their muted silver surfaces
were clouded with pastel lusters. There in the nest of green, they
swirled around themselves, shimmering.

"They're nothing but sea shells," Rara said.

Alter reached her forefinger out and touched a white periwinkle.
"They're lovely," she told him. "Where did you get them?" They ranged in
size from the first joint of her thumb to the width of her pinky nail.

"By your departed mother, my own sister, we can't afford to give him a
centiunit, Alter. I hardly sold a thing before that brute officer forced
me away."

"I found them on the beach," the boy explained. "I was hiding on the
boat and I didn't have nothing to do. So I polished them."

"What were you hiding for?" asked Rara, her voice suddenly sharp. "You
don't mean you stowed away?"

"Un-huh," the boy nodded.

"How much do you want for them?" Alter asked.

"How much? How much would it cost to get a meal and a place to stay?"

"Much more than we can afford to pay," interrupted Rara. "Alter, come
with me. This boy is going to talk you out of a unit or two yet, if you
keep on listening to him."

"See," said the boy, pointing to the shells. "I've put holes in them
already. You can string them around your neck."

"If you want to get food and a place to sleep," said Alter, "you don't
want money. You want friends. What's your name? And where are you from?"

The boy looked up from the handful of shells, surprised. "My name is
Tel," he said after a moment. "I come from the mainland coast. And I'm a
fisherman's son. I thought when I came here I could get a job in the
aquariums. That's all you hear about on the coast."

Alter smiled. "First of all you're sort of young ..."

"But I'm a good fisherman."

"... and also, it's very different from fishing on a boat. I guess you'd
say that there were a lot of jobs in the aquariums and the hydroponics
gardens. But with all the immigrants, there are three people for every
job."

The boy shrugged. "Well, I can try."

