middle of the air. Tell me, who do _you_ think is behind it all?"

She was walking around the big-sided room as if taking mental inventory.
There wasn't much to catalogue--six straight chairs, heavy and
modern-looking, with a large wooden table, a framed piece of dark glass
that might be a television set, and a gray steel box about the size and
shape of a three-drawer filing cabinet. This last was near the big
window-wall and had three black buttons on its otherwise smooth top. Don
itched to push the buttons to see what would happen. Jen Jervis seemed
to have the same urge. She drummed on the box with her long fingernails.

"I?" she said. "Behind it all?"

"Yes. What's your theory? Is this something for the Un-Earthly
Activities Committee to investigate?"

"Don't be impertinent. If the Senator thinks it's his duty to look into
it, he will. He undoubtedly is already. In the meantime, I can do no
less than gather whatever information I can while I'm on the scene."

"Very patriotic. What do you conclude from your information-gathering so
far?"

"Obviously there's some kind of conspiracy--" she began, then stopped as
if she suspected a trap.

"--afoot," Don said with a grin. "As I see it, all you do is have Bobby
the Bold subpoena everybody up here--every last man-jack of 'em--to
testify before his committee. They wouldn't dare refuse."

"I don't find you a bit amusing, Mr. Cort, though I have no doubt this
sophomoric humor makes a big hit with your teen-age blonde. We'd better
get back. I can see it was a mistake to expect any co-operation from
you."

"As you like, Madame Investigator." Don gave her a mock bow, then turned
for a last look down at the vast segment of Earth below.

Geneva Jervis screamed.

He whirled to see her standing, big-eyed and open-mouthed, in front of
the framed dark glass he had taken for a television screen. Her face was
contorted in horror, and as Don's gaze flicked to the screen he had the
barest glimpse of a pair of eyes fading with a dissolving image. Then
the screen was blank and Don wasn't sure whether there had been a face
to go with the eyes--an inhuman, un-earthly face--or whether his
imagination had supplied it.

The girl slumped to the floor in a faint.

       *       *       *       *       *

_COLUMBUS, OHIO, Nov. 1 (AP)--Sen. Robert (Bobby) Thebold landed here
today after leading his Private Pilots (PP) squadron of P-38's on a
reconnaissance flight which resulted in the loss of one of the six World
War II fighters in a crash landing on the mysteriously airborne town of
Superior, Ohio. The pilot of the crashed plane parachuted safely to
Earth._

_Sen. Thebold told reporters grimly:_

_"There is no doubt in my mind that mysterious forces are at work when a
town of 3,000 population can rise in a body off the face of the Earth.
My reconnaissance has shown conclusively that the town is intact and its
inhabitants alive. On one of my passes I saw my secretary, Miss Geneva
Jervis."_

_Sen. Thebold said he was confident Miss Jervis would contact him the
moment she had anything to report, indicating she would make an
on-the-spot investigation._

_The Senator said in reply to a question that he was "amazed" at
official Washington's "complete inaction" in the matter, and declared he
would demand a probe by the Senate Investigations Subcommittee, of which
he is a member. He indicated witnesses might include officials of the
Defense Department, the Central Intelligence Agency, and "possibly
others."_

       *       *       *       *       *

_LADENBURG, Ohio, Nov. 1 (UPI)--Little Ladenburg, former neighbor of
"The City in the Sky," complained today of a rain of empty beer cans and
other rubbish, apparently being tossed over the edge by residents of
airborne Superior._

_"They're not so high and mighty," one sanitation official here said,
"that they can make Ladenburg their garbage dump."_

       *       *       *       *       *

_WASHINGTON, Nov. 1 (Reuters)--American officials today were at a loss
to explain the strange behaviour of Superior, Ohio, "the town that took
off."_

_Authoritative sources assured Reuters that no military or scientific
experiments were in progress which could account for the phenomenon of a
town being lifted intact thousands of feet into the air._

_Rumors circulating to the effect that a "Communist plot" was at work
were greeted with extreme scepticism in official quarters._

       *       *       *       *       *

BULLETIN

_COLUMBUS, Ohio, Nov. 1 (UPI)--The airborne town of Superior began to
drift east across Ohio late today._




VI


The unconscious Geneva Jervis, lying crumpled up in the oversized fur
coat, was the immediate problem. Don Cort straightened her out so she
lay on her back, took off her shoes and propped her ankles on the lower
rung of a chair. He found she was wearing a belt and loosened it. It was
obvious that she was also wearing a girdle but there wasn't anything he
wanted to do about that. He was rubbing one of her wrists when her eyes
fluttered open.

She smiled self-consciously. "I guess I was a sissy."

"Not at all. I saw it, too. A pair of eyes."

"And a face! A horrible, horrible face."

"I wasn't sure about the face. Can you describe it?"

She darted a tentative look at the screen but it was comfortingly blank.
"It wasn't human. And it was staring right into me. It was awful!"

"Did it have a nose, ears, mouth?"

"I--I can't be sure. Let's get out of here. I'm all right now. Thanks
for being so good to me--Don."

"Don't mention it--Jen. Here, put your shoes on."

When he had closed the big wooden door behind them, Don padlocked it
again. He preferred to leave things as they'd found them, even though
their visit to the observation room was no longer a secret.

He was relieved when they had scrambled up the steps under the
grandstand. There had been no sense of anyone or anything following them
or spying on them during their long walk through the tunnel.

They were silent with their separate thoughts as they crossed the frosty
ground and Jen held Don's arm, more for companionship than support. At
the campus the girl excused herself, saying she still felt shaky and
wanted to rest in her room. Don went back to the dining room.

The meeting was over but Alis Garet was there, having a cup of tea and
reading a book.

"Well, sir," she said, giving him an intent look, "how was the
rendezvous?"

"Fair to middling." He was relieved to see that she wasn't angry. "Did
anybody say anything while I was gone?"

"Not a coherent word. You don't deserve it but I made notes for you.
Running off with that redhead when you have a perfectly adequate blonde.
Did you kiss her?"

"Of course not. It was strictly business. Let me see the notes, you
angel."

"Notes, then." She handed over a wad of paper.

"Rubach," he read, "Magnology stuff stuff stuff etc. etc. Nothing.

"Q. (Conductor Jas Brown) Wht abt Mayor's proclamation Superior seceded
frm Earth?

"A. (Civek) Repeated stuff abt discrimination agnst Spr & Cavlr & bubl
gum prices.

"Q. Wht u xpct gain?

"A. Stuff abt end discrimination.

"Q. Sovereignty?

"A. How's that?

"Q. R u trying set up Spr as separate city-state w/govt independent of U
S or Earth? ('That Conductor Brown is sharper than I gave him credit
for,' Alis elaborated.)

"A. Hem & haw. Well now.

"Q. Well, r u?

"A. (Father, rescuing Civek) Q of sovereignty must remain temporarily
up in the air. Laughter (Father's). When & if Spr returns wil acpt
state-fed laws as b4 but meantime circs warrant adapt to prevailing
conditions.

"Rest of mtg was abt sleeping arngmnts, meals, recreation privileges,
clothing etc."

Don folded the notes and put them in his pocket. "Thanks. I see I didn't
miss much. The only thing it seems to add is that Mayor Civek is a
figurehead, and that if the Cavalier people know anything they're not
talking, except in gobbledygook."

"Check," Alis said. "Now let's go take a look at Pittsburgh."

"Pittsburgh?"

"That's where we are now. One of the students who lives there peeped
over the edge a while ago. I was waiting for you to come back before I
went to have a look."

"Pittsburgh?" Don repeated. "You mean Superior's drifting across the
United States?"

"Either that or it's being pushed. Let's go see."

       *       *       *       *       *

There hadn't been much to see and it had been too cold to watch for
long. The lights of Pittsburgh were beginning to go on in the dusk and
the city looked pretty and far away. A Pennsylvania Air National Guard
plane came up to investigate, but from a respectful distance. Then it
flew off.

Don left Alis, shivering, at her door and decided he wanted a drink. He
remembered having seen a sign, _Club Lyric_, down the street from the
_Sentry_ office and he headed for it.

"Sergeant Cort," said a muffled voice under his collar.

Don jumped. He'd forgotten for the moment that he was a walking radio
station. "Yes?" he said.

"Reception has been excellent," the voice said. It was no longer that of
Captain Simmons. "You needn't recapitulate. We've heard all your
conversations and feel we know as much as you do. You'll have to admit
it isn't much."

"I'm afraid not. What do you want me to do now? Should I go back and
investigate that underground room again? That seems to be the best lead
so far."

"No. You're just a bank messenger whose biggest concern was to safeguard
the contents of the brief case. Now that the contents are presumably in
the bank vault your official worries are over, and though you're curious
to know why Superior's acting the way it is, you're willing to let
somebody else do something about it."

"But they saw me in the room. Those eyes, whatever they are. I had the
feeling--well, that they weren't human."

"Nonsense!" the voice from the Pentagon said. "An ordinary
closed-circuit television hookup. Don't let your imagination run away
with you, and above all don't play spy. If they're suspicious of anyone
it will be of Geneva Jervis because of her connection with Senator
Thebold. Where are you going now?"

"Well, sir, I thought--that is, if there's no objection--I thought I'd
go have a drink. See what the townspeople are saying."

"Good idea. Do that."

"What are they saying in Washington? Does anybody put any stock in this
magnology stuff of Professor Garet's?"

"Facts are being collated. There's been no evaluation yet. You'll hear
from us again when there's something to tell you. For now, Cort, carry
on. You're doing a splendid job."

The streets were cold, dark, and deserted. The few street lights were
feeble and the lights in houses and other buildings seemed dimmer than
normal. A biting wind had sprung up and Don was glad when he saw the
neon words _Club Lyric_ ahead.

The bartender greeted him cheerfully. "It ain't a fit night. What'll it
be?"

Don decided on a straight shot, to start. "What's going on?" he asked.
"Where's the old town going?"

The bartender shrugged. "Let Civek worry about that. It's what we pay
him for, ain't it?"

"I suppose so. How're you fixed for liquor? Big supply?"

"Last a coupla weeks unless people start drinking more than usual.
Beer'll run out first."

"That's right, I guess. But aren't you worried about being up in the air
like this?"

The bartender shrugged again. "Not much I can do about it, is there?
Want another shot?"

"Mix it this time. A little soda. Is that the general attitude? Business
as usual?"

"I hear some business is picking up. Lot of people buying winter
clothes, for one thing, weather turning cold the way it did. And Dabney
Brothers--they run the coal and fuel oil company--got enough orders to
keep them going night and day for a week."

"That's fine. But when they eventually run out, like you, then what?
Everybody freeze to death?"

The bartender made a thoughtful face. "You got something there. Oh,
hello, Ed. Kinda brisk tonight."

It was Ed Clark, the newspaperman. Clark nodded to the bartender, who
began to mix him a martini. "Freeze the ears off a brass monkey," Clark
said, joining Don. "I have an extra pair of earmuffs if you'd like
them."

"Thanks," Don said, "but I think I'd better buy myself some winter
clothes tomorrow and return yours."

"Suit yourself. Planning to settle down here?"

"I don't seem to have much choice. Anything new at your end?"

Clark lifted his brimming glass and took a sip. "Here's to a mild
winter. New? I guess you know we're in Pennsylvania now and not Ohio.
_Over_ Pennsylvania, I should say. Don't ask me why, unless Hector Civek
thinks Superior will get a better break, taxwise."

"You think the mayor's behind it all?"

"He has his delusions of grandeur, like a lot of people here. But I do
think Hector knows more than he's telling. Some of the merchants--mostly
those whose business hasn't benefited by the cold wave--have called a
meeting for tomorrow. They want to pump him."

"He wasn't exactly a flowing spout at Cavalier this afternoon when the
people from the train wanted answers."

"So that's where he was. They couldn't find him at Town Hall."

"Where's it all going to end? If we keep on drifting we'll be over the
Atlantic--next stop Europe. Then Superior will be crossing national
boundaries instead of just state lines, and some country may decide
we're violating its air space and shoot us out of the sky."

"I see you take the long view," Clark said.

"Is there any other?" Don asked. "The alternative is to kid ourselves
that everything's all right and trust in Providence and Hector Civek.
What is it with you people? You don't seem to realize that sixteen
square miles of solid earth, and three thousand people, have taken off
to go waltzing through the sky. That isn't just something that happens.
Something or somebody's making it happen. The question is who or what,
and what are you going to do about it?"

The bartender said, "The boy's right, Ed. How do we know they won't take
us up higher--up where there's no air? Then we'd be cooked."

Clark laughed. "'Cooked' is hardly the word. But I agree that things are
getting out of hand." He set down his glass with a clink. "I know the
man we want. Old Doc Bendy. He could stir things up. Remember the time
they tried to run the pipeline through town and Doc formed a citizens
committee and stopped them?"

"Stopped them dead," the bartender recalled, then cleared his throat.
"Speak of the devil." He raised his voice and greeted the man who had
just walked in. "Well, Doc. Long time since we've had the pleasure of
your company. Nice to see you."

       *       *       *       *       *

Doc Bendy was an imposing old gentleman of more than average height and
magnificent girth. He carried a paunch with authority. His hands, at the
ends of short arms, seemed to fall naturally to it, and he patted the
paunch with satisfaction as he spoke. He was dressed for the cold
weather in an old frock coat, black turning green, with a double line of
oversized buttons down the front and huge eighteenth-century lapels. He
wore a battered black slouch hat which long ago had given up the
pretense of holding any particular shape.

"Salutations, gentlemen!" Doc Bendy boomed, striding majestically toward
the bar. "They tell me our peripatetic little town has just passed
Pittsburgh. I'd have thought it more likely we'd crossed the Arctic
Circle. Rum, bartender, is the only suitable potable for the occasion."

Clark introduced Don, who saw that close up Doc Bendy's face was full
and firm rather than fat. The nose had begun to develop the network of
visible blood vessels which indicated a fondness for the bottle. Shaggy
white eyebrows matched the fringe of white hair that sprouted from under
the sides and back of the slouch hat. The eyes themselves were alert
and humorous. The mouth rose subtly at the corners and, though Bendy
never seemed to smile outright, it conveyed the same humor as the eyes.
These two features, in fact, saved the old man from seeming pompous.

Don noticed that the rum the bartender poured for Bendy was 151 proof
and the portion was a generous one.

Bendy raised his glass. "Your health, gentlemen." He took a sip and put
it down. "I might also drink to a happy voyage, destination unknown."

"Don here thinks we're in danger of drifting over Europe."

"A distinct possibility," Bendy said. "Your passports are in order, I
trust? I remember the first time I went to the Continent. It was with
Black Jack Pershing and the AEF."

"Were you in the Medical Corps, sir?" Don asked.

Doc Bendy boomed with laughter, holding his paunch. "Bless your soul,
lad, I'm no doctor. I was on the board of directors of Superior's first
hospital, hence the title. A mere courtesy, conferred on me by a
grateful citizenry."

"The citizens might be looking to you again, Doc," Clark said, "since
their elected representatives are letting them down."

"But not _bringing_ them down, eh? Suppose you tell me what you know,
Mr. Editor. I assume you're the best-informed man on the situation,
barring the conspirators who have dragged us aloft."

"You think it's a conspiracy?"

"It's not an act of God."

Clark began to fill an ancient pipe, so well caked that the pencil with
which he tamped the tobacco barely fitted into the bowl. By the time the
pipe was ready for a match he had exhausted the solid facts. Don then
took over and described the underground passage he had seen that
afternoon. He was about to go further when the old man held up a hand.

"The facts only, if you please. Mr. Cort, what you saw in the
underground chamber fits in remarkably with something I stumbled on this
afternoon while I was skating."

"Skating?" Clark said.

"Ice skating. At North Lake. It's completely frozen over and I'm not so
decrepit that I can't glide on a pair of blades. Well, I was gliding
along, humming the _Skater's Waltz_, when I tripped over a stump. When I
said I stumbled on something I was speaking literally, because I fell
flat. While I lay there, with the breath knocked out of me, my face was
only an inch from the ice and I realized I was eye-to-eye with a thing.
Just as you were, Mr. Cort."

"You mean there was something under the ice?"

"Exactly. Staring up at me. Balefully, I suppose you could say, as if it
resented my presence."

"Did you see the whole face?"

"I'd be embroidering if I said yes. It seemed--but I must stick to the
facts. I saw only the eyes. Two perfectly circular eyes, which glared at
me for a moment, then disappeared."

"It could have been a fish," Clark said.

"No. A fish is about the most expressionless thing there is, while these
eyes had intelligence behind them. None of your empty, fishy stares."

Clark knocked his pipe against the edge of the bar so the ashes fell in
the vicinity of an old brass cuspidor. "So, since what you and Don saw
were both under the surface, we could put two and two together and
assume that some kind of alien beings have taken up residence in
Superior's lower levels?"

"Only if you think two and two make five," Doc Bendy said. "But even if
they don't, there's a great deal more going on than Civek knows, or the
Garet-Rubach crowd at Cavalier will admit. It seems to me, gentlemen,
that it's time I set up a committee."




VII


Miss Leora Frisbie, spinster, was found dead in the mushroom cellar of
her home on Ryder Avenue in the northeastern part of town. She had been
sitting in a camp chair, bundled in heavy clothing, when she died. She
had been subject to heart trouble and that fact, coupled with notes she
had been making on a pad in her lap, led the coroner to believe she had
been frightened to death.

The first entry on the pad said: _Someone stealing my mushrooms; must
keep vigil_. The notes continued:

_Sitting in chair near stairs. Single 60-w. bulb dims, gravity
increases. Superior rising again? Movement in corner--soil being pushed
up from underneath. Hand. Hand? Claw!_

_Claw withdraws._

_Head. Rat? No. Bigger._

_Human? No. But the eyes eyes ey_

That was all.

Photostatic copies of the late Miss Frisbie's notes and the coroner's
report became exhibits one and two in Doc Bendy's dossier. Exhibit three
was a carbon copy of a report by the stock control clerk at the bubble
gum factory.

Bubble gum had been piling up in the warehouse on the railroad siding
back of Reilly Street. The stock control clerk, Armand Specht, was
taking inventory when he saw a movement at the far end of the warehouse.
His report follows:

_Investigated and found carton had been dislodged from top of pile and
broken into. Gross of Cheeky brand missing. Saw something sitting with
back to me opening packages, stuffing gum into mouth, wax paper and all,
half-dozen at time. Looked like overgrown chimpanzee. It turned and saw
me, continuing to chew. Didn't get clear look before it disappeared but
noticed two things: one, that its cheeks bulged out from chewing so much
gum at once, and other, that its eyes were round and bright, even in
dim corner. Then animal turned and disappeared behind pile of Cheekys.
No chimpanzee. Didn't follow right away but when I did it was gone._

Exhibit four:

_Dear Diary:

_There wasn't any TV tonight and I asked Grandfather Bendy what to do and
he said "Marie, when I was young, boys and girls made their own fun" and
so I got out the Scrabble and asked Mom and Dad to play but they said no
they had to go to the Warners and play bridge. So they went and I was
playing pretending I was both sides when the door opened and I said
Hello Grandfather but it wasn't him it was like a kangaroo and it had
big eyes that were friendly._

_After a while I went over and scratched its ears and it liked that and
then it went over to the table and looked at the Scrabble. I thought
wouldn't it be funny if it could play but it couldn't. But it could
spell! It had hands like claws with long black fingernails and fur on
them (the fingers) and it pushed the letters around so they spelled Name
and I spelled out Marie._

_Then I spelled out Who are you and it spelled Gizl._

_Then I spelled How old are you and it put all the blank spaces together._

_I said Where do you live and it spelled Here. Then I changed to Where do
you come from and it pointed to the blanks again._

_The gizl went away before Mom and Dad came home and I didn't tell them
about it but I'll tell Grandfather Bendy because he understands better
about things like the time I had an invisible friend._

       *       *       *       *       *

Don Cort went to bed in the dormitory at Cavalier with the surprised
realization that it had been only twenty-four hours since Superior took
off. It seemed more like a week. When he woke up the floating town was
