
Afterward, Davis settled down below to a delicate short-wave tuning
process to get music from an improbable distance. Deirdre served Tony
his meal and talked with him while he ate it. Terry went abovedecks and
paced back and forth as the _Esperance_ sailed on through the night.

He couldn't make out anything at all about the crew or the purpose
behind the _Esperance's_ chosen task and purpose. He felt dubious about
the whole business. Like most technically-minded men, he could become
absorbed in a problem, especially if it was a device difficult to design
or a design that somehow didn't work. Such things fascinated him. But
the _Esperance's_ crew was not concerned with a problem like that. There
was no pattern in their talk or behavior to match the way a technical
mind would go about finding a solution. The problem was bafflingly
vague, yet there _was_ one.

_La Rubia_ was an element in it. Possibly Davis' wistful mention of a
partial map of the bottom of the Luzon Deep fitted in somewhere. Davis
had spoken of _orejas de ellos_ with some familiarity, but certainly no
Navy ship would cooperate in the investigation of a fisherman's
superstition in which even fishermen didn't believe any longer. The
Philippine fishing fleet was modern and efficient. Fishermen used
submarine ears without superstitious fears, and if they referred to
imaginary _ellos_ it was as an American would say "knock on wood," with
no actual belief that it meant anything.

Whatever the _Esperance's_ purpose was, there was nothing mystical about
it--not if a flattop parted with rare and expensive specialized vacuum
tubes to try to help, and the police department of Manila urged Terry
tactfully--through Horta--to join the yacht, and no less than a Navy
Captain had named him as someone to be recruited.

Deirdre came abovedecks and replaced Tony at the wheel. The _Esperance_
sailed on. A last-quarter moon was now shining low on the eastern
horizon. It seemed larger and nearer to the earth than when seen from
more temperate climes. The wake of the yacht glowed in the moonlight.

The wide expanse of canvas made stark contrast between its moonlit top
and its shadow on the deck. The only illumination on the ship was the
binnacle lights and the red and green running lights. Deirdre kept the
_Esperance_ on course.

Terry went up to where she sat, beside the wheel.

"I've been making guesses," he told her. "Your father.... I believe that
his curiosity has been aroused by something, and he's resolved to track
it down. I strongly suspect that at some time or another he's gotten
bored with making money and decided to have some fun."

Deirdre nodded.

"Very good! Almost completely true. But what he's interested in is a
good deal more important than fun."

Terry nodded in his turn.

"I suspected that too. And it's rather likely that you've got a
volunteer crew instead of a professional one because these young men
consider it a fascinating adventure into the absurd, and because they'll
keep their mouths shut if something turns out to be classified
information."

"My father's doing this strictly on his own!" said Deirdre quickly.
"There's nothing official about it. There isn't any classified
information about it. This is a private affair from the beginning!"

"But in the end it may turn out to be something else," said Terry.

"Y-yes. We don't know, though. It's impossible to know!
It's--ridiculous!"

"And my explanation for your being so mysterious with me is that you and
your father insist that I find out everything for myself because I'd
think it foolish if you told me."

Deirdre did not answer for a moment. There was a movement behind Terry,
and Davis came on deck.

"That was good music!" he said pleasedly. "You missed some very
interesting sounds, Deirdre! You too, Holt."

"He's decided," said Deirdre, "that we're a little bit ashamed of our
enterprise and won't tell him about it for fear he'll simply laugh at
us."

Terry protested, "Not at all! Nothing like that!"

"When some forty-odd people have been killed by something inexplicable
at one time that we know of," said Davis, "--and we don't know how many
others have been killed at other times, or may be killed by it in the
future--I don't think that's a laughing matter."

He surveyed what should be the direction of the land. A light showed
there and vanished, then came on again and vanished. A minute later it
showed and disappeared, then came on again twice. It was very far away.
Davis said in a different tone, "We can change course now, Deirdre. You
know the new one."

The _Esperance's_ bowsprit forsook the star at which it had been aiming.
It swung to another. Davis moved about, adjusting the sheets alone. On
the new heading the yacht heeled over a little more and the water
rushing past her hull had a different sound. The sky seemed larger and
more remote than it ever appears from a city. The yacht's wake streamed
behind her in a trail of bluish brightness. Even the moon was strange.
It had the cold enormousness of something very near and menacing. It
looked as close as when seen through a telescope of moderate power.

The _Esperance_ seemed very lonely on the immense waste of waters.

Next morning, of course, the sense of loneliness was gone. There was
neither land nor any ship in sight, but gulls fluttered and squawked
overhead, and the waves seemed to leap and gambol in the sunshine. Just
before the foremast a metal plate in the decking had been lifted up, and
a new, stubby, extensible mast rose almost as high as the crosstrees. A
tiny basket-like object rotated monotonously at its upper end. It was a
radar-bowl, and somehow it was not unusual, except in the manner in
which it was mounted. Yet, such a collapsible radar mast was reasonable
on a sailing yacht with many lines aloft that could be fouled. Anyhow,
the radar was concerned with human affairs, and so it was company.

The housekeeping work on the boat was in progress. Doug and Jug scrubbed
the deck. The other crew-cuts gave signs of industry from time to time,
appearing and vanishing. Davis smoked tranquilly at the wheel. Terry
felt useless, as well as puzzled.

"Can I do anything?" he asked awkwardly.

"You're your own boss," said Davis.

"Then I might as well see what can be done about that submarine
noisemaker."

"If you feel like it," said Davis, "fine!"

But he did not urge. Terry waited a moment. There was a sort of
contagion of purposefulness in this eccentric small group on the
_Esperance_. They had something they were trying to do, and it seemed
important to them. But Terry was an outsider and would remain one until
he became active in their joint effort.

He got out his equipment and materials and spread them out. There was no
need to build a recorder, since there was one among the supplies. The
rest wouldn't be unduly difficult. He established a working space and
set systematically to work. The task he'd accepted was essentially
simple. A submarine ear was to pick up underwater sounds. He had to
modify a microphone and enclose it in a water-tight housing, with
certain special features that would make it highly directional. The
recorder would take the pick-up and register it on magnetic tape, while
playing it for simultaneous listening. Then he had to assemble a
machine for playing back the taped sounds under water. That required a
unit for a submarine horn, to broadcast the amplified sound. It isn't
difficult to make a sound under water. One can knock two stones together
under the surface and a swimmer can hear it a mile or more away. But a
horn to reproduce specific sounds is more difficult to build. It needs
extra power. A sound-truck in a city, competing with all the traffic
noises, will turn no more than fifteen watts of electricity into noise.
But much more power would be needed to produce a similar volume under
water.

Terry modified the mike into a submarine ear--an _orejas de ellos_. Then
he began to assemble an audio amplifier to build up the volume of the
sounds already taped for re-use under the sea. He had the parts. It was
mostly just finicky labor. He sat cross-legged in the sunshine, not far
from the _Esperance's_ unusual winch.

Nick came up from below and went aft. He spoke to Davis. Terry couldn't
hear what was said, but Davis gave orders.

The _Esperance_ heeled over; away, away over. The four crew-cuts
adjusted the sheets for maximum effect of the sails on the new direction
of motion. The yacht seemed to tear through the water like a racing
boat. Terry had to rescue some of his smaller parts which started for
the scuppers. He looked up. Deirdre said cheerfully, "Our radar picked
up a boat that's probably _La Rubia_ on the way back to Manila. We don't
want her to see us."

Terry blinked.

"Why?"

"We're going to take a look at the spot where we think she catches her
fish," said Deirdre. "It's strange enough that she catches so many, but
what's even stranger is the kind of fish she catches at times."

"How?"

Deirdre shrugged. Then she said irrelevantly, "_La Rubia's_ skipper
would like to have the only radar in the world, as you've reason to
know, and he doesn't think of radars, except his own and possible
competitors. But there are lots of others. We're probably a blip on
somebody's radar-screen right now. In fact, we're supposed to be. So
when my father got interested in _La Rubia_ and her--catches, he was
able to have somebody notice where she goes every time she slips away
from the fishing fleet. And so he was told. It was all quite unofficial,
of course."

Terry bent over his task again while the _Esperance_ sped along over the
off-shore swells. There was no land in sight anywhere. An albatross
glided overhead for a time, as if inspecting the _Esperance_ as a
possible source of food. When Terry looked for it later it was gone.
Once there was a flurry in many wave-flanks, and a small school of
flying fish darted out of the sea with hazy, beating fins, and dived
back into the sea many yards from where they started.

But nothing of any consequence happened anywhere. Terry fitted and
soldered and tested. By noon he had a rather powerful audio amplifying
unit, set up to magnify any sound the tape-recorder fed into it. Deirdre
prepared a meal. The galley of the _Esperance_ was admirably supplied
with all kinds of food. After the noon meal the yacht changed course
again to a line which would intersect her original morning course at
some point.

Terry found himself fuming. He'd set to work to make something that
Davis apparently wanted, but his most elementary questions still ran
against a blank refusal to answer. Both Davis and Deirdre had spoken of
oddities in the catches of _La Rubia_. There could not possibly be any
reason for them to refuse to tell him what they were. Terry worked
himself into irritability, recalling how he volunteered to come on the
_Esperance_ but not thinking that he would be treated as someone who
wasn't allowed to know what everybody else aboard most certainly did.

In the afternoon there was guitar music down in the forecastle, and Doug
came out and settled himself on the bowsprit with a book of poetry.
Presently Nick sat down close by Terry and watched interestedly as he
put mysterious-looking electronic elements together into
incomprehensible groups. When he had finished, Terry did not admire his
handiwork. The noisemaking unit came last. The electrical part had to be
enclosed, water-tight, with a diaphragm exposed to the water on one
side and its working parts protected from all moisture on the other. The
device looked cobbled, but it worked, and made monstrous sounds in the
air.

Now he plugged the submarine ear into the recorder. He dropped it
overside and taped the random noises of the sea: the washings of sea
water against the _Esperance's_ hull, frequent splashings, and very
faint, chirping noises from who-knew-what.

"Watch the volume, will you?" Terry pointed out the Indication that
should not be exceeded. Nick nodded. "I'm going to whack the paddle
overside and see what we get in the way of noise."

Nick hesitated. Then he said uneasily, "Wait a minute."

He went aft to Davis, apparently somnolent at the wheel. Deirdre joined
the two of them in a seemingly very serious discussion. Then she walked
over to Terry.

"I hate to say it," she told him with evident concern, "but my father
thinks it would be wiser to try out the paddle in shallow water. Do you
mind?"

"Yes," snapped Terry. "I do mind, since I'm not allowed to know the
reason for that or anything else."

He put away his tools and the unused parts. He pointed to the machines
he had already built.

"This is what your father wanted, I think. After it's tested I'll ask
you to put me ashore."

He went below, where he fretted to himself. But no one came, either to
inform him of Davis' reasons, or to tell him to do as he pleased. He
felt like a child who isn't allowed to play with other children; who is
arbitrarily excluded from the purpose and the excitement of his fellows.
Thinking in such terms did not make him feel any better. His irritation
increased. The _Esperance_ was engaged in an enterprise that these
people considered very much worth doing. He'd joined them to accomplish
it, and they wouldn't tell him what it was. He hadn't the temperament to
be content with just following blindly. And somehow the fact that
Deirdre was aboard and a participant in the secret made his exclusion an
insult.

He felt about Deirdre that urgent concern that a man may feel about one
or two, or at most three girls during his whole lifetime. It wasn't a
romantic interest, at this stage, but he wanted to look well in her
eyes, and he was enormously interested in anything she said and did. If
he left the _Esperance_ and ceased to know her, he knew he'd be nagged
at by the feeling that he'd made a very bad mistake. He didn't want to
stop knowing her. But he refused to be patronized.

He saw an open book on the after-cabin table and glanced restlessly at
it. There were three or four photographs and a newspaper clipping stuck
into its pages. The book itself dealt with physics at post-graduate
levels--which meant that it included a good deal about electronics.

Still fuming, Terry glanced at the pictures. The first was of a
spherical object made of transparent plastic and probably of small size.
It had a number of metallic elements clearly visible through the
transparent case. It looked as if it might be an electronic device
itself, but there was no sign of lead-in contacts, and the parts inside
made no sense at all. The second and third photographs were of a similar
yet slightly different object. The fourth photograph was a picture of
what looked like ocean water, taken from a plane. The horizon showed in
one corner. The center of the picture was an irregularly-shaped mass of
white. On close examination it appeared to be foam. But it looked as if
it were piled up in masses above the surface. If the water around it was
ocean--and it was--and the visible crest-lines were of waves--and they
were--that heap of foam must have been hundreds of yards in diameter and
piled many feet high on the surface. Foam does not form in such masses
in the open sea. It would not last if it did.

On the margin of this picture a date had been inked--three days
before--and a position in degrees of latitude and longitude.

Terry turned to the chart rack. He pulled out a chart and looked up the
position. Someone had made a pencil-dot there. It was close to Thrawn
Island, on the very brink of the Luzon Deep, that incredible submarine
chasm in which the entire Himalayan chain could be sunk without showing
a single pinnacle above the surface.

He went back to the clipping. It was dated Manila, two years earlier. It
was an obviously skeptical article on a report made by the crewmen of a
sailing ship that stopped by Manila. Sailing ships are rare enough in
modern times. This ship reported that she had sighted another of her own
kind at sea. The two ships altered course to speak to each other. And
