46, Ascot Gardens, Southall, Middlesex, England (President), and P.
Enever, Esq., "Rosemead," High Road, Hayes, Middlesex, England (Hon.
Secretary). The method to be followed in sending in an application is
as follows: in ink or type give 1. Full name; 2. Full address; 3. Age
in years and months; 4. Your hobby (if any); 5. The names of the
science fiction magazines you read; 6. Your scientific pursuits and
interests. State what subscriptions you inclose. (It is desirable,
though not necessary if you are unable to afford it, to send your
dollar for the year.) Sign at the bottom, and submit.




MY FAVORITE SCIENCE FICTION STORY

by Mortimer Weisinger


"The Second Deluge" by Garret P. Serviss has always had a hold on me.
I have re-read it so many times that the characters in this tale seem
to be real people. When Garret P. Serviss, a world famous scientist,
couples his knowledge with vivid imagination, the result is sure to be
something decidedly unique, and "The Second Deluge" was a truly
amazing tale. The colorful descriptions and gripping action of this
exciting narrative make it one that is not soon forgotten.




PENPALS WANTED


Every month in this column will appear the names of those that desire
penpals. PC after a name means via postcard. If you want to correspond
with other lovers of science and weird fiction, send us your name and
we will print it free of charge.

    Bob Tucker, P.O. Box 260,
    Bloomington, Illinois. PC




THE BOILING POINT


Only the hottest of controversies will be printed in this
column--radical arguments that will bring your blood to 'The Boiling
Point.' We start this department off by presenting one of the most
blasphemous articles it has been our pleasure to read. It is by
Forrest J. Ackerman, and he calls it

    'A Quarrel With Clark Ashton Smith'

No doubt this will be the commencement of a lively discussion between
the readers. It is the editor's intention to print the most
interesting arguments on both sides of the case. I have this to say:
it seems to me that Wonder Stories is going far afield when it takes
such a horror story as Mr. Smith's "Dweller in Martian Depths" and,
because it is laid on the Red Planet, prints it in a magazine of
scientific fiction. Frankly, I could not find one redeeming feature
about the story. Of course, everything doesn't have to have a moral.
The thrilling scientifilm, "King Kong," for instance, has no moral to
it--except, perhaps, to be careful of Fay Wray, if you are a great
prehistoric ape--but it has a point, at least: to interest. And
"Dweller in Martian Depths" didn't interest me. I don't know, maybe it
did others. But it disappointed me very greatly to find it in a stf
publication. In Weird Tales, all right. I don't like that type of
story, I wouldn't read it there. I fail to find anything worth-while
in an endless procession of ethereal lites, phantastic visions,
ultra-mundane life, exotic paradises, airy vegetation, whispering
flutes, ghastly plants, and dirge-like horrors. May the ink dry up in
the pen from which they flow! Or, at least, Mr. Smith, direct those
tales elsewhere--NOT to a stf publication, because I do like your
science fiction like "Master of the Asteroid" and "Flight into Super
Time." But 'stuff' like "The Light From Beyond"....

Well, let's hear from someone in favor.

(Make "The Boiling Point" boil you indignant fans. Don't let this guy
Ackerman get away with it. Your replies will be published in this
department. We would especially appreciate a reply from Mr. Smith
himself in defense of his stories.)

                     *      *      *      *      *

You may have the mistaken idea that "The Fantasy Fan" and the "Science
Fiction Digest" are in competition. The truth is that they are not. We
are working together, and it is our mutual opinion that TFF and SFD
each fill a separate niche in the fantasy field. Every active fan will
want both magazines. See the SFD ad in this issue. You won't want to
miss COSMOS, and the other SFD features.




SCIENCE FICTION IN ENGLISH MAGAZINES

by Bob Tucker


Of late, quite a number of English 'penny dreadfuls,' or known to
others as 'blood and thunders' are finding their way into this
country, from London.

These small magazines have very lurid covers. Almost every one of
these publications run science fiction, or what could be termed
science fiction by a very broadminded person. The plots are
scientific, even though some of the tales contain very little science.

The Wizard Magazine is running a serial named "The End of the World,"
and in the same issue, another story, "Vengeance of the Incas," tells
of the Incas overcoming their enemies with a huge Sunray, which burns
up everything in its path. Another mag by name of Boys' Magazine is
running a thriller "The 1933 Dragon Killer" and two others, "The House
of Mocking Shadows," and "Tiger Boy," which, you may guess, is on the
same plot as Tarzan, Kaspa, Tam, and Jan. Still another pub., The
Skipper, is running "The Moon Men," and is about those gentlemen
visiting the Earth, intent on its capture, as usual. One of the weird
type is in this issue; "The Ice Pirates."

A fourth mag, The Rover, is running a serial that is amazingly like a
story that was in an American mag last spring. The story is "The
Flaming Avenger," and the author has his hero do the very same thing
the American did, and copied the idea completely, even down to the
invention the hero made, and used the invention to do the same work
with, that the American did. Of course, locale, names, and situations
are different, but outside of that, the two plots are similar.
