the earth.... Its taste momentarily sated, the thing paused and
turned.

It took some moments for reason to replace the stark terror of the
townsfolk. Then there was a mad and frantic rush for the nearest
houses. Those to first gain entrance barred the doors upon their
comrades. In a moment the street was apparently bare--save for the
unseen monster.

All that afternoon and night it pried at doors, scratched at roofs,
muzzled windows and upset fruits-carts inquiringly. But the people of
Droom had built well. It did not gain entrance during the night,
although few slept, when they heard the constant breathing before
their homes, and the dull thumping sounds as it wreaked its malice
upon the shops of the marketplace.

It was high noon before any dared unbar their doors and venture forth.
Nothing unusual greeted their blanched faces, and silently,
apprehensively they stole to their tasks. Soon all activity again
commenced.

The horror had gone.

                     *      *      *      *      *

Come over to "Our Readers Say" and "The Boiling Point" and join in the
comment.




THE BOILING POINT


Herewith we continue the Ackerman-Smith debate, which is waxing hot.

"The Ackerman-Smith controversy assumes all the aspects of a mad
comedy. To assail and reprehend the writings of Clark Ashton Smith is
as preposterous and futile as a dwarf transporting a huge mountain
peak upon the tip of his tiny finger. Either Forrest J. Ackerman is
daft or an imbecile or a notoriety-seeking clown and knave. Clark
Ashton Smith stands alone in the realm of present-day weird and
fantastic literature, and, therefore, above all his contemporaries. He
is still King: and has yet to be dethrone."--Robert Nelson.

"Personally, I thought that 'The Light From Beyond' was very good, and
I saw nothing weird about it. It was fantasy and not stf., but some of
the greatest classics of so-called science fiction have been almost
pure fantasy. Witness: Merritt's 'Snake Mother' and 'Moon Pool,' and
Taine's 'Time Stream.' Ackerman's objections to this were particularly
obnoxious to me, as I thought it one of the best stories ever written.
Certainly, there should be something more to science fiction than
rays, machines, villains, heroines (composed of lipstick and leg, as
Mr. Barlow rather bitterly expresses it), as has been stressed so
greatly of late. There should be an element of fantasy, strong
characters, and a well-developed plot in addition. The lack of those
is why so many weird story lovers (like Mr. Barlow) can find so much
fault with stf. I do not blame him. I, myself, as a reader, will stop
reading stf when the fantasy element is dropped completely." William
Crawford.




QUESTIONNAIRE


Here are the answers to the questions we asked you in September. How
many could you answer without looking them up?

1. David H. Keller's first story was "The Revolt of the Pedestrians"
in the February, 1928 issue of Amazing.

2. Tom Jenkins was the leading character in "In 20,000 A.D." and "Back
to 20,000 A.D." by Schachner and Zagat, in the Sept., 1930 and March,
1931 issues of Wonder, respectively.

3. A. Hyatt Verrill lays most of his plots in Central and South
America.

4. "Through the Veil" by Leslie F. Stone in May, 1930 Amazing, gave a
scientific explanation of the fairy myth.

5. Clement Fezandie wrote the "Dr. Hackensaw's Secrets" stories, a
series in the old Electrical Experimenter, and early issues of Science
and Invention.

                     *      *      *      *      *

Not so much in rebuttal to Mr. Ackerman as to toss another stick
onto the fire, let me confess that the scientific fiction type of
literature seems to me among the dullest written. I avoid whenever
possible, except in such cases where it passes the boundaries into
the weird and horrible. Of course, the work of Wells is an exception.
This may be blasphemy to most of your readers, but there it is. To
return to Mr. Ackerman's complaint: I fail to see why it is any more
deplorable for Wonder Stories to publish Clark Ashton Smith's
horror story than for Weird Tales to publish Edmond Hamilton's
pseudo-scientific effusions. And it was Amazing Stories that had the
honor to publish "The Colour Out of Space" by America's master of the
weird, Lovecraft. Richard E. Morse.




A DREAM OF THE ABYSS

by Clark Ashton Smith


    I seemed at the sheer end:
    Albeit mine eyes, in mystery and night
    Shrouded as with the thick profundity of death,
    Or as if underneath Lethean lentors drowned,
    Saw never lamp nor star nor dead star's wraith of light,
    Yet seemed I at the world's sheer end;
    And fearfully and slowly I drew breath
    From silent gulfs of all uncertainty and dread,
    Precipitate to Nadir from around;
    Nor trusted I on any side to tread
    One pace, lest I should overstep the brink
    And infinitely and forever sink
    Past eye-shot of the Cyclopean sun,
    When from the bulwark of the world adown oblivion,
    He on the morrow should stare after me.

    Swift from infinity,
    The black, unformed, enormous Fear that lives between the stars,
    Clutched with the cold, great darkness at my heart.
    Then from the gulf arose a whispering,
    And rustle as of Silence on the wing,
    To stay and stand
    Anear at my right hand:
    What Powers abysmal, born o' the blind black air,
    What nameless demons of the nether deep
    That 'scape the sun and from the moonlight live apart,
    Came and conspired against me there
    I heard not, ere the whispering
    Ceased, and a heavier darkness seemed to spring
    Upon me, and I felt the silence leap
    And clasp me closer, and the sweep
    Of all the abyss reach up and drag
    Body and feet from the crumbling uttermost crag
    To the plumb and infinite emptiness unknown:
    Nor knew I, in tumult of the rapid air,
    If me did Azrael or Abaddon bear,
    Or if I fell alone.




HOW TO COLLECT FANTASY FICTION

