had been anticipating this eventful visit for several months, during
which time I had reacted this scene many times.

"Yes," the man replied. "I am Dr. Trowbridge. Will you please come
in?"

I entered, just as a voice from within called out, "Who was it, Friend
Trowbridge?"

We entered a large, cheery room, and seated in a deep study chair, I
saw Jules de Grandin, his blond hair sleek and shining. He looked up
from the magazine had been reading, and seeing me, arose, and stroking
his blond mustache, said, "What can we do for you, my dear young
lady?"

Suddenly, my knees seemed to turn to water. "Mr. de Grandin," I
managed to whisper, "I have always wanted to see you in person; I hope
you will forgive my intrusion."

Jules de Grandin waved me to a seat with his long, artistic hand, and
seeing a silver topped walking stick in the corner, I asked, "Is that
the famous walking stick which vanquished the werewolf in 'The Thing
in the Fog'?"

"Eh, bien, of a truth, my young friend," he admitted, "if it were not
for the concealed sword in the center, I would have been in too many
tight places for comfort."

"Mr. de Grandin, will you please tell how many years you have been
interested in this line of investigation?" I asked.

"O, tiens, my young lady, I have been actively engaged for the past
eight years in this thrilling occupation."

"I am sorry that I weren't acquainted with your adventures right from
the start," I confessed. "Weren't you afraid in some of the gruesome
cases such as 'The Bleeding Mummy' and the 'Band of Glory'?"

"Eh, bien," he answered, "my friend, if one allows himself to let fear
enter his heart, he is already defeated, and I know that I have the
Good One in my favor."

"Well, Mr. de Grandin and Dr. Trowbridge, thank you for this
delightful talk," I began, when a blood-curdling moan echoed through
the house. De Grandin, Dr. Trowbridge, and I ran to where the moan
seemed to come from, but nothing was there. I imagine that I must have
turned pale, for Dr. Trowbridge caught hold of my arm and gave me a
glass of water containing some sort of restorative. As I began to feel
better, my color came back and de Grandin said, "My friend, your train
leaves in twenty minutes, so, Friend Trowbridge, get out your car and
take the young lady to the station."

"But how about that moan?" I asked.

"_Mon Dieu!_" he exclaimed, though less excited than would be expected
under the circumstances, "but I, Jules de Grandin, shall soon find
out!"

Gathering up my purse, I arose and gave my hand to de Grandin, then
Dr. Trowbridge took me to the station.

Safely in my compartment, I suddenly realized how tired I was. So,
leaning back in my seat and closing my eyes, I drifted into the land
of dreams--into the realm of deathless visions, where hazy phantasms
of the imagination take one through glorious adventures in which
earthly realities become as nothing.




WINDS

by Richard F. Searight


    The North Wind blares, a gelid, lee-born roar,
    Down from the arctic wastes where sit the ghosts
    Of one-eyed Odin, bloody-handed Thor,
    In frost-bound silence with their warrior hosts.

    The East Wind murmurs softly through the night
    Of dank and noisome things, and evil lore
    Old in the days when Atlar rose to might.
    And Chaldic magic ruled a world of gore.

    The South Wind breathes a pestilential dirge.
    It whispers of corruption and the tomb;
    Of life in death, and mankind's biting urge
    To gain the secrets hidden in Time's womb.

    The West Wind keens a warning cry of hate,
    As, from the boundless voids of sea and sky,
    It sweeps upon a race bowed low by fate,
    Yet striving still to gain the heights or die.




THE DWELLER

by William Lumley


    Dread and potent broods a Dweller
      In an evil twilight space,
    Formless as a daemon's shadow,
      Void of members and of face.

    Heeding not the shaped or human,
      Past the reach of time or law--
    Never may our minds conceive It
      Save as clouds of fright and awe.

    When It crawls malignly on us,
      Lethal mists of leaden grey,
    Rising vaguely in the distance,
      Veil its hideous bulk away.

    And Its mutterings of horror,
      Foul with lore of charnel ground,
    Lose themselves in troubled thunders
      That from far horizons sound.




THE WEIRD WORKS OF M. R. JAMES

by Clark Ashton Smith


The four books of short stories written by Montague Rhodes James,
Provost of Eton College, have been collected in a single but not
overly bulky volume under the imprint of Longmans, Green & Co. One can
heartily recommend the acquisition of this volume to all lovers of the
weird and supernatural who are not already familiar with its contents.

James is perhaps unsurpassed in originality by any living writer; and
he has made a salient contribution to the technique of his genre as
well as to the enriching of its treasury of permanent masterpiece. His
work is marked by rare intellectual skill and ingenuity, by power
