pouring from his forehead and body, soaking his clothes. He sat bolt
upright. He searched for his watch, but couldn't find it. _How long had
he slept?_

His eyes shot to the opposite bed, standing empty, and he rolled out
onto his feet. He had the horrible feeling that the world had passed
him by, that he had missed something critical while he slept.

He stared at his wrist. The watch was definitely gone. Then, with a
curse, he crossed the room and ripped open Blackie's foot locker.
Sure enough, the watch lay with the heap of gold jewelry on the dirty
clothes pile. He stared at it as he re-strapped it on his wrist. Then
he walked into the lavatory, splashed cold water into his face and
tried to quell the fierce painful throbbing in his head. The watch said
eight-thirty. He had slept for five hours--five precious hours for
Conroe to hide, cover his tracks, disappear deeper into this mire of
human trash.

Jeff stumbled to the door, glanced out to see two gray-clothed guards
passing in the corridor. Quietly he pulled the door shut. His stomach
was screaming from hunger and he searched the room restlessly. Finally,
he unearthed a box of crackers and a quarter pound of cheese in the
bottom of Blackie's locker. He ate ravenously and drank some water from
the lavatory tap. Then he sank down on the edge of the bed.

The dream again, the same horrible, frightening, desperate dream--the
dream that recurred and recurred; always different, yet always the
same. The same face that had haunted him all his life, the face that
had almost driven him insane that day, five years before, when he met
it face to face for the first time; the face of the man he had hunted
to the ends of the earth. But never had he caught the man, never had
he seen him but for brief glimpses. Conroe had slipped from every trap
before it was sprung. Yet finally he had become so desperate that he
was forced to retreat down a one-way road that led to hellish death.

Jeff shook his head hopelessly as he tried to piece together the
situation. He was in a half-world of avaricious men and women out to
sell themselves for incredible fees. It was a half-world that seemed
to Jeff only slightly more insane than the warped, intense world of
pressure and fear and insecurity that lay outside the Hoffman Center.
And in this half-world were a doctor who knew Jeff was a fraud, a
kleptomaniac girl who thought he was an addict, and somewhere--the
slender figure of the man he hunted.

Again he walked to the door. After peering out cautiously, he started
down the corridor. From the far end he heard a burst of laughter, the
sound of many voices. The smell of coffee floated down the corridor to
tantalize him. He followed the sounds and reached the large, long room
that served as a lounge and library for the Mercy Men in his unit.

The room was crowded. A dozen groups were huddled on the floor in a
buzz of frantic excitement. The room was blue with cigarette smoke, and
the lights glowed harshly from the walls. He saw the dice rolling in
the centers of the groups and he also saw half a dozen tables, crowded
with bright-eyed people. He heard the riffle of playing cards and the
harsh, tense laugh of a winner drawing in a pot. And then he spied the
Nasty Frenchman, his eyes bright with excitement, a cup of exceedingly
black coffee in one hand and a pile of white paper tags in the other.

He grinned at Jeff with undisguised malice and said, "Come on in, wise
guy. Things are just beginning to get hot."

Blinking, Jeff walked into the room.




CHAPTER FIVE


His first impulse was to turn and run. There was no explaining it,
no rationalizing the feeling of dread and danger that struck him
as he walked into the room. The feeling swept over him with almost
overpowering intensity; something was unbearably wrong here.

Jeff walked in slowly, closing the door behind him. The door seemed
to be pulled tight shut, sucked out of his hand. That was when the
tension in the air struck Jeff like an almost physical force, and his
mind filled with dread.

No one noticed him. He stared around himself curiously. He watched
the Nasty Frenchman shoulder his way through the crowd. One of Silly
Giggin's particularly maddening nervous-jazz arrangements was squawking
from a player somewhere in the room, and the air itself was filled with
a jagged rattle of conversation that rose above the music.

Most of the faces were new to Jeff. There were tired, old ones, marked
indelibly with lines of fear, lines of hunted hopelessness. There
were faces with tight, compressed, bloodless lips; faces with eyes
full of coldness and cynicism, and faces radiating sharp, perverted
intelligence.

Crowds leaned tensely around the tables and watched the cards with
eager, calculating eyes. Side bets were made as the hands were opened.
Other groups huddled on the floor and watched the dice with beady,
avaricious eyes.

The music jangled and scraped, and little bursts of harsh laughter
broke out to compete with it. And through it all ran the chilling
inescapable feeling of error, of something missed, something gone
horribly wrong.

He moved slowly through the room and searched the faces milling around
him. His eyes caught Blackie's, far across the room, for the barest
instant, and the chill of something gone wrong intensified and sent a
quiver up his spine. He stopped a passerby and motioned at the nearest
dice huddle. "How do you get in?" he asked.

The man shrugged, looking at him strangely. "You lay down your money
and you play," he snapped. "If you got no money, then you've got the
next job's payoff to bet with. 'Smatter, Jack, you new around here?"
And the man moved on, shaking his head.

Jeff nodded, realization striking. What would be more natural to a
group of people teetering from day to day on the brink of death? The
need for excitement, for activity, would be overpowering in a dismal
prison-place like this. And with the huge sums of money yet unearned to
bet with--Jeff shuddered. Cut-throat games, yes, but could they really
explain this strange tension he sensed? Or had something happened,
something to change the atmosphere, to pervade every nook and cranny of
the room with an air of explosive tension?

Jeff started moving toward the Nasty Frenchman. The little man was
gulping coffee in the corner. He sucked on a long, black cigar and
appeared to be in deep conversation with a bald-headed giant who leaned
against the wall. Jeff spotted Blackie again. She was across the room
on her knees. She faced a little buck-toothed man, as she swiftly
rolled the three colored dice. Her eyes followed them, quick and
unnaturally bright.

Jeff shook his head. Panmumjon was a high-speed, high-tension game--a
game for the steel-nerved. Its famous dead-locks had often led to
murder, as the pots rose higher and higher. The girl seemed to be
winning. She rolled the dice with trance-like regularity, and the
little buck-toothed man's face darkened as his money pile dwindled.

Across the room a corner crap game was moving swiftly, with staggering
sums of money passing from hand to hand; the card games, though slower,
left the mark of their tension on the players' faces. Jeff still
stared, until he had seen every face in the room. Paul Conroe's face
was not one of them.

No, he had not expected that. But what had happened? It was maddening
to stand there, to feel the tension in the room, sense that it was
growing until it seemed to pound at his temples. No one else seemed to
notice it. Was he the only one aware of the change in the air, in the
sounds, even in the color of the light against the walls? Something was
impelling him, urging him to run, to get away, to leave the room now
while he could. Yet when he tried to analyze the creeping, poisonous
fear, tried to pin it down, it wriggled away into the fringes of his
mind, and mocked him.

Finally, he reached the corner of the room. His ear caught the Nasty
Frenchman's nasal voice, and he froze as he stared at the little man.

"I tell you, Harpo, I heard it with my own ears. You never saw Schiml
so excited. And then Shaggy Parsons was saying that the whole unit was
being split up--that's the A unit. I saw him when I was going through
this afternoon. He was all excited, too."

"But why split it up?" The huge bald-headed man called Harpo growled,
his heavy lips twisting in disgust. "I don't trust Shaggy Parsons for
nothin', and I think you hear what you want to hear. What's the point
to it? Schiml's coming along fine in the work he's using us in--"

The Nasty Frenchman turned red. "That's just it: we've been in and
we're going to be out, right out in the cold. Can't you get that
straight? Something's going to break. They're onto something--Schiml
and his boys--something big. And they've got a new man, somebody
they're excited about, somebody that's been knocking walls down just by
looking at them, or something--"

Harpo made a disgusted noise. "You mean, the old ESP story again. So
maybe they go off on another spook hunt. They'll get over it, same as
they did the last time or the time before."

The Nasty Frenchman's voice was tense. "But they're _changing things_.
And changes mean trouble." He glanced at Jeff and his eyebrows went
up. "Look, they get on a line of work, they assign men to different
parts of a job, they get work lined up months in advance. Then all of
a sudden something new comes along. They get excited about something
and they toss out a couple dozen workers, add on a couple dozen new
ones, change the fees, change the work. And they end up handing the
best pay to somebody who's just come in. I don't like it. I've been in
this place too long. I've had too many tough, lousy jobs here to just
get pushed aside because they don't happen to be interested any more
in what they were doing to me before. And they never tell us! We never
know for sure. We just have to wait and guess and hope."

The little man's eyes blazed. "But we can pick up some things, a little
here, a little there--you learn how, after a while. And I can tell you,
something's wrong, something's going to happen. You can even feel it in
here."

Jeff's skin crawled. That was it, of course. There was something wrong.
But it hadn't happened yet. It was going to happen. He stared at a
huddled group around a panmumjon game, watched the bright-colored dice
cubes roll across and back, across and back. A newcomer, the Nasty
Frenchman had said, someone who had come in and disrupted the smooth
work schedule of the Center, someone who had the doctors suddenly
excited. Someone whom they were planning to use--on a spook hunt.

What kind of a spook hunt? Why that choice of words? Could Conroe
conceivably be the newcomer they had been talking about? It didn't seem
possible that it could have happened so suddenly if Conroe were the
one--but who? And what did this have to do with the ever-growing sense
of impending danger that pervaded the room, right now?

Jeff's eyes wandered to the dice game, and the fear in his mind
suddenly grew to a screaming torrent. _Go away, Jeff. Don't watch,
don't look--_He scowled, suddenly angry. Why not look? What was there
so dangerous in a dice game? He moved over to the nearby huddle and
watched the moving cubes in fascination. _No, Jeff, no, don't do it,
Jeff--_With a curse, he dropped to his knees and reached out for the
dice.

"You in?" somebody asked. Jeff nodded, his face like a rock. The voice
had stopped screaming in his ear, and now something else grew in his
mind: a wild exhilaration that caught his breath and swept through his
brain like a whirl-wind. His eyes sparkled and he pulled money from his
pocket. He laid the bills on the floor and his hands closed on the dice.

He faced a little, pimple-faced man with beady black eyes and he raised
the three brightly colored dice, rolling into the familiar pattern.
The dice deadlocked in four throws. He sweated out seven more with new
dice. Then Jeff saw a break in the odds, boosted the ante on his next
throw and caught his breath as the man facing him matched it.

The dice rolled, fell into deadlock again, and the crowd around them
gasped, moved in closer around them. The third set of dice was brought
out, for the attempts at dead-lock-breaking. Then a fourth set
followed, as the complex structure of the game built up like a house
of cards. Then Jeff's dice at last rolled the critical number, and the
structure began to break apart--throw after throw falling faster and
faster into his hands.

Four or five people moved in at his side with side bets and began to
collect along with him, as he moved into another game, built it up.
This one he lost cold, but still he played on, his excitement growing.

And then, suddenly, pandemonium broke loose in the room. Eyes glanced
up, startled, at the two men, far across the room, who stood facing
each other, eyes blazing.

"Throw them down! Go on! Throw them, see how they land!"

Somebody shouted, "What happened, Archie?"

"He's got loaded dice in here, somehow." Archie pointed an accusing
finger at the other man. "They don't fall right. There's something
wrong with them--"

The other man snarled. "So you aren't winning any more--so what? You
brought the dice in yourself."

"But the odds aren't right. There's something funny going on."

Jeff turned back to the dice, his mind still screaming, sensing that
disaster hung in the air like a heavy sword. His own game moved on,
faster and faster. Somewhere across the room another fight broke out,
and another. Several men dropped out of games and stood up against
the walls. Their eyes were wide with anger as they watched the other
players. And then Jeff rolled three sixes, fourteen times in a row. He
tossed the dice down in front of his gaping opponents with a curse and
walked shakily back to the corner. The whole room spun around his head.

_Suddenly, in this room, probabilities had gone mad._ He could feel the
shifting instability of the atmosphere, as real and oppressive to him
as if it were solid and he were attempting to wade through it. This was
what had been bothering him, plaguing him. Quite suddenly and without
explanation, something impossible had begun to happen. Cards had begun
to fall in unbelievable sequences, repeating themselves with idiotic
regularity; dice had defied the laws of gravity as they spun on the
tables and floor.

A hubbub filled the room as the players stopped and stared at each
other, unable to comprehend the impossible that was happening before
their eyes. And then Blackie was passing Jeff, her face flushed, a
curious light of desperation in her eyes.

An impulse passed through Jeff's mind. He reached out an arm, stopped
the girl. "Game," he said sharply.

Her eyes flashed at him. "What game?"

"Anything." He held up his wrist before her eyes and showed her the
gold watch. "We can play for this."

Something flared in her eyes for a moment before she gained control.
Then she was down on her knees, pushing her sleeves up, a tight look of
fear and dread haunting her eyes as she looked up at Jeff. "Something's
happening," she said softly. "The dice--they're not right."

"I know it. Why not?" His voice was hoarse, his eyes hard on her face.

She threw him a baffled look. "There isn't any reason. Nothing is
different, but the dice don't fall right. That's all, they just don't."

Jeff grinned tightly. "Go on, throw them."

She threw the dice, saw them dance on the floor, caught her number.
Jeff rolled them, beat her on it, picked up the money. He rolled again,
then again. The tightness grew around the girl's eyes; little tense
lines hardened near her mouth. Nervously, she fumbled a cigarette into
her mouth, lit it, puffed as the dice rolled.

She lost. She lost again. Side bets picked up around them, the people
as they watched catching the tension that was building up.

"What's happening?"

"The dice--my God! They've gone crazy!"

"Blackie's losing. What do you think--"

"--losing? She never loses on dice. Who's the guy?"

"Never saw him before. Look, he took another one! Those dice are hexed."

"My cards were crazy too: king high full every time, a dozen hands in a
row. How can you bet on something like that, I ask you."

The Silly Giggins record screeched louder, then gave a squawk as the
record suddenly shattered in a thousand pieces. Somebody cursed and
threw a pack of cards on the floor, and a scream broke out across the
room. One group came suddenly to blows; several dice games tightened
down to bloody conflict between individuals. A man burst into tears,
suddenly, and sat back on his haunches, his face stricken. "They can't
act this way," he wailed. "They just _can't_--"

Jeff's eyes watched the spinning dice, and again something was
screaming in his ear. He felt as though his head were going to burst,
but he continued to roll and he saw the girl's face darken with each
throw. He saw the fear shine out from her blue eyes. Suddenly she let
out a curse, snatched the dice from Jeff's hand and threw them sharply
across the room. She stared at Jeff venomously, then glared at the
people around her as if she were a cornered animal.

"It's all of you," she snarled. "You're turning them against me. You're
making them fall wrong." She spat on the floor and started for the
door. Jeff moved after her but felt a restraining hand on his arm.

"Leave her alone," said the Nasty Frenchman. "You'll have trouble on
your hands if you don't. You see what I meant about something being
wrong? The whole crowd here is on edge, as if somebody were picking
them up and throwing them down. Who ever saw dice fall that way, or
cards fall that way"--the little man's eyes flashed slyly--"_unless
somebody was controlling them_."

Jeff's breath was faster as he stared at the Nasty Frenchman, and his
voice was hoarse. "What are you talking about?"

The little man's lips twisted angrily. "You saw what happened in here,
didn't you?"

Jeff turned away in anger. He wove through the crowd, his jaw tight as
he moved toward the door. The Nasty Frenchman could only glimpse the
truth, but someone else saw more, much more. Somehow, Jeff knew that
this past hour held the key to the whole problem, if he could only see
it. Here was the answer to the whole tangled puzzle of the girl and
Paul Conroe, of Dr. Schiml and the Mercy Men.

And he knew that when he reached the room, the girl would be waiting.
She would be waiting with cold fire in her eyes, as she sat at the
table, a small pair of colored dice lying before her in the dim light.

Jeff hurried down the darkened corridor, fear exploding in his brain.
She would be there and he knew why she would be smoldering when he
walked into the room. He had seen her eyes, seen her face as they
had thrown the dice. He knew beyond any shadow of doubt who had been
controlling the dice.

The girl was waiting, just as he had known she would. He stepped into
the room and closed the door gently behind him, facing her desperate
eyes as she rolled the colored dice back and forth in front of her.
"Game," she challenged, her voice harsh and metallic.

The room was tense with silent fear as he sank down opposite her at the
table.




CHAPTER SIX


Jeff reached out and took the dice from the girl's hand. "Put them
away, Blackie," he said softly, "You don't have to prove anything. I
know--"

"Game," she repeated harshly, shaking her head.

"Look. Think a minute. Back there, do you know what happened in that
room?"

Her eyes caught his and were wide with fear. "Game," she whispered, her
hands trembling. "You've got to play me!"

He shrugged, his eyes tired as he watched her face. He took the dice
and rolled them out on the table. A three, a four and a five fell; he
saw her eyes flash across the table, taking in the sequence. Then her
hand reached out, grasped the dice, gave them a throw. The hostility
in her mind struck out at him, reinforcing the terrible dread that he
already felt. He fought the hostility, staring at the dice, his hands
gripping the edge of the table. And the dice danced and settled down: a
three, a four and a five....

The girl's eyes widened, staring first at him, then back at the dice.
Slowly she reached out, took the cube with the five showing, sent it
bouncing across the table. It spun and bounced--and settled down once
again with the five exposed.

Jeff felt the blast of bitter fear strike out from the girl's eyes.
The room seemed to scream with the tension he felt. She took the dice
with trembling hands, threw them out hard and clenched her fists as
they fell. The three and four settled out immediately. Jeff watched
the third cube, spinning on one corner, spinning ... spinning.... He
felt his muscles grow tense, his mind screaming, tightening down as
he stared at the little cube. It was as though an iron fist held his
brain in its palm and was slowly, slowly squeezing. And the little cube
continued, ridiculously, to spin and spin, until it quite suddenly
flipped over onto its side and lay still with the five exposed.

Blackie gave a choked scream, her face pasty white. "Then it was you."
She choked, staring at him as if he were a ghost. "You were doing it
deliberately in there, throwing off the odds, twisting things around,
turning the dice against me."

Jeff shook his head violently. "No, no, not me--us--both of us. We were
fighting each other, without knowing it--"

Her hand went up to her mouth, choking off the words as she stared at
him. Jeff stared at the dice, his whole body trembling, huge drops of
sweat running down his forehead. And as he watched, the dice hopped
about on the table, like jumping beans, turning over and over, jerkily,
spinning on their edges in a horrible, incredible little dance. Jeff
shook his head, his eyes wide with horror as he watched the dice.

"You knew it all along," the girl choked. "You came in there just to
torment me, to show me up--"

"No, no." Jeff turned wide eyes on her. "I didn't know it, until I
picked up the dice in that room. Something drove me to do it. I didn't
know what I was doing until all of a sudden the dice were doing what I
wanted them to do--" He broke off, panting. "I never knew it, I never
dreamed it." His eyes sought the girl's, pleading. "I didn't understand
it; I couldn't help it. I just knew that something wrong was going on.
And then I knew that somebody was fighting me. There was a tension in
it. I felt it. I knew somebody was tampering with the dice. Then when I
got near you, I knew it was you."

The girl's face was working, tears welling up in her eyes. "I had to--I
had to win with them."

"Then you knew you were doing it!" Jeff stared at her. "And when
both of us started tampering, opposing each other, the probabilities
governing the games went wild, completely wild."

The girl was sobbing, her face in her hands. "I could always control
it. It always worked. It was the only thing I could do that came out
right. Everything else has always gone wrong." She sobbed like a baby,
her shoulders shaking as she choked out great, racking sobs.

Jeff leaned forward, almost cruelly, his eyes burning at her. "When did
you find out you could ... make dice fall the way you wanted them to?"

The girl shook her head helplessly. "I didn't know it. I didn't have
any idea, until I came here. It was the only thing I could win at.
Everything else I lost at. All my life I've been losing."

"What have you been losing?"

"Everything, everything--everything I touch turns black, goes sour,
somehow."

"But what, _what_?" Jeff leaned toward the girl, his voice hoarse. "Why
did you come here? How did you get here?"

The girl's sobs broke out again, her shoulders shaking in anguish. "I
don't know, I don't know. Oh, I could take it, up to a limit, but then
I couldn't stand it any more. Everything I tried went wrong; everyone
that was near me went wrong too. Even the rackets wouldn't work with me
around."

"What rackets?"

Her voice was weak and cracking. "Any of the rackets. I've been in
a dozen, two dozen, ever since the war. Dad was killed in the first
bombing of the Fourth War, when I was just a kid--twelve, thirteen,
I can't remember now. He died trying to get us out of the city and
through to the Defense area north of the Trenton section. Radiation
burns got him, maybe pneumonia, I don't know. But it got Dad first and
Mom later."

She straightened up and wiped her eyes with her sleeve. "We never did
get out of the devastated area. We were killing dogs and cats for food
for a while. Then when things did get straightened out, we ran into
the inflation, the burned-out crops, the whole rat-race. The dirty
breaks were coming in hard then. First we were guerrillas, then we were
bushwhackers. Then we came into the city again and started shaking down
the rich ones that came back from the mountains where they hid."

"But you came in here," Jeff grated. "Why here, if you were doing so
well in rackets?"

"I wasn't. Can't you understand? The luck--it was running wrong, worse
and worse all the time. And then I got hooked on dope. Narcotics
control was all shot to pieces during the war; heroin was all over the
place. But they knew I had this hard-luck jinx. They caught me on it,
until I was hooked bad."

She shrugged, her face a study in pathetic hopelessness. "They hauled
me in here. Schiml sold me his bill of goods. What could I lose? I was
so tired, I didn't care. I didn't care if they jolted my brains loose,
or what they did to me. All I wanted was to eat and get off the dope
and get enough cash so I could try for something decent, where hard
luck couldn't touch me. And I didn't really care if I never got out."

"But with the dice you made out."

"Oh, yes, with the dice--" The girl's eyes flickered for a moment. "I
found out I could make them sit up and talk for me. I played it cozy,
didn't let anybody catch on. But they always worked for me, until
tonight--"

Jeff nodded, his face white. "Until tonight, when you found out you
were fighting for control. Because tonight I found out they'd talk for
me too. And you couldn't beat me with them."

Her voice was weak. "I--I couldn't budge them. They fell the way you
called them."

"It isn't possible, you know," Jeff said softly. "Every time they've
tried to prove it was, they've found some loophole in the study of
it, something wrong somewhere. Nobody's ever proved a thing about
