outside bearings to the leading and trailing axles, and inside bearings to
the driving axle. The boiler is 11 ft. 6 in. long and 3 ft. 11 in.
diameter, and the grate area is 17 square feet. The heating surface is in
the tubes 1,057 square feet; fire-box, 87 square feet; total, 1,144 square
feet. The tractive force per pound of mean cylinder pressure is 88.4 lb.
The weight in full working order is, on the leading wheels, 11 tons 3
cwt.; driving wheels, 17 tons 11 cwt.; trailing wheels, 11 tons 18 cwt.;
total, 40 tons 12 cwt. This engine is remarkable for the great weight
thrown on the driving wheels, and its cylinder power is great in
proportion to its adhesion, thus allowing the steam to be worked at a high
rate of expansion, which is most favorable to the economical consumption
of fuel. There are numerous fine engines running on other lines, such as
the new bogie locomotives on the North-Eastern and Lancashire and
Yorkshire railways, and the coupled express engines on the Caledonian; but
those already described represent fairly the lending features of modern
practice, and the author will now notice briefly the two other classes of
engines--tank passenger engines for suburban and local traffic and goods
engines. The Brighton tank passenger engine is a good example of the
former class; it has inside cylinders 17 in. diameter and 24 in. stroke.
The two coupled wheels under the barrel of the boiler are 5 ft. 6 in.
diameter, and the trailing wheels 4 ft. 6 in.; there are single frames
with inside bearings to all the axles. The boiler pressure is 140 lb., and
the tractive force per pound of mean cylinder pressure 106 lb.; the total
wheel base is 14 ft. 6 in. The boiler is 10 ft. 2 in. long and 4 ft. 4 in.
diameter, and the heating surface is in the tubes, 858 square feet;
fire-box, 90 square feet; total, 948 square feet. The engine is furnished
with wing tanks holding 860 gallons of water, and carries 30 cwt. of coal.
The weight in working order is 38 tons. These engines have taken a maximum
load of twenty-five coaches between London and Brighton, but are mainly
employed in working the suburban and branch line traffic; their average
consumption of coal is 23.5 lb. per mile, with trains averaging about ten
coaches.

Another example is Mr. Webb's tank engine on the North-Western Railway,
which presents a contrast to the foregoing. It has inside cylinders 17 in.
diameter and 20 in. stroke, coupled wheels 4 ft. 6 in. diameter, and a
tractive power per lb. of mean cylinder pressure of 107 lb.; the wheel
base is 14 ft. 6 in. with a radial box to the leading axle; the heating
surface is in the tubes, 887; fire-box, 84; total, 971 square feet; the
weight in working order is 35 tons 15 cwt. The engine is fitted with
Webb's hydraulic brake, and steel, manufactured at Crewe, is largely used
in its construction. The consumption of coal-working fast passenger trains
has been 281/2 lb. per mile. There are many other types, such as the ten
wheel bogie tank engines of the London, Tilbury, and Southend and
South-Western railways; the saddle tank bogie engines, working the broad
gauge trains on the Great Western Railway, west of Newton; and the
familiar class working the Metropolitan and North London traffic. But the
same principle is adopted in nearly all--a flexible wheel base to enable
them to traverse sharp curves, small driving wheels coupled for adhesion,
and wing or saddle tanks to take the water. One notable exception is,
however, the little six wheel all-coupled engines weighing only 24 tons,
which work the South London traffic, burning 241/4 lb. of coal per mile,
with an average load of eleven coaches.

Goods engines on all lines do not vary much. As a rule they are six wheel
all-coupled engines, with generally 5 ft. wheels, and cylinders varying
between 17 in. and 18 in. diameter and 24 in. to 26 in. stroke; the grate
area is about 17 square feet, and the total heating surface from 1,000 to
1,200 sq. ft.; the average weight in full working order varies from 30 to
38 tons. One noteworthy exception occurs, however, on the Great Eastern
Railway, where a type of goods engine with a pony truck in front has been
introduced. The cylinders are outside 19 in. diameter and 26 in. stroke,
there are six coupled wheels 4 ft. 10 in. diameter, and the pony truck
wheels are 2 ft. 10 in. diameter; the total wheel wheel base is 23 ft. 2
in., but there are no flanges on the driving wheels. The boiler is 11 ft.
5 in. long and 4 ft. 5 in. diameter, the boiler pressure is 140 lb., and
the tractive force per lb. of mean cylinder pressure 162 lb.; the grate
area is 18.3 square feet, and the heating surface is in the tubes, 1,334
square feet; fire-box, 122 square feet; total, 1,456 square feet.

The weight in working order is on the pony truck, 8 tons 10 cwt.; leading
coupled, 12 tons 8 cwt.; driving coupled, 13 tons 5 cwt.; trailing
coupled, 12 tons 15 cwt.; total, 47 tons.

The tender weighs 28 tons in full working order. These engines take 40
loaded coal trucks or sixty empty ones, and burn 52 lb. of coal per train
mile, the worst gradient being 1 in 176. A notice of goods engines would
not be complete without alluding to a steep gradient locomotive, and a
good example is the engine which works the Redheugh Bank on the
North-Eastern Railway. This incline is 1,040 yards long, and rises for 570
yards 1 in 33, then for 260 yards 1 in 21.7, for 200 yards 1 in 25, and
finally for 110 yards 1 in 27. The engine, which is an all-coupled six
wheel tank engine, weighs 481/2 tons in working order, it has cylinders 18
in. diameter and 24 in. stroke, and 4 ft. wheels, the boiler pressure is
160 lb., and the tractive force per lb. of mean steam pressure in the
cylinders is 162 lb. This engine will take up the incline twenty-six coal
wagons, or a gross load of 218 tons, which is a very good duty indeed.

Having now passed in review the general types of engines adopted in modern
English practice, the author would briefly draw attention to some points
of design and some improvements effected in late years. And first, as to
the question of single or coupled engines, there is a great diversity of
opinion. Mr. Stirling conducts his traffic at a higher rate of speed, and
certainly with equal punctuality, with his magnificent single 8 ft.
engines, as Mr. Webb on the North-Western with coupled engines, and the
economy of fuel of the former class over the latter is very remarkable;
this is, no doubt, owing, as has been previously pointed out, to their
ample cylinder power, which permits of the steam being worked at a high
rate of expansion. There is no doubt that if single engines can take the
load they will do so more freely and at a less cost than coupled engines,
burning on the average 2 lb. of coal per mile less with similar trains.
With, regard to loads, it is a question whether any express train should
be made up with more than twenty-five coaches. The Great Northern engine
will take twenty-six and keep time, and the Brighton single engine has
taken the five P.M. express from London Bridge to Brighton, consisting of
twenty-two coaches, at a speed of forty-five miles per hour. Of course
where heavy gradients have to be surmounted, such as those on the Midland
route to Scotland, coupled engines are a necessity. Single engines are
said to slip more than coupled; thus an 8 ft. single Great Northern engine
running down the incline from Potter's Bar to Wood Green with twelve
coaches at the rate of sixty miles an hour was found to be making 242
revolutions per mile instead of 210; and in an experiment tried on the
Midland Railway it was found that a coupled engine with ten coaches at
fifty miles an hour made seventeen extra revolutions a mile, but when the
side rods were removed it made forty-three. The Great Western, Great
Northern, and Brighton mainly employ single engines for their fast
traffic; and the Manchester, Sheffield, and Lincolnshire have now adopted
the single type in preference to the coupled for their express trains;
while the North-Western, Midland, South-Western, and Chatham adopted the
coupled type. One noticeable feature in modern practice is the increased
height of the center line of boiler; formerly it was the great aim to keep
this low, and numerous schemes to this effect were propounded, but now it
has become generally recognized that a high pitched engine will travel as
steadily and more safely round a curve--given a good road--than a low
pitched one; and thus while in 1850 the average height of the center line
of boilers varied between 5 ft. 3 in. and 6 ft. 3 in., now in the latest
designs it lies between 7 ft. and 7 ft. 6 in. Single frames are very
generally adopted, but double frames and outside bearings to the leading
and trailing wheels, as in the Great Western engines, give great
steadiness in running, and this class has also double bearings to the
driving wheels, thus entailing greater security in case of the facture of
a crank axle. The general adoption of cabs on the foot-plate for the men
is another improvement of late introduction, although at first not
universally appreciated by those for whose comfort it was designed--"I
felt as if I was in my coffin," said an old driver when asked how he liked
the new shelter. Mild steel fire-boxes, which have been employed in
America, are not in favor here, copper being universally used; they have
been tried on the Caledonian, Great Southern and Western, North London,
and North-Western, and were found not to succeed. Brake blocks of cast
iron have now generally superseded wood; steel is being more and more
used, especially on the North Western. There is less use of brasswork for
domes and fittings, although it is claimed for brass that it looks
brighter and can easily be kept clean. There is greater simplicity of
design generally, and the universal substitution of coal as coke for fuel,
with its consequent economy; and last, but not least, the adoption of
standard types of engines, are among the changes which have taken place in
locomotive practice during the past quarter of a century.

[Illustration: FIG. 8.--LONDON, CHATHAM, & DOVER RAILWAY.]

[Illustration: FIG. 9.--GREAT EASTERN RAILWAY.]

[Illustration: FIG. 10.--MANCHESTER, SHEFFIELD, AND LINCOLNSHIRE RAILWAY.]

Having now reviewed, as far as the limits of this paper will allow, the
locomotive practice of the present day, the author would in conclusion
draw attention to what may possibly be one course of locomotive
development in the future. Time is money, and it may be in the coming
years that a demand will arise for faster means of transit than that which
we possess at present. How can we meet it? With our railways laid out with
the curves and gradients existing, and with our national gauge, and our
present type of locomotive, no great advance in speed is very probable;
the mean speed of express trains is about fifty miles an hour, and to take
an average train of 200 tons weight at this speed over a level line
requires between 650 and 700 effective horse-power, within the compass of
the best engines of the present day. But if instead of fifty miles an hour
seventy is required, an entirely different state of things obtains. Taking
a train of 100 tons, with engine and tender weighing 75 tons, or 175 tons
gross, the first question to determine will be the train resistance, and
with reference to this we much want careful experiments on the subject,
like those which Sir Daniel Gooch made in 1848, on the Bristol and Exeter
Railway, which are even now the standard authority; the general use of oil
axle-boxes and long bogie coaches, irrespective of other improvements,
would render this course desirable. With regard to the former, they appear
to run with less friction, but are heavier to start, oil boxes in some
experiments made on the South-Western Railway giving a resistance of 2.5
lb. per ton, while grease boxes ranged from 6 lb. to 9 lb. per ton. Again,
the long and heavy bogie Pullman and other coaches have the reputation
among drivers, rightly or wrongly, of being hard to pull. The resistance
of an express train on the Great Western Railway at seventy-five miles an
hour was 42 lb. per ton, and taking 40 lb. per ton for seventy miles an
hour would give a total resistance on the level of 7,000 lb.,
corresponding to 1,400 horse-power--about double the average duty of an
express engine of the present day. The weight on the driving wheels
required would be 183/4 tons, allowing one-sixth for adhesion, about the
same as that on the driving axle of the Bristol and Exeter old bogie
engines. Allowing 21/2 lb. of coal per horse-power per hour would give a
total combustion of 3,500 lb. per hour and to burn this even at the
maximum economic rate of 85 lb. per square foot of grate per hour would
require a grate area of 41 square feet, and about 2,800 square feet of
heating surface. Unless a most exceptional construction combined with
small wheels is adopted, it appears almost impossible to get this amount
on the ordinary gauge. It is true the Wootten locomotives on the
Philadelphia and Reading Railway have fire-boxes with a grate area of as
much as 76 square feet, but these boxes extend clean over the wheels, and
the heating surface in the tubes is only 982 square feet; but although
these engines run at a speed of forty-two miles an hour, they are hardly
the type to be adopted for such a service as is being considered. On the
broad gauge, however, such an engine could easily be designed on the lines
now recognized as being essential for express engines without introducing
any exceptional construction, and there appears but little doubt that were
Brunei's magnificent gauge the national one, competition would have
introduced a higher rate of speed between London and our great towns than
that which obtains at present.

The whole question of the future introduction of trunk lines, exclusively
for fast passenger traffic, is fraught with the highest interest, but it
would be foreign to the subject matter of this paper to enter more fully
on it, the author merely desiring to state his opinion that if the future
trade and wealth of our country require their construction, and if a very
high rate of speed much above our present is to be attained, their gauge
will have to be seriously considered and settled, not by the reasons which
caused the adoption of the present gauge, but by the power required to
carry on the traffic--in fact, to adapt the rail to the engine, and not,
as at present, the engine to the rail. High speed requires great power,
and great power can only be obtained by ample fire-grate area, which for a
steady running engine means a broad gauge. The Gauge Commissioners of 1846
in their report esteemed the importance of the highest speed on express
trains for the accommodation of a comparatively small number of persons,
however desirable that may be to them, as of far less moment than
affording increased convenience to the general commercial traffic of the
country. The commercial traffic of England has grown and prospered under
our present system, and if its ever increasing importance demands high
speed passenger lines, we may rest assured that the ingenuity of man, to
which it is impossible to assign limits, will satisfactorily solve the
problem.

       *       *       *       *       *




SCREW STEAM COLLIER FROSTBURG.


[Illustration: NEW STEAM COLLIER.]

Our diagram shows the screw steam collier Frostburg, built by Henry H.
Gorringe (the American Shipbuilding Co.), Philadelphia, Pa. Length, 210
ft. Beam, 33 ft. Depth, 17 ft, Register tonnage, 533. Carrying capacity on
14ft., 1,100 tons, and 100 tons coal in bunker. Cubical contents of cargo
space, 55,168 cub. ft. Carrying capacity on 16 feet draught, 1,440 tons.
Engines, compound surface condensing. High pressure 26 in. diameter, low
pressure 48 in. diameter, stroke 36 in. Two boilers, each 13 ft. diameter.
10 ft. long, and one auxiliary 5 ft. diameter and 10 ft. high. 100 lb.
working pressure. Sea speed with full cargo, 11 knots.

       *       *       *       *       *


A thirteen year old girl, who is perfect in other ways, but who has simply
little blue spots that puff out slightly where her eyes should be, is said
to be living at Amherst, Portage County, Wisconsin.

       *       *       *       *       *




DESTRUCTION OF THE TARDES VIADUCT.


The railroad from Montlucon to Eygurande, which is being constructed by
the state engineers, crosses the valley of the Tardes in the environs of
Evaux (Creuse).

At the spot selected for the establishment of the viaduct the gauge is
deep and steep. The line passes at 300 feet above the river, and the total
length of the metallic superstructure had to be 822 feet. To support this
there was built upon the right bank a pier 158 feet in height, and, upon
the left, another one of 196 feet. The superstructure had been completed,
and a portion of it had already been swung into position, when a violent,
gale occurred and blew it to the bottom of the gorge. At the time of the
accident the superstructure projected 174 feet beyond the pier on the
right bank, and had to advance but 121 feet to reach the 33 foot
scaffolding that had been established upon the other pier.

It blows often and violently in this region. For example, a gale on the
20th of February, 1879, caused great damage, and, among other things, blew
the rear cars of a hay train from the top of the Louvoux viaduct to the
Bouble.

The superstructure of the Tardes viaduct had already withstood the tempest
of the 23d and the 24th of January, 1884, and neither any alteration in
its direction nor any change in the parts that held it upon the pile could
be perceived. But on the night of January 26-27 the storm doubled in
violence, and the work was precipitated into the ravine. No one was
witness of the fall, and the noise was perceived only by the occupants of
the mill located below the viaduct.

The workmen of the enterprise, who lived about 325 feet above this mill
and about 650 feet from the south abutment, heard nothing of it, the wind
having carried the noise in an opposite direction. It was not until
morning that they learned of the destruction of their work and the extent
of the disaster.

One hundred and sixty-nine feet of the superstructure, weighing 450 tons,
had been precipitated from a height of nearly 200 feet and been broken up
on the rock at 45 feet from the axis of the pier. The breakage had
occurred upon the abutment, and the part 195 feet in length that remained
in position in the cutting was strongly wedged between walls of rock,
which had kept this portion in place and prevented its following the other
into the ravine.

Upon the pier there remained a few broken pieces and a portion of the
apparatus used in swinging the superstructure into place.

Below, in the debris of the superstructure, the up-stream girder lay upon
the down-stream one. The annexed engraving shows the state of things after
the disaster.

Several opinions have been expressed in regard to the cause of the fall.
According to one of these, the superstructure was suddenly wrenched from
its bearings upon the pier, and was horizontally displaced by an impulse
such that, when it touched the masonry, its up-stream girder struck the
center of the pier, upon which it divided, while the down-stream one was
already in space. The fall would have afterward continued without the
superstructure meeting the face of the pier.

[Illustration: DESTRUCTION OF THE TARDES VIADUCT.]

Upon taking as a basis the horizontal displacement of the superstructure,
which was 45 meters to the right of the pier, and upon combining the
horizontal stress that produced it with that of the loads, the stress
exerted upon the body may he deduced. But this hypothesis seems to us
scarcely tenable, especially by reason of the great stress that it would
have taken to lift the superstructure. On another hand, it was possible
for the latter to slide over one edge of the pier, and this explains the
horizontal distance of 45 feet by which its center of gravity was
displaced. It is probable, moreover, that the superstructure, before
going over, moved laterally upon its temporary supports.

The girders were, in fact, resting upon rollers, and the roller apparatus
themselves were renting upon wedges, and there was no anchorage to prevent
a transverse sliding.

Under the prolonged thrust of a very high wind, the superstructure, by
reason of its considerable projection, must have begun to swing like a
pendulum. These oscillations acquired sufficient amplitude to cause the
superstructure to gradually move upon its rollers until the latter no
longer bore beneath the webs. The flanges therefore finally bent upward
where they rested upon the rollers, through the action of the weight which
they had to support, and the entire superstructure slid off into space.

An examination of the bent pieces seems to give great value to this
hypothesis.--_Le Genie Civil_.

       *       *       *       *       *




JOY'S REVERSING AND EXPANSION VALVE GEAR.

[Footnote: A paper read before the Mechanical Section of the British
Association, at Montreal, August, 1884.]


Four years ago, in August, 1880, a paper was read on this subject before
the Annual Summer Meeting of the Mechanical Engineers' Society of Great
Britain, then held in Barrow-in-Furness, describing this valve motion and
its functions, which was then comparatively new. It was, however,
illustrated by its application to a large express goods (freight) engine,
built by the London and North-Western Railway Company (England) specially
to test the advantages and the endurance of the gear. This engine had
cylinders of 18 inches in diameter and 24 inch stroke, and six wheels
coupled 5 feet 1 inch diameter, and was designed by Mr. Webb, the
Company's chief engineer, for their heavy fast goods traffic on the main
line. The engine has been running this class of traffic ever since. In
January, 1884, it was passed through the repair shops for a general
overhauling, when it was found that the valve motion was in such good
condition as to be put back on the engine without any repairs.

The main object of this present paper is to deal with the advantages of
the valve gear and its application to various classes of engines both on
land and at sea, and with the results of such applications, rather than
treating it as a novelty, to give an exhaustive description of its
construction and functions, which was done in the paper above referred to.
A very short description of its action and main features will, however,
be necessary to the completeness of the paper, and as a basis from which
the improved results to be recorded should necessarily be shown to spring.

The essential feature of this valve gear is that movement for the valve is
produced by a combination of two motions at right angles to each other;
and by the various proportions in which these are combined, and by the
positions in which the moving parts are set with regard to each other, it
gives both the reversal of motion and the various degrees of expansion
required. Eccentrics are entirely dispensed with and the time-honored link
gear abandoned, the motion is taken direct from the connecting rod, and by
utilizing independently the backward and forward action of the rod, due to
the reciprocation of the piston, and combining this with the vibrating
action of the rod, a movement results which is suitable to work the valves
of engines, allowing the use of any proportions of lap and lead desired,
and giving an almost mathematically correct "cut-off" for both sides of
the piston and for all points of expansion intermediately, as well as a
much quicker action at the points of "cut-off" and "release" than is given
by a link gear.

The machinery for accomplishing this is both less costly and less
complicated than the ordinary link motion, and is shown in elevation on
cut, which is a view of the complete motion as on the first London and
North-Western locomotive. Here E is the main valve lever, pinned at D to a
link, B, one end of which is fastened to the connecting rod at A, and the
other end maintained in about the vertical by the radius rod, C, which is
fixed at the point, C. The center or fulcrum, F, of the lever, E,
partaking of the vibrating movement of the connecting rod at the point, A,
is carried in a curved slide, J, the radius of which is equal to the
length of the link, G, and the center of which is fixed to be concentric
with the fulcrum, F, of the lever when the piston is at either extreme end
of its stroke. From the upper end of the lever, E, the motion is carried
direct to the valve by the rod, G. It will be evident thus that by one
revolution of the crank the lower end of the lever, E, will have imparted
to it two different movements, one along the longer axis of the ellipse,
traveled by the point, A, and one through its minor axis up and down,
these movements differing as to time, and corresponding with the part of
the movement of the valve required for lap and lead, and that part
constituting the port opening for admission of steam.

[Illustration: JOY'S REVERSING AND EXPANDING VALVE GEAR.]

The former of these is constant and unalterable, the latter is
controllable by the angle at which the curved slide, J, may be set with
the vertical.

It will further be evident that if the lever, E, were pinned direct to
the connecting rod at the point, A, which passes through a practically
true ellipse, it would vibrate its fulcrum, F, unequally on either side of
the center of the curved slide, J, by the amount of the versed sine of the
arc of the lever, E, from F D; it is to correct this error that the lever,
E, is pinned at the point, D, to a parallel motion formed by the parts, B
and C. The point, D, performing a figure which is equal to an ellipse,
with the error to be eliminated added, so neutralizing its effect on the
motion of the fulcrum, F.

The "lap" and "lead" are opened by the action of the valve lever acting as
a lever, and the port opening is given by the incline of the curved slide
in which the center of that lever slides, and the amount of this opening
depends upon the angle given to that incline. When these two actions are
in unison, the motion of the valve is very rapid, and this occurs when the
steam is being admitted. Then follows a period of opposition of these
motions, during which time the valve pauses momentarily, this
corresponding to the time when the port is fully open. Further periods of
unison follow, at which time the sharp "cut-off" is obtained.

The "compression" resulting with this gear is also reduced to a minimum,
owing to the peculiar movement given to the valves (_i. e._, the series of
accelerations and retardations referred to), as, while the "lead" is
obtained later and quicker, the port is also shut for "compression" later
and quicker, doing away with the necessity for a special expansion valve,
with its complicated and expensive machinery, and allowing the main valve
to be used for expansion, as the "compression" is not of an injurious
amount, even with a "cut-off" reduced to 15 per cent., or about 1/6 of the
stroke.

Thus, so far as the distribution of the steam and its treatment in the
cylinder is concerned, a marked advantage is shown in favor of this valve
gear. But next in its favor, as before said, is that the above advantages
are not gained at the cost of added complication of parts or increased
cost of machinery, but the reverse, as this gear can be built at a less
cost than link gear, varying according to the circumstances, but reaching
as high as a saving of 25 per cent., or, if it be compared with a link
gear supplemented by the usual special expansion valve and gear as
employed on marine engines, then the total saving is fully 50 per cent.,
and an equally good result is obtained as to the distribution and
subsequent treatment of the steam.

After accuracy of result and reduction in cost may rank saving room and
the advantages arising therefrom (though for steamships perhaps this
should have come first). Taking locomotives of the inside cylinder type,
which is the general form in use in England and the continent of Europe,
by clearing away the eccentrics and valves from the middle of the engine,
much larger cylinders may be introduced and a higher rate of expansion
employed, and this is being done. Also room is left for increasing the
length and wearing surfaces of all the main bearings with even less
crowding than is now the case with engines with the smaller cylinders.
