[Illustration: FIG. 10.]

[Illustration: FIG. 11.]

[Illustration: FIG. 12.]

Mention may be made of Singer's special button hole machine for making the
straight holes used in linen work, and in which a shuttle is employed. Of
Wheeler & Wilson's ingenious button hole machine for the same purpose, I am
enabled to show a diagram, in which it will be observed that the feeding
arrangements are placed above the bed plate, and are no doubt thereby
rendered easily accessible.

_Application of Power to Sewing Machines_.--There was a time when a cry
arose to the effect that the introduction of mechanical sewing would lead
to divers calamities, physical and mental. The ladies were to become
crooked in the spine, and regular operators were to become regular
cripples. It is scarcely necessary to ask, Has this been so? The operators
of to-day are, I think, superior in physical attainments to their sisters
of the needle and thread fifty years ago.

Within the past few years a revolution has taken place in the moving of
sewing machines. Domestic machines will probably always be driven by foot
power, spring, electric, and water motors notwithstanding. But the age of
treadles in the great manufacturing trades is a thing of the past. It was
not necessary for Parliament to step in and protect the workers, as was
frequently suggested by alarmists. The commercial interests of
manufacturers themselves were at stake. Machines driven by power could do
25 per cent. more work than those moved by foot. The operators, relieved of
the treadling, maintained a much better working condition; and altogether
the introduction of power driving, once well tested, became a necessity.
Power sewing machinery was speedily devised and introduced by several of
the first manufacturers, controllers of the speed of the machines followed,
and two or three splendid systems of stitching by steam power were soon
widely known.

By the kindness of three of the best manufacturers of power sewing
machinery, I am enabled to show to you, this evening, the best known
systems, arranged just as they are fitted in many large factories, as also
a sketch of the arrangements of Wheeler & Wilson's system. We have in the
first place a light shafting carrying a band wheel opposite to each
machine. By the use of a powerful electromotor, the shafting is caused to
rotate at the rate of 400 revolutions per minute by electricity. The
current is generated by the Society's dynamo machine, and is conveyed here
by copper cable. I do not know of any instance of sewing machinery in a
factory being driven by an electromotor, but such means of conveying motive
power appears admirably adapted for that purpose, when the stitching room
happens to be far removed from the main shafting or engine. But with regard
to motors for sewing machines, when special power has to be fitted down for
that purpose, my own experience leads me to speak in favor of the admirably
governed "Otto" gas engines made by Crossley Bros. These are especially
steady, a feature of no small moment in moving stitching machinery of
various kinds.

Much attention has been devoted to the invention of controllers of the
motive power supplied to sewing machines. The principle of the friction
disk has found most favor. In many cases two of these plates, fast and
loose, are placed upon the main shaft, and their separation and contact
controlled by the treadle. The great sensitiveness of the friction
attachment employed by the Singer company is due chiefly to the
transference of the friction plates to the axis of the machine itself (Fig.
13). Their contact and separation are controlled by a lever worked by a
very slight movement of the treadle. But the chief point of interest in
this device lies in the combination with the lever of a brake, enabling the
operator, by a simple reversal of the treadle's motion, to instantly
suspend the rotation of the machine. The forked lever, in fact, acts
simultaneously in throwing off the motion and applying the brake. The speed
is always in direct proportion to the pressure exerted upon the treadle,
and a single stitch can be made at will. Fig. 14 shows the friction wheel
separated, the portion a being fast, and e loose.

[Illustration: FIG. 13.]

[Illustration: FIG. 14.]

The Wheeler & Wilson company do not confine themselves to any particular
controller, but prefer the form shown here this evening (Fig. 15), in which
two bands and an intermediate pulley are employed. The first band is left
rather loose, and the machine is set in motion by the tightening of this
band through the depression of the treadle. The speed varies in proportion
to the pressure applied, and the sensitiveness of the arrangement is
increased by a brake device coming into play by the reversal of the treadle
as before.

[Illustration: FIG. 15.]

Messrs. Willcox & Gibbs depend upon a similar device shown in three
varieties to-night.

_Speed of Power Sewing Machines_.--The fastest practicable speed of a
machine worked by the foot appears to be 1,000 stitches per minute. Most
operators can guide the work at a much higher rate, especially in tailoring
or on long seams. The average speed upon such work is 1,200 stitches per
minute; but many lock-stitch machines are run at 1,500 and 1,800 per
minute, and even at much higher rates. There is always a limit to be
imposed upon speed by the guiding powers of hand and eye; it is this limit,
and not the capability of the machine, that confines the rate of driving.
Willcox & Gibbs' single thread machines are run in many instances at 3,500
stitches per minute. We have before us a single thread Singer machine
(appropriately named the "Lightning Sewer") and a Willcox machine, moving
at the enormous rate of 4,500 stitches per minute, and producing good work.
But it is doubtful whether such very great velocities can ever be
advantageously employed. Upon collar work, and in sewing boot uppers, the
rate seldom rises above 1,200 with advantage. If the machines be speeded
too high in any trade, the operator never uses the excess, and it only
proves a drawback. I seen the heaviest and hardest kind of navy boots
stitched at 1,500 to the minute upon Singer's lock-stitch machines. Wheeler
& Wilson's No. 10 D machine has been run by them, I am informed, as high as
2,500 to the minute. Loop-stitch machines, when well made, can be actually
run as high as 6,000, but 4,500 is, I believe, the maximum yet used for
this class of machine, even experimentally. There can be no doubt that
lock-stitch machines can be run as high as 3,000. The actual speeds of the
lock-stitch machines shown here upon the power stand average 1,300; those
of the chain stitch machines vary from 1,200 for the sack sewing machine to
4,500 for the small or single chain stitchers. Any of the latest styles of
either lock stitch or single thread machines can be run far faster than any
known expert operator can possibly guide the work under it.

It is very improbable that such speeds will ever be exceeded. The limit has
no doubt been reached. Very high speed is generally a delusion, and either
results in indifferent work, or actually retards its progress. Some idea of
the speed of the single thread machines now shown may be gathered from the
fact that, running at 4,500, and making eight stitches to the inch, they
accomplish over fourteen yards of sewing every minute.

Of special machines of interest, and which are too unwieldy to be shown
here, I am enabled to exhibit a few photographs.

One of the most novel of these is the "Twin" machine, designed by the
Singer company for the connecting together of the Jacquard cards used in
lace machines. The operation was formerly performed by hand. It is now done
by machine at less cost. The cards are placed upon a feeding drum, and fed
beneath a pair of needles. The laces forming the connection between the
cards are fed above and beneath, in line with the needles, and the whole is
easily stitched together. An extension of the same device is the multiple
machine, in which four needles and shuttles are used, sewing all the four
seams at one operation. This method of linking the cards is considered
better than similar work done by hand.

Of Wheeler & Wilson's new factory, at Bridgeport, and of the Singer
company's great new factory near Glasgow, I am enabled to exhibit
photographic views.

Before drawing my remarks to a close, I would briefly indicate the nature
of the various machines shown upon the power benching. Of the Singer
system, there are four. A drop-feed oscillating shuttle machine for
manufacturing purposes; a wheel-feed oscillating shuttle machine, furnished
with a trimmer, used chiefly in stitching leather and boot uppers; double
chain-stitch machine, used for sack making, now shown for the first time;
and a single thread "Lightning Sewer," fitted with a trimmer for hosiery
work. Of Wheeler & Wilson's system, there is a drop-feed manufacturing
machine with the new detached hook and latest improvements; a No. 10
machine with the usual hook, a wheel feed and trimmer, and a smaller
machine of the same type with drop feed. Of Willcox & Gibbs' system, there
is the ordinary single-thread machine for manufacturing, a single-thread
machine, with a trimmer, as used in the hosiery trades, and a machine
specially used for straw hat making.

We have here a small Singer machine, riding upon the edge of two pieces of
carpet, a carpet machine weighing ten pounds. When the handle is turned, it
stitches and travels over the edges, uniting them faster and more securely
than six hand sewers; and several others, representative of the family type
of sewing machine, besides Wheeler & Wilson's hemstitch machine, the
working of which is of much interest.

I would now invite those of you who seek a better acquaintance with those
curious and novel machines to freely examine and test the various types to
be found upon the power benching and upon stands. One or two operators will
come forward and show some of the capabilities of the machines upon actual
work, in which the making of a straw hat will perhaps show what can be done
in a few minutes by quick speed and expert fingers; but these performances
must not be regarded in the light of competitive tests between the
manufacturers showing them, and are intended merely to show the utility of
motive power driving.

In conclusion, I desire to thank those gentlemen at the head of the leading
firms of sewing machine manufacturers for the trouble they have taken to
arrange for your inspection specimens of their excellent systems, and I
have much satisfaction in expressing my obligations to them for ready
assistance in the preparation of my paper.

       *       *       *       *       *

Power machines and treadle machines were exhibited by Messrs. Willcox &
Gibbs, Messrs. Wheeler & Wilson, and the Singer Manufacturing Company. The
motive power was provided by an electrical motor, supplied by Mr. Moritz
Immish. The Howe Machine Company exhibited a model of the first machine
made by Elias Howe, and also one of the most recent Howe machines. Mr.
Newton Wilson showed a model of the Saint sewing machines, constructed from
Thomas Saint's patent specification, 1790, and Mr. Carver showed the
Standard sewing machine.

       *       *       *       *       *




THE NEW KRUPP GUNS.


Nothing is being talked about at present in Germany but the guns of great
caliber that are manufacturing at the celebrated works on the banks of the
Ruhr. As our neighbors appear to be elated over this wonderful work, it is
expedient to examine the subject, in order to see whether their applause is
legitimate.

We have known for a long time that the artillery _materiel_ devoted to the
defense of the German coasts consists of a long, stationary 53/4 inch gun; of
long 73/4 inch hooped steel guns, closed by a cylindrico-prismatic wedge; of
an 8 inch mortar; and of guns of 113/4 and 15 inch caliber. The 113/4 inch gun
is 22 feet in length, and, including the closing mechanism, weighs 79,200
pounds. As regards the projectiles that this weapon throws, the _ordinary_
shell is 33 inches in length, and weighs, all charged, 656 pounds, and the
_exploding_ shell, of the same length, weighs, all charged, 1,160 pounds.
The initial velocity of the latter is 1,600 feet with a maximum charge of
148 pounds of powder.

The 15 inch gun is 32.8 feet in length, and weighs 158,400 pounds. Its
projectiles are 3.67 feet in length. The _ordinary_ shell, charge included,
weighs 1,400 pounds, and the exploding shell, under the same circumstances,
1,700 pounds, that is, more than three quarters of a metric ton. The
initial velocity of this last named projectile is 1,650 feet with a maximum
charge of 1,650 pounds of powder. We also know that Mr. Krupp has two
models of guns of 131/2 inch caliber, and of a length equal to 35 times the
caliber, say 39-5/12 feet. The lighter of these models (which was shown at
Anvers) weighs no less than 264,000 pounds, carriage not included. Its
cylindrico prismatic closing mechanism (_Rundkeilverschluss_) alone weighs
82,500 pounds. This is the weight of a 53/4 inch hooped steel gun!

[Illustration: FIG. 1.--NEW 52 FOOT KRUPP GUN AND A GERMAN FIELD PIECE
FIGURED ON THE SAME SCALE.]

We now learn that the Essen works have just begun the manufacture of a
314,600 pound gun. This piece, called "40 cm. kanone L/40," will, of
course, be of 15.6 inch caliber, but it will differ from the one above
described in that its length will be equal to 40 times the caliber, say 52
feet, or to the space occupied on the maneuvering ground by a field piece
drawn by six horses (Fig. 1). This gun will be provided with two kinds of
projectiles. One of these, called _light_, will be 31/2 feet in length, weigh
1,628 pounds, and be capable of taking an initial velocity of 2,410 feet
and of piercing, on its exit from the chamber, either a hammered iron plate
33/4 feet in thickness or two united plates 13/4 and 23/4 feet in thickness.

The shell called _heavy_ will be 53/4 feet in length, and weigh 2,310 pounds,
say more than a 43/4 inch siege piece! The charge employed will be 1,067
pounds of brown, prismatic Dunwald powder. Ten hundred and sixty-seven
pounds--nearly half a metric ton, more than the weight of a field piece
without its carriage! With this enormous charge, the heavy shell will be
capable of an initial velocity of 2,100 feet and of piercing, on its exit
from the chamber, either a hammered iron plate 4 feet in thickness or two
united plates 2 and 2.88 feet in thickness.

The _Cologne Gazette_, from which we borrow most of the data just
presented, adds that the "40 L/40" piece will be the largest cannon in the
world, but that it will not long enjoy the privilege of such pre-eminence.
It appears, in fact, that Mr. Krupp is preparing to manufacture a gun of
171/2 inch caliber, weighing 330,000 pounds. The projectile for this monster
will be 6 feet in length, say the stature of a full grown man, and will
weigh no less than a ton and a half. A man of medium stature will measure a
little less than this projectile (Fig. 2).

It is possible that all these figures have been slightly exaggerated by the
ultra-Vosges journals, who doubtless intend to make an impression upon us;
but we shall not dwell upon that point.

As regards the penetrating power of the large "40 L/40" gun, the German
press observes that in 1868 artillery was incapable of piercing in
one-hundredths of an inch what it is now piercing in tenths of an inch. The
principle was formerly admitted, it says, that a shell should by right have
a thickness equal to its caliber. Now, "the largest cannon in the world"
perforates a plate whose thickness is three times the diameter of the gun's
bore. What great progress! exclaim the German journals, and how jealous the
French and English are going to be! Jealous of that? Why, indeed? We are
not the least in the world so. How could we be? In the first place, we have
a gun of very great caliber--a 131/4 inch steel coast and siege piece. This
weighs 37 tons, and is 363/4 feet in length. Its projectile weighs from 924
to 1,320 pounds, according to its internal organization. Its conoid head is
very elongated, and by reason of this elegant form it always falls upon its
point, even at falling angles of an amplitude approaching 60 degrees. The
charge used varies from 396 to 440 pounds, according to the nature of the
powder. As for the ballistic properties of the piece, they are very
remarkable. Its projectile has an initial velocity of 2,132 feet, and the
maximum range is from 10 to 11 miles, say the distance from Paris to
Montgeron by the Paris-Lyons-Mediterranean railroad, or from Paris to
Versailles. Finally, the accuracy of this gun is much greater than that of
the 91/2 inch steel one. Now, the accuracy of this latter is such that it is
impossible for its projectiles to miss a ship under way, and that we are
sure of playing with it against the enemy that game whose device is "We win
at every shot!" Well, we do not hesitate to say that these results appear
to us to be satisfactory--we mean quite sufficient--and that there is no
need of looking for a better gun. If there were, French industry would be
capable of producing weapons of any caliber desired. As regards this, there
is, so to speak, no limit; moreover, taking into account merely the
terrestrial conditions of the problem, we may be satisfied that the great
works of our country are more powerfully equipped than those of Essen, and
consequently better able to forge large pieces of steel.

Mr. Krupp, it is said, is very proud of his two power hammers, which he has
named Max and Fritz. But, on the whole, these two apparatus are only fifty
ton ones, and have a fall of but ten feet. Now, Creusot and St. Chamond
each has a hundred ton steam hammer with a fall of 16 feet, accompanied
with four furnaces and four cranes.

[Illustration: FIG. 2.--3,300 POUND PROJECTILE OF A KRUPP GUN IN COURSE
OF MANUFACTURE.]

But why proceed to the manufacture of monstrous guns, like those that Mr.
Krupp has just produced, or meditates producing in the future; guns of such
a caliber can be used only in special cases--in battery on the coast or on
board of a ship. It is not with _materiel_ of this kind that war is waged;
it is with field pieces. Our ultra-Vosges neighbors well know this.

One of the reasons that the war that very recently threatened us did not
break out, was because the Germans could not fail to see that their field
_materiel_ was not as powerful as ours; that the shell of our 31/2 inch gun
weighs 171/2 pounds, while that of their heavy 31/2 inch gun does not weigh 15.
Now, this difference has its value.

Hunters well know what importance it is necessary to attach to the number
of the ball that they use.

This granted, it is well to observe that the net cost of the "40 cm. kanone
L/40" must not be less than $300,000 or $400,000. Now, on the interest of
such a sum we could have from ten to fifteen complete batteries, that is to
say, comprising, in addition to the sixty or eighty guns, all the necessary
accessories, such as carriages, limbers, caissons, harness, etc.

Frankly, between the two acquisitions, there is no hesitation possible.

Finally, if we must say so, we do not think that foreign powers, when they
believe it their duty to provide themselves with _materiel_ of great
caliber, will think of supplying themselves from the Essen works, on
account of the memorable accidents due to the imperfection of guns coming
from this celebrated establishment. The list of burstings that have
occurred, not only in Germany, but also in Russia, Bohemia, Italy, Turkey,
and Roumania, is already a long one. To speak here only of what occurred
in France in 1870-71, it is certain that out of seventy German guns of
large caliber in battery against the southwest front of the wall of Paris,
thirty-six--say more than half--were put out of service during the first
fifteen days of the bombardment, and that too through firing merely; and it
was the opinion of Mr. De Moltke himself that the German siege batteries
would have been reduced to silence, had the defenders been able to hold out
for a week longer. It is equally certain that, during the course of the
Loire campaign, eighty guns of Prince Frederick Charles' were put out of
service by the sole fact of their firing. Summing up the history of these
many accidents, the Duke of Cambridge asserted to the House of Lords (April
30, 1876) that _two hundred_ Krupp guns burst during the Franco-German war.
Have the engineers of the Essen works improved their processes of
manufacture since that epoch? It is permissible to doubt it, seeing that,
very recently, the Italian navy refused to take from Mr. Krupp some 151/2
inch guns whose tubes were but very imperfectly welded.

Must the numerous accidents mentioned be attributed to defects in the metal
employed? Were they due to defective hooping? Were they due to some one of
the numerous inconveniences inherent to the cylindrico-prismatic system of
closing (_Rundkeilverschluss_)?

They were doubtless owing to such causes combined.--_La Nature_.

       *       *       *       *       *




COLORS OF THIN PLATES.


The Right Hon. Lord Rayleigh lately delivered a lecture at the Royal
Institution upon "The Colors of Thin Plates," a term which he explained was
applied to thin films of substances, such as oily films on the surface of
water or the equally familiar soap bubble. Although the reflection of
colors from the surface of a soap bubble is probably the most noticeable,
yet the "plate" which lends itself most readily for experiment is a film of
air confined between two sheets of glass. If a ray of white light be
reflected from the surface of the film upon a screen, the so-called
Newton's rings, a series of colored concentric rings, are obtained. If,
instead of reflected light, the ray of light transmitted through the film
of air be allowed to fall upon the screen, the same phenomenon is
observable, but the effect is very considerably minimized, owing to the
great preponderance of white light, which overlies as it were the colored
rings. Even in the first instance, as the lecturer was able to show later
on, the colors are not nearly so intense as they may be obtained, owing to
some white light being reflected from the surfaces of the two sheets of
glass. With regard to the appearance of the phenomenon, it is observed that
the part which corresponds to the thinnest part of the film is considerably
darker than the rest of the spectrum; around this is a bright ring of
white, succeeded by constantly increasing concentric rings of different
colors apparently repeating themselves. Lord Rayleigh also obtained the
same results with a film of a solution of soap and glycerine, but in this
case the dark portion was observed at the top of the spectrum, the other
colors arranging themselves in order in the soap film thinned by the force
of gravitation, thus showing that the colors vary according to the
thickness of the film. Another form of the experiment called forth a
considerable amount of applause from the audience. Lord Rayleigh caused a
gentle stream of air to play obliquely upon a soap film, so that the part
struck was moved forward and the whole film rotated. Then with the
alteration of the force of the current of air, which of course regulated
the centrifugal force, alternating thicknesses of film were obtained,
causing a varying display of beautiful colors and combinations of colors.
This last experiment also tended to prove that the bands of color are not
arranged in a certain order, but vary according to the thickness of the
film, a conclusion arrived at by Brewster, who observed that if a film
reflecting certain colors be carefully inverted so as not to disturb the
gravity, the colors reflected are also inverted. Lord Rayleigh explained
the phenomenon by referring to Young's wave theory of light. He regarded
the film as having two surfaces from which light is reflected, an anterior
exterior surface and a posterior interior surface. If a ray of light be
thrown upon the film, a part of the light is reflected from the first
surface, but the greater part is transmitted, and some of this is reflected
from the second surface, passes back through the film, and is combined with
the light reflected from the first surface. If then the light reflected
from the second surface be in the same state of vibration as that reflected
from the first surface, the effect of their combination will be to increase
the amount of light reflected from the first surface, but if otherwise, the
