Apparently common at low elevations throughout southern Lower
California, especially the eastern side.

Specimens examined: Lower California (W. M. Gabb 17 of 1867, near
Loreto; Brandegee of 1889, at San Gregorio; Palmer 139 of 1890,
near La Paz; Palmer 880 of 1890, on Carmen Island; Brandegee 241
of 1890, at Rancho Colorado).

One of the most showy species of Lower California.  The plant has
the appearance of a Coryphanth, and is remarkable for its tall
and slender habit, its large central hooks, and its globose
fruit.  Since 1867 this species has been in Herb. Engelmann,
fully characterized as above under the very appropriate specific
name longihamatus.

24. Cactus setispinus, sp. nov.

  Mamillaria Setispina  Engelm. Mss.

Fasciculate and ascending, simple or branched at base, the stems
about 30 cm. high and 3 to 6 cm. in diameter, densely covered
with remarkably long stout spines: tubercles short and broadly
conical, with axillary wool: spines white. with black tips;
radials 10 to 12, widely spreading, very unequal, 10 to 34 mm.
long, slender and flexuous; central spines 1 to 4, more rigid and
much longer (20 to 50 mm.), the upper ones straight, the lowest
one longest and hooked (usually upwards) and often variously
curved and twisted: fruit obovate and scarlet 30 mm. long: seeds,
black and pitted.  Type, Gabb 15 in Herb. Mo. Bot. Gard.

Rocky or gravelly soil, San Julio Canyon. and in the vicinity of
San Borgia, Lower California.

Specimens examined: Lower California (W. M. Gabb 15 of 1867, at
San Borgia; Brandegee of 1889, from San Borgia and San Julio
Canyon).

In his notes Mr. Gabb describes the flower as "large, 3 to 3.5
inches long, bell-shaped, of a beautiful purplish red color,"
concerning which Dr. Engelmann remarks "this would indicate a
Coryphanth, but the tubercles show no trace of a groove, and,
moreover, a withered remnant of a flower laterally attached (say
18 to 20 mm. long), so that I have no doubt that Mr. Gabb's
statement is founded on some error."  It is very probable that
the flowers are scarlet and larger than Dr. Engelmann suggests.
The species is closely allied to C. roseanus, but differs in its
shorter tubercles and much longer spines.  About a dozen stems
rise in a clump, about a foot high, covering an area of 2 or 3
feet.  These two species represent a very distinct Lower
Californian group of cylindrical and hooked Eumamillarias.  Both
probably have showy scarlet flowers and may attain considerable
length when growing upon rock ledges so as to become pendent.
The specimens of C. setispinus from San Julio Canyon are from
younger parts and show but a single long and hooked central.  The
San Borgia specimens show mostly 3 or 4 centrals, the lowest one
hooked and becoming remarkably long and often variously twisted
and curved.  However, I can discover no difference except such as
may be due to age.

  ++ Central spines present and not hooked.
  + Central spines more than one, longer than the radials, which
    are numerous, white and slender (capillary or bristle-like)
    (rigid in C. Halei).

25. Cactus halei (Brandegee).

  Mamillaria halei  Brandegee, Proc. Calif. Acad. Sci Scr. 2. ii.
  161 (1889).

Stems cylindrical, 8 to 10 in a clump, about 30 cm. high and 5 to
7.5 cm. in diameter: tubercles short, with axillary wool: radial
spines 10 to 22, rigid and erect-spreading, unequal, 6 to 15 mm.
long; central spines numerous and erect-spreading, 1 to 3 of them
very stout and prominent (25 to 35 mm. long); all the spines
straight, at first reddish-brown, becoming yellowish and ashy,
more or less dark-tipped: flowers 2.5 cm. long, bright scarlet
(almost throughout): fruit 12 mm, long, clavate and red: seeds
black and pitted. (Ill. l. c. t. 6)  Type in Herb. Calif. Acad.

Abundant on Magdalena and Santa Margarita Islands, western coast
of Lower California.  Fl. January.

Specimens examined: Lower California (Brandegee of 1889, on
Magdalena Island).

The tubercles are so close together that the plant appears
thickly covered with the unusually stout and erect-spreading
straight spines, a few of the centrals being specially prominent.
The plant is more slender than the ordinary "cylindrical"
members of the genus, but stouter than the slender hooked forms
of the preceding section.

26. Cactus rhodanthus (Link & Otto) Kuntze, Rev. Gen. Pl. 261
    (1891).

  Mamillaria rhodantha  Link & Otto, Icon. t. 26 (1828-31)
  Mamillaria lanifera  Haw. Phil. Mag. lxiii., 41 (), not
  Salm-Dyck (1850).

Oblong or subcylindric, 30 cm. or more high, 7.5 to 10 cm. in
diameter, often forking from the middle: tubercles conical, 12
mm. long, 8 mm. in diameter, with woolly axils: radial spines 16
to 20, bristle-like, white, the lower longer (8 to 10 mm.);
central spines 6 or 7, rigid, whitish with black tip, 12 mm.
long: flowers rose color, 12 mm. in diameter: fruit 2.5 cm. long,
cylindrical. (Ill. l. c.)  Type unknown.

Referred to Mexico in general, but reported as yet from San Luis
Potosi to southern Mexico.  Fl. profusely all summer.

Specimens examined: San Luis Potosi (Bourgeau 47; Pringle 3679;
Eschanzier of 1891): also growing in Mo. Bot. Gard. 1893.

The specimens of Bourgeau and Pringle have somewhat larger spines
than the type, as indicated by the description.

27. Cactus rhodanthus sulphureospinus.

  Mamillaria sulphurea  Forst. Handb. Cact. (1846), not Cactus
    sulphureus Gill, (1830).
  Mamillaria rhodantha sulphurea  Salm, Hurt. Cact. Dyck. 11
(1850).

Central spines sulphur-yellow; otherwise like the species.  Type
unknown.

San Luis Potosi.

Specimens examined: San Luis Potosi (Pfeiffer, with no number or
date; Eschanzier of 1891).

The varietal distinction maintained seems a small one, but it is
constant and striking, so far as can be discovered.

28. Cactus capillaris.

  Mamillaria lanifera  Salm, Cact. Hort. Dyck. 98 (1850), not
Haw.
  Cactus laniferus  Kuntze, Rev. Gen. Pl. 250 (1891).

Cylindrical and erect: tubercles crowded, conical, glaucous, with
axillary bristles: radial spines capillary and very numerous,
white and crisped, entirely covering the plant; central spines 4
to 6, rigid, straight and spreading, straw-colored, 8 to 12 mm.
long: flowers equaling the tubercles, the yellow petals striped
with red: fruit unknown.  Type unknown.

Referred to Mexico in general, but definitely known only from
Coahuila.

Specimens examined: Coahuila. (Palmer of 1880).

There is a confusion of synonymy between this species and C.
rhodanthus, both having been named Mamillaria lanifera. The
earlier M. lanifera of Haworth, however, is clearly M. rhodantha
of Link & Otto; and although Prince Salm-Dyck revived the name
for the present species, the law of homonyms will not permit it
to stand.  The name proposed refers to the abundant display of
capillary radial spines, which is probably the most notable
feature.

29. Cactus palmeri, sp. nov.

Cylindrical: tubercles crowded, glaucous, cylindrical (somewhat
broadest above), about 4 mm. long, with dense axillary wool
containing bristles: radial spines 25 to 30, very slender and
white but rigid, about 5 mm. long, spreading or somewhat radiant,
entangled with those of neighboring tubercles, and so covering
the whole plant; central spines 3 to 5 (usually 4), more robust,
erect or slightly divergent, brownish with darker tip, 7 to 8 mm.
long: flowers small: fruit clavate and scarlet: seeds black and
strongly pitted, 0.5 to 0.8 mm. in diameter.  Type, Palmer 921 in
U. S. Nat. Herb.

San Benito Island, off the west coast of lower California.

Specimens examined: Lower California, San Benito Island (Palmer
921 of 1889, reported as Mamillaria Goodrichii).

Very closely allied to C. capillaris of eastern Mexico.

30. Cactus stellatus  Willd. Enum. Suppl. 30 (1813).

  Cactus pusillus  DC. Cat. Hort. Monsp. 184 (1813), not Haw.
    (1803).
  Mamillaria pusilla  DC. Prod. iii. 459 (1828).

A very common West Indian species, apparently differing from the
variety only in the very much fewer (12 to 20) radial spines,
although numerous specimens, both dried and living, were examined
for additional characters.  This difference, however, is so
constant and striking that, taken together with the wide
geographical separation, it should stand as varietal.

31. Cactus stellatus texanus (Engelm.).

  Mamillaria pusilla texana  Engelm. Syn. Cact. 216 (1856).
  Mamillaria texana  Young, Fl. Texas, 279 (1873).

Ovate-globose, 2.5 to 3 cm. in diameter, 2.5 to 6 cm. high,
proliferous and at length cespitose: tubercles 7 to 9 mm. long,
the long axillary wool intermixed with several coarse twisted
bristles: radial spines very numerous, in many series, the outer
ones (30 to 50) capillary, white, elongated and flexuous or
crisped (12 to 16 mm, long when straightened), the inner ones (10
to 12) more rigid, shorter (6 to 8 mm.), puberulent, whitish or
yellowish, usually dark-tipped; central spines 5 to 8, rigid,
straight, pubescent, unequal, white below and reddish or dark
above: flowers 1.5 to 2 cm. long, the yellowish-white petals with
reddish median band: fruit 1.5 to 2 cm. long: seeds black and
shining, conspicuously pitted, 1.2 mm. long. (Ill. Cact. Mex.
Bound. t 5.)  Type, Bigelow specimens in Herb. Mo. Bot. Gard.

From the mouth of the Rio Grande to El Paso, Tex., and southward
into Coahuila and Chihuahua.  Fl. March-May.

Specimens examined: Texas (Bigelow of 1853; Nealley of 1892):
Coahuila (Bigelow of 1853): also growing in Mo. Bot. Gard. 1892
and 1893.

The exterior capillary spines cover the whole plant as with a
coarse wool.

32. Cactus pringlei, sp. nov.

Globose (?), 5 cm. in diameter: tubercles short-conical, about 6
mm. long, with very woolly axils: radial spines 18 to 20,
setaceous-bristly and radiant, 5 to 8 m in. long; central spines
5 to 7 (usually 6), stout and horny, more or less recurved,
spreading, 20 to 25 mm. long; all straw-colored, but the centrals
darker: flowers deep red (darker, even brownish, outside), 8 to
10 mm. long: fruit unknown.  Type, Pringle of 1891 in Herb. Gray.

San Luis Potosi.

Specimens examined: San Luis Potosi (Pringle of 1891).

Evidently a member of the Chrysacantha group and near C.
rhodanthus sulphureospinus, but differs in the much shorter
tubercles, straw-colored spines, shorter radials, much longer
centrals, and smaller darker flowers.

33. Cactus sphaerotrichus  (Lem.) Kuntze, Rev. Gen. Pl. 261
    (1891).

  Mamillaria sphaerotricha  Lem. Cact. 33 (1839).

Depressed-globose: tubercles cylindrical, obtuse, with some
axillary bristles: radial spines very much crowded, exceedingly
numerous, radiant, very slender and bristle-like, white; central
spines 6 to 10 and even more, erect and more rigid: flowers pale
reddish: fruit unknown.  Type unknown.

Referred to Mexico in general, but reported only from San Luis
Potosi.

Specimens examined: Mexican specimens from Hort. Dyck in 1857;
from Hort. Pfersdorff in 1869; and growing in Mo. Bot. Gard. 1893
(from material sent by Pringle from San Luis Potosi).

  ++ The single central spine shorter than the radials (in C.
     longimamma centrals often more than one and somewhat
longer).

34. Cactus gabbli, sp. nov.

  Mamillaria gabbii  Engelm Mss.

Globose, 5 to 10 cm. in diameter, simple: tubercles cylindrical,
slender, 12 to 14 mm. long, with woolly axils: radial spines
about 13, 5 to 8 mm. long, lower ones longer and stouter,
especially the lateral ones pectinate; the central shorter,
straight, and robust: flowers small, yellowish-red: fruit
unknown.  Type in Herb. Mo. Bot. Gard.

Among rocks, from San Ignacio to Mission San Fernando, Lower
California, and "perhaps farther north in the interior."

Specimens examined: Lower California (W. M. Gabb 19 of 1867).

35. Cactus sphaericus  (Dietr.) Kuntze, Rev. Gen Pl. 261 (1891).

  Mamillaria sphaerica  Dietr. Allg. Gart. Zeit xxi. 94 (1853).

Obovate or clavate, 5 cm. or more high, proliferous and at length
densely cespitose: tubercles elongated-ovate, acutish, 12 to 10
mm. long with axillary wool: radial spines 12 to 14, setaceous, 7
to 9 mm. long, bulbous at base, straight or curved, white;
