certain tendency to curl inward. This curling, I take it, is a measure of
the strain upon the print, produced by the more complete return to its
original dimensions of the paper photograph. Probably it would be well to
keep the prints a few days after drying, or to subject them to
alternations of damp and dryness, in order to facilitate this complete
return before being placed upon the card. The evil of distortion is,
however, very slight--perhaps imperceptible--compared with that existing
when the prints are mounted wet. I may mention, _en passant_, that I have
found gum much more satisfactory as a mountant than starch paste in what
is known as the "dry mounting" system.

The paper which has recently been introduced for producing prints by
development upon a gelatine surface does not generally, when dried in the
usual way, give so good or so brilliant a surface as that of albumenized
paper; but on the other hand it is very easy with it to obtain what is
called an enamel surface, by simply allowing it to dry in contact with a
prepared surface of glass. This method of finishing has therefore been
much recommended and adopted, but without consideration of the effect of
distortion in connection with it. In an ordinary photograph the print is
mounted damp, but in the case of a print squeegeed on to the glass, the
paper is saturated and thoroughly swollen, and the use of the squeegee
strains it out to its fullest extent. By drying in the position in which
it has been held by contact with the glass, the distortion becomes fixed,
and if the print is mounted while in this state the distortion is made
permanent. How long the strain and distortion remain in an unmounted
print, and whether by time and alternations of moisture and dryness the
strain would be lost, and if so, whether the brilliant enamel surface
would go at the same time, are questions worthy of further investigation
and discussion.

For mounting prints upon developed gelatine paper, it has been
recommended to cement the edges only, so as to leave the greater part of
the print with its enamel surface. This plan is unsatisfactory, for two
reasons, besides the objection on the ground of distortion. There is a
rough-looking margin which spoils the continuity of appearance,
especially (as in the specimens I have seen) where the line of cement is
not kept at an exact width, but encroaches here and there.

Secondly, the print, from not being attached to the mount all over, is
apt, especially when in a large size, to be somewhat wavy and wanting in
flatness. Another plan recommended, as giving a surface resembling
albumen paper, is to paste the back of the print without moistening the
surface, and so mount. Some prints that have been shown thus treated had
so strongly curled the cards upon which they were mounted that it is
evident there was considerable strain and consequent distortion.

A third plan recommended is to paste the back of the print while in
contact with the glass upon which it has to dry; and, when dried, to
mount by passing through a rolling press with a damped card. This plan
looks, at first sight, like that recommended for albumen paper, and
called "dry" mounting. Consideration, however, will show that there is a
radical difference. In the case of the albumen paper the print has been
dried without strain, and therefore but little change is to be looked
for, while the print dried in contact with glass is strained to the
utmost, causing present distortion and future curling of the mount.
Perhaps the evil of distortion caused by enameling may be reduced to a
minimum by soaking the print in alcohol previous to laying it upon the
glass.

Since the distortion of the photograph arises from the unequal expansion
of the paper when wet, it becomes a question whether something may not be
done in the selection of the paper itself. It may be that some makes vary
much less than others in the "length against width" extension of the
surface by wetting. It must be remembered that for gelatine emulsion we
are not nearly so limited in the selection of paper as when it is
required to be albumenized. In the latter case the image is in the paper,
whereas with gelatine the image is contained in the surface coating. I
may mention that the best plain, i.e., not enameled, but resembling that
of ordinary albumen paper, surface that I have seen upon gelatine paper
was upon some foreign post that I had obtained for another purpose. The
emulsion employed was that described by Mr. J.B.B. Wellington, and this
gentleman agreed with me in attributing the superiority of the surface
obtained to the fine quality of the paper upon which the emulsion had
been coated. Some commercial samples appear to be coated upon paper of
somewhat coarse texture. This does not show when the print is enameled.

The unequal expansion of paper is a subject of interest, not only in
connection with gelatine paper for development, but with various
photographic processes. In making carbon transparencies for instance, the
gelatine film which is squeegeed against the glass necessarily takes its
dimensions from the paper to which it is attached, and if that be
expanded more in the one direction than another, the transparency is
similarly deformed; and so, of course, is any negative, enlarged or
otherwise, produced in the camera therefrom. A reproduced negative by
contact printing may either have the distortion due to expansion of the
paper bearing the gelatine film removed or doubled, according to the
direction in which the paper is used for the new negative.--_W.E.
Debenham, in Br. Jour. of Photography_.

       *       *       *       *       *




MEASURING THE THICKNESS OF BOILER PLATES.


An ingenious process for determining the thickness of iron plates in
boilers, or places where they cannot otherwise be measured without
cutting them, has been invented by M. Lebasteur. He spreads upon the
plate the thickness of which he desires to find, and also upon a piece of
sheet iron of known thickness, a layer of tallow about 0.01 inch thick.
He then applies to each, for the same length of time, a small object,
such as a surgeon's cauterizing instrument, heated as nearly as possible
to a constant temperature. The tallow melts, and as in the thicker plate
the heat of the cautery is conducted away more rapidly, while in the thin
plate the heat is less freely conducted away, and the tallow is
consequently melted over a large area, the diameters of the circles of
bare metal around the heated point, bounded after cooling by a little
ridge of tallow, will be to each other inversely as the thickness of the
plates. The process is stated to have given in the inventor's hands,
results of great accuracy.

       *       *       *       *       *




GROUPS OF STATUARY FOR THE PEDIMENT OF THE HOUSE OF PARLIAMENT IN
VIENNA.


The pediment of the central pavilion and the two side pavilions of the
new House of Parliament, at Vienna, are to be ornamented with groups of
statuary. The group in the middle pediment represents the granting of the
constitution by the Emperor Francis Joseph, and was executed by Professor
Helmer.

[Illustration: STATUARY FOR THE VIENNA HOUSE OF PARLIAMENT.--SCIENCE
AND LITERATURE. (GROUP TO THE LEFT.)]

The pediment of the left wing is ornamented by a group representing
Justice, and the pediment of the right wing by a group representing the
Home Government.

Johannes Benk, the well known Austrian sculptor, designed and executed
the last mentioned group. The two figures at the left hand end of this
group represent Science and Literature, and those at the right hand end,
Industry and Commerce. The entire group consists of nine figures, the
middle figure being seated and the rest standing, sitting, and lying, as
the space in the pediment allows.

A seated female figure studying a papyrus roll represents Science, and
the adjacent female figure, resting one arm on the figure representing
Science, and the other, on a lyre, represents Literature or Poetry.

Industry is represented by a strong and powerful woman holding a hammer,
and the figure of Mercury and the prow of a vessel represent Commerce.

[Illustration: STATUARY FOR THE VIENNA HOUSE OF PARLIAMENT.--INDUSTRY
AND COMMERCE. (GROUP TO THE RIGHT.)]

The modulation and formation of each figure conform strictly to Grecian
models, as does also the entire arrangement of the figures in the group;
and yet there is much of modern life in the figures, especially in the
faces, in which the stereotyped Grecian profile has not been adopted. The
attitudes of the figures are also freer and more easy than those of the
Grecian period.--_Illustrirte Zeitung_.

       *       *       *       *       *




ON THE FRITTS SELENIUM CELLS AND BATTERIES.

[Footnote: Paper read before the American Association for the Advancement
of Science, at Philadelphia, Sept, 5, 1884.]

By C.E. FRITTS, 42 Nassau St., New York, N.Y.


In all previous cells, so far as I am aware, the two portions or parts of
the selenium at which the current enters and leaves it have been in
substantially the same electrical state or condition. Furthermore, the
paths of the current and of the light have been transverse to each other,
so that the two forces partially neutralize each other in their action
upon the selenium. Lastly, the current flows through not only the surface
layer, which is acted upon by the light, but also the portion which is
underneath, and not affected thereby, and which therefore detracts from
the actual effect of the light upon the selenium at the surface.

My form of cell is a radical departure from all previous methods of
employing selenium, in all of these respects. In the first place, I form
the selenium in very thin plates, and polarize them, so that the
opposite faces have different electrical states or properties. This I do
by melting it upon a plate of metal with which it will form a chemical
combination, sufficient, at least, to cause the selenium to adhere and
make a good electrical connection with it. The other surface of the
selenium is not so united or combined, but is left in a free state, and a
conductor is subsequently applied over it by simple contact or pressure.

During the process of melting and crystallizing, the selenium is
compressed between the metal plate upon which it is melted and another
plate of steel or other substance with which it will not combine. Thus by
the simultaneous application and action of heat, pressure, chemical
affinity, and crystallization, it is formed into a sheet of granular
selenium, uniformly polarized throughout, and having its two surfaces in
opposite phases as regards its molecular arrangement. The non-adherent
plate being removed after the cell has become cool, I then cover that
surface with a _transparent conductor of electricity_, which may be a
thin film of gold leaf. Platinum, silver, or other suitable material may
also be employed. The whole surface of the selenium is therefore covered
with a good electrical conductor, yet is practically bare to the light,
which passes through the conductor to the selenium underneath.[5] My
standard size of cell has about two by two and a half inches of surface,
with a thickness of 1/1000 to 5/1000 inch of selenium. But the cells can,
of course, be made of any size or form. A great advantage of this
arrangement consists in the fact that it enables me to apply the current
and the light to the selenium in the same plane or general direction,
instead of transversely to each other as heretofore done, so that I can
cause the two influences to either coincide in direction and action, or
to act upon opposite faces of the selenium and oppose each other,
according to the effect desired.

[Footnote 5: The method of constructing the cells was described in the
SCIENTIFIC AMERICAN SUPPLEMENT, No. 462, for Nov. 8, 1884, page 7371.]

By virtue of the process and arrangement described, my cells have a
number of remarkable properties, among which are the following:

1. _Their sensitiveness to light_ is much greater than ever before known.
The most sensitive cell ever produced, previous to my investigations, was
one made by Dr. Werner Siemens, which was 14.8 times as conductive in
sunlight as in dark. In table A, I give results obtained from a number of
my cells.

It will be observed that I have produced one cell which was 337.5 times
as conductive in hazy sunlight as in dark. The tremendous change of
resistance involved in the expression "337.5 times" may perhaps be more
fully realized by saying that 99.704 _per cent_. of the resistance had
disappeared temporarily, under the joint action of light and electricity,
so that there remained _less than 3/10 of 1 per cent_. of the original
resistance of the selenium in dark.

In order to obtain these high results, the cells must be protected from
light when not in use. The resistance is first measured while the cell is
still in total darkness. It is then exposed to sunlight and again
measured. It is also necessary to send the current in at the gold
electrode or face, as the cell is much less sensitive to light when the
light acts upon one surface of the selenium and the current enters at the
opposite surface. When the two influences, the light and the current, act
through the gold, in conjunction, their forces are united; and, as every
atom of the selenium is affected by the light, owing to the extreme
thinness of the plate, we have the full effect shown in the measurements.

                          TABLE A.

                   SENSITIVENESS TO LIGHT.

-----------------------------------------------------------------
Selenium  |  Battery  | Resistance in | Resistance in |
  cell.   |  power.   |     dark.     |   sunlight.   |  Ratio.
----------+-----------+---------------+---------------+----------
          |           |    ohms.      |   ohms.       |
 No. 22   |5 elements.|    39,000     |    340        |114   to 1
  "  23[6]|5     "    |    14,000     |    170        | 82.3  " "
  "  24[7]|5     "    |   648,000     |  2,400        |270    " "
  "  25   |5     "    |   180,000     |    930        |196.5  " "
  "  26   |5     "    |   135,000     |    710        |190    " "
  " 107   |5     "    |   118,000     |    740        |159    " "
  " 108   |5     "    |   200,000     |    900        |222    " "
  " 122   |5     "    |    56,000     |    220        |254.5  " "
  " 129[6]|5     "    |   200,000     |    940        |212    " "
  " 137   |5     "    |   108,000     |    320        |337.5  " "
-----------------------------------------------------------------

[Footnote 6: Cells No. 23 and No. 129 are now in possession of Prof. W.
Gryllis Adams, of King's College, London; Dr. Werner Siemens has No. 25,
and Prof. George F. Barker, of Philadelphia, has No. 26.]

[Footnote 7: No. 24 was measured with a bridge multiplier of 6 to 1.]

Cells which are sensitive to light improve by being used daily, and their
sensitiveness becomes less if they are laid aside and not used for a
considerable length of time, especially if allowed to become overheated.
They should be kept cool, and exposed to light frequently, whether they
are used or not.

_Mode of measuring cells_.--So great is the sensitiveness of these cells
to external influences, that it is necessary to adopt some particular
system in measuring their resistance and to adhere strictly to that
system, as every change in the method of measurement produces a
difference in the result, and the different measurements would not be
comparable with each other. The reason for this will be explained
presently.

The system I have adopted is the Wheatstone's bridge arrangement, with
equal sides, never using multipliers except for some experimental
purpose. In each multiplier wire I have 500 ohms resistance. When the
bridge is balanced, one-half of the current flows through the cell and
acts upon the selenium. Between the bridge and the cell is a reversing
switch, so that the current can be reversed through the cell without
changing its course through the bridge. A Bradley tangent galvanometer is
used, employing the coil of 160 ohms resistance. The Leclanche battery is
exclusively used in measurements for comparison.

2. _The kind of battery employed_ has a marked effect upon the
sensitiveness to light, which is largely reduced or entirely destroyed
when the bichromate battery is used. The same cells again become
extremely sensitive with the Leclanche battery. We might expect that a
change in the current employed would cause a change in the _resistance_
of a cell, but it is not clear how or why it should affect the
_sensitiveness of selenium to light_.

"If one kind of battery current destroys its sensitiveness, may we not
suppose that another kind might increase its sensitiveness? Although the
Leclanche has operated well, some other may operate still better, and by
its special fitness for use on selenium cells may intensify their
actions, and so bring to light other properties yet unthought of. Is not
here a promising field for experiment, in testing the various forms of
battery already known, or even devising some new form especially adapted
to the needs and peculiarities of selenium cells?"

One year ago I made the foregoing suggestion in a paper on _A New Form of
Selenium Cell_, presented before this Association at Minneapolis. I am
now at liberty to state that my photo-electric battery, presently to be
described, marks an advance in the direction indicated. The current from
this battery increases the sensitiveness of the cells to light, and also
to reversal of current. One cell whose highest ratio in light was about
83 to 1, with the Leclanche battery, when measured with my battery gave a
ratio of 120 to 1. It seems to make the resistance of the cell both
higher in dark and lower in sunlight than with the Leclanche battery. But
the field is yet open to others, for the discovery of a battery which may
be still better for use with selenium cells.

3. _The two surfaces of the selenium act differently toward currents_
sent into them from the contiguous conductors. One surface offers a
higher resistance to the current than the other. The former I utilize as
the anode surface, as I have found that the cell is more sensitive to
light when the current enters at that surface, which is ordinarily the
one covered by the gold or other transparent conductor. Some cells have
this property but feebly developed; but in one instance the resistance
offered to the current by the anode surface was 256 times as high as that
offered by the cathode surface to the same current. In the majority of
cases, however, the ratio does not exceed ten times. Table B gives some
recent results.

                           TABLE B.

      SENSITIVENESS TO REVERSAL OF DIRECTION OF CURRENT.

-----------------------+--------------+------------------+---------
                       |              |   Resistance     |
    No. of cell.       |   Battery.   | "gold  | "gold   | Ratio
                       |              | anode."|cathode."|
-----------------------+--------------+--------+---------+---------
                       |              |  ohms. |  ohms.  |
3/8 inch square. No. 4 |  5 elements. | 20,000 |  1,000  | 20  to 1
      "     "     "  3 |   Se. cell.  |  6,500 |    400  | 16.2 "
   Full size, No. 13   |  1 element.  |  9,000 |    800  | 11.2 "
     "    "    "  14   |  5    "      |  2,440 |    130  | 18   "
     "    "    "  15   |  5    "      |  4,640 |    210  | 22   "
     "    "    "  27   |  5    "      |  6,900 |    440  | 16   "
     "    "    " 126   |  1    "      |  5,000 |    330  | 15   "
-----------------------+--------------+--------+---------+---------

The direction of the current is always indicated by stating the position
of the gold electrode, by the terms "gold anode" and "gold cathode." The
above measurements were made in dark.

4. _Sensitiveness to change of battery power_.--My cells are extremely
sensitive to any change in the strength or character of the current
flowing through them, which is shown by a corresponding change in the
resistance of the cell. I can, therefore, vary the resistance of one of
my cells in many ways, and the following may be specified--

(a) By changing the potential or electromotive force of the current
through the cell.

(b) By changing the "quantity" of the battery or current.

(c) By putting more or less resistance in the circuit.

(d) By dividing the current, by one or more branch circuits or shunts
around the cell.

(e) By varying the resistance in any or all of said circuits.

A cell whose resistance becomes greater as the battery power becomes
greater, and _vice versa_, I call an "L B cell" signifying _Like the
Battery power_. A "U B cell" is one whose resistance becomes greater as
the battery power (or strength of current) becomes less, and _vice
versa_, being _Unlike the Battery power_, or current strength.

These changes of resistance are not due to heating of the conductor or
the selenium, and the following instance will illustrate this. I have one
cell in which the selenium has about one-fourth inch square of surface
melted on a brass block one inch thick. This cell measured, with 25
elements of Leclanche, 40,000 ohms. On changing the battery to 5 elements
the resistance fell instantly to 30 ohms, and there remained. On again
using the current from 25 elements, the resistance instantly returned to
40,000 ohms. Had these results been due in any degree to heating, the
resistance would have changed gradually as the heat became communicated
to the brass, whereas no such change occurred, the resistances being
absolutely steady. Moreover, even the fusion of the selenium would not
produce any such change.

The "U B" property does not ordinarily change the resistance of the cell
to exceed ten times, i.e., the resistance with a weak current will not be
over ten times as high as with a strong one. But I have developed the "L
B" property to a far higher degree. Table C gives some recent results
obtained with L B cells, including one whose resistance, with 25 elements
Leclanche, was 11,381 times as high as with 8 elements, and which, after
standing steadily at 123 ohms (and then at 325 ohms with 1 element), on
receiving the current from 25 elements again returned to its previous
figure of 1,400,000 ohms.

                         TABLE C.

          SENSITIVENESS TO CHANGE OF BATTERY POWER.
-----------------------+------------+------------+-------------
                       | Resistance | Resistance |
       No. of cell.    |   with 25  |   with 5   |  Ratio of
                       |  elements. |  elements. |   Change.
-----------------------+------------+------------+-------------
                       |  ohms.     |  ohms.     |
3/8 inch square, No. 1 |    40,000  |     30     |  1,333 to 1
3/8  "     "      "  2 |    13,000  |     40     |    325  "
1/4  "     "      "  1 | 1,400,000  |    123[8]  | 11,381  "
1/2  "     "      "  2 |   500,000  |     62     |  8,064  "
1/2  "     "      "  5 |     3,500  |     21     |    167  "
   Full size, No. 81   |    68,000  |    121     |    561  "
    "    "     "  82   |     9,000  |     64     |    140  "
    "    "     "  83   |    17,300  |     74     |    233  "
    "    "     " 119   |    35,600  |     19     |  1,894  "
-----------------------+------------+------------+-------------

[Footnote 8: This measurement was obtained with 8 elements.]

The results in the table were obtained by changing the strength of
current by throwing in more or less of the battery. Like results can be
obtained by varying the current through the cell by any of the other
methods before specified. The above measurements were in dark.

5. _Dual state of selenium_.--My cells, when first made seem to have two
states or conditions. In one, their resistance is very low, in the other
it is high. When in the low state they are usually not very sensitive, in
any respect. I therefore raise the resistance, by sending an intermittent
or an alternating current though the cells, and in their new condition
