covers the last 4,000 feet of the ascent, and the power house is at the
bottom, a steel cable running up, passing round a wheel at the top and
returning to the engine in the power house. The ascent to the lower
terminus of the road is made on mules or donkeys; then, in a comfortable
car, the traveler is carried to a point not far from the crater. The car
is a combined grip and a passenger car, similar in some points to the
grip car of the present day, while the seats of the passenger portion
are inclined as in the cars on the Rigi road. But the angle of the road
being from thirty-three to forty-five degrees, makes both ascent and
descent seem fearfully perilous. Every precaution, however, is taken to
insure the safety of passengers; each car is provided with several
strong and independent brakes, and thus far no accident worth recording
has occurred. The road was opened in June, 1880. Although there have
been several considerable eruptions since that date, none of them did
any damage to the line but what was repaired in a few hours.

The fashion thus set will, no doubt, be followed in many other quarters.
Wherever there is sufficient travel to pay working expenses and a profit
on a steep grade mountain road it will probably be built. Already there
is talk of a road on Mont Blanc, of another up the Yungfrau, and several
have been projected in the Schwartz and Hartz mountains. A route on Ben
Nevis, in Scotland, is already surveyed, and it is said surveys have
also been made up Snowden, with a view to the establishment of a road to
the summit of the highest Welsh peak. Sufficient travel is all that is
necessary, and when that is guaranteed, whenever a mountain possesses
sufficient interest to induce people to make its ascent in considerable
numbers, means of transportation, safe and speedy, will soon be
provided. The modern engineer is able, willing and ready to build a road
to the top of Mt. Everest in the Himalayas if he is paid for doing
so.--_St. Louis Globe-Democrat._

       *       *       *       *       *

To clean hair brushes, wash with weak solution of washing soda, rinse
out all the soda, and expose to sun.

       *       *       *       *       *




THE MARCEAU.


[Illustration: THE FRENCH ARMORED TURRET SHIP MARCEAU]

The Marceau, the last ironclad completed and added to the French navy,
was put in commission at Toulon in April last, and has lately left that
town to join the French squadron of the north at Brest. The original
designs of this ship were prepared by M. Huin, of the French Department
of Naval Construction, but since the laying down of the keel in the year
1882 they have been very considerably modified, and many improvements
have been introduced.

Both ship and engines were constructed by the celebrated French firm,
the Societe des Forges et Chantiers de la Mediterranee, the former at
their shipyard in La Seyne and the latter at their engine works in
Marseilles. The ship was five years in construction on the stocks, was
launched in May, 1887, and not having been put in commission until the
present year, was thus nearly nine years in construction. She is a
barbette belted ship of somewhat similar design to the French ironclads
Magenta, now being completed at the Toulon arsenal, and the Neptune, in
construction at Brest.

The hull is constructed partly of steel and partly of iron, and has the
principal dimensions as follows. Length, 330 ft. at the water line;
beam, 66 ft. outside the armor; draught, 27 ft. 6 in. aft.;
displacement, 10,430 English or 10,600 French tons. The engines are two
in number, one driving each propeller; they are of the vertical compound
type, and on the speed trials developed 11,300 indicated horse power
under forced and 5,500 indicated horse power under natural draught, the
former giving a speed of 16.2 knots per hour with 90 revolutions per
minute. The boilers are eight in number, of the cylindrical marine type,
and work at a pressure of 85.3 lb. per square inch. During the trials
the steering powers of the ship were found to be excellent, but the bow
wave is said, by one critic, to have been very great.

The ship is completely belted with Creusot steel armor, which varies in
thickness from 9 in. forward to 173/4 in. midships. In addition to this
belt the ship is protected by an armored deck of 31/2 in., while the
barbette gun towers are protected with 153/4 in. steel armor with a hood
of 21/2 in. to protect the men against machine gun fire. As a further
means of insuring the life of the ship in combat and also against
accidents at sea, the Marceau is divided into 102 water-tight
compartments and is fitted with torpedo defense netting. There are two
masts, each carrying double military tops; and a conning tower is
mounted on each mast, from either of which the ship may be worked in
time of action, and both of which are in telegraphic communication with
the engine rooms and magazines. Provision is made for carrying 600 tons
of coal, which, at a speed of 10 knots, should be sufficient to supply
the boilers for a voyage of 4,000 miles.

The armament of the Marceau is good for the tonnage of the ship and
consists principally of four guns of 34 centimeters (13.39 in.) of the
French 1884 model, having a weight of 52 tons, a length of 281/2 calibers,
and being able to pierce 30 in. of iron armor at the muzzle. The
projectiles weigh 924 lb., and are fired with a charge of 387 lb. of
powder. The muzzle velocity has been calculated to be 1,968 ft. per
second. The guns are entirely of steel and are mounted on Canet
carriages in four barbette towers, one forward, one aft, and one on each
side amidships. On the firing trials both the guns and all the Canet
machinery, for working the guns and hoisting the ammunition, gave very
great satisfaction to all present at the time. In addition to the above
four heavy guns there are, in the broadside battery, sixteen guns of 14
centimeters (5.51 in.), eight on each side, and a gun of equal caliber
is mounted right forward on the same deck. The armament is completed by
a large number of Hotchkiss quick-firing and revolver guns and four
torpedo tubes, one forward, one aft, and one on each side.

The crew of the Marceau has been fixed at 600 men, and the cost is
stated to have been about $3,750,000.--_Engineering_.

       *       *       *       *       *

[Continued from SUPPLEMENT, No. 820, page 13097.]




A REVIEW OF MARINE ENGINEERING DURING THE PAST DECADE.[1]

[Footnote 1: Paper read before the Institution of Mechanical Engineers,
July 28, 1891.]

BY MR. ALFRED BLECHYNDEN, OF BARROW-IN-FURNESS


_Steam Pipes_.--The failures of copper steam pipes on board the Elbe,
Lahn, and other vessels have drawn serious attention both to the
material and to the modes of construction of the pipes. The want of
elastic strength in copper is an important element in the matter; and
the three following remedies have been proposed, while still retaining
copper as the material. First, in view of the fact that in the operation
of brazing the copper may be seriously injured, to use solid drawn
tubes. This appears fairly to meet the main dangers incidental to
brazing; but as solid drawn pipes of over 7 inches diameter are
difficult to procure, it hardly meets the case sufficiently. Secondly,
to use electrically deposited tubes. At first much was promised in this
direction; but up to the present time it can hardly be regarded as more
than in the experimental stage. Thirdly, to use the ordinary brazed or
solid drawn tubes, and to re-enforce them by serving with steel cord or
steel or copper wire. This has been tried, and found to answer
perfectly. For economical reasons, as well as for insuring the minimum
of torsion to the material during manufacture, it is important to make
as few bends as possible; but in practice much less difficulty has been
experienced in serving bent pipes in a machine than would have been
expected. Discarding copper, it has been proposed to substitute steel or
iron. In the early days of the higher pressures, Mr. Alexander Taylor
adopted wrought iron for steam pipes. One fitted in the Claremont in
February, 1882, was recently removed from the vessel for experimental
purposes, and was reported upon by Mr. Magnus Sandison in a paper read
before the Northeast Coast Institution of Engineers and Shipbuilders.[2]
The following is a summary of the facts. The pipe was 5 inches external
diameter, and 0.375 inch thick. It was lap welded in the works of
Messrs. A. & J. Stewart. The flanges were screwed on and brazed
externally. The pipe was not lagged or protected in any manner. After
eight and a half years' service the metal measured where cut 0.32 and
0.375 inch in thickness, showing that the wasting during that time had
been very slight. The interior surface of the tube exhibited no signs of
pitting or corrosion. It was covered by a thin crust of black oxide, the
maximum thickness of which did not exceed 1/32 inch. Where the deposit
was thickest it was curiously striated by the action of the steam. On
the scale being removed, the original bloom on the surface of the metal
was exposed. It would thus appear that the danger from corrosion of iron
steam pipes is not borne out in their actual use; and hence so much of
the way is cleared for a stronger and more reliable material than
copper. So far the source of danger seems to be in the weld, which would
be inadmissible in larger pipes; but there is no reason why these should
not be lapped and riveted. There seems, however, a more promising way
out of the difficulty in the Mannesmann steel tubes which are now being
"spun" out of solid bars, so as to form weldless tubes.

[Footnote 2: Transactions Northeast Coast Institution of Engineers and
Shipbuilders, vol. 7, 1890-91, p. 179.]

TABLE I.--TENSILE STRENGTH OF GUN METAL AT HIGH TEMPERATURES.

--------------+------------+-------------+-------------+------------+
              |            |             |             |            |
 Composition  |Temperature |   Tensile   |   Elastic   | Elongation |
     of       |  of oil    |   strength  |    limit    |     in     |
 gun metal.   |   bath.    |  per square |  per square | length of  |
              |            |    inch.    |    inch.    | 2 inches   |
--------------+------------+-------------+-------------+------------+
   Per cent.  |    Fahr.   |    Tons     |    Tons     |  Per cent. |
 Copper 87   /|     50 deg.    |    12.34    |     8.38    |    14.64   |
 Tin     8  / |            |             |             |            |
 Zinc    31/2 \ |            |             |             |            |
 Lead    11/2  \|    400 deg.    |    10.83    |     6.30    |    11.79   |
--------------+------------+-------------+-------------+------------+
 Copper 87   /|     50 deg.    |    13.86    |     8.33    |    20.30   |
 Tin     8  { |            |             |             |            |
 Zinc    5   \|    458 deg.    |    10.70    |     7.43    |    12.42   |
--------------+------------+-------------+-------------+------------+

Cast steel has been freely used by the writer for bends, junction
pieces, etc., of steam pipes, as well as for steam valve chests; and
except for the fact that steel makers' promises of delivery are
generally better than their performance, the result has thus far been
satisfactory in all respects. These were adopted because there existed
some doubt as to the strength of gun metal under a high temperature; and
as the data respecting its strength appeared of a doubtful character, a
series of careful tests were made to determine the tensile strength of
gun metal when at atmospheric and higher temperatures. The test bars
were all 0.75 in diameter, or 0.4417 square inch sectional area; and
those tested at the higher temperatures were broken while immersed in a
bath of oil at the temperature here stated, each line being the mean of
four experiments. The result of these experiments was to give somewhat
greater faith in gun metal as a material to be used under a higher
temperature; but as steel is much stronger, it is probably the most
advisable material to use, when the time necessary to procure it can be
allowed.

_Feed Heating_.--With the double object of obviating strain on the
boiler through the introduction of the feed water at a low temperature,
and also of securing a greater economy of fuel, the principle of
previously heating the feed water by auxiliary means has received
considerable attention, and the ingenious method introduced by Mr. James
Weir has been widely adopted. It is founded on the fact that, if the
feed water as it is drawn from the hot well be raised in temperature by
the heat of a portion of steam introduced into it from one of the steam
receivers, the decrease of the coal necessary to generate steam from the
water of the higher temperature bears a greater ratio to the coal
required without feed heating than the power which would be developed in
the cylinder by that portion of steam would bear to the whole power
developed when passing all the steam through all the cylinders. The
temperature of the feed is of course limited by the temperature of the
steam in the receiver from which the supply for heating is drawn.
Supposing, for example, a triple expansion engine were working under the
following conditions without feed heating: Boiler pressure, 150
lb.;--indicated horse power in high pressure cylinder 398, in
intermediate and low pressure cylinders together 790, total, 1,188; and
temperature of hot well 100 deg. Fahr. Then with feed heating the same
engine might work as follows: The feed might be heated to 220 deg. Fahr.,
and the percentage of steam from the first receiver required to heat it
would be 12.2 per cent.; the indicated horse power in the high pressure
cylinder would be as before 398, and in the intermediate and low
pressure cylinders it would be 12.2 per cent, less than before, or 694,
and the total would be 1,092, or 92 per cent. of the power developed
without feed heating. Meanwhile the heat to be added to each pound of
the feed water at 220 deg. Fahr. for converting it into steam would be 1,005
units against 1,125 units with feed at 100 deg. Fahr., equivalent to an
expenditure of only 89.4 per cent. of the heat required without feed
heating. Hence the expenditure of heat in relation to power would be
89.4 + 92.0 = 97.2 per cent., equivalent to a heat economy of 2.8 per
cent. If the steam for heating can be taken from the low pressure
receiver, the economy is about doubled. Other feed heaters, more or less
upon the same principle, have been introduced. Also others which heat
the feed in a series of pipes within the boiler, so that it is
introduced into the water in the boiler practically at boiling
temperature; this is economical, however, only in the sense that wear
and tear of the boiler is saved; in principle the plan does not involve
economy of fuel.

_Auxiliary Supply of Fresh Water_.--Intimately associated with the feed
is the means adopted for making up the losses of fresh water due to
leakage of steam from safety valves, glands, joints, etc., and of water
discharged from the air pumps. A few years ago this loss was regularly
made up from the sea, with the result that the water in the boilers was
gradually increased in density; whence followed deposit on the internal
surfaces, and consequent loss of efficiency, and danger of accident
through overheating the plates. With the higher pressures now adopted,
the danger arising from overheating is much more serious, and the
necessity is absolute of maintaining the heating surfaces free from
deposit. This can be done only by filling the boiler with fresh water in
the first instance, and maintaining it in that condition. To do this two
methods are adopted, either separately or in conjunction. Either a
reserve supply of fresh water is carried in tanks or the supplementary
feed is distilled from sea water by special apparatus provided for the
purpose. In the construction of the distilling or evaporating apparatus
advantage has been taken of two important physical facts, namely, that,
if water be heated to a temperature higher than that corresponding with
the pressure on its surface, evaporation will take place; and that the
passage of heat from steam at one side of a plate to water at the other
is very rapid. In practice the distillation is effected by passing
steam, say from the first receiver, through a nest of tubes inside a
still or evaporator, of which the steam space is connected either with
the second receiver or with the condenser. The temperature of the steam
inside the tubes being higher than that of the steam either in the
second receiver or in the condenser, the result is that the water inside
the still is evaporated, and passes with the rest of the steam into the
condenser, where it is condensed, and serves to make up the loss. This
plan localizes the trouble of deposit, and frees it from its dangerous
character, because an evaporator cannot become overheated like a boiler,
even though it be neglected until it salts up solid; and if the same
precautions are taken in working the evaporator which used to be adopted
with low pressure boilers when they were fed with salt water, no serious
trouble should result. When the tubes do become incrusted with deposit,
they can be either withdrawn or exposed, as the apparatus is generally
so arranged; and they can then be cleaned.

_Screw Propeller_.--In Mr. Marshall's paper of 1881 it was said that
"the screw propeller is still to a great extent an unsolved problem."
This was at the time a fairly true remark. It was true the problem had
been made the subject of general theoretical investigation by various
eminent mathematicians, notably by Professor Rankine and Mr. William
Froude, and of special experimental investigation by various engineers.
As examples of the latter may be mentioned the extended series of
investigations in the French vessel Pelican, and the series made by Mr.
Isherwood on a steam launch about 1874. These experiments, however, such
as they were, did little to bring out general facts and to reduce the
subject to a practical analysis. Since the date of Mr. Marshall's paper,
the literature on this subject has grown rapidly, and, has been almost
entirely of a practical character. The screw has been made the subject
of most careful experiments. One of the earliest extensive series of
experiments was made under the writer's direction in 1881, with a large
number of models, the primary object being to determine what value there
was in a few of the various twists which inventive ingenuity can give to
a screw blade. The results led the experimenters to the conclusion that
in free water such twists and curves are valueless as serving to augment
efficiency. The experiments were then carried further with a view to
determine quantitative moduli for the resistance of screws with
different ratios of pitch to diameter, or "pitch ratios," and afterward
with different ratios of surface to the area of the circle described by
the tips of the blades, or "surface ratios." As these results have to
some extent been analyzed and published, no further reference need be
made to them now.

In 1886, Mr. R.E. Froude published in the Transactions of the
Institution of Naval Architects the deductions drawn from an extensive
series of trials made with four models of similar form and equal
diameter, but having different pitch ratios. Mr. S.W. Barnaby has
published some of the results of experiments made under the direction of
Mr. J.I. Thornycroft; and in his paper read before the Institution of
Civil Engineers in 1890 he has also put Mr. R.E. Froude's results into a
shape more suitable for comparison with practice. Nor ought Mr. G.A.
Calvert's carefully planned experiments to pass unnoticed, of which an
account was given in the Transactions of the Institution of Naval
Architects in 1887. These experiments were made on rectangular bodies
with sections of propeller blade form, moved through the water at
various velocities in straight lines, in directions oblique to their
plane faces; and from their results an estimate was formed of the
resistance of a screw.

One of the most important results deduced from experiments on model
screws is that they appear to have practically equal efficiencies
throughout a wide range both in pitch ratio and in surface ratio; so
that great latitude is left to the designer in regard to the form of the
propeller. Another important feature is that, although these experiments
are not a direct guide to the selection of the most efficient propeller
for a particular ship, they supply the means of analyzing the
performances of screws fitted to vessels, and of thus indirectly
determining what are likely to be the best dimensions of screw for a
vessel of a class whose results are known. Thus a great advance has been
made on the old method of trial upon the ship itself, which was the
origin of almost every conceivable erroneous view respecting the screw
propeller. The fact was lost sight of that any modification in form,
dimensions, or proportions referred only to that particular combination
of ship and propeller, or to one similar thereto; so something like
chaos was the result. This, however, need not be the case much longer.

In regard to the materials used for propellers, steel has been largely
adopted for both solid and loose-bladed screws; but unless protected in
some way, the tips of the blades are apt to corrode rapidly and become
unserviceable. One of the stronger kinds of bronze is often judiciously
employed for the blades, in conjunction with a steel boss. Where the
first extra expense can be afforded, bronze seems the preferable
material; the castings are of a reliable character, and the metal does
not rapidly corrode; the bronze blades can therefore with safety be made
lighter than steel blades, which favors their springing and
accommodating themselves more readily to the various speeds of the
different parts of the wake. This might be expected to result in some
slight increase of efficiency; of which, however, the writer has never
had the opportunity of satisfactorily determining the exact extent.
Instances can be brought forward where bronze blades have been
substituted for steel or iron with markedly improved results; but in
cases of this kind which the writer has had the opportunity of
analyzing, the whole improvement might be accounted for by the modified
proportions of the screw when in working condition. In other words, both
experiment and practical working alike go to show that, although cast
iron and steel blades as usually proportioned are sufficiently stiff to
retain their form while at work, bronze blades, being made much lighter,
are not; and the result is that the measured or set pitch is less than
that which the blades assume while at work. Some facts relative to this
subject have already been given in a recent paper by the author.

_Twin Screws_.--The great question of twin screw propulsion has been put
to the test upon a large scale in the mercantile marine, or rather in
what would usually be termed the passenger service. While engineers,
however, are prepared to admit its advantages so far as greater security
from total breakdown is concerned, there is by no means thorough
agreement as to whether single or twin screws have the greater
propulsive efficiency. What is required to form a sound judgment upon
the whole question is a series of examples of twin and single screw
vessels, each of which is known to be fitted with the most suitable
propeller for the type of vessel and speed; and until this information
is available, little can be said upon the subject with any certainty. So
far the following large passenger steamers, particulars of which are
given in table II., have been fitted with twin screws. It appears t be a
current opinion that the twin screw arrangement necessitates a greater
weight of machinery. This is not necessarily so, however; on the
contrary, the opportunity is offered for reducing the weight of all that
part of the machinery of which the weight relatively to power is
inversely proportional to the revolutions for a given power. This can be
reduced in the proportion of 1 to the square root of 2, that is 71 per
cent. of its weight in the single screw engine; for since approximately
the same total disk area is required in both cases with similar
proportioned propellers, the twins will work at a greater speed of
revolution than the single screw. From a commercial point of view there
ought to be little disagreement as to the advantage of twin screws, so
long as the loss of space incurred by the necessity for double tunnels
is not important; and for the larger passenger vessels now built for
ocean service the disadvantage should not be great. Besides their
superiority in the matter of immunity from total breakdown, and in
greatly diminished weight of machinery, they also offer the opportunity
of reducing to some extent the cost of machinery. A slightly greater
engine room staff is necessary; but this seems of little importance
compared with the foregoing advantages.

TABLE II.--PASSENGER STEAMERS FITTED WITH TWIN SCREWS.

-----------------+-----------+-----+-----------+-------+--------+-------+
                 | Length    |     |     Cylinders,    | Boiler |Indi-  |
                 | between   |     |  two sets in all  |pressure|cated  |
    Vessels.     | perpen-   |Beam.|      cases.       |  per   |horse- |
                 | diculars. |     |-----------+-------| square |power. |
                 |           |     |Diameters. |Stroke.|  inch. |       |
-----------------+-----------+-----+-----------+-------+--------+-------+
                 |   Feet.   |Feet.| Inches.   |Inches.| Lb.    |       |
City of Paris.   |\          |     |           |       |        |       |
                 | }  525    | 631/4 |45, 71, 113|  60   |  150   |20,000 |
City of New York.|/          |     |           |       |        |       |
-----------------+-----------+-----+-----------+-------+--------+-------+
Teutonic.        |\          |     |           |       |        |       |
                 | }  565    | 58  |43, 68, 110|  60   |  180   |18,000 |
Majestic.        |/          |     |           |       |        |       |
-----------------+-----------+-----+-----------+-------+--------+-------+
Normannia.       |    500    | 571/2 |40, 67, 106|  66   |  160   |11,500 |
-----------------+-----------+-----+-----------+-------+--------+-------+
Columbia.        |    4631/2   | 551/2 |41, 66, 101|  66   |  160   |12,500 |
-----------------+-----------+-----+-----------+-------+--------+-------+
Empress of India.|\          |     |           |       |        |       |
Empress of Japan.| }  440    | 51  |32, 51, 82 |  54   |  160   |10,125 |
Empress of China.|/          |     |           |       |        |       |
-----------------+-----------+-----+-----------+-------+--------+-------+
Orel.            |    415    | 48  |34, 54, 85 |  51   |  160   |10,000 |
-----------------+-----------+-----+-----------+-------+--------+-------+

_Weight of Machinery Relatively to Power_.--It is interesting to compare
the weight of machinery relatively to the power developed; for this
comparison has sometimes been adopted as the standard of excellence in
design, in respect of economy in the use of material. The principle,
however, on which this has generally been done is open to some
objections. It has been usual to compare the weight directly with the
indicated horse-power, and to express the comparison in pounds per
horse-power. So long as the machinery thus compared is for vessels of
the same class and working at about the same speed of revolution, no
great fault can be found; but as speed of revolution is a great factor
in the development of power, and as it is often dependent on
circumstances altogether external to the engine and concerning rather
the speed of the ship, the engines fitted to high speed ships will thus
generally appear to greater advantage than is their due. Leaving the
condenser out of the question, the weight of an engine would be much
better referred to cylinder capacity and working pressures, where these
are materially different, than directly to the indicated power. The
advantages of saving weight of machinery, so long as it can be done with
efficiency, are well known and acknowledged. If weight is to be reduced,
it must be done by care in design, not by reduction of strength, because
safety and saving of repairs are much more important than the mere
capability of carrying a few tons more of paying load. It must also be
done with economy; but this is a matter which generally settles itself
aright, as no shipowner will pay more for a saving in weight than will
bring in a remunerative interest on his outlay. In his paper on the
weight of machinery in the mercantile marine,[3] Mr. William Boyd
discussed this question at some length, and proposed to attain the end
of reducing the weight of machinery by the legitimate method of
augmenting the speed of revolution and so developing the required power
with smaller engines. This method, while promising, is limited by the
efficiency of the screw, but may be adopted with advantage so long as
the increase in speed of revolution involves no such change in the screw
as to reduce its efficiency as a propeller. But when the point is
reached beyond which a further change involves loss of propelling
efficiency, it is time to stop; and the writer ventures to say that in
many cargo vessels now at work the limit has been reached, while in many
others it has certainly been passed.

[Footnote 3: Transactions Northeast Coast Institution of Engineers and
Shipbuilders, vol. 6, 1889-90, p. 253.]

_Economy of Fuel_.--Coming to the highly important question of economy
of fuel, the average consumption of coal per indicated horse-power is
1.522 lb. per hour. The average working pressure is 158.5 lb. per square
inch. Comparing this working pressure with 77.4 lb. in 1881, a superior
economy of 19 per cent. might be expected now, on account of the higher
pressure, or taking the 1.828 lb. of coal per hour per indicated
horse-power in 1881, the present performance under similar conditions
should be 1.48 lb. per hour per indicated horse-power. It appears that
the working pressures have been increased twice in the last ten years,
and nearly three times in the last nineteen. The coal consumptions have
been reduced 16.7 per cent. in the last ten years and 27.9 per cent. in
the last nineteen. The revolutions per minute have increased in the
ratios of 100, 105, 114; and the piston speeds as 100, 124, 140.
Although it is quite possible that the further investigations of the
Research Committee on Marine Engine Trials may show that the present
actual consumption of coal per indicated horse-power is understated, yet
it is hardly probable that the relative results will be affected
thereby.

_Dimensions_.--In the matter of the power put into individual vessels,
considerable strides have been made. In 1881, probably the greatest
power which has been put into one vessel was in the case of the Arizona,
whose machinery indicated about 6,360 horse-power. The following table
gives an idea of the dimensions and power of the larger machinery in the
later passenger vessels:

TABLE III.--DIMENSIONS AND POWER OF MACHINERY IN LATER PASSENGER
VESSELS.

-----+----------------+-----------------------+-------+-----------+
     |                |                       |Length |           |
Year.| Name of vessel.|     Diameters of      |  of   |Indicated  |
     |                |      cylinders.       |Stroke.|horsepower.|
-----+----------------+-----------------------+-------+-----------+
     |                |        Inches.        |Inches.|           |
1881 |Alaska          |     68, 100, 100      |  72   |   10,686  |
-----+----------------+-----------------------+-------+-----------+
1881 |City of Rome    | 46, 86; 46, 86; 46, 86|  72   |   11,800  |
-----+----------------+-----------------------+-------+-----------+
1881 |Servia          |     72, 100, 100      |  78   |   10,300  |
-----+----------------+-----------------------+-------+-----------+
1881 |Livadia yacht   |  60, 78, 78; 60, 78, \|  39   |   12,500  |
