comes to a question of the length of time for which you want to work
it. What fraction of a second do you require your signal to be given
in? What is the rate of the vibrator of your electric bell? Suppose
you have settled that point, and that the short time during which the
current is required to rise is called t; then the apparent resistance
at time t after the current is turned on is given by the formula:

        R_{t} = R x e^{(R/L)t} +  ( e^{(R/L)t} - 1 )


TIME CONSTANTS OF ELECTROMAGNETS.

I may here refer to some determinations made by M. Vaschy,[1]
respecting the coefficients of self-induction of the electromagnets of
a number of pieces of telegraphic apparatus. Of these I must only
quote one result, which is very significant. It relates to the
electromagnet of a Morse receiver of the pattern habitually used on
the French telegraph lines.

                                              L, in quadrants.
    Bobbins, separately, without iron cores.   0.233 and 0.265
    Bobbins, separately, with iron cores.      1.65  and 1.71
    Bobbins, with cores joined by yoke,
       coils in series                         6.37
    Bobbins, with armature resting on poles.  10.68

[Footnote 1: "Bulletin de la Societe Internationale des Electriciens,"
1886.]

It is interesting to note how the perfecting of the magnetic circuit
increases the self-induction.

Thanks to the kindness of Mr. Preece, I have been furnished with some
most valuable information about the coefficients of self-induction,
and the resistance of the standard pattern of relays, and other
instruments which are used in the British postal telegraph service,
from which data one is able to say exactly what the time constants of
those instruments will be on a given circuit, and how long in their
case the current will take to rise to any given fraction of its final
value. Here let me refer to a very capital paper by Mr. Preece in an
old number of the "Journal of the Society of Telegraph Engineers," a
paper "On Shunts," in which he treats this question, not as perfectly
as it could now be treated with the fuller knowledge we have in 1890
about the coefficients of self-induction, but in a very useful and
practical way. He showed most completely that the more perfect the
magnetic circuit is--though of course you are getting more magnetism
from your current--the more is that current retarded. Mr. Preece'e
mode of experiment was extremely simple. He observed the throw of the
galvanometer when the circuit which contained the battery and the
electromagnet was opened by a key which at the same moment connected
the electromagnet wires to the galvanometer. The throw of the
galvanometer was assumed to represent the extra current which flowed
out. Fig. 56 represents a few of the results of Mr. Preece's paper.

                                                   +==========+
         |=|                |=|      |=|           |=|      |=|
      \=======           \=======  =======/      =======  =======
       |     |            |     |  |     |       |     |  |     |
       |     |            |     |  |     |       |     |  |     |
       |     |            |     |--|     |       |     |  |     |
       =======            =======  =======      /=======  =======\
         |=|                |=|      |=|           |=|      |=|

   +===========+            +==========+            +===== ======+
     |=|      |=|           |=|      |=|            |=|        |=|
   =======  =======/    B\=======  =======/A    A\=======   =======/B
   |     |  |     |       |     |  |     |        |     |   |     |
   |     |  |     |       |     |  |     |        |     |   |     |
   |     |--|     |       |     |  |     |        |     |   |     |
   =======  =======      A=======  =======B       =======B  =======A
     |=|      |=|           |=|      |=|            |=|        |=|
     +==========+           +==========+            +====== =====+

          FIG. 56.--ELECTROMAGNETS OF RELAY, AND THEIR EFFECTS.

Take from an ordinary relay a coil, with its iron core, half the
electromagnet, so to speak, without any yoke or armature. Connect it
up as described, and observe the throw given to the galvanometer. The
amount of throw obtained from the single coil was taken as unity, and
all others were compared with it. If you join up two such coils as
they are usually joined, in series, but without any iron yoke across
the cores, the throw was 17. Putting the iron yoke across the cores,
to constitute a horseshoe form, 496 was the throw; that is to say, the
tendency of this electromagnet to retard the current was 496 times as
great as that of the simple coil. But when an armature was put over
the top, the effect ran up to 2,238. By the mere device of putting the
coils in parallel, instead of in series, the 2,238 came down to 502, a
little less than the quarter value which would have been expected.
Lastly, when the armature and yoke were both of them split in the
middle, as is done in fact in all the standard patterns of the British
postal telegraph relays, the throw of the galvanometer was brought
down from 502 to 26. Relays so constructed will work excessively
rapidly. Mr. Preece states that with the old pattern of relay having
so much self-induction as to give a galvanometer throw of 1,688, the
speed of signaling was only from 50 to 60 words per minute, whereas,
with the standard relays constructed on the new plan, the speed of
signaling is from 400 to 450 words per minute. It is a very
interesting and beautiful result to arrive at from the experimental
study of these magnetic circuits.


SHORT CORES _versus_ LONG CORES.

In considering the forms that are best for rapid action, it ought to
be mentioned that the effects of hysteresis in retarding changes in
the magnetization of iron cores are much more noticeable in the case
of nearly closed magnetic circuits than in short pieces.
Electromagnets with iron armatures in contact across their poles will
retain, after the current has been cut off, a very large part of their
magnetism, even if the cores be of the softest of iron. But so soon as
the armature is wrenched off, the magnetism disappears. An air gap in
a magnetic circuit always tends to hasten demagnetizing. A magnetic
circuit composed of a long air path and a short iron path demagnetizes
itself much more rapidly than one composed of a short air path and a
long iron path. In long pieces of iron the mutual action of the
various parts tends to keep in them any magnetization that they may
possess; hence they are less readily demagnetized. In short pieces,
where these mutual actions are feeble or almost absent, the
magnetization is less stable, and disappears almost instantly on the
cessation of the magnetizing force. Short bits and small spheres of
iron have no magnetic memory. Hence the cause of the commonly received
opinion among telegraph engineers that for rapid work electromagnets
must have short cores. As we have seen, the only reason for employing
long cores is to afford the requisite length for winding the wire
which is necessary for carrying the needful circulation of current to
force the magnetism across the air gaps. If, for the sake of rapidity
of action, length has to be sacrificed, then the coils must be heaped
up more thickly on the short cores. The electromagnets in American
patterns of telegraphic apparatus usually have shorter cores, and a
relatively greater thickness of winding upon them, than those of
European patterns.

       *       *       *       *       *




ELECTRIC ERYGMASCOPE.


The erygmascope is the name of an electric lighting apparatus designed
for the examination of the strata of earth traversed by boring
apparatus.

It consists of a very powerful incandescent lamp inclosed in a
metallic cylinder. One of the two semi-cylindrical sides constitutes
the reflector, and the other, which is of thick glass, allows of the
passage of the luminous rays, which thus illuminate with great
brilliancy the strata of earth traversed by the instrument. The base,
which is inclined at an angle of 45 deg., is an elliptical mirror, and the
top, of straight section, is open in order to permit the observer
standing at the mouth of the well, and provided with a powerful
spyglass, to see in the mirror the image of the earth. The lamp is so
mounted that its upwardly emitted rays are intercepted.

The whole apparatus is suspended from a long cable, formed of two
conducting wires, which winds around a windlass with metallic
journals which are electrically insulated. These journals communicate,
through the intermedium of two friction springs, with the conductors
on the one hand and, on the other, with the poles of an automatic and
portable battery.

[Illustration: THE TROUVE ERYGMASCOPE.]

This permits of lowering and raising the apparatus at will, without
derangement, and without its being necessary to interrupt the light
and the observation.--_Revue Industrielle._

       *       *       *       *       *




A NEW ELECTRIC BALLISTIC TARGET.


The electrical target usually employed in determining velocities of
projectiles consists of a wooden frame on which is strung a copper
wire so as to make a continuous circuit arranged in parallel vertical
lines about one inch or one and one half inches apart.

It frequently happens that a projectile will pass through this target
without breaking the circuit, either by squeezing between the wires or
because, when last repaired, the target was short-circuited unnoticed,
so that the cutting of the wires did not break the circuit. The repair
of this target takes considerable time.

  _______________________________________________________
 |                                                       {
 |  +-------------__ --------------__----------------    }
 |  |   _      //    \\         //    \\             }   {
 |  |  |_|    || C_{0}  ||  A    ||  ||  ||     A      {   }
 |  |    P     \\    //         \\    //             }   {
 |  +-------------  ---------------  ----------------    }
 |                                  F                    {
 |_______________________________________________________}

                           Plan.
         P        C
        =|=   _________
       |===|  =========      A                A
      ========|   | S |========\_______/=================
              |spring |        |       |
              |   |   |        |       |
              |S_ | __|        |__   __|
                 |||              | |
      ___________|||______________| |_____________________
                  |
                  |         Section.
               H /
                 \+/
                  |
                  |
                  |
                  |
                  |
                  |
             _____+_____
            |           |
            |     W     |
            |           |
            |___________|


Besides these objections to this target, another and more serious one
is the irregularity in the manner of breaking the circuit. It has been
proved that times required for a flat headed and an ogival headed
projectile to rupture the current are very different.

To remedy these defects a new and very ingenious target has been
devised and used with great success at the United States Military
Academy at West Point. The top of the target is a wooden strip, F, on
the upper side of which are screwed strips of copper, A A, about 1/2
in. wide, and 1/8 in. thick. The connection between two adjoining
strips is made by a copper cartridge, C, which is dropped in a hole in
the frame bored to receive it. This cartridge is the one used in the
Springfield rifle. Inside the cartridge is a spiral spring, S, which,
acting on the bottom of the hole and the head of the cartridge, tends
to make the latter spring up, and so break the circuit.

To the hook, H, which is attached to the cartridge, is suspended, by
means of a string, the lead weight, W, thus drawing down the cartridge
and making the circuit between A and A'. All the weights being
suspended the current comes in through the post, P, passes along the
copper strips and out of the corresponding post on the other end.

On firing the projectile cuts a string, and the spring at once causes
the cartridge to spring up, thus breaking the circuit.

It is not possible for the projectile to squeeze between the strings
and not break the current, for in so doing the cartridge is tipped
slightly, which is sufficient, as it breaks the current on one side.

This target is used in connection with the Boulenge chronograph. Two
targets are established at a known distance apart, say 50 ft., and the
time required for the projectile to pass over this distance is
determined by finding the difference in the time of cutting of the two
targets, by finding the difference in the time of falling of the two
rods, caused by the demagnetization of two electromagnets in the same
circuit with the targets.

By means of a disjunctor both rods are dropped at the same time, the
shorter one releasing a knife blade which makes a cut on the longer
one. Now both rods are hung from the magnets again and the gun is
fired.

The projectile passes through the first target, breaks the circuit,
demagnetizes the magnet of the longer rod, and it begins to fall. On
passing through the second target, the projectile causes the shorter
rod to fall. This releases the knife blade, and a second cut is made.
The time corresponding to the distance between these cuts is the time
the longer rod was falling before the second rod began to fall or the
time between the cutting of the two targets by the projectile.

The distance between the cuts is measured, and the time corresponding
to it can easily be found. Then the velocity of the projectile is
equal to 50/t.

To repair this target, strings are prepared in advance of suitable
length and looped at both ends, so that by placing the hook of the
cartridge in one loop and that of the weight in the other the repair
is quickly made.

This target has been used on the West Point proving ground to
determine velocities over distances of 100 ft. interval to distances
of only 9 ft. interval, and has given most satisfactory results.

       *       *       *       *       *

[Continued from SUPPLEMENT, No. 786, page 12566.]




THE OUTLOOK FOR APPLIED ENTOMOLOGY.

[Footnote: Address of Dr. C.V. Riley at the annual meeting of the
Association of Economic Entomologists, Champaign, Ills., November 11
to 14, 1890.]

LEGISLATION.


The amount of legislation in different countries that has of late
years been deemed necessary or sufficiently important, in view of
injurious insects, is a striking evidence of the increased attention
paid to applied entomology; and while modern legislation of this kind
has been, on the whole, far more intelligent than similar efforts in
years gone by, many of the laws passed have nevertheless been unwise,
futile, and impracticable, and even unnecessarily oppressive to other
interests. The chief danger here is the intervention of politics or
political methods. Expert counsel should guide our legislators and the
steps taken should be thorough in order to be effective. We have had
of late years in Germany very good evidence of the excellent results
flowing from thorough methods, and the recent legislation in
Massachusetts against the gypsy moth (_Ocneria dispar_), which at one
time threatened to become farcical, has, fortunately, proved more than
usually successful; the commission appointed to deal with the subject
having worked with energy and followed competent advice.


PUBLICATION.

On the question of publication of the results of our labors it is
perhaps premature to dwell at length. Each of the experiment stations
is publishing its own bulletins and reports quite independently of the
others, but after a uniform plan recommended by the association with
which we meet here; and with but one exception that has come to my
notice, another important recommendation of the same association--that
these publications shall be void of all personal matter--has been kept
in mind. The National Bureau of Experiment Stations at Washington is
doing what it can with the means at command to further the general
work by issuing the Experiment Station Record, devoted chiefly to
digests of the State station bulletins. There is a serious question in
my mind as to the utility of State digests by the national department
of results already published extensively by the different States and
distributed under government frank to all similar institutions and to
whomsoever is interested enough to ask for them.

Such digests may or may not be intelligently made, and, even under the
most favorable circumstances, will hardly serve any other purpose than
helping to the reference to the original articles, and this could
undoubtedly be done more satisfactorily to the stations and to the
people at large by general and classified indices to all the State
documents, made as full as possible and issued at stated intervals.
Only a small proportion of the bulletins have been so far noticed by
digest in this record, with no particular rule, so far as I can see,
in the selection. In point of fact, those will be most apt to be
noticed whose authors can find time to themselves send or make for the
purpose their own abstracts. This is, perhaps, inevitable under
present arrangements. Complete and satisfactory digests of all, if
intelligent and critical, imply a far greater force than is at present
at Prof. Atwater's command.

Under these circumstances, it would seem wiser to devote all the
energies of the bureau to digests of the similar literature of other
countries, which would be of immense advantage to our people and to
the different station workers. Judging from the recommendations and
resolutions of the general association, this is the view very
generally held, but except in chemistry and special industries like
that of beet sugar, very little of that kind of work has yet been
attempted.

What is true of the station publications in general is equally true of
special publications. As entomologist of the department, I have been
urged to bring together, at stated intervals, digests of the
entomological publications of the different stations. Such digests to
be of any value, however, should also be critical, and it were a
thankless task for any one to be critic or censor even of that which
needs correction or criticism. Moreover, to do this work intelligently
would require increase of the divisional force, which at present is
more advantageously employed, for, as already intimated, I should have
great doubts of the utility of these digests.

I believe, however, that the division should strive for such increase
of means as would justify the periodic publication, either
independently or as a part of the department record, of general and
classified indices to the entomological matter of the station
bulletins, and should work more and more toward giving results from
other parts of the world. This could, perhaps, best be done by titles
of subject and of author so spaced and printed on stout paper that
they could be cut and used in the ordinary card catalogue. The
recipient could cut and systematically place the titles as fast as
received.

As to the character of the matter of the entomological bulletins, it
will inevitably be influenced by the needs and demands of the people
of the respective States, and while originality should be kept in
mind, there must needs be in the earlier years of the work much
restatement of what is already well known. That some results have been
published of work which reflects no particular credit upon our calling
is a mere incident of the new positions created. Yet we may expect
marked improvement from year to year in this direction, and without
being invidious, I would cite those of Prof. Gillette's on his
spraying experiments and on the plum curculio and plum gouger, as
models of what such bulletins should be.

Although the resolution offered at our last meeting by Prof. Cook, to
the effect that purely descriptive matter should be excluded from the
station bulletins, met with no favor, but was laid on the table, by
the general association, I am in full sympathy with this position and
am strongly of the opinion that in the ordinary bulletins such purely
technical and descriptive matter should be reduced to the necessary
minimum consistent with clearness of statement and accuracy, and that
if it is desired, on the part of the station entomologists, to issue
technical and descriptive papers, a separate series of bulletins were
better instituted for this class of matter.

Finally, for results which it is desired to promptly get before the
people, the agricultural press is at our disposal, and so far as the
entomological work of the department of agriculture is concerned, the
periodical bulletin, _Insect Life_, was established for this purpose.
Its columns are open to all station workers, and I would here appeal
to the members of the association to help make it, as far as possible,
national, by sending brief notes and digests of their work as it
progresses. Hitherto we have been unable to make as much effort in
this direction as we desired, but in future it is our hope to make the
bulletin, as far as possible, a national medium through which the
results of work done in all parts of the country may quickly be put on
record and distributed, not only to all parts of our own country, but
to all parts of the world.

The rapid growth and development of the national department and the
multiplication of its divisions have necessitated special modes of
publication and rendered the annual report almost an anachronism so
far as it pretends to be what it at one time was--a pretty complete
report of the scientific and other work of the department. The
attempts which I have made through the proper authorities to get
Congress to order more pretentious monographic works in quarto volume
similar to those issued by other departments of the government have
not met with encouragement, and in this direction many of the stations
will, let us hope, be able to do better.


CO-OPERATION.

Every other subject that might be considered on this occasion must be
subordinate to the one great question of co-operation. With the large
increase of actual workers in our favorite field, distributed all over
the country, the necessity for some co-operation and co-ordination
must be apparent to every one. Just how this should be brought about
or in what direction we may work toward it, will be for this
association in its deliberations to decide. Nor will I venture to
anticipate the deliberations and conclusions of the special committee
appointed to take the matter into consideration, beyond the statement
that there are many directions in which we can adopt plans for mutual
benefit. Take, for instance, the introduction and dissemination of
parasites. How much greater will be the chance of success in any
particular case if we have all the different station entomologists
interested in some specific plan to be carried out in co-operation
with the national department, which ought to have better facilities of
introducing specimens to foreign countries or to different sections of
our own country than any of the State stations.

Let us suppose that the fruit growers of one section of the country,
comprising several States in area, need the benefit in their warfare
against any particularly injurious insect of such natural enemy or
enemies as are known to help the fruit growers of some other section.
There will certainly be much greater chances of success in the
carrying out of any scheme of introduction if all the workers in the
one section may be called upon through some central or national body
to help in the introduction and disposition of the desired material
into the other section. Or, take the case of the boll worm
investigation already alluded to. The chances of success would be much
greater if the entomologists in all the States interested were to give
some attention to such lepidopterous larvae as are found to be affected
with contagious diseases and to follow out some specific plan of
cultivating and transmitting them to the party or parties with whom
the actual trials are intrusted. The argument applies with still
greater force to any international efforts. I need hardly multiply
instances. There is, it is true, nothing to prevent any individual
station entomologist from requesting co-operation of the other
stations, nor is there anything to prevent the national department
from doing likewise; but in all organization results are more apt to
flow from the power to direct rather than from mere liberty to request
or to plead. The station entomologist may be engrossed in some line of
research which he deems of more importance to the people of his State,
and may resent being called upon to divert his energies; and with no
central or national power to decide upon plans of co-operation for the
common weal, we are left to voluntary methods, mutually devised, and
it is here that this association can, it seems to me, most fully
justify its organization. And this brings me to the question of


THE DEPARTMENT AND THE STATIONS.

Immediately connected with the question of co-operation is the
relation of the National Department of Agriculture and the State
experiment stations. The relation, instead of being vital and
authoritative, is, in reality, a subordinate one. Many persons
interested in the advancement of agriculture foresaw the advantage of
having experiment stations attached to the State agricultural colleges
founded under the Morrill act of 1862; but I think that in the minds
of most persons the establishment of these stations implied some such
connection with the national department as that outlined in an address
on Agricultural Advancement in the United States, which I had the
honor to deliver in 1879 before the National Agricultural Congress, at
Rochester, and in which the following language was used:

  "In the light of the past history of the German experimental
  stations and their work, or of that in our own State of
  Connecticut, the expediency of purchasing an experimental farm of
  large dimensions in the vicinity of Washington is very
  questionable. There can be no doubt, however, of the value of a
  good experimental station there that shall have its branches in
  every State of the Union. The results to flow from such stations
  will not depend upon the number of acres at command, and it will
  be far wiser and more economical for the commissioner to make each
  agricultural college that accepted the government endowment
  auxiliary to the national bureau, so that the experimental farm
  that is now, or should be, connected with each of these
  institutions might be at its service and under the general
  management of the superintendent of the main station. There is
