Mary the Jewess. A writer of the 7th century says she was initiated in
the sacred art in the temple of Memphis; a legend prevailed among some
of the alchemists that she was the sister of Moses.

Fig. X. p. 85, represents methods of distilling with an apparatus for
cooling the volatile products; the lower vessel is an _alembic_, with
a long neck, the upper part of which passes through a vessel
containing cold water.

[Illustration: Fig XIII. _See p. 94._]

Fig. XI. p. 88, shows a _pelican_, that is a vessel wherein a liquid
might be heated for a long time, and the volatile products be
constantly returned to the original vessel.

Fig. XII. p. 89, represents a retort with a receiver.

Some of the pieces of apparatus for distilling, which are described
by French, are shown in the following figures. Besides describing
apparatus for distilling, subliming, and other processes in the
laboratory, French gives directions for making tinctures, essences,
essential oils, spirits of salt, and pure saltpetre, oil of vitriol,
butter of antimony, calces (or as we now say, oxides) of metals, and
many other substances. He describes processes for making fresh water
from salt, artificial mineral water, medicated hot baths for invalids
(one of the figures represents an apparatus very like those advertised
to-day as "Turkish baths at home"), and artificial precious stones; he
tells how to test minerals, and make alloys, and describes the
preparation of many substances made from gold and silver. He also
gives many curious receipts; for instance, "To make Firre-trees appear
in Turpentine," "To make a Plant grow in two or three hours," "To make
the representation of the whole world in a Glass," "To extract a white
Milkie substance from the raies of the Moon."

[Illustration: FIG. XIV. _See p. 94._]

The process of making oil of vitriol, by burning sulphur under a hood
fitted with a side tube for the outflow of the oil of vitriol, is
represented in Fig. XIII. p. 92.

Fig. XIV. p. 93, is interesting; it is an apparatus for rectifying
spirits, by distilling, and liquefying only the most volatile portions
of the distillate. The spirituous liquor was heated, and the vapours
caused to traverse a long zigzag tube, wherein the less volatile
portions condensed to liquid, which flowed back into the vessel; the
vapour then passed into another vessel, and then through a second
zigzag tube, and was finally cooled by water, and the condensed liquid
collected. This apparatus was the forerunner of that used to-day, for
effecting the separation of liquids which boil at different
temperatures, by the process called _fractional distillation_.

We should never forget that the alchemists were patient and laborious
workers, their theories were vitally connected with their practice,
and there was a constant action and reaction between their general
scheme of things and many branches of what we now call chemical
manufactures. We may laugh at many of their theories, and regret that
much useless material was accumulated by them; we may agree with Boyle
(end of 17th century) when he likens the "hermetick philosophers," in
their search for truth, to "the navigators of Solomon's Tarshish
fleet, who brought home from their long and tedious voyages, not only
gold, and silver, and ivory, but apes and peacocks too; for so the
writings of several of your hermetick philosophers present us,
together with divers substantial and noble experiments, theories,
which either like peacocks' feathers make a great show but are neither
solid nor useful; or else like apes, if they have some appearance of
being rational, are blemished with some absurdity or other, that, when
they are attentively considered make them appear ridiculous." But
however we may condemn their method, because it rested on their own
conception of what the order of nature must be, we cannot but praise
their assiduity in conducting experiments and gathering facts.

As Bacon says, in _De Augmentis Scientiarum_:

  "Alchemy may be compared to the man who told his sons that he had
  left them gold buried somewhere in his vineyard; where they by
  digging found no gold, but by turning up the mould about the roots
  of the vines, procured a plentiful vintage. So the search and
  endeavours to make gold have brought many useful inventions and
  instructive experiments to light."




CHAPTER VII.

THE LANGUAGE OF ALCHEMY


The vagueness of the general conceptions of alchemy, and the
attribution of ethical qualities to material things by the alchemists,
necessarily led to the employment of a language which is inexact,
undescriptive, and unsuggestive to modern ears. The same name was
given to different things, and the same thing went under many names.
In Chapter IV. I endeavoured to analyse two terms which were
constantly used by the alchemists to convey ideas of great importance,
the terms _Element_ and _Principle_. That attempt sufficed, at any
rate, to show the vagueness of the ideas which these terms were
intended to express, and to make evident the inconsistencies between
the meanings given to the words by different alchemical writers. The
story quoted in Chapter III., from Michael Sendivogius, illustrates
the difficulty which the alchemists themselves had in understanding
what they meant by the term _Mercury_; yet there is perhaps no word
more often used by them than that. Some of them evidently took it to
mean the substance then, and now, called mercury; the results of this
literal interpretation were disastrous; others thought of mercury as a
substance which could be obtained, or, at any rate, might be obtained,
by repeatedly distilling ordinary mercury, both alone and when mixed
with other substances; others used the word to mean a hypothetical
something which was liquid but did not wet things, limpid yet capable
of becoming solid, volatile yet able to prevent the volatilisation of
other things, and white, yet ready to cause other white things to
change their colour; they thought of this something, this soul of
mercury, as having properties without itself being tangible, as at
once a substance and not a substance, at once a bodily spirit and a
spiritual body.

It was impossible to express the alchemical ideas in any language save
that of far-fetched allegory. The alchemical writings abound in such
allegories. Here are two of them.

The first allegory is taken from _The Twelve Keys_, of Basilius
Valentinus, the Benedictine:--

  "The eleventh key to the knowledge of the augmentation of our
  Stone I will put before you in the form of a parable.

  "There lived in the East a gilded knight, named Orpheus, who was
  possessed of immense wealth, and had everything that heart can
  wish. He had taken to wife his own sister, Euridice, who did not,
  however, bear him any children. This he regarded as the punishment
  of his sin in having wedded his own sister, and was instant in
  prayer to God both by day and by night, that the curse might be
  taken from him. One night when he was buried in a deep sleep,
  there came to him a certain winged messenger, named Phoebus, who
  touched his feet, which were very hot, and said: 'Thou noble
  knight, since thou hast wandered through many cities and kingdoms
  and suffered many things at sea, in battle, and in the lists, the
  heavenly Father has bidden me make known to thee the following
  means of obtaining thy prayer: Take blood from thy right side, and
  from the left side of thy spouse. For this blood is the heart's
  blood of your parents, and though it may seem to be of two kinds,
  yet, in reality, it is only one. Mix the two kinds of blood, and
  keep the mixture tightly enclosed in the globe of the seven wise
  Masters. Then that which is generated will be nourished with its
  own flesh and blood, and will complete its course of development
  when the Moon has changed for the eighth time. If thou repeat this
  process again and again, thou shalt see children's children, and
  the offspring of thy body shall fill the world.' When Phoebus
  had thus spoken, he winged his flight heavenward. In the morning
  the knight arose and did the bidding of the celestial messenger,
  and God gave to him and to his wife many children, who inherited
  their father's glory, wealth, and knightly honours from generation
  to generation."

In the "Dedicatory Epistle" to his _Triumphal Chariot of Antimony_,
Basil Valentine addresses his brother alchemists as follows:--

  "Mercury appeared to me in a dream, and brought me back from my
  devious courses to the one way. 'Behold me clad not in the garb of
  the vulgar, but in the philosopher's mantle.' So he said, and
  straightway began to leap along the road in headlong bounds. Then,
  when he was tired, he sat down, and, turning to me, who had
  followed him in the spirit, bade me mark that he no longer
  possessed that youthful vigour with which he would at the first
  have overcome every obstacle, if he had not been allowed a free
  course. Encouraged by his friendly salutation, I addressed him in
  the following terms: 'Mercury, eloquent scion of Atlas, and father
  of all Alchemists, since thou hast guided me hitherto, shew me, I
  pray thee, the way to those Blessed Isles, which thou hast
  promised to reveal to all thine elect children. 'Dost thou
  remember,' he replied, that when I quitted thy laboratory, I left
  behind me a garment so thoroughly saturated with my own blood,
  that neither the wind could efface it, nor all-devouring time
  destroy its indelible essence? Fetch it hither to me, that I may
  not catch a chill from the state of perspiration in which I now
  am; but let me clothe myself warmly in it, and be closely incited
  thereto, so that I may safely reach my bride, who is sick with
  love. She has meekly borne many wrongs, being driven through water
  and fire, and compelled to ascend and descend times without
  number--yet has she been carried through it all by the hope of
  entering with me the bridal chamber, wherein we expect to beget a
  son adorned from his birth with the royal crown which he may not
  share with others. Yet may he bring his friends to the palace,
  where sits enthroned the King of Kings, who communicates his
  dignity readily and liberally to all that approach him.'

  "I brought him the garment, and it fitted him so closely, that it
  looked like an iron skin securing him against all the assaults of
  Vulcan. 'Let us proceed,' he then said, and straightway sped
  across the open field, while I boldly strove to keep up with my
  guide.

  "Thus we reached his bride, whose virtue and constancy were equal
  to his own. There I beheld their marvellous conjugal union and
  nuptial consummation, whence was born the son crowned with the
  royal diadem. When I was about to salute him as King of Kings and
  Lord of Lords, my Genius stood by me and warned me not to be
  deceived, since this was only the King's forerunner, but not the
  King himself whom I sought.

  "When I heard the admonition, I did not know whether to be sad or
  joyful. 'Depart,' then said Mercury, 'with this bridal gift, and
  when you come to those disciples who have seen the Lord himself,
  show them this sign.' And therewith he gave me a gold ring from
  his son's finger. 'They know the golden branch which must be
  consecrated to Proserpina before you can enter the palace of
  Pluto. When he sees this ring, perhaps one will open to you with a
  word the door of that chamber, where sits enthroned in his
  magnificence the Desire of all Nations, who is known only to the
  Sages.'

  "When he had thus spoken, the vision vanished, but the bridal gift
  which I still held in my hand shewed me that it had not been a
  mere dream. It was of gold, but to me more precious than the most
  prized of all metals. Unto you I will shew it when I am permitted
  to see your faces, and to converse with you freely. Till that
  earnestly wished-for time, I bid you farewell."

One result of the alchemical modes of expression was, that he who
tried to follow the directions given in alchemical books got into
dire confusion. He did not know what substances to use in his
operations; for when he was told to employ "the homogeneous water of
gold," for example, the expression might mean anything, and in despair
he distilled, and calcined, and cohobated, and tried to decompose
everything he could lay hands on. Those who pretended to know abused
and vilified those who differed from them.

In _A Demonstration of Nature_, by John A. Mehung (17th century),
Nature addresses the alchemical worker in the following words:--

  "You break vials, and consume coals, only to soften your brains
  still more with the vapours. You also digest alum, salt, orpiment,
  and altrament; you melt metals, build small and large furnaces,
  and use many vessels; nevertheless I am sick of your folly, and
  you suffocate me with your sulphurous smoke.... You would do
  better to mind your own business, than to dissolve and distil so
  many absurd substances, and then to pass them through alembics,
  cucurbits, stills, and pelicans."

Henry Madathanas, writing in 1622, says:--

  "Then I understood that their purgations, sublimations,
  cementations, distillations, rectifications, circulations,
  putrefactions, conjunctions, calcinations, incinerations,
  mortifications, revivifications, as also their tripods, athanors,
  reverberatory alembics, excrements of horses, ashes, sand, stills,
  pelican-viols, retorts, fixations, etc., are mere plausible
  impostures and frauds."

The author of _The Only Way_ (1677) says:

  "Surely every true Artist must look on this elaborate tissue of
  baseless operations as the merest folly, and can only wonder that
  the eyes of those silly dupes are not at last opened, that they
  may see something besides such absurd sophisms, and read something
  besides those stupid and deceitful books.... I can speak from
  bitter experience, for I, too, toiled for many years ... and
  endeavoured to reach the coveted goal by sublimation,
  distillation, calcination, circulation, and so forth, and to
  fashion the Stone out of substances such as urine, salt, atrament,
  alum, etc. I have tried hard to evolve it out of hairs, wine,
  eggs, bones, and all manner of herbs; out of arsenic, mercury, and
  sulphur, and all the minerals and metals.... I have spent nights
  and days in dissolving, coagulating, amalgamating, and
  precipitating. Yet from all these things I derived neither profit
  nor joy."

Another writer speaks of many would-be alchemists as "floundering
about in a sea of specious book-learning."

If alchemists could speak of their own processes and materials as
those authors spoke whom I have quoted, we must expect that the
alchemical language would appear mere jargon to the uninitiated. In
Ben Jonson's play _The Alchemist_, _Surley_, who is the sceptic of the
piece, says to Subtle, who is the alchemist--

      ... Alchemy is a pretty kind of game,
      Somewhat like tricks o' the cards, to cheat a man
      With charming ...
      What else are all your terms,
      Whereon no one of your writers 'grees with other?
      Of your elixir, your _lac virginis_,
      Your stone, your med'cine, and your chrysosperme,
      Your sal, your sulphur, and your mercury,
      Your oil of height, your tree of life, your blood,
      Your marchesite, your tutie, your magnesia,
      Your toad, your crow, your dragon, and your panther;
      Your sun, your moon, your firmament, your adrop,
      Your lato, azoch, zernich, chibrit, heutarit,
      And then your red man, and your white woman,
      With all your broths, your menstrues, and materials,
      Of lye and egg-shells, women's terms, man's blood,
      Hair o' the head, burnt clout, chalk, merds, and clay,
      Powder of bones, scalings of iron, glass,
      And moulds of other strange ingredients,
      Would burst a man to name?

To which _Subtle_ answers,

                And all these named
      Intending but one thing; which art our writers
      Used to obscure their art.
      Was not all the knowledge
      Of the Egyptians writ in mystic symbols?
      Speak not the Scriptures oft in parables?
      Are not the choicest fables of the poets,
      That were the fountains and first springs of wisdom,
      Wrapp'd in perplexed allegories?

The alchemists were very fond of using the names of animals as symbols
of certain mineral substances, and of representing operations in the
laboratory by what may be called animal allegories. The _yellow lion_
was the alchemical symbol of yellow sulphides, the _red lion_ was
synonymous with cinnabar, and the _green lion_ meant salts of iron and
of copper. Black sulphides were called _eagles_, and sometimes
_crows_. When black sulphide of mercury is strongly heated, a red
sublimate is obtained, which has the same composition as the black
compound; if the temperature is not kept very high, but little of the
red sulphide is produced; the alchemists directed to urge the fire,
"else the black crows will go back to the nest."

[Illustration: A salamander lives in the fire, which imparts to it a
               most glorious hue.

               This is the reiteration, gradation, and amelioration
               of the Tincture, or Philosopher's Stone; and the whole
               is called its Augmentation.

               FIG. XV.]

The salamander was called the king of animals, because it was supposed
that he lived and delighted in fire; keeping a strong fire alight
under a salamander was sometimes compared to the purification of gold
by heating it.

Fig. XV., reduced from _The Book of Lambspring_ represents this
process.

The alchemists employed many signs, or shorthand expressions, in place
of writing the names of substances. The following are a few of the
signs which were used frequently.

[Symbol: Saturn] Saturn, also lead; [Symbol: Jupiter] Jupiter, also
tin; [Symbol: Mars-1] and [Symbol: Mars-2] Mars, also iron; [Symbol:
Sun] Sol, also gold; [Symbol: Venus] Venus, also copper; [Symbol:
Mercury-1], [Symbol: Mercury-2] and [Symbol: Mercury-3] Mercury;
[Symbol: Moon] Luna, also silver; [Symbol: Sulphur] Sulphur; [Symbol:
Vitriol] Vitriol; [Symbol: Fire] fire; [Symbol: Air] air; [Symbol:
Water] and [Symbol: Aquarius] water; [Symbol: Earth] earth; [Symbol:
Aqua Fortis] aqua fortis; [Symbol: Aqua Regis] aqua regis; [Symbol:
Aqua Vitae] aqua vitae; [Symbol: Day] day; [Symbol: Night] night;
[Symbol: Amalgam] Amalgam; [Symbol: Alembic] Alembic.




CHAPTER VIII.

THE DEGENERACY OF ALCHEMY.


I have tried to show that alchemy aimed at giving experimental proof
of a certain theory of the whole system of nature, including humanity.
The practical culmination of the alchemical quest presented a
threefold aspect; the alchemists sought the stone of wisdom, for by
gaining that they gained the control of wealth; they sought the
universal panacea, for that would give them the power of enjoying
wealth and life; they sought the soul of the world, for thereby they
could hold communion with spiritual existences, and enjoy the fruition
of spiritual life.

The object of their search was to satisfy their material needs, their
intellectual capacities, and their spiritual yearnings. The alchemists
of the nobler sort always made the first of these objects subsidiary
to the other two; they gave as their reason for desiring to make gold,
the hope that gold might become so common that it would cease to be
sought after by mankind. The author of _An Open Substance_ says:
"Would to God ... all men might become adepts in our art, for then
gold, the common idol of mankind, would lose its value, and we should
prize it only for its scientific teaching."

But the desire to make gold must always have been a very powerful
incentive in determining men to attempt the laborious discipline of
alchemy; and with them, as with all men, the love of money was the
root of much evil. When a man became a student of alchemy merely for
the purpose of making gold, and failed to make it--as he always
did--it was very easy for him to pretend he had succeeded in order
that he might really make gold by cheating other people. Such a man
rapidly degenerated into a charlatan; he used the language of alchemy
to cover his frauds, and with the hope of deluding his dupes by
high-sounding phrases. And, it must be admitted, alchemy lent itself
admirably to imposture. It promised unlimited wealth; it encouraged
the wildest dreams of the seeker after pleasure; and over these dreams
it cast the glamour of great ideas, the idea of the unity of nature,
and the idea of communion with other spheres of life, of calling in
the help of 'inheritors of unfulfilled renown,' and so it seemed to
touch to fine issues the sordidness of unblushing avarice.

Moreover, the working with strange ingredients and odd-fashioned
instruments, and the employment of mouth-filling phrases, and scraps
of occult learning which seemed to imply unutterable things, gave just
that pleasing dash of would-be wickedness to the process of consulting
the alchemist which acts as a fascination to many people. The earnest
person felt that by using the skill and knowledge of the alchemists,
for what he deemed a good purpose, he was compelling the powers of
evil to work for him and his objects.

It was impossible that such a system as alchemy should appear to the
plain man of the middle ages, when the whole scheme of life and the
universe rested on a magical basis, to be more than a kind of magic
which hovered between the black magic of the Sorcerer and the white
magic of the Church. Nor is it to be wondered at that a system which
lends itself to imposture so easily as alchemy did, should be thought
of by the plain man of modern times as having been nothing but a
machinery of fraud.

It is evident from the _Canon's Yeoman's Tale_ in Chaucer, that many
of those who professed to turn the base metals into gold were held in
bad repute as early as the 14th century. The "false chanoun" persuaded
the priest, who was his dupe, to send his servant for quicksilver,
which he promised to make into "as good silver and as fyn, As ther is
any in youre purse or myn"; he then gave the priest a "crosselet," and
bid him put it on the fire, and blow the coals. While the priest was
busy with the fire,

      This false chanoun--the foule feend hym fecche!--
      Out of his bosom took a bechen cole,
      In which ful subtilly was maad an hole,
      And therinne put was of silver lemaille
      An ounce, and stopped was withouten faille
      The hole with wex, to kepe the lemaille in.

The "false chanoun" pretended to be sorry for the priest, who was so
busily blowing the fire:--

      Ye been right hoot, I se wel how ye swete;
      Have heer a clooth, and wipe awey the we't.
      And whyles that the preest wiped his face,
      This chanoun took his cole with harde grace,
      And leyde it above, upon the middeward
      Of the crosselet, and blew wel afterward.
      Til that the coles gonne faste brenne.

As the coal burned the silver fell into the "crosselet." Then the
canon said they would both go together and fetch chalk, and a pail of
water, for he would pour out the silver he had made in the form of an
ingot. They locked the door, and took the key with them. On returning,
the canon formed the chalk into a mould, and poured the contents of
the crucible into it. Then he bade the priest,

      Look what ther is, put in thin hand and grope,
      Thow fynde shalt ther silver, as I hope.
      What, devel of helle! Sholde it ellis be?
      Shavyng of silver silver is, _parde!_
      He putte his hand in, and took up a teyne
      Of silver fyn, and glad in every veyne
      Was this preest, when he saugh that it was so.

The conclusion of the _Canon's Yeoman's Tale_ shows that, in the 14th
century, there was a general belief in the possibility of finding the
philosopher's stone, and effecting the transmutation, although the
common practitioners of the art were regarded as deceivers. A disciple
of Plato is supposed to ask his master to tell him the "name of the
privee stoon." Plato gives him certain directions, and tells him he
must use _magnasia_; the disciple asks--

      'What is Magnasia, good sire, I yow preye?'
      'It is a water that is maad, I seye,
      Of elementes foure,' quod Plato.
      'Telle me the roote, good sire,' quod he tho,
      Of that water, if it be youre wille.'
      'Nay, nay,' quod Plato, 'certein that I nylle;
      The philosophres sworn were everychoon
      That they sholden discovers it unto noon,
      Ne in no book it write in no manere,
      For unto Crist it is so lief and deere,
      That he wol nat that it discovered bee,
      But where it liketh to his deitee
      Man for tenspire, and eek for to deffende
      Whom that hym liketh; lo, this is the ende.'

The belief in the possibility of alchemy seems to have been general
sometime before Chaucer wrote; but that belief was accompanied by the
conviction that alchemy was an impious pursuit, because the
transmutation of baser metals into gold was regarded as trenching on
the prerogative of the Creator, to whom alone this power rightfully
belonged. In his _Inferno_ (which was probably written about the year
1300), Dante places the alchemists in the eighth circle of hell, not
apparently because they were fraudulent impostors, but because, as one
of them says, "I aped creative nature by my subtle art."

In later times, some of those who pretended to have the secret and to
perform great wonders by the use of it, became rich and celebrated,
and were much sought after. The most distinguished of these
pseudo-alchemists was he who passed under the name of Cagliostro. His
life bears witness to the eagerness of human beings to be deceived.

Joseph Balsamo was born in 1743 at Palermo, where his parents were
tradespeople in a good way of business.[5] In the memoir of himself,
which he wrote in prison, Balsamo seeks to surround his birth and
parentage with mystery; he says, "I am ignorant, not only of my
birthplace, but even of the parents who bore me.... My earliest
infancy was passed in the town of Medina, in Arabia, where I was
brought up under the name of Acharat."

   [5] The account of the life of Cagliostro is much condensed
   from Mr A.E. Waite's _Lives of the Alchemystical Philosophers_.

When he was thirteen years of age, Balsamo's parents determined he
should be trained for the priesthood, but he ran away from his school.
He was then confined in a Benedictine monastery. He showed a
remarkable taste for natural history, and acquired considerable
knowledge of the use of drugs; but he soon tired of the discipline and
escaped. For some years he wandered about in different parts of Italy,
living by his wits and by cheating. A goldsmith consulted him about a
hidden treasure; he pretended to invoke the aid of spirits, frightened
the goldsmith, got sixty ounces of gold from him to carry on his
incantations, left him in the lurch, and fled to Messina. In that
town he discovered an aged aunt who was sick; the aunt died, and left
her money to the Church. Balsamo assumed her family name, added a
title of nobility, and was known henceforward as the Count Alessandro
Cagliostro.

In Messina he met a mysterious person whom he calls Altotas, and from
whom, he says in his Memoir, he learnt much. The following account of
the meeting of Balsamo and the stranger is taken from Waite's book:
"As he was promenading one day near the jetty at the extremity of the
port he encountered an individual singularly habited and possessed of
a most remarkable countenance. This person, aged apparently about
fifty years, seemed to be an Armenian, though, according to other
accounts, he was a Spaniard or Greek. He wore a species of caftan, a
silk bonnet, and the extremities of his breeches were concealed in a
pair of wide boots. In his left hand he held a parasol, and in his
right the end of a cord, to which was attached a graceful Albanian
greyhound.... Cagliostro saluted this grotesque being, who bowed
slightly, but with satisfied dignity. 'You do not reside in Messina,
signor?' he said in Sicilian, but with a marked foreign accent.
Cagliostro replied that he was tarrying for a few days, and they began
to converse on the beauty of the town and on its advantageous
situation, a kind of Oriental imagery individualising the eloquence of
the stranger, whose remarks were, moreover, adroitly adorned with a
few appropriate compliments."

Although the stranger said he received no one at his house he allowed
Cagliostro to visit him. After various mysterious doings the two went
off to Egypt, and afterwards to Malta, where they performed many
wonderful deeds before the Grand Master, who was much impressed. At
Malta Altotas died, or, at anyrate, vanished. Cagliostro then
travelled for some time, and was well received by noblemen,
ambassadors, and others in high position. At Rome he fell in love with
a young and beautiful lady, Lorenza Feliciani, and married her.

Cagliostro used his young wife as a decoy to attract rich and foolish
men. He and his wife thrived for a time, and accumulated money and
jewels; but a confederate betrayed them, and they fled to Venice, and
then wandered for several years in Italy, France, and England. They
seem to have made a living by the sale of lotions for the skin, and by
practising skilful deceptions.

About the year 1770 Cagliostro began to pose as an alchemist. After
another period of wandering he paid a second visit to London and
founded a secret society, based on (supposed) Egyptian rites, mingled
with those of freemasonry. The suggestion of this society is said to
have come from a curious book he picked up on a second-hand stall in
London. The society attracted people by the strangeness of its
initiatory rites, and the promises of happiness and wellbeing made by
its founder to those who joined it. Lodges were established in many
countries, many disciples were obtained, great riches were amassed,
and Cagliostro flourished exceedingly.

In his _Histoire du Merveilleux dans les Temps modernes_, Figuier,
speaking of Cagliostro about this period of his career, says:

"He proclaimed himself the bearer of the mysteries of Isis and Anubis
from the far East.... He obtained numerous and distinguished
followers, who on one occasion assembled in great force to hear Joseph
Balsamo expound to them the doctrines of Egyptian freemasonry. At this
solemn convention he is said to have spoken with overpowering
eloquence;... his audience departed in amazement and completely
converted to the regenerated and purified masonry. None doubted that
he was an initiate of the arcana of nature, as preserved in the temple
of Apis at the era when Cambyses belaboured that capricious divinity.
From this moment the initiations into the new masonry were numerous,
albeit they were limited to the aristocracy of society. There are
reasons to believe that the grandees who were deemed worthy of
admission paid exceedingly extravagantly for the honour."

Cagliostro posed as a physician, and claimed the power of curing
diseases simply by the laying on of hands. He went so far as to assert
he had restored to life the dead child of a nobleman in Paris; the
discovery that the miracle was effected by substituting a living child
for the dead one caused him to flee, laden with spoil, to Warsaw, and
