successors, the Hungarians, whose invasions took place in the first
half of the tenth century.

About the same time of the Hungarian invasions, the Normans began to
disturb the southwestern part of Europe with their Viking expeditions.
Their sea kings seem to have been equestrians at very early times, and
to have had their horses shod, although perhaps only in winter; at
least the excavation of the Viking ship in 1881 disclosed the remains
of a horse which was shod. The shoeing consisted only of a toe
protection--"Brodder" (Bruder, Brother)--provided with a small sharp
calk, and fastened by two nails.

When later, in the year 1130, the Norwegian king Sigard Yorsalafar,
during his journey to Jerusalem, entered Constantinople, his horse is
said to have carried only the small toe-protecting shoes.

The art of horseshoeing, immediately after the migration of the
nations, came near our improvement of the same to-day; especially near
the reputed discoveries met with, which consist simply of iron
protection for the margin of the hoof, fastened by nails. The heads
were sunk into the shoe so as to increase its firmness. Special
consideration was given to local and climatic conditions through the
introduction of toes and heels.

The mechanism of the hoof also found remarkable consideration,
inasmuch as they apparently avoided driving nails too close to the
heel end of the shoe. Notwithstanding this early improvement in the
art of horseshoeing, the Huns (as stated before) took a prominent
part. It appears to have taken a long time after the migration of the
nations for shoeing to become general, as is shown by various
descriptions of tournaments, pictures of horses, etc.

[Illustration: FIG. 18.]

We will mention in the first place the "Percival des Wolfram von
Eschenbach," as well as "Christ von Troies," where there is a great
deal said about horses, horse grooms, and tournaments, but nowhere in
those works is any mention made of horseshoeing. Likewise is found the
horse on the coat of arms of Wolfram von Eschenbach, in the Manessi
collection in Paris, which was begun in Switzerland in the fourteenth
century; but, although we find this horse most beautifully finished,
it was not shod.

[Illustration: FIG. 19.]

During the time of the crusades, 1096-1291, however, there appeared
suddenly in Germany a plate-like horseshoe of southern character
(Figs. 18 and 19), which was occasionally bent upward at the heel end,
and was very heavy. The toe was very broad sometimes, and was also
bent upward. In this form we have seen the shoes of the Balkan and
Pyrean peninsula. The shoe was remarkably narrow at the heel, and was
supplied with calks, which accounts for the highness of the back part
of the shoe. Frequently we find one calk set diagonally, but the other
drawn out wedge shaped, and sharp; so that there existed a great
similarity between this iron shank and that used by Count Einsiedel
for winter shoeing. Sometimes both shanks were sharpened in this way,
or were provided with blade-shaped calks well set forward. The form of
nail holes used was very characteristic of that of the Huns, but they
were decidedly smaller and square, as were seen in the African shoe of
the twelfth century. The nail heads were slightly sunk, which was
according to southern customs.

That this shoe really belongs to the period of the crusades is proved
by the numerous horse pictures which have been preserved from that
time; of which we will mention the manuscript of Heinrich von Veldecka
("Eneidt")[4] in the year 1180, which belongs to the most valuable
parts of German history of art.

   [Footnote 4: "Wanderungen des Aeneas" (Travels of Aeneas).]

This south European Hunish horseshoe had remained the standard form
during the middle ages and until the thirty years war, at least in
South Germany. The shoe was continually improved, and reached its
highest point of perfection about the time of the "Bauern-krieg"
(Revolution of the Peasants), at a time when, under the leadership of
the Renaissance, the whole art of mechanics, and especially that of
blacksmithing, had taken an extraordinarily great stride (Figs. 20 and
21).

[Illustration: FIG. 20.]

[Illustration: FIG. 21.]

The shoe (Figs. 22 and 23) is found in Franconia, in all places where,
in the sixteenth century, battles had been fought with the rebellious
peasants. We may, therefore, be justified in fixing its origin mainly
from that period, for which also speaks its high perfection of form.
We find here still the bent-up heel and toe (the latter broad and
thin) of the south European form.

The staved rim of the Spanish Arabic Turkomanic shoe is observed to be
undergoing a change to that of a groove. The broad surface of the shoe
evidently led to the beveling of the same, so as to lessen sole
pressure. The size of the nail holes remains still like that of the
Huns; but the unsunk southern nail heads yet serve to improve the hold
on the ground. The calks were next placed forward, perhaps from an
uncultivated sense of beauty, or from the high bending up of the hind
part of the shoe, which would necessitate a high and heavy unsightly
calk.

From this time on horseshoeing in south Germany fell back very
quickly, and loses all scientific holds of support after the thirty
years war. In the mean time toe protection in the form of a calk had
spread from the colder north over southern Germany; whereas this north
German invention did not find favor in England in consequence of her
mild oceanic climate.

[Illustration: FIG. 22]

Also, the calks in England, as well as in the southern countries, on
the same ground, therefore, with good reason, could at no time be
adopted. This did, however, not interfere with the use of the calk in
the colder south Germany, where after a use of nearly 1,500 years it
has maintained its local and climatic adaptation. Notwithstanding the
occasional aping by foreigners, it has remained victorious in its
original form, and has been chosen in many countries.

The historical development of the horseshoe in general, from about the
time of Emperor Maximilian until the seven years war, furnishes a true
picture of the confused condition of things at that period of time,
which, to make intelligible, would require a separate and complete
treatise. Interesting as it is to the scientist to follow up this
development and mode of present German horseshoeing, which, aside from
the national toe and calk, is the English form and has become
influential, and with full right, for a periodical of this kind
further, more comprehensive, statement would under all circumstances
take up too much room; therefore I must drop the pen, although
reluctantly.

[Illustration: FIG. 23.]

       *       *       *       *       *




SHEET GLASS FROM MOLTEN METAL.


The present practice in making metal sheets is to cast ingots or slabs
and then reduce these by repeated rollings and reheating. Attempts
have been previously made to produce sheets directly from molten metal
by pouring the metal: (1) between two revolving rollers; or (2)
between a revolving wheel and the surface of an inclosing fixed
semicircular segment. By these means none but very thin plates could
be satisfactorily produced. In this invention by C.M. Pielsticker,
London, the machinery consists of a large receiving roller of 5 ft.
diameter more or less, and of a length equal to that of the plate to
be produced. With this are combined small forming rollers arranged in
succession part way round the periphery of the large roller, and
revolving at the same rate as the large roller. The rollers can be
cooled by a current of water circulating through them. The molten
metal flows on to the surface of the large roller and is prevented
from escaping sideways by flanges with which the large roller is
provided. These flanges embrace the small rollers and are of a depth
greater than that of the thickest plate which it is proposed to roll.
The distance between the large roller and the small rollers can be
adjusted according to the desired thickness of the plate. When dealing
with metals of high melting point, such as steel, the first small
roller is made of refractory material and is heated from inside by the
flame of a blow pipe. The rollers are coated with plumbago or other
material to prevent adhesion to the molten metal. In the case of
metals of high melting point the machine is fed direct from a furnace
divided into two compartments by a wall or bridge in which is a
stopper which can be operated so as to regulate the flow of metal.
When applied to forming sheets of glass, the rollers should be warmed
by a blow pipe flame as above described, and the sheet of glass
stretched and annealed as it leaves the last roller.

       *       *       *       *       *




WELDLESS STEEL CHAINS.


At the Royal Naval Exhibition, London, Messrs. William Reid & Co. are
exhibiting their weldless steel chains, which we now illustrate.

Of the many advantages claimed for steel chains, it may be prominently
noted that a very important saving of weight is effected on account of
their possessing such a high breaking strain, compared with the
ordinary welded iron chains. To illustrate this, it may be stated that
a given length of the weldless steel chain is 35 to 40 per cent. less
in weight than an equivalent length of iron chain, will stand the same
breaking strain as the latter, and indeed, where steel of special
quality is used in making the weldless chains, this difference can be
increased as much as 70 to 80 per cent. Whereas superior iron chains
break at a strain at 17 tons per square inch, these weldless steel
chains will stand a strain of 28 to 30 tons, with 20 to 26 per cent.
elongation.

[Illustration: Figures 1. Through 9., 1_a_, 1_b_ and 3_a_
               MANUFACTURE OF WELDLESS CHAINS.]

Again, there is greater security in their use from the fact that there
are no welds, and they give warning of the limit of strain to which
they can bear being approached, by elongation, which can be carried to
a considerable extent before the chain breaks. Moreover, over, in
chains made by this process, the links are all exactly alike. Though
the life of a weldless steel chain is said to be twice that of an
ordinary one, the price per length is little more than that of best
iron chains.

They are made in lengths of from 40 to 50 feet, being compressed from
a solid rolled steel bar, the section of which is shaped like a
four-pointed star. In the first place holes are pierced at intervals
down the length of the bar, thus determining the length of the several
links. Then the bar is notched between the holes so as to give the
external form of the links. The next step is "flattening out," which
presses the links into shape on their inner side, but leaves the
openings still closed by a plate of metal. They are then stamped out
so as to round them up, and the metal inside them is punched out, and
the edges "cleaned," or trimmed off. The links are now parted from one
another and stamped again, to insure equal thickness in all parts of
the chain. The only processes now to be gone through are dressing and
finishing. According to the die used, the shape of the links can be
varied to suit any required pattern. The lengths of chain thus made
are joined by spiral rings made of soft steel, the convolutions being
afterward hammered together till they become solid. A ring of this
description, 3/4 inch diameter, underwent a strain of 46,200 lb., that
is, 23 tons to the square inch, its elongation being 21 per cent.

These chains have passed satisfactorily the tests of the Bureau
Veritas, and both that association and Lloyd's have accepted their use
on the same conditions and under the same tests as ordinary chains.

So much for the general idea of punching steel chains. We will now
describe a recent invention by which superior steel chains are
produced, the author of which is Mr. Hippolyte Rongier, of Birmingham,
Eng. He says:

My invention has for its object the manufacture of weldless stayed
chains, whereof each link, together with its cross strut or stay, is
made of one piece of metal without any weld or joint; and the
invention consists in producing a chain of stayed links from a bar of
cruciform section by the consecutive series of punching, twisting and
stamping operations hereinafter described, the punching operations
being entirely performed on the metal when in the cold state.

Figs. 1 to 10 show the progressive stages in the manufacture of the
chain, and the remaining figures show the series of tools that are
employed.

The general method of operation of making stayed chains according to
my invention is so far similar to the methods heretofore proposed for
making unstayed chains from the bar of cruciform section that the
links are formed alternately out of the one and the other pair of
diametrically opposite webs of the rod, the links, when severed and
completed, being already enchained together at the time of their
formation. The successive operations differ, however, in many
important practical respects from those heretofore proposed, as will
appear from the following detailed description of the successive steps
in the process illustrated by Figs. 1 to 10.

I will distinguish the one pair of diametrically opposite webs of the
bar and the notches and mortises punched therein and the links formed
therefrom from the other pair by an index figure 1 affixed to the
reference letters appertaining thereto.

_a a_ are one pair of diametrically opposite webs, and _a' a'_ the
other pair of webs of the bar.

[Illustration: Figures 2_a-_b, 6_a_, 4_a-b_, 7 _a-b_ and 10 _a-b_
               MANUFACTURE OF WELDLESS CHAINS]

The first operation illustrated in Fig. 1 is to punch out of the edge
of one of the webs, _a_, a series of shallow notches, _b_, at equal
intervals apart, corresponding to the pitch of the links to be formed
out of that pair of webs and situated where the spaces will ultimately
be formed between the ends of that series of links. The notches are
made with beveled ends, and are no deeper than is absolutely necessary
(for the purpose of a guide stop in the subsequent operations, as
hereinafter described), so as to avoid, as far as possible, weakening
the bar transversely. This operation is repeated upon one of the pairs
of webs _a'_; but whereas in the first operation of notching the web
the "pitch" of the notches is determined by the feed mechanism, in
this second operation of notching the notches, _b_, cut in the web,
_a_, serve as guides to influence and compensate for any inaccuracy of
the feed mechanism, so that the second set of notches, _b'_, shall be
intermediate of and rigorously equidistant from the first set of
notches, _b_. This compensation is effected by the notches, _b_,
fitting on to a beveled stop on the bed of the punching tool by which
the notches, _b'_, are cut, the beveled ends of the notches, _b_,
causing the bar under the pressure of the punch to adjust itself in
the longitudinal direction (if necessary) sufficiently to rectify any
inaccuracy of feed. These notches, _b b'_, similarly serve as guides
to insure uniformity of spacing in the subsequent operations of
punching out the links.

The second operation (illustrated in Fig. 2) is to punch out of the
pair of opposite webs, _a a_, pairs of oblong mortises--two pairs, _c
c_, and one pair, _d d_. These three pairs of mortises (which might be
punched at separate operations, but are preferably punched at one
stroke of the press) are situated as close as possible up to the faces
of the other pairs of webs, _a' a'_, the pairs of mortises, _c c_,
being so spaced as to correspond in position to the eyes of the links
to be formed, to which they correspond approximately in form, while
the pair, _d_, correspond in position to the notches, _b_, and
therefore to the intervals by which the links formed out of the same
pair of webs, _a a_, will be separated when completed. This operation
is continued along the whole length of the pair of webs, _a_. It will
be observed that a considerable thickness of metal is left at _a*_
between the notches, _b_, and the mortises, _d_. This is of primary
importance and is one of the essential features of my method of
manufacture, inasmuch as by first punching out the mortises, _d_, the
subsequent removal of the metal from between the outer ends of the
links is greatly facilitated, while by leaving the solid metal, _a*_,
the transverse strength of the webs, _a a_, is not materially
diminished, so that when the operation of punching the mortises, _c_
and _d_, in the other pair of webs, _a'_, is performed the bar will
not be bent and crippled, as would inevitably be the case were the
whole of the metal opposite the notches, _b_, which is ultimately to
be removed, to be punched out at so early a stage of the manufacture.
The operation of punching the pairs of mortises, _c'_ and _d_, having
been repeated along the other pair of webs, _a'_, it will be observed
that like the notches, _b_, the mortises, _c d_, in the one pair of
webs alternate with those, _c' d'_, in the other pair of webs.

The third operation (illustrated in Fig. 3) is to elongate the
mortises, _c d_, and bring the mortises, _c c'_, more nearly to the
final form. This is performed by punches similar to but larger (in the
direction of the length of the rod) than those used in the second
operation.

The third operation, which is repeated upon both pairs of webs, _a a
a' a'_, may be considered as a second stage of the second operation,
it being preferable to punch out the mortises in two stages in order
to remove sufficient metal without unduly straining the bar.

The fourth operation (illustrated in Fig. 4) consists in roughly
shaping the ends of the links externally by punching out the portions,
_a*_, of the webs, _a_, between the links lying in the same plane or
formed out of the same pair of webs. This operation is repeated on the
other pair of webs, _a'_. Up to this point a continuous core of metal
has been left at the intersection of the two pairs of webs.

The fifth operation (illustrated in Fig. 5) consists in punching out
the portions, _e_, of the core at each side of the cross stay of the
link, so as to separate the cross stay from the outer ends of the
adjacent links. This operation is performed by removing a portion only
of the metal of the core which intervenes between the cross stay and
the outer ends of the adjacent links enchained with the link under
operation--that is to say, portions, _e*_, of the core are temporarily
left attached to the outer ends of the links in order to avoid
crippling or bending the bar, which might occur were the whole of this
metal, which is ultimately to be removed, to be punched out at once,
these portions, _e*_, being supported by the bed die in the operation
of punching out the spaces, _e_, as hereinafter described. This
operation having been repeated upon both pairs of webs, it will be
observed that the rod-like form of the chain is now only maintained by
the portion of the core at the points, _f_, where the inner side of
the eye or bow of one link is united with that of the next one. The
severing of these intervening portions of the core and the breaking up
of the rod into the constituent links of the chain constitute the
sixth operation.

The sixth operation (illustrated in Fig. 6) is performed by torsion,
and for this purpose one end of the rod is held fixed while the other
is twisted once or twice in opposite directions, until by fatigue of
the metal at the points, _f_, the whole of the links are severed
almost at the same instant, and a chain of roughly formed stayed links
is produced.

The seventh operation (illustrated in Fig. 7) is to remove the
superfluous projecting pieces of metal both from the inside and
outside of the ends of the links. For this purpose the two ends of
each link are operated on at the same time by two pairs of punches
corresponding to the outline of the ends of the link.

The eighth operation (illustrated in Fig. 8) is to bring the ends of
the links to their finished rounded form. This is performed by
stamping both ends of each link at the same time between pairs of
shaping dies or swages.

The ninth operation (illustrated in Fig. 9) is to bring the middle
portion of each link--that is to say, the side members and the cross
stay--to the finished rounded form, which is also performed by means
of a pair of dies or swages.

The tenth and last operation (illustrated in Fig. 10) is to contract
the link slightly in the lateral direction in order to correct any
imperfections at the sides left by the two previous operations and
bring the link to a more perfect and stronger form, as shown. This
operation has the important result of strengthening the link
considerably by contracting or rendering more pointed the arched form
of the bow or end of the link, and also by thickening the metal at
that part where the wear is greatest, this thickening of the metal at
the ends of the link occurring in the direction of the line of strain
(as indicated by _x_ in Fig. 10) and being brought about by the
compression or "upsetting" of the metal at the end of the link. It may
be preferable to perform this operation immediately after the seventh
operation, and I reserve the right to do so.

In the case of large cables only the metal is preferably heated for
the eighth, ninth, and tenth operations.

I will now refer to the figures which illustrate the series of tools
whereby the above mentioned operations are performed.

Fig. 1_a_ shows a plan (the punch being in section) and Fig. 1_b_ an
elevation of the bed die of the tool by which the notches _b_ of the
first operation are performed. The feed mechanism is not shown, but
might be of any ordinary intermittent kind. _g_ is a groove in the
bed, in which lies the lower vertical web of the rod, of cruciform
section, the two horizontal webs lying upon the bed with the edge of
the web to be notched lying just over the die, in which works the
punch, B, of which B' is the cutting edge. The punch is operated in
the usual way, its lower end, which does not rise out of the die,
acting as a guide. B* is the beveled stop in the groove, _g_, which by
fitting in the notches, _b_ or _b'_, corrects inaccuracies of the
feed.

Fig. 2_a_ is a sectional plan and Fig. 2_b_ an elevation of the tool
by which the second operation is performed, the same tool being also
used for performing the third operation. (Illustrated in Fig. 3_a_.)
_h h_ are a pair of bed-dies having a space _h'_ between them to
receive the lower web of the bar, and having notches, C C and D D, in
their inner ends, forming counterparts of the punches by which the
pairs of mortises, _c d_, Fig. 2, are punched in the pair of webs
lying upon the bed-dies, _h_. These bed-dies are fitted to slide a
little in opposite directions upon a suitable bed plate and are caused
by the inclined cams, _i'_, on the guides, _i_, of the press head
(which pass through corresponding apertures in the bed-dies, _h_) to
approach each other at the moment the punches come down on the work,
so as to grip the lower web of the rod and support the pair of webs
being operated on close up to the sides of the lower web lying in the
space _h'_, while when the punches rise the bed-dies move apart, so
that the web is quite free in said space _h'_ and the rod may be
easily fed forward for a fresh stroke of the press. B* is the beveled
stop in the space, _k'_, as in the tool first described. The bed-dies
_h_ have a second set of notches C' D' at their outer ends, similar to
but longer than those C D, so that by reversing the bed-dies they will
form counterparts for a second set of punches corresponding thereto
for performing the third operation--_i.e._, enlarging the mortises, _c
d_, as represented in Figs. 3 and 3_a_; or, instead of adapting the
dies, _h_, to perform the two operations, separate tools may be used
for the second and third operations.

Fig. 4_a_ is an elevation and Fig. 4_b_ a sectional plan of the tool
