disaggregation of matter. We shall have to seek the exact meaning
which ought to be given to the experiments on the emanation of these
bodies, and to discover whether these experiments really imperil the
law of Lavoisier.

For some years different experimenters have also effected many very
precise measurements of the weight of divers bodies both before and
after chemical reactions between these bodies. Two highly experienced
and cautious physicists, Professors Landolt and Heydweiller, have not
hesitated to announce the sensational result that in certain
circumstances the weight is no longer the same after as before the
reaction. In particular, the weight of a solution of salts of copper
in water is not the exact sum of the joint weights of the salt and the
water. Such experiments are evidently very delicate; they have been
disputed, and they cannot be considered as sufficient for conviction.
It follows nevertheless that it is no longer forbidden to regard the
law of Lavoisier as only an approximate law; according to Sandford and
Ray, this approximation would be about 1/2,400,000. This is also the
result reached by Professor Poynting in experiments regarding the
possible action of temperature on the weight of a body; and if this be
really so, we may reassure ourselves, and from the point of view of
practical application may continue to look upon matter as
indestructible.

The principles of physics, by imposing certain conditions on
phenomena, limit after a fashion the field of the possible. Among
these principles is one which, notwithstanding its importance when
compared with that of universally known principles, is less familiar
to some people. This is the principle of symmetry, more or less
conscious applications of which can, no doubt, be found in various
works and even in the conceptions of Copernican astronomers, but which
was generalized and clearly enunciated for the first time by the late
M. Curie. This illustrious physicist pointed out the advantage of
introducing into the study of physical phenomena the considerations on
symmetry familiar to crystallographers; for a phenomenon to take
place, it is necessary that a certain dissymmetry should previously
exist in the medium in which this phenomenon occurs. A body, for
instance, may be animated with a certain linear velocity or a speed of
rotation; it may be compressed, or twisted; it may be placed in an
electric or in a magnetic field; it may be affected by an electric
current or by one of heat; it may be traversed by a ray of light
either ordinary or polarized rectilineally or circularly, etc.:--in
each case a certain minimum and characteristic dissymmetry is
necessary at every point of the body in question.

This consideration enables us to foresee that certain phenomena which
might be imagined _a priori_ cannot exist. Thus, for instance, it is
impossible that an electric field, a magnitude directed and not
superposable on its image in a mirror perpendicular to its direction,
could be created at right angles to the plane of symmetry of the
medium; while it would be possible to create a magnetic field under
the same conditions.

This consideration thus leads us to the discovery of new phenomena;
but it must be understood that it cannot of itself give us absolutely
precise notions as to the nature of these phenomena, nor disclose
their order of magnitude.


Sec. 2. THE PRINCIPLE OF THE CONSERVATION OF ENERGY

Dominating not physics alone, but nearly every other science, the
principle of the conservation of energy is justly considered as the
grandest conquest of contemporary thought. It shows us in a powerful
light the most diverse questions; it introduces order into the most
varied studies; it leads to a clear and coherent interpretation of
phenomena which, without it, appear to have no connexion with each
other; and it supplies precise and exact numerical relations between
the magnitudes which enter into these phenomena.

The boldest minds have an instinctive confidence in it, and it is the
principle which has most stoutly resisted that assault which the
daring of a few theorists has lately directed to the overthrow of the
general principles of physics. At every new discovery, the first
thought of physicists is to find out how it accords with the principle
of the conservation of energy. The application of the principle,
moreover, never fails to give valuable hints on the new phenomenon,
and often even suggests a complementary discovery. Up till now it
seems never to have received a check, even the extraordinary
properties of radium not seriously contradicting it; also the general
form in which it is enunciated gives it such a suppleness that it is
no doubt very difficult to overthrow.

I do not claim to set forth here the complete history of this
principle, but I will endeavour to show with what pains it was born,
how it was kept back in its early days and then obstructed in its
development by the unfavourable conditions of the surroundings in
which it appeared. It first of all came, in fact, to oppose itself to
the reigning theories; but, little by little, it acted on these
theories, and they were modified under its pressure; then, in their
turn, these theories reacted on it and changed its primitive form.

It had to be made less wide in order to fit into the classic frame,
and was absorbed by mechanics; and if it thus became less general, it
gained in precision what it lost in extent. When once definitely
admitted and classed, as it were, in the official domain of science,
it endeavoured to burst its bonds and return to a more independent and
larger life. The history of this principle is similar to that of all
evolutions.

It is well known that the conservation of energy was, at first,
regarded from the point of view of the reciprocal transformations
between heat and work, and that the principle received its first clear
enunciation in the particular case of the principle of equivalence. It
is, therefore, rightly considered that the scholars who were the first
to doubt the material nature of caloric were the precursors of R.
Mayer; their ideas, however, were the same as those of the celebrated
German doctor, for they sought especially to demonstrate that heat was
a mode of motion.

Without going back to early and isolated attempts like those of Daniel
Bernoulli, who, in his hydrodynamics, propounded the basis of the
kinetic theory of gases, or the researches of Boyle on friction, we
may recall, to show how it was propounded in former times, a rather
forgotten page of the _Memoire sur la Chaleur_, published in 1780 by
Lavoisier and Laplace: "Other physicists," they wrote, after setting
out the theory of caloric, "think that heat is nothing but the result
of the insensible vibrations of matter.... In the system we are now
examining, heat is the _vis viva_ resulting from the insensible
movements of the molecules of a body; it is the sum of the products of
the mass of each molecule by the square of its velocity.... We shall
not decide between the two preceding hypotheses; several phenomena
seem to support the last mentioned--for instance, that of the heat
produced by the friction of two solid bodies. But there are others
which are more simply explained by the first, and perhaps they both
operate at once." Most of the physicists of that period, however, did
not share the prudent doubts of Lavoisier and Laplace. They admitted,
without hesitation, the first hypothesis; and, four years after the
appearance of the _Memoire sur la Chaleur_, Sigaud de Lafond, a
professor of physics of great reputation, wrote: "Pure Fire, free from
all state of combination, seems to be an assembly of particles of a
simple, homogeneous, and absolutely unalterable matter, and all the
properties of this element indicate that these particles are
infinitely small and free, that they have no sensible cohesion, and
that they are moved in every possible direction by a continual and
rapid motion which is essential to them.... The extreme tenacity and
the surprising mobility of its molecules are manifestly shown by the
ease with which it penetrates into the most compact bodies and by its
tendency to put itself in equilibrium throughout all bodies near to
it."

It must be acknowledged, however, that the idea of Lavoisier and
Laplace was rather vague and even inexact on one important point. They
admitted it to be evident that "all variations of heat, whether real
or apparent, undergone by a bodily system when changing its state, are
produced in inverse order when the system passes back to its original
state." This phrase is the very denial of equivalence where these
changes of state are accompanied by external work.

Laplace, moreover, himself became later a very convinced partisan of
the hypothesis of the material nature of caloric, and his immense
authority, so fortunate in other respects for the development of
science, was certainly in this case the cause of the retardation of
progress.

The names of Young, Rumford, Davy, are often quoted among those
physicists who, at the commencement of the nineteenth century, caught
sight of the new truths as to the nature of heat. To these names is
very properly added that of Sadi Carnot. A note found among his papers
unquestionably proves that, before 1830, ideas had occurred to him
from which it resulted that in producing work an equivalent amount of
heat was destroyed. But the year 1842 is particularly memorable in the
history of science as the year in which Jules Robert Mayer succeeded,
by an entirely personal effort, in really enunciating the principle of
the conservation of energy. Chemists recall with just pride that the
_Remarques sur les forces de la nature animee_, contemptuously
rejected by all the journals of physics, were received and published
in the _Annalen_ of Liebig. We ought never to forget this example,
which shows with what difficulty a new idea contrary to the classic
theories of the period succeeds in coming to the front; but
extenuating circumstances may be urged on behalf of the physicists.

Robert Mayer had a rather insufficient mathematical education, and his
Memoirs, the _Remarques_, as well as the ulterior publications,
_Memoire sur le mouvement organique et la nutrition_ and the
_Materiaux pour la dynamique du ciel_, contain, side by side with very
profound ideas, evident errors in mechanics. Thus it often happens
that discoveries put forward in a somewhat vague manner by adventurous
minds not overburdened by the heavy baggage of scientific erudition,
who audaciously press forward in advance of their time, fall into
quite intelligible oblivion until rediscovered, clarified, and put
into shape by slower but surer seekers. This was the case with the
ideas of Mayer. They were not understood at first sight, not only on
account of their originality, but also because they were couched in
incorrect language.

Mayer was, however, endowed with a singular strength of thought; he
expressed in a rather confused manner a principle which, for him, had
a generality greater than mechanics itself, and so his discovery was
in advance not only of his own time but of half the century. He may
justly be considered the founder of modern energetics.

Freed from the obscurities which prevented its being clearly
perceived, his idea stands out to-day in all its imposing simplicity.
Yet it must be acknowledged that if it was somewhat denaturalised by
those who endeavoured to adapt it to the theories of mechanics, and if
it at first lost its sublime stamp of generality, it thus became
firmly fixed and consolidated on a more stable basis.

The efforts of Helmholtz, Clausius, and Lord Kelvin to introduce the
principle of the conservation of energy into mechanics, were far from
useless. These illustrious physicists succeeded in giving a more
precise form to its numerous applications; and their attempts thus
contributed, by reaction, to give a fresh impulse to mechanics, and
allowed it to be linked to a more general order of facts. If
energetics has not been able to be included in mechanics, it seems
indeed that the attempt to include mechanics in energetics was not in
vain.

In the middle of the last century, the explanation of all natural
phenomena seemed more and more referable to the case of central
forces. Everywhere it was thought that reciprocal actions between
material points could be perceived, these points being attracted or
repelled by each other with an intensity depending only on their
distance or their mass. If, to a system thus composed, the laws of the
classical mechanics are applied, it is shown that half the sum of the
product of the masses by the square of the velocities, to which is
added the work which might be accomplished by the forces to which the
system would be subject if it returned from its actual to its initial
position, is a sum constant in quantity.

This sum, which is the mechanical energy of the system, is therefore
an invariable quantity in all the states to which it may be brought by
the interaction of its various parts, and the word energy well
expresses a capital property of this quantity. For if two systems are
connected in such a way that any change produced in the one
necessarily brings about a change in the other, there can be no
variation in the characteristic quantity of the second except so far
as the characteristic quantity of the first itself varies--on
condition, of course, that the connexions are made in such a manner as
to introduce no new force. It will thus be seen that this quantity
well expresses the capacity possessed by a system for modifying the
state of a neighbouring system to which we may suppose it connected.

Now this theorem of pure mechanics was found wanting every time
friction took place--that is to say, in all really observable cases.
The more perceptible the friction, the more considerable the
difference; but, in addition, a new phenomenon always appeared and
heat was produced. By experiments which are now classic, it became
established that the quantity of heat thus created independently of
the nature of the bodies is always (provided no other phenomena
intervene) proportional to the energy which has disappeared.
Reciprocally, also, heat may disappear, and we always find a constant
relation between the quantities of heat and work which mutually
replace each other.

It is quite clear that such experiments do not prove that heat is
work. We might just as well say that work is heat. It is making a
gratuitous hypothesis to admit this reduction of heat to mechanism;
but this hypothesis was so seductive, and so much in conformity with
the desire of nearly all physicists to arrive at some sort of unity in
nature, that they made it with eagerness and became unreservedly
convinced that heat was an active internal force.

Their error was not in admitting this hypothesis; it was a legitimate
one since it has proved very fruitful. But some of them committed the
fault of forgetting that it was an hypothesis, and considered it a
demonstrated truth. Moreover, they were thus brought to see in
phenomena nothing but these two particular forms of energy which in
their minds were easily identified with each other.

From the outset, however, it became manifest that the principle is
applicable to cases where heat plays only a parasitical part. There
were thus discovered, by translating the principle of equivalence,
numerical relations between the magnitudes of electricity, for
instance, and the magnitudes of mechanics. Heat was a sort of variable
intermediary convenient for calculation, but introduced in a
roundabout way and destined to disappear in the final result.

Verdet, who, in lectures which have rightly remained celebrated,
defined with remarkable clearness the new theories, said, in 1862:
"Electrical phenomena are always accompanied by calorific
manifestations, of which the study belongs to the mechanical theory of
heat. This study, moreover, will not only have the effect of making
known to us interesting facts in electricity, but will throw some
light on the phenomena of electricity themselves."

The eminent professor was thus expressing the general opinion of his
contemporaries, but he certainly seemed to have felt in advance that
the new theory was about to penetrate more deeply into the inmost
nature of things. Three years previously, Rankine also had put forth
some very remarkable ideas the full meaning of which was not at first
well understood. He it was who comprehended the utility of employing a
more inclusive term, and invented the phrase energetics. He also
endeavoured to create a new doctrine of which rational mechanics
should be only a particular case; and he showed that it was possible
to abandon the ideas of atoms and central forces, and to construct a
more general system by substituting for the ordinary consideration of
forces that of the energy which exists in all bodies, partly in an
actual, partly in a potential state.

By giving more precision to the conceptions of Rankine, the physicists
of the end of the nineteenth century were brought to consider that in
all physical phenomena there occur apparitions and disappearances
which are balanced by various energies. It is natural, however, to
suppose that these equivalent apparitions and disappearances
correspond to transformations and not to simultaneous creations and
destructions. We thus represent energy to ourselves as taking
different forms--mechanical, electrical, calorific, and chemical--
capable of changing one into the other, but in such a way that the
quantitative value always remains the same. In like manner a bank
draft may be represented by notes, gold, silver, or bullion. The
earliest known form of energy, _i.e._ work, will serve as the standard
as gold serves as the monetary standard, and energy in all its forms
will be estimated by the corresponding work. In each particular case
we can strictly define and measure, by the correct application of the
principle of the conservation of energy, the quantity of energy
evolved under a given form.

We can thus arrange a machine comprising a body capable of evolving
this energy; then we can force all the organs of this machine to
complete an entirely closed cycle, with the exception of the body
itself, which, however, has to return to such a state that all the
variables from which this state depends resume their initial values
except the particular variable to which the evolution of the energy
under consideration is linked. The difference between the work thus
accomplished and that which would have been obtained if this variable
also had returned to its original value, is the measure of the energy
evolved.

In the same way that, in the minds of mechanicians, all forces of
whatever origin, which are capable of compounding with each other and
of balancing each other, belong to the same category of beings, so for
many physicists energy is a sort of entity which we find under various
aspects. There thus exists for them a world, which comes in some way
to superpose itself upon the world of matter--that is to say, the
world of energy, dominated in its turn by a fundamental law similar to
that of Lavoisier.[5] This conception, as we have already seen, passes
the limit of experience; but others go further still. Absorbed in the
contemplation of this new world, they succeed in persuading themselves
that the old world of matter has no real existence and that energy is
sufficient by itself to give us a complete comprehension of the
Universe and of all the phenomena produced in it. They point out that
all our sensations correspond to changes of energy, and that
everything apparent to our senses is, in truth, energy. The famous
experiment of the blows with a stick by which it was demonstrated to a
sceptical philosopher that an outer world existed, only proves, in
reality, the existence of energy, and not that of matter. The stick in
itself is inoffensive, as Professor Ostwald remarks, and it is its
_vis viva_, its kinetic energy, which is painful to us; while if we
possessed a speed equal to its own, moving in the same direction, it
would no longer exist so far as our sense of touch is concerned.

[Footnote 5: "Nothing is created; nothing is lost"--ED.]

On this hypothesis, matter would only be the capacity for kinetic
energy, its pretended impenetrability energy of volume, and its weight
energy of position in the particular form which presents itself in
universal gravitation; nay, space itself would only be known to us by
the expenditure of energy necessary to penetrate it. Thus in all
physical phenomena we should only have to regard the quantities of
energy brought into play, and all the equations which link the
phenomena to one another would have no meaning but when they apply to
exchanges of energy. For energy alone can be common to all phenomena.

This extreme manner of regarding things is seductive by its
originality, but appears somewhat insufficient if, after enunciating
generalities, we look more closely into the question. From the
philosophical point of view it may, moreover, seem difficult not to
conclude, from the qualities which reveal, if you will, the varied
forms of energy, that there exists a substance possessing these
qualities. This energy, which resides in one region, and which
transports itself from one spot to another, forcibly brings to mind,
whatever view we may take of it, the idea of matter.

Helmholtz endeavoured to construct a mechanics based on the idea of
energy and its conservation, but he had to invoke a second law, the
principle of least action. If he thus succeeded in dispensing with the
hypothesis of atoms, and in showing that the new mechanics gave us to
understand the impossibility of certain movements which, according to
the old, ought to have been but never were experimentally produced, he
was only able to do so because the principle of least action necessary
for his theory became evident in the case of those irreversible
phenomena which alone really exist in Nature. The energetists have
thus not succeeded in forming a thoroughly sound system, but their
efforts have at all events been partly successful. Most physicists are
of their opinion, that kinetic energy is only a particular variety of
energy to which we have no right to wish to connect all its other
forms.

If these forms showed themselves to be innumerable throughout the
Universe, the principle of the conservation of energy would, in fact,
lose a great part of its importance. Every time that a certain
quantity of energy seemed to appear or disappear, it would always be
permissible to suppose that an equivalent quantity had appeared or
disappeared somewhere else under a new form; and thus the principle
would in a way vanish. But the known forms of energy are fairly
restricted in number, and the necessity of recognising new ones seldom
makes itself felt. We shall see, however, that to explain, for
instance, the paradoxical properties of radium and to re-establish
concord between these properties and the principle of the conservation
of energy, certain physicists have recourse to the hypothesis that
radium borrows an unknown energy from the medium in which it is
plunged. This hypothesis, however, is in no way necessary; and in a
few other rare cases in which similar hypotheses have had to be set
up, experiment has always in the long run enabled us to discover some
phenomenon which had escaped the first observers and which corresponds
exactly to the variation of energy first made evident.

One difficulty, however, arises from the fact that the principle ought
only to be applied to an isolated system. Whether we imagine actions
at a distance or believe in intermediate media, we must always
recognise that there exist no bodies in the world incapable of acting
on each other, and we can never affirm that some modification in the
energy of a given place may not have its echo in some unknown spot
afar off. This difficulty may sometimes render the value of the
principle rather illusory.

Similarly, it behoves us not to receive without a certain distrust the
extension by certain philosophers to the whole Universe, of a property
demonstrated for those restricted systems which observation can alone
reach. We know nothing of the Universe as a whole, and every
generalization of this kind outruns in a singular fashion the limit of
experiment.

Even reduced to the most modest proportions, the principle of the
conservation of energy retains, nevertheless, a paramount importance;
and it still preserves, if you will, a high philosophical value. M.J.
Perrin justly points out that it gives us a form under which we are
experimentally able to grasp causality, and that it teaches us that a
result has to be purchased at the cost of a determined effort.

We can, in fact, with M. Perrin and M. Langevin, represent this in a
way which puts this characteristic in evidence by enunciating it as
follows: "If at the cost of a change C we can obtain a change K, there
will never be acquired at the same cost, whatever the mechanism
employed, first the change K and in addition some other change, unless
this latter be one that is otherwise known to cost nothing to produce
or to destroy." If, for instance, the fall of a weight can be
accompanied, without anything else being produced, by another
transformation--the melting of a certain mass of ice, for example--it
will be impossible, no matter how you set about it or whatever the
mechanism used, to associate this same transformation with the melting
of another weight of ice.

We can thus, in the transformation in question, obtain an appropriate
number which will sum up that which may be expected from the external
effect, and can give, so to speak, the price at which this
transformation is bought, measure its invariable value by a common
measure (for instance, the melting of the ice), and, without any
ambiguity, define the energy lost during the transformation as
