throughout, and the subject did not suffer inconvenience. Of course the
full amount of calories was kept up; as each succeeding quantity of the
proteid was left off, it was replaced by a proper quantity of
non-nitrogenous food. These experiments were carried out in the usual
approved scientific manner. It may, however, be urged against any
generalised and positive conclusions as to the minimum quantity of proteid
required for the body, being drawn from such experiments, that the period
covered by them was much too short. A prolonged trial might have revealed
some obscure physiological derangement. We are quite justified in
concluding that the usual, so-called "standard dietaries" contain an
unnecessarily large proportion of proteid. In some practical dietaries, 50
grammes and under have seemed enough; but for the ordinary adult man, who
has been accustomed to an abundance of proteid, and whose ancestors have
also, it is probably advisable not to take less than 70 or 80 grammes per
day (2-1/2 to 3 ounces). If it is desired to try less, the diminution
should be very gradual, and a watch should be kept for any lessening of
strength.

Some comments may now be made upon the table of dietaries. That of the
London sewing girl contained 53 grammes of proteid, which should have been
ample, according to some of the authorities we have given; yet she was
badly nourished. The food was doubtless of bad quality, and it appears
deficient in carbo-hydrates; this latter is shown by the low number of
calories. The long hours and unhealthy conditions of work, and not a
deficiency of food constituents, is probably the cause of the bad health
of such persons. There is no reason to think the proteid insufficient,
although some persons have said as much. We have no particulars of the
German vegetarians, but the calories appear satisfactory. In the poor
German labourer's family the calories are too low. In Dr. T.R. Allinson's
experiment on a wheatmeal dietary, it will not do to assume that less than
82 grammes of proteid would have been insufficient. It is probable that a
smaller quantity of proteid would have been enough if the fat and
carbohydrates had been increased. The calories are below the usual
standard. In the succeeding example the calories are considerably higher,
being not far from the usual standard, yet 54 grammes of proteid sufficed.
It is a common error to place an undue value on the proteids to the extent
of overlooking the other constituents. Dr. Alexander Haig in "Diet and
Food," p. 8, cites the case of a boy aged 10, fed on 2-1/4 pints of milk
per day. The boy lost weight, and Dr. Haig is of opinion that the quantity
of milk was very deficient in proteid; more than twice as much being
required. 2-1/4 pints of milk contain about 45 grammes of proteid,
whereas, according to the usual figures (125 x 6/10) a boy of this age
requires 75 g. This quantity of 45 g. is however, higher, allowing for the
boy's age, than that in several of the dietaries we have given in our
table. A little consideration will show that Dr. Haig has overlooked the
serious deficiency of the milk in the other constituents, which accounts
for the boy's loss of weight. The quantity of milk contains only about 160
g. of total solid matter, whilst 400 g. is the necessary quantity. Milk is
too rich in proteid matter to form, with advantage, the sole food of a
human being. Human milk contains much less in proportion to the other
constituents.

The old doctrine enunciated by Justus von Liebig was that proteid matter
is the principal source of muscular energy or strength. He afterwards
discovered and acknowledged his error, and the subject has since been
thoroughly investigated. The makers of meat extracts and other foods,
either from their own ignorance of modern research or their wish to take
advantage of the lack of knowledge and prejudice of the public, call
proteid matter alone nourishment. The carbo-hydrates and fats are equally
entitled to be called nourishment.

Our reason for devoting so much space to the consideration of the quantity
of proteid matter required, is that in the opinion of many eminent writers
it is the crux of vegetarianism. They have stated that it is impossible to
obtain sufficient from vegetable foods alone, without consuming an
excessive quantity of carbo-hydrates. We will summarise the argument as
given in Kirke's Physiology, as edited by Morrant Baker, a standard work,
and which is repeated in Furneaux's "Animal Physiology," a book which is
much used in elementary science schools: "The daily waste from the system
amounts to, carbon 4,500 grains (or 300 grammes), and nitrogen, 300 grains
(or 20 grammes). Now let us suppose a person to feed on bread only. In
order to obtain the necessary quantity of nitrogen to repair this waste
he would have to eat nearly 4-1/4 lbs. daily.... He would be compelled to
take about double the quantity of carbon required in order to obtain the
necessary weight of nitrogen.... Next, let us suppose that he feeds on
lean meat only. Then, in order to obtain the necessary quantity of carbon,
he must eat no less than 6-1/2 lbs. daily.... In this case we notice a
similar waste of nitrogen, the removal of which would give an undue amount
of work to the organs concerned.... But it is possible to take such a
mixed diet of bread and meat as will supply all the requirements of the
system, and at the same time yield but little waste material." (These
extracts are from Furneaux, the next is from Kirke. The figures and
argument is the same in each, but we have chosen those sentences for
quotation which are the briefest and most suitable; certain calculations
being omitted.) "A combination of bread and meat would supply much more
economically what was necessary ... so that 3/4 lbs. of meat, and less
than 2 lbs. of bread would supply all the needful carbon and nitrogen with
but little waste. From these facts it will be plain that a mixed diet is
the best and most economical food for man; and the result of experience
entirely coincides with what might have been anticipated on theoretical
grounds only." Professor Huxley, in his "Elementary Physiology" uses
almost the same figures and argument.

The adoption of this high proteid or nitrogen figure would lead to some
ridiculous conclusions. One writer states that 18 eggs would contain
sufficient flesh forming substance for a day's ration, but a very much
larger quantity would be required to supply enough carbon. On the other
hand, Professor Church says that, no less than 70 lbs. of pears would have
to be eaten per day, to supply the necessary quantity of nitrogen;
although the carbon would be in excess. The curious may calculate the
proper quantity of each that would make a theoretically perfect dietary.
People are apt to assume that what they themselves eat, or what their
class, race, or nation eat, is the proper and necessary diet; at least as
far as the elementary constituents and quantities are concerned. The error
is in attempting to make a vegetarian diet, however contrary to common
sense and the experience of the greater part of the earth's inhabitants,
agree in composition with the ordinary lavish flesh dietary of the
well-to-do European. It is significant that John Bull is caricatured with
a large abdomen and a coarse, ruddy, if not inflamed face, indicative of
his hearty dining on flesh, coarse food and alcoholic drinks. An unhealthy
short lived individual. Even if we accept a high proportion of proteid, it
is possible to combine purely vegetable foods so as to give the required
quantity of the various constituents, without a superfluity of the
carbo-hydrates. In "Food Grains of India," Professor A.H. Church shows by
elaborate analyses and dietary tables, how this can be accomplished by
various combinations of cereals, pulses, etc. He takes Forster and Voit's
standard of 282 grains of nitrogen and 5,060 grains of carbon, with a
suitable deduction for the smaller weight of the Indians. In his examples
of daily rations he gives from 5 to 9 ounces of various beans, balanced
by the addition of the proper quantity of rice--4 to 16 ounces, and a
little oil. Such a large quantity of pulse appears to us excessive, and
would cause discomfort to most persons. We much doubt whether those
Indians who are strict vegetarians could consume such quantities.

Some valuable investigations were made on the diet of a family of
fruitarians, at the Californian Agricultural Experimental Station, July,
1900, by Professor M.E. Jaffa (bulletin 107). The proportion of food, both
proteid and carbo-hydrate used was surprisingly small. The research is
particularly important, as the diet was not an experimental one, tried
during a short period only; but that to which the family were accustomed.
The family consisted of two women and three children; they had all been
fruitarians for five to seven years, and made no change in their dietary
during the experiment. They only had two meals a day, the food being eaten
uncooked. The quantities of all the foods and other particulars are
detailed in the bulletin. The first meal was at 10-30 a.m., and always
consisted of nuts followed by fruits. The other meal was about 5 p.m.,
when they usually ate no nuts, substituting olive oil and honey. The nuts
used were almonds, Brazil, pine, pignolias and walnuts; the fresh fruits
were apples, apricots, bananas, figs, grapes, oranges, peaches and pears.
Other foods were dates, raisins, pickled olives, olive oil and honey. One
person (_b_) ate a little celery and tomatoes, and another (_c_) a little
cereal food. In the following table are given the average daily quantities
of the food constituents in grammes:--Proteids, fat, carbo-hydrate, crude
fibre, value in calories and nutrient ratio. The crude fibre is classed as
a carbo-hydrate and included in the calorie value, and also in calculating
the nutrient ratio.

                                        Pro. Fat. C'r'b. Fibre. Cal.  N. R.
Woman, age 33, weight 90    lbs. (_a_)   33   59   110    40    1300   8.6
Woman   "  30    "   104     "   (_b_)   25   57    72    27    1040   9.1
Girl    "  13    "    75-1/2 "   (_c_)   26   52   111    46    1235  10.5
Boy     "   9    "    43     "   (_d_)   27   56   102    50    1255  10.3
Girl    "   6    "    30-1/2 "   (_e_)   24   58    97    37    1190  11.1
Girl    "   7    "    34     "   (_ee_)  40   72   126     8    1385   7.4

The last research extended over ten days; the period during which each of
the other subjects was under observation was from 20 to 28 days.

(_a_) The tentative standard for a woman at light work calls for 90
grammes of proteids and 2,500 calories; it is thus seen that the quantity
of food eaten was far below that usually stated as being necessary. The
subject, however, was a very small woman, 5 feet in height, taking almost
no physical exercise. She believed, as do fruitarians generally, that
people need far less raw than cooked food. (_b_) The food eaten was even
less in quantity than in the previous dietary. One reason for this was the
fact that the subject was, for part of the time at least, under great
mental strain, and did not have her usual appetite. Even this small amount
of food, judging by her appearance and manner, seemed sufficient for her
needs, enabling her to do her customary housework and take care of her two
nieces and nephew, the subjects of the other experiments. (_c_) This girl
was given cereals and vegetables when she craved them, but her aunt says
she never looks nor feels so well when she has much starchy food, and
returns to her next meal of uncooked food with an increased appreciation
of its superiority. The commonly accepted dietary standard for a child 13
years old and of average activity, is not far from 90 grammes of proteids
and 2,450 calories, yet the girl had all the appearance of being well fed
and in excellent health and spirits. (_d_) During the 22 days of
experiment, there was an increase in weight of 2 pounds, due to the fact
that the family had been in straitened circumstances, and the food
provided was more abundant during the study. (_e_) The subject had been
very delicate as a baby. She was very small for her age, being 10 pounds
under the average weight, and 7 inches less than the average height. It is
interesting to note that her only gain in weight during the past year was
made during this dietary and the one immediately following. This was due
to her being urged to eat all she wanted, of what she most preferred, as
the food was provided by those making the study. The proteid is less than
the tentative standard for a child of 1 to 2 years old, but the subject
appeared perfectly well and was exceedingly active. She impressed one as
being a healthy child, but looked younger than her age. (_ee_) The subject
is the same as in the previous experiment (_e_), but after an interval of
8 months, her seventh birthday occurred during the time.

Professor Jaffa, who made the investigation, says:--"It would appear that
all the subjects were decidedly under-nourished, even making allowance for
their light weight. But when we consider that the two adults have lived
upon this diet for seven years, and think they are in better health and
capable of more work than they ever were before, we hesitate to pronounce
judgment. The three children had the appearance of health and strength.
They ran and jumped and played all day like ordinary healthy children, and
were said to be unusually free from colds and other complaints common to
childhood. The youngest child, and the only one who has lived as a
fruitarian almost from infancy was certainly undeveloped. She looked fully
two years younger than she was. Still, there are so many children who are
below the average in development, whose dietaries conform to the ordinary
standards, that it would be unfair to draw any conclusions until many more
such investigations are made."

The research shows that not only is there need of a revision of the
"standard" quantity of proteids, but also of the carbo-hydrates and fats.
It is generally said by those who have no practical experience amongst
vegetarians, that the latter require a much larger quantity of food than
do those who include flesh. The truth is that vegetarians eat less, often
much less. It is a common experience that vegetable food has a more
staying power, and a much longer period can be allowed between meals,
without the inconvenience that a flesh-eater, especially a flesh and
alcohol consumer, suffers. This is due, in part at least, to its less
stimulating character and its slower digestion. This fact has been shown
by the success of vegetarians in feats of strength and endurance, and
especially in the comparatively fresh condition in which they have
finished long walking, cycling, tennis, and other matches. Those who
attempt to prolong their powers of endurance by flesh extracts and
stimulating foods and drinks, usually finish in a very exhausted
condition. The superior endurance and recovery from wounds, when compared
with our English soldiers, of simple feeding men, such as the Zulus, Turks
and Japanese, has often been remarked. It is often said that vegetable
food, as it contains more fibre and is slower of digestion, taxes the
bodily organs more. If we attempted to eat uncooked, the more fibrous
vegetables, the grains, and unripe fruit, it would be quite true, but it
is not so of the ordinary food of vegetarians. A slowness of digestion
does not necessarily imply a greater strain on the system. As vegetables,
in particular, are for the longest period of time in the intestines, and
undergo the greater part of their digestion there, a gentle and slow
process of digestion in that organ may be more thorough. It may also
entail less expenditure of nervous energy than if the food had been of
such a stimulating character, as to be hurried along the digestive tract.
Digestion is for the most part a chemical process. If the food is of right
kind and quantity, thoroughly masticated, assisted if necessary by
cookery, and the digestive ferments are normal, digestion proceeds without
any sensible expenditure or energy or consciousness of its accomplishment.
There is nothing improbable in a flesh-eater requiring more food than a
simple living vegetarian. His food contains more proteid, and
excrementitious matter or extractives; these stimulate the digestive
organs and overtax the excretory ones. Generally, he is fond of
condiments, salt, and elaborate cooking, often also of alcohol; if a man,
probably of tobacco. He lives, as it were, at high pressure.

There are on record certain experiments which appear to indicate the
necessity of a large proportion of proteid, especially when the diet has
been of vegetable origin. These experiments are inconclusive, because the
subject has been accustomed to an ordinary flesh diet, perhaps also to
alcoholic drinks. The change to a comparatively non-stimulating diet
cannot be made, and the digestive organs expected to adapt themselves in
a few days. Perhaps not even a month or a year would suffice, for some
people, and yet that same diet would suit others. In some experiments the
food has not been appetising, the subject has even taken it with
reluctance or even loathing; an excess of some food has been eaten which
no vegetarian or anybody else would think of using in a practical dietary.

Sometimes persons on changing from an ordinary flesh dietary, lose weight
and strength. Generally, it is found that they have done little more than
discontinue the flesh, without substituting suitable foods. Authorities
think it is from a deficiency of proteid, and recommend an addition of
such foods as pulse, wheatmeal, oatmeal, eggs, milk, cheese, and such as a
reference to the table of analyses, show a low nutrient ratio figure. This
may also be due to an insufficiency of food eaten, owing to the
comparatively insipid character of the food and want of appetite. In
making a change to a vegetarian diet, such foods had better be taken that
are rather rich in proteid, and that approximate somewhat in their flavour
and manner of cooking to that used previously. A further change to a
simpler diet can afterwards gradually be made, according to conviction,
tastes and bodily adaptability. It must not be expected that a change,
even an ultimately very advantageous one, will always meet with an
immediate and proper response from digestive and assimilative organs which
have been accustomed for many years, perhaps by inheritance for
generations, to another manner of living. There are several preparations
produced from centrifugalised milk--that is milk from which the butter fat
has been removed, which consist chiefly of proteid. These have a value in
increasing the proteid contents of foods which may be thought deficient.
The addition of these manufactured products appear unnecessary, as most
of our food contains an abundance of proteid, and we can easily limit the
quantity or avoid altogether those that are thought defective.

The later apologists for a flesh diet have had to admit that it is not a
physiological necessity; but they have attempted to justify its use by a
theory somewhat as follows. It is admitted, that any excess of proteid
over that necessary for its special province of producing tissue, is
utilised as a force-producer, in a similar manner to the carbo-hydrates.
When the molecule is split up, and the carbon utilised, the nitrogen
passes off in the form of urea by the kidneys. The theory propounded is
that at the moment the nitrogen portion is liberated, it in some manner
stimulates the living protoplasm of the nerve cells in its immediate
neighbourhood to a higher state of activity. These views are given by Dr.
Hutchison in his book on "Food," but there are no substantial grounds for
them. It is only prompted by a wish to excuse a cherished habit. Sir
William Roberts, M.D., in "Dietetics and Dyspepsia," p. 16 says that "high
feeding consists mainly in a liberal allowance of meat, and in the
systematic use of alcoholic beverages, and that low-feeding consists in a
diet which is mainly vegetarian and non-alcoholic," and he proceeds to say
that the high-fed classes and races display, on the whole, a richer
vitality and a greater brain-power than their low-fed brethren. That "it
is remarkable how often we hear of eminent men being troubled with gout,
and gout is usually produced either by personal or ancestral
high-feeding." We can only spare room for a few remarks on this subject.
Intellectual and business ability brings wealth, wealth frequently leads
to the pleasures of the table, but such habits are detrimental to
sustained effort and clearness of mind. The children and grandchildren of
such high livers are usually common-place, intellectually, and of
deteriorated physique. The aristocracy who are generally high livers,
notwithstanding their great advantages of education, travel and leisure,
are not as a rule famed for their intellectual gifts. In the recent war
the frugal living Japanese soldier has proved himself the most enduring
and bravest in history; whilst the Japanese officers are more resourceful
and tactful than the wealthier, high-fed Russian officers, with their
aristocratic lineage. What is called high-feeding, is of the greatest
benefit to the doctors and the proprietors of remedies for digestive and
nervous disorders.

Food Adjuncts and Drugs.--In addition to the nutrients and the small
quantity of indigestible fibre of which we have already written, food
generally contains small quantities of substances which are difficult to
classify, and whose action on the body is but imperfectly understood. Many
of these possess pungent or strong odours and flavours. To them, various
fruits, meats, etc., owe much of their characteristic differences of
taste. When pure the proteids and starches are devoid of taste. Such oils
and fats as are generally eaten have also but little flavour, providing
they are free from rancidity and of good quality. The sugars differ from
the other nutrients in possessing a more or less decided taste. The free
vegetable acids also strongly affect the sense of taste, but they are only
consumed in small quantities.

A drug may be defined as a substance which modifies the functions of the
body or of some organ without sensibly imparting nourishment. This action
may be one of stimulation or of depression. A drug is taken for its
medicinal action, a food adjunct for its modifying action on food. It is
impossible to give a quite satisfactory definition, or to draw sharp
distinctions. For example, tea, coffee, alcohol and tobacco are sometimes
placed in one group, and sometimes in another, according to opinion of
their action and the definition of the terms food adjuncts, drugs and
poisons. The difference of grouping often depends upon intensity rather
than of kind of action. If taken frequently and not in quantity sufficient
to have a markedly medicinal action, such things are generally called food
adjuncts or supplementary foods, although much may be said in favour of a
different view. The volatile oils of mustard, caraway, cloves, etc., are
used in medicine; also the alkaloids of coffee and cocoa. Even honey is
used as a mild laxative for infants; that is, as a drug. The difference
between a drug and a poison is one only of degree. Some of the most
esteemed drugs have to be administered in very small quantities, or they
cause death; e.g., strychnine and morphine.

Classifications are necessary for methodical study, and for assisting the
memory in grasping large numbers of things which can be grouped together.
Classifications, however, are artificial, not due to natural lines of
demarkation, but according to man's knowledge and convenience; hence a
group is apt to approach and finally merge into another group, although on
first consideration they appeared quite distinct. The disregard of this
often leads to confusion and useless discussions.

Plants, like animals, as the result of tissue change, have certain used-up
or waste matters to get out of the way. Animals have special excretory
organs for the purpose; waste matter remains in the flesh and blood of
dead animals. In plants are found a large number of powerful volatile
oils, alkaloids, bitter resins, etc. Many of these are, in all
probability, excretory products of no assimilative value to the plant.
Certain volatile oils may attract insects, and in obtaining nectar from
flowers insects assist fertilisation. Agreeable volatile oils and
flavouring substances in fruits attract birds and animals. The eating of
the fruits cause the seeds, which are uninjured by passing through the
digestive system, to be disseminated over wide areas to the advantage of
the plant species. On the other hand, nauseous and poisonous alkaloids,
