Again, fineness of the particles results in their being speedily
heated to a uniform temperature, so that they do not serve as nuclei
for the condensation of the moisture existing in the furnace gas. The
calcined material, on reaching the lower end of the furnace, is
discharged on to the floor or on to a suitable "conveyer," and removed
to a convenient locality for cooling and subsequent grinding or
finishing. It, however, is not in the condition of hard, heavy
clinkers, such as are produced in the ordinary cement kiln, which
require special machinery for breaking up into smaller pieces before
being admitted between the millstones for the final process of
grinding; nor does it consist of an overburnt exterior and an
underburnt core or center portion; but it issues from the cylindrical
furnace in a condition resembling in appearance coarse gunpowder, with
occasional agglutinations of small friable particles readily reduced
to fine powder in an ordinary mill, requiring but small power to work,
and producing but little wear and tear upon the millstones. The
operation is continuous. The revolver or furnace, once started, works
on night and day, receiving the adjusted quantity of powdered material
at the upper or feed end, and delivering its equivalent in properly
burnt cement at the opposite end, thus effecting a great saving of
time, and preventing the enormous waste of heat and serious injury to
the brickwork, etc., incidental to the cooling down, withdrawing the
charge, and reloading the ordinary kiln.

Cement, when taken from the furnace, weighed 110 lb. per bushel.
Cement, when ground, leaving 10 percent. on sieve with 2,500 holes to
the inch, weighed 121 lb. per bushel, and when cold 118 lb. per
bushel. When made into briquettes, the tensile breaking strain upon
the square inch:

    At  4 days was       410 lb. per square inch.
    At  6 days  "        610  "   "     "     "
    At 14 days  "        810  "   "     "     "
    At 49 days  "        900  "   "     "     "
    At 76 days  "      1,040  "   "     "     "

A cylindrical furnace, such as the author has described, is capable of
turning out at least 20 tons of good cement per day of twenty-four
hours, with a consumption of about 3 tons of slack coal. It will be
readily understood that these furnaces can be worked more economically
in pairs than singly, as they can be so arranged that one producer may
furnish a sufficient quantity of gas for the supply of two cylinders,
and the same labor will suffice; but in order to provide for possible
contingencies the author advises that a spare gas producer and an
extra furnace should be in readiness, so that by a simple arrangement
of valves, etc., two cylinders may always be in operation, while from
any cause one may be undergoing temporary repairs, and by this means
any diminution in the output may be avoided.

The author considers it unnecessary here to discuss either the
advantages or the economy of fuel effected by the employment of gas
producers for such a purpose. These have been abundantly proved in
steel and glass making industries, where a saving of from 50 to 70 per
cent. of the fuel formerly employed has been made. Their cost is
small, they occupy little room, they can be placed at any reasonable
distance from the place where the gas is to be burnt; any laborer can
shovel the slack into them, and they do not require constant skilled
supervision. It is claimed by the author of this paper that the
following are among the many advantages derivable from the adoption of
this method of manufacturing Portland cement, as compared with the old
system:

    (1) Economy of space--the furnaces, with their appurtenances,
    requiring only about one-fourth the space of what would be
    occupied by the ordinary kilns for producing the same quantity
    of finished cement.

    (2) Continuous working, and consequent economy of fuel lost by
    cooling and subsequent reheating of the kiln walls.

    (3) Economy of repairs, which are of a simple and comparatively
    inexpensive character, and of much less frequent occurrence, as
    the continuous heat avoids the racking occasioned by the
    alternate heating and cooling.

    (4) Economy in first cost.

    (5) Economy in grinding, a friable granular substance being
    produced instead of a hard clinker, whereby crushers are quite
    abolished, and the wear and tear of millstones greatly
    reduced.

    (6) Economy of labor, the conveyance to and removal from, the
    revolving furnace being conducted automatically by mechanical
    elevators and conveyers.

    (7) Improved quality of the cement, from non-mixture with
    fuel, ash, or other impurities, and no overburning or
    underburning of the material.

    (8) Thorough control, from the facility of increasing or
    diminishing the flow of crushed slurry and of regulating the
    heat in the furnace as desirable.

    (9) Absence of smoke and deleterious gases.

It is well known that in some localities the materials from which
Portland cement is made are of such a powdery character that they have
to be combined or moulded into balls or bricks previous to calcination
in the ordinary way, thus entailing expense which would be entirely
obviated by the adoption of the patent revolving furnace, as has been
proved by the author in producing excellent cement with a mixture of
slag sand from the blast furnaces of the Cleveland iron district, with
a proper proportion of chalk or limestone, which, in consequence of
the friable nature of the compound, he was unable to burn in the
ordinary cement kiln, but which, when burnt in the revolving furnace,
gave the most satisfactory results. The cement so made possessed
extraordinary strength and hardness, and it has been a matter of
surprise that iron masters and others have not adopted such a means of
converting a waste material--which at the present time entails upon
its producers constant heavy outlay for its removal--into a
remunerative branch of industry by the expenditure of a comparatively
small amount of capital. The demand for Portland cement has increased
and is still increasing at a rapid ratio. It is being manufactured
upon a gigantic scale.

Great interests are involved; large sums of money are being expended
in the erection and maintenance of expensive plant for its production;
and the author submits that the development of any method which will
improve the quality and at the same time reduce the cost of
manufacture of this valuable material will tend to increase the
prosperity of one of our great national industries, and stimulate
commercial enterprise. Works are in progress for manufacturing cement
by this improved process, and the author trusts the time is not far
distant when the unsightly structures which now disfigure the banks of
some of our rivers will be abolished--the present cement kilns, like
the windmills once such a common feature of our country, being
regarded as curiosities of the past, and cement manufacturers cease to
be complained of as causing nuisances to their neighbors.

       *       *       *       *       *




MIX AND GENEST'S MICROPHONE TELEPHONE.


We illustrate in the annexed engraving the microphone-telephone
constructed by Messrs. Mix & Genest, of Berlin, which, after extended
trials, has been adopted in preference to others by the imperial
postal department of Germany. There are now more than 5,000 of these
instruments in use, and we need scarcely mention that the invention
has been patented in many countries.

In some microphones a rattling noise is frequently occasioned, which
borne along with the sound of the human voice causes an audible
disturbance in the telephone. The chief cause of these disturbances
may be ascribed to the fact that the carbon rollers in their journals,
rest loose in the flutings of the beam, which is fastened to the sound
plate. Owing to the shocks given to the entire apparatus, and
independent of the oscillations of the sound plate, they are set in
motion and roll to and fro in their bearings.

In microphones in which the sound plates are arranged vertically (as
shown in Fig. 2), these disturbances assume such a character that
there is no possibility of understanding the speaker, for in this case
the horizontally directed oscillations of the sound plate, _m_, cause
themselves a backward and forward motion on the part of the carbon
rollers without increasing or decreasing at the same time the lying-on
pressure of the roller journals, and by doing so bring the places of
contact one on the other, and thus occasion a conducting resistance of
greater or less force. This circumstance serves as an explanation of
the reason why the sound plates in Ader's microphones are not arranged
vertically, although this way of arranging them offers many advantages
over a horizontal or slightly inclined arrangement of the sound
plates. Speaking is more convenient in the vertical arrangement, and
moreover the plates can be fitted on to instruments better in this
way.

All the drawbacks just enumerated and found in Ader's microphones are
avoided in the apparatus made by Messrs. Mix & Genest. A sort of
braking contrivance operates on the carbon rollers in such a way as to
prevent their journals from lying on the lower points in the flutings
of the beams. Thus, for instance, if in a microphone with a horizontal
sound plate, as illustrated in Fig. 3, the carbon rollers are pressed
upward by outward force, it is evident that only a very trifling
rolling and disturbing motion can occur, and only small pieces of
carbon can be knocked off, which would act injuriously as a secondary
contact. The same may be said of the journals of microphones with
vertical sound plates, as represented in Fig. 2, when the carbon
rollers are pressed in the direction of the arrow, _p_, that is to
say, against the sound plate. In this case the journals, _a_, are
fixed in the flutings of the beams, _b_, in a direction given them by
the power and gravity operating on them, which is clearly represented
in the accompanying design, Fig. 2.

[Illustration: FIG. 1.
               FIG. 2.
               FIG. 3.
       THE MIX AND GENEST TELEPHONE]

In all such cases the regulating contrivance applied to brake the
carbon rollers in their motion has the result that only the
oscillations transmitted from the sound plate on to the contacts come
in operation, whereas disturbing mechanical shocks resulting from any
outward influences occasion very insignificant vibrations, which are
not perceptible in the telephone. The separate contacts thus form a
firm system with the sound plate, so that the former are influenced in
their motions and effects solely and alone by the shocks and
oscillations which operate direct on these sound plates. The roller
motion of the carbon is thus removed, and the distinctness of the
words spoken is greatly augmented.

The above Figs. 1 and 2 show the microphone in side view and in cross
section.

A metal ring, R (see Fig. 1), is fastened by means of the four screws,
_r_{1}_ _r_{2}_ _r_{3}_ _r_{4}_, on a wooden mouthpiece. In a recess of the
above ring is the diaphragm, M, which is provided on its outer edge
with an India rubber band and is held in position by the two clamps, _a_
and _a_{1}_. The diaphragm is cut out of finely fibered firwood and is
well lacquered to preserve it against dampness. On it there are two
carbon beams, _b_, and in the perforations of the latter are the
journals of the carbon rollers, _k_. The alterations in contact take
place in the touching points. The cross piece, _f_, that runs straight
across the carbon rollers serves as a braking contrivance, which is
regulated as may be necessary by the large projecting screws.

Fig. 3 shows the apparatus in cross section. T is the mouth piece, R
the metal ring, M the diaphragm, _f_ the breaking cross piece. On the
latter is a metal block fastened by means of two screws. On this metal
block is a soft elastic strip (d) of felt or similar material. The
letters _s_ and _s_ indicate the regulating screws for the braking
contrivance.

The excellent qualities of other microphones, in particular their
extreme sensibility for the very least impressions, are undeniable;
but it is just this sensibility that is the cause of the complaints
made by the public. In practical use this overgreat sensibility proves
to be a fault.

In the apparatus constructed by Messrs. Mix and Genest the well-known
deficiencies of other systems are avoided. The effect of the sound and
the distinctness of the human voice are clearer and far more
intelligible. One simple regulation of the microphone suffices for the
installation, for there is no danger of its getting out of order.
Owing to its peculiar construction, this new microphone is very firm
and solid, and for this very reason offers another advantage, namely,
the possibility of transmitting sound over very long distances. In the
competitive trials instituted by order of the imperial postal
department, apparatus of various systems and constructions were
subjected to tests, and the apparatus we are speaking of showed the
favorable results just mentioned. This microphone has overcome in
particular the difficulties connected with the using of combined lines
above and below ground, and with the aid of it the excellent
telephonic communication is carried on in Berlin, in which city the
telephone net is most extensive and complicated. At the same time this
microphone transmits the sound over long distances (up to 200 kilom.
even) in the most satisfactory manner. Another peculiar advantage of
this construction is that it exercises a very small inductive effect
on cables and free lines, and consequently the simultaneous speaking
on parallel lines causes but little disturbance.

After repeated trials made by the German imperial postal department
with the microphones constructed by Messrs. Mix and Genest, these
apparatus have been introduced in the place of the telephones and
Bell-Blake microphones hitherto used in the telephone service. At
present we understand there are about 8,000 of these apparatus in use.

       *       *       *       *       *




ELECTROLYSIS AND REFINING OF SUGAR.


Mr. G. Fahrig, of Eccles, Lancashire, has invented a new process of
refining sugar through electrolysis. The brown sugar is decolorized by
means of ozone produced by electric currents of high tension from a
dynamo. The electrodes consist of metal grills covered with platinum
or some other inoxidizable metal, and are placed in a vat with the
intervention of perforated earthenware plates. After being ground and
dried in hot air, the crude sugar is placed between the plate and the
grills, and the discharges passing between the electrodes produce
ozone, which separates the sugar from the coloring matter. To purify
the sugar still further, Mr. Fahrig dries it and places it in another
vat, with carbon or platinum conducting plates separated by a porous
partition. The sugar is placed on one side of this partition, and
water circulates on the other side.

The current from a dynamo of feeble tension is sent through the vat
between the plates. The water carries along the impurities separated
by the current, and the sugar is further whitened and refined.

[Illustration]

The accompanying figure shows a series of four vats arranged one above
another, in order to permit the water to circulate. Here _i_ and _h_
represent the plates connected with the poles of the dynamo through
the conductors, _f_ and _g_; _m_ represents the porous partition; L,
the spaces filled with sugar; and _l_, the compartments in which the
water circulates.--_La Lumiere Electrique._

       *       *       *       *       *

[THE ELECTRICIAN.]




A CURRENT METER.


We give a description of a meter we made in June, 1883. You will find
a cross section of the meter and also a printed dial we had made at
the time. We called it an ampere register, but no doubt we would give
it a better name to-day. The meter consisted of a glass tube, _c_,
both ends of which were fitted into two bent pieces of piping, D and
F, as shown. Through these bent tubes, D and F, passed the wires, a
and _b_, which were connected to the binding posts, A and B. The part
of the wire where it passed into the tubes was well insulated. At the
ends, _a'_ and _b'_, was connected the coil, R, which consisted simply
of a few turns of copper wire whose diameter was less than the leading
wires, _a_ and _b_. To the tube, D, was attached a square tube, E,
which had a little opening at the top so as to permit a small
undershot wheel, I, to revolve freely. This undershot wheel was well
pivoted and constructed very light. To the axis of this wheel was
connected another system of wheels with indicators, as shown, J. Now
the tubes, E and F, were connected to a reservoir, G. This reservoir
consisted of a square tank, in the inside of which were soldered in an
alternating manner square sheets of copper as shown in the drawing,
_g_ _g'_ _g''_ _g'''_ ... These sheets acted as diffusers. These
plates or sheets presented a very large surface. On the outside of the
tank, G, were also diffusers, _h_ _h'_ ... arranged all round and
presenting an appearance as if two books were open so as to form a
square with their covers, the leaves being the diffusers. The
diffusers on the outside were at right angles to those inside.

[Illustration: CROSS SECTION OF JEHL AND RUPP'S CURRENT METER.]

The action of the meter was thus: When a current passes through the
coil, R, it heats the liquid at the place, thus causing a circulation,
the warm liquid ascending while the cold liquid descends as shown by
the arrows. This circulation causes the undershot wheel to revolve,
and its revolutions are registered by the clockwork. The stronger the
current, the more the heat, and thus the more rapid the circulation.
The warm liquid once in the tank, which is of a reasonable size, will
impart its heat to all the diffusers. The surface of the glass tube,
etc., is very small in comparison to the surface of the tank. It will
be seen that the function of this apparatus is independent of the
outward temperature, for the motion of the liquid is due only to that
heat which is generated by the current. When the current does not
pass, it is evident that the liquid, at whatever temperature it may
be, does not circulate, as all parts are of the same temperature; but
the moment the current passes, a difference is produced, which causes
a circulation in proportion to the current. We may mention that we
tried various liquids, and give preference to pure olive oil. It will
also be seen that this meter is good for alternating currents. In
conclusion, we may remark that the tests we made gave satisfaction,
and we wanted to publish them, but that Mr. Jehl was called away to
fit up the Edison exhibit in the Vienna exhibition for the Societe
Electrique Edison of Paris. After the exhibition we began our work
upon our disk machine, and had almost forgotten our meter. The whole
apparatus is mounted on a base, K.

[Illustration: DIAL FACE.]

JEHL AND RUPP.
Bruenn, Sept. 26, 1887.

       *       *       *       *       *




STORAGE BATTERIES FOR ELECTRIC LOCOMOTION.[1]

  [Footnote 1: From a paper read before the National Electric Light
  Association, New York, August, 1887.]

By A. RECKENZAUN.


The idea of employing secondary batteries for propelling vehicles is
almost contemporaneous with the discovery of this method of storing
energy. To Mr. Plante, more than to any other investigator, much of
our knowledge in this branch of electrical science is due. He was the
first to take advantage of the action of secondary currents in voltaic
batteries. Plante is a scientist of the first grade, and he is a
wonderfully exact experimenter. He examined the whole question of
polarization of electrodes, using all kinds of metal as electrodes and
many different liquids as electrolytes, and during his endless
researches he found that the greatest useful effect was produced when
dilute sulphuric acid was electrolyzed between electrodes of metallic
lead.

A set of Plante's original cells was exhibited for the first time in
March, 1860, before the Paris Academy of Sciences. Scientists admired
and praised it, but the general public knew nothing of this great
discovery thus brought to notice. Indeed, at that period little
commercial value could be attached to such apparatus, since the
accumulator had to be charged by means of primary batteries, and it
was then well known that electrical energy, when produced by chemical
means in voltaic cells, was far too expensive for any purpose outside
the physical laboratory or the telegraph office.

It was twenty years after this exhibition at the Academy of Sciences
in Paris that public attention was drawn to the importance of storage
batteries, and that Mr. Faure conceived the idea of constructing
plates consisting of lead and oxides of lead. At that time the
advantages accruing through a system of electrical storage could be
fully appreciated, since electrical energy was already being produced
by mechanical means through the medium of dynamo-electric machines.

It was the dynamo machine which created the demand for the storage
battery, and the latter was introduced anew to the public at large
and to the capitalist with great pomp and enthusiasm. One of Faure's
accumulators was sent to Sir William Thomson, and this eminent
scientist in the course of experiments ascertained that a single cell,
weighing 165 lb., can store two million foot-pounds of energy, or one
horse power for one hour, and that the loss of energy in charging did
not exceed 15 per cent. These results appeared highly encouraging.
There we had a method of storing that could give out the greater part
of the energy put in. The immense development which the electric
transmission of energy was even at that early day expected to undergo
pointed to the fact that a convenient method of receiving large
quantities of transmitted energy, and of holding it in readiness until
wanted, must be of the highest importance. Numerous applications of
the Faure battery were at once suggested, and the public jumped to the
conclusion that a thing for which so many uses could be instantly
found must necessarily be a profitable investment, and plenty of money
was provided forthwith, not with the idea of commencing careful
experiments and developing the then crude invention, which would have
been the correct thing, but for manufacturing tons of accumulators in
their first and immature form.

I need not describe the disappointments which followed the first
unfulfilled hopes, nor repeat the criticism that was heaped upon the
heads of the early promoters. Those early hopes were untimely and
unreasonable. A thousand difficulties had to be overcome--scientific
difficulties and manufacturing difficulties. This invention, like most
others, had to go through steady historical developments and
evolution, and follow the recognized laws of nature, which are against
abnormal and instantaneous maturity. The period of maturity has also
been retarded by injudicious treatment, but the ultimate success was
inevitable. Great advances have been made within the last few years,
and I propose now to offer a few facts and figures relating to the
present state of the subject with reference to the application of
storage batteries to locomotive purposes. It is not within the
province of this paper to discuss all the different inventions of
secondary batteries nor to offer any suggestions with regard to
priority, therefore I will confine myself to general statements. I am
aware of the good work that was done in the United States by Kirchhoff
twenty-six years ago, and of the more recent work of Mr. Brush, of
Cleveland, Mr. Julien and others, but I am more particularly
acquainted with the recent achievements of the Electrical Accumulator
Company, who own the rights of the Electrical Power Storage Company,
of London. I have used the batteries of the latter company for
propelling electric boats and electric street cars. The first of the
boats was the Electricity, which was launched in September, 1882, and
