of boron and titanium had received most attention from inventors. The
nitride of boron, which is obtained by treating boracic acid with
carbon in the presence of nitrogen, when acted upon by steam, forms
boracic acid again and yields the whole of its nitrogen in the form of
ammonia, but the high temperature at which the first reaction takes
place, and the volatility of boracic acid in a current of steam, make
it impossible to utilize this reaction industrially.

There seemed to be a better chance for a process patented by M.
Tessier du Mothay, who proposed to bring a mixture of nitrogen and
hydrogen into contact with titanium nitride and thus to form ammonia
continuously. Titanium is the only element of which we know at present
several combinations with nitrogen, and the higher of these does, on
being acted upon by a current of hydrogen at an elevated temperature,
produce ammonia and a lower nitride of titanium; but this lower
nitride does not absorb nitrogen under any of the conditions under
which we tried it, which explains the fact that if we passed a current
of hydrogen and nitrogen over the higher nitride, we at first obtained
a quantity of ammonia corresponding to the quantity which the nitride
would give with hydrogen alone, but that the formation of ammonia then
ceased completely.

Thus far we had quite failed to get the nitrogen of the air into
action.

With the third class of processes, however, based upon the formation
in the first instance of cyanides, we found by our very first
experiments that the nitrogen of the atmosphere can be easily led into
combination. A few experiments showed that the cyanide of barium was
much more readily formed than any other cyanide; so we gave our full
attention from this time to the process for obtaining ammonia by means
of cyanide of barium invented by MM. Margueritte and Sourdeval. This
process consists in heating a mixture of carbonate of barium with
carbon in the presence of nitrogen, and subsequently treating the
cyanide of barium produced with steam, thus producing ammonia and
regenerating the carbonate of barium. A great difficulty in this
process is that the carbonate of barium fuses at high temperatures,
and when fused attacks fireclay goods very powerfully.

We found that this can be overcome by mixing the carbonate of barium
with a sufficient quantity of carbon and a small quantity of pitch,
and that in this way balls can be made which will not fuse, so that
they can be treated in a continuous apparatus in which the broken
briquettes can be charged from the top, and after treatment can be
withdrawn from the bottom.

We found that the formation of cyanides required a temperature of at
least 1,200 deg. C., and proceeded most readily at 1,400 deg. C., temperatures
which, although difficult to attain, are still quite within the range
of practical working, and we found no difficulty in obtaining a
product containing 30 per cent. of barium cyanide, corresponding to a
conversion into cyanide of 40 per cent. of the barium present.

We found, however, that the cyanide when exposed to the atmosphere at
a temperature above 300 deg. C. is readily destroyed under reformation of
carbonate of barium, so that it is absolutely necessary to cool it
down to this temperature before exposing it to the atmosphere, a fact
of great importance that had hitherto been overlooked.

The operation for producing ammonia and regenerating the carbonate of
barium by acting upon the cyanide with steam offers no difficulty
whatever, and if the temperature is not allowed to exceed 500 deg. C., the
results are quantitative. The regenerated carbonate of barium acts
actually better than the ground witherite used in the first instance,
and if care is taken that no impurities are introduced by the pitch
which is used to remake the briquettes and to replace the small amount
of carbon consumed at each operation, I see no reason why it should
not continue to act for a very long time.

The cyanide is not acted on by carbonic oxide, but carbonic acid
destroys it at high temperatures, so that it is not possible to
produce it by heating the briquettes directly in a flame free from
oxygen, but containing carbonic acid. The process has, therefore, to
be carried out in closed vessels, and I designed for this purpose the
following apparatus:

Clay retorts of moderate dimensions and thin walls are placed
vertically in a furnace, passing through the hearth as well as through
the arch of the furnace. These are joined at the bottom to cast iron
retorts of the same shape as the earthenware retort. Through a cast
iron mouthpiece on the top of the retort the material was introduced,
while in the cast iron retort below the material was cooled to the
necessary temperature by radiation and by the cold nitrogen gas
introduced into the bottom of it. The lower end of the cast iron
retort was furnished with an arrangement for taking out from time to
time small quantities of the material, while fresh material was in the
same proportion fed in at the top. As a source of nitrogen I used the
gases escaping from the carbonating towers of the ammonia-soda
process. The formation of cyanide of barium from barium carbonate,
carbon, and nitrogen absorbs a very large amount of heat--no less than
97,000 calories per equivalent of the cyanide formed--which heat has
to be transmitted through the walls of the retort. I therefore
considered it necessary to use retorts with very thin walls, but I did
not succeed in obtaining retorts of this description which would
resist the very high temperatures which the process requires, and for
this reason I abandoned these experiments. I was at that time not
acquainted with the excellent quality of clay retorts used in zinc
works, with which I have since experimented for a different purpose. I
have no doubt that with such retorts the production of cyanides by
this process can be carried out without great difficulty.

I believe that the process will prove remunerative for the manufacture
of cyanogen products, which, if produced more cheaply, may in the
future play an important role in organic synthesis, in the extraction
of noble metals, and possibly other chemical and metallurgical
operations.

The process certainly also offers a solution of the problem of
obtaining ammonia from the nitrogen of the atmosphere, but whether
this can be done with satisfactory commercial results is a question I
cannot at present answer, as I have not been able to secure the data
for making the necessary calculations.

I am the more doubtful about this point, as in the course of our
investigations I have found means to produce ammonia at small cost and
in great abundance from the immense store of combined nitrogen which
we possess in our coal fields.

Among the processes for obtaining ammonia from the nitrogen of the air
which we investigated, was one apparently of great simplicity,
patented by Messrs. Rickman and Thompson. These gentlemen state that
by passing air and steam through a deep coal fire, the nitrogen so
passed through is to a certain extent converted into ammonia. In
investigating this statement we found that the process described
certainly yields a considerable quantity of ammonia, but when we
burned the same coal at a moderate temperature by means of steam
alone in a tube heated from the outside, we obtained twice as much
ammonia as we had done by burning it with a mixture of air and steam,
proving in this case, as in all others, the source of the ammonia to
have been the nitrogen contained in the coal. The quantity of ammonia
obtained was, however, so large that I determined to follow up this
experience, and at once commenced experiments on a semi-manufacturing
scale to ascertain whether they would lead to practical and economic
results.

I came to the conclusion that burning coal by steam alone at a
temperature at which the ammonia formed should not be dissociated,
although it yielded more ammonia, would not lead to an economic
process, because it would require apparatus heated from the outside,
of great complication, bulk, and costliness, on account of the immense
quantity of raw material to be treated for a small amount of ammonia
obtainable.

On the other hand, if the coal could be burned in gas producers by a
mixture of air and steam, the plant and working of it would be simple
and inexpensive, the gas obtained could be utilized in the same way as
ordinary producer gas, and would pay to a large extent for the coal
used in the operation, so that although only one-half of the ammonia
would be obtained, it seemed probable that the result would be
economical.

I consequently constructed gas producers and absorbing plant of
various designs and carried on experiments for a number of years.
These experiments were superintended by Mr. G. H. Beckett, Dr. Carl
Markel, and, during the last four years, by Dr. Adolf Staub, to whose
zeal and energy I am much indebted for the success that has been
achieved. The object of these experiments was to determine the most
favorable conditions for the economic working of the process with
respect to both the cost of manufacture as well as the first cost and
simplicity of plant. The cost of manufacture depends mainly upon the
yield of ammonia, as the expenses remain almost the same whether a
large or a small amount of ammonia is obtained; the only other item of
importance is the quantity of steam used in the process. We found the
yield of ammonia to vary with the temperature at which the producer
was working, and to be highest when the producer was worked as cool as
was compatible with a good combustion of the fuel. The temperature
again depended upon the amount of steam introduced into the producer,
and of course decreased the more steam increased. We obtained the best
practical results by introducing about two tons of steam for every ton
of fuel consumed. We experimented upon numerous kinds of fuel, common
slack and burgy of the Lancashire, Staffordshire, and Nottinghamshire
districts. We found not much difference in the amount of nitrogen
contained in these fuels, which varied between 1.2 and 1.6 per cent.,
nor did we find much difference in the ammonia obtained from these
fuels if worked under similar conditions. Employing the quantity of
steam just named we recovered about half the nitrogen in the form of
ammonia, yielding on an average 0.8 per cent. of ammonia, equal to 32
kilos, of sulphate per ton of fuel. In order to obtain regular results
we found it necessary to work with a great depth of fuel in the
producers, so that slight irregularities in the working would not
affect results. Open burning kinds of slack do of course work with the
greater ease, but there is no difficulty in using a caking fuel, as
the low temperature at which the producers work prevents clinkering
and diminishes the tendency of such fuels to cake together.

The quantity of steam thus required to obtain a good yield of ammonia
is rather considerable, and threatened to become a serious item of
expense. Only one-third of this steam is decomposed, in its passage
through the producer, and two-thirds remain mixed with the gases which
leave the producer. My endeavors were consequently directed toward
finding means to recover this steam, and to return it to the
producers, and also to utilize the heat of the gases which leave the
producers with a temperature of 450 deg. to 500 deg. C., for raising steam for
the same purpose. The difficulties in the way of attaining this end
and at the same time of recovering, in a simple manner, the small
amount of ammonia contained in the immense volume of gas we have to
deal with, were very great. We obtain from one ton of coal 160,000
cubic feet of dry gas at 0 deg. C. and atmospheric pressure. The steam
mixed with this gas as it leaves the producer adds another 80,000
cubic feet to this, and the large amount of latent heat in this
quantity of steam makes the problem still more difficult. The
application of cooling arrangements, such as have been successfully
applied to blast furnace gases, in which there is no steam present,
and which depend upon the cooling through the metallic sides of the
apparatus, is here practically out of the question. After trying a
number of different kinds of apparatus, I have succeeded in solving
the problem in the following way:

The gases issuing from the producers are led through a rectangular
chamber partly filled with water, which is thrown up in a fine spray
by revolving beaters so as to fill the whole area of the chamber. This
water, of course, becomes hot; a certain quantity of it evaporates,
the spray produced washes all dust and soot out of the gases, and also
condenses the fixed ammonia. The water thus becomes, to a certain
degree, saturated with ammonia salts, and a certain portion of it is
regularly removed from the chamber and distilled with lime to recover
the ammonia.

[Illustration: Longitudinal Section of Plant for obtaining Ammonia
from Gas Producers.

Cross Section through Gas Producers.]

This chamber is provided with water lutes, through which the tar
condensed in it is from time to time removed. From this chamber the
gases, which are now cooled down to about 100 deg. C., and are loaded with
a large amount of water vapor, are passed through a scrubber filled
with perforated bricks, in which the ammonia contained in the gases is
absorbed by sulphuric acid. In this scrubber a fairly concentrated
solution of sulphate of ammonia containing 36 to 38 per cent. is used,
to which a small quantity of sulphuric acid is added, so that the
liquid leaving the scrubber contains only 2.5 per cent. of free acid.
This is necessary, as a liquid containing more acid would act upon the
tarry matter and produce a very dark-colored solution. The liquid
running from the scrubber is passed through a separator in which the
solution of sulphate of ammonia separates from the tar. The greater
portion of the clear liquid is, after adding a fresh quantity of acid
to it, pumped back through the scrubber. A certain portion of it is,
after treatment with a small quantity of heavy tar oils, which take
the tarry matter dissolved in it out, evaporated in conical lead-lined
pans furnished with lead steam coils, and which are kept constantly
filled by the addition of fresh liquor until the whole mass is thick.
This is then run out on a strainer and yields, after draining and
washing with a little water, a sulphate of ammonia of very fair
quality, which finds a ready sale. The mother liquor, which contains
all the free acid, is pumped back to the scrubber.

The gas on entering this scrubber contains only 0.13 volume per cent.
of ammonia, and on leaving the scrubber it contains not more than
one-tenth of this quantity. Its temperature has been reduced to
80 deg. C., and is fully saturated with moisture, so that practically no
condensation of water takes place in the scrubber. The gas is next
passed through a second scrubber filled with perforated wood blocks.
In this it meets with a current of cold water which condenses the
steam, the water being thereby heated to about 78 deg. C. In this scrubber
the gas is cooled down to about 40 deg.-50 deg. C., and passes from it to the
gas main leading to the various places where it is to be consumed. The
hot water obtained in this second scrubber is passed through a vessel
suitably constructed for separating the tar which is mixed with it,
and is then pumped through a third scrubber, through which, in an
opposite direction to the hot water, cold air is passed. This is
forced by means of a Roots blower through the scrubber into the
producer.

The air gets heated to about 76 deg. C. and saturated with moisture at
that temperature by its contact with the hot water, and the water
leaves this third scrubber cold enough to be pumped back through the
second scrubber. The same quantity of water is thus constantly used
for condensing the water vapor in one scrubber and giving it up to the
air in the other. In this way we recover and return to the producer
fully two-thirds of the steam which has been originally introduced, so
that we have to add to the air, which has thus been loaded with
moisture, an additional quantity of steam equal to only one-third of
the total quantity required before it enters the producer. This
additional quantity of steam, which amounts to 0.6 ton of steam for
every ton of fuel burnt, we obtain as exhaust steam from the engines
driving the blowers and pumps required for working the plant.

The gas producers which I prefer to use are of rectangular shape, so
that a number of them can be put into a row. They are six feet wide
and 12 feet long inside. The air is introduced and the ashes removed
at the two small sides of the producer which taper toward the middle
and are closed at the bottom by a water lute of sufficient depth for
the pressure under which the air is forced in, equal to about 4 inches
of water. The ashes are taken out from underneath the water, the
producers having no grate or fire bars at all. The air enters just
above the level of the water through a pipe connected with the blower.
These small sides of the producer rest upon cast iron plates lined to
a certain height with brickwork, and this brickwork is carried by
horizontal cast iron plates above the air entrance. In this way a
chamber is formed of triangular shape, one side of which is closed by
the ashes, and thus the air is distributed over the whole width of the
producer.

The gas is taken out in the middle of the top of the producer by an
iron pipe, and fuel charged in by hoppers on both sides of this pipe.
Between the pipe and the hoppers two hanging arches are put into the
producers a certain distance down, and the fuel is kept above the
bottom level of these hanging arches. This compels the products of
distillation, produced when fresh fuel is charged in, to pass through
the incandescent fuel between the two hanging arches, whereby the
tarry products are to a considerable extent converted into permanent
gas, and the coal dust arising from the charging is kept back in the
producer.

The details of construction of this plant will be easily understood by
reference to the diagrams before you.

The fuel we use is a common kind of slack, and contains, on an
average, 33.5 per cent. of volatile matter, including water, and 11.5
per cent. of ashes, leaving 55 per cent. of non-volatile carbon.

The cinders which we take out of the producer contain, on an average,
33 per cent. of carbon. Of this we recover about one-half by riddling
or picking, which we return to the producer. The amount of unburnt
carbon lost in the cinders is thus not more than 3 per cent. to 4 per
cent. on the weight of fuel used.

The gas we obtain contains, in a dry state, on an average, 15 per
cent. of carbonic acid, 10 per cent. of carbonic oxide, 23 per cent.
of hydrogen, 3 per cent. of hydrocarbons, and 49 per cent. of
nitrogen.

The caloric value of this gas is very nearly equal to 73 per cent. of
the caloric value of the fuel used, but in using this gas for heating
purposes, such as raising steam or making salt, we utilize the heat it
can give very much better than in burning fuel, as we can completely
burn it with almost the theoretical quantity of air, so that the
products of combustion resulting do not contain more than 1 to 2 per
cent. of free oxygen. Consequently the heat escaping into the chimney
is very much less than when fuel is burnt direct, and we arrive at
evaporating, by means of the gas, 85 per cent. of the water that we
would evaporate by burning the fuel direct, in ordinary fireplaces.

We have, however, to use a certain quantity of steam in the producers
and in evaporating the sulphate of ammonia liquors, which has to be
deducted from the steam that can be raised by the gas in order to get
at the quantity of available steam therefrom obtainable. The former
amounts, as already stated, to 0.6 ton, the latter to 0.1 ton of steam
per ton of fuel burnt, making a total of 0.7 ton. The gas obtained
from one ton of fuel evaporates 5.8 tons of water in good steam
boilers, working at a rate of evaporation of 50 to 55 tons per 24
hours under 90 lb. pressure. Deducting from this the 0.7 ton necessary
for working the plant leaves an available amount of steam raised by
the gas from one ton of fuel of 5.1 tons, equal to 75 per cent. of the
steam that we can obtain from the same fuel by hand firing.

In addition to the gas, we obtain about 3 per cent. of tar from the
fuel. This tar is very thick, and of little commercial value. It
contains only 4 per cent. of oils volatile below 200 deg. C., and 38 per
cent. of oils of a higher boiling point, consisting mostly of creosote
oils very similar to those obtained from blast furnaces; and only
small quantities of anthracene and paraffin wax.

I have made no attempts to utilize this tar except as fuel. It
evaporates nearly twice as much water as its weight of coal, and we
have thus to add its evaporative efficiency to that of the gas given
above, leading to a total of about 80 per cent. of the evaporative
efficiency of the fuel used in the producers. The loss involved in
gasifying the fuel to recover the ammonia therefrom amounts thus to 20
per cent. of the fuel used. This means that, where we have now to burn
100 tons of fuel, we shall have to burn 125 tons in the producers in
order to obtain ammonia equal to about half the nitrogen contained
therein. Our actual yield of ammonia on a large scale amounting on an
average to 32 kilos., equal to 70.6 lb. per ton of fuel, 125 tons of
fuel will turn out 4 tons of sulphate of ammonia. We thus consume 6.25
tons of fuel for every ton of sulphate obtained, or nearly the same
quantity as is used in producing a ton of caustic soda by the Le Blanc
process--a product not more than half the value of ammonium sulphate.
At present prices in Northwich this fuel represents a value of 35s. If
we add to this the extra cost of labor over and above the cost of
burning fuel in ordinary fireplaces, the cost of sulphuric acid, bags,
etc., we come to a total of 4l. 10s. to 5l. per ton of sulphate of
ammonia, which at the present selling price of this article, say 12l.
per ton, leaves, after a liberal allowance for wear and tear of plant,
an ample margin of profit. With a rise in the price of fuel, this
margin, however, rapidly decreases, and the working of the process
will, of course, be much more expensive on a small scale, as will also
be the cost of the plant, which under all circumstances is very
considerable. The great advantages incidental to this process over and
above the profit arising from the manufacture of sulphate of ammonia,
viz., the absolute impossibility of producing smoke and the great
regularity of the heating resulting from the use of gas, are,
therefore, as far as I can see for the present, only available for
large consumers of cheap fuel.

We have tried many experiments to produce hydrochloric acid in the
producers, with the hope of thereby increasing the yield of ammonia,
as it is well known that ammonium chloride vapor, although it consists
of a mixture of ammonia gas and hydrochloric acid gas, is not at all
dissociated at temperatures at which the dissociation of ammonia alone
has already taken place to a considerable extent.

I had also hoped that I might in this way produce the acid necessary
to combine with the ammonia at very small cost. For this purpose we
moistened the fuel used with concentrated brine, and also with the
waste liquors from the ammonia soda manufacture, consisting mainly of
chloride of calcium; and we also introduced with the fuel balls made
by mixing very concentrated chloride of calcium solution with clay,
which allowed us to produce a larger quantity of hydrochloric acid in
the producer than by the other methods.

We did in this way succeed in producing hydrochloric acid sometimes
less and sometimes more than was necessary to combine with the
ammonia, but we did not succeed in producing with regularity the exact
amount of acid necessary to neutralize the ammonia. When the ammonia
was in excess, we had therefore to use sulphuric acid as before to
absorb this excess, and we were never certain that sometimes the
hydrochloric acid might not be in excess, which would have
necessitated to construct the whole plant so that it could have
resisted the action of weak hydrochloric acid--a difficulty which I
have not ventured to attack. The yield of ammonia was not in any case
increased by the presence of the hydrochloric acid. This explains
itself if we consider that there is only a very small amount of
ammonia and hydrochloric acid diffused through a very large volume of
other gases, so that the very peculiar protective action which the
hydrochloric acid does exercise in retarding the dissociation of
ammonia in ammonium chloride vapor, where an atom of ammonia is always
in contact with an atom of hydrochloric acid, will be diminished
almost to zero in such a dilute gas where the atoms of hydrochloric
acid and ammonia will only rarely come into immediate contact with
each other.

When we burnt coke by a mixture of air and steam in presence of a
large excess of hydrochloric acid, the yield of ammonia certainly was
thereby considerably increased, but such a large excess cannot be used
on an industrial scale. I have therefore for the present to rest
satisfied with obtaining only half the nitrogen contained in the fuel
in the form of ammonia.

The enormous consumption of fuel in this country--amounting to no less
than 150 million tons per annum--would at this rate yield as much as
five million tons of sulphate of ammonia a year, so that if only
one-tenth of this fuel would be treated by the process, England alone
could supply the whole of the nitrogenous compounds, sulphate of
ammonia, and nitrate of soda at present consumed by the Old World. As
the process is especially profitable for large consumers of fuel
situated in districts where fuel is cheap, it seems to me particularly
suitable to be adopted in this country. It promises to give England
the privilege of supplying the Old World with this all-important
fertilizer, and while yielding a fair profit to the invested capital
and finding employment for a considerable number of men, to make us,
last not least, independent of the New World for our supply of so
indispensable a commodity.

Before leaving my subject, I will, if you will allow me, give you in a
few words a description of two other inventions which have been the
outcome of this research. While looking one day at the beautiful,
almost colorless, flame of the producer gas burning under one of our
boilers, it occurred to me that a gas so rich in hydrogen might be
turned to better use, and that it might be possible to convert it
direct into electricity by means of a gas battery.

You all know that Lord Justice Grove showed, now fifty years ago, that
two strips of platinum partly immersed in dilute sulphuric acid, one
of which is in contact with hydrogen and the other with oxygen,
produce electricity. I will not detain you with the many and varied
forms of gas batteries which Dr. Carl Langer (to whom I intrusted this
investigation) has made and tried during the last four years, in order
to arrive at the construction of a gas battery which would give a
practical result, but I will call your attention to the battery before
me on the table, which is the last result of our extended labors in
this direction, and which we hope will mark a great step in advance in
the economic production of electricity.

The distinguishing feature of this battery is that the electrolyte is
not employed as a mobile liquid, but in a quasi-solid form, and it is,
therefore, named dry gas battery. It consists of a number of elements,
which are formed of a porous diaphragm of a non-conducting material
(in this instance plaster of Paris), which is impregnated with dilute
sulphuric acid. Both sides of this diaphragm are covered with very
fine platinum leaf perforated with very numerous small holes, and over
this a thin film of platinum black. Both these coatings are in contact
with frameworks of lead and antimony, insulated one from the other,
which conduct the electricity to the poles of the battery.

A number of these elements are placed side by side, with
non-conducting frames intervening, so as to form chambers through
which the hydrogen gas is passed along one side of the element and air
along the other.

This peculiar construction allows us to get a very large amount of
duty from a very small amount of platinum. One of the batteries before
you, consisting of seven elements, with a total effective surface of
half a square meter, contains 21/2 grammes of platinum leaf and 7
grammes of platinum black, a total of 91/2 grammes of platinum, and
produces a current of 2 amperes and 5 volts, or 10 watts, when the
outer resistance is properly adjusted. This current is equal to nearly
50 per cent. of the total energy obtainable from the hydrogen absorbed
in the battery.

In order to maintain a constant current, we have from time to time
(say once an hour) to interchange the gases, so as to counteract the
disturbing influence produced by the transport of the sulphuric acid
gas from one side of the diaphragm to the other. This operation can
easily be performed automatically by a commutator worked by a clock.
