bringing out unfavorable factors in a situation. A man in optimistic
mood can ignore them. But no awkward situation is likely to be
remedied while any of its elements are neglected.

Calhoun dourly considered the situation of the people of the planet
Dara, which it was his job as a Med Service man to remedy or at least
improve. Those people were marked by patches of blue pigment as an
inherited consequence of a plague of three generations past. Because
of the marking, which it was easy to believe a sign of continuing
infection, they were hated and dreaded by their neighbors. Dara was a
planet of pariahs--excluded from the human race by those who feared
them.

And now there was famine on Dara for the second time, and they were of
no mind to starve quietly. There was food on the planet Orede,
monstrous herds of cattle without owners. It was natural enough for
Darians to build a ship or ships and try to bring food back to its
starving people. But that desperately necessary enterprise had now
roused Weald to a frenzy of apprehension.

Weald was, if possible, more hysterically afraid of blueskins than
ever before, and even more implacably the enemy of the starving
planet's population. Weald itself prospered. Ironically, it had such
an excess of foodstuffs that it stored them in unneeded spaceships in
orbits about itself.

Hundreds of thousands of tons of grain circled Weald in sealed-tight
hulks, while the people of Dara starved and only dared try to
steal--if it could be called stealing--some of the innumerable wild
cattle of Orede.

The blueskins on Orede could not trust Calhoun, so they pretended not
to hear. Or maybe that didn't hear. They'd been abandoned and betrayed
by all of humanity off their world. They'd been threatened and
oppressed by guardships in orbit about them, ready to shoot down any
spacecraft they might send aloft....

So Calhoun brooded, while Murgatroyd presently yawned and climbed to
his cubbyhole and curled up to sleep with his furry tail carefully
adjusted over his nose.

A long time later Calhoun heard small sounds which were not normal on
a Med Ship in overdrive. They were not part of the random noises
carefully generated to keep the silence of the ship endurable. Calhoun
raised his head. He listened sharply. No sound could come from
outside.

He knocked on the door of the sleeping cabin. The noises stopped
instantly.

"Come out," he commanded through the door.

"I'm--I'm all right," said Maril's voice. But it was not quite steady.
She paused. "Did I make a noise? I was having a bad dream."

"I wish," said Calhoun, "that you'd tell me the truth just
occasionally! Come out, please!"

There were stirrings. After a little it opened and Maril appeared. She
looked as if she'd been crying. She said, quickly, "I probably look
queer, but it's because I was asleep."

"To the contrary," said Calhoun, fuming. "You've been lying awake
crying. I don't know why. I've been out here wishing I could, because
I'm frustrated. But since you aren't asleep maybe you can help me with
my job. I've figured some things out. For some others I need facts.
Will you give them to me?"

She swallowed. "I'll try."

"Coffee?" he asked.

Murgatroyd popped his head out of his miniature sleeping cabin.

"_Chee?_" he asked interestedly.

"Go back to sleep!" snapped Calhoun.

He began to pace back and forth.

"I need to know something about the pigment patches," he said jerkily.
"Maybe it sounds crazy to think of such things now--first things
first, you know. But this is a first thing! So long as Darians don't
look like the people of other worlds, they'll be believed to be
different. If they look repulsive, they'll be believed to be evil.

"Tell me about those patches. They're different sizes and different
shapes and they appear in different places. You've none on your face
or hands, anyhow."

"I haven't any at all," said the girl reservedly.

"I thought--"

"Not everybody," she said defensively. "Nearly, yes. But not all. Some
people don't have them. Some people are born with bluish splotches on
their skin, but they fade out while they're children. When they grow
up they're just like the people of Weald or any other world. And their
children never have them."

Calhoun stared.

"You couldn't possibly be proved to be a Darian, then?"

She shook her head. Calhoun remembered, and started the coffee.

"When you left Dara," he said, "you were carried a long, long way, to
some planet where they'd practically never heard of Dara, and where
the name meant nothing. You could have settled there, or anywhere else
and forgotten about Dara. But you didn't. Why not, since you're not a
blueskin?"

"But I am!" she said fiercely. "My parents, my brothers and sisters,
and Korvan--"

Then she bit her lip. Calhoun took note but did not comment on the
name she'd mentioned.

"Then your parents had the splotches fade, so you never had them," he
said absorbedly. "Something like that happened on Tralee, once!
There's a virus, a whole group of virus particles! Normally we humans
are immune to them. One has to be in terrifically bad physical
condition for them to take hold and produce whatever effects they do.
But once they're established they're passed on from mother to child.
And when they die out it's during childhood, too!"

He poured coffee for the two of them. Murgatroyd swung down to the
floor and said, impatiently, "_Chee! Chee! Chee!_"

Calhoun absently filled Murgatroyd's tiny cup and handed it to him.

"But this is marvellous!" he said exuberantly. "The blue patches
appeared after the plague, didn't they? After people recovered--when
they recovered?"

Maril stared at him. His mind was filled with strictly professional
considerations. He was not talking to her as a person. She was purely
a source of information.

"So I'm told," said Maril reservedly. "Are there any more humiliating
questions you want to ask?"

He gaped at her. Then he said ruefully, "I'm stupid, Maril, but you're
touchy. There's nothing personal--"

"There is to me!" she said fiercely. "I was born among blueskins, and
they're of my blood, and they're hated and I'd have been killed on
Weald if I'd been known as ... what I am! And there's Korvan, who
arranged for me to be sent away as a spy and advised me to do just
what you said: abandon my home world and everybody I care about!
Including him! It's personal to me!"

Calhoun wrinkled his forehead helplessly.

"I'm sorry," he repeated. "Drink your coffee!"

"I don't want it," she said bitterly. "I'd like to die!"

"If you stay around where I am," Calhoun told her, "you may get your
wish. All right, there'll be no more questions."

She turned and moved toward the door to the cabin. Calhoun looked
after her.

"Maril."

"What?"

"Why were you crying?"

"You wouldn't understand," she said evenly.

Calhoun shrugged his shoulders almost up to his ears. He was a
professional man. In his profession he was not incompetent. But there
is no profession in which a really competent man tries to understand
women. Calhoun, annoyed, had to let fate or chance or disaster take
care of Maril's personal problems. He had larger matters to cope with.

But he had something to work on, now. He hunted busily in the
reference tapes. He came up with an explicit collection of information
on exactly the subject he needed. He left the control room to go down
into the storage areas of the Med Ship's hull. He found an ultra
frigid storage box, whose contents were kept at the temperature of
liquid air.

He donned thick gloves, used a special set of tongs, and extracted a
tiny block of plastic in which a sealed-tight phial of glass was
embedded. It frosted instantly he took it out, and when the storage
box was closed again the block was covered with a thick and opaque
coating of frozen moisture.

He went back to the control room and pulled down the panel which made
available a small-scale but surprisingly adequate biological
laboratory. He set the plastic block in a container which would raise
it very, very gradually to a specific temperature and hold it there.
It was, obviously, a living culture from which any imaginable quantity
of the same culture could be bred. Calhoun set the apparatus with
great exactitude.

"This," he told Murgatroyd, "may be a good day's work. Now I think I
can rest."

Then, for a long while, there was no sound or movement in the Med
Ship. The girl may have slept, or maybe not. Calhoun lay relaxed in a
chair which at the touch of a button became the most comfortable of
sleeping places. Murgatroyd remained in his cubbyhole, his tail curled
over his nose.

There were comforting, unheard, easily dismissable murmurings now and
again. They kept the feeling of life alive in the ship. But for such
infinitesimal stirrings of sound, carefully recorded for this exact
purpose, the feel of the ship would have been that of a tomb.

But it was quite otherwise when another ship-day began with the taped
sounds of morning activities as faint as echoes but nevertheless
establishing an atmosphere of their own.

Calhoun examined the plastic block and its contents. He read the
instruments which had cared for it while he slept. He put the
block--no longer frosted--in the culture microscope and saw its
enclosed, infinitesimal particles of life in the process of
multiplying on the food that had been frozen with them when they were
reduced to the spore condition. He beamed. He replaced the block in
the incubation oven and faced the day cheerfully.

Maril greeted him with great reserve. They breakfasted, with
Murgatroyd eating from his own platter on the floor, a tiny cup of
coffee alongside.

"I've been thinking," said Maril evenly. "I think I can get you a
hearing for whatever ideas you may have to help Dara."

"Kind of you," murmured Calhoun.

In theory, a Med Service man had all the authority needed for this or
any other emergency. The power to declare a planet in quarantine, so
cutting it off from all interstellar commerce, should be enough to
force cooperation from any world's government. But in practice Calhoun
had exactly as much power as he could exercise.

And Weald could not think straight where blueskins were concerned, and
certainly the authorities on Dara could not be expected to be
levelheaded. They had a history of isolation and outlawry, and long
experience of being regarded as less than human. In cold fact, Calhoun
had no power at all.

"May I ask whose influence you'll exert?" asked Calhoun.

"There's a man," said Maril reservedly, "who thinks a great deal of
me. I don't know his present official position, but he was certain to
become prominent. I'll tell him how you've acted up to now, and your
attitude, and of course that you're Med Service. He'll be glad to help
you, I'm sure."

"Splendid!" said Calhoun, nodding. "That will be Korvan."

She started. "How did you know?"

"Intuition," said Calhoun dryly. "All right. I'll count on him."

But he did not. He worked in the tiny biological lab all that ship-day
and all the next. The girl was very quiet. Murgatroyd tried to enter
into pretended conversation with her, but she was not able to match
his pretense.

On the ship-day after, the time for breakout approached. While the
ship was practically a world all by itself, it was easy to look
forward with confidence to the future. But when contact and, in a
fashion, conflict with other and larger worlds loomed nearer,
prospects seemed less bright. Calhoun had definite plans, now, but
there were so many ways in which they could be frustrated.

Calhoun sat down at the control board and watched the clock.

"I've got things lined up," he told Maril, "if only they work out. If
I can make somebody on Dara listen, which is unlikely, and follow my
advice, which they probably won't; and if Weald doesn't get the ideas
it probably will get; and isn't doing what I suspect it is--why,
maybe something can be done."

"I'm sure you'll do your best," said Maril politely.

Calhoun managed to grin. He watched the clock. There was no sensation
attached to overdrive travel except at the beginning and the end. It
was now time for the end. He might find most anything having happened.
His plans might immediately be seen to be hopeless. Weald could have
sent ships to Dara, or Dara might be in such a state of
desperation....

As it turned out, Dara was desperate. The Med Ship came out nearly a
light-month from the sun about which the planet Dara revolved. Calhoun
went into a short hop toward it. Then Dara was on the other side of
the blazing yellow star. It took time to reach it.

He called down, identifying himself and the ship and asking for
coordinates so his ship could be brought to ground. There was
confusion, as if the request were so unusual that the answers were not
ready. The grid, too, was on the planet's night side. Presently the
ship was locked onto by the grid's force-fields. It went downward.

Calhoun saw that Maril sat tensely, twisting her fingers within each
other, until the ship actually touched ground.

Then he opened the exit port--and faced armed men in the darkness,
with blast-rifles trained on him. There was a portable cannon trained
on the Med Ship itself.

"Come out!" rasped a voice. "If you try anything you get blasted! Your
ship and its contents are seized by the planetary government!"

       *       *       *       *       *




5


It seemed that the smell of hunger was in the air. The armed men were
emaciated. Lights came on, and stark, harsh shadows lay black upon the
ground. Calhoun's captors were uniformed, but the uniforms hung
loosely upon them. Where the lights struck upon their faces, their
cheeks were hollow. They were cadaverous. And there were the splotches
of pigment of which Calhoun had heard.

The man nearest the Med Ship's port had a monstrous, irregular
dull-blue marking over half of one side of his face and up upon his
forehead. The man next to him had a blue throat. The next man again
was less marked, but his left ear was blue and there was what seemed a
splashing of the same color on the skin under his hair.

The leader of the truculent group--it might have been a firing
squad--made an imperious gesture with his hand. It was blue, except
for two fingers which in the glaring illumination seemed whiter than
white.

"Out!" said that man savagely. "We're taking over your stock of food.
You'll get your share of it, like everybody else, but--"

Maril spoke over Calhoun's shoulder. She uttered a cryptic sentence or
two. It should have amounted to identification but there was
skepticism in the armed party.

"Oh, you're one of us, eh?" said the guard leader sardonically.
"You'll have a chance to prove that. Come out of there!"

Calhoun spoke abruptly, "This is a Med Ship," he said. "There are
medicines and bacterial culture inside it. They shouldn't be meddled
with. Here on Dara you've had enough of plagues!"

The man with the blue hand said as sardonically as before, "I said the
government was taking over your ship! It won't be looted. But you're
not taking a full cargo of food away! In fact, it's not likely you're
leaving!"

"And I want to speak to someone in authority," snapped Calhoun. "We've
just come from Weald." He felt bristling hatred all about him as he
named Weald. "There's tumult there. They're talking about dropping
fusion-bombs here. It's important that I talk to somebody with the
authority to take a few sensible precautions!"

He descended to the ground. There was a panicky "_Chee! Chee!_" from
behind him, and Murgatroyd came dashing to swarm up his body and cling
apprehensively to his neck.

"What's that?"

"A _tormal_" said Calhoun. "He's not a pet. Your medical men will know
something about him. This is a Med Ship and I'm a Med Ship man, and
he's an important member of the crew. He's a Med Ship _tormal_ and he
stays with me!"

The man with the blue hand said harshly, "There's somebody waiting to
ask you questions. Here!"

A groundcar came rolling out from the side of the landing-grid
enclosure. The groundcar ran on wheels, and wheels were not much used
on modern worlds. Dara was behind the times in more ways than one.

"This car will take you to Defense and you can tell them anything you
want. But don't try to sneak back in this ship! It'll be guarded!"

The groundcar was enclosed, with room for a driver and the three from
the Med Ship. But armed men festooned themselves about its exterior
and it went bumping and rolling to the massive ground-layer girders of
the grid. It rolled out under them and onto a paved highway. It picked
up speed.

There were buildings on either side of the road, but few showed
lights. This was night, and the men at the landing-grid had set a
pattern of hunger, so that the silence and the dark buildings did not
seem a sign of tranquility and sleep, but of exhaustion and despair.

The highway lamps were few, by comparison with other inhabited worlds,
and the groundcar needed lights of its own to guide its driver over a
paved surface that needed repair. By those moving lights other
depressing things could be seen: untidiness, buildings not kept up to
perfection, evidences of apathy, the road, which hadn't been cleaned
lately, litter here and there.

Even the fact that there were no stars added to the feeling of
wretchedness and gloom and, ultimately, of hunger.

Maril spoke nervously to the driver.

"The famine isn't any better?"

He moved his head in negation, but did not speak. There was a splotch
of blue pigment at the back of his neck. It extended upward into his
hair.

"I left two years ago," said Maril. "It was just beginning then.
Rationing hadn't started."

The driver said evenly, "There's rationing now!"

The car went on and on. A vast open space appeared ahead. Lights about
its perimeter seemed few and pale.

"Everything seems worse. Even the lights."

"Using all the power," said the driver, "to warm up ground to grow
crops where it ought to be winter. Not doing too well, either."

Calhoun knew, somehow, that Maril moistened her lips.

"I was sent," she explained to the driver, "to go ashore on Trent and
then make my way to Weald. I mailed reports of what I found out back
to Trent. Somebody got them back to here whenever it was possible."

The driver said, "Everybody knows the man on Trent disappeared. Maybe
he got caught, maybe somebody saw him without make-up. Or maybe he
just quit being one of us. What's the difference? No use!"

Calhoun found himself wincing a little. The driver was not angry. He
was hopeless. But men should not despair. They shouldn't accept
hostility from those about them as a device of fate for their
destruction.

Maril said quickly to Calhoun, "You understand? Dara's a heavy-metals
planet. There aren't many light elements in our soil. Potassium is
scarce. So our ground isn't very fertile. Before the Plague we traded
metals and manufactured products for imports of food and potash. But
since the Plague we've had no off-planet commerce. We've been
quarantined."

"I gathered as much," said Calhoun. "It was up to Med Service to see
that that didn't happen. It's up to Med Service now to see that it
stops."

"Too late now for anything," said the driver. "Whatever Med Service
may be! They're talking about cutting down our population so there'll
be food enough for some to live. There are two questions about it. One
is who's to be kept alive, and the other is why."

The groundcar aimed now for a cluster of faintly brighter lights on
the far side of the great open space. They enlarged as they grew
nearer. Maril said hesitantly, "There was someone, Korvan--" Calhoun
didn't catch the rest of the name. Maril said hesitantly, "He was
working on food plants. I thought he might accomplish something...."

The driver said caustically, "Sure! Everybody's heard about him! He
came up with a wonderful thing! He and his outfit worked out a way to
process weeds so they can be eaten. And they can. You can fill your
belly and not feel hungry, but it's like eating hay. You starve just
the same. He's still working. Head of a government division."

The groundcar passed through a gate. It stopped before a lighted door.
The armed men hanging to its outside dropped off. They watched Calhoun
closely as he stepped out with Murgatroyd riding on his shoulder.

Minutes later they faced a hastily summoned group of officials of the
Darian government. For a ship to land on Dara was so remarkable an
event that it called practically for a cabinet meeting. And Calhoun
noted that they were no better fed than the guards at the spaceport.

They regarded Calhoun and Maril with oddly burning, eyes. It was, of
course, because the two of them showed no signs of hunger. They
obviously had not been on short rations. Darians had this, now, to
increase a hatred which was inevitable anyhow, directed at all peoples
off their own planet.

"My name is Calhoun," said Calhoun briskly. "I've the usual Med
Service credentials. Now--"

He did not wait to be questioned. He told them of the appalling state
of things in the Twelfth Sector of the Med Service, so that men had
been borrowed from other sectors to remedy the intolerable, and he was
one of them. He told of his arrival at Weald and what had happened
there, from the excessively cautious insistence that he prove he was
not a Darian, to the arrival of the death-ship from Orede.

He was giving them the news affecting them, as they had not heard it
before. He went on to tell of his stop at Orede and his purpose, and
his encounter with the men he found there. When he finished there was
silence. He broke it.

"Now," he said, "Maril's an agent of yours. She can add to what I've
told you. I'm Med Service. I have a job to do here to carry out what
wasn't done before. I should make a planetary health inspection and
make recommendations for the improvement of the state of things. I'll
be glad if you'll arrange for me to talk to your health officials.
Things look bad, and something should be done."

Someone laughed without mirth.

"What will you recommend for long-continued undernourishment?" he
asked derisively. "That's our health problem!"

