pleasing effect. The agreeable contrast between the natural grain of
the wood and the deeper shade of the bands and mouldings is all that
is necessary to harmonize with the other parts of the interiors of
certain classes of cars--smoking and dining cars, for example. But in
the case of parlor and dining-room cars, the decorations of these
ceilings should be in keeping with the style of the cars, by giving
such a character to the lines, curves, and colors, as will be
suggestive of cheerfulness and life. While these head linings are
deserving of the highest commendation as an important improvement upon
previous ones, they are still open to some objections. One barrier to
their general adoption is their increased cost. It is true that
superior quality implies higher prices, but when the prices exceed so
much those of cloth linings, it is difficult to induce road managers
to increase expenses by introducing the new linings, when the great
object is to reduce expenses. Another objection to wood linings is
their liability to injury from heat and moisture, a liability which
results from the way in which they are put together. A heated roof or
a leak swells the veneering, and in many cases takes it off in strips.
To obviate these objections, I have, during the past eighteen months,
been experimenting with some materials that would be less affected by
these causes, and at the same time make a handsome ceiling. About a
year ago I fitted up one car in this way, and it has proved a success.
The material used is heavy tar-board pressed into the form of the roof
and strengthened by burlaps. It is then grained and decorated in the
usual manner, and when finished has the same appearance as the
veneers, will wear as well, and can be finished at much less
cost.--_D.D. Robertson._

       *       *       *       *       *




IMPROVED MORTAR MIXER.


The engravings herewith illustrate a new form of mixing or pugging
machine for making mortar or any other similar material. It has been
designed by Mr. R.R. Gubbins, more especially for mixing emery with
agglutinating material for making emery wheels; and a machine is at
work on this material in the manufactory of the Standard Emery Wheel
Company, Greek Street, Soho. The machine is shown in perspective in
Fig. 1 with the side door of the mixing box let down as it is when the
box is being emptied; and in Fig. 2 it is shown in transverse section.
The principle of the machine is the employment of disks fixed at an
angle of about 45 deg. on shafts revolving in a mixing box, to which a
slow reciprocating movement of short range is given.

[Illustration: FIGS. 1 and 2--IMPROVED MORTAR MIXING
MACHINE.]

In our illustrations, C is a knife-edge rail, upon which run grooved
wheels supporting the pugging box. To the axle of one grooved wheel a
connecting rod from crank arm, F is attached to effect the to-and-fro
motion of the mixing box, B. G is the door of the box, B, hinged at H,
and secured by hinged pins carrying fly nuts. A cover and hopper and
also a trap may be supplied to the box, B, for continuously feeding
and discharging the material operated upon. L, L, are the pugging
blades or discs on shafts, M. The shafts, M, pass through a slot in
the box, B, and the packing of these shafts is effected by the face
plate sliding and bearing against the face on the standard of the
machine. P is a guide piece on the standard, against which bears and
slides the piece, Q, bolted on to box, B, to support and guide the
box, B, in its movement. The forked ends of a yoke engage with the
collars, S, on the shafts, M, this yoke being set by a screw so that
the shafts may be easily removed. The machine is driven from the
pulleys and shaft, T, through gearing, T2 and T3, and by the Ewart's
chain on the wheel and pinion, V and U.--_The Engineer._

       *       *       *       *       *

[Continued from SUPPLEMENT, No. 311, page 4960.]




PRACTICAL NOTES ON PLUMBING.[1]

   [Footnote 1: From the London _Building News_.]

BY P.J. DAVIES, H.M.A.S.P., ETC.


TINNING IRON PIPES, COPPER OR BRASS-WORK, BITS, ETC.

Previously, I described the method of tinning the bit, etc., with
resin; but before this work on joints can be considered complete, I
find it necessary to speak of tinning the ends of iron pipes, etc.,
which have within the last fifty years been much used in conjunction
with leaden pipes. This is done as follows: Take some spirits of salts
(otherwise known as hydrochloric acid, muriatic acid, hydrogen
chloride, HCl), in a gallipot, and put as much sheet-zinc in it as the
spirit will dissolve; you have then obtained chloride of zinc (ZnCl).
A little care is required when making this, as the acid is decomposed
and is spread about by the discharged hydrogen, and will rust anything
made of iron or steel, such as tools, etc. It also readily absorbs
ammoniacal gas, so that, in fact, sal ammoniac may also be dissolved
in it, or sal ammoniac dissolved in water will answer the purpose of
the chloride of zinc.

Having the killed spirits, as it is sometimes called, ready, file the
end of your iron or bit and plunge this part into the spirits, then
touch your dipped end with some fine solder, and dip it again and
again into the spirits until you have a good tinned face upon your
iron, etc.; next you require a spirit-brush.


SPIRIT-BRUSH.

You can make this by cutting a few bristles out of a broom or brush,
push them into a short piece of compo tube, say 1/4 in., and hammer up
the end to hold the bristles; next cut the ends of the bristles to
about 3/8 in. long, and the brush is ready for use.


SOLDERING IRON TO LEAD.

Suppose you want to make a joint round a lead and iron pipe. First
file the end of your iron pipe as far up as you would shave it if it
were lead, and be sure to file it quite bright and free from grease;
heat your soldering-iron; then, with your spirit-brush, paint the
prepared end of your iron, and with your bit, rub over the pipe plenty
of solder, until the pipe is properly tinned, not forgetting to use
plenty of spirits; this done, you can put your joint together, and
wipe in the usual manner. Caution.--Do not put too much heat on your
iron pipe, either when tinning or making the joint, or the solder will
not take or stand.


DUMMIES FOR PIPE-BENDING.

[Illustration: FIGS. 38. and 38B.]

Figs. 38 and 38B. This tool I had better describe before
proceeding to the method of bending. To make it take a piece of, say,
1/2 in. iron pipe, 3 ft. long, or the length required, bent a little at
one end, as shown at A B in Fig. 38 and Fig. 38B. Tin the end
about 2 in. up, make a hole with a small plumbing-iron in some sand,
and place the tinned end of the iron pipe, B, into this hole; fill the
hole up with good hot lead, and the dummy, after it has been rasped up
a little, is ready for use. It will be found handy to have three or
four different lengths, and bent to different angles, to suit your
work. A straight one (Fig. 38B.) made to screw into an iron
socket or length of gas-pipe, will be found very handy for getting
dents out of long lengths of soil-pipe.


BENDS AND SET-OFFS.

Before you begin bending solid pressed pipes always put the thickest
part of your pipe _at the back_. Lead, in a good plumber's hands, may
be twisted into every conceivable shape; but, as in all other trades,
there is a right and a wrong way of doing everything, and there are
many different methods, each having a right and wrong way, which I
shall describe. I shall be pleased if my readers will adopt the style
most suitable for their particular kind of work; of course I shall say
which is the best for the class of work required.

For small pipes, such as from 1/2 in. to 1 in. "_stout_ pipe," you may
pull them round without trouble or danger; but for larger sizes, say,
from 11/4 in. to 2 in., some little care is necessary, even in stout
pipes.

Fig. 37 illustrates a badly made bend, and also shows how it comes
together at the throat, X, and back, E; L is the enlarged section of X
E, looking at the pipe endways. The cause of this contraction is
pulling the bend too quickly, and too much at a time, without dressing
in the sides at B B as follows: After you have pulled the pipe round
until it just begins to flatten, take a soft dresser, or a piece of
soft wood, and a hammer, and turn the pipe on its side as at Fig. 37;
then strike the bulged part of the pipe from X B toward E, until it
appears round like section K. Now pull your pipe round again as
before, and keep working it until finished. If you find that it
becomes smaller at the bend, take a long bolt and work the throat part
out until you have it as required.

[Illustration: FIG. 37.]


BENDING WITH WATER (LIGHT PIPES).

Fig. 39. This style of bending is much in use abroad, but not much
practiced in London, though a splendid method of work.

[Illustration: FIG. 39.]

It is a well known fact that, practically speaking, for such work,
water is incompressible, but may be turned and twisted about to any
shape, provided it is inclosed in a solid case--Fig. 39 is that case.
The end, A, is stopped, and the stopcock, B, soldered into the other
end. Now fill up this pipe quite full with warm water and shut the
cock, take the end, A, and pull round the pipe, at the same time
dressing the molecules of lead from the throat, C, toward D E, which
will flow if properly worked.

You can hammer away as much as you please, but be quick about it, so
that the water does not cool down, thereby contracting; in fact, you
should open the cock now and then, and recharge it to make sure of
this.


SAND BENDING.

This is a very old method of bending lead pipes, and answers every
purpose for long, easy bends. Proceed in this way: The length of the
pipe to be 5 ft., fill and well ram this pipe solid with sand 2 ft.
up, then have ready a metal-pot of very hot sand to fill the pipe one
foot up, next fill the pipe up with more cold sand, ramming it as
firmly as possible, stop the end and work it round as you did the
water bend, but do not strike it too hard in one place, or you will
find it give way and require to be dummied out again, or if you cannot
get the dent out with the dummy send a ball through (see "Bending with
Balls").


BENDING WITH BALLS OR BOBBINS.

This style of work is much practiced on small pipes, such as 2 in. to
3 in., especially by London plumbers. Method: Suppose your pipe to be
2 in., then you require your ball or bobbin about 1/16 in. less than
the pipe, so that it will run through the pipe freely. Now pull the
pipe round until it just begins to flatten, as at Fig. 37, put the
ball into the pipe, and with some short pieces of wood (say, 2 in.
long by 11/2 in. diameter) force the ball through the dented part of the
pipe, or you may use several different-sized balls, as at A B C, Fig.
40, and ram them through the pipe with a short mandrel, as at D M. You
will require to proceed very carefully about this ramming, or
otherwise you will most likely drive the bobbins through the back at L
K J. You must also watch the throat part, G H I, to keep it from
kinking or buckling-up; dress this part from the throat toward the
back, in order to get rid of the surplus in the throat.

[Illustration: FIG. 40.]


THREE-BALL OR LEAD DRIVING BALL AND DOUBLE-BALL BENDING.

Fig. 41 shows a method of bending with three balls, one of lead being
used as a driver attached to a piece of twine. This is a country
method, and very good, because the two balls are kept constantly to
the work. First, put the two balls just where you require the bend,
then pull the pipe slightly round; take the leaden ball and drop it
on the ball, B, then turn the pipe the other end up and drop it on A,
and do so until your bend is the required shape. You must be careful
not to let your leaden ball touch the back of the pipe. Some use a
piece of smaller leaden pipe run full of lead for the ball, C, and I
do not think it at all a bad method, as you can get a much greater
weight for giving the desired blow to your _boxwood_ balls.

[Illustration: FIG. 41.]


BENDING WITH WINDLASS AND BRASS BALL.

This is an excellent method of bending small pipes. Fig. 42 will
almost describe itself. A is a brass or gun metal ball having a copper
or wire rope running through it, and pulled through the flattened part
of the pipe as shown. It will be quite as well to tack the bend down
to the bench, as at B, when pulling the ball through; well dress the
lead from front to back to thicken the back. I have seen some plumbers
put an extra thickness of lead on the back before beginning to bend.
Notice: nearly all solid pressed pipes are thicker on one side than
the other (as before remarked), always place the thickest part at the
back.

[Illustration: FIG. 42.]


HYDRAULIC OR CUP-LEATHER AND BALL BENDING.

Fig 43. This is my own method of pipe-bending, and is very useful when
properly handled with plenty of force, but requires great care and
practice. You must have a union sweated on the end, A, Fig. 43, and
the ball, B, to fit the pipe. The cup-leather, E, should have a plate
fixed on the front to press the ball forward. Pull up the pipe as you
please, and pump the ball through; it will take all the dents out, and
that too very quickly.

[Illustration: FIG. 43.]


BENDING BY SPLITTING OR SPLIT-MADE BENDS.

This method of bending is much practiced in the provinces, and, for
anything I know to the contrary, is one of the best methods in use, as
by it you are likely to get a good substance of metal on the back of
the bend whether the plumber be a good or a bad workman. Proceed as
follows: Cut the pipe down the center to suit the length of your bend,
as shown at A B, Fig. 44. It will be quite as well if you first set
out this bend on the bench, then you may measure round the back, as
from C to L, to obtain the distance of the cut, which should always be
three or four inches longer than the bend. You may also in this way
obtain the correct length for the throat, G H I; here you will see
that you have a quantity of lead to spare, i.e., from A to E, all of
which has to be got rid of in uncut bends--some plumbers shift from
front to back, but how many? Not one in twenty. After you have cut the
pipe, open the throat part, bend out the sides, and pull this part
round a little at a time, then with a dummy, Fig. 38, work the
internal part of the throat outward to as nearly the shape as you can.
Go carefully to work, and do not attempt to work up the sides, A D B,
until your throat is nearly to the proper shape, after which you may
do so with a small boxwood dresser or bossing-stick (It is not
necessary to explain minutely what a bosser or dressing-stick is, as
they can be bought at almost any lead-merchants--the dresser is shown
at E, Fig. 1; the bossing-stick is somewhat similar, the only
difference being that it has a rounded face instead of flat.) Keep the
dummy up against the sides when truing it. If you have proceeded
properly with this throat part, you will not require to work up the
sides or edges, as in working the throat back the sides will come up
by themselves. Next take the back, pull it round a little at a time,
the dummy being held inside, with your dresser work the two edges and
sides slowly round, and the back will follow. Never strike the back
from the underside with the dummy. After you have made a dozen or two
you will be able to make them as fast as you please, but do not hurry
them at first, as the greater part of this work is only to be learned
by patient application, perseverance, and practice.

[Illustration: FIG. 44.]

After you have made the bend it will require to be soldered, but
before you can do this you must have the joint quite perfect and the
edges true one with the other. A good bender will not require to touch
his edges at all, but a novice will have to rasp and trim them up so
that they come together. Having your edges true, soil them, take a
gauge-hook, which may be described as a shave-hook with a gauge
attached, and shave it about 1/8 in. each side; now solder it to look
like the solder A, Fig. 45, which is done as follows: With some fine
solder tack the joint at A D B, Fig. 44, put on some resin, and with a
well-heated copper-bit drop some solder roughly on the point from B to
A, then draw the bit over it again to float the solder, being
especially careful not to let the joint open when coming off at A.
Some plumbers think fit to begin here, but that is a matter of no
importance. Do not forget that if your joint is not properly prepared,
that is to say, true and even, it is sure to be a failure, and will
have a "higgledy-piggledy" appearance. Some difference of opinion
exists as to the best method of making these joints: one workman will
make a good joint by drawing it while, on the other hand, another one
will do it equally well by wiping it. Drawing will be fully explained
in a part on pipe making. It may, however, be here mentioned that it
is a method of making the joint by floating the solder along the joint
with the ladle and plumbing-iron.

[Illustration: FIG. 45.]

It is not uncommon for plumbers to make their bends with only one
joint on the back.


PULLING UP BENDS.

In London, it is the favorite plan to make bends without cutting them.
Fig. 46. It is done by taking a length of pipe, and, just where you
require the bend, lay it (_with the seam at the side_) upon a pillow,
made by tightly filling a sack with sand, wood shavings, or sawdust;
have some shavings ready to hand and a good lath, also a short length
of mandrel about 3 ft. long and about 1/2 in. smaller than the pipe, and
a dummy as shown at A B, Fig. 56. Now, all being ready, put a few
burning shavings into the throat of the bend, just to get heat enough
to make it fizz, which you can judge by spitting on it. When this heat
is acquired withdraw the fire, and let the laborer quickly place the
end of the mandrel into the pipe, and pull the pipe up while you place
a sack or anything else convenient across the throat of the bend, then
pull the pipe up a little, just sufficient to dent it across the
throat. Now, with a _hot_ dummy, dummy out the dent, until it is round
like the other part of the pipe. Keep at this until your bend is made,
occasionally turning the pipe or its side and giving it a sharp blow
on the side with the soft or hornbeam dresser; this is when the sides
run out as in Fig. 37. Never strike the back part of the bend from
inside with the dummy, but work the lead from the throat to the back
with a view to thickening the back.

[Illustration: FIG. 46.]


SET-OFFS.

A set-off is nothing more than a double bend, as shown at Fig. 47, and
made in much the same manner. D is the long end of the pipe. Always
make this bend first and pull it up quite square, as it will be found
to go a little back when pulling up the other bend; if you can make
the two together so much the better, as you can then work the stuff
from the throat of one bend into the back of the other. The different
shaped dummies are also here shown: F a round-nosed dummy, G a double
bent dummy, H a single bent, I straight, J hand-dummy, ABN a long bent
dummy shown at Fig. 38.

[Illustration: FIG. 47.]


BAD BENDS.

These can always be detected by examining them in their backs, as at
Fig. 48; take a small dresser and tap the pipe a few times round ABD
to test for the thickness. Strike it hard enough to just dent it; next
strike the back part of the pipe, E, _with the same force_, and if it
dents much more it is not an equally-made bend. I have seen some of
these much-praised London-made bends that could be easily squeezed
together by the pressure of the thumb and finger. N.B.--Care must be
taken not to reduce or enlarge the size of the bore at the bend.

[Illustration: FIG. 48.]


BAD FALLS IN BENDS.

The fall given in bending lead pipes should be considered of quite as
much importance as making the bends of equal thickness especially for
pipes, as shown in Fig. 49. In this Fig. you have a drawing of a bad
bend. From A to B there is no fall whatever, as also from B to C; such
bending is frequently done and fixed in and about London, which is
not only more work for the plumber, but next to useless for
soil-pipes. Fig. 50 shows how this bend should be made with a good
fall from A to J, also from M to N; the method of making these bends
requires no further explanation. R, P, and K are the turnpins for
opening the ends, the method of which will be explained in a future
paragraph on "Preparing for Fixing."

[Illustration: FIG. 49.]

[Illustration: FIG. 50.]


BENDS MADE INTO TRAPS OR RETARDERS.

It will sometimes be found requisite to retard the flow of water when
running through soil or other pipes, or to direct it to another
course, or even to form a trap in the length of pipe. This has been
done in many ways, but Figs. 51 and 52 represent the method that I,
after mature consideration, think most preferable. There is nothing
new about this style of bending, as it has been long in vogue with
provincial plumbers, but more especially in Kent. For many years it
has had a run as a sink and slop closet-trap. Mr. Baldwin Latham, in
his "Sanitary Engineering," says it was introduced and has been used
for the Surrey and Kent sewers from about 1848.

[Illustration: FIG. 51.]

[Illustration: FIG. 52.]

I have also noticed many of these traps in the Sanitary Exhibition at
South Kensington, made by Graham and Fleming, plumbers, who deserve a
medal for their perseverance and skill, not only for the excellence of
their bends, but also for some other branches of the trade, such as
joint-wiping, etc., which is unquestionably the best work sent into
this Exhibition--in fact, quite equal to that which was shown at the
Exhibition of 1862. I shall treat further of these bends in an article
on Fixing, in a future part.


BENDS MADE WITH THE "SNARLING DUMMY."

This is an American method of making lead bends. Fig. 53 shows a dummy
made upon a bent steel rod, fixed into the bench. The method of
working it is by first pulling up the bend, and to get out the dents,
strike the rod of the snarling dummy, as shown at A, and the reaction
gives a blow within the bend, throwing out the bend to any shape
required. This method of working the dummy is also taken advantage of
in working up embossed vases, etc.

[Illustration: FIG. 53.]

_(To be continued)_

       *       *       *       *       *




