brought the paralo-ray gun up to his shoulder quickly and was about to
fire when he realized that the light he saw was Tom opening the door on
the opposite side. He breathed easier and waited until he could
distinguish Tom's moving figure clearly, and then walked stealthily
forward on a parallel line.

It was the first time Roger had been inside the hangar since it had been
constructed and he was not sure of his way around, but gradually, the
moonlight filtering in through the frosted plates of Titan crystal
illuminated the huge forms of the machines around him.

He stopped and gasped. Without even realizing it, he emitted a long
whistle of astonishment. Before him, reaching up into the shadows of the
cavernous hangar, was the gleaming hull of a huge rocket ship. Two
hundred feet long, the space vessel stood on its stabilizer fins,
ladders and cables running into the open ports on both sides.

Roger waved to Tom, who had also stopped to stare at the giant
spaceship, and the two of them met beneath the gleaming hull.

"What's the matter?" asked Tom. "Astro said you saw someone."

"_I_ didn't see a blasted thing," said Roger in an exasperated whisper.
"That big goof said _he_ did."

"Wow!" said Tom, looking up at the ship. "This is some baby. I never saw
one with lines like that before. Look at the funny bulges on the lower
side of the hull."

"Sh!" hissed Roger. "I just heard something."

The two cadets stood silently, ears cocked for the slightest sound in
the huge hangar. They heard a distinct tapping sound from somewhere
above them.

"It's coming from inside the ship!" said Tom.

"You climb in the other port," said Roger. "I'll take this one."

"Right," said Tom. "And remember, if there's any trouble, shoot first
and ask questions later."

"Check."

Tom slipped away from Roger and moved to the opposite side of the ship.
Slinging the rifle over his shoulder, he climbed up the ladder silently
toward the open port.

Making his way noiselessly through the air lock, he entered the huge
main deck of the ship and was able to see his way around by the faint
glow of the emergency reflectors in the bulkheads. Tiny, sparkling
gemlike pieces of specially coated Titan crystal, they glowed with
steady intensity for many hours after having been exposed to any form of
light. The deck was a mass of cables, boxes, tools, and equipment. Tom
noticed curious-looking machines behind, what he judged to be, the odd
bulges on the outside of the hull. Ahead of him, a hatch was partially
open and he could see light streaking through the opening. He gripped
his rifle tightly, finger on the trigger, and moved forward.

At the hatch he paused and looked into the next compartment. From the
opposite side, he saw another hatch partially open and the outline of
Roger's head and shoulders. Between them, a man was bending over a
makeshift desk, copying information from a calculator and a set of
blueprints. Tom nodded across to Roger and they both stepped into the
compartment at the same time.

"Put up your hands, mister, or I'll freeze you so hard it'll take a
summer on the Venus equator to warm you up," Roger drawled.

The man jerked upright, stumbled back from the desk, and moved toward
Tom, keeping his eyes on Roger. He backed into the barrel of Tom's ray
gun and stopped, terrified. He threw up his hands.

"What--wh--" he stammered and then caught himself. "How dare you do this
to me?" he demanded.

"Shut up!" snapped Tom. "What are you doing here?"

"None of your business," the man replied.

"I'm making it my business," snapped Tom, pressing the gun into the
man's back. "Who are you and how did you get in here?"

The man turned and looked Tom in the eye. "I have a right to be here,"
he stated coldly. "I'll show you my identification--" He brought his
hands down and reached into his jacket, but Roger stepped over quickly
and brought the barrel of his gun down sharply on the man's head. He
slumped to the floor with a groan and was still.

"What did you do that for?" growled Tom.

Roger didn't reply. He reached down into the unconscious man's jacket
and pulled out a small paralo-ray gun stuck in the top of his waistband.
"Some identification," Roger drawled.

"Thanks, pal," said Tom sheepishly. "Let's search him. Maybe we can find
out who he is."

As Roger bent over the fallen man, there was a commotion in the hangar
outside the ship, followed by the sound of footsteps clattering up the
ladders to the ports. Seconds later, Astro, followed by Tim Rush and a
squad of enlisted spacemen, surged into the compartment. Rush stopped
short when he saw the man on the floor.

"Great jumping Jupiter," gasped the petty officer, then whirled on Tom
and Roger. "You space-blasted idiots!" he shouted. "You good-for-nothing
harebrained, moronic dumbbells! Do you know what you've done?"

Tom and Roger stared at each other in amazement. Astro, standing to one
side, looked confused.

"Sure we know what we've done," declared Tom. "We found this guy in here
copying secrets from some blueprints there on the desk and--"

"Copying secrets!" screamed Rush. "Why, you ding-blasted idiots, that's
Dave Barret, the supervisor of this whole project!"

The man on the floor stirred and Firehouse ordered the squad of enlisted
men to help him up. Just then, there was a bellow of rage from the
hatch. Major Connel stepped into the compartment, his face a mask of
disgust and anger.

"By the rings of Saturn!" he roared. "I've been sitting in the
laboratory for the last hour and a half waiting for Dave Barret to come
back with vital information, so we could get on with our experiments,
and I find that you--you--" Connel was so furious, he could hardly talk.

He faced the three cadets. "There isn't anything in the books that says
you should be disciplined for this--this--outrage, but believe me,
Cadets"--his voice sounded like thunder in the small compartment--"this
is the very last time I'll stand for this kind of stupidity."

Tom gulped but stepped forward bravely. "Sir," he said clearly, "I would
like respectfully to submit the facts for the major's honest
consideration. Neither of us has ever seen this man before and we found
him copying information from these blueprints. When I challenged him,
he said he was going to show us his identification. He put his hands in
his jacket to get it, but Roger saw a gun in his belt, and thinking he
was going to use it, Roger hit him on the head." Tom stopped, clamped
his mouth shut, and stared the major in the eye. "That's all, sir."

Connel returned the stare, his eyes meeting those of the cadet for a
full half minute. "All right," he said finally. "I guess it's just a
case of misjudgment. But," he added scathingly, "in the face of the
_Polaris_ unit's record, you can understand my initial opinion."

As Dave Barret was assisted from the ship by the guards, Connel turned
to Rush. "Firehouse!" he barked.

"Yes, sir?"

"See that these cadets don't cause any more mischief."

"Yes, _sir_."

"Dismissed," snapped Connel.

"All right, you space brats," bellowed Rush, "back to your patrol!"

Tom, Roger, and Astro left the ship and returned to their posts outside
the hangar. Just before they separated to resume their endless march
around the hangar, Tom winked at his unit mates. "At least we didn't get
demerits," he said.

"Only because Connel couldn't find any reason to give them to us,"
sneered Roger. "What a busted rocket he's getting to be!"

"Yeah," agreed Astro quietly.

The three cadets began their round again, their eyes heavy with lack of
sleep, their arms and legs leaden, and their desire to become successful
Space Cadets more determined than ever. But they didn't know they had
started a chain reaction that would affect their very lives.

[Illustration]




CHAPTER 5


"We passed!"

Tom turned away from the lists posted on the dormitory bulletin board
and with his arms around Astro and Roger pushed through the knot of
cadets.

"Yeow!" bellowed Astro.

"We made it," murmured Roger with a note of disbelief in his voice. "We
made it!" And then, with the realization that he was still a Space Cadet
for at least another term, he turned and began pounding Astro on the
back. "You big Venusian ape, we made it."

Arm in arm, the three cadets strolled across the quadrangle and shouted
to friends they passed. Occasionally they fell silent when they saw a
boy carrying his gear to the supply building. These had failed to pass
the rigid examinations.

Near the Tower of Galileo, the cadets came face to face with Tony
Richards, McAvoy, and Davison. The two units looked at each other
silently, remembering what had happened only four short weeks before.
Then they all smiled and pounded each other on the back, congratulating
each other on passing. Neither of the units had made top honors as a
result of their fight and the trial, and having to spend so much time on
guard duty, but they had passed and that was the most important thing.
The boys all adjourned to the credit exchange and gorged themselves on
Martian fruit pies covered with ice cream. Finally the party broke up
when Tom remembered that he and his unit mates had to go on guard duty
in half an hour.

"Well," said Tony Richards, rising, "we relieve you guys at midnight, so
we might as well hit the sack right now. I've been waiting for this
night for a long time."

"No study," sighed Davison. "What heaven! I feel as if I've been
pardoned from prison."

The three boys of the _Capella_ crew said good-by to Tom, Roger, and
Astro, and walked off. Tom settled back in his chair and sighed. "Sure
wish I was in their boots," he said. "I don't see how I'm going to get
through tonight."

"Don't think about it," said Roger. "Only seven more days to go, and
then we go on summer cruise with the _Polaris_."

"I can't wait to get back on that power deck," said Astro. "It'll be
like going home."

Later, riding the new slidewalk to the area where the huge hangar had
been built, they saw Captain Strong returning from the restricted area
on the other slidewalk. They hopped off their walk and waited for the
young officer.

"I'm happy that you passed the exams, boys," he said. "And I want you to
know Commander Walters and Major Connel think a lot more of you, though
they wouldn't admit it, for the way you worked to make it."

"Thank you, sir," said Astro respectfully.

"You'll have to excuse us, sir," said Tom. "We've got to get out to the
hangar and go on guard."

"Yes, and you'd better hurry," said Strong. "After that mix-up with Dave
Barret, Firehouse Tim has his eye on you. Barret put up quite a fuss
about it."

"I still don't see how Mr. Barret got in there," said Tom. "The fourth
side of the hangar faces the hills, and we three covered the other three
sides."

"However he got in," interrupted Strong, "he had a right to be there.
And he also had a right to carry sidearms."

"Captain Strong," said Roger, "we've talked about it a lot, the three of
us. And we decided that regardless of what Major Connel or Firehouse or
Barret have said, we'd do the same thing, in the same way again."

"I think you're perfectly right, Manning. But don't quote me," said
Strong, his voice serious. "This is one of the most important projects
I've ever been connected with and--" He stopped suddenly. "Well, I can't
tell you any more. That's how tight the security is on it."

"But everyone knows that it's a projectile that will home on a target,
sir," said Tom.

"Yes, that was given to the stereos for general news release, but there
are other factors involved, factors so important that they could
revolutionize the whole concept of space flight."

"Wow!" said Tom. "No wonder they have this place so well guarded."

"Humph," snorted Roger. "I'd give up the opportunity of guarding this
revolutionary secret for one night's good sleep."

"You'll get that tomorrow when we go off duty," said Tom. "And please,
Roger, no blunders tonight, eh? Let's not take any chances of losing the
summer cruise in the _Polaris_."

"Listen! You want to talk to the Venusian hick about that, not me,"
declared Roger. "He's the one that spotted Barret."

"But you hit him on the head," growled Astro. "You and your catlike
reflexes." The big cadet referred to a recent letter he had seen in
which one of the blond-haired cadet's many space dolls referred to his
sensitivity as being that of a poet, and his dancing as smooth as the
reflexes of a cat.

Roger spun on the big cadet. "You blasted throwback to a Venusian ape!"
he roared. "If I ever catch you reading my mail again--"

"You'll what?" growled Astro. "You'll do just exactly what?" He grabbed
Roger by the arm and held him straight out, so that he looked as if he
were hanging from a tree.

Strong laughed and shook his head. "I give you three to the loving,
tender care of Firehouse Tim," he said, hopping over on the moving
slidewalk, back to the Academy.

"Put me down, you overgrown idiot," Roger howled.

"Not until you promise not to threaten me with violence again," said
Astro with a wink at Tom. The young curly-haired cadet doubled up with
laughter. Finally Roger was lowered to the ground, and, though he
rubbed his shoulder and grumbled, he was really pleased that Astro felt
like roughhousing with him. The events of the last few weeks had so
tired all of them that there had been no energy left for play.

Lightheartedly they stepped over to the slidewalk and were back on their
way to the secret project.

       *       *       *       *       *

Two huge wire fences had been built around the hangar area now, fences
carrying a surge of paralyzing power ready to greet anyone that dared
touch it. More than twenty feet high, the outer fence was buried six
feet into the ground and was some hundred yards away from the hangar
building itself, and fifty yards away from the second fence. The entire
area was also guarded by radar. Should any unauthorized person or object
be found in that area, an automatic alarm sounded and in fifteen seconds
a hundred fully armed guards were ready for action. The men who had been
cleared by security to work in and around the restricted area wore
specially designed belts of sensitized metal that offset the effects of
the radar. But the fence was still the untouchable for everyone.

Tom, Roger, and Astro had now been moved inside the hangar itself, to
stand guard over the only three doors in the cavernous structure. They
were armed with powerful heat blasters. These rifles were different from
the paralo-ray guns they had used previously. A beam of light from the
ray guns would only paralyze a human being, while the blaster destroyed
anything it touched, burning it to a crisp.

As soon as the three cadets saw the change in armament, they knew they
were guarding something so secret that human life, if it interfered with
the project, would be disintegrated. Only once before, on a hunting trip
to Venus, had they ever used the blasters, but they knew the deadly
power of the weapons.

Nothing was said to them. Firehouse Tim had not posted any special
orders or given them any special instructions. Each man who worked
