handy to make some of these reports of freak phenomena, like mysterious
appearances and disappearances, or flying-object sightings, or reported
falls of non-meteoric matter, theoretically respectable. Reports like
that usually get the ignore-and-forget treatment, now."

"Zen you believe zat zeese ozzer world of zee alternate probabeelitay,
zey exist?"

"No. I don't disbelieve it, either. I've no reason to, one way or
another." He studied his drink for a moment, and lowered the level in
the glass slightly. "I've said that once in a while things get reported
that look as though such other worlds, in another time-dimension, may
exist. There have been whole books published by people who collect
stories like that. I must say that academic science isn't very
hospitable to them."

"You mean, zings sometimes, 'ow-you-say, leak in from one of zees ozzer
worlds? Zat has been known to 'appen?"

"Things have been said to have happened that might, if true, be cases of
things leaking through from another time world," the sandy-haired man
corrected. "Or leaking away to another time world." He mentioned a few
of the more famous cases of unexplained mysteries--the English diplomat
in Prussia who vanished in plain sight of a number of people, the ship
found completely deserted by her crew, the lifeboats all in place;
stories like that. "And there's this rash of alleged sightings of
unidentified flying objects. I'd sooner believe that they came from
another dimension than from another planet. But, as far as I know,
nobody's seriously advanced this other-time-dimension theory to explain
them."

"I think the idea's familiar enough, though, that we can use it as an
explanation, or pseudo-explanation, for the program," the television man
said. "Fact is, we aren't married to this Crossroads title, yet; we
could just as easily all it _Fifth Dimension_. That would lead the
public, to expect something out of the normal before the show started."

      *       *       *       *       *

That got the conversation back onto the show, and we talked for some
time about it, each of us suggesting possibilities. The stranger even
suggested one--that the Civil War had started during the Jackson
Administration. Fortunately, nobody else noticed that. Finally, a porter
came through and inquired if any of us were getting off at Harrisburg,
saying that we would be getting in in five minutes.

The stranger finished his drink hastily and got up, saying that he would
have to get his luggage. He told us how much he had enjoyed the
conversation, and then followed the porter toward the rear of the train.
After he had gone out, the TV man chuckled.

"Was that one an oddball!" he exclaimed. "Where the hell do you suppose
he got that suit?"

"It was a tailored suit," the colonel said. "A very good one. And I
can't think of any country in the world in which they cut suits just
like that. And did you catch his accent?"

"Phony," the television man pronounced. "The French accent of a Greek
waiter in a fake French restaurant. In the Bronx."

"Not quite. The pronunciation was all right for French accent, but the
cadence, the way the word-sounds were strung together, was German."

The elderly man looked at the colonel keenly. "I see you're
Intelligence," he mentioned. "Think he might be somebody up your alley,
Colonel?"

The colonel shook his head. "I doubt it. There are agents of unfriendly
powers in this country--a lot of them, I'm sorry to have to say. But
they don't speak accented English, and they don't dress eccentrically.
You know there's an enemy agent in a crowd, pick out the most normally
American type in sight and you usually won't have to look further."

The train ground to a stop. A young couple with hand-luggage came in and
sat at one end of the car, waiting until other accommodations could be
found for them. After a while, it started again. I dallied over my
drink, and then got up and excused myself, saying that I wanted to turn
in early.

In the next car behind, I met the porter who had come in just before the
stop. He looked worried, and after a moment's hesitation, he spoke to
me.

"Pardon, sir. The man in the club-car who got off at Harrisburg; did you
know him?"

"Never saw him before. Why?"

"He tipped me with a dollar bill when he got off. Later, I looked
closely at it. I do not like it."

He showed it to me, and I didn't blame him. It was marked _One Dollar_,
