       *       *       *       *       *

At that moment, there was a sudden rushing overhead, and an instant
later the barrage began falling beyond the crest of the ridge. He looked
at his watch, blinked, and looked again. That barrage was due at 0550;
according to the watch, it was 0726. He was sure that, ten minutes ago,
when he had looked at it, up there at the head of the ravine, it had
been twenty minutes to six. He puzzled about that for a moment, and
decided that he must have caught the stem on something and pulled it
out, and then twisted it a little, setting the watch ahead. Then,
somehow, the stem had gotten pushed back in, starting it at the new
setting. That was a pretty far-fetched explanation, but it was the only
one he could think of.

But about this tank, now. He was positive that he could remember
throwing a grenade.... Yet he'd used his last grenade back there at the
supply dump. He saw his carbine, and picked it up. That silly blackout
he'd had, for a second, there; he must have dropped it. Action was open,
empty magazine on the ground where he'd dropped it. He wondered,
stupidly, if one of his bullets couldn't have gone down the muzzle of
the tank's gun and exploded the shell in the chamber.... Oh, the hell
with it! The tank might have been hit by a premature shot from the
barrage which was raging against the far slope of the ridge. He reset
his watch by guess and looked down the valley. The big attack would be
starting any minute, now, and there would be fleeing Commies coming up
the valley ahead of the UN advance. He'd better get himself placed
before they started coming in on him.

He stopped thinking about the mystery of the blown-up tank, a solution
to which seemed to dance maddeningly just out of his mental reach, and
found himself a place among the rocks to wait. Down the valley he could
hear everything from pistols to mortars going off, and shouting in three
or four racial intonations. After a while, fugitive Communists began
coming, many of them without their equipment, stumbling in their haste
and looking back over their shoulders. Most of them avoided the mouth
of the ravine and hurried by to the left or right, but one little clump,
eight or ten, came up the dry stream-bed, and stopped a hundred and
fifty yards from his hiding-place to make a stand. They were Hindus,
with outsize helmets over their turbans. Two of them came ahead,
carrying a machine gun, followed by a third with a flame-thrower; the
others retreated more slowly, firing their rifles to delay pursuit.

       *       *       *       *       *

Cuddling the stock of his carbine to his cheek, he divided a ten-shot
burst between the two machine-gunners, then, as a matter of principle,
he shot the man with the flame-thrower. He had a dislike for
flame-throwers; he killed every enemy he found with one. The others
dropped their rifles and raised their hands, screaming: "Hey, Joe! Hey,
Joe! You no shoot, me no shoot!"

A dozen men in UN battledress came up and took them prisoner. Benson
shouted to them, and then rose and came down to join them. They were
British--Argyle and Sutherland Highlanders, advertising the fact by
inconspicuous bits of tartan on their uniforms. The subaltern in command
looked at him and nodded.

"Captain Benson? We were warned to be on watch for your patrol," he
said. "Any of the rest of you lads get out?"

Benson shrugged. "We split up after the attack. You may run into a
couple of them. Some are locals and don't speak very good English. I've
got to get back to Division, myself; what's the best way?"

"Down that way. You'll overtake a couple of our walking wounded. If you
don't mind going slowly, they'll show you the way to advance dressing
station, and you can hitch a ride on an ambulance from there."

Benson nodded. Off on the left, there was a flurry of small-arms fire,
ending in yells of "Hey, Joe! Hey, Joe!"--the World War IV version of
"Kamarad"!

       *       *       *       *       *

His company was a non-T/O outfit; he came directly under Division
command and didn't have to bother reporting to any regimental or brigade
commanders. He walked for an hour with half a dozen lightly wounded
Scots, rode for another hour on a big cat-truck loaded with casualties
of six regiments and four races, and finally reached Division Rear,
where both the Division and Corps commanders took time to compliment him
on the part his last hunter patrol had played in the now complete
breakthrough. His replacement, an equine-faced Spaniard with an imposing
display of fruit-salad, was there, too; he solemnly took off the
bracelet a refugee Caucasian goldsmith had made for his predecessor's
predecessor and gave it to the new commander of what had formerly been
Benson's Butchers. As he had expected, there was also another medal
waiting for him.

A medical check at Task Force Center got him a warning; his last patrol
had brought him dangerously close to the edge of combat fatigue.
Remembering the incidents of the tank and the unaccountably fast watch,
and the mysterious box and envelope which he had found in his coat
pocket, he agreed, saying nothing about the questions that were puzzling
him. The Psychological Department was never too busy to refuse another
case; they hunted patients gleefully, each psych-shark seeking in every
one proof of his own particular theories. It was with relief that he
watched them fill out the red tag which gave him a priority on jet
transports for home.

Ankara to Alexandria, Alexandria to Dakar, Dakar to Belem, Belem to the
shattered skyline of New York, the "hurry-and-wait" procedures at Fort
Carlisle, and, after the usual separation promotion, Major Fred Benson,
late of Benson's Butchers, was back at teaching high school juniors the
difference between H_{2}O and H_{2}SO_{4}.

       *       *       *       *       *

There were two high schools in the city: McKinley High, on the east
side, and Dwight Eisenhower High, on the west. A few blocks from
McKinley was the Tulip Tavern, where the Eisenhower teachers came in the
late afternoons; the McKinley faculty crossed town to do their
after-school drinking on the west side. When Benson entered the Tulip
Tavern, on a warm September afternoon, he found Bill Myers, the school
psychologist, at one of the tables, smoking his pipe, checking over a
stack of aptitude test forms, and drinking beer. He got a highball at
the bar and carried it over to Bill's table.

"Oh, hi, Fred." The psychologist separated the finished from the
unfinished work with a sheet of yellow paper and crammed the whole
business into his brief case. "I was hoping somebody'd show up...."

Benson lit a cigarette, sipped his highball. They talked at
random--school-talk; the progress of the war, now in its twelfth year;
personal reminiscences, of the Turkish Theater where Benson had served,
and the Madras Beachhead, where Myers had been.

"Bring home any souvenirs?" Myers asked.

"Not much. Couple of pistols, couple of knives, some pictures. I don't
remember what all; haven't gotten around to unpacking them, yet.... I
have a sixth of rye and some beer, at my rooms. Let's go around and see
what I did bring home."

They finished their drinks and went out.

"What the devil's that?" Myers said, pointing to the cardboard box with
the envelope taped to it, when Benson lifted it out of the gray-green
locker.

"Bill, I don't know," Benson said. "I found it in the pocket of my coat,
on my way back from my last hunter patrol.... I've never told anybody
about this, before."

"That's the damnedest story I've ever heard, and in my racket you hear
some honeys," Myers said, when he had finished. "You couldn't have
picked that thing up in some other way, deliberately forgotten the
circumstances, and fabricated this story about the tank and the grenade
and the discrepancy in your watch subconsciously as an explanation?"

"My subconscious is a better liar than that," Benson replied. "It
would have cobbled up some kind of a story that would stand up. This
business...."

"Top Secret! For the Guide Only!" Myers frowned. "That isn't one of our
marks, and if it were Soviet, it'd be tri-lingual, Russian, Hindi and
Chinese."

"Well, let's see what's in it. I want this thing cleared up. I've been
having some of the nastiest dreams, lately...."

"Well, be careful; it may be booby-trapped," Myers said urgently.

"Don't worry; I will."

He used a knife to slice the envelope open without untaping it from the
box, and exposed five sheets of typewritten onion-skin paper. There was
no letterhead, no salutation or address-line. Just a mass of chemical
formulae, and a concise report on tests. It seemed to be a report on an
improved syrup for a carbonated soft-drink. There were a few cryptic
cautionary references to heightened physico-psychological effects.

The box was opened with the same caution, but it proved as innocent of
dangers as the envelope. It contained only a half-liter bottle,
wax-sealed, containing a dark reddish-brown syrup.

