rebounded to Earth, where spies and agents of foreign powers tried
desperately to make sense of the incredible syllables. They failed.

There was a relay system in operation now, from spaceship to Platform to
Earth and back again. In the ship Chief Bender, Mohawk and steelman
extraordinary, talked to the Shed and to one Charley Red Fox. They
talked in Mohawk, which is an Algonquin Indian language, agglutinative,
complicated, and not to be learned in ten easy lessons. It was not a
language which eavesdroppers were likely to know as a matter of course.
But it was a language by which computations could be asked for, so that
a very forlorn hope might be attempted with the best possible chances of
success.

Naturally, none of this appeared in the look of things. The small ship
floated on and on. It reached an altitude of 3,500 miles. The Earth was
visibly farther away. Behind the ship the Atlantic with its stately
cloud-formations was sunlit to the very edge of its being. Ahead, the
edge of night appeared beyond India. And above, the Platform appeared as
a speck of molten light, quarter-illuminated by the sun above it.

Spaceship and Platform moved on toward a meeting place. The ship moved a
trifle faster, because it was climbing. The speeds would match exactly
when they met. The small torpedo-shaped shining ship and the bulging
glowing metal satellite floated with a seeming vast deliberation in
emptiness, while the most gigantic of possible round objects filled all
the firmament beneath them. They were 200 miles apart. It seemed that
the huge Platform overtook the shining ship. It did. They were only 50
miles apart and still closing in.

By that time the twilight band of Earth's surface was nearly at the
center of the planet, and night filled more than a quarter of its disk.

By that time, too, even to the naked eye through the ports of the
supply-ship the enemy rockets had become visible. They were a thin skein
of threads of white vapor which seemed to unravel in nothingness. The
vapor curled and expanded preposterously. It could just be seen to be
jetting into existence from four separate points, two a little ahead of
the others. They came out from Earth at a rate which seemed remarkably
deliberate until one saw with what fury the rocket-fumes spat out to
form the whitish threads. Then one could guess at a three-or even
four-stage launching series, so that what appeared to be mere pinpoints
would really be rockets carrying half-ton atomic warheads with an
attained velocity of 10,000 miles per hour and more straight up.

The threads unraveled in a straight line aimed at the two metal things
floating in emptiness. One was small and streamlined, with inadequate
landing-rockets clamped to its body and with stubby fins that had no
possible utility out of air. The other was large and clumsy to look at,
but very, very stately indeed in its progress through the heavens. They
floated smoothly toward a rendezvous. The rockets from Earth came
ravening to destroy them at the instant of their intersection.

The little spaceship turned slowly. Its rounded bow had pointed
longingly at the stars. Now it tilted downward. Its direction of
movement did not change, of course. In the absence of air, it could
tumble indefinitely without any ill effect. It was in a trajectory
instead of on a course, though presently the trajectory would become an
orbit. But it pointed nose-down toward the Earth even as it continued to
hurtle onward.

The great steel hull and the small spaceship were 20 miles apart. An
infinitesimal radar-bowl moved on the little ship. Tight-beam waves
flickered invisibly between the two craft. The rockets raged toward
them.

The ship and the Platform were 10 miles apart. The rockets were now
glinting missiles leaping ahead of the fumes that propelled them.

The ship and the Platform were two miles apart. The rockets rushed
upward.... There were minute corrections in their courses. They
converged....

Flames leaped from the tiny ship. Its landing-rockets spouted white-hot
flame and fumes more thick and coiling than even the smoke of the bombs.
The little ship surged momentarily toward the racing monsters. And
then----

The rockets which were supposed to let the ship down to Earth flew
free--flung themselves unburdened at the rockets which came with deadly
intent to the meeting of the two Earth spacecraft.

The landing-rockets plunged down at forty gravities or better. They were
a dwindling group of infinitely bright sparks which seemed to group
themselves more closely as they dwindled. They charged upon the
attacking robot things. They were unguided, of necessity, but the robot
bombs had to be equipped with proximity fuses. No remote control could
be so accurate as to determine the best moment for detonation at 4,000
miles' distance. So the war rockets had to be devised to explode when
near anything which reflected their probing radar waves. They had to be
designed to be triggered by anything in space.

And the loosed landing-rockets plunged among them.

They did not detonate all at once. That was mathematically impossible.
But no human eye could detect the delay. Four close-packed flares of
pure atomic fire sprang into being between the Platform and Earth. Each
was brighter than the sun. For the fraction of an instant there was no
night where night had fallen on the Earth. For thousands of miles the
Earth glowed brightly.

Then there was a twisting, coiling tumult of incandescent gases, which
were snatched away by nothingness and ceased to be.

Then there were just two things remaining in the void. One was the
great, clumsy, shining Platform, gigantic in size to anything close by.
The other was the small spaceship which had climbed to it and fought for
it and defended it against the bombs from Earth.

The little ship now had a slight motion away from the Platform, due to
the instant's tugging by its rockets before they were released.

It turned about in emptiness. Its steering-rockets spouted smoke. It
began to cancel out its velocity away from the Platform, and to swim
slowly and very carefully toward it.




3


Making actual contact with the platform was not a matter for instruments
and calculations. It had to be done directly--by hand, as it were. Joe
watched out the ports and played the controls of the steering jets with
a nerve-racked precision. His task was not easy.

Before he could return to the point of rendezvous, the blinding sunlight
on the Platform took on a tinge of red. It was the twilight-zone of the
satellite's orbit, when for a time the sunlight that reached it was
light which had passed through Earth's atmosphere and been bent by it
and colored crimson by the dust in Earth's air. It glowed a fiery red,
and the color deepened, and then there was darkness.

They were in Earth's shadow. There were stars to be seen, but no sun.
The Moon was hidden, too. And the Earth was a monstrous, incredible,
abysmal blackness which at this first experience of its appearance
produced an almost superstitious terror. Formerly it had seemed a
distant but sunlit world, flecked with white clouds and with sprawling
differentiations of color beneath them.

Now it did not look like a solid thing at all. It looked like a hole in
creation. One could see ten thousand million stars of every imaginable
tint and shade. But where the Earth should be there seemed a vast
nothingness. It looked like an opening to annihilation. It looked like
the veritable Pit of Darkness which is the greatest horror men have ever
imagined, and since those in the ship were without weight it seemed that
they were falling into it.

Joe knew better, of course. So did the others. But that was the look of
things, and that was the feeling. One did not feel in danger of death,
but of extinction--which, in cold fact, is very much worse.

Lights glowed on the outside of the Platform to guide the supply ship to
it. There were red and green and blue and harsh blue-white electric
bulbs. They were bright and distinct, but the feeling of loneliness
above that awful appearance of the Pit was appalling. No small child
alone at night had ever so desolate a sensation of isolation as the four
in the small ship.

But Joe painstakingly played the buttons of the steering-rocket control
board. The ship surged, and turned, and surged forward again. Mike, at
the communicator, said, "They say slow up, Joe."

Joe obeyed, but he was tense. Haney and the Chief were at other
portholes, looking out. The Chief said heavily, "Fellas, I'm going to
admit I never felt so lonesome in my life!"

"I'm glad I've got you fellows with me!" Haney admitted guiltily.

"The job's almost over," said Joe.

The ship's own hull, outside the ports, glowed suddenly in a light-beam
from the Platform. The small, brief surges of acceleration which sent
the ship on produced tremendous emotional effects. When the Platform was
only one mile away, Haney switched on the ship's searchlights. They
stabbed through emptiness with absolutely no sign of their existence
until they touched the steel hull of the satellite.

Mike said sharply: "Slow up some more, Joe."

He obeyed again. It would not be a good idea to ram the Platform after
they had come so far to reach it.

They drifted slowly, slowly, slowly toward it. The monstrous Pit of
Darkness which was the night side of Earth seemed almost about to engulf
the Platform. They were a few hundred feet higher than the great metal
globe, and the blackness was behind it. They were a quarter of a mile
away. The distance diminished.

A thin straight line seemed to grow out toward them. There was a small,
bulb-like object at its end. It reached out farther than was at all
plausible. Nothing so slender should conceivably reach so far without
bending of its own weight. But of course it had no weight here. It was a
plastic flexible hose with air pressure in it. It groped for the
spaceship.

The four in the ship held their breaths.

There was a loud, metallic _clank!_

Then it was possible to feel the ship being pulled toward the Platform
by the magnetic grapple. It was a landing-line. It was the means by
which the ship would be docked in the giant lock which had been built to
receive it.

As they drew near, they saw the joints of the plating of the Platform.
They saw rivets. There was the huge, 30-foot doorway with its valves
swung wide. Their searchlight beam glared into it. They saw the metal
floor, and the bulging plastic sidewalls, restrained by nets. They saw
the inner lock-door. It seemed that men should be visible to welcome
them. There were none.

The airlock swallowed them. They touched against something solid. There
were more clankings. They seemed to crunch against the metal
floor--magnetic flooring-grapples. Then, in solid contact with the
substance of the Platform, they heard the sounds of the great outer
doors swinging shut. They were within the artificial satellite of Earth.
It was bright in the lock, and Joe stared out the cabin ports at the
quilted sides. There was a hissing of air, and he saw a swirling mist,
and then the bulges of the sidewall sagged. The air pressure gauge was
spinning up toward normal sea-level air pressure.

Joe threw the ready lever of the steering rockets to _Off_. "We're
landed."

There was silence. Joe looked about him. The other three looked queer.
It would have seemed natural for them to rejoice on arriving at their
destination. But somehow they didn't feel that they had.

Joe said wrily, "It seems that we ought to weigh something, now we've
got here. So we feel queer that we don't. Shoes, Mike?"

Mike peeled off the magnetic-soled slippers from their place on the
cabin wall. He handed them out and opened the door. A biting chill came
in it. Joe slipped on the shoe-soles with their elastic bands to hold
them. He stepped out the door.

He didn't land. He floated until he reached the sidewall. Then he pulled
himself down by the netting. Once he touched the floor, his shoes seemed
to be sticky. The net and the plastic sidewalls were, of course, the
method by which a really large airlock was made practical. When this
ship was about to take off again, pumps would not labor for hours to
pump the air out. The sidewalls would inflate and closely enclose the
ship's hull, and so force the air in the lock back into the ship. Then
the pumps would work on the air behind the inflated walls--with nets to
help them draw the wall-stuff back to let the ship go free. The lock
could be used with only fifteen minutes for pumping instead of four
hours.

The door in the back of the lock clanked open. Joe tried to walk toward
it. He discovered his astounding clumsiness. To walk in magnetic-soled
shoes in weightlessness requires a knack. When Joe lifted one foot and
tried to swing the other forward, his body tried to pivot. When he
lifted his right foot, he had to turn his left slightly inward. His arms
tried to float absurdly upward. When he was in motion and essayed to
pause, his whole body tended to continue forward with a sedate toppling
motion that brought him down flat on his face. He had to put one foot
forward to check himself. He seemed to have no sense of balance. When he
stood still--his stomach queasy because of weightlessness--he found
himself tilting undignifiedly forward or back--or, with equal
unpredictability, sidewise. He would have to learn an entirely new
method of walking.

A man came in the lock, and Joe knew who it was. Sanford, the senior
scientist of the Platform's crew. Joe had seen him often enough on the
television screen in the Communications Room at the Shed. Now Sanford
looked nerve-racked, but his eyes were bright and his expression
sardonic.

"My compliments," he said, his voice tight with irony, "for a splendidly
futile job well done! You've got your cargo invoice?"

Joe nodded. Sanford held out his hand. Joe fumbled in his pocket and
brought out the yellow sheet.

"I'd like to introduce my crew," said Joe. "This is Haney, and Chief
Bender, and Mike Scandia." He waved his hand, and his whole body wobbled
unexpectedly.

"We'll know each other!" said Sanford sardonically. "Our first job is
more futility--to get the guided missiles you've brought us into the
launching tubes. A lot of good they'll do!"

A huge plate in the roof of the lock--but it was not up or down or in
any particular direction--withdrew itself. A man floated through the
opening and landed on the ship's hull; another man followed him.

"Chief," said Joe, "and Haney. Will you open the cargo doors?"

The two swaying figures moved to obey, though with erratic clumsiness.
Sanford called sharply: "Don't touch the hull without gloves! If it
isn't nearly red-hot from the sunlight, it'll be below zero from
shadow!"

Joe realized, then, the temperature effects the skin on his face
noticed. A part of the spaceship's hull gave off heat like that of a
panel heating installation. Another part imparted a chill.

Sanford said unpleasantly, "You want to report your heroism, eh? Come
along!"

He clanked to the doorway by which he had entered. Joe followed, and
Mike after him.

They went out of the lock. Sanford suddenly peeled off his metal-soled
slippers, put them in his pocket, and dived casually into a four-foot
metal tube. He drifted smoothly away along the lighted bore, not
touching the sidewalls. He moved in the manner of a dream, when one
floats with infinite ease and precision in any direction one chooses.

Joe and Mike did not share his talent. Joe launched himself after
Sanford, and for perhaps 20 or 30 feet the lighted aluminum sidewall of
the tube sped past him. Then his shoulder rubbed, and he found himself
skidding to an undignified stop, choking the bore. Mike thudded into
him.

"I haven't got the hang of this yet," said Joe apologetically.

He untangled himself and went on. Mike followed him, his expression that
of pure bliss. He was a tiny man, was Mike, but he had the longings and
the ambitions of half a dozen ordinary-sized men in his small body. And
he had known frustration. He could prove by mathematics that space
exploration could be carried on by midgets at a fraction of the cost and
risk of the same job done by normal-sized men. He was, of course, quite
right. The cabins and air and food supplies for a spaceship's crew of
midgets would cost and weigh a fraction of similar equipment for
six-footers. But people simply weren't interested in sending midgets
out into space.

But Mike had gotten here. He was in the Space Platform. There were
full-sized men who would joyfully have changed places with him,
forty-one inch height and all. So Mike was blissful.

The tube ended and Joe bounced off the wall that faced its end. Sanford
was waiting. He grinned with more than a hint of spite.

"Here's our communications room," he said. "Now you can talk down to
Earth. It'll be relayed, now, but in half an hour you can reach the Shed
direct."

He floated inside. Joe followed cautiously. There was another crew
