dozen implicitly-trusted technicians and guards, who had been secretly
gathered in MacLeod's office the night before and informed of the crisis
that had arisen. Their associates could not miss the fact that they were
preoccupied with something unusual.

They were a variegated crew; men who had been added to the Team in every
corner of the world. There was Ahmed Abd-el-Rahman, the Arab jeep-driver
who had joined them in Basra. There was the wiry little Greek whom
everybody called Alex Unpronounceable. There was an Italian, and two
Chinese, and a cashiered French Air Force officer, and a Malay, and the
son of an English earl who insisted that his name was Bertie Wooster.
They had sworn themselves to secrecy, had heard MacLeod's story with a
polylingual burst of pious or blasphemous exclamations, and then they
had scattered, each to the work assigned him.

MacLeod had risen early and submitted to the ordeal of the search to
leave the reservation and go to town again, this time for a conference
at the shabby back-street cigar store that concealed a Counter Espionage
center. He had returned just as Farida Khouroglu was finishing the
microfilm copies of Kato's ingeniously-concocted pseudo-data. These
copies were distributed at noon, while the Team was lunching, along with
carbons of the original type-script.

He was the first to leave the table, going directly to the basement,
where Alex Unpronounceable and the man who had got his alias from the
works of P. G. Wodehouse were listening in on the telephone calls going
in and out through the Team-center switch-board, and making recordings.
For two hours, MacLeod remained with them. He heard Suzanne Maillard and
some woman who was talking from a number in the Army married-officers'
settlement making arrangements about a party. He heard Rudolf von
Heldenfeld make a date with some girl. He listened to a violent
altercation between the Team chef and somebody at Army Quartermaster's
HQ about the quality of a lot of dressed chicken. He listened to a call
that came in for Adam Lowiewski, the mathematician.

"This is Joe," the caller said. "I've got to go to town late this
afternoon, but I was wondering if you'd have time to meet me at the
Recreation House at Oppenheimer Village for a game of chess. I'm calling
from there, now."

"Fine; I can make it," Lowiewski's voice replied. "I'm in the middle of
a devil's own mathematical problem; maybe a game of chess would clear my
head. I have a new queen's-knight gambit I want to try on you, anyhow."

Bertie Wooster looked up sharply. "Now there; that may be what we're--"

The telephone beside MacLeod rang. He scooped it up; named himself into
it.

It was Ahmed Abd-el-Rahman. "Look, chief; I tail this guy to Oppenheimer
Village," the Arab, who had learned English from American movies,
answered. "He goes into the rec-joint. I slide in after him, an' he
ain't in sight. I'm lookin' around for him, see, when he comes bargin'
outa the Don Ameche box. Then he grabs a table an' a beer. What next?"

"Stay there; keep an eye on him," MacLeod told him. "If I want you, I'll
call."

MacLeod hung up and straightened, feeling under his packet for his
.38-special.

"That's it, boys," he said. "Lowiewski. Come on."

"Hah!" Alex Unpronounceable had his gun out and was checking the
cylinder. He spoke briefly in description of the Polish mathematician's
ancestry, physical characteristics, and probable post-mortem
destination. Then he put the gun away, and the three men left the
basement.

       *       *       *       *       *

For minutes that seamed like hours, MacLeod and the Greek waited on the
main floor, where they could watch both the elevators and the stairway.
Bertie Wooster had gone up to alert Kato Sugihara and Karen. Then the
door of one of the elevators opened and Adam Lowiewski emerged, with
Kato behind him, apparently lost in a bulky scientific journal he was
reading. The Greek moved in from one side, and MacLeod stepped in front
of the Pole.

"Hi, Adam," he greeted. "Have you looked into that batch of data yet?"

"Oh, yes. Yes." Lowiewski seemed barely able to keep his impatience
within the bounds of politeness. "Of course, it's out of my line, but
the mathematics seems sound." He started to move away.

"You're not going anywhere," MacLeod told him. "The chess game is over.
The red pawns are taken--the one at Oppenheimer Village, and the one
here."

There was a split second in which Lowiewski struggled--almost
successfully--to erase the consternation from his face.

"I don't know what you're talking about," he began. His right hand
started to slide under his left coat lapel.

MacLeod's Colt was covering him before he could complete the movement.
At the same time, Kato Sugihara dropped the paper-bound periodical,
revealing the thin-bladed knife he had concealed under it. He stepped
forward, pressing the point of the weapon against the Pole's side. With
the other hand, he reached across Lowiewski's chest and jerked the
pistol from his shoulder-holster. It was one of the elegant little .32
Beretta 1954 Model automatics.

"Into the elevator," MacLeod ordered. An increasing pressure of Kato's
knife emphasized the order. "And watch him; don't let him get rid of
anything," he added to the Greek.

"If you would explain this outrage--" Lowiewski began. "I assume it is
your idea of a joke--"

Without even replying, MacLeod slammed the doors and started the
elevator upward, letting it rise six floors to the living quarters.
Karen Hilquist and the aristocratic black-sheep who called himself
Bertie Wooster were waiting when he opened the door. The Englishman took
one of Lowiewski's arms; MacLeod took the other. The rest fell in behind
as they hustled the captive down the hall and into the big sound-proofed
dining room. They kept Lowiewski standing, well away from any movable
object in the room; Alex Unpronounceable took his left arm as MacLeod
released it and went to the communicator and punched the all-outlets
button.

"Dr. Maillard; Dr. Sir Neville Lawton; Dr. ben-Hillel; Dr. von
Heldenfeld; Mlle. Khouroglu," he called. "Dr. MacLeod speaking. Come at
once, repeat at once, to the round table--Dr. Maillard; Dr. Sir Neville
Lawton--"

       *       *       *       *       *

Karen said something to the Japanese and went outside. For a while,
nobody spoke. Kato came over and lit a cigarette in the bowl of
MacLeod's pipe. Then the other Team members entered in a body. Evidently
Karen had intercepted them in the hallway and warned them that they
would find some unusual situation inside; even so, there was a burst of
surprised exclamations when they found Adam Lowiewski under detention.

"Ladies and gentlemen," MacLeod said, "I regret to tell you that I have
placed our colleague, Dr. Lowiewski, under arrest. He is suspected of
betraying confidential data to agents of the Fourth Komintern.
Yesterday, I learned that data on all our work here, including
Team-secret data on the Sugihara Effect, had got into the hands of the
Komintern and was being used in research at the Smolensk laboratories. I
also learned that General Nayland blames this Team as a whole with
double-dealing and selling this data to the Komintern. I don't need to
go into any lengthy exposition of General Nayland's attitude toward this
