of heat; they are consequently much used by the natives for boiling
eggs, heating milk, and indeed for culinary purposes generally. A
brief glance at the structure of the bark will show how it comes to be
so well adapted for this purpose. The bark seldom grows more than half
an inch thick, and is covered with a skin or epidermis; when fresh, it
cuts somewhat similar to a soft sandstone, but when dry, it is very
brittle and flint like, and often difficult to break. On examination
of a section under the microscope, all the cells of the different
layers are seen to be more or less silicated, the silex forming in the
cells when the bark is still very young. In the inner bark the flint
is deposited in a very regular manner, the particles being straight
and giving off branches at right angles; that of the porous cells of
the bark, however, is very much contorted, and ramifies in all
directions. In the best varieties of the tree, those growing in rich
and dry soil, the silex can be readily detected by the naked eye; but
to test the quality of the various kinds of bark, the natives burn it
and then try its strength between their fingers; if it breaks easily
it is considered of little value, but if it requires a mortar and
pestle to break, its quality is pronounced good. From an analysis of
this singular bark, that of old trees has been found to give 30.8 per
cent of ash, and that of young 23.30 per cent. Of the different layers
of old bark, the outer gave 17.15 per cent, the middle 37.7, and the
inner 31. The wood of the tree, in comparison with the bark, is
relatively poor in silex, the duramen of an old tree giving only 2.5
per cent of silex.

       *       *       *       *       *




GLASS SPONGES.


The natural history of sponges had, up to the middle of this century,
been comparatively neglected. Until 1856, when Lieberkuhn published
his treatise on sponges, very little or nothing had been written on
the subject. Later, Haeckel did much to determine their exact nature,
and it is now universally admitted that sponges form one of the
connecting links between the animal and the vegetable kingdom.

Sponges, generally considered, consist of fine porous tissue, covered,
during life, with viscid, semi-liquid protoplasm, and are held in
shape and strengthened by a more or less rigid skeleton, consisting
chiefly of lime or silica. The tissue consists of a very fine network
of threads, formed probably by gradual solidification of the threads
of protoplasm. The inorganic skeleton is formed by larger and smaller
crystals and crystalline threads. In the various families of sponges
the quantity of inorganic matter varies greatly; some sponges are
nearly devoid of an inorganic skeleton, while other families consist
chiefly of lime or silica, the organic tissue being only rudimentarily
developed.

As observed in their natural state, sponges are apparently lifeless.
When, however, a live sponge is placed in water containing some finely
powdered pigment in suspension, it will be noticed that in regular,
short intervals water is absorbed through the pores of the tissue and
ejected again through larger openings, which are called "osculae."
Following up these into the interior, we find them divided into
numerous branches, the walls of which are, under the microscope, found
to be covered with minute cells, fastened at one end only and
oscillating continually. By means of these cells the sponge receives
its nourishment.

Sponges with very rigid inorganic skeletons may be divided into two
classes--calcareous and silicious--according to whether the skeleton
is chiefly composed of lime or silica.

Our engravings represent two species of the latter kind, which are, on
account of the peculiar appearance of their skeleton, called glass
sponges.

Fig. 1 represents the "sprinkling pot sponge," _Eucleptella
aspergillum_. It is generally found in very deep water throughout the
Pacific. Specimens were found over fifty years ago, but, as they had
to be brought up from depths between 500 and 800 fathoms, they
remained very scarce and sold at fabulous prices.

[Illustration: Fig. 1.--SPRINKLING POT SPONGE.--(_Eucleptella
aspergillum_.)]

The skeleton is formed by small crystals and long threads of vitreous
silica, cemented together, during life, by protoplasm. They are
arranged in longitudinal and annular bands so as to form a long curved
cylinder, about nine to twelve inches long, the walls of which are
about one inch in thickness. The threads and bands are interwoven with
the greatest regularity, and when the skeleton is freed from the
adhering organic matter, it looks extremely beautiful.

The mode in which the intersecting bunches of crystals are connected
is shown in Fig. 2. The upper end of the cylinder is closed by a
perforated cover, which probably has given rise to the name of the
sponge. The upper portion of the cylinder is surrounded by a few
irregular, annular masses of organic tissue, which adheres loosely
only to the skeleton. The lower end is formed by a bunch of long
threads, rooting firmly in the ground.

[Illustration: Fig. 2.--SPONGE CRYSTALS MAGNIFIED.]

Up to about ten years ago the price of specimens of this sponge was
very high. At that time, however, a colony of Eucleptellas was found
near the cities of Cebu and Manila, in the East Indies, in a depth not
exceeding 100 fathoms, and since they have appeared in larger
quantities in the market. It is remarkable that, contrary to their
habits, these organisms have immigrated into regions to which they
were totally unaccustomed. Yet it must be regarded as a greater
curiosity that they have been accompanied to their new abode by a few
animals living in equally deep water and never met with before at
depths less than three or four hundred fathoms. Among these animals is
a _Phormosoma_ (water hedgehog), noted for its long spines.

Glass sponges are not confined to tropical regions. They are met with
in latitudes as high as the Faeroee Islands, where the beautiful
_Holtenia Carpentaria_ abounds. It is represented in Fig. 3. Its
cup-shaped skeleton is similar in structure to that of the
_Eucleptella_; numerous crystalline needles protrude from the surface
of the upper part. Lately some specimens of _Holtenia_ have been found
on the coast of Florida.

[Illustration: Fig. 3.--HOLTENIA CARPENTERIA.]

Glass sponges serve as dwellings for numerous animals, especially
crustaceae. A small shrimp inhabits the tubes of the _Eucleptella_, a
male and a female generally living together. They are shut up as in a
prison in their crystalline home, as they are generally too large to
pass through the meshes formed by the bundles of crystals. It was
formerly believed that these skeletons had actually been built by the
shrimps, and we can find no explanation for this curious circumstance,
other than that the shrimps entered these habitations while very small
and became too large to leave them.

       *       *       *       *       *




PLANTS PROTECTED BY INSECTS.


Mr. Francis Darwin, in a lecture on "Means of Self-Defense among
Plants," delivered lately at the London Institution, said that one of
the most curious forms of defense known is afforded by a recently
discovered class of plants, which, being stingless themselves, are
protected by stinging ants, which make their home in the plant and
defend it against its enemies. Of these the most remarkable is the
bull's-horn acacia (described by the late Mr. Belt in his book "The
Naturalist in Nicaragua"), a shrubby tree with gigantic curved thorns,
from which its name is derived. These horns are hollow and tenanted by
ants, which bore a hole in them, and the workers may be seen running
about over the green leaves. If a branch is shaken the ants swarm out
of the thorns and attack the aggressor with their stings. Their chief
service to the plant consists in defending it against leaf-cutting
ants, which are the great enemy of all vegetation in that part of
America. The latter form large underground nests, and their work of
destruction consists in gathering leaves, which they strip to form
heaps of material, which become covered over with a delicate white
fungus, on which the larvae of the ants are fed, so that literally they
are a colony of mushroom growers. The special province of the little
stinging ants, which live in the thorns of the acacia, is, therefore,
to protect the leaves of the shrub from being used by the leaf-cutters
to make mushroom beds. Certain varieties of the orange tree have
leaves which are distasteful to the leaf-cutters, this property of the
leaves thus forming a means of defense. Other plants are unaccountably
spared by them--grass, for example, which, if brought to the nest, is
at once thrown out by some ant in authority. The bull's-horn acacia,
in return for the service rendered by the stinging ants, not only
affords them shelter in its thorns, but provides them with nectar
secreted by glands at the base of its leaves, and also grows for them
small yellow pear-shaped bodies, about one twelfth of an inch in
length, at the tip of some of its leaflets, which they use as food.
These little yellow bodies are made up of cells containing protoplasm
rich in oil, and afford the insects an excellent food. When the leaf
unfolds, the ants may be seen running from one leaflet to another, to
see if these little yellow bodies are ripe; and if they are ready to
be gathered they are broken up by the ants and carried away to the
nest in the thorn. Several small birds, also, build their nests in the
bull's horn acacia, thus escaping from a predatory ant which is
capable of killing young birds. The trumpet tree, another plant of
South and Central America, is also protected by a standing army of
ants; and, like the above mentioned acacia, grows for its protectors
small food bodies containing oil, but instead of secreting nectar in
its leaves it harbors a small insect (coccus), whose sweet secretion
is much relished by the ants. Dr. Beccari mentions an epiphytal plant
growing on trees in Borneo, the seeds of which germinate, like those
of the mistletoe, on the branches of the tree; and the seedling stem,
crowned by the cotyledons, grows to about an inch in length, remaining
in that condition until a certain species of ant bites a hole in the
stem, which then produces a gall-like growth that ultimately
constitutes the home of the ants. If the plant is not fortunate enough
to be bitten by an ant it dies. These ants, then, protect their plant
home by rushing out fiercely on intruders, and thus are preserved the
sessile white flowers which, in this plant, are developed on the tuber
like body.

       *       *       *       *       *


ADVANCE IN IRON.--At a meeting of the Philadelphia Iron Merchants'
Association, March 11, prices of all descriptions of merchant iron
were advanced fully 5 per cent.

       *       *       *       *       *




THE ANEROID BAROMETER.


The aneroid barometer was invented by M. Vidi, of Paris. It consists
essentially of a circular box, the face of which is made of thin
elastic metal, rendered more elastic by being stamped and pressed into
concentric circular wave-like corrugations. This box is nearly
exhausted of air, and its elastic face supports the pressure of the
atmosphere, and yields to it with elastic resistance in proportion to
the amount of pressure. Thus, if the atmospheric pressure increases,
the face is pressed inward; if atmospheric pressure diminishes, the
elastic reaction of the metal moves the face outward. These movements
are communicated to an index by suitable and very delicate mechanism,
and registered in largely magnified dimensions, by the movements of
this index upon the face of the dial.

Aneroid barometers are now made of pocket size, compensated for
temperature, and with double scales, one reading the height of the
barometer column, the other the elevation obtained. I have, says Prof.
W. M. Williams, used one of these during many years, and find it a
very interesting traveling companion. It is sufficiently sensitive to
indicate the ascent from the ground floor to the upper rooms of a
three-storied house, or to enable the traveler sitting in a railway
train to tell, by watching its face, whether he is ascending or
descending an incline.

Such slight variations are more easily observed on the aneroid than on
the mercurial barometer, and therefore it is commonly stated that the
aneroid is the more sensitive instrument. This, however, is a
fallacious conclusion. It is not the superior sensitiveness of the
movements of the instrument, but the greater facility of reading them,
that gives this advantage to the aneroid, the index of which has a
needle point traveling nearly in contact with the foot of the
divisions; the readings are further aided by a needle point register
attached to a movable rim, which may be brought point to point against
the index, thus showing the slightest movement that human vision may
detect. A magnifying lens may be easily used in such a case.

It should be understood that the aneroid barometer is not an
independent instrument; it is merely a device for representing the
movements of the mercurial barometer. It is regulated by comparison
with the primary instrument, and this comparison should be renewed
from time to time, as the elastic properties of the metal may and do
vary.

An adjusting or regulating screw is attached to the back of the
instrument, and is usually movable by a watch key.

Besides this, the magnified reading of course magnifies any primary
error, and is largely dependent on the accuracy of the mechanism.

       *       *       *       *       *




THE ALBO-CARBON LIGHT.


We need hardly remind our readers that numerous unsuccessful attempts
have been made at various times to enrich ordinary coal gas by the aid
of volatile oils. Upon the present occasion we have to place before
them particulars of a process having the same object in view, but
which is so far dissimilar in that it deals with a solid substance
instead of a liquid oil. The invention has been brought into its
present practical shape by Mr. James Livesey, C. E., of No. 9 Victoria
Chambers, Westminster, in conjunction with Mr. Kidd, with whom it
originated. The process consists in the employment of a substance
called albo-carbon, which is the solid residuum of creosote. This
material is moulded into the form of candles, which in large lamps are
placed in a metallic vessel or receiver near the gas burner. The
albo-carbon is warmed by the heat of the burning gas, the heat being
transmitted to the receiver by a metallic conductor. Upon the
albo-carbon being raised to the necessary temperature it volatilizes,
and as the coal gas passes over it to the burner its vapor becomes
mingled with the gas, and greatly raises its illuminating power. Of
course when first lighted the coal gas only is burned, but in a few
minutes the albo-carbon communicates its enriching vapor to it. The
only alteration necessary to the present gas fittings is the
vaporizing chamber, which is of simple construction, although at
present the details of the various arrangements necessary for the
different kinds of lights have not yet been fully worked out. This
invention is now being tried experimentally in the eastern section of
the Westminster Aquarium, where we recently examined it, and found it
to afford a marked improvement upon the ordinary system of gas
illumination, although a smaller number of burners is being used.
Tried alternately with ordinary coal gas, the higher illuminating
power of the albo-carbon light was very remarkable. It appears that
there are 200 burners fitted at the Aquarium with the new light, and
these successfully take the place of 500 ordinary gas burners
previously in use. The illuminating effect is stated to be doubled,
with an additional advantage as regards economy. The reduction of cost
arises from the smaller quantity of gas consumed with the albo-carbon
process than without it, and the very small cost of the enriching
material. According to our information, 1,000 cubic feet of ordinary
gas as generally used will, by the albo-carbon appliance, give as much
illumination as 3,000 cubic feet without it, and the cost of the
material to produce this result is only 1s. 6d. Experiments have been
made with this light by Mr. T. W. Keates, the consulting chemist to
the Metropolitan Board of Works, who reports very favorably upon it,
as does also Dr. Wallace, of Glasgow, who has obtained some very
satisfactory results with it. It is claimed for the albo-carbon
material that it is perfectly inexplosive, safe and portable, that it
causes no obstruction and leaves no residuum, and that the receivers
can be replenished almost indefinitely without any accumulation taking
place, so perfect is the evaporation of the albo-carbon. On the whole
the display at the Aquarium speaks greatly in favor of the new process
of gas enrichment, which, other things being equal, bids fair to find
its way into practice.--_Engineering._

       *       *       *       *       *




ENGLISH AND AMERICAN HARDWARE.


Mr. Frederick Smith, Manager of the Union Land and Building Company
(limited), recently read a paper on the above subject before the
Manchester Scientific and Mechanical Society. Mr. H. Whiley,
Superintendent of the Manchester Health Department, presided. The
following is the text of the paper, as given in the London
_Ironmonger_. The lecturer said:

A spectator in any of our courts of justice will generally be struck
with the amount of hard swearing which is given to the court, under
the name of evidence. He will find one set of witnesses testifying,
under oath, to one thing, and another set, also under oath, to the
very opposite. Some prove too much, some too little, some are of a
totally negative character, proving nothing, and some are of no
character at all, and therefore are willing to prove anything. To some
extent the same phenomena are to be observed in reference to the
question of foreign competition. On the one hand the manufacturers
hold up to our affrighted vision the picture of our mills stopped, our
machine shops standing empty and idle, our hardware trade slipping
through our fingers, our ships rotting in our own and in foreign
ports, and our greatness as a producing nation for ever passed away.
On the other hand, the journalists who take the labor side of the
question, the trades-union leaders, and a large number of the workmen
themselves, hold that we have little or nothing to fear from our
foreign rivals; that the depression, like those atmospheric ones of
which our American cousins are constantly warning us, will pass away,
and leave us with better times to follow. I will, therefore, as far as
possible, keep out of the region of speculation, give you a few facts,
show you some examples, and leave you to draw your own inferences.
Some two or three years ago ordinary axle pulleys of English make were
difficult to get; the price was scandalously high, and the quality as
scandalously low. Out of a dozen probably four would not turn round
without sticking, and the casting was--well, simply vile. I show you a
sample rather above the average, and the retail price for this
inferior article was 22s. per gross. All at once the Americans deluged
the English market with the pulley which I now show to you, and it
needs no explanation of mine to satisfy the mechanical minds present
of the superiority of the transatlantic article; but when we also bear
in mind that the price of the American was from 25 to 33 per cent less
than the English pulley, you can understand how the builders exulted,
and how the Volscians of the Birmingham district were fluttered. Then,
and not till then, would the English maker condescend to believe that
it was possible to improve upon the wretched things which he had
foisted upon his customers, and he at once commenced to copy the
American pulley. He has not yet succeeded in producing such a
beautiful casting, but I venture to say that he has improved the
quality more in the last eighteen months than in the previous eighteen
years.

Now take the ordinary door furniture. For generations the English
builder and householder has had to be content with the stereotyped,
with all its aggravating propensities. First, the little screw (so
small as to be scarcely perceptible to touch or to sight) shakes loose
from its countersunk depression in the spindle, gets lost, and lets
the knob go adrift; or next, the knob itself, formed of a bit of sheet
brass, turns round on its shank and the door cannot be opened, or the
shank, not having a sufficient bearing on the spindle, works loose,
and the whole thing is out of repair. It is the same thing to-day as
it was when it tormented my grandfather; for, of course, no
improvement could be made until Uncle Sam sent us his cheap, strong,
serviceable, and sensible "Mineral Knob."

The English maker says: "But look at the many devices which we have
invented for door furniture." Granted, and some of them very good, but
none of them so good as this--for the money. Plenty of them well
adapted for extraordinary use, but none of them cheap enough and
strong enough to be placed in competition with this in fitting up the
dwelling of the ordinary Englishman. The spindle and furniture of a
lock is the portion which is liable to and receives the most rough
usage.

I have here an ordinary cheap set of china furniture of English make,
which I dare not drop lest I should break it, but as you see, I dare
throw its Yankee competitor the whole length of this room. The retail
price of this English set is ninepence--the price of the American is
less than sixpence. The English spindle is fitted with the usual
little screw, the knob is loose, the roses are china, and liable to
break with the least strain or blow. The American set, as you see, has
a long shank; the form of the knob is a very oblate spheroid, giving a
good grip and free play for the fingers between the knob and the door.
The rose is japanned iron, and has small studs or teeth projecting on
its inner side effectually preventing it from turning round with the
spindle; the screw is strong, and is tapped through the spindle
itself, insuring both security and perfect steadiness. Several small
washers are supplied with each spindle, enabling the slack to be taken
up perfectly, and at the same time preventing the spindle from
sticking with any ordinary amount of friction.

I will now show you a cheap American rim lock. First, you will notice
that both sides are alike. Next, that by pulling the latch forward it
can be turned half round, and is thereby converted from a right hand
to a left hand, or _vice versa_, in an instant. This is an important
point to a builder, but our lockmakers do not seem to know it. Several
attempts have been made to introduce locks of this kind, but the fancy
prices put upon every article which departs, in ever so slight a
measure, from the antediluvian patterns mostly used, practically
prohibits their adoption. The carcass of the lock is of cast iron; the
casting, like all the small American castings, is simply perfect;
bosses are cast round the follower and keyholes; the box staple is one
piece of metal, neat and strong.

But there is another point, and, to my mind, the most important one.
Whatever opinions may be held as to the relative quality of this lock,
whether it is better or worse than an English one, it is at least an
honest article. It makes no pretensions to be any better than it is.
It does not entrap the unwary purchaser by pretending to be a
first-class article, when at the same time it may be a swindle.

I will now show you an ordinary 6 inch rim-lock of English
manufacture. At a short distance it looks like a superior article; the
follower and keyhole appear as if they were bushed with brass. But let
us take it to pieces, and see what we can find. The follower is a
rough casting, not turned at the bearings, and is in no sense a fit.
The screw holes are not countersunk, but merely punched in; the key is
of the roughest and worst fitting description; the inside is as rough
and cheap as possible; the key is cut so as to deceive the purchaser
into the belief that there are twice as many wards in the lock as is
really the case, and the bushes prove to be thin plates of brass
riveted on, and not bushes at all. In short, the whole article is a
vile fraud, and the maker was a swindler. This is strong language, but
I think you will agree with me when I maintain that it is not stronger
than the circumstances warrant.

But there are still its defects of bad design and useless workmanship.
The lock is of the usual form given to the English rim-lock, that is,
it has a flange which requires to be let into the edge of the door. I
have fixed hundreds of them, and have never yet been able to see a use
for this flange. It is one great obstacle to the general introduction
of a reversible lock; it adds to the labor of fixing without adding to
the security of the door, for if the door is to be forced from the
outside, the box staples give way first; if from the inside, the
unscrewing of the box staple is all that is necessary to give egress;
if the door requires easing, it effectually prevents it being done--in
fact, it is a nuisance, and nothing but a nuisance. But our lockmakers
do not appear to give these things a thought; their doctrine seems to
be, "As it was in the beginning, is now, and ever shall be."

Again, notice that the edges of the iron which lie against the door
and the sham bushes are ground bright. Here is labor wasted, for as
soon as the lock is fixed these polished portions are hidden for
ever. Next, take the box staple. As is usual, it is fearfully and
wonderfully made up of sheet iron, square iron, and brass; the outcome
of which is that the showy brass striking piece comes unriveted, the
door comes unfastened, and the tenant's temper comes unhinged. Why, in
the name of common sense, could they not substitute a neat malleable
casting? In our own houses I have long since discarded the ordinary
box staple for draw-back locks, and find it cheaper to buy a cast iron
staple, and throw away the one supplied by the English lockmaker.

Bear in mind that I have shown neither of these locks as samples of
high-class goods, but as samples of the furniture fixed in the houses
of the working and middle classes of this country; and when I tell you
that the American lock, fitted with the mineral furniture, is at least
25 per cent cheaper than the English abortion I have shown to you, you
will begin to realize what our English markets have to fear from the
Americans.

Here is a common, cheap English mortise lock, and you will naturally
ask why the outside of this lock is ground bright, when it is buried
in the door and never seen except it has to be taken out for repairs.
I have asked the same question, and for 20 years have paused for a
reply. This lock is not reversible, the follower is not bushed, and
the inside is rough and cheap. Contrast it with this neat American
lock, and notice again the bosses to receive the wear; notice also
that the bolts are brass; the latch-bolt is, of course, reversible--I
never saw an American lock which was not. The body of the lock is cast
iron; and, seeing that there are no strains upon a mortise lock, it is
quite as good as if it was of wrought iron. There is no unnecessary
grinding, but the iron is japanned, and the japan is as much superior
to the English compound as is the lacquer ware of the Japanese to that
which is executed in Birmingham and palmed upon the ignorant buyer as
Japanese work. In fact, as you can see for yourselves, the English
japan looks almost like gas tar beside the American. This American
lock is a two-lever, and there is no sham about the key, which is made
of some kind of white metal and is small and neat. This lock is only
21/2 per cent higher in price than the English.

Before leaving these locks, let me say a word or two upon the
relative wear upon their different portions, and their relative
safety. The English maker appears to ignore the fact that
nineteen-twentieths of the wear of a lock is upon the latch, spindle,
and follower; the amount of actual wear upon the rest of the lock is
comparatively slight. Let any of you consider the number of times you
open and close a door, compared with the times you lock it. Our
drawbacks and large rim locks are used about once a day; the great
bulk of our mortise locks are not used, except as latches, once a
week. One argument used by our manufacturers against the American lock
is that, being made by machinery, there is necessarily a great
duplication of parts, and a consequent lowering of the standard of
security; while their own locks, being made by hand, are not alike,
and therefore cannot be so easily opened.

Let any of you put this argument to proof, by trying how many front
doors you can open with one key in a row of workmen's dwellings such
as are found in Manchester, ranging up to L25 rentals, and the result
will astonish you. If our own manufacturers made their locks
sufficiently well to give this security, there would be some force in
what they say; but so far as security is concerned, they might as well
make their locks by machinery as make them in the way they do.

I now show you two thumb latches, one of American and one of English
make. Notice the general finish of the American latch; the shape, the
mode of construction, and everything about it proves that brains were
used when it was designed and made. The English "Norfolk latch," on
the other hand, is ill designed, uncomfortable in hand, clumsily
finished, the japan hangs about it in lumps, the latch is clumsy, the
catch is clumsier, and the keeper, a rough piece of hoop iron, seems
as if designed to "keep" the latch from doing its duty. In this case
the American latch is 25 per cent cheaper than the English one; and
the English latch is of the same pattern as the one that was in use
when I was a boy, only that it is a greatly inferior article.

I will now introduce you to the well known nuisance which we have been
accustomed to use for fastening our cupboard doors--the cupboard
turn--and without further comment, ask you to compare it with this
neat and simple latch of American make, costing about 5 per cent more,
twice as efficacious, and five times as durable. In this case no
improvement has been made in the English fastener. It is just as it
was when I went to the trade, about 28 years ago, and although many
attempts have been made to improve it they have added so much to its
cost as to prevent the improved articles from coming into general use.

The difference between the English and American inventor and designer
seems to consist in this--that while an Englishman devotes all his
energies to the improvement of an existing shape, the American throws
the old article under his bench and commences _de novo_.

I think I have made out a case against the English hardware
manufacturer, but when I have pointed these matters out to merchants
and ironmongers, I have been met with various reasons for this
manifest inferiority. I do not know how far these excuses may be
valid, but one man says that the reason, as regards locks, is somewhat
as follows: The locksmiths of the district wherein they are made in
many cases work at their own homes; one man making one part of a lock,
while other men make other parts. This goes on generation after
generation, and the men become mere machines, not knowing how the
entire lock is constructed, and not caring to know. Another attributes
it to the influence of the trades-unions, and says that if a
manufacturer wants a different kind of lock, the price for the work is
immediately put higher, even though the actual labor may not be
increased. A third says it is due to the drunkenness of the hands, and
their consequent poverty and physical and social demoralization, which
prevents them from rising to such an intellectual level as will enable
them to see the evils of their system, and adopt the right means to
remove them. A fourth boldly says, "We make these goods because our
customers want them." How far the reasons assigned by the first three
are correct I am unable to say, but for the fourth, the extent to
which the builders of England have patronized the Americans is a
complete answer.

This defense, "Our customers want them," is as old as the hills, and
has been used to cover every kind of deception and inferior article
ever manufactured. Our Lancashire manufacturers use it when they are
charged with sending china clay and mildew (and call it calico) for
the mild Hindoo and the Heathen Chinee to dress themselves in. Our
butter merchants use it when they make up grease and call it butter;
and our hardware merchants use it when they send us sham locks, and
call them brass bushed, etc.

It is the duty of the manufacturer to invent for his customers, and it
is preposterous to say that the builder would prefer that embodiment
of fraud--the English rim-lock, which I showed to you--to the American
lock, which, at any rate, was an honest article, especially when the
latter had the great advantage of being considerably cheaper. I am
afraid that the swindling and greed of our merchants is having the
effect of thrusting us out of the markets of the world, including our
home markets; and when it is too late, these men who are making the
name of English goods a byword and a reproach, even among the Hindoos,
the Chinese, and the untutored savages of the South Sea Islands, will
find that "honesty is the best policy."

We have been accustomed to hear a deal of buncombe talked about the
honesty of the Englishman, and the want of honesty of the Yankee;
