knew, generally, where the thieves were going, but he wanted their
tracks unobliterated in front of him. The snow fell thicker and
thicker, and it was growing dark, and he was tiring. Even Brave was
stumbling occasionally before Raud stopped, in a hollow among the
pines, to build his tiny fire and eat and feed the dog. They bedded
down together, covered by the same sleeping robes.

When he woke, the world was still black and white and gray in the
early dawn-light, and the robe that covered him and Brave was powdered
with snow, and the pine-branches above him were loaded and sagging.

The snow had completely obliterated the tracks of the four thieves,
and it was still falling. When the sled was packed and the dog
harnessed to it, they set out, keeping close to the flank of the
Ice-Father on their left.

It stopped snowing toward mid-day, and a little after, he heard a
shot, far ahead, and then two more, one upon the other. The first shot
would be the rifle of Vahr Farg's son; it was a single-loader, like
his own. The other two were from one of the light Southron rifles,
which fired a dozen shots one after another. They had shot, or shot
at, something like a deer, he supposed. That was sensible; it would
save their dried meat for the trip across the back of the Ice-Father.
And it showed that they still didn't know he was following them. He
found their tracks, some hours later.

Toward dusk, he came to a steep building-mound. It had fared better
than most of the houses of the ancient people; it rose to twenty times
a man's height and on the south-east side it was almost perpendicular.
The other side sloped, and he was able to climb to the top, and far
away, ahead of him, he saw a tiny spark appear and grow. The fire
could not be more than two hours ahead.

He built no fire that evening, but shared a slab of pemmican with
Brave, and they huddled together under the bearskin robe. The dog fell
asleep at once. For a long time, Raud sat awake, thinking.

At first, he considered resting for a while, and then pressing forward
and attacking them as they slept. He had to kill all of them to regain
the Crown; that he had taken for granted from the first. He knew what
would happen if the Government Police came into this. They would take
one Southron's word against the word of ten Northfolk, and the thieves
would simply claim the Crown as theirs and accuse him of trying to
steal it. And Dranigo and Salvadro--they seemed like good men, but
they might see this as the only way to get the Crown for
themselves.... He would have to settle the affair for himself, before
the men reached Long Valley town.

If he could do it here, it would save him and Brave the toil and
danger of climbing the Ice-Father. But could he? They had two rifles,
one an autoloader, and they had in all likelihood three negatron
pistols. After the single shot of the big rifle was fired, he had only
a knife and a hatchet and the spiked and pickaxed ice-staff, and
Brave. One of the thieves would kill him before he and Brave killed
all of them, and then the Crown would be lost. He dropped into sleep,
still thinking of what to do.

He climbed the mound of the ancient building again in the morning, and
looked long and carefully at the face of the Ice-Father. It would take
the thieves the whole day to reach that place where the two tongues of
the glacier split apart, the easiest spot to climb. They would not try
to climb that evening; Vahr, who knew the most about it, would be the
last to advise such a risk. He was sure that by going up at the
nearest point he could get to the top of the Ice-Father before dark,
and drag Brave up after him. It would be a fearful climb, and he would
have most of a day's journey after that to reach the head of the long
ravine up which the thieves would come, but when they came up, he
could be there waiting for them. He knew what the old rifle could do,
to an inch, and there were places where the thieves would be coming up
where he could stay out of blaster-range and pick them all off, even
with a single-loader.

He knew about negatron pistols, too. They shot little bullets of
energy; they were very fast, and did not drop, like a real bullet, so
that no judgment of range was needed. But the energy died quickly; the
negatrons lived only long enough to go five hundred paces and no more.
At eight hundred, he could hit a man easily. He almost felt himself
pitying Vahr Farg's son and his companions.

When he reached the tumble of rocks that had been dragged along with
and pushed out from the Ice-Father, he stopped and made up a
pack--sleeping robes, all his cartridges, as much pemmican as he could
carry, and the bag of trade-tokens. If the chase took him to Long
Valley Town, he would need money. He also coiled about his waist a
long rawhide climbing-rope, and left the sled-harness on Brave, simply
detaching the traces.

At first, they walked easily on the sloping ice. Then, as it grew
steeper, he fastened the rope to the dog's harness and advanced a
little at a time, dragging Brave up after him. Soon he was forced to
snub the rope with his ice-staff and chop steps with his hatchet.
Toward noon--at least he thought it was noon--it began snowing again,
and the valley below was blotted out in a swirl of white.

They came to a narrow ledge, where they could rest, with a wall of ice
rising sheerly above them. He would have to climb that alone, and then
pull Brave up with the rope. He started working his way up the
perpendicular face, clinging by the pick of his ice-staff, chopping
footholds with the hatchet; the pack and the slung rifle on his back
pulled at him and threatened to drag him down. At length, he dragged
himself over the edge and drove the ice-staff in.

"Up, Brave!" he called, tugging on the rope. "Good dog, Brave; come
up!"

Brave tried to jump and slipped back. He tried again, and this time
Raud snubbed the rope and held him. Below the dog pawed frantically,
until he found a paw-hold on one of the chopped-out steps. Raud hauled
on the rope, and made another snub.

It seemed like hours. It probably was; his arms were aching, and he
had lost all sense of time, or of the cold, or the danger of the narrow
ledge; he forgot about the Crown and the men who had stolen it; he
even forgot how he had come here, or that he had ever been anywhere
else. All that mattered was to get Brave up on the ledge beside him.

Finally Brave came up and got first his fore-paws and then his body
over the edge. He lay still, panting proudly, while Raud hugged him
and told him, over and over, that he was a good dog. They rested for a
long time, and Raud got a slab of pemmican from the pack and divided
it with Brave.

It was while they rested in the snow, munching, that he heard the
sound for the first time. It was faint and far away, and it sounded
like thunder, or like an avalanche beginning, and that puzzled him,
for this was not the time of year for either. As he listened, he heard
it again, and this time he recognized it--negatron pistols. It
frightened him; he wondered if the thieves had met a band of hunters.
No; if they were fighting Northfolk, there would be the reports of
firearms, too. Or might they be fighting among themselves? Remembering
the melted brass studs on Bold's collar, he became more frightened at
the thought of what a negatron-blast could do to the Crown.

The noise stopped, then started again, and he got to his feet, calling
to Brave. They were on a wide ledge that slanted upward toward the
north. It would take him closer to the top, and closer to where Vahr
and his companions would come up. Together, they started up, Raud
probing cautiously ahead of him with the ice-staff for hidden
crevasses. After a while, he came to a wide gap in the ice beside him,
slanting toward the top, its upper end lost in swirling snow. So he
and Brave began climbing, and after a while he could no longer hear
the negatron pistols.

