hand. "There are other supplies. Jake, do you have any signal to get in
touch with Molly at the Ryan house?"

"Three raps on the rear left window. I'll get Lou."

"No!" Doc came to his feet, reaching for his jacket. "They're looking
for three men now. It's safer if I go alone--and I'm the only one who
knows what supplies are needed. With luck, I may even get the electron
mike. Got a gun I can borrow?"

Jake found one somewhere, an old revolver with a few loads. He began
protesting, but Doc overruled him sharply. Three men could no more fight
off the police than one, if they were spotted. He swung toward the
tractor.

"You'd better start spreading the word on everything we know. If people
realize they're already safe or doomed it'll be better than having them
going crazy to avoid contagion."

"Most of the villages know already," Jake told him. "And damn it, get
back here, Doc. If you can't make it, turn tail quick, and we'll think
of something else."

Southport seemed normal enough as Doc drove through its streets. The
stereo house was open, and the little shops were brightly lighted. He
stopped once to pull a copy of Southport's little newspaper from a
dispenser. All was quiet on its front page, too.

As usual, though, the facts were buried inside. The editorial was
pouring too much oil on the waters in its lauding of the role of
Medical Lobby on Mars for no apparent reason. The death notices no
longer listed the cause of death. Medical knew something was up, at
least, and was worried.

He parked the tractor behind Chris' house and slipped to the proper
window. Everything was seemingly quiet there. At his knock, the shade
was drawn back, and he caught a brief glimpse of Molly looking out. A
moment later she opened the rear lock to let him into the kitchen.

"Shh. She's still up, I think. What can I do, Doc?"

He tried to smile at her. "Hide me until it's safe to get into her
laboratory. I've got to--"

The inner kitchen was kicked open and Chris stood beyond it, holding a
cocked gun in her hand.

"It took longer than I expected, Dan," she said quietly. "But after your
letter, I knew you'd swallow the bait. You bloody fool! Did you really
believe I'd start doing research here just because of your imaginings?"

He slumped slowly back against the sink. "So this is a fool's errand,
then? There never was any equipment here?"

"The equipment's here--in my office. I guessed your spies would report
it, so it had to be here. But it won't help you now, pariah Feldman!"

He came from his braced position against the sink like a spring
uncoiling. He expected her to shoot, but hoped the surprise would ruin
her aim. Then it was too late, and his boot hit the gun savagely,
knocking it from her hand. Life in the villages had hardened him
surprisingly. She was comparatively helpless in his hands. A few minutes
later, he had her bound securely with surgical tape Molly brought him.
She raged furiously in the chair where he'd dumped her, then gave up.

"They'll get you, Daniel Feldman!" Surprisingly, there was no rage in
her voice now. "You won't get away from us. The planet isn't big
enough."

"I got away from your trial," he reminded her. "And I got away and lived
when you left me without a chance on the ground of the spaceport."

She laughed harshly. "_You_ got away then? You fool, who do you think
gave you the extra battery so you could live long enough to be helped at
the spaceport? Who hired a fool like Matthews so you wouldn't get the
death sentence you deserved? Who let you get away as an herb doctor for
months before you set yourself up as God and a traitor to mankind
again?"

It shook him, as it was probably intended to do. How had she known about
the extra battery? He'd always assumed that Ben had returned to give it
to him. But in that case, Chris couldn't know of it. Then he hardened
himself again. In the old days, she'd always had one trump card he
couldn't beat and hadn't expected. But too much was involved for games
now.

"Any police around, Molly?" he asked.

Molly came back a minute later to report that everything looked clear
and to show him where the equipment had been set up in Chris' office. It
was all there, including the electron mike--a beautiful little portable
model. There was even a small incubator with its own heat source into
which he immediately transferred the little bottles he'd been keeping
warm against his skin. Most of the equipment had never been unpacked,
which made loading it onto his tractor ridiculously easy.

"Better come with me now, Molly," he suggested at last. Then he turned
to Chris, who was watching him with almost no expression. "You can
wriggle your chair to the phone in half an hour, I guess. Knock the
phone off and yell for help. It's better than you deserve, unless you
really did leave me that battery."

"You won't get away with it," she told him again, calmly this time.

"No," he admitted. "Probably not. But maybe the human race will, if I
have time to find an answer to the plague you won't see under your nose.
But you won't get away with it, either. In the long run, your kind never
do."

Molly was sniffling as they drove away. It had probably been the best
life she'd known, Doc supposed. Chris could be kind to menials. But now
Molly's work was done, and she'd have to disappear into the villages. He
let her off at the first village and drove on alone. He was itching to
get to the microscope now, hardly able to wait through the long journey
back to Jake. His impatience grew with each mile.

Finally he gave up. He swung the tractor into a small gulley between
sand dunes, left the motor idling and pulled down the shades the
villagers used for blackout traveling. There was power enough for the
mike here, and the cab was big enough for what he had to do.

He mounted the mike on the tractor seat and began laying out the
collection of smears and cultures he had brought. It had been years
since he'd made a film for the electron mike, but he found it all came
back to him as he worked.

His hands were sweating with tension as he inserted the first film into
the chamber. He had the magnetic "lenses" set for twenty thousand power,
but a quick glance showed it was too weak. He raised the power to fifty
thousand.

The filaments were there, clear and distinct.

He turned on the little tape recorder that had been part of Chris'
equipment and set the microphone where he could dictate into it without
stopping to make clumsy notes. He readjusted the focus carefully,
carrying on a running commentary.

Then he gasped. Each of the little filaments carried three tiny darker
sections; each was a cell, complete in itself, with the typical Martian
triple nucleus.

He put a film with a tiny section of the nerve tissue from a corpse into
the chamber next, and again a quick glance at the screen was enough. The
filaments were there, thickly crowded among nerve cells. They _did_
travel along the nerves to reach the base of the brain before the larger
lump could form.

A specimen from one of the black specks was even more interesting. The
filaments were there, but some were changed or changing into tiny, round
cells, also with the triple dark spots of nuclei. Those must be the
final form that was released to infect others. Probably at first these
multiplied directly in epithelial tissue, so that there was a rapid
contagion of infection. Eventually, they must form the filaments that
invaded the nerves and caused the brief bodily reaction that was
Selznik's migraine. Then the body adapted to them and they began to
incubate slowly, developing into the large cells he had first seen. When
"ripe", the big cells broke apart into millions of the tiny round ones
that went back to the nerve endings, causing the black spots and killing
the host.

He knew his enemy now, at least.

He reached for the controls, increasing the magnification. He would lose
resolution, but he might find something more at the extreme limits of
the mike.

Something wet and cold gushed into his face. He jerked back, trying to
wipe it off, but it was already evaporating, and there was a thick,
acrid odor in the cab. He grabbed for his aspirator, then tried to reach
the airlock. But paralysis was already spreading through him, and he
toppled to the floor before he could escape.

When he came to, it was morning outside, and Chris was waiting inside
the cab with two big Lobby policemen. A hypo in her hand must have been
what revived him.

She touched the electron microscope with something like affection. "The
Lobby technicians did a good job on this, don't you think, Dan? I warned
you, but you wouldn't listen. And now we've even got your own taped
words to prove you were doing forbidden research. Fool!"

She shook her head pityingly as the tractor began moving with two others
toward Southport.

"You and your phony diseases. A little skin disorder, Selznik's
migraine, and a few cases of psychosis to make a new disease. Do you
think Medical Lobby can't check on such simple things? Or didn't you
expect us to hear of your open talk of revolt and realize you were
planning to create some new germ to wipe out the Earth forces. Maybe
those runners of yours were real, mass murderer!"

She drew out another hypo and shoved the needle into his arm.
Necrosynth--enough to keep him unconscious for twenty-four hours. He
started to curse her, but the drug acted before he could complete the
thought.




IX

Judgment


Doc woke to see sunlight shining through a heavily barred window that
must be in the official Southport jail. He waited a few minutes for his
head to clear and then sat up; necrosynth left no hangover, at least.

The sound of steps outside was followed by the squeak of a key in the
lock. "Fifteen minutes, Judge Wilson," a voice said.

"Thank you, officer." Wilson came into the cell, carrying a tray of
breakfast and a copy of the Northport _Gazette_. He began unloading
bracky weeds from his pocket while Doc attacked the breakfast.

"They tossed the book at you, Doc," he said. "You haven't got a chance,
and there's nothing the villages can do. Trial's set for tomorrow at
Northport, and it's in closed session. We can't get you off this time."

Doc nodded. "Thanks for coming, even if there's nothing you can do. I've
been living on borrowed time for a year, anyhow, so I have no right to
kick. But who's 'we'?"

"The villages. I've been part of their organization for years." The old
man sighed heavily. "You might say a revolution has been going on since
I can remember, though most villagers don't know it. We've just been
waiting our time. Now we've stopped waiting and the rifles will be
coming out--rifles made in village shops. The villages are going to
rebel, even if we're all dead of plague in a month."

Doc Feldman nodded and reached for the bracky. He knew that this was
their way of trying to make him feel his work hadn't been for nothing,
and he was grateful for Wilson's visit. "It was a good year for me.
Damned good. But time's running short. I'd better brief you on the
latest on the plague."

Wilson began making notes until Doc was finished. Finally he got up as
steps sounded from the hall. "Anything else?"

"Just a guess. A lot of Earth germs can't live in Mars-normal flesh;
maybe this can't live in Earth-normal. Tell them so long for me."

"So long, Doc." He shook hands briefly and was waiting at the door when
the guard opened it.

An hour later, the Lobby police took Feldman to the Northport shuttle
rocket. They had some trouble on the way; a runner cut down the street,
with the crowds frantically rushing out of his way. Terror was reaching
the cities already.

Doc flashed a look at Chris. "Mob hysteria. Like flying saucers and
wriggly tops, I suppose?" he asked, before the guard could stop him.

They locked his legs, but left his hands free in the rocket. He unfolded
the paper Wilson had brought and buried his face in it. Then he swore.
They _were_ explaining the runners as a case of mob hysteria!

Northport was calmer. Apparently they had yet to have first-hand
experience with the plague. But now nothing seemed quite real to Doc,
even when they locked him into the big Northport jail. The whole ritual
of the Lobbies seemed like a fantasy after the villages.

It snapped back into focus, however, when they led him into the trial
room of the Medical Lobby building. It was a smaller version of his
trial on Earth. Fear washed in by association. The complete lack of
humanity in the procedure was something from a half-remembered and
horrible past.

The presiding officer asked the routine question: "Is the prisoner
represented by counsel?"

Blane, the dapper little prosecutor, arose quickly. "The prisoner is a
pariah, Sir Magistrate."

"Very well. The court will accept the protective function for the
prisoner. You may proceed."

_I'll be judge, I'll be jury._ And prosecution and defense. It made for
a lot less trouble. Of course, if Space Lobby had asserted interest, it
would have gone to a supposedly neutral court. But as usual, Space was
happy to leave it in the hands of Medical.

The tape was played as evidence. Doc frowned. The words were his, but
there had been a lot of editing that subtly changed the import of his
notes.

"I protest," he challenged. "It's not an accurate version."

The Lobby magistrate turned a wooden face to him. "Does the prisoner
have a different version to introduce?"

"No, but--"

"The evidence is accepted. One of the prisoner's six protests will be
charged against him."

Blane smiled smoothly and held up a small package. "We wish to introduce
this drug as evidence that the prisoner is a confirmed addict, morally
irresponsible under addiction. This is a package of so-called bracky
weed, a vile and noxious substance found in his possession."

"It has alkaloids no more harmful than nicotine," Feldman stated
sharply.

"Do you contend that you find the taste pleasing?" Blane asked.

"It's bitter, but I've gotten used to it."

"I've tasted it," the magistrate said. "Evidence accepted. Two
deductions, one for irregularity of presentation."

Doc shrugged and sat back. He'd tested his rights and found what he
expected. It was hard to see now how he had ever accepted such
procedure. Jake must be right; they'd been in power too long, and were
making the mistake of taking the velvet glove off the iron fist and
flailing about for the sheer pleasure of power.

It dragged on, while he became a greater and greater monster on the
record. But finally it was over, and the magistrate turned to Feldman.
"You may present your defense."

"I ask complete freedom of expression," Doc said formally.

The magistrate nodded. "This is a closed court. Permission granted. The
recording will be scrambled."

The last bit ruined most of the purpose Doc had in mind. But it was too
late to change. He could only hope that some one of the Medical men
present would remember something of what he said.

"I have nothing to say for myself," he began. "It would be useless. But
I had to do what I did. There's a plague outside. I've studied that
plague, and I have knowledge which must be used against it...."

He sat down in three minutes. It had been useless.

Blane arose, with a smile still plastered on his face. "We, of course,
recognize the existence of a new contagion, but I believe we have
established that this is one disseminated by the prisoner himself, and
probably not directly contagious. There have been many cases of fanatics
ready to destroy humanity to eliminate those they hate. Now, surely, the
prisoner has himself left no question of his attitude. He asserts he has
knowledge and skill greater than the entire Medical Research staff. He
has attempted to intimidate us by threats. He is clearly psychopathic,
and dangerously so. The prosecution rests."

The guards took Doc into the anteroom, where he was supposed to hear
nothing that went on. But their curiosity was stronger than their
discretion, and the door remained a trifle ajar.

The magistrate began the discussion. "The case seems firm enough. It's
fortunate Dr. Ryan acted so quickly, with some of the people getting
nervous. Perhaps it might be wise to publicize our verdict."

"My thought exactly," Blane agreed. "If we show Feldman is responsible
and that Medical is eliminating the source of the infection, it may have
a stabilizing effect."

"Let's hope so. The sentence will have to be death, of course. We can't
let such a rebellious psychopath live. But this needs something more, it
seems. You've prepared a recommendation, I suppose."

"There was the case of Albrecht Delier," Blane suggested. "Something
like that should have good publicity impact."

It struck Doc that they sounded as if they believed themselves--as the
witch-burners had believed in witches. He was sweating when the guards
led him before the bench.

The magistrate rolled a pen slowly across his fingers as his eyes raked
Feldman. "Pariah Daniel Feldman, you have been found guilty on all
counts. Furthermore, your guilt must be shared by that entire section of
Mars known as the villages. Therefore the entire section shall be banned
and forbidden any and all services of the Medical Lobby for a period of
one year."

"Sir Magistrate!" One of the members of Southport Hospital staff was on
his feet. "Sir Magistrate, we can't cut them off completely."

"We must, Dr. Harkness. I appreciate the fine humanitarian tradition of
our Lobby which lies behind your protest, but at such a time as this the
good of the body politic requires drastic measures. Why not see me after
court, and we can discuss it then?"

He turned back to Feldman, and his face was severe.

"The same education which has produced such fine young men as Dr.
Harkness was wasted on you and perverted to endanger the whole race. No
punishment can equal your crimes, but there is one previously invoked
for a particularly horrible case, and it seems fitting that you should
be the fourth so sentenced.

"Daniel Feldman, you are sentenced to be taken in to space beyond
planetary limits, together with all material used by you in the
furtherance of your criminal acts. There you shall be placed into a
spacesuit containing sufficient oxygen for one hour of life, and no
more. You and your contaminated possessions shall then be released into
space, to drift there through all eternity as a warning to other men.

"This sentence shall be executed at the earliest possible moment, and
Dr. Christina Ryan is hereby commissioned to observe such execution. And
may God have mercy on your soul!"




X

Execution


The hours of waiting were blurred for Doc. There were periods when fear
clogged his throat and left him gasping with the need to scream and beat
his cell walls. There were also times when it didn't seem to matter, and
when his only thoughts were for the villages and the plague.

They brought him the papers, where he was painted as a monster beside
whom Jack the Ripper and Albrecht Delier were gentle amateurs. They were
trying to focus all fear and resentment on him. Maybe it was working.
There were screaming crowds outside the jail, and the noise of their
hatred was strong enough to carry through even the atmosphere of Mars.
But there were also signs that the Lobby was worried, as if afraid that
some attempt might still be made to rescue him.

He'd looked forward to the trip to the airport as a way of judging
public reaction. But apparently the Lobby had no desire to test that.
The guards led him up to the roof of the jail, where a rocket was
waiting. The landing space was too small for one of the station
shuttles, but a little Northport-Southport shuttle was parked there
after what must have been a difficult set-down. The guards tested Doc's
manacles and forced him into the shuttle.

Inside, Chris was waiting, carrying an official automatic. There was
also a young pilot, looking nervous and unhappy. He was muttering under
his breath as the guards locked Doc's legs to a seat and left.

"All right," Chris ordered. "Up ship!"

"I tell you we're overweight with you. I wasn't counting on three for
the trip," the pilot protested. "The only thing that will get this into
orbit with the station is faith. I'm loaded with every drop of fuel
she'll hold and it still isn't enough."

"That's your problem," Chris told him firmly. "You've got your orders,
and so have I. Up ship!"

If she had her own worries about the shuttle, she didn't show it. Chris
had never been afraid to do what she felt she should. The pilot stared
at her doubtfully and finally turned back to his controls, still
muttering.

The shuttle lifted sluggishly, but there was no great difficulty. Doc
could see that there was even some fuel remaining when they slipped into
the tube at the orbital station. Chris went out, and other guards came
in to free him.

"So long, Dr. Feldman," the pilot called softly as they led him out.
Then the guards shoved him through the airlock into the station. Fifteen
minutes later he was locked into one of the cabins of the _Iroquois_,
with all his possessions stacked beside him.

He grinned wryly. As an honest worker on the _Navaho_ he'd been treated
like an animal. Now, as a human fiend, he was installed in a luxury
cabin of the finest ship of the fleet, with constant spin to give a
feeling of weight and more room than the entire tube crew had known.

He roamed the cabin until he found a little collapsible table. He set
the electron microscope up on that and plugged it in. It seemed a shame
that good equipment should be wasted along with his life. He wondered
if they would really throw it out into space with him. Probably they
would.

He pushed a button on the call board over the table and asked for the
steward. There was a long wait, as if the procedure were being checked
with some authority, but finally he received a surly acknowledgement.
"Steward. Whatcha want?"

"How's the chance of getting some food?"

"You're on first-class."

They could afford it, Doc decided. He wouldn't cost them much,
considering the distance he was going. "Bring me two complete
dinners--one Earth-normal and one Mars-normal."

"Okay, Feldman. But if you think you can suicide that way, you're wrong.
You may be sick, but you'll be alive when they dump you."
