
The day dragged on and on and he didn't die.

After waking up in late afternoon he felt better. He ate a handful of nuts
and figs washed down with a little herb tea. Then as night crept over the
sky, he tottered down to the village.

Whatever had taken place during the day was done, and little groups of
people stood around fires resting and talking--as though it were the old
days before the coming of Thor, thought Builder. That was good.

Builder moved in closer to one of the fires to warm himself against the
early spring night. Someone recognized him--it was one of his workers--and
he was suddenly made welcome, once again being given the place of honor
nearest the fire, as in the old days when he'd first discovered the
humans.

Builder was dumbfounded at the sudden cordiality. In recent days, Thougor
had done such a good job of discrediting, he never dreamed of regaining
his old standing.

Then he was told what had happened during the day while he lay almost
dying:

When the god and Morge were discovered missing, Thougor had called the
village together, explaining that Thor had left them, taking Morge as a
sacrifice because he was dissatisfied with the tribe's paltry blood
offerings and worship. Therefore a great death sacrifice of young men and
women must be undertaken to pacify Thor and cause his return.

But the people questioned Thougor's order; they seemed to feel it was the
priest who had been at fault, not themselves. After all, he was the
closest to Thor, was he not? Therefore it was Thougor, not the village,
that Thor had become angered at. And after holding quick council, they had
driven Thougor out into the wilderness, telling him he was not to return
unless Thor was with him.

Old Builder almost cried when he heard this joyful news. The dam would be
completed after all, he was almost certain. He decided to say nothing more
about religion, Thor or Thougor. Maybe soon they would forget the whole
thing. Now he could go back to teaching the youngsters and some of the
brighter oldsters the methods of writing in symbols instead of drawing
pictures.



Hours and days turned into weeks and months as Builder taught his people
what feeble knowledge he possessed in arithmetic, simple engineering--such
as the dam--and most of all, instilling in them the will to want to learn
and investigate and question anything they came in contact with--even the
very thing he was asking them to do.

As the weeks passed on and the dam was completed, he gradually gathered
around him an ardent little group of seeker after that most elusive of all
things--"Truth".

But Builder knew that his days were numbered now, and his work completed;
there was still one thing he had to do, and that was permanently to do
away with Thor by dropping the idol to the bottom of the dam; he still
hadn't examined the god hidden under his sleeping pile.

One evening after returning from a solitary walk above the dam, he entered
his shack and lit a torch, then almost dropped it from shock!

His dwelling was a wreck. The place had been ransacked from top to bottom.
His sleeping pile lay in the middle of the floor--the idol was gone!

He turned and fled from the room, but before he could take a dozen steps
towards the village, several shadows glided out from behind trees and
rocks in the moonlight, resolving themselves into men.

Before he could cry out or struggle, strong arms pinned his arms to his
body and someone clapped a dirty hand over his mouth. He was forced back
into his hovel and the door slammed shut. Standing in front of him was a
very bedraggled figure whom he recognized as Thougor. He also recognized
his three other captors; all were elderly reactionaries of the tribe who
had disapproved of him from the beginning. In spite of his predicament
Builder felt a warm glow of happiness course through him. If these were
the only cronies Thougor could round up, that meant the rest of the
villagers were sympathetic with his cause. He suddenly became aware of
Thougor's grating voice:

"It took me a little time to piece things together, but once I did, it
didn't take me long to come back and find the god where I might have at
first suspected it would be--right here! For your sacrilege you will pay
with every last drop of blood you have in your scrawny old body--and now!"
Whereupon Thougor disappeared out of the hovel.

Somehow Builder had known they were going to kill him before arousing the
rest of the tribe to the fact that Thor was back. Thougor was taking no
chances of his standing in the way of him or Thor ever again. But Builder
didn't care: he had sown his few seeds of knowledge and wisdom well.
Although Thougor didn't know it, this time he wouldn't have complete
homage from all the tribe. There would now be doubts and questionings and
tests for both Thor and Thougor in the ways of truth and righteousness.

Then Thougor returned to the shack with what, Builder thought, must be
Thor. The hand over his mouth had twisted his head back so that he only
got a glimpse, but he didn't miss the long knife Thougor pulled from
