that was not visible from the big observatory on the Moon.

"I think we may as well go nearer," suggested Morey, "and see what we
find on close range observation. Meanwhile, turn the ship back around
and I'll take some pictures of the sun and its surrounding star field
from this distance. Our only way of getting back is going to be this
series of pictures, so I think we had best make it complete. For the
first light century, we ought to take a picture every ten light years,
and after that one each light century until we reach a point where we
are only getting diminishing pictures of the local star cluster. After
that, we can wait until we reach the edge of the Galaxy."

"Sounds all right to me," agreed Arcot. "After all, you're the
astronomer, I'm not. To tell you the truth, I'd have to search a while
to find Old Sol again. I can't see just where he is. Of course, I could
locate him by means of the gyroscope settings, but I'm afraid I wouldn't
find him so easily visually."

"Say! You sure are a fine one to pilot an expedition in space!" cried
Wade in mock horror. "I think we ought to demote him for that! Imagine!
He plans a trip of a thousand million light years, and then gets us out
seven light years and says he doesn't know where he is! Doesn't even
know where home is! I'm glad we have a cautious man like Morey along."
He shook his head sadly.

They took a series of six plates of the sun, using different
magnifications.

"These plates will help prove our story, too," said Morey as he looked
at the finished plates. "We might have gone only a little way into
space, up from the plane of the ecliptic and taken plates through a wide
angle camera. But we'd have had to go at least seven years into the past
to get a picture like this."

The new self-developing short-exposure plates, while not in perfect
color balance, were more desirable for this work, since they took less
time on exposure.

Morey and the others joined Arcot in the control room and strapped
themselves into the cushioned seats. Since the space strain mechanism
had proved itself in the first test, they felt they needed no more
observations than they could make from the control room meters.

Arcot gazed out at the spot that was their immediate goal and said
slowly: "How much bigger than Sol is that star, Morey?"

"It all depends on how you measure size," Morey replied. "It is two and
a half times as heavy, has four times the volume, and radiates
twenty-five times as much light. In other words, one hundred million
tons of matter disappear each second in that star.

"That's for Sirius A, of course. Sirius B, its companion, is a different
matter; it's a white dwarf. It has only one
one-hundred-twenty-five-thousandths the volume of Sirius A, but it
weighs _one third_ as much. It radiates more per square inch than our
sun, but, due to its tiny size, it is very faint. That star, though
almost as massive as the sun, is only about the size of Earth."

"You sure have those statistics down pat!" said Fuller, laughing. "But
I must say they're interesting. What's that star made of, anyway? Solid
lux metal?"

"Hardly!" Morey replied. "Lux metal has a density of around 103, while
this star has a density so high that one cubic inch of its matter would
weigh a ton on Earth."

"Wow!" Wade ejaculated. "I'd hate to drop a baseball on my toe on that
star!"

"It wouldn't hurt you," Arcot said, smiling. "If you could lift the
darned thing, you ought to be tough enough to stand dropping it on your
toe. Remember, it would weigh about two hundred tons! Think you could
handle it?"

"At any rate, here we go. When we get there, you can get out and try
it."

Again came the shock of the start. The heavens seemed to reel about
them; the bright spot of Sirius was a brilliant violet point that
swelled like an expanding balloon, spreading out until it filled a large
angle.

Then again the heavens reeled, and they were still. The control room was
filled with a dazzling splendor of brilliant blue-white light, and an
intense heat beat in upon them.

"Brother! Feel that heat," said Arcot in awe. "We'd better watch
ourselves; that thing is giving off plenty of ultraviolet. We could end
up with third-degree sunburns if we're not careful." Suddenly he stopped
and looked around in surprise. "Hey! Morey! I thought you said this was
a double star! Look over there! That's no white dwarf--_it's a planet_!"

"Ridiculous!" snapped Morey. "It's impossible for a planet to be in
equilibrium about a double star! But--" He paused, bewildered. "But it
is a planet! But--but it can't be! We've made too many measurements on
this star to make it possible!"

"I don't give a hang whether it can or not," Wade said coolly, "the fact
remains that it is. Looks as if that shoots a whole flock of holes in
that bedtime story you were telling us about a superdense star."

"I make a motion we look more closely first," said Fuller, quite
logically.

But at first the telectroscope only served to confuse them more. It was
most certainly a planet, and they had a strange, vague feeling of having
seen it before.

Arcot mentioned this, and Wade launched into a long, pedantic discussion
of how the left and right hemispheres of the brain get out of step at
times, causing a sensation of having seen a thing before when it was
impossible to have seen it previously.

Arcot gave Wade a long, withering stare and then pushed himself into the
library without saying a word. A moment later, he was back with a large
volume entitled: "_The Astronomy of the Nigran Invasion_," by _D. K.
Harkness_. He opened the volume to a full-page photograph of the third
planet of the Black Star as taken from a space cruiser circling the
planet. Silently, he pointed to it and to the image swimming on the
screen of the telectroscope.

"Good Lord!" said Wade in astonished surprise. "It's impossible! We came
here faster than light, and that planet got here first!"

"As you so brilliantly remarked a moment ago," Arcot pointed out, "I
don't give a hang whether it can or not--it is. How they did it, I don't
know, but it does clear up a number of things. According to the records
we found, the ancient Nigrans had a force ray that could move planets
from their orbits. I wonder if it couldn't be used to break up a double
star? Also, we know their scientists were looking for a method of moving
faster than light; if we can do it, so could they. They just moved their
whole system of planets over here after getting rid of the upsetting
influence of the white dwarf."

"Perfect!" exclaimed Morey enthusiastically. "It explains everything."

"Except that we saw that companion star when we stopped back there, half
an hour ago," said Fuller.

"Not half an hour ago," Arcot contradicted. "Two years ago. We saw the
light that left the companion before it was moved. It's rather like
traveling in time."

"If that's so," asked Fuller, suddenly worried, "what is our time in
relation to Earth?"

"If we moved by the space-strain drive at all times," Arcot explained,
"we would return at exactly the same time we left. Time is passing
normally on Earth as it is with us right now, but whenever we use the
space-strain, we move instantaneously from one point to another as far
as Earth and the rest of the universe is concerned. It seems to take
time to us because we are within the influence of the field.

"Suppose we were to take a trip that required a week. In other words,
three days traveling in space-strain, a day to look at the destination,
and three more days coming back. When we returned to Earth, they would
insist we had only been gone one day, the time we spent out of the
drive. See?"

"I catch," said Fuller. "By the way, shouldn't we take some photographs
of this system? Otherwise, Earth won't get the news for several years
yet."

"Right," agreed Morey. "And we might as well look for the other planets
of the Black Star, too."

They made several plates, continuing their observations until all the
planets had been located, even old Pluto, where crews of Nigran
technicians were obviously at work, building giant structures of lux
metal. The great cities of the Nigrans were beginning to bloom on the
once bleak plains of the planet. The mighty blaze of Sirius had warmed
Pluto, vaporizing its atmosphere and thawing its seas. The planet that
the Black Star had stolen from the Solar System was warmer than it had
been for two billion years.

"Well, that's it," said Arcot when they had finished taking the
necessary photographs. "We can prove we went faster than light easily,
now. The astronomers can take up the work of classifying the planets and
getting details of the orbits when we get back.

"Since the Nigrans now have a sun of their own, there should be no
reason for hostility between our race and theirs. Perhaps we can start
commercial trade with them. Imagine! Commerce over quintillions of miles
of space!"

"And," interrupted Wade, "they can make the trip to this system in less
time than it takes to get to Venus!"

"Meanwhile," said Morey, "let's get on with our own exploration."

They strapped themselves into the control seats once more and Arcot
threw in the molecular drive to take them away from the sun toward which
they had been falling.

When the great, hot disc of Sirius had once more diminished to a tiny
white pinhead of light, Arcot turned the ship until old Sol once more
showed plainly on the cross-hairs of the aiming telescope in the rear
of the vessel.

"Hold on," Arcot cautioned, "here we go again!"

Again he threw the little red tumbler that threw a flood of energy into
the coils. The space about them seemed to shiver and grow dim.

Arcot had thrown more power into the coils this time, so the stars ahead
of them instead of appearing violet were almost invisible; they were
radiating in the ultra-violet now. And the stars behind them, instead of
appearing to be green, had subsided to a dull red glow.

Arcot watched the dull red spark of Sirius become increasingly dimmer.
Then, quite suddenly, a pale violet disc in front of them ballooned out
of nowhere and slid off to one side.

The spaceship reeled, perking the men around in the control seats. Heavy
safety relays thudded dully; the instruments flickered under a suddenly
rising surge of power--then they were calm again. Arcot had snapped over
the power switch.

"That," he said quietly, "is not so good."

"Threw the gyroscopes, didn't it?" asked Morey, his voice equally as
quiet.

"It did--and I have no idea how far. We're off course and we don't know
which direction we're headed."




VI


"What's the matter?" asked Fuller anxiously.

Arcot pointed out the window at a red star that blazed in the distance.
"We got too near the field of gravity of that young giant and he threw
us for a loss. We drained out three-fourths of the energy from our coils
and lost our bearings in the bargain. The attraction turned the
gyroscopes and threw the ship out of line, so we no longer know where
the sun is.

"Well, come on, Morey; all we can do is start a search. At this
distance, we'd best go by Sirius; it's brighter and nearer." He looked
at the instrument panel. "I was using the next lowest power and I still
couldn't avoid that monster. This ship is just a little _too_ hot to
handle."

Their position was anything but pleasant. They must pick out from the
vast star field behind them the one star that was home, not knowing
exactly where it was. But they had one tremendous help--the photographs
of the star field around Sol that they had taken at the last stop. All
they had to do was search for an area that matched their photographs.

They found the sun at last, after they had spotted Sirius, but they had
had to rotate the ship through nearly twenty-five degrees to do it.
After establishing their bearings, they took new photographs for their
files.

Meanwhile, Wade had been recharging the coils. When he was finished, he
reported the fact to Arcot.

"Fine," Arcot said. "And from now on, I'm going to use the least
possible amount of power. It certainly isn't safe to use more."

They started for the control room, much relieved. Arcot dived first,
with Wade directly behind him. Wade decided suddenly to go into his room
and stopped himself by grabbing a handhold. Morey, following close
behind, bumped into him and was brought to rest, while Wade was pushed
into his room.

But Fuller, coming last, slammed into Morey, who moved forward with new
velocity toward the control room, leaving Fuller hanging at rest in the
middle of the corridor.

"Hey, Morey!" he laughed. "Send me a skyhook! I'm caught!" Isolated as
he was in the middle of the corridor, he couldn't push on anything and
remained stranded.

"Go to sleep!" advised Morey. "It's the most comfortable bed you'll
find!"

Wade looked out of his room just then. "Well, if it isn't old
Weakmuscles Fuller! Weighs absolutely nothing and is still so weak he
can't push himself around."

"Come on, though, Morey--give me a hand--I got you off dead center."
Fuller flailed his hand helplessly.

"Use your brains, if you have any," said Morey, "and see what you can
do. Come on, Wade--we're going."

Since they were going to use the space control, they would remain in
free fall, and Fuller would remain helplessly suspended in mid-air.

The air of the ship suddenly seemed supercharged with energy as the
space around them became gray; then the stars were all before them. The
ship was moving forward again.

"Well, old pals," said Fuller, "at least I have traffic blocked fairly
well if I feel like it, so eventually you'd have to help me. However--"
He floundered clumsily as he removed one of his foam-rubber space-boots,
"--my brains tell me that action is equal and opposite to reaction!" And
he threw the boot with all possible velocity toward Morey!

The reaction of the motion brought him slowly but surely to a handhold
in the wall.

In the meantime, the flying boot caught Morey in the chest with a
pronounced _smack_! as he struggled vainly to avoid it. Handicapped by
the lack of friction, his arms were not quite powerful enough to move
his mass as quickly as his legs might have done, for his inertia was as
great as ever, so he didn't succeed in ducking.

"Round one!" called Arcot, laughing. "Won by Kid Fuller on a TKO! It
appears he has brains and knows how to use them!"

"You win," laughed Morey. "I concede the battle!"

Arcot had cut off the space-strain drive by the time Fuller reached the
control room, and the men set about making more observations. They took
additional photographs and turned on the drive again.

Time passed monotonously after they had examined a few stars. There was
little difference; each was but a scene of flaming matter. There was
little interest in this work, and, as Fuller remarked, this was supposed
to be a trip of exploration, not observation. They weren't astronomers;
they were on a vacation. Why all the hard work? They couldn't do as good
a job as an experienced astronomer, so they decided to limit their
observations to those necessary to retrace their path to Earth.

"But we want to investigate for planets to land on, don't we?" asked
Morey.

"Sure," agreed Fuller. "But do we have to hunt at random for them? Can't
we look for stars like our own sun? Won't they be more apt to have
planets like Sol's?"

"It's an idea," replied Morey.

"Well, why not try it then?" Fuller continued logically. "Let's pick out
a G-0 type sun and head for it."

They were now well out toward the edge of the Galaxy, some thirty
thousand light years from home. Since they had originally headed out
along the narrow diameter of the lens-shaped mass of stars that forms
our Island Universe, they would reach the edge soon.

"We won't have much chance of finding a G-0 this far out," Arcot pointed
out. "We're about out of stars. We've left most of the Galaxy behind
us."

"Then let's go on to another of the galactic nebulae," said Morey,
looking out into the almost unbroken night of intergalactic space. Only
here and there could they see a star, separated from its nearest
neighbor by thousands of light years of empty space.

"You know," said Wade slowly, "I've been wondering about the progress
along scientific lines that a race out here might make. I mean, suppose
that one of those lonely stars had planets, and suppose intelligent life
evolved on one of those planets. I think their progress would be much
slower."

"I see what you mean," Arcot said. "To us, of Earth, the stars are
gigantic furnaces a few light years away. They're titanic tests tubes of
nature, with automatic reading devices attached, hung in the sky for us
to watch. We have learned more about space from the stars than all the
experiments of the physicists of Earth ever secured for us. It was in
the atoms of the suns that we first counted the rate of revolutions of
the electrons about their nuclei."

"Couldn't they have watched their own sun?" Fuller asked.

"Sure, but what could they compare it with? They couldn't see a white
dwarf from here. They couldn't measure the parallax to the nearest star,
so they would have no idea of stellar distances. They wouldn't know how
bright S Doradus was. Or how dim Van Maanen's star was."

"Then," Fuller said speculatively, "they'd have to wait until one of
their scientists invented the telectroscope."

Arcot shook his head. "Without a knowledge of nuclear physics, the
invention of the telectroscope is impossible. The lack of opportunity to
watch the stars that might teach them something would delay their
knowledge of atomic structure. They might learn a great deal about
chemistry and Newtonian physics, and go quite a ways with math, but even
there they would be handicapped. Morey, for instance, would never have
developed the autointegral calculus, to say nothing of tensor and spinor
calculus, which were developed two hundred years ago, without the
knowledge of the problems of space to develop the need. I'm afraid such
a race would be quite a bit behind us in science.

"Suppose, on the other hand, we visit a race that's far ahead of us.
We'd better not stay there long; think what they might do to us. They
might decide our ship was too threatening and simply wipe us out. Or
they might even be so far advanced that we would mean nothing to them at
all--like ants or little squalling babies." Arcot laughed at the
thought.

"That isn't a very complimentary picture," objected Fuller. "With the
wonderful advances we've made, there just isn't that much left to be
able to say we're so little."

"Fuller, I'm surprised at you!" Arcot said. "Today, we are only opening
our eyes on the world of science. Our race has only a few thousand years
behind it and hundreds of millions yet to come. How can any man of
