
Chapter Six


"Evil," the priest said, after he had settled comfortably into Barrent's
best chair, "is that force within us which inspires men to acts of
strength and endurance. The worship of Evil is essentially the worship
of oneself, and therefore the only true worship. The self which one
worships is the ideal social being; the man content in his niche in
society, yet ready to grasp any opportunity for advancement; the man who
meets death with dignity, who kills without the demeaning vice of pity.
Evil is cruel, since it is a true reflection of the uncaring and
insensate universe. Evil is eternal and unchanging, although it comes to
us in the many forms of protean life."

"Would you care for a little wine, Uncle?" Barrent asked.

"Thank you, that's very thoughtful," Uncle Ingemar said. "How is
business?"

"Fair. A little slow this week."

"People don't take the same interest in poisoning," the priest said,
moodily sipping his drink. "Not like when I was a boy, newly unfrocked
and shipped out from Earth. However. I was speaking to you about Evil."

"Yes, Uncle."

"We worship Evil," Uncle Ingemar said, "in the incarnate form of The
Black One, that horned and horrid specter of our days and nights. In The
Black One we find the seven cardinal sins, the forty felonies, and the
hundred and one misdemeanors. There is no crime that The Black One has
not performed--faultlessly, as befits his nature. Therefore we imperfect
beings model ourselves upon his perfections. And sometimes, The Black
One rewards us by appearing before us in the awful beauty of his fiery
flesh. Yes, Nephew, I have actually been privileged to see him. Two
years ago he appeared at the conclusion of the Games, and he also
appeared the year before that."

The priest brooded for a moment over the divine appearance. Then he
said, "Since we recognize in the State man's highest potential for Evil,
we also worship the State as a suprahuman, though less than divine,
creation."

Barrent nodded. He was having a difficult time staying awake. Uncle
Ingemar's low, monotonous voice lecturing about so commonplace a thing
as Evil had a soporific effect on him. He struggled to keep his eyes
open.

"One might well ask," Uncle Ingemar droned on, "if Evil is the highest
attainment of the nature of man, why then did The Black One allow any
Good to exist in the universe? The problem of Good has bothered the
unenlightened for ages. I will now answer it for you."

"Yes, Uncle?" Barrent said, surreptitiously pinching himself on the
inside of the thigh in an effort to stay awake.

"But first," Uncle Ingemar said, "let us define our terms. Let us
examine the nature of Good. Let us boldly and fearlessly stare our great
opponent in the face and discover the true lineaments of his features."

"Yes," Barrent said, wondering if he should open a window. His eyes felt
incredibly heavy. He rubbed them hard and tried to pay attention.

"Good is a state of illusion," said Uncle Ingemar in his even,
monotonous voice, "which ascribes to man the nonexistent attributes of
altruism, humility, and piety. How can we recognize Good as being an
illusion? Because there is only man and The Black One in the universe,
and to worship The Black One is to worship the ultimate expression of
oneself. Thus, since we have proven Good to be an illusion, we
necessarily recognize its attributes as nonexistent. Understood?"

Barrent didn't answer.

"Do you understand?" the priest asked more sharply.

"Eh?" Barrent said. He had been dozing with his eyes open. He forced
himself awake and managed to say, "Yes, Uncle, I understand."

"Excellent. Understanding that, we ask, why did The Black One allow even
the illusion of Good to exist in an Evil universe? And the answer is
found in the Law of Necessary Opposites; for Evil could not be
recognized as such without something to contrast it with. The best
contrast is an opposite. And the opposite of Evil is Good." The priest
smiled triumphantly. "It's so simple and clear-cut, isn't it?"

"It certainly is, Uncle," Barrent said. "Would you like a little more
wine?"

"Just the tiniest drop," the priest said.

He talked to Barrent for another ten minutes about the natural and
charming Evil inherent in the beasts of the field and forest, and
counseled Barrent to pattern his behavior on those simple-minded
creatures. At last he rose to leave.

"I'm very glad we could have this little chat," the priest said, warmly
shaking Barrent's hand. "Can I count on your appearance at our Monday
night services?"

"Services?"

"Of course," Uncle Ingemar said. "Every Monday night--at midnight--we
hold Black Mass at the Wee Coven on Kirkwood Drive. After services, the
Ladies Auxiliary usually puts out a snack, and we have community dancing
and choir singing. It's all very jolly." He smiled broadly. "You see,
the worship of evil _can_ be fun."

"I'm sure it can," Barrent said. "I'll be there, Uncle."

He showed the priest to the door. After locking up, he thought carefully
about what Uncle Ingemar had said. No doubt about it, attendance at
services was necessary. Compulsory, in fact. He just hoped that the
Black Mass wouldn't be as infernally dull as Ingemar's exposition of
Evil.

That was Friday. Barrent was kept busy over the next two days. He
received a shipment of homeopathic herbs and roots from his agent in the
Bloodpit district. It took the better part of a day to sort and classify
them, and another day to store them in the proper jars.

On Monday, returning to his shop after lunch, Barrent thought he saw
the girl. He hurried after her, but lost her in the crowd.

When he got back to his store, Barrent found that a letter had been
slipped under his door. It was an invitation from his neighborhood Dream
Shop. The letter read:

     Dear Citizen, We take this opportunity of welcoming you into
     the neighborhood and extending to you the services of what we
     believe to be the finest Dream on Omega.

     All manner and type of dreams are available to you--and at a
     surprisingly low cost. We specialize in memory-resurrecting
     dreams of Earth. You can be assured that your neighborhood
     Dream Shop offers you only the finest in vicarious living.

     As a Free Citizen, you will surely wish to avail yourself of
     these services. May we hope that you do so within the week?

     The Proprietors.

Barrent put down the letter. He had no idea what a Dream Shop was, or
how the dreams were produced. He would have to find out. Even though the
invitation was graciously worded, it had a peremptory tone to it. Past a
doubt, a visit to a Dream Shop was one of the obligations of a Free
Citizen.

But of course, an obligation could be a pleasure, too. The Dream Shop
sounded interesting. And a genuine memory-resurrection dream of Earth
would be worth almost any price the proprietors wished to ask.

But that would have to wait. Tonight was Black Mass, and his attendance
there was definitely required.

Barrent left his store at eleven o'clock in the evening. He wanted time
for a stroll around Tetrahyde before going to the service, which began
at midnight.

He started his walk with a definite sense of well-being. And yet,
because of the irrational and unexpecting nature of Omega, he almost
died before reaching the Wee Coven on Kirkwood Drive.




Chapter Seven


It had turned into a hot, almost suffocatingly humid night when Barrent
began his walk. Not the faintest breath of air stirred along the
darkened streets. Although he was wearing only a black mesh shirt,
shorts, gunbelt, and sandals, Barrent felt as if he were wrapped in a
thick blanket. Most of the people of Tetrahyde, except for those already
at the Covens, had retired to the coolness of their cellars. The dark
streets were nearly deserted.

Barrent walked on, more slowly. The few people he met were running to
their homes. There was a sense of panic in that silent, dogged sprint
through heat which made walking difficult. Barrent tried to find out
what the matter was, but no one would stop. One old man shouted over his
shoulder, "Get off the street, idiot!"

"Why?" Barrent asked him.

The old man snarled something unintelligible and hurried on.

Barrent kept on walking, nervously fingering the butt of his
needlebeam. Something was certainly wrong, but he had no idea what it
was. His nearest shelter now was the Wee Coven, about half a mile away.
It seemed best to keep on moving in that direction, staying alert,
waiting to see what was wrong.

In a few minutes, Barrent was alone in a tightly shuttered city. He
moved into the center of the street, loosened the needlebeam in its
holster, and prepared for attack from any side. Perhaps this was some
special holiday like Landing Day. Perhaps Free Citizens were fair game
tonight. Anything seemed possible on a planet like Omega.

He thought he was ready for any possibility. But when the attack came,
it was from an unexpected quarter.

A faint breeze stirred the stagnant air. It faded and returned, stronger
this time, perceptibly cooling the hot streets. Wind rolled off the
mountains of the interior and swept through the streets of Tetrahyde,
and Barrent could feel the perspiration on his chest and back begin to
dry.

For a few minutes, the climate of Tetrahyde was as pleasant as anything
he could imagine.

Then the temperature continued to fall.

It dropped rapidly. Frigid air swept in from the distant mountain
slopes, and the temperature fell through the seventies into the sixties.

This is ridiculous, Barrent thought to himself. I'd better get to the
Coven.

He walked more rapidly, while the temperature plummeted. It passed
through the forties into the low thirties. The first glittering signs of
frost appeared on the streets.

It can't go much lower, Barrent thought.

But it could. An angry winter wind blew through the streets, and the
temperature dropped into the twenties. Moisture in the air began forming
into sleet.

Chilled to the bone, Barrent ran down the empty streets, and the wind,
rising to gale force, pulled and tugged at him. The streets glittered
with ice, making the footing dangerous. He skidded and fell, and had to
run at a slower pace to keep his footing. And still the temperature
dropped, and the wind growled and snapped like an angry beast.

He saw light through a heavily shuttered window. He stopped and pounded
at the shutters, but no sound came from inside. He realized that the
people of Tetrahyde never helped anyone; the more who died, the more
chance there was for the survivors. So Barrent continued running, on
feet that felt like chunks of wood.

The wind shrieked in his ear, and hailstones the size of his fist pelted
the ground. He was getting too tired to run. All he could do now was
walk, through a frozen white world, and hope he would reach the Wee
Coven.

He walked for hours or for years. At one corner he passed the bodies of
two men huddled against a wall and covered with frost. They had stopped
running and had frozen to death.

Barrent forced himself to run again. A stitch in his side felt like a
knife wound, and the cold was creeping up his arms and down his legs.
Soon the cold would reach his chest, and that would be the end.

A flurry of hailstones stunned him. Without conscious transition he
found that he was lying on the icy ground, and a monstrous wind was
whirling away the tiny warmth his body was able to generate.

At the far end of the block he could see the tiny red light of the
Coven. He crept toward it on hands and knees, moving mechanically, not
really expecting to get there. He crawled forever, and the beckoning red
light always remained the same distance from him.

But he kept on crawling, and at last he reached the door of the Coven.
He pulled himself to his feet and turned the doorknob.

The door was locked.

He pounded feebly on the door. After a moment, a panel slid back. He saw
a man staring at him; then the panel slid shut. He waited for the door
to open. It didn't open. Minutes passed, and still it didn't open. What
were they waiting for inside? What was wrong? Barrent tried to pound on
the door again, lost his balance and fell to the ground. He rolled over
and looked despairingly at the locked door. Then he lost consciousness.

       *       *       *       *       *

When he came to, Barrent found himself lying on a couch. Two men were
massaging his arms and legs, and beneath him he could feel the warmth of
heating pads. Peering anxiously at him was the broad, swarthy face of
Uncle Ingemar.

"Feeling better now?" Uncle Ingemar asked.

"I think so," Barrent said. "Why did you take so long opening the door?"

"We almost didn't open it at all," the priest told him. "It's against
the law to aid strangers in distress. Since you hadn't as yet joined the
Coven, you were technically still a stranger."

"Then why did you let me in?"

"My assistant noticed that we had an even number of worshipers. We
require an odd number, preferably ending in three. Where the sacred and
the profane laws are in conflict, the profane must yield. So we let you
in despite the government ruling."

"It's a ridiculous ruling," Barrent said.

"Not really. Like most of the laws of Omega, it is designed to keep the
population down. Omega is an extremely barren planet, you know. The
constant arrival of new prisoners keeps swelling the population, to the
enormous disadvantage of the older inhabitants. Ways and means must be
sought to dispose of the excess newcomers."

"It isn't fair," Barrent said.

"You'll change your mind when you become an older inhabitant," Ingemar
said. "And by your tenacity, I'm sure you'll become one."

"Maybe," Barrent said. "But what happened? The temperature must have
dropped nearly a hundred degrees in fifteen minutes."

"A hundred and eight degrees to be exact," Uncle Ingemar said. "It's
really very simple. Omega is a planet which revolves eccentrically
around a double star system. Further instability, I'm told, comes from
the planet's peculiar physical make-up--the placement of mountains and
seas. The result is a uniformly and dramatically bad climate
characterized by sudden violent temperature changes."

The assistant, a small, self-important fellow, said, "It has been
calculated that Omega is at the outer limits of the planets which can
support human life without gross artificial aids. If the fluctuations
between hot and cold were any more violent, all human life here would
be wiped out."

"It's the perfect punitive world," Uncle Ingemar said proudly.
"Experienced residents sense when a temperature change is about to take
place and get indoors."

"It's--hellish," Barrent said, at a loss for words.

"That describes it perfectly," the priest said. "It _is_ hellish, and
therefore perfect for the worship of The Black One. If you're feeling
better now, Citizen Barrent, shall we proceed with services?"

