
"Then he held that dim torch of his toward the walls, and they were
pictured. Lord, what pictures! They stretched up and up into the
blackness of the roof, mysterious and gigantic. I couldn't make much of
the first wall; it seemed to be a portrayal of a great assembly of
Tweel's people. Perhaps it was meant to symbolize Society or Government.
But the next wall was more obvious; it showed creatures at work on a
colossal machine of some sort, and that would be Industry or Science.
The back wall had corroded away in part, from what we could see, I
suspected the scene was meant to portray Art, but it was on the fourth
wall that we got a shock that nearly dazed us.

"I think the symbol was Exploration or Discovery. This wall was a little
plainer, because the moving beam of daylight from that crack lit up the
higher surface and Tweel's torch illuminated the lower. We made out a
giant seated figure, one of the beaked Martians like Tweel, but with
every limb suggesting heaviness, weariness. The arms dropped inertly on
the chair, the thin neck bent and the beak rested on the body, as if the
creature could scarcely bear its own weight. And before it was a queer
kneeling figure, and at sight of it, Leroy and I almost reeled against
each other. It was, apparently, a man!"

"A man!" bellowed Harrison. "A man you say?"

"I said apparently," retorted Jarvis. "The artist had exaggerated the
nose almost to the length of Tweel's beak, but the figure had black
shoulder-length hair, and instead of the Martian four, there were _five_
fingers on its outstretched hand! It was kneeling as if in worship of
the Martian, and on the ground was what looked like a pottery bowl full
of some food as an offering. Well! Leroy and I thought we'd gone
screwy!"

"And Putz and I think so, too!" roared the captain.

"Maybe we all have," replied Jarvis, with a faint grin at the pale face
of the little Frenchman, who returned it in silence. "Anyway," he
continued, "Tweel was squeaking and pointing at the figure, and saying
'Tick! Tick!' so he recognized the resemblance--and never mind any
cracks about my nose!" he warned the captain. "It was Leroy who made the
important comment; he looked at the Martian and said 'Thoth! The god
Thoth!'"

"_Oui!_" confirmed the biologist. "_Comme l'Egypte!_"

"Yeah," said Jarvis. "Like the Egyptian ibis-headed god--the one with
the beak. Well, no sooner did Tweel hear the name Thoth than he set up a
clamor of twittering and squeaking. He pointed at himself and said
'Thoth! Thoth!' and then waved his arm all around and repeated it. Of
course he often did queer things, but we both thought we understood what
he meant. He was trying to tell us that his race called themselves
Thoth. Do you see what I'm getting at?"

"I see, all right," said Harrison. "You think the Martians paid a visit
to the earth, and the Egyptians remembered it in their mythology. Well,
you're off, then; there wasn't any Egyptian civilization fifteen
thousand years ago."

"Wrong!" grinned Jarvis. "It's too bad we _haven't_ an archeologist
with us, but Leroy tells me that there was a stone-age culture in Egypt
then, the pre-dynastic civilization."

"Well, even so, what of it?"

"Plenty! Everything in that picture proves my point. The attitude of the
Martian, heavy and weary--that's the unnatural strain of terrestrial
gravitation. The name Thoth; Leroy tells me Thoth was the Egyptian god
of philosophy and the inventor of _writing_! Get that? They must have
picked up the idea from watching the Martian take notes. It's too much
for coincidence that Thoth should be beaked and ibis-headed, and that
the beaked Martians call themselves Thoth."

"Well, I'll be hanged! But what about the nose on the Egyptian? Do you
mean to tell me that stone-age Egyptians had longer noses than ordinary
men?"

"Of course not! It's just that the Martians very naturally cast their
paintings in Martianized form. Don't human beings tend to relate
everything to themselves? That's why dugongs and manatees started the
mermaid myths--sailors thought they saw human features on the beasts. So
the Martian artist, drawing either from descriptions or imperfect
photographs, naturally exaggerated the size of the human nose to a
degree that looked normal to him. Or anyway, that's my theory."

"Well, it'll do as a theory," grunted Harrison. "What I want to hear is
why you two got back here looking like a couple of year-before-last
bird's nests."

Jarvis shuddered again, and cast another glance at Leroy. The little
biologist was recovering some of his accustomed poise, but he returned
the glance with an echo of the chemist's shudder.

"We'll get to that," resumed the latter. "Meanwhile I'll stick to Tweel
and his people. We spent the better part of three days with them, as you
know. I can't give every detail, but I'll summarize the important facts
and give our conclusions, which may not be worth an inflated franc. It's
hard to judge this dried-up world by earthly standards.

"We took pictures of everything possible; I even tried to photograph
that gigantic mural in the library, but unless Tweel's lamp was
unusually rich in actinic rays, I don't suppose it'll show. And that's a
pity, since it's undoubtedly the most interesting object we've found on
Mars, at least from a human viewpoint.

"Tweel was a very courteous host. He took us to all the points of
interest--even the new water-works."

Putz's eyes brightened at the word. "Vater-vorks?" he echoed. "For vot?"

"For the canal, naturally. They have to build up a head of water to
drive it through; that's obvious." He looked at the captain. "You told
me yourself that to drive water from the polar caps of Mars to the
equator was equivalent to forcing it up a twenty-mile hill, because Mars
is flattened at the poles and bulges at the equator just like the
earth."

"That's true," agreed Harrison.

"Well," resumed Jarvis, "this city was one of the relay stations to
boost the flow. Their power plant was the only one of the giant
buildings that seemed to serve any useful purpose, and that was worth
seeing. I wish you'd seen it, Karl; you'll have to make what you can
from our pictures. It's a sun-power plant!"

Harrison and Putz stared. "Sun-power!" grunted the captain. "That's
primitive!" And the engineer added an emphatic "_Ja!_" of agreement.

"Not as primitive as all that," corrected Jarvis. "The sunlight focused
on a queer cylinder in the center of a big concave mirror, and they drew
an electric current from it. The juice worked the pumps."

"A t'ermocouple!" ejaculated Putz.

"That sounds reasonable; you can judge by the pictures. But the
power-plant had some queer things about it. The queerest was that the
machinery was tended, not by Tweel's people, but by some of the
barrel-shaped creatures like the ones in Xanthus!" He gazed around at
the faces of his auditors; there was no comment.

"Get it?" he resumed. At their silence, he proceeded, "I see you don't.
Leroy figured it out, but whether rightly or wrongly, I don't know. He
thinks that the barrels and Tweel's race have a reciprocal arrangement
like--well, like bees and flowers on earth. The flowers give honey for
the bees; the bees carry the pollen for the flowers. See? The barrels
tend the works and Tweel's people build the canal system. The Xanthus
city must have been a boosting station; that explains the mysterious
machines I saw. And Leroy believes further that it isn't an intelligent
