cylinders having been activated by whatever force there was in
action--all right, call it psi--well, why didn't they retain it, the way
the other cylinders retained the antigrav force?"

I thought for a moment. Something about the conditional setup seemed to
give me an idea.

"You take a photographic plate," I reasoned. "Give it a weak exposure to
light, then give it a strong blast of overexposure. The first exposure
is going to be blanked out by the second. Old Stone Face was feeling
pretty strongly toward the whole matter."

Auerbach looked at me, unbelieving.

"There isn't any rule about who can have psi talent," I argued. "I'm
just wondering if I shouldn't wire General Sanfordwaithe and tell him
to cut our order for poltergeists down to five."

       *       *       *       *       *

I spent a glum, restless night. I knew, with certainty, that Old Stone
Face was going to give me trouble. I didn't need any psi talent for
that, it was an inevitable part of his pattern. He had made up his mind
to take charge of this antigrav operation, and he wouldn't let one bogus
seance stop him more than momentarily.

If it weren't so close to direct interference with my department, I'd
have been delighted to sit on the side lines and watch him try to
command psi effects to happen. That would be like commanding some random
copper wire and metallic cores to start generating electricity.

For once I could have overlooked the interference with my department if
I didn't know, from past experience, that I'd be blamed for the
consequent failure. That's a cute little trick of top executives,
generally. They get into something they don't understand, really louse
it up, then, because it is your department, you are the one who failed.
Ordinarily I liked my job, but if this sort of thing went too far--

But more than saving my job, I had the feeling that if I were allowed to
go along, carefully and experimentally, I just might discover a few of
the laws about psi. There was the tantalizing feeling that I was on the
verge of knowing at least something.

The Pentagon people had been right. The Swami was an obvious phony of
the baldest fakery, yet he had something. He had something, but how was
I to get hold of it? Just what kind of turns with what around what did
you make to generate a psi force? It took two thousand years for man to
move from the concept that amber was a stone with a soul to the concept
of static electricity. Was there any chance I could find some shortcuts
in reducing the laws governing psi? The one bright spot of my morning
was that Auerbach hadn't denied seeing the evidence of the cylinders
pointing North.

It turned out to be the only bright spot. I had no more than got to my
office and sorted out the routine urgencies which had to be handled
immediately from those which could be put off a little longer, when Sara
announced the lieutenant and the Swami. So I put everything else off,
and told her to send them right in.

The Swami was in an incoherent rage. The lieutenant was contracting his
eyebrows in a scowl and clenching his fists in frustration. In a voice,
soaring into the falsetto, the Swami demanded that he be sent back to
Brooklyn where he was appreciated. The lieutenant had orders to stay
with the Swami, but he didn't have any orders about returning either to
Brooklyn or the Pentagon. I managed, at last, to get the lieutenant
seated in a straight chair, but the Swami couldn't stay still long
enough. He stalked up and down the room, swirling his slightly odorous
black cloak on the turns. Gradually the story came out.

       *       *       *       *       *

Old Stone Face, a strong advocate of Do It Now, hadn't wasted any time.
From his home he had called the Swami at his hotel and commanded him to
report to the general manager's office at once. Apparently they both got
there about the same time, and Henry had waded right in.

Apparently Henry, too, had spent a restless night. He accused the Swami
of inefficiency, bungling, fraud, deliberate insubordination, and a few
other assorted faults for having made a fool out of us all at the
seance. He'd as much as commanded the Swami to cut out all this
shilly-shallying and get down to the business of activating antigrav
cylinders, or else. He hadn't been specific about what the "or else"
would entail.

It was up to me to pick up the pieces, if I could.

"Now I'm sure he really didn't mean--" I began to pour oil on the
troubled waters. "With your deep insight, Swami--The fate of great
martyrs throughout the ages--" Gradually the ego-building phrases calmed
him down. He grew willing to listen, if for no more than the
anticipation of hearing more of them.

He settled down into the crying chair at last, and I could see his
valence shifting from outraged anger to a vast and noble forgiveness.
This much was not difficult. To get him to cooeperate, consciously and
enthusiastically, well that might not be so easy.

Each trade has its own special techniques. The analytical chemist has a
series of routines he tries when he wishes to reduce an unknown compound
to its constituents. To the chemically uneducated, this may appear to be
a fumbling, hit or miss, kind of procedure. The personnel man, too, has
his series of techniques. It may appear to be no more than random,
pointless conversation.

I first tried the routine process of reasoning. I didn't expect it to
work; it seldom does, but it can't be eliminated until it has been
tested.

       *       *       *       *       *

"You must understand," I said slowly, soothingly, "that our intentions
are constructive. We are simply trying to apply the scientific method to
something which has, heretofore, been wrapped in mysticism."

The shocked freezing of his facial muscles told me that reasoning had
missed its mark. It told me more.

"Science understands nothing, nothing at all!" he snapped, "Science
tries to reduce everything to test tubes and formulae; but I am the
instrument of a mystery which man can never know."

"Well, now," I said reasonably. "Let us not be inconsistent. You say
this is something man was not meant to know; yet you, yourself, have
devoted your life to gaining a greater comprehension of it."

"I seek only to rise above my material self so that I might place
myself in harmony with the flowing symphony of Absolute Truth," he
lectured me sonorously. Oh well, his enrapturement with such terminology
differed little from some of the sciences which tended to grow equally
esoteric. And maybe it meant something. Who was I to say that mine ears
alone heard all the music being played?

It did mean one thing very specifically. There are two basic approaches
to the meaning of life and the universe about us. Man can know: That is
the approach of science, its whole meaning. There are mysteries which
man was not meant to know: That is the other approach. There is no
reconciling of the two on a reasoning basis. I represented the former. I
wasn't sure the Swami was a true representative of the latter, but at
least he had picked up the valence and the phrases.

I made a mental note that reasoning was an unworkable technique with
this compound. Henry, a past master at it, had already tried threats and
abuse. That hadn't worked. I next tried one of the oldest forms in the
teaching of man, a parable.

I told him of my old Aunt Dimity, who was passionately fond of Rummy,
but considered all other card games sinful.

"Ah, how well she proves my point," the Swami countered. "There is an
inner voice, a wisdom greater than the mortal mind to guide us--"

"Well now," I asked reasonably, "why would the inner voice say that
Rummy was O.K., but Casino wasn't?" But it was obvious he liked the
point he had made better than he had liked the one I failed to make.

So I tried the next technique. I tried an appeal for instruction. Often
an opponent will come over to your side if you just confess, honestly,
that he is a better man than you are, and you need his help. What was
the road I must take to achieve the same understanding he had achieved?
His eyes glittered at that, and a mercenary expression underlay the tone
of his answer.

"First there is fasting, and breathing, and contemplating self," he
murmured mendaciously. "I would be unable to aid you until you gave me
full ascendancy over you, so that I might guide your every thought--"

I decided to try inspiration. In breaking down recalcitrant materials in
the laboratory of my personnel office, sometimes one method worked,
sometimes another.

"Do you realize, Swami," I asked, "that the one great drawback
throughout the ages to a full acceptance of psi is the lack of permanent
evidence? It has always been evanescent, perishable. It always rests
solely upon the word of witnesses. But if I could show you a film print,
then you could not doubt the existence of photography, could you?"

I opened my lower desk drawer and pulled out a couple of the Auerbach
cylinders which we had used the night before. I laid them on top of the
desk.

"These cylinders," I said, "act like the photographic film. They will
record, in permanent form, the psi effects you command. At last, for all
mankind the doubt will be stilled; man will at once know the truth; and
you will take your place among the immortals."

[Illustration]

I thought it was pretty good, and that, with his overweening ego, it
would surely do the trick. But the Swami was staring at the cylinders
first in fascination, then fear, then in horror. He jumped to his feet,
without bothering to swirl his robe majestically, rushed over to the
door, fumbled with the knob as if he were in a burning room, managed to
get the door open, and rushed outside. The lieutenant gave me a puzzled
look, and went after him.

       *       *       *       *       *
