
"Society for the Protection of the Native Born," Costa read. "Doesn't
sound like very important. Who or what are they?"

"Proof positive of the law of averages. It's possible to be dealt a
royal flush in a hand of cards, but it isn't very common. It's just as
possible for a bunch of simpletons to set up an organization for one
purpose, and have it turn out to be a supercharged, high-frequency
k-factor amplifier. That's what's happened with this infernal S.P.N.B. A
seedy little social club, dedicated to jingoists with low I.Q.'s. With
the war scare they have managed to get hold of a few credits. They have
probably been telling the same inflated stories for years about the
discrimination against natives of this fair planet, but no one has
really cared. Now they have a chance to get their news releases and
faked pix out in quantity. Just at a time when the public is ripe for
their brand of nonsense. Putting this bunch out of business will be a
good day's work."

"Won't there be repercussions?" Costa asked. "If they are this important
and throw so much weight around--won't it look suspicious if they are
suddenly shut up. Like an obvious move by the enemy?"

"Not at all. That might be true if, for instance, you blew up the
headquarters of the War Party. It would certainly be taken as an
aggressive move. But no one really knows or cares about this Society of
the Half-baked Native Born. There might be reaction and interest if
attention was drawn to them. But if some accident or act of nature were
to put them out of business, that would be the end of it."

Costa was snapping his lighter on and off as he listened to Neel,
staring at the flame. He closed it and held it up. "I believe in
accidents. I believe that even in our fireproof age, fires still occur.
Buildings still burn down. And if a burnt building just happened to be
occupied by the S.P.N.B.--just one tenant of many--and their offices and
records were destroyed; that would be of very little interest to anyone
except the fire brigade."

"You're a born criminal," Neel told him. "I'm glad we're on the same
side. That's your department and I leave it to you. I'll just listen for
the news flashes. Meanwhile I have one little errand to take care of."

The words stopped Costa, who was almost out the door. He turned stiffly
to look at Neel putting papers into an envelope. Yet Costa spoke
naturally, letting none of his feelings through into his voice.

"Where are you going?"

"To see Hengly, the planetary operator here. Abravanel told me to stay
away from him, to run an entirely new basic survey. Well we've done that
now, and pinpointed some of the trouble areas as well. I can stop
feeling guilty about poaching another man's territory and let him know
what's going on."

"No. Stay away from Hengly," Costa said. "The last thing in the world we
want to do, is to be seen near him. There's a chance that he ... well
... might be compromised."

"What do you mean!" Neel snapped. "Hengly's a friend of mine, a
graduate--"

"He might also be surrounded ten deep by the secret police. Did you stop
to think about _that_?"

Neel hadn't thought about it, and his anger vanished when he did. Costa
drove the point home.

"Societics has been a well kept secret for over two centuries. It may
still be a secret--or bits of it might have leaked out. And even if the
Himmelians know nothing about Societics, they have certainly heard of
espionage. They know the UN has agents on their world, they might think
Hengly is one of them. This is all speculation, of course, but we do
have one fact--this Society of Native Boobs we turned up. _We_ had no
trouble finding them. If Hengly had reliable field men, he should know
about them, too. The only reason he hasn't is because he isn't getting
the information. Which means he's compromised."

Reaching back for a chair, Neel fell heavily into it. "You're right ...
of course! I never realized."

"Good," Costa said. "We'll do something to help Hengly tomorrow, but
this operation comes first. Sit tight. Get some rest. And don't open the
door for anyone except me."

       *       *       *       *       *

It had been a long job--and a tiring one--but it was almost over. Neel
allowed himself the luxury of a long yawn, then shuffled over to the
case of rations they had brought. He stripped the seal from something
optimistically labeled CHICKEN DINNER--it tasted just like the algae it
had been made from--and boiled some coffee while it was heating.

And all the time he was doing these prosaic tasks his mind was turning
an indigestible fact over and over. It wasn't a conscious process, but
it was nevertheless going on. The automatic mechanism of his brain ran
it back and forth like a half heard tune, searching for its name. Neel
was tired, or he would have reacted sooner. The idea finally penetrated.
One fact he had taken for granted was an obvious impossibility.

The coffee splashed to the floor as he jumped to his feet.

"It's wrong ... it _has_ to be wrong!" he said aloud, grabbing up the
papers. Computations and graphs dropped and were trampled into the
spilled coffee. When he finally found the one he wanted his hands were
shaking as he flipped through it. The synopsis of Hengly's reports for
the past five years. The gradual rise and fall of the k-factor from
month to month. There were no sharp breaks in the curve or gaps in the
supporting equations.

Societics isn't an exact science. But it's exact enough to know when it
is working with incomplete or false information. If Hengly had been kept
in the dark about the S.P.N.B., he would also have been misinformed
about other factors. This kind of alteration of survey would _have_ to
show in the equations.

It didn't.

Time was running out and Neel had to act. But what to do? He must warn
Adao Costa. And the records here had to be protected. Or better yet
destroyed. There was a power in these machines and charts that couldn't
be allowed to fall into nationalist hands. But what could be done about
it?

In all the welter of equipment and containers, there was one solid,
heavy box that he had never opened. It belonged to Costa, and the UN man
had never unlocked it in his presence. Neel looked at the heavy clasps
on it and felt defeat. But when he pulled at the lid, wondering what to
do next, it fell open. It hadn't been sealed. Costa wasn't the kind of
man who did things by accident. He had looked forward to the time when
Neel might need what was in this box, and had it ready.

Inside was just what Neel expected. Grenades, guns, some smoothly
polished devices that held an aura of violence. Looking at them, Neel
had an overwhelming sensation of defeat. His life was dedicated to peace
and the furthering of peace. He hated the violence that seemed inborn in
man, and detested all the hypocritical rationalizations, such as the
ends justifying the means. All of his training and personal inclinations
were against it.

And he reached down and removed the blunt, black gun.

There was one other thing he recognized in the compact arsenal--a time
bomb. There had been lectures on this mechanism in school, since the
fact was clearly recognized that a time might come when equipment had
to be destroyed rather than fall into the wrong hands. He had never seen
one since, but he had learned the lesson well. Neel pushed the open
chest nearer to his instruments and set the bomb dial for fifteen
minutes. He slipped the gun into his pocket, started the fuse, and
carefully locked the door when he left.

[Illustration]

The bridges were burned. Now he had to find Adao Costa.

This entire operation was outside of his experience and knowledge. He
could think of no plan that could possibly make things easier or safer.
