planet."

The sheriff was unperturbed. "Mr. Star boy," he said sarcastically, "any
grammar school kid knows that if someone came within a hundred yards of
one of those power-house piles, he'd burn like a match stick. And
besides why would he want to blow himself to pieces?"

"He's made out of permallium." Jordan was shouting now.

The sheriff suddenly grew pale. "Get off my screen. I'm calling
Sacramento."

       *       *       *       *       *

Jordan set the ship for maximum speed, well beyond the safety limit. He
kept peering ahead into the dusk, momentarily fearful that the whole
countryside would light up in one brilliant flash. In a few minutes he
was sweating and trembling with the tension.

Over Walnut Grove, he recognized the series of dams, reservoirs and
water-lifts where the Sacramento was raised up out of its bed and turned
south. For greater speed, he came close to Earth, flying at emergency
height, reserved ordinarily for police, firemen, doctors and ambulances.
He set his course by sight following the silver road of the river,
losing it for ten or fifteen miles at a time where it passed through
subterranean tunnels, picking it up again at the surface, always
shooting south as fast as the atmosphere permitted.

At seven thirty, when the sun had finally set, he sighted the lights of
Red Mountain, and he cut his speed and swung in to land. There was no
trouble picking out the power plant; it was a big dome-shaped building
surrounded by a high wall. It was so brilliantly lit up, that it stood
out like a beacon, and there were several hundred men milling about
before it.

He settled down on the lawn inside the walls, and the sheriff came
bustling up, a little more red in the face than usual.

"I've been trying to figure for the last hour what the devil I would do
to stop him if he decided to come here," Berkhammer said.

"He's not here then?"

The sheriff shook his head. "Not a sign of him. We've gone over the
place three times."

Jordan settled back in relief, sitting down in the open doorway of his
ship. "Good," he said wearily.

"Good!" the sheriff exploded. "I don't know whether I'd rather have him
show up or not. If this whole business is nothing more than the crazy
imagination of some kid who ought to get tanned and a star-cop with milk
behind his ears, I'm really in the soup. I've sent out an alarm and I've
got the whole state jumping. There's a full mechanized battalion of
state troops waiting in there." He pointed toward the power plant.
"They've got artillery and tanks all around the place."

Jordan jumped down out of the ship. "Let's see what you've got set up
here. In the meantime, stop fretting. I'd rather see you fired than
vaporized along with fifty million other people."

"I guess you're right there," Berkhammer conceded, "but I don't like to
have anyone make a fool out of me."

       *       *       *       *       *

At Ballarat, an old man, Eddie Yudovich, was the watchman and general
caretaker of the electrical generation plant. Actually, his job was a
completely unnecessary one, since the plant ran itself. In its very
center, buried in a mine of graphite were the tubes of hafnium, from
whose nuclear explosions flowed a river of electricity without the need
of human thought or direction.

He had worked for the company for a long time and when he became
crippled with arthritis, the directors gave him the job so that he might
have security in his latter years.

Yudovich, however, was a proud old man, and he never once acknowledged
to himself or to anyone else that his work was useless. He guarded and
checked the plant as though it were the storehouse of the Terrestrial
Treasury. Every hour punctually, he made his rounds through the
building.

At approximately seven thirty he was making his usual circuit when he
came to the second level. What he discovered justified all the years of
punctilious discharge of his duties. He was startled to see a man
kneeling on the floor, just above where the main power lines ran. He had
torn a hole in the composition floor, and as Yudovich watched, he
reached in and pulled out the great cable. Immediately the intruder
glowed in the semidarkness with an unearthly blue shine and sparkles
crackled off of his face, hands and feet.

Yudovich stood rooted to the floor. He knew very well that no man could
touch that cable and live. But as he watched, the intruder handled it
with impunity, pulling a length of wire out of his pocket and making
some sort of a connection.

It was too much for the old man. Electricity was obviously being stolen.
He roared out at the top of his voice, and stumped over to the wall
where he threw the alarm switch. Immediately, a hundred arc lights
flashed on, lighting the level brighter than the noon sun, and a
tremendously loud siren started wailing its warning to the whole
countryside.

The intruder jumped up as though he had been stabbed. He dropped the
wires, and after a wild look around him, he ran at full speed toward the
far exit.

"Hold on there," Yudovich shouted and tried to give chase, but his
swollen, crooked knees almost collapsed with the effort.

His eyes fell on a large wrench lying on a worktable, and he snatched it
up and threw it with all his strength. In his youth he had been a ball
player with some local fame as a pitcher, and in his later life, he was
addicted to playing horseshoes. His aim was, therefore, good, and the
wrench sailed through the air striking the runner on the back of the
head. Sparks flew and there was a loud metallic clang, the wrench
rebounding high in the air. The man who was struck did not even turn his
head, but continued his panicky flight and was gone in a second.

When he realized there was no hope of effecting a capture, Yudovich
stumped over to see the amount of the damage. A hole had been torn in
the floor, but the cable itself was intact.

Something strange caught his attention. Wherever the intruder had put
his foot down, there were many radiating cracks in the composition
floor, just as though someone had struck a sheet of ice with a sledge
hammer.

"I'll be danged," he said to himself. "I'll be danged and double
danged."

He turned off the alarm and then went downstairs to the teledepth screen
to notify the sheriff's office.

A few hundred yards from the powerhouse, Jon Hall stood in the darkness,
listening to the voices of his fellows. There were eighteen of them, not
seventeen, for a short while before the one in the ice cave had been
captured, and they railed at him with a bitter hopeless anger.

He looked toward the bright lights of the powerhouse, considering
whether he should return. "It's too late," said one of them. "The alarm
is already out." "Go into the town and mix with the people," another
suggested. "If you stay within a half mile of the hafnium pile, the
detection man will not be able to pick up your radiation and maybe you
will have a second chance."

They all assented in that, and Hall, weary of making his own decisions
turned toward the town. He walked through a tree-lined residential
street, the houses with neatly trimmed lawns, and each with a copter
parked on the roof. In almost every house the teledepths were turned on
and he caught snatches of bulletins about himself: "... Is known to be
in the Mojave area." "... About six feet in height and very similar to a
human being. When last seen, he was dressed in--" "Governor Leibowitz
has promised speedy action and attorney general Markle has stated--"

The main street of Ballarat was brilliantly lighted. Many of the
residents, aroused by the alarm from the powerhouse, were out, standing
in small groups in front of the stores and talking excitedly to one
another.

He hesitated, unwilling to walk through the bright street, but uncertain
where to turn. Two men talking loudly came around the corner suddenly
and he stepped back into a store entrance to avoid them. They stopped
directly in front of him. One of them, an overalled farm hand from his
looks, said, "He killed a kid just a little while ago. My brother-in-law
heard it."

"Murderer," the other said viciously.

The farmer turned his head and his glance fell on Hall. "Well, a new
face in town," he said after a moment's inspection. "Say I bet you're a
reporter from one of the papers, aren't you?"
