
He was fortunate that it was dark. "I'm drunk," he told himself. "Never
been so drunk in my life. Never felt so good. Mother never felt so good.
Malevski never felt so good."

He passed a shadowy figure in the dark and said, "Hiya, friend and
worshipper. Ever see a god drunk before?"

The figure bowed, and kept its head lowered until he had moved on.

"Drunk or sober, I'm shtill divine," he said proudly. And he began to
sing, loudly and impressively, his voice orchestral in his own ears
within the confines of the helmet. "Ould Lang Shyne, she ain't what she
ushed to be, ain't what she ushed to be--" The words came easily, and as
it seemed, naturally to his lips.

After awhile, however, he tired of them. After awhile he found that his
legs had tired of them. He sat down with a thump under a spiky tree and
said solemnly, "Never felt so good in my life. Never felt so happy--it's
a lie. I don't feel good."

He didn't, not any more. He felt sick to his stomach. A touch of sober
thought had corroded the happiness of his intoxication, and he was sick
and afraid. Today their god was a hero, today they would forgive him
everything. But did they actually _prefer_ a drunken god? No.
Drunkenness made a god human, all too human. A drunken god was a weak
god, and his hold on his worshippers was their belief in his strength.
As he valued his life, he must get drunk no more.

"Ain't gonna get drunk no more, no more," he sang sadly and solemnly to
himself, and finally he fell asleep.

       *       *       *       *       *

He awoke with a hangover and a memory. He was not one of those men who
when sober forget all they have done when drunk. He remembered
everything. And he knew that he must put drunkenness away from him.

That morning they brought him only food and flowers. But at the evening
ceremony they presented him once more with a jug of liquor as an
additional reward for his destruction of the deadly beast. For the first
time, Bradley took an active part in the ceremony. He held up the jug
and said in grave tones, "In the name of Carrie Nation, I renounce thee
and all thy works."

Then he poured out the liquor and smashed the jug on the ground.

After that, the smashing of the jug was part of the ceremony of
worshipping him. It left him unhappy at first, but sober. After awhile,
the unhappiness disappeared, but the soberness remained. From now on, he
would act as a god should act.

The natives were not stupid, he saw that very clearly. The first jugs
they had offered him had been beautiful objects, of excellent
workmanship. But when they perceived that the only use he had for them
was to break them, the quality deteriorated rapidly. Now the jugs they
brought him were crude things indeed, made for the sole purpose of being
smashed. He wondered how many other tribes had tricked their gods
similarly.

No, they were not at all stupid. It struck him that with such advantages
of civilization as he himself had enjoyed, they would have gone much
further than he did. Two weeks or so after he had come down from the sky
to be their god, he saw that they had learned from him. One of the young
men appeared during the day wearing a wooden helmet. It was a helmet
obviously patterned after his own, although it had no glass or plastic,
and the openings in front of the eyes were left blank. The mythical
Earth-hero, Prometheus, had brought fire down from the skies. He had
brought the Helmet. He was Bradley, the Helmet-Bringer.

Even at that he had underestimated his worshippers. He had thought at
first that the helmets were meant merely for ornament and decoration. He
learned better one day when a swarm of creatures like flying lizards
swept down out of a group of trees in a fierce attack. He had not known
that such creatures existed here, and now that he saw them, he realized
how fortunate it was that they were not more numerous. They had sharp
teeth and sharper claws, and they tore at his head with a ferocity that
struck fear into his heart. His gun was of less use than usual against
them. He could catch one or two, but the others moved too swiftly for
him to aim.

By this time, others of the natives wore wooden helmets, and he could
see how the sharp claws ripped splinter after splinter from them. But
the birds or lizards, or whatever they were, didn't go unscathed. From a
sort of skin bellows, several of the natives blew a gray mist at them,
and where the mist made contact with the leather skin, the flying
creatures seemed to be paralyzed in mid-flight, and they fell to the
ground, where they were easily crushed to death. By the time they had
given up the fight and fled, half a dozen of them were lying dead.

They were evidently useless for food because of the poison they
contained. He was surprised to see, however, that the natives still had
a use for them. They dragged the dead creatures into a field of growing
crops, and left them there to rot into fertilizer.

But such incidents as this, he found, were to be rare. For the most
part, the life here was peaceful, and he found himself liking it more
and more. Now, without laughter, he wondered again what his mother would
have thought of him.

She would have been proud. He realized now that she had done her best
for him. And when every one else had given up hope for him, she had not.
Perhaps she had protected him too much--but she had early learned the
need for protection. He could look at her now in a new light. Her own
father had died early in life, and then her husband soon after her son
had been born. She had faced a tough fight, and had thought to spare him
what she herself had gone through. Too bad she hadn't realized exactly
what she was doing. She was bringing him up with the ability, as the old
epigram had it, to resist everything but temptation.

The temptation to steal that petty cash, to put his hands into a drunk's
pocket and lift the man's wallet, to lie to a pretty girl, to slug a
