at a calculating machine; at one glance he _knew_, without knowing how
he knew, that no equation could be made to fit even the weighted-average
locus of that wildly-shifting Sigma curve. "But most of the cycles cut
this ordinate here--seven fifty-one--so I'll take that for my value.
That means nine point nine oh six kilograms of duodec basic charge, with
one five percent over and one five percent under that for alternates.
Neocarballoy casing, fifty-three millimeters on the basic, others in
proportion. On the wire?"

"It went out as you said it," the observer reported. "They'll have 'em
here in fifteen minutes."

"QX--I'll get dressed, then."

The Lensman and the observer helped him into his cumbersome,
heavily-padded armor. They checked his instruments, making sure that the
protective devices of the suit were functioning at full efficiency. Then
all three went out to the flitter. A tiny speedster, really; a torpedo
bearing the stubby wings and the ludicrous tail-surfaces, the
multifarious driving-, braking-, side-, top-, and under-jets so
characteristic of the tricky, cranky, but ultra-maneuverable breed. But
this one had something that the ordinary speedster or flitter did not
carry; spaced around the needle beak there yawned the open muzzles of a
triplex bomb-thrower.

    [Illustration: _Ten seconds in which to solve the
    equation--to choose, fire, move clear--the flitter
    bucked._]

More checking. The Lensman and the armored Cloud both knew that every
one of the dozens of instruments upon the flitter's special board was
right to the hair; nevertheless each one was compared with the
master-instrument of the observatory.

       *       *       *       *       *

The bombs arrived and were loaded in; and Cloud, with a casually-waved
salute, stepped into the tiny operating compartment. The massive
door--flitters have no airlocks, as the whole midsection is scarcely
bigger than an airlock would have to be--rammed shut upon its fiber
gaskets, the heavy toggles drove home. A cushioned form closed in upon
the pilot, leaving only his arms and lower legs free.

Then, making sure that his two companions had ducked for cover, Cloud
shot his flitter into the air and toward the seething inferno which was
Loose Atomic Vortex Number One. For it was seething, no fooling; and it
was an inferno. The crater was a ragged, jagged hole a full mile from
lip to lip and perhaps a quarter of that in depth. It was not, however,
a perfect cone, for the floor, being largely incandescently molten, was
practically level except for a depression at the center, where the
actual vortex lay. The walls of the pit were steeply, unstably
irregular, varying in pitch and shape with the hardness and
refractoriness of the strata composing them. Now a section would glare
into an unbearably blinding white puffing away in sparkling vapor.
Again, cooled by an inrushing blast of air, it would subside into an
angry scarlet, its surface crawling in a sluggish flow of lava.
Occasionally a part of the wall might even go black, into pock-marked
scoriae or into brilliant planes of obsidian.

For always, somewhere, there was an enormous volume of air pouring into
that crater. It rushed in as ordinary air. It came out, however, in a
ragingly-uprushing pillar, as--as something else. No one knew--or knows
yet, for that matter--exactly what a loose vortex does to the molecules
and atoms of air. In fact, due to the extreme variability already
referred to, it probably does not do the same thing for more than an
instant at a time.

That there is little actual combustion is certain; that is, except for
the forced combination of nitrogen, argon, xenon, and krypton with
oxygen. There is, however, consumption: plenty of consumption. And what
that incredibly intense bombardment impinges up is ... is altered.
Profoundly and obscuredly altered, so that the atmosphere emitted from
the crater is quite definitely no longer air as we know it. It may be
corrosive, it may be poisonous in one or another of a hundred fashions,
it may be merely new and different; but it is no longer the air which we
human beings are used to breathing. And it is this fact, rather than the
destruction of the planet itself, which would end the possibility of
life upon Earth's surface.

       *       *       *       *       *

It is difficult indeed to describe the appearance of a loose atomic
vortex to those who have never seen one; and, fortunately, most people
never have. And practically all of its frightful radiation lies in those
octaves of the spectrum which are invisible to the human eye. Suffice it
to say, then, that it had an average effective surface temperature of
about fifteen thousand degrees absolute--two and one-half times as hot
as the sun of Tellus--and that it was radiating every frequency possible
to that incomprehensible temperature, and let it go at that.

And Neal Cloud, scurrying in his flitter through that murky,
radiation-riddled atmosphere, setting up equations from the readings of
his various meters and gauges and solving those equations almost
instantaneously in his mathematical-prodigy's mind, sat appalled. For
the activity level was, and even in its lowest dips remained, far above
the level he had selected. His skin began to prickle and to burn. His
eyes began to smart and to ache. He knew what those symptoms meant; even
the flitter's powerful screens were not stopping all the radiation; even
his suit-screens and his special goggles were not stopping what leaked
through. But he wouldn't quit yet; the activity might--probably
would--take a nose-dive any instant. If it did, he'd have to be ready.
On the other hand, it might blow up at any instant, too.

There were two schools of mathematical thought upon that point. One held
that the vortex, without any essential change in its physical condition
or nature, would keep on growing bigger. Indefinitely, until, uniting
with the other vortices of the planet, it had converted the entire mass
of the world into energy.

The second school, of which the forementioned Carlowitz was the loudest
voice, taught that at a certain stage of development the internal energy
of the vortex would become so great that generation-radiation
equilibrium could not be maintained. This would, of course, result in an
explosion; the nature and consequences of which this Carlowitz was wont
to dwell upon in ghoulishly mathematical glee. Neither school, however,
could prove its point--or, rather, each school proved its point, by
means of unimpeachable mathematics--and each hated and derided the
other, loudly and heatedly.

And now Cloud, as he studied through his almost opaque defenses that
indescribably ravening fireball, that esuriently rapacious monstrosity
which might very well have come from the deepest pit of the hottest hell
of mythology, felt strongly inclined to agree with Carlowitz. It didn't
seem possible that anything _could_ get any worse than that without
exploding. And such an explosion, he felt sure, would certainly blow
everything for miles around into the smitheriest kind of smithereens.

The activity of the vortex stayed high, 'way too high. The tiny control
room of the flitter grew hotter and hotter. His skin burned and his eyes
ached worse. He touched a communicator stud and spoke.

"Phil? Better get me three more bombs. Like these, except up around...."

"I don't check you. If you do that, it's apt to drop to a minimum and
