
"I thought--I thought of 'girl'," I groaned.

He snorted. "Hah! You would, you idiot! 'House' or 'horse' wasn't good
enough; you had to pick something with emotional connotations. Well, you
can start right in forgetting her, because she doesn't exist."

I couldn't give up hope, as easily as that. "But can't you--can't
you--?" I didn't even know what I meant to ask.

"Van Manderpootz," he announced, "is a mathematician, not a magician. Do
you expect me to materialize an ideal for you?" When I had no reply but
a groan, he continued. "Now I think it safe enough to try the device
myself. I shall take--let's see--the thought 'man.' I shall see what the
superman looks like, since the ideal of van Manderpootz can be nothing
less than superman." He seated himself. "Turn that switch," he said.
"Now!"

I did. The tubes glowed into low blue light. I watched dully,
disinterestedly; nothing held any attraction for me after that image of
the ideal.

"Huh!" said van Manderpootz suddenly. "Turn it on, I say! I see nothing
but my own reflection."

I stared, then burst into a hollow laugh. The mirror was spinning; the
banks of tubes were glowing; the device was operating.

Van Manderpootz raised his face, a little redder than usual. I laughed
half hysterically. "After all," he said huffily, "one might have a lower
ideal of man than van Manderpootz. I see nothing nearly so humorous as
your situation."

The laughter died. I went miserably home, spent half the remainder of
the night in morose contemplation, smoked nearly two packs of
cigarettes, and didn't get to the office at all the next day.

       *       *       *       *       *

Tips Alva got back to town for a week-end broadcast, but I didn't even
bother to see her, just phoned her and told her I was sick. I guess my
face lent credibility to the story, for she was duly sympathetic, and
her face in the phone screen was quite anxious. Even at that, I couldn't
keep my eyes away from her lips because, except for a bit too lustrous
make-up, they were the lips of the ideal. But they weren't enough; they
just weren't enough.

Old N. J. began to worry again. I couldn't sleep late of mornings any
more, and after missing that one day, I kept getting down earlier and
earlier until one morning I was only ten minutes late. He called me in
at once.

"Look here, Dixon," he said. "Have you been to a doctor recently?"

"I'm not sick," I said listlessly.

"Then for Heaven's sake, marry the girl! I don't care what chorus she
kicks in, marry her and act like a human being again."

"I--can't."

"Oh. She's already married, eh?"

Well, I couldn't tell him she didn't exist. I couldn't say I was in love
with a vision, a dream, an ideal. He thought I was a little crazy,
anyway, so I just muttered "Yeah," and didn't argue when he said
gruffly: "Then you'll get over it. Take a vacation. Take _two_
vacations. You might as well for all the good you are around here."

I didn't leave New York; I lacked the energy. I just mooned around the
city for a while, avoiding my friends, and dreaming of the impossible
beauty of the face in the mirror. And by and by the longing to see that
vision of perfection once more began to become overpowering. I don't
suppose anyone except me can understand the lure of that memory; the
face, you see, had been my ideal, my concept of perfection. One sees
beautiful women here and there in the world; one falls in love, but
always, no matter how great their beauty or how deep one's love, they
fall short in some degree of the secret vision of the ideal. But not the
mirrored face; she was my ideal, and therefore, whatever imperfections
she might have had in the minds of others, in my eyes she had none.
None, that is, save the terrible one of being only an ideal, and
therefore unattainable--but that is a fault inherent in all perfection.

It was a matter of days before I yielded. Common sense told me it was
futile, even foolhardy, to gaze again on the vision of perfect
desirability. I fought against the hunger, but I fought hopelessly, and
was not at all surprised to find myself one evening rapping on van
Manderpootz's door in the University Club. He wasn't there; I'd been
hoping he wouldn't be, since it gave me an excuse to seek him in his
laboratory in the Physics Building, to which I would have dragged him
anyway.

There I found him, writing some sort of notations on the table that held
the idealizator. "Hello, Dixon," he said. "Did it ever occur to you that
the ideal university cannot exist? Naturally not since it must be
composed of perfect students and perfect educators, in which case the
former could have nothing to learn and the latter, therefore, nothing
to teach."

What interest had I in the perfect university and its inability to
exist? My whole being was desolate over the non-existence of another
ideal. "Professor," I said tensely, "may I use that--that thing of yours
again? I want to--uh--see something."

My voice must have disclosed the situation, for van Manderpootz looked
up sharply. "So!" he snapped. "So you disregarded my advice! Forget her,
I said. Forget her because she doesn't exist."

"But--I can't! Once more, Professor--only once more!"

He shrugged, but his blue, metallic eyes were a little softer than
usual. After all, for some inconceivable reason, he likes me. "Well,
Dixon," he said, "you're of age and supposed to be of mature
intelligence. I tell you that this is a very stupid request, and van
Manderpootz always knows what he's talking about. If you want to stupefy
yourself with the opium of impossible dreams, go ahead. This is the last
chance you'll have, for tomorrow the idealizator of van Manderpootz goes
into the Bacon head of Isaak there. I shall shift the oscillators so
that the psychons, instead of becoming light quanta, emerge as an
electron flow--a current which will actuate Isaak's vocal apparatus and
come out as speech." He paused musingly. "Van Manderpootz will hear the
voice of the ideal. Of course Isaak can return only what psychons he
receives from the brain of the operator, but just as the image in the
mirror, the thoughts will have lost their human impress, and the words
will be those of an ideal." He perceived that I wasn't listening, I
suppose. "Go ahead, imbecile!" he grunted.

I did. The glory that I hungered after flamed slowly into being,
incredible in loveliness, and somehow, unbelievably, even more beautiful
than on that other occasion. I know why now; long afterwards, van
Manderpootz explained that the very fact that I had seen an ideal once
before had altered my ideal, raised it to a higher level. With that face
among my memories, my concept of perfection was different than it had
been.

So I gazed and hungered. Readily and instantly the being in the mirror
responded to my thoughts with smile and movement. When I thought of
love, her eyes blazed with such tenderness that it seemed as if--I--I,
