
They were too caught up in their own thoughts and in the barrage of
demands they were leveling at Crowley to notice direction. It wasn't
until they were already on the George Washington Bridge that Patricia
blurted, "Don, this isn't the way to your hotel!"

Crowley said tolerantly, "Take it easy, Pat. We're taking a short
detour. Something I have to show you in Jersey."

"I don't like this," Ross snapped. The redhead shifted his heavy
shoulders in a reflexive protest against the confining tweed coat he
wore.

"Relax," Crowley told him reasonably. "I've been thinking things out
quite a bit and I've got a lot to discuss with you folks."

They were across the bridge now and Larry headed into the maze which
finally unraveled itself to the point that it was obvious they were
heading north. Larry hit the lift lever and they rose ten feet from the
surface.

Dr. Braun said evenly, "You had no intention of taking us to your room.
You used that as a ruse to get us out of our hotel and, further, across
the bridge until we are now in a position where it's quite impossible
for us to summon police assistance."

Crowley grinned. "That's right, Doc. Didn't I tell you these three were
real eggheads, Larry? Look how quick he figured that out."

Larry grunted in what might have been amusement.

Ross, growling low in his throat, turned suddenly in his jump seat and
grabbed Crowley by the coat front. "What's going on here?"

Crowley snapped, "Larry!"

From seemingly nowhere, the chauffeur had produced a thin black
automatic and was now lazily pointing it, not so much at Ross Wooley as
at Dr. Braun and Patricia. He said evenly, softly, "Easy, friend."

Ross released his grip, "Put that thing away," he blurted.

"Sure, sure," Larry said, his voice all but disinterested. The gun
disappeared.

Crowley, only slightly ruffled, said now, "Take it easy, Ross. Nothing's
going to happen to you. I'm going to need you folks and I'm going to
treat you right."

"Where are we going?" Ross growled.

"I had the boys rent me a big estate like up in the Catskills. Big
place, nice and quiet. In fact, the last tenants used it for one of
these rest sanitariums. You know, rich people with DTs or trying to get
a monkey off their back."

"The boys?" Patricia said softly.

He looked at her and grinned again. Crowley was obviously enjoying
himself. "I got a few people working for me," he explained.

Dr. Braun blurted, "You fool! You mean you've revealed the existence of
the process Pat, Ross and I worked out to a group of ignoramuses?"

Crowley said angrily, "Now look, Doc, let's don't get on that bit. Maybe
I'm just a country boy but I'm as smart as the next man. Just because
some of you eggheads spend half your life in college don't mean you've
got any monopoly on good common sense. I went to the school of hard
knocks, understand, and I got plenty of diplomas to prove it. Take it
easy on that ignoramus talk."

Patricia said suddenly, "Don's right, Dr. Braun. I think you've badly
underestimated him."

Ross snorted sourly at that remark. "We've all underestimated him. Well,
I think you'll agree that our friend Don will get no more injections of
the invisibility serum."

Crowley chuckled.

They looked at him. Three sinkings of stomach taking place
simultaneously.

"Now, you know I thought that might be your altitude...."

"Attitude," Ross muttered.

"... So I went to the trouble of coming up to your suite last night and
sort of confiscating the supply. By the looks of it, I'd say there was
enough for another ten shots or so."

"See," Patricia said to Ross. "You're not as smart as you thought you
were. Don's one up on you."

       *       *       *       *       *

The estate which the "boys" had secured for Crowley was two or three
miles out of Tannersville on a mountainside and quite remote. He took
considerable pride in showing them about, although it was obvious that
he had been here before only once himself.

He was obviously enjoying the situation thoroughly and had planned it
out in some detail. Besides the empty-faced Larry, who had driven the
car, they were introduced to two more of Crowley's confederates, neither
of whom gave any indication that the three were present under duress.
The first was a heavy-set, moist palmed southerner with a false air of
the jovial. He shook hands heartily, said nothing with a good many words
for a few minutes and then excused himself. The third confidant was an
older man of sad mien who would have passed easily in the swankest of
Washington, New York or London private clubs. He was introduced simply
as Mr. Whitely, greeted them pleasantly as though all were fellow
guests, had a word to say about the weather then and passed on.

Patricia was frowning. "Your southern friend, Paul Teeter, it seems to
me I've heard his name before."

Crowley grinned. "Oh, Paul's been in the news from time to time."

Ross was looking after Mr. Whitely who had disappeared into the main
building. They were standing on the lawn, as part of the guided tour
Crowley was giving them. He growled, "I suppose the two of them are
experienced confidence men, or something."

"Take it easy with those cracks, Ross," Crowley said. "Whitely used to
have a seat on the Stock Exchange. A real big shot. But that was before
they disbarred him, or whatever they call it."

"See here," Dr. Braun said urgently. "We've had enough of all this, Don.
I propose we go somewhere where it will be possible for us to bring you
to your senses, and save you from disaster."

"Kind of a powwow, eh? O.K., Doc, come on in here." He led them to the
entrance, conducted them inside and into a library that led off the main
_entrada_. He said, "By the way, Larry has a few of his boys up here
just kind of like estate watchmen. Some of them aren't much used to
being out of the city and they get nervous. So...."

Ross growled, "All right, all right, don't try to make like a third-rate
villain in a B-Movie. You have guards about and it would be dangerous to
try to leave without your permission."

"How about that?" Crowley exclaimed as though amazed. "Man, you eggheads
catch on quick. Nothing like a college education." He waved them to
chairs. "I'm going to have to leave for a while. Whitely's got some big
deal brewing and we got to work it out." He grinned suddenly. "And
Larry's got a different kind of deal. One he's been planning for years
but hasn't been able to swing one or two details. It's a caution how
many details a little man who wasn't there can handle in one of these
king-size capers."

He had used the pseudo-criminal term, caper, with considerable
satisfaction. Crowley was obviously having the time of his life.

"Very well," Braun said, "we'll wait." When the other had left the room,
leaving the door open behind him, the doctor turned to his two younger
associates. "What children we've been."

Ross Wooley growled unhappily, "Brother, we couldn't have picked a worse
so-called Common Man, if we'd tried. That character is as nutty as a
stuffed date. Do you realize what he's in a position to do?"

Patricia twisted her mouth thoughtfully. "I wonder if any of us really
realize. I am afraid even with all our speculation, we never truly
thought this out."

Dr. Braun pushed his glasses back on his nose with a forefinger. He
shook his head. "You make a mistake, Ross. We didn't make a bad choice
in our selection of Don Crowley for our typical Common Man."

Ross looked at him and snorted.

Braun said doggedly, "Remember, we attempted to find the average man,
the common man, the little man, the man in the street. Well, it becomes
obvious to me that we did just that."

Patricia said thoughtfully, "I don't know. I'm inclined to think that
from the beginning you two have underestimated Don. He has certainly
shown considerable ingenuity. Do you realize that he's done all this in
a matter of less than a week?"

"Done all _what_?" Ross said sarcastically.

She gestured. "Look at this establishment. He's obviously acquired
considerable money, and he already has an organization, or at least the
beginnings of one."

"That is beside the point," Braun said ruefully. "I say that he is
reacting as would be expected. As the average man in the street would
react given the opportunity to seize almost unlimited power, and with
small chance of reprisal."

Patricia shrugged as though in disagreement.

Braun looked at Ross Wooley. "Close the door, Ross. Lord knows when
we'll have another chance to confer. Obviously, something must be done."

Ross came quickly to his feet, crossed to the door, looked up and down
the hallway which was empty and then closed the door behind him. He came
back to the others and drew his chair in closer so that they could
communicate in low voices.

Braun said, "One thing is definite. We must not allow him to secure
further serum. For all we know, he might be planning to inject some of
those gangsters he's affiliated himself with."

Patricia shook her head thoughtfully. "I still think you underestimate
Don. He must realize he can't trust them. At this stage, he has had to
confide in at least two or three, fully to utilize his invisibility. But
in the long run it isn't to his advantage to have _anybody_ know about
it. If the authorities, such as the F.B.I., began looking for an
invisible man, sooner or later they would penetrate the field of
invisibility."

"You mean you think Crowley will use these men for a time and then ...
destroy them?"

"He'll have to, or sooner or later the secret will be out."

Braun said in soft logic, "If he can't allow anyone to know about it,
then we, too, must be destroyed."

Ross growled, "Then we've got to finish him first."

Patricia said, "Now, I don't know. Don is showing considerably more
sense than you two evidently give him credit for. I think in many ways
what he's done is quite admirable. He's seen his chance--and has grasped
it. Why, I wouldn't be surprised that Don will be the most powerful man
in the country within months."

The two men were staring at her. Ross sputtered, "Have you gone
completely around the bend? Are you defending this ... this...."

       *       *       *

A voice chuckled, "Mind your language, Buster. Just take it easy or
you'll wind up with some missing teeth."
