one reporter who'd showed up for the press conference, "I'll try to
put him in a coffin so I can pay him a dividend."

       *       *       *       *       *

Finally, though, a man who thought he must be the last living human,
wandered contentedly about the city of Denver looking for the coffin
he liked best. He settled at last upon a rich mahogany number with
platinum trimmings, an Automatic Self-Adjusting Cadaver-contour
Innerspring Wearever-Plastic-Covered Mattress with a built in bar. He
climbed in, drew himself a generous slug of fine Scotch, giggled as
the mattress prodded him exploringly, closed his eyes and sighed in
solid comfort. Soft music played as the lid closed itself.

From a building nearby a turkey-buzzard swooped down, cawing in
raucous anger because it had let its attention wander for a moment. It
was too late. It clawed screaming at the solid cover, hissed in
frustration and finally gave up. It flapped into the air again, still
grumbling. It was tired of living on dead small rodents and coyotes.
It thought it would take a swing over to Los Angeles, where the
pickings were pretty good.

As it moved westward over parched hills, it espied two black dots a
few miles to its left. It circled over for a closer look, then grunted
and went on its way. It had seen _them_ before. The old prospector and
his burro had been in the mountains for so long the buzzard had
concluded they didn't know _how_ to die.

The prospector, whose name was Adams, trudged behind his burro toward
the buildings that shimmered in the heat, humming to himself now and
then or addressing some remark to the beast. When he reached the
outskirts of Denver he realized something was amiss. He stood and
gazed at the quiet scene. Nothing moved except some skinny packrats
and a few sparrows foraging for grain among the unburied coffins.

"Tarnation!" he said to the burro. "Martians?"

A half-buried piece of newspaper fluttered in the breeze. He walked
forward slowly and picked it up. It told him enough so that he
understood.

"They're gone, Evie," he said to the burro, "all gone." He put his arm
affectionately around her neck. "I reckon it's up to me and you agin.
We got to start all over." He stood back and gazed at her with mild
reproach. "I shore hope they don't favor your side of the house so
much this time."--C.C. MacAPP


       *       *       *       *       *

    +-------------------------------------------------------------+
    | Typographical errors corrected in text:                     |
    |                                                             |
    | Page 127: "She looked as if had just" replaced with         |
    |           "She looked as if she had just"                   |
    | Page 131: immedately replaced with immediately              |
    | Page 131: affort replaced with afford                       |
    | Page 132: "It flapped into the air begin, still grumbling." |
    |           replaced with "It flapped into the air again,     |
    |           still grumbling."                                 |
    | Page 132: "the pickings yere pretty good." replaced with    |
    |           "the pickings were pretty good."                  |
    |                                                             |
    +-------------------------------------------------------------+

       *       *       *       *       *





