get down to Washington en route to Woods Hole and talk over the whole
thing over a bottle of beer, _dark beer_. From what I hear of the
demands on a first-rate mathematician's time these days, you should be
grateful that I didn't get to see you, because I would have monopolized
_all_ your time. I appreciate your generosity in extending the
invitation as a rain check to me.

Your mention of the Duke School of "psychology"--my quotes--leaves me
cold. It's too obvious and puts the cart before the horse. The important
point that I was trying to make dealt not with the "possible
parapsychological" manipulation of equipment or the materials _a la_
telekinesis to produce the desired results, _but that our Science may
not be studying natural phenomena and trying to interpret them at all_.
The point, to get it down in black and white, is that our
"Science"--yes, quotes--may be _inventing_ the reality that it is
supposedly studying. _Inventing the atoms, molecules, cells, nuclei, et
cetera ... and then describing them, and in the description giving them
reality._

While I was at Woods Hole I had some really good bull sessions about
this very thing. I realize now that I may have been falling into the
trap of solipsism, "who watches the quad," et cetera, type of thing.
Incidentally, my research is finally beginning to fall into shape. My
sponsor and I had some pretty good sessions about it, and some of the
screwy results I wrote you begin to make sense. I had the good luck to
talk to an outstanding man in the field of nucleic acid synthesis and he
was quite enthusiastic about the caliber of our work. He feels quite
strongly--but has no real evidence--that the synthesis of both types of
nucleic acid are independent of each other and has pointed out some
significant references that I did not know about. I'm anxious to buckle
down and really lick this nucleic acid problem ... in time for a June
degree.

Cordially,

Jonathan

P.S.

Please send me a reprint of your lecture on "Memory
Banks--Transistorized Neurones." The lecture was ingenious, but there
are some biological phenomena with which I don't agree. Remember, I'm
the biologist. Honestly, Doc, don't you think--_entre nous_--that your
idea that a living organism, can be compared with automata in picking up
informational items and processing them simultaneously in parallel,
rather than in series, is naif?

J.

       *       *       *       *       *

October 28, 1958

Dr. R. Von Engen,
Journal of the National Academy of Sciences,
Washington, D. C.

Dear Dr. Von Engen:

I apologize for not answering your letter sooner. I assume you were
pulling my leg when you suggested that I make a science-fiction story
out of "the confused ideas of a beginning graduate student." You might
give _your_ idea of a "possible science-fiction story" to one of your
acolytes that has some small experience in the field of writing--not
science. I am afraid that your other suggestions are not germane to the
problem of nucleic acid synthesis and metabolism, a problem that has
been occupying _all_ my time. In fact, I've been doing with three to
four hours of sleep these days. With the kind of concentration that I
can offer the problem, there is no question that the data are falling
into line, and our research is going rather well. We will show, I hope,
fairly conclusively that there is little or no interconversion between
the two types of nucleic acid synthesis in the cell.

Despite your ingenious mathematical approaches for stimulation criteria,
in biological research--a very abstruse field--even your multiplex
machines with elaborate means of intercommunication are not
sophisticated enough--or ever will be--to cope with the complexities
inherent in the numerous interacting biosyntheses on the subcellular
ultratopographical level of protoplasm.

Sincerely yours,
