and Uncle Al swimming.

Uncle Al had his arm around Pigtail, and Jimmy could see Pigtail's white
face bobbing up and down as Uncle Al breasted the tide with his strong
right arm.

Closer to the bend was the Harmon shantyboat. The Harmons were using
their shotguns now, blasting fiercely away at Uncle Al and Pigtail.
Jimmy could see the smoke curling up from the leaping guns and the water
jumping up and down in little spurts all about Uncle Al.

There was an awful hollow agony in Jimmy's chest as he stared, a fear
that was partly a soundless screaming and partly a vision of Uncle Al
sinking down through the dark water and turning it red.

It was strange, though. Something was happening to Jimmy, nibbling away
at the outer edges of the fear like a big, hungry river cat. Making the
fear seem less swollen and awful, shredding it away in little flakes.

There was a white core of anger in Jimmy which seemed suddenly to blaze
up.

He shut his eyes tight.

In his mind's gaze Jimmy saw himself holding the Harmon brothers up by
their long, mottled legs. The Harmon brothers were frogs. Not friendly,
good natured frogs like Uncle Al, but snake frogs. Cottonmouth frogs.

All flannel red were their mouths, and they had long evil fangs which
dripped poison in the sunlight. But Jimmy wasn't afraid of them no-ways.
Not any more. He had too firm a grip on their legs.

"Don't let anything happen to Uncle Al and Pigtail!" Jimmy whispered, as
though he were talking to himself. No--not exactly to himself. To
someone like himself, only larger. Very close to Jimmy, but larger, more
powerful.

"Catch them before they harm Uncle Al! Hurry! _Hurry!_"

There was a strange lifting sensation in Jimmy's chest now. As though he
could shake the river if he tried hard enough, tilt it, send it swirling
in great thunderous white surges clear down to Lake Pontchartrain.

       *       *       *       *       *

But Jimmy didn't want to tilt the river. Not with Uncle Al on it and
Pigtail, and all those people in New Orleans who would disappear right
off the streets. They were frogs too, maybe, but good frogs. Not like
the Harmon brothers.

Jimmy had a funny picture of himself much younger than he was. Jimmy saw
himself as a great husky baby, standing in the middle of the river and
blowing on it with all his might. The waves rose and rose, and Jimmy's
cheeks swelled out and the river kept getting angrier.

No--he must fight that.

"Save Uncle Al!" he whispered fiercely. "Just save him--and Pigtail!"

It began to happen the instant Jimmy opened his eyes. Around the bend in
the sunlight came a great spinning disk, wrapped in a fiery glow.

Straight toward the Harmon shantyboat the disk swept, water spurting up
all about it, its bottom fifty feet wide. There was no collision. Only a
brightness for one awful instant where the shantyboat was twisting and
turning in the current, a brightness that outshone the rising sun.

Just like a camera flashbulb going off, but bigger, brighter. So big and
bright that Jimmy could see the faces of the Harmon brothers fifty times
as large as life, shriveling and disappearing in a magnifying burst of
flame high above the cypress trees. Just as though a giant in the sky
had trained a big burning glass on the Harmon brothers and whipped it
back quick.

Whipped it straight up, so that the faces would grow huge before
dissolving as a warning to all snakes. There was an evil anguish in the
dissolving faces which made Jimmy's blood run cold. Then the disk was
alone in the middle of the river, spinning around and around, the
shantyboat swallowed up.

And Uncle Al was still swimming, fearfully close to it.

The net came swirling out of the disk over Uncle Al like a great,
dew-drenched gossamer web. It enmeshed him as he swam, so gently that he
hardly seemed to struggle or even to be aware of what was happening to
him.

Pigtail didn't resist, either. She simply stopped thrashing in Uncle
Al's arms, as though a great wonder had come upon her.

Slowly Uncle Al and Pigtail were drawn into the disk. Jimmy could see
Uncle Al reclining in the web, with Pigtail in the crook of his arm, his
long, angular body as quiet as a butterfly in its deep winter sleep
inside a swaying glass cocoon.

Uncle Al and Pigtail, being drawn together into the disk as Jimmy
stared, a dull pounding in his chest. After a moment the pounding
subsided and a silence settled down over the river.

Jimmy sucked in his breath. The voices began quietly, as though they had
been waiting for a long time to speak to Jimmy deep inside his head, and
didn't want to frighten him in any way.

"Take it easy, Jimmy! Stay where you are. We're just going to have a
friendly little talk with Uncle Al."

"A t-talk?" Jimmy heard himself stammering.

"We knew we'd find you where life flows simply and serenely, Jimmy.
Your parents took care of that before they left you with Uncle Al.

"You see, Jimmy, we wanted you to study the Earth people on a great,
wide flowing river, far from the cruel, twisted places. To grow up with
them, Jimmy--and to understand them. Especially the Uncle Als. For Uncle
Al is unspoiled, Jimmy. If there's any hope at all for Earth as we guide
and watch it, that hope burns most brightly in the Uncle Als!"

