biopods prove that!" Jarvis grinned and took up his narrative. "Anyway,
we plugged along across Xanthus and in about the middle of the
afternoon, something else queer happened. The pyramids ended."

"Ended!"

"Yeah; the queer part was that the last one--and now they were
ten-footers--was capped! See? Whatever built it was still inside; we'd
trailed 'em from their half-million-year-old origin to the present.

"Tweel and I noticed it about the same time. I yanked out my automatic
(I had a clip of Boland explosive bullets in it) and Tweel, quick as a
sleight-of-hand trick, snapped a queer little glass revolver out of his
bag. It was much like our weapons, except that the grip was larger to
accommodate his four-taloned hand. And we held our weapons ready while
we sneaked up along the lines of empty pyramids.

"Tweel saw the movement first. The top tiers of bricks were heaving,
shaking, and suddenly slid down the sides with a thin crash. And
then--something--something was coming out!

"A long, silvery-grey arm appeared, dragging after it an armored body.
Armored, I mean, with scales, silver-grey and dull-shining. The arm
heaved the body out of the hole; the beast crashed to the sand.

"It was a nondescript creature--body like a big grey cask, arm and a
sort of mouth-hole at one end; stiff, pointed tail at the other--and
that's all. No other limbs, no eyes, ears, nose--nothing! The thing
dragged itself a few yards, inserted its pointed tail in the sand,
pushed itself upright, and just sat.

"Tweel and I watched it for ten minutes before it moved. Then, with a
creaking and rustling like--oh, like crumpling stiff paper--its arm
moved to the mouth-hole and out came a brick! The arm placed the brick
carefully on the ground, and the thing was still again.

"Another ten minutes--another brick. Just one of Nature's bricklayers.
I was about to slip away and move on when Tweel pointed at the thing and
said 'rock'! I went 'huh?' and he said it again. Then, to the
accompaniment of some of his trilling, he said, 'No--no--,' and gave two
or three whistling breaths.

"Well, I got his meaning, for a wonder! I said, 'No breath?' and
demonstrated the word. Tweel was ecstatic; he said, 'Yes, yes, yes! No,
no, no breet!' Then he gave a leap and sailed out to land on his nose
about one pace from the monster!

"I was startled, you can imagine! The arm was going up for a brick, and
I expected to see Tweel caught and mangled, but--nothing happened! Tweel
pounded on the creature, and the arm took the brick and placed it neatly
beside the first. Tweel rapped on its body again, and said 'rock,' and I
got up nerve enough to take a look myself.

"Tweel was right again. The creature was rock, and it didn't breathe!"

"How you know?" snapped Leroy, his black eyes blazing interest.

"Because I'm a chemist. The beast was made of silica! There must have
been pure silicon in the sand, and it lived on that. Get it? We, and
Tweel, and those plants out there, and even the biopods are _carbon_
life; this thing lived by a different set of chemical reactions. It was
silicon life!"

"_La vie silicieuse!_" shouted Leroy. "I have suspect, and now it is
proof! I must go see! _Il faut que je--_"

"All right! All right!" said Jarvis. "You can go see. Anyhow, there the
thing was, alive and yet not alive, moving every ten minutes, and then
only to remove a brick. Those bricks were its waste matter. See,
Frenchy? We're carbon, and our waste is carbon dioxide, and this thing
is silicon, and _its_ waste is silicon dioxide--silica. But silica is a
solid, hence the bricks. And it builds itself in, and when it is
covered, it moves over to a fresh place to start over. No wonder it
creaked! A living creature half a million years old!"

"How you know how old?" Leroy was frantic.

"We trailed its pyramids from the beginning, didn't we? If this weren't
the original pyramid builder, the series would have ended somewhere
before we found him, wouldn't it?--ended and started over with the small
ones. That's simple enough, isn't it?

"But he reproduces, or tries to. Before the third brick came out, there
was a little rustle and out popped a whole stream of those little
crystal balls. They're his spores, or eggs, or seeds--call 'em what you
want. They went bouncing by across Xanthus just as they'd bounced by us
back in the Mare Chronium. I've a hunch how they work, too--this is for
your information, Leroy. I think the crystal shell of silica is no more
than a protective covering, like an eggshell, and that the active
principle is the smell inside. It's some sort of gas that attacks
silicon, and if the shell is broken near a supply of that element, some
reaction starts that ultimately develops into a beast like that one."

"You should try!" exclaimed the little Frenchman. "We must break one to
see!"

"Yeah? Well, I did. I smashed a couple against the sand. Would you like
to come back in about ten thousand years to see if I planted some
pyramid monsters? You'd most likely be able to tell by that time!"
Jarvis paused and drew a deep breath. "Lord! That queer creature! Do you
picture it? Blind, deaf, nerveless, brainless--just a mechanism, and
yet--immortal! Bound to go on making bricks, building pyramids, as long
as silicon and oxygen exist, and even afterwards it'll just stop. It
won't be dead. If the accidents of a million years bring it its food
again, there it'll be, ready to run again, while brains and
civilizations are part of the past. A queer beast--yet I met a stranger
one!"

"If you did, it must have been in your dreams!" growled Harrison.

"You're right!" said Jarvis soberly. "In a way, you're right. The
dream-beast! That's the best name for it--and it's the most fiendish,
terrifying creation one could imagine! More dangerous than a lion, more
insidious than a snake!"

"Tell me!" begged Leroy. "I must go see!"

"Not _this_ devil!" He paused again. "Well," he resumed, "Tweel and I
left the pyramid creature and plowed along through Xanthus. I was tired
and a little disheartened by Putz's failure to pick me up, and Tweel's
trilling got on my nerves, as did his flying nosedives. So I just strode
along without a word, hour after hour across that monotonous desert.

"Toward mid-afternoon we came in sight of a low dark line on the
horizon. I knew what it was. It was a canal; I'd crossed it in the
rocket and it meant that we were just one-third of the way across
Xanthus. Pleasant thought, wasn't it? And still, I was keeping up to
schedule.

"We approached the canal slowly; I remembered that this one was bordered
by a wide fringe of vegetation and that Mud-heap City was on it.

"I was tired, as I said. I kept thinking of a good hot meal, and then
from that I jumped to reflections of how nice and home-like even Borneo
would seem after this crazy planet, and from that, to thoughts of little
old New York, and then to thinking about a girl I know there--Fancy
Long. Know her?"

"Vision entertainer," said Harrison. "I've tuned her in. Nice
blonde--dances and sings on the _Yerba Mate_ hour."

"That's her," said Jarvis ungrammatically. "I know her pretty well--just
friends, get me?--though she came down to see us off in the _Ares_.
Well, I was thinking about her, feeling pretty lonesome, and all the
time we were approaching that line of rubbery plants.

"And then--I said, 'What 'n Hell!' and stared. And there she was--Fancy
Long, standing plain as day under one of those crack-brained trees, and
smiling and waving just the way I remembered her when we left!"

"Now you're nuts, too!" observed the captain.

"Boy, I almost agreed with you! I stared and pinched myself and closed
my eyes and then stared again--and every time, there was Fancy Long
smiling and waving! Tweel saw something, too; he was trilling and
