added example after example, being careful to state them in the present
tense; I did not want to give the impression that the examples had
actually been run.

In a month's time I checked with John Bostick. Bostick had been able to
duplicate Callahan's work, and we had three more, flimsy, diaphanous
sheets that could not be torn by human hands. That was all I needed. Now
I knew that anyone could duplicate the Tearproof Paper, and I had at
least one, good, substantial working example for my patent application.
The knowledge gave me greater confidence in the alternate materials and
procedures that Callahan and I had dreamed up. I prepared a final draft
containing twenty-three pages of detailed specification and eleven
examples and topped it all off with forty-six claims. It was a
magnificent application, considering what I had to start with. I handed
it to Mr. Spardleton and sat down to hear what he had to say about it.

I watched him out of the corner of my eye as he read it, and I had the
pleasure of seeing his cigar slowly swing outward until the glowing end
was almost beneath one of his ears. This, I knew, was his Amazed
Position, and it was rare indeed that I or anyone else ever saw it. Mr.
Spardleton was a man who does not amaze easily.

He finished and looked up at me and said, "I assume this is the same
invention you told me about last month?" When I nodded he continued,
"And I further assume that you have no experimental data in addition to
that you described last month?" Again I nodded, and he said, "All of
this is paperwork with the exception of Example I?" I nodded again, and
he put the draft down in front of him and stared at it.

I began to grow uncomfortable in the silence. Then he said, so softly
that I could hardly hear him, "I remember, many, many years ago,
answering the phone, Cliff Norbright--great chemist--telling me he had
smelled phenol when he heated ethylene chlorohydrin in the presence of
holmium-treated silica gel in a test tube. I wrote the greatest patent
application of the age based on that evidence. Just like this one." He
laid a hand on it, and shook his head, and smiled.

"There is no crude guesswork on this product," I said. "The work has
been duplicated, and I've seen many specimens of this paper. I tell you,
sir, there never has been anything like it. Why, even Callahan ..."

"Yes, tell me about Dr. Callahan. He is usually a pretty conservative
fellow. How does he feel about this completely untried product?"

I sat up straighter. "This is not an untried product, Mr. Spardleton. It
has been made and duplicated. It has all the properties that the
application says it has. And Dr. Callahan has just as much faith in it
as I have."

Mr. Spardleton looked at me, and smiled, and slowly handed over the
draft. "Mr. Saddle, I wish you all the best in your prosecution of this
case. Please call on me if there is anything I can do to help. In any
way, don't hesitate to call on me."

I stood up and took the draft and turned to go, but Mr. Spardleton
thrust his hand out. I shook it and said, "Is anything wrong with it?"

"Not that I am able to see, Mr. Saddle. It is a most remarkable job, and
bespeaks of ingenuity, resourcefulness, and skill. You have come a long
way to be able to write such an application."

I didn't know what to say, so I smiled and bobbed my head and walked out
still looking at him and smiling, which made it necessary for me to walk
sideways, and thus made me look, I suppose, somewhat like a crab.

Susan put the case in final form. We sent the papers to California for
Callahan's signature, then we filed the case, and things got back to
normal with me. It was a great relief not to have the strain on me night
and day. That's the trouble with an important case. You live with it too
much.

       *       *       *       *       *

It was seven months before I got the first Office Action in the Case. I
read the first few paragraphs and they were quite normal. They rejected
the Case in the usual manner by citing prior patents that had nothing to
do with my application. This kind of thing was just part of the game of
prosecution in which the Patent Examiner makes rejections because that
is what he is supposed to do no matter what the invention; they don't
have to make much sense. But then came a paragraph that went way beyond
good sense and proper rejection technique. It said:

_The specification is objected to as containing large portions that are
merely laudatory. See Ex parte Grieg, 181 OG 266, and Ex parte
Wellington 113 OG 2218. These portions are superfluous and should be
deleted, Ex parte Ball, 1902 CD 326. The specification is unnecessarily
prolix throughout and contains an unduly large number of embodiments, Ex
parte Blakemen, 98 OG 791. Shortening is required._

I didn't wait. I grabbed the file of the Case and almost ran over to the
Patent Office to straighten out the Examiner on a few things. As usual,
Herbert Krome was the Examiner, so I charged up to his desk and
immediately began explaining to him the importance of the Tearproof
Paper Case. He seemed to pay no attention to me, but I knew him; he was
listening. When I finally paused to let him say something, he looked at
me quizzically and said, "Mr. Saddle, aren't you aware of the Notice of
October 11, 1955?"

I looked at him blankly and said, "What's that?"

"It says that interviews with Examiners are not to be held on Fridays
except in exceptional circumstances."

I gulped and said, "Is today Friday?"

He pushed his desk calendar toward me. It was Friday all right, and the
thirteenth at that. I was too embarrassed to speak, and I got up and
began to walk out. Mr. Krome called after me. "This must be an important
case, Mr. Saddle. I'll expect to see you the first thing Monday." I
nodded, and left.

By Monday, my embarrassment had not diminished. I had really done an
unheard-of thing in patent prosecution. In patent prosecution, the
patent attorney has six months to respond to an Office Action. Since
attorneys carry a docket of cases adapted to fill all their time, an
attorney in most instances requires the full six months to respond to an
outstanding Office Action. Industrious attorneys with relatively light
dockets might respond in five months' time. This may also happen when
the attorney is trying to get a little ahead so he can go on a vacation.
There are rare instances of record when an attorney had taken some
action in three or four months. But here, in the Tearproof Paper Case, I
had actually gone for an interview on the very first day. I couldn't
possibly go back on the following Monday; my pride would not allow me. I
waited until Tuesday.

By that time I had gone over the entire rejection and planned my
