
"No, Huvane. By depriving him of the one thing that Life cannot exist
without."

"Food? Safety?"

Chelan shook his head. "More primitive than these." He lowered his
voice. "He suffers now from being cut off from his kind. Life starts,
complaining about the treatment it receives during the miracle of birth
and crying for its first breath of air. Life departs gasping for air,
with someone listening for the last words, the last message from the
dying. Communication, Huvane, is the primary drive of all Life, from
plant to animal to man--and if such exists, superman.

"Through communication Life goes on. Communication is the prime
requisite to procreation. The firefly signals his mate by night, the
human male entices his woman with honeyed words and is not the gift of a
jewel a crystalline, enduring statement of his undying affection?"

Chelan dropped his flowery manner and went on in a more casual vein:
"Huvane, boil it down to the least attractive form of simplification, no
life stands alone. And no viable life goes on without communication, I
shall shut off the Terran's communication."

"Then he will go rank staring, raving mad."

"No, for I shall offer him the alternative. Co-operate, or molder in
utter blankness."

Huvane shrugged. "Seems to me that any Terran locked in a duralim cell
so far from home the distance means nothing is already cut from
communication."

"Deeper, deeper, Huvane. The brain lies prisoner within a cell of bone.
Its contact with the Outside world lies along five channels of sensory
communication. Everything that the brain believes about the Universe is
the product of sensory information carried inward by sight, touch,
sound, taste and smell. From five basic bits of information, knowledge
of the Great Truth is formed through logic and self-argument.
Everything."

"But--"

"Oh, now stop. I am not expressing my own singular opinion. I believe a
rather great proportion of the things that I was taught, and I was
taught through the self-same five sensory channel."

"Um-m-m."

"Good. Just plain 'Um-m-m.' Now we shall shut off the Terran's channels
of communication until he consents as an alternative. This, Huvane,
hasn't been tried before. It may bring us the final important bit of
information."

       *       *       *       *       *

Slowly the lights went out. Jerry Markham was prepared for dark
isolation, he could do nothing about it so he accepted it by the simple
process of assuring himself that things were going to get worse before
they got better.

The darkness became--absolute. Utter. Complete. Not even the dots and
whorls and specks that are technically called "Visual noise" occurred. A
level of mental alertness niggled at him; for nearly twenty-four years
it had been a busy little chunk of his mind. It was that section that
inspected the data for important program material and decided which was
trivial and which was worthy of the Big Boy's attention. Now it was out
of a job because there wasn't even a faint background count of
plateau-noise to occupy its attention.

The silence grew--vast. Brain said that the solid walls were no more
than ten feet from him; ears said that he was in the precise middle of
absolutely nowhere. Feeling said that the floor was under his feet, ears
said that upward pressure touched his soles. Deeper grew the deadening
of his ears, and orientation was lost. Feeling remained and he felt his
heart beating in a hunting rhythm because the sound-feedback through the
ear was gone, and the hortator had lost his audible beat.

Feeling died and he knew not whether he stood or sat or floated askew.
Feeling died and with it went that delicate motor control that directs
the position of muscle and limb and enables a man to place his little
finger on the tip of his nose with his eyes closed.

Aside from the presence of foreign matter, the taste of a clean mouth
is--tasteless. The term is relative. Jerry Markham learned what real
tastelessness was. It was flat and blank and--nothingness.

Chemists tell us that air is tasteless, colorless, and odorless, but
when sense is gone abruptly one realizes that the air does indeed have
its aroma.

In an unemployed body the primitive sensors of the mind had nothing to
do, and like a man trained to busy-ness, loafing was their hardest task.
Gone was every sensory stimulus. His heart pumped from habit, not
controlled by the feedback of sound or feeling. He breathed, but he did
not hear the inrush of air. Brain told him to be careful of his mouth,
the sharp teeth could bite the dead tongue and he could bleed to death
never feeling pain nor even the swift flow of salty warmth.
Habit-trained nerves caused a false tickle in his throat; he never knew
