liner _Oriona_, bound for Sirius.

       *       *       *       *       *

If ever there was a Gold Mine In The Sky, it was Centaurus City. To the
cultural xenologists who worked on its mysterious riches, it seemed to
present an almost inexhaustible supply of new data. The former
inhabitants had left everything behind, as though it were no longer of
any value whatever. No other trace of them had as yet been found
anywhere in the known galaxy, but they had left enough material in
Centaurus City to satisfy the curiosity of Mankind for years to come,
and enough mystery and complexity to whet that curiosity to an even
sharper degree.

It's difficult for the average person to grasp just how much information
can be packed into a city covering ten thousand square miles with a
population density equal to that of Manhattan. How long would it take
the hypothetical Man From Mars to investigate New York or London if he
had only the City to work with, if he found them just as they stand
except that the inhabitants had vanished?

The technological level of the aliens could not be said to be either
"above" or "below" that of Man: it could only be said to be "different."
It was as if the two cultures complemented each other; the areas of
knowledge which the aliens had explored seemed to be those which Mankind
had not yet touched, while, at the same time, there appeared to be many
levels of common human knowledge which the aliens had never approached.

From the combination of the two, whole new fields of human thought and
endeavor had been opened.

No trace of the alien spaceships had been uncovered, but the
anti-gravitational devices in their aircraft, plus the basic principles
of Man's own near-light-velocity drive had given Man the ultralight
drive.

Their knowledge of social organization and function far exceeded that of
Man, and the hints taken from the deciphered writings of the aliens had
radically changed Man's notions of government. Now humanity could build
a Galactic Civilization--a unity that was neither a pure democracy nor
an absolute dictatorship, but resulted in optimum governmental control
combined with optimum individual freedom. It was _e pluribus unum_ plus.
Their technological writings were few, insofar as physics and chemistry
were concerned. What there were turned out to be elementary texts rather
than advanced studies--which was fortunate, because it had been through
these that the cultural xenologists had been able to decipher the
language of the aliens, a language that was no more alien to the modern
mind than, say, ancient Egyptian or Cretan.

But without any advanced texts, deciphering the workings of the
thousands of devices that the aliens had left behind was a tedious job.
The elementary textbooks seemed to deal with the same sort of science
that human beings were used to, but, at some point beyond, the aliens
had taken a slightly different course, and, at first, only the very
simplest of their mechanisms could be analyzed. But the investigators
learned from the simpler mechanisms, and found themselves able to take
the next step forward to more complex ones. However, it still remained a
fact that the majority of the devices were as incomprehensible to the
investigators as would the function of a transistor have been to James
Clerk Maxwell.

In the areas of the social sciences, data was deciphered at a fairly
rapid rate; the aliens seemed to have concentrated all their efforts on
that. Psionics, on the other hand, seemed never to have occurred to
them, much less to have been investigated. And yet, there were devices
in Centaurus City that bore queer generic resemblances to common
Terrestrial psionic machines. But there was no hint of such things in
the alien literature.

And the physical sciences were deciphered only slowly, by a process of
cut-and-try and cut-and-try again.

The investigations would take time. There were only a relatively small
handful of men working on the problems that the City posed. Not because
there weren't plenty of men who would have sacrificed their time and
efforts to further the work, but because the planet, being hostile to
Man, simply would not support very many investigators. It was not
economically feasible to pour more men and material into the project
after the point of diminishing returns had been reached. Theoretically,
it would have been possible to re-seal the City's dome and pump in an
atmosphere that human beings could live with, but, aside from every
other consideration, it was likely that such an atmosphere would ruin
many of the artifacts within the City.

Besides, the work in the City was heady stuff. Investigation of the City
took a particular type of high-level mind, and that kind of mind did not
occur in vast numbers.

It was not, Turnbull thought, his particular dish of tea. The physical
sciences were not his realm, and the work of translating the alien
writings could be done on Earth, from 'stat copies, if he'd cared to do
that kind of work.

       *       *       *       *       *

Sirius VI was a busy planet--a planet that was as Earthlike as a planet
could be without being Earth itself. It had a single moon, smaller than
Earth's and somewhat nearer to the planet itself. The _Oriona_ landed
there, and Dave Turnbull took a shuttle ship to Sirius VI, dropping down
at the spaceport near Noiberlin, the capital.

It took less than an hour to find that Scholar Duckworth had gone no
farther on his journey to Mendez than Sirius VI. He hadn't cashed in his
ticket; if he had, they'd have known about it on Earth. But he certainly
hadn't taken a ship toward the Central Stars, either.

Turnbull got himself a hotel room and began checking through the
Noiberlin city directory. There it was, big as life and fifteen times as
significant. Rawlings Scientific Corporation.

Turnbull decided he might as well tackle them right off the bat; there
was nothing to be gained by pussyfooting around.

He used the phone, and, after browbeating several of the employees and
pulling his position on a couple of executives, he managed to get an
appointment with the Assistant Director, Lawrence Drawford. The
Director, Scholar Jason Rawlings, was not on Sirius VI at the time.

The appointment was scheduled for oh nine hundred the following morning,
and Turnbull showed up promptly. He entered through the big main door
and walked to the reception desk.

"Yes?" said the girl at the desk.

"How do you do," Turnbull said. "My name is Turnbull; I think I'm
expected."

"Just a moment." She checked with the information panel on her desk,
then said: "Go right on up, Dr. Turnbull. Take Number Four Lift Chute to
the eighteenth floor and turn left. Dr. Drawford's office is at the end
of the hall."

Turnbull followed directions.

Drawford was a heavy-set, florid-faced man with an easy smile and a
rather too hearty voice.

"Come in, Dr. Turnbull; it's a pleasure to meet you. What can I do for
you?" He waved Turnbull to a chair and sat down behind his desk.

Turnbull said carefully: "I'd just like to get a little information, Dr.
Drawford."

Drawford selected a cigar from the humidor on his desk and offered one
to Turnbull. "Cigar? No? Well, if I can be of any help to you, I'll
certainly do the best I can." But there was a puzzled look on his face
as he lit his cigar.

"First," said Turnbull, "am I correct in saying that Rawlings Scientific
is in charge of the research program at Centaurus City?"

Drawford exhaled a cloud of blue-gray smoke. "Not precisely. We work as
a liaison between the Advanced Study Board and the Centaurus group, and
we supply the equipment that's needed for the work there. We build
instruments to order--that sort of thing. Scholar Rawlings is a member
of the Board, of course, which admits of a somewhat closer liaison than
might otherwise be possible.

"But I'd hardly say we were in charge of the research. That's handled
entirely by the Group leaders at the City itself."

Turnbull lit a cigarette. "What happened to Scholar Duckworth?" he said
