_She's afraid of me_! Mryna thought. And that made no sense at all.

Mryna knew she had to get back to the god-car quickly. Since the
Earthmen had built up the taboos in order to get their sacrifice ores
from Rythar, they would do everything they could to prevent her return.
She ran toward an intersecting spoke corridor. An alarm bell began to
clang, and the sound vibrated against the metal walls. An armed man
sprang from a side room and fired his weapon at Mryna. The discharge
burned a deep groove in the wall.

So they would even kill her--these men who pretended to be gods!

Before the man could fire again, Mryna swung down a side corridor, and
at once the sensation of weightlessness overtook her. She could not move
quickly. She saw the armed man at the mouth of the corridor. Frantically
she pushed open the door of a room, which was crowded with consoles of
transmission machines. Three men were seated in front of the speakers.
They jumped and came toward her, clumsily fighting the weightlessness.

Mryna caught at the door jamb and swung herself toward the ceiling. At
the same time the armed man fired. The discharge missed her and washed
against the transmission machinery. Blue fire exploded from the room.
The three men screamed in agony. Concussion threw Mryna helplessly
toward the rim again.

And the Guardian Wheel was plunged into darkness. Mryna's head swam; her
shoulder seethed with pain where she had banged into the wall. She tried
to creep toward the circular room, but she had lost her sense of
direction and she found herself back on the rim.

The clanging bell had stopped when the lights went out, but Mryna heard
the panic of frightened voices. Far away someone was screaming. Running
feet clattered toward her. Mryna flattened herself against the outer
wall. An indistinct body of men shot past her.

"From Rythar," one of them was saying. "A woman from Rythar!"

"And we've blasted the communication center. We've no way of sending the
warning back to Earth--"

They were gone.


Mryna moved back into the spoke corridor. She felt her way silently
toward the circular hub room and the god-car. Suddenly very close she
heard voices which she recognized--the man and the woman who had been
talking in the supply room.

"You're still all right, Dick," the woman said. "She hasn't been here
long enough to--"

"We don't know that. We don't know how it spreads or how quickly. We
can't take the chance."

"Then ... then we've no choice?" Her voice was a small whisper, choked
with terror.

"None. These have been standing emergency orders for twenty years. We
always faced the possibility that one of them would escape. If we'd been
allowed to use a different policy of education--but the politicians
wouldn't permit that. The Wheel has to be destroyed, and we must die
with it."

"Couldn't we wait and make sure?"

"It works too fast. None of us would be able to do the job--afterward."


The voices moved away. Mryna floated toward the hub room. She found the
air lock and pulled herself into the god-car. The metal lock hissed
closed and light came on. Then she knew she had made a mistake. This
ship was not the one she had used when she came up from Rythar. The tiny
cabin was fitted with a sleeping lounge, a food cabinet and a file of
reading films. Above the lounge a mica viewplate gave her a broad view
of the sky.

Mryna remembered that the man in the supply room had said he was waiting
for an auto-pickup; he was on his way back to Earth. Mryna had taken his
ship instead of her own. In panic she tried to open the door again, but
she found no way to do it. Machinery beneath her feet began to hum. She
felt a slight lurch as the pickup left the hub of the Guardian Wheel.

It swung in a wide arc. Through the viewplate she saw the enormous Wheel
growing small behind her, silhouetted against the mist of Rythar.
Suddenly the wheel glowed red with a soundless explosion. Its flaming
fragments died in the void.

Mryna dropped weakly on the lounge. Nausea spun through her mind. The
man had said they would destroy themselves. Because Mryna had come
aboard? But why were they afraid of her? What possible harm could she do
them? Mryna had left Rythar to discover the truth, and the truth was
insanity. Was truth always like this--a bitter disillusionment, an empty
horror?

She had something else to say to the people of Rythar now: not that the
gods were men, but that men were mad. Believe in the taboos; send up the
sacrificial ores. It was a small price to pay to keep that madness away
from Rythar.

And Mryna knew she could not go back. With the Wheel gone, she could
never return to Rythar; the auto-pickup was carrying her inexorably
toward Earth. The scream of the machinery slowly turned shrill,
hammering against her eardrums. The stars visible in the viewplate
blurred and winked out. Mryna felt a twist of vertigo as the shuttle
shifted from conventional speed into a time warp. And then the sound
was gone. The ship was floating in an impenetrable blackness.

Mryna had no idea how much time passed subjectively. When she became
hungry, she took food from the cabinet. She slept when she was tired. To
pass the time, she turned the reading films through the projector.

Most of the film stored in the shuttle covered material Mryna already
knew. The Earthmen, clearly, had not denied any information to Rythar.
