won't backfire again. I've had their burnt-out cylinder heads replaced."

An agitated voice came from the visiplate on the captain's desk: "Tuning
in, sir."

Lawton stopped pacing abruptly. He swung about and grasped the desk edge
with both hands, his head touching Forrester's as the two men stared
down at the horizontal face of petty officer James Caldwell.

Caldwell wasn't more than twenty-two or three, but the screen's
opalescence silvered his hair and misted the outlines of his jaw, giving
him an aspect of senility.

"Well, young man," Forrester growled. "What is it? What do you want?"

The irritation in the captain's voice seemed to increase Caldwell's
agitation. Lawton had to say: "All right, lad, let's have it," before
the information which he had seemed bursting to impart could be wrenched
out of him.

It came in erratic spurts. "The bubble is all blooming, sir. All around
inside there are big yellow and purple growths. It started up above,
and--and spread around. First there was just a clouding over of the sky,
sir, and then--stalks shot out."

For a moment Lawton felt as though all sanity had been squeezed from his
brain. Twice he started to ask a question and thought better of it.

Pumpings were superfluous when he could confirm Caldwell's statement in
half a minute for himself. If Caldwell had cracked up--

Caldwell hadn't cracked. When Lawton walked to the quartz port and
stared down all the blood drained from his face.

The vegetation was luxuriant, and unearthly. Floating in the sky were
serpentine tendrils as thick as a man's wrist, purplish flowers and ropy
fungus growths. They twisted and writhed and shot out in all directions,
creating a tangle immediately beneath him and curving up toward the ship
amidst a welter of seed pods.

He could see the seeds dropping--dropping from pods which reminded him
of the darkly horned skate egg sheaths which he had collected in his
boyhood from sea beaches at ebb tide.

It was the _unwholesomeness_ of the vegetation which chiefly unnerved
him. It looked dank, malarial. There were decaying patches on the fungus
growths and a miasmal mist was descending from it toward the ship.

The control room was completely still when he turned from the quartz
port to meet Forrester's startled gaze.

"Dave, what does it mean?" The question burst explosively from the
captain's lips.

"It means--life has appeared and evolved and grown rotten ripe inside
the bubble, sir. All in the space of an hour or so."

"But that's--_impossible_."

Lawton shook his head. "It isn't at all, sir. We've had it drummed into
us that evolution proceeds at a snailish pace, but what proof have we
that it can't mutate with lightning-like rapidity? I've told you there
are gases outside we can't even make in a chemical laboratory, molecular
arrangements that are alien to earth."

"But plants derive nourishment from the soil," interpolated Forrester.

"I know. But if there are alien gases in the air the surface of the
bubble must be reeking with unheard of chemicals. There may be compounds
inside the bubble which have so sped up organic processes that a
hundred million year cycle of mutations has been telescoped into an
hour."

Lawton was pacing the floor again. "It would be simpler to assume that
seeds of existing plants became somehow caught up and imprisoned in the
bubble. But the plants around us never existed on earth. I'm no
botanist, but I know what the Congo has on tap, and the great rain
forests of the Amazon."

"Dave, if the growth continues it will fill the bubble. It will choke
off all our air."

"Don't you suppose I realize that? We've got to destroy that growth
before it destroys us."

                *       *       *       *       *

It was pitiful to watch the crew's morale sag. The miasmal taint of the
ominously proliferating vegetation was soon pervading the ship,
spreading demoralization everywhere.

It was particularly awful straight down. Above a ropy tangle of livid
vines and creepers a kingly stench weed towered, purplish and bloated
and weighted down with seed pods.

It seemed sentient, somehow. It was growing so fast that the evil odor
which poured from it could be correlated with the increase of tension
inside the ship. From that particular plant, minute by slow minute,
there surged a continuously mounting offensiveness, like nothing Lawton
had ever smelt before.

The bubble had become a blooming horror sailing slowly westward above
the storm-tossed Atlantic. And all the chemical agents which Lawton
sprayed through the ventilation valves failed to impede the growth or
destroy a single seed pod.

It was difficult to kill plant life with chemicals which were not
harmful to man. Lawton took dangerous risks, increasing the
unwholesomeness of their rapidly dwindling air supply by spraying out a
thin diffusion of problematically poisonous acids.

It was no sale. The growths increased by leaps and bounds, as though
determined to show their resentment of the measures taken against them
by marshalling all their forces in a demoralizing plantkrieg.

Thwarted, desperate, Lawton played his last card. He sent five members
