blacked out, and eventually his brain would have been permanently
damaged from the lack of blood to carry oxygen to it.

A red light on the instrument panel blinked balefully at him as it
measured out the oxygen he required. Other instruments on the panel
informed him of the amount of cooling air flowing through his suit to
keep his temperature within the tolerable range, and the amount of
moisture the dehumidifier had to carry away from him so that his suit
didn't become a steam-bath. He was surrounded by hundreds of pounds of
equipment which added nothing to the performance of the ship; which
couldn't be counted as payload; which cut down on the speed and altitude
the ship might have reached without them. Their sole purpose was to keep
this magnificent high-performance, self-steering machine from killing
its load of fragile human flesh.

At one hundred twenty-eight seconds after launch, the acceleration
suddenly dropped to zero. He breathed deeply again, and swallowed
repeatedly to get the salty taste out of his throat. His stomach was
uneasy, but he wasn't spacesick. Had he been prone to spacesickness, he
would never have been accepted as a Rocket Interceptor pilot. Rocket
Interceptor pilots had to be capable of taking all the punishment their
ships could dish out.

He knew there would be fifty seconds of free-fall before the rockets
fired again. One solid-fuel stage had imparted to the ship a velocity
which would carry it to the altitude of the missile it was to intercept.
A second solid-fuel stage would match trajectories with the missile.
Final corrections would be made with the liquid-fuel rockets in the
third stage. The third stage would then become a glider which eventually
would carry him back to Earth.

Before the second stage was fired, however, the ship had to be oriented
properly. The autopilot consulted its gyros, took some star sights, and
asked the navigation computer some questions. The answers came back in
seconds, an interval which was several hours shorter than a human pilot
would have required. Using the answers, the autopilot started to swing
the ship about, using small compressed-gas jets for the purpose.
Finally, satisfied with the ship's orientation, the autopilot rested. It
patiently awaited the moment, precisely calculated by the computer on
the ground, when it would fire the second stage.

Major Harry Lightfoot, fighter pilot, waited idly for the next move of
his ship. He could only fume inwardly. This was no way for an Apache
warrior to ride into battle. What would his grandfather think of a steed
which directed itself into battle and which could kill its rider, not by
accident, but in its normal operation? He should be actively hunting for
that missile, instead of lying here, strapped into his couch so he
wouldn't hurt himself, while the ship did all the work.

As for the missile, it was far to the north and slightly above the ship.
Without purpose of its own, but obedient to the laws of Mr. Newton and
to the wishes of its makers, it came on inexorably. It was a sleek
aluminum cylinder, glinting in the sunlight it had just recently
entered. On one end was a rocket-motor, now silent but still warm with
the memory of flaming gas that had poured forth from it only minutes
ago. On the other end was a sleek aerodynamic shape, the product of
thousands of hours of design work. It was designed to enter the
atmosphere at meteoric speed, but without burning up. It was intended to
survive the passage through the air and convey its contents intact to
the ground. The contents might have been virulent bacteria or toxic gas,
according to the intentions of its makers. Among its brothers elsewhere
in the sky this morning, there were such noxious loads. This one,
however, was carrying the complex mechanism of a hydrogen bomb. Its
destination was an American city; its object to replace that city with
an expanding cloud of star-hot gas.

       *       *       *       *       *

Suddenly the sleek cylinder disappeared in a puff of smoke, which
quickly dissipated in the surrounding vacuum. What had been a
precisely-built rocket had been reduced, by carefully-placed charges of
explosive, to a collection of chunks of metal. Some were plates from the
skin and fuel tanks. Others were large lumps from the computer-banks,
gyro platform, fuel pumps, and other more massive components. This was
not wanton destruction, however. It was more careful planning by the
same brains which had devised the missile itself. To a radar set on the
ground near the target, each fragment was indistinguishable from the
nose cone carrying the warhead. In fact, since the fragments were
separating only very slowly, they never would appear as distinct
objects. By the time the cloud of decoys entered the atmosphere, its
more than two dozen members would appear to the finest radar available
on the ground as a single echo twenty-five miles across. It would be a
giant haystack in the sky, concealing the most deadly needle of all
time. No ground-controlled intercept scheme had any hope of selecting
the warhead from among that deceptive cloud and destroying it.

The cloud of fragments possessed the same trajectory as the missile
originally had. At the rate it was overtaking RI 276, it would soon pass
the ship by. The autopilot of RI 276 had no intention of letting this
happen, of course. At the correct instant, stage two thundered into
life, and Harry Lightfoot was again smashed back into his acceleration
couch. Almost absentmindedly, the ship continued to minister to his
needs. Its attention was focused on its mission. After a while, the
ground computer sent some instructions to the ship. The navigation
computer converted these into a direction, and pointed a radar antenna
in that direction. The antenna sent forth a stream of questing pulses,
which quickly returned, confirming the direction and distance to the
oncoming cloud of missile fragments. A little while later, fuel pumps
began to whine somewhere in the tail of the ship. Then the acceleration
dropped to zero as the second-stage thrust was terminated. There was a
series of thumps as explosive bolts released the second stage. The whine
of the pumps dropped in pitch as fuel gushed through them, and
acceleration returned in a rush. The acceleration lasted for a few
seconds, tapered off quickly, and ended. A light winked on on the
instrument panel as the ship announced its mission was accomplished.

Major Harry Lightfoot, fighter pilot, felt a glow of satisfaction as he
saw the light come on. He might not have reflexes fast enough to pilot
the ship up here; he might not be able to survive the climb to intercept
without the help of a lot of fancy equipment; but he was still
necessary. He saw still one step ahead of this complex robot which had
carried him up here. It was his human judgment and his ability to react
correctly in an unpredictable situation which were needed to locate the
warhead from among the cluster of decoys and destroy it. This was a job
no merely logical machine could do. When all was said and done, the only
purpose for the existence of this magnificent machine was to put him
where he was now; in the same trajectory as the missile, and slightly
behind it.
