"Cool, man," the repairman said. "Here we go." He lifted his hands in an
ecclesiastical gesture, and his voice became a deep boom.

"6SN7, 6ac5, six and seven millivolts are running down the line, E
equals R times A, that's the way it goes, go round the other way, Subhas
Chandra BOSE!"

Afterward, Mr. Rapp was never quite sure exactly what happened. He had
an impression of a flash of light, and an odd, indefinite sound rather
like the dropping of a cosmic garbage can lid. But possibly neither the
light nor the sound actually happened; at any rate, there were no
complaints from the neighbors later on. However, the lighted screen was
certainly doing something.

"Crazy!" the repairman said, in awed tones.

Mr. Rapp, his view partly blocked by the repairman, could not see
exactly what was happening on the screen. However, he caught a brief
glimpse of the newscaster's face. It was right side up, but no longer
smiling. Instead, the pictured face wore a look of profound alarm, and
the newsman was apparently leaning far forward, his face almost out of
focus because of its nearness to the lens. Just for a moment, Mr. Rapp
could have sworn he saw a chair floating _up_, past the agonized
expression on the screen.

Then the screen want gray, and a panel of lettering appeared, shaking
slightly.

OUR PICTURE HAS BEEN TEMPORARILY INTERRUPTED. NORMAL SERVICE WILL BE
RESTORED AS SOON AS POSSIBLE. PLEASE STAND BY.

"I was going to give you a bill," the repairman said. "Only maybe we
better just charge it up to customer relations."

The letters remained steady on the screen, and Mr. Rapp studied them.
They were right side up.

"You fixed it," Mr. Rapp said, a little uncertainly. "I mean, it's
working. I ought to pay...."

"I goofed," the repairman said. He picked up his tools, and moved toward
the door. "Like, I won't mention it to anybody if you won't. But I
goofed, all right. Didn't you see the picture?"

"But whatever you did ... it worked," Mr. Rapp said. "The picture's
right side up."

"I know," the repairman said. "Only somewhere ... there's a studio
that's upside down. I just goofed, Pops, that's all."

He closed the door behind him, leaving Mr. Rapp still staring at the
immobile, right-side-up message on the glowing screen.

[Illustration]

The End.





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Something Will Turn Up, by David Mason

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK SOMETHING WILL TURN UP ***

***** This file should be named 24189.txt or 24189.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/2/4/1/8/24189/

Produced by Greg Weeks, Geetu Melwani and the Online
