millions and millions of past ages, we see our earth ever growing
warmer and warmer the further and further we look back. There was a
time when those heated strata which we have now to go deep down in
mines to find were considerably nearer the surface. At present, were
it not for the sun, the heat of the earth where we stand would hardly
be appreciably above the temperature of infinite space--perhaps some
200 or 300 degrees below zero. But there must have been a time when
there was sufficient internal heat to maintain the exterior at a warm
and indeed at a very hot temperature. Nor is there any bound to our
retrospect arising from the operation or intervention of any other
agent, so far as we know; consequently the hotter and the hotter grows
the surface the further and the further we look back. Nor can we stop
until, at an antiquity so great that I do not venture on any estimate
of the date, we discover that this earth must have consisted of
glowing hot material. Further and further we can look back, and we see
the rocks--or whatever other term we choose to apply to the then
ingredients of the earth's crust--in a white-hot and even in a molten
condition. Thus our argument has led us to the belief that time was
when this now solid globe of ours was a ball of white-hot fluid.

On the argument which I have here used there are just two remarks
which I particularly wish to make. Note in the first place, that our
reasoning is founded on the fact that the earth is at present, to some
extent, heated. It matters not whether this heat be much or little;
our argument would have been equally valid had the earth only
contained a single particle of its mass at a somewhat higher
temperature than the temperature of space. I am, of course, not
alluding in this to heat which can be generated by combustion. The
other point to which I refer is to remove an objection which may
possibly be urged against this line of reasoning. I have argued that
because the temperature is continually increasing as we look
backwards, that therefore a very great temperature must once have
prevailed. Without some explanation this argument is not logically
complete. There is, it is well known, the old paradox of the geometric
series; you may add a farthing to a halfpenny, and then a
half-farthing, and then a quarter-farthing, and then the eighth of a
farthing, followed by the sixteenth, and thirty-second, and so on,
halving the contribution each time. Now no matter how long you
continue this process, even if you went on with it for ever, and thus
made an infinite number of contributions, you would never accomplish
the task of raising the original halfpenny to the dignity of a penny.
An infinite number of quantities may therefore, as this illustration
shows, never succeed in attaining any considerable dimensions. Our
argument, however, with regard to the increase of heat as we look back
is the very opposite of this. It is the essence of a cooling body to
lose heat more rapidly in proportion as its temperature is greater.
Thus though the one-thousandth of a degree may be all the fall of
temperature that our earth now experiences in a twelvemonth, yet in
those glowing days when the surface was heated to incandescence, the
loss of heat per annum must have been immensely greater than it is
now. It therefore follows that the rate of gain of the earth's heat as
we look back must be of a different character to that of the geometric
series which I have just illustrated; for each addition to the
earth's heat, as we look back from year to year, must grow greater and
greater, and therefore there is here no shelter for a fallacy in the
argument on which the existence of high temperature of primeval times
is founded.

The reasoning that I have applied to our earth may be applied in
almost similar words to the moon. It is true that we have not any
knowledge of the internal nature of the moon at present, nor are we
able to point to any active volcanic phenomena at present in progress
there in support of the contention that the moon either has now
internal heat, or did once possess it. It is, however, impossible to
deny the evidence which the lunar craters afford as to the past
existence of volcanic activity on our satellite. Heat, therefore,
there was once in the moon; and accordingly we are enabled to conclude
that, on a retrospect through illimitable periods of time, we must
find the moon transformed from that cold and inert body she now seems
to a glowing and incandescent mass of molten material. The earth
therefore and the moon in some remote ages--not alone anterior to the
existence of life, but anterior even to the earliest periods of which
geologists have cognizance--must have been both globes of molten
materials which have consolidated into the rocks of the present epoch.

We must now revert to the tidal history of the earth-moon system. Did
we not show that there was a time when the earth and the moon--or
perhaps, I should say, the ingredients of the earth and moon--were
close together, were indeed in actual contact? We have now learned,
from a wholly different line of reasoning, that in very early ages
both bodies were highly heated. Here as elsewhere in this theory we
can make little or no attempt to give any chronology, or to harmonize
the different lines along which the course of history has run. No one
can form the slightest idea as to what the temperature of the earth
and of the moon must have been in those primeval ages when they were
in contact. It is impossible, however, to deny that they must both
have been in a very highly heated state; and everything we know of the
matter inclines us to the belief that the temperature of the
earth-moon system must at this critical epoch have been one of
glowing incandescence and fusion. It is therefore quite possible that
these bodies--the moon especially--may have then been not at all of
the form we see them now. It has been supposed, and there are some
grounds for the supposition, that at this initial stage of earth-moon
history the moon materials did not form a globe, but were disposed in
a ring which surrounded the earth, the ring being in a condition of
rapid rotation. It was at a subsequent period, according to this view,
that the substances in the ring gradually drew together, and then by
their mutual attractions formed a globe which ultimately consolidated
down into the compact moon as we now see it. I must, however,
specially draw your attention to the clearly-marked line which divides
the facts which dynamics have taught us from those notions which are
to be regarded as more or less conjectural. Interpreting the action of
the tides by the principles of dynamics, we are assured that the moon
was once--or rather the materials of the moon--in the immediate
vicinity of the earth. There, however, dynamics leaves us, and
unfortunately withholds its accurate illumination from the events
which immediately preceded that state of things.

The theory of tidal evolution which I am describing in these lectures
is mainly the work of Professor George H. Darwin of Cambridge. Much of
the original parts of the theory of the tides was due to Sir William
Thomson, and I have also mentioned how Professor Purser contributed an
important element to the dynamical theory. It is, however, Darwin who
has persistently deduced from the theory all the various consequences
which can be legitimately drawn from it. Darwin, for instance, pointed
out that as the moon is receding from us, it must, if we only look far
enough back, have been once in practical contact with the earth. It is
to Darwin also that we owe many of the other parts of a fascinating
theory, either in its mathematical or astronomical aspect; but I must
take this opportunity of saying, that I do not propose to make
Professor Darwin or any of the other mathematicians I have named
responsible for all that I shall say in these lectures. I must be
myself accountable for the way in which the subject is being treated,
as well as for many of the illustrations used, and some of the
deductions I have drawn from the subject.

It is almost unavoidable for us to make a surmise as to the cause by
which the moon had come into this remarkable position close to the
earth at the most critical epoch of earth-moon history.

With reference to this Professor Darwin has offered an explanation,
which seems so exceedingly plausible that it is impossible to resist
the notion that it must be correct. I will ask you to think of the
earth not as a solid body covered largely with ocean, but as a glowing
globe of molten material. In a globe of this kind it is possible for
great undulations to be set up. Here is a large vase of water, and by
displacing it I can cause the water to undulate with a period which
depends on the size of the vessel; undulations can be set up in a
bucket of water, the period of these undulations being dependent upon
the dimensions of the bucket. Similarly in a vast globe of molten
material certain undulations could be set up, and those undulations
would have a period depending upon the dimensions of this vibrating
mass. We may conjecture a mode in which such vibrations could be
originated. Imagine a thin shell of rigid material which just encases
the globe; suppose this be divided into four quarters, like the four
quarters of an orange, and that two of these opposite quarters be
rejected, leaving two quarters on the liquid. Now suppose that these
two quarters be suddenly pressed in, and then be as suddenly
removed--they will produce depressions, of course, on the two opposite
quarters, while the uncompressed quarters will become protuberant. In
virtue of the mutual attractions between the different particles of
the mass, an effort will be made to restore the globular form, but
this will of course rather overshoot the mark; and therefore a series
of undulations will be originated by which two opposite quarters of
the sphere will alternately shrink in and become protuberant. There
will be a particular period to this oscillation. For our globe it
would appear to be somewhere about an hour and a half or two hours;
but there is necessarily a good deal of uncertainty about this point.

We have seen how in those primitive days the earth was spinning around
very rapidly; and I have also stated that the earth might at this
very critical epoch of its history be compared with a grindstone
which is being driven so rapidly that it is on the very brink of
rupture. It is remarkable to note, that a cause tending to precipitate
a rupture of the earth was at hand. The sun then raised tides in the
earth as it does at present. When the earth revolved in a period of
some four hours or thereabouts, the high tides caused by the sun
succeeded each other at intervals of about two hours. When I speak of
tides in this respect, of course I am not alluding to oceanic tides;
these were the days long before ocean existed, at least in the liquid
form. The tides I am speaking about were raised in the fluids and
materials which then constituted the whole of the glowing earth; those
tides rose and fell under the throb produced by the sun, just as truly
as tides produced in an ordinary ocean. But now note the significant
coincidence between the period of the throb produced by the sun-raised
tides, and that natural period of vibration which belonged to our
earth as a mass of molten material. It therefore follows, that the
impulse given to the earth by the sun harmonized in time with that
period in which the earth itself was disposed to oscillate. A
well-known dynamical principle here comes into play. You see a heavy
weight hanging by a string, and in my hand I hold a little slip of
wood no heavier than a common pencil; ordinarily speaking, I might
strike that heavy weight with this slip of wood, and no effect is
produced; but if I take care to time the little blows that I give so
that they shall harmonize with the vibrations which the weight is
naturally disposed to make, then the effect of many small blows will
be cumulative, so much so, that after a short time the weight begins
to respond to my efforts, and now you see it has acquired a swing of
very considerable amplitude. In Professor Fitzgerald's address to the
British Association at Bath last autumn, he gives an account of those
astounding experiments of Hertz, in which well-timed electrical
impulses broke down an air resistance, and revealed to us ethereal
vibrations which could never have been made manifest except by the
principle we are here discussing. The ingenious conjecture has been
made, that when the earth was thrown into tidal vibrations in those
primeval days, these slight vibrations, harmonizing as they did with
the natural period of the earth, gradually acquired amplitude; the
result being that the pulse of each successive vibration increased at
last to such an extent that the earth separated under the stress, and
threw off a portion of those semi-fluid materials of which it was
composed. In process of time these rejected portions contracted
together, and ultimately formed that moon we now see. Such is the
origin of the moon which the modern theory of tidal evolution has
presented to our notice.

There are two great epochs in the evolution of the earth-moon
system--two critical epochs which possess a unique dynamical
significance; one of these periods was early in the beginning, while
the other cannot arrive for countless ages yet to come. I am aware
that in discussing this matter I am entering somewhat largely into
mathematical principles; I must only endeavour to state the matter as
succinctly as the subject will admit.

In an earlier part of this lecture I have explained how, during all
the development of the earth-moon system, the quantity of moment of
momentum remains unaltered. The moment of momentum of the earth's
rotation added to the moment of momentum of the moon's revolution
remains constant; if one of these quantities increase the other must
decrease, and the progress of the evolution will have this result,
that energy shall be gradually lost in consequence of the friction
produced by the tides. The investigation is one appropriate for
mathematical formulae, such as those that can be found in Professor
Darwin's memoirs; but nature has in this instance dealt kindly with
us, for she has enabled an abstruse mathematical principle to be dealt
with in a singularly clear and concise manner. We want to obtain a
definite view of the alteration in the energy of the system which
shall correspond to a small change in the velocity of the earth's
rotation, the moon of course accommodating itself so that the moment
of momentum shall be preserved unaltered. We can use for this purpose
an angular velocity which represents the excess of the earth's
rotation over the angular revolution of the moon; it is, in fact, the
apparent angular velocity with which the moon appears to move round
the heavens. If we represent by N the angular velocity of the earth,
and by M the angular velocity of the moon in its orbit round the
earth, the quantity we desire to express is N--M; we shall call it the
relative rotation. The mathematical theorem which tells us what we
want can be enunciated in a concise manner as follows. _The alteration
of the energy of the system may be expressed by multiplying the
relative rotation by the change in the earth's angular velocity._ This
result will explain many points to us in the theory, but just at
present I am only going to make a single inference from it.

I must advert for a moment to the familiar conception of a maximum or
a minimum. If a magnitude be increasing, that is, gradually growing
greater and greater, it has obviously not attained a maximum so long
as the growth is in progress. Nor if the object be actually decreasing
can it be said to be at a maximum either; for then it was greater a
second ago than it is now, and therefore it cannot be at a maximum at
present. We may illustrate this by the familiar example of a stone
thrown up into the air; at first it gradually rises, being higher at
each instant than it was previously, until a culminating point is
reached, when just for a moment the stone is poised at the summit of
its path ere it commences its return to earth again. In this case the
maximum point is obtained when the stone, having ceased to ascend, and
not having yet commenced to descend, is momentarily at rest.

The same principles apply to the determination of a minimum. As long
as the magnitude is declining the minimum has not been reached; it is
only when the decline has ceased, and an increase is on the point of
setting in, that the minimum can be said to be touched.

The earth-moon system contains at any moment a certain store of
energy, and to every conceivable condition of the earth-moon system a
certain quantity of energy is appropriate. It is instructive for us to
study the different positions in which the earth and the moon might
lie, and to examine the different quantities of energy which the
system will contain in each of those varied positions. It is however
to be understood that the different cases all presuppose the same
total moment of momentum.

Among the different cases that can be imagined, those will be of
special interest in which the total quantity of energy in the system
is a maximum or a minimum. We must for this purpose suppose the system
gradually to run through all conceivable changes, with the earth and
moon as near as possible, and as far as possible, and in all
intermediate positions; we must also attribute to the earth every
variety in the velocity of its rotation which is compatible with the
preservation of the moment of momentum. Beginning then with the
earth's velocity of rotation at its lowest, we may suppose it
gradually and continually increased, and, as we have already seen, the
change in the energy of the system is to be expressed by multiplying
the relative rotation into the change of the earth's angular velocity.
It follows from the principles we have already explained, that the
maximum or minimum energy is attained at the moment when the
alteration is zero. It therefore follows, that the critical periods of
the system will arise when the relative rotation is zero, that is,
when the earth's rotation on its axis is performed with a velocity
equal to that with which the moon revolves around the earth. This is
truly a singular condition of the earth-moon system; the moon in such
a case would revolve around the earth as if the two bodies were bound
together by rigid bonds into what was practically a single solid body.
At the present moment no doubt to some extent this condition is
realized, because the moon always turns the same face to the earth (a
point on which we shall have something to say later on); but in the
original condition of the earth-moon system, the earth would also
constantly direct the same face to the moon, a condition of things
which is now very far from being realized.

It can be shown from the mathematical nature of the problem that there
are four states of the earth-moon system in which this condition may
be realized, and which are also compatible with the conservation of
the moment of momentum. We can express what this condition implies in
a somewhat more simple manner. Let us understand by the _day_ the
period of the earth's rotation on its axis, whatever that may be, and
let us understand by the _month_ the period of revolution of the moon
around the earth, whatever value it may have; then the condition of
maximum or minimum energy is attained when the day and the month have
become equal to each other. Of the four occasions mathematically
possible in which the day and the month can be equal, there are only
two which at present need engage our attention--one of these occurred
near the beginning of the earth and moon's history, the other remains
to be approached in the immeasurably remote future. The two remaining
solutions are futile, being what the mathematician would describe as
imaginary.

There is a fundamental difference between the dynamical conditions in
these critical epochs--in one of them the energy of the system has
attained a maximum value, and in the other the energy of the system is
at a minimum value. It is impossible to over-estimate the significance
of these two states of the system.

I may recall the fundamental notion which every one has learned in
mechanics, as to the difference between stable and unstable
equilibrium. The conceivable possibility of making an egg stand on its
end is a practical impossibility, because nature does not like
unstable equilibrium, and a body departs therefrom on the least
disturbance; on the other hand, stable equilibrium is the position in
which nature tends to place everything. A log of wood floating on a
river might conceivably float in a vertical position with its end up
out of the water, but you never could succeed in so balancing it,
because no matter how carefully you adjusted the log, it would almost
instantly turn over when you left it free; on the other hand, when the
log floats naturally on the water it assumes a horizontal position, to
which, when momentarily displaced therefrom, it will return if
permitted to do so. We have here an illustration of the contrast
between stable and unstable equilibrium. It will be found generally
that a body is in equilibrium when its centre of gravity is at its
highest point or at its lowest point; there is, however, this
important difference, that when the centre of gravity is highest the
equilibrium is unstable, and when the centre of gravity is lowest the
equilibrium is stable. The potential energy of an egg poised on its
end in unstable equilibrium is greater than when it lies on its side
in stable equilibrium. In fact, energy must be expended to raise the
egg from the horizontal position to the vertical; while, on the other
hand, work could conceivably be done by the egg when it passes from
the vertical position to the horizontal. Speaking generally, we may
say that the stable position indicates low energy, while a redundancy
of that valuable agent is suggestive of instability.

We may apply similar principles to the consideration of the earth-moon
system. It is true that we have here a series of dynamical phenomena,
while the illustrations I have given of stable and unstable
equilibrium relate only to statical problems; but we can have
dynamical stability and dynamical instability, just as we can have
stable and unstable equilibrium. Dynamical instability corresponds
with the maximum of energy, and dynamical stability to the minimum of
energy.

At that primitive epoch, when the energy of the earth-moon system was
a maximum, the condition was one of dynamical instability; it was
impossible that it should last. But now mark how truly critical an
occurrence this must have been in the history of the earth-moon
system, for have I not already explained that it is a necessary
condition of the progress of tidal evolution that the energy of the
system should be always declining? But here our retrospect has
conducted us back to a most eventful crisis, in which the energy was a
maximum, and therefore cannot have been immediately preceded by a
state in which the energy was greater still; it is therefore
impossible for the tidal evolution to have produced this state of
things; some other influence must have been in operation at this
beginning of the earth-moon system.

Thus there can be hardly a doubt that immediately preceding the
critical epoch the moon originated from the earth in the way we have
described. Note also that this condition, being one of maximum energy,
was necessarily of dynamical instability, it could not last; the moon
must adopt either of two courses--it must tumble back on the earth, or
it must start outwards. Now which course was the moon to adopt? The
case is analogous to that of an egg standing on its end--it will
inevitably tumble one way or the other. Some infinitesimal cause will
produce a tendency towards one side, and to that side accordingly the
egg will fall. The earth-moon system was similarly in an unstable
state, an infinitesimal cause might conceivably decide the fate of the
system. We are necessarily in ignorance of what the determining cause
might have been, but the effect it produced is perfectly clear; the
moon did not again return to its mother earth, but set out on that
mighty career which is in progress to-day.

Let it be noted that these critical epochs in the earth-moon history
arise when and only when there is an absolute identity between the
length of the month and the length of the day. It may be proper
therefore that I should provide a demonstration of the fact, that the
identity between these two periods must necessarily have occurred at a
very early period in the evolution.

The law of Kepler, which asserts that the square of the periodic time
is proportioned to the cube of the mean distance, is in its ordinary
application confined to a comparison between the revolutions of the
several planets about the sun. The periodic time of each planet is
connected with its average distance by this law; but there is another
application of Kepler's law which gives us information of the distance
and the period of the moon in former stages of the earth-moon history.
Although the actual path of the moon is of course an ellipse, yet that
ellipse is troubled, as is well known, by many disturbing forces, and
from this cause alone the actual path of the moon is far from being
any of those simple curves with which we are so well acquainted. Even
