"I see." Gloria hesitated a moment. "Can you describe him for me?"

"Describe him?"

"That's right," Gloria said. "You see, the somatotypes have, we've
discovered, a great influence on mental and emotional makeup."

She didn't feel right, lying to the woman--but chances were that what
she'd said didn't make any sense to Mrs. Francis and, in any case,
Gloria could hardly tell her the real reason she wanted a description.

It would aid in making the doll she needed.

"He's about six feet tall," Mrs. Francis said, "but he's very thin, and
sometimes I worry about that. I try to give him the best nourishment I
know how, but he--"

"What color is his hair?" Gloria interrupted.

"Oh," Mrs. Francis said. "Brown. And brown eyes. Really nice eyes;
they're his best feature; everybody says so."

"Any distinguishing marks, or anything unusual about him?"

"He has a scar now, on his left arm just below the elbow, but he got
that in a fight with these boys--"

"All right," Gloria said. "Thank you very much."

"What are you going to do?" Mrs. Francis said. "You're not going to have
him arrested or anything, are you? Because he's not a bad boy, you know
that. He's only--"

"Easily led," Gloria finished. "Of course. There won't be any need for
arrest, or for anything as drastic as that. You just go home now, and
don't worry. I'm sure everything's going to be all right."

"I only want to help my boy," Mrs. Francis said.

"Of course you do," Gloria said. "I want to help him, too."

Mrs. Francis stood up and swallowed hard. "I appreciate that," she said.

"It's my job, that's all," Gloria said, feeling unaccountably shy. As
the woman left she thought about that embarrassment and finally decided
that she felt she had no right to be complimented. She was doing a job;
it needed to be done; that was all.

True, she had special talents for the job--but Mrs. Francis didn't know
that, and she hadn't made the talents anyhow, but been born with them.

Congratulations?

Don't be silly.

As a matter of fact, Gloria thought, she deserved a good talking-to. She
hadn't had enough experience, and that was the simple truth. It was all
very well to work on a boy like Rudi, or another one like Tom Francis,
when they didn't have any idea who you were or even that you were trying
to do something. That was easy.

But a woman like Mrs. Wladek--

She was suspicious from the start, and Gloria thought that perhaps she
shouldn't have done anything. But it was obvious that the woman needed
help to become a functioning member of society.

The only trouble was that Gloria hadn't been quite expert enough. Oh,
given enough time, the command would work, and eventually become part of
the personality. But, because Mrs. Wladek had been afraid and a little
forewarned, she'd been able to fight off the command a little.

_Practice_, Gloria told herself, _makes perfect._ And it wasn't her
fault that she couldn't do any better. Next time, she'd have a little
more practice and she'd be able to do a clearer and more complete job.

And, in the meantime, there was no real harm done. Mrs. Wladek would
come round, before long, and then everything would be all right.

Why, after all, there was Rudi, too. And Rudi undoubtedly had a job by
now, or at least a good chance of one through an employment agency.

There was no reason to be depressed.

       *       *       *       *       *

Her son was waiting for her when she arrived at her home once more. Mrs.
Wladek looked at the boy with relief and some suspicion. It was not
natural for Rudi to be at home during such an hour; he was out with his
friends through the day, and this was good for a boy.

"Ma," Rudi said, "guess what?"

"You are in trouble," Mrs. Wladek said at once, in a heavy voice.

"Trouble? I got no troubles, ma," Rudi said. He stood before her in the
dusty living room, self-assured and proud, and it came to Mrs. Wladek
all at once that her boy was a man.

"What is it?" she demanded. "Tell me at once."

"Sure I will. Ma," Rudi said. "I got a job. I start tomorrow. In an
office, wrapping things. The mail room, they call it."

Silence descended on the little room.

"Ma," Rudi said at last. "Ma, what's wrong?"

"Wrong?" Mrs. Wladek said. "What should be wrong? Nothing at all is
wrong. You have a job, very well, you have a job."

"You're not happy about it, Ma?"

Mrs. Wladek gave a short bark. "Happy? Indeed I should be happy? My son
goes to work, like a dog, and I should be--" She paused and gasped
suddenly. "Why did you go to work?"

"You mean why did I get a job, Ma?" Rudi said. "Listen, let's have
supper and we'll talk about it, huh?"

"Supper?" Mrs. Wladek snorted. "Supper we will have when I find out what
I need to know. Not before."

"But I'm hungry, Ma, and ... oh, all right." Rudi sat down on the old
brown couch and sighed. "I just thought it would be a good idea to get a
job, bring some bread into the house, you know? So I went down to the
agency, and they had this application waiting, and I went down and got
the job, and I start tomorrow. That's all. Now let's eat."

"You got the idea to have a job?" Mrs. Wladek said. "Fine. Fine. Just
fine. And when did you get this idea?"

"I don't know," Rudi said, and shrugged. "Some time. This morning,
maybe. Look, what difference does it make? I thought you'd like the
idea, Ma. Some more dough coming in ... you know."

"This morning." Mrs. Wladek raised clenched fists over her head.
"Cossacks!" she screamed. "Monsters! Witches!"

Lunchtime.

Gloria looked up and smiled sweetly and distantly as Harold Meedy
appeared at her desk. "Got any special place to go?" he said.

"As a matter of fact--" she began, but he was too quick for her.

"It's always 'as a matter of fact,'" he said. "What's the matter--you
got another boy friend or something? You don't like poor Harold? Look,
Gloria, if you want to avoid me, then you go ahead and avoid me. But--"

"It's nothing like that," Gloria said.

"So come on," Harold said. "Listen, I'm really a sweet guy when you get
to know me. You'd like me. Sure you would."

"I'm sure," Gloria said. "But I really do have something to take care
of."

"Can't you take care of it later?"

She shook her head.

"Well ... all right, if you want me to grow up all frustrated." He
grinned at her and moved away.

When they were all gone, and only Mr. Fredericksohn remained in his
private office, behind the closed door, Gloria opened a drawer of her
desk and took out a piece of modeling clay a little bigger than her
fist. Working without haste, and never bothering to look up she made a
doll in the shape of a tall, thin boy.

The voodoo sects in Haiti used hair or fingernail parings from the
subject, Gloria knew; she had learned that in her college research, but
she had known about the doll long before. Hair and fingernail parings:
what superstition! And it wasn't as if you really needed the doll; if
necessary, you could get along very well without it. But it was a help;
it made things easier; and why not?

She tried to picture Tom Francis. His mother's description of him had
been pretty vague, but Gloria found she could locate him at his house;
she turned the doll until she had the feeling of contact, and then--

There.

It didn't take long, actually, not once you had your subject located.
Tom hadn't really been a hard case; his juvenile delinquency, Gloria was
quite sure, was a thing of the past. He'd be back in school as soon as
