
"I must be slow, you mean."

"I mean what I have told you," Claerten thought. "And--one more thing,
Jonas."

"Yes?"

"The daughter," Claerten thought. "I have seen her in your mind. Ignore
the wench. Is she worth what your task is worth?"

"I never--"

"Then my caution is unnecessary," Claerten thought. "But, in the
unlikely case that she might tempt you to folly--remember it."

Jonas, who disliked irony, sighed and cut off.

That was the third night. During the days he had done the things he had
planned; he did no work with the Scharpes, but let them find him, when
they returned to the hut of an evening, reciting strange words. Once he
built a small outdoor fire and walked around it, widdershins, for
several minutes. Then he put the fire out and went inside. He wasn't
sure whether or not anyone was watching him, that time.

But sooner or later it had to happen.

And it happened, as Jonas had suspected it would, through the wife. Mrs.
Scharpe came back to the hut early one day, threw a frightened glance at
Jonas sitting in a corner doing nothing at all, and left.

He hardly needed to see into her mind to know where she was going.

And twenty minutes later two men came to the hut. They stood in the
opened doorway, Mrs. Scharpe behind them twittering like an ancient
bird, and Jonas watched them boredly. They were giants, for this part of
the world, almost six feet tall, with great hands and jaws. One had
black, coarse hair on his head and a stubble about his face; the other
was bald as an egg.

"That's him," Mrs. Scharpe said--just a trifle hesitantly. "He's the
one. He came to stay with us and we didn't know--"

The man with black hair said: "Uh. Gur."

"Herr Knupf said take him back," the bald one added.

"Herr Knupf?" Jonas said, entering the conversation with a light,
pleasant tone.

"He's the ... the--" Mrs. Scharpe tried to get the word out, and then
pushed by the two men and came into the hut. "I didn't want to but
there's something strange, and we can't afford any suspicion, and--"

Jonas realized slowly that she was crying as she looked at him. "It's
all right," he said uncomfortably.

"You're--"

"I'll be perfectly all right," Jonas said. He stood up. "This Herr
Knupf," he said. "He wants to see me?"

"He said bring you along," the bald man told him.

The black-haired man nodded very slowly. "Gur," he said.

Jonas sighed and went forward to meet the two big men, leaving Mrs.
Scharpe sobbing in the background. The poor woman felt terrible, he
knew; but there was nothing he could do about that. "Then let us go,"
he said, and marched off. Feeling that one more effect wouldn't hurt,
he led the way to the Town Hall; let them figure out how he had known
just where to go, he thought.

Their minds were very, very boring, and quite blank. Herr Knupf, Jonas
reflected, might be a definite relief.

       *       *       *       *       *

First there was the cell, which was in the basement of the Town Hall. It
was damp and the air was not too good, but there were compensations.
Rats, for instance. Jonas told himself, after the first couple of hours,
that he simply wouldn't have known what to do without the rats. Trying
to trap and kill them, with no weapons beyond his bare hands--even an
eating knife he had carried in his jerkin had been taken away, leaving
him to the uncomfortable reflection that he was going to have to dine
with his fingers--was a pastime that occupied him for several hours on
the first day.

On the second day, the rats began to bore him. By that evening, they
were annoying him, and when the third day dawned bright and warm--as
near as he could tell from the tiny slip of window at the top of his
cell--Jonas was telling himself that any move at all was a move in the
right direction.

He set up a shout for one of the guards. The bald one had brought his
meals every day, but the black-haired one was the man who checked his
cell at night. For once, Jonas thought, he was lucky; the bald man
appeared, after some fifteen minutes of screaming and cursing. Jonas was
not at all sure whether the black-haired man understood language: there
was little trace of it in his mind, and virtually nothing that might be
called intelligence. With the bald man, at least, he could communicate.

"What's wanted?" the guard said sourly, staring through the bars.

Jonas smiled softly. "You know why I'm here, don't you?" he said in a
voice as close to silky as he could make it.

"You?" the bald man said. "You're here. In a cell."

"That's right," Jonas said patiently. He rubbed at his face. "Do you
know why I was put here?"

"You--cast spells. You make things happen."

"That's right," Jonas said, smiling again. "I'm a wizard. A warlock.
That's what they say, isn't it?"

"You--make things happen," the bald man said.

But he had the basic idea; Jonas checked that in his mind. "Very well,"
he said. "Now, I wish to see Herr Knupf."

"The Inquisitor calls you when he wants you," the bald man said.

"Now," Jonas said.

"When he wants--"

"If I am a wizard," Jonas said, "I have powers. Strange powers. I could
make you--" He reflected for a minute. "I could make you into a beetle,
and squash you underfoot. As a matter of fact, I think I will." He gazed
reflectively at the bald man, who gulped and turned a little pale.

"You ... you are in a cell," he said at last. "Locked up."

"Do you think that will stop me?" Jonas said. He came to the barred
door, still smiling.

"You would not dare--"

"Why not?" Jonas asked. "What have I got to lose?"

