"If we could shut it off, the _Queen_ would be 'rejected' by the
current, like Maulbow's sailer was. In other words, we'd get knocked
back into normspace--which is what we want. And we want it to happen as
soon as possible because, if Maulbow was telling the truth on that
point, every minute that passes here is taking us farther away from the
Hub, and farther from our own time towards his."

Kerim nodded, eyes intent on his face.

"Now I can't just go down there and start slapping switches around on
the thing," Gefty went on. "He said it wasn't working right, and even if
it were, I couldn't tell what would happen. But it doesn't seem to
connect up with any ship systems--it just seems to be holding us in a
field of its own. So I should be able to move the whole unit into the
cargo lock and eject it from there. If we shift the _Queen_ outside its
field, that should have the same effect as shutting the control unit
off. It should throw us back into normspace."

Kerim nodded again. "What about Mr. Maulbow's janandra animal?"

Gefty shrugged. "Depends on the mood I find it in. He said it wasn't
usually aggressive. Maybe it isn't. I'll get into a spacesuit for
protection and break out some of the mining equipment to move it along
with. If I can maneuver it into an empty compartment where it will be
out of the ..."

       *       *       *

He broke off, expression changing, eyes fastened on the emergency panel.
Then he turned hurriedly, reached across the side of the console for the
intership airseal controls. Kerim asked apprehensively, "What's the
matter, Gefty?"

"Wish I knew ... exactly." Gefty indicated the emergency panel. "Little
red light there, on the storage deck section--it wasn't showing a minute
ago. It means that the vault doors have been opened since then."

He saw the same half-superstitious fear appear in her face that had
touched him. "You think _he_ did it?"

"I don't know." Maulbow's control of the guns had seemed uncanny enough.
But that was a different matter. The guns were a product of his own time
and science. But the vault door mechanisms? There might have been
sufficient opportunity for Maulbow to study them and alter them, for
some purpose of his own, since he'd come aboard....

"I've got the ship compartments and decks sealed off from each other
now," Gefty said slowly. "The only connecting points from one to the
other are personnel hatches--they're small air locks. So the janandra's
confined to the storage deck. If it's come out of the vault, it might be
a nuisance until I can get equipment to handle it. But that isn't too
serious. The spacesuits are on the second deck, and I'll get into one
before I go on to the storage. You wait here a moment, I'll look in on
Maulbow again before I start."

If Maulbow wasn't still unconscious, he was doing a good job of feigning
it. Gefty looked at the pale, lax face, the half-shut eyes, shook his
head and left the cabin, locking it behind him. It mightn't be Maulbow's
doing, but having the big snake loose in the storage could, in fact,
make things extremely awkward now. He didn't think his gun would make
much impression on anything of that size, and while several of the
ship's mining tools could be employed as very effective close-range
weapons, they happened, unfortunately, to be stored away on the same
deck.

He found Kerim standing in the center of the instrument room, waiting
for him.

"Gefty," she said, "do you notice anything? An odd sort of smell...."

Then the odor was in Gefty's nostrils, too, and the back of his neck
turned to ice as he recognized it. He glanced up at the ventilation
outlet, looked back at Kerim.

He took her arm, said softly, "Come this way. Keep very quiet! I don't
know how it happened, but the janandra's on the main deck now. That's
what it smells like. The smell's coming through the ventilation system,
so the thing's moving around in the port section. We'll go the other
way."

Kerim whispered, "What will we do?"

"Get ourselves into spacesuits first, and then get Maulbow's control
unit out of the ship. The janandra may be looking around for him. If it
is, it won't bother us."

       *       *       *       *       *

He hadn't wanted to remind Kerim that, from what Maulbow said, there
might be more than one reason for getting rid of the control unit as
quickly as possible. But it had been constantly in the back of his mind;
and twice, in the few minutes that passed after Maulbow's strange
weapons were silenced, he had seen a momentary pale glare appear in the
unquiet flow of darkness reflecting in the viewscreens. Gefty had said
nothing, because if it was true that hostile forces were alert and
searching for them here, it added to their immediate danger but not at
all to the absolute need to free themselves from the inexorable rush of
the Great Current before they were carried beyond hope of return to
their civilization.

But those brief glimpses did add to the sense of urgency throbbing in
Gefty's nerves, while events, and the equally hard necessity to avoid a
fatally mistaken move in this welter of unknown factors, kept blocking
him. Now the mysterious manner in which Maulbow's unpleasant traveling
companion had appeared on the main deck made it impossible to do
anything but keep Kerim at his side. If Maulbow was still capable of
taking a hand in matters, there was no reasonably safe place to leave
her aboard the _Queen_.

And Maulbow might be capable of it. Twice as they hurried up the narrow,
angled passages along the _Queen's_ curving hull towards an airseal
leading to the next compartment, Gefty caught a trace of the
ammonia-like animal odor coming over the ventilating system. They
reached the lock without incident; but then, as they came along the
second deck hall to the ship's magazine, there was a sharp click in the
stillness behind them. Its meaning was disconcertingly apparent. Gefty
hesitated, turned Kerim into a side passage, guided her along it.

She looked up at his face. "It's following us?"

"Seems to be." No time for the spacesuits in the magazine now--something
had just emerged from the air lock through which they had entered the
second deck not many moments before. He helped the girl quickly down a
section of ladderlike stairs to the airseal connecting the second deck
with the storage, punched a wall button there. As the lock door opened,
there was another noise from the passage they had just left, as if
something had thudded briefly and heavily against one of the bulkheads.
Kerim uttered a little gasp. Then they were in the lock, and Gefty
slapped down two other buttons, stood watching the door behind them snap
shut and, a few seconds later, the one on the far side open on the dark
storage deck.

They scrambled down another twelve feet of ladder to the floor of a side
passage, hearing the lock snap shut behind them. As it closed, they were
in complete darkness. Gefty seized Kerim's arm, ran with her up the
passage to the left, guiding himself with his fingertips on the left
bulkhead. When they came to a corner, he turned her to the left again. A
few seconds later, he pulled open a small door, bundled the girl
through, came in himself, and shut the door to a narrow slit behind
them.

Kerim whispered shakily, "What will we do now, Gefty?"

"Stay here for the moment. It'll look for us in the vault first."

And it should go to the storage vault first where it had been guarding
Maulbow's machine, to hunt for them there. But it might not. Gefty eased
the gun from his pocket on the far side of Kerim. Across the dark
compartment was another door. They could retreat a little farther here
if it became necessary--but not very much farther.

They waited in a silence that was complete except for their unsteady
breathing and the distant, deep pulse of the _Queen's_ throttled-down
drives. He felt Kerim trembling against him. How did Maulbow's creature
move through the airseal locks? The operating mechanisms were simple--a
dog might have been taught to use them. But a dog had paws....

There came the soft hiss of the opening lock, the faintest shimmer of
light to the right of the passage mouth he was watching through the
door. A heavy thump on the floor below the locks followed, then a hard
click as the lock closed and complete darkness returned.

The silence resumed. Seconds dragged on. Gefty's imagination pictured
the thing waiting, its great, wedge-shaped head raised as its senses
probed the dark about it for a sign of the two human beings. Then a
vague rushing noise began, growing louder as it approached the passage
mouth, crossing it, receding rapidly again to the left.

Gefty let his breath out slowly, eased the door open and stood listening
again. Abruptly, there was reflected light in the lock passage, coming
now from the left. He said in a whisper, "It's moving around in the main
hall, Kerim. We can go on the other way now, but we'll have to be fast
and keep quiet. I've thought of how we can get rid of that thing."

       *       *       *

The cargo lock on the storage deck had two inner doors. The one which
opened into the side of the vault hall was built to allow passage of the
largest chunks of freight the _Queen_ was likely to be burdened with; it
was almost thirty feet wide and twenty high. The second door was just
large enough to let a man in a spacesuit climb in and out of the side of
the lock without using the freight door. It opened on a tiny control
cubicle from which the lock's mechanisms were operated during loading
processes.
