"Good," Malone said.

"Not only that," Burris told him. "They're good men. Maybe among the
best in their field."

So Malone made his last call, to the firm of Leibowitz & Hardin,
Electronic Engineers.

Then he beckoned to Boyd.

"I don't see what I've been sitting around here for, all this time," his
partner complained. "I could have been home sleeping until you needed
me. And--"

"I need you now," Malone said. "I want you to take over part of this
plan."

Boyd nodded sourly. "Oh, all right," he said.

"Here's what I want," Malone said. "Every red 1972 Cadillac in the area
is to be picked up for inspection. I don't care why--make up a reason. A
general traffic check. Anything you please. You can work that end of it
out with the Commissioner; he knows about it and he's willing to go
along."

"Great," Boyd said. "Do you have any idea how many cars there are in a
city this size?"

"Well, we don't want all of them," Malone said. "Only red 1972
Cadillacs."

"It's still a lot," Boyd said.

"If there were only three," Malone said, "we wouldn't have any
problems."

"And wouldn't that be nice?" Boyd said.

"Sure," Malone said, "but it isn't true. Anyhow: I want every one of
those cars checked for any oddity, no matter how small. If there's an
inch-long scratch on one fender, I want to know about it. If you've got
to take the cars apart, then do that."

"Me?" Boyd said. "All by myself?"

"No," Malone said. "Use your head. There'll be a team working with you.
Let me explain it. Every nut, every bolt, every inch of those cars has
to be examined thoroughly--got it?"

"I've got it," Boyd said, "but I don't like it. After all, Malone--"

Malone ignored him. "The Governor of New York promised his
co-operation," he said, "and he said he'd get in touch with the
Governors of New Jersey and Connecticut and get co-operation from that
angle. So we'll have state and local police working with us."

"That's a help," Boyd said. "We'll make such a happy team of workmen.
Singing as we pull the cars apart through the long day and night and ...
listen, Malone, when do you want reports on this?"

"Yesterday," Malone said.

Boyd's eyebrows raised, then lowered. "Great," he said dully.

"I don't care how you get the cars," Malone said. "If you've got to,
condemn 'em. But get every last one of them. And bring them over to
Leibowitz & Hardin for a complete checkup. I'll give you the address."

"Thanks," Boyd said.

"Not at all," Malone said. "Glad to be of help. And don't worry; I'll
have other work to do." He paused, and then went on: "I talked to Dr.
Isaac Leibowitz, he's the head of the firm out there--and he says...."

"Wait a minute," Boyd said.

"What?"

"You mean I don't have to take the cars apart myself? You mean this
Leibowitz & Hardin, or whatever it is, will do it for me?"

"Of course," Malone said wearily. "You re not an auto technician or an
electronics man. You're an agent of the FBI."

"I was beginning to wonder," Boyd said. "After all."

[Illustration]

"Anyhow," Malone said doggedly, "I talked to Leibowitz, and he says he
can give a car a complete check in about six hours, normally."

"Six hours?" Boyd stared. "That's going to take forever," he said.

"Well, he can set up a kind of assembly-line process and turn out a car
every fifteen minutes. Any better?"

Boyd nodded.

"Good," Malone said. "There can't be so many 1972 red Cadillacs in the
area that we can't get through them all at that speed." He thought a
minute and then added: "By the way, you might check with the Cadillac
dealers around town, and find out just how many there are, sold to
people living in the area."

"And while I'm doing all that," Boyd said, "what are you going to be
doing?"

Malone looked at him and sighed. "I'll worry about that," he said. "Just
get started."

"Suppose Leibowitz can't find anything?" Boyd said.

"If Leibowitz can't find it, it's not there," Malone said. "He can find
electronic devices anywhere in any car made, he says--even if they're
printed circuits hidden under the paint job."

"Pretty good," Boyd said. "But suppose he doesn't?"

"Then they aren't there," Malone said, "and we'll have to think of
something else." He considered that. It sounded fine. Only he wished he
knew what else there was to think of.

Well, that was just pessimism. Leibowitz would find something, and the
case would be over, and he could go back to Washington and rest. In
August he was going to have his vacation, anyway, and August wasn't very
far away.

Malone put a smile carefully on his face and told Boyd: "Get going." He
slammed his hat on his head.

Wincing, he took it off and replaced it gently. The bottle of pills was
still in his pocket, but he wasn't due for another one just yet.

He had time to go over to the precinct station in the West Eighties
first.

He headed outside to get another taxi.




V.


The door didn't say anything at all except "Lt. P. Lynch." Malone looked
at it for a couple of seconds. He'd asked the Desk Sergeant for Lynch,
shown his credentials and been directed up a set of stairs and around a
hall. But he still didn't know what Lynch did, who he was, or what his
name was doing in the little black notebook.

Well, he told himself, there was only one way to find out.

He opened the door.

The room was small and dark. It had a single desk in it, and three
chairs, and a hatrack. There wasn't any coat or hat on the hatrack, and
there was nobody in the chairs. In a fourth chair, behind the desk, a
huskily-built man sat. He had steel-gray hair, a hard jaw and, Malone
noticed with surprise, a faint twinkle in his eye.

"Lieutenant Lynch?" Malone said.

"Right," Lynch said. "What's the trouble?"

"I'm Kenneth J. Malone," Malone said. "FBI." He reached for his wallet
and found it. He flipped it open for Lynch, who stared at it for what
seemed a long, long time and then burst into laughter.

"What's so funny?" Malone asked.

Lynch laughed some more.

"Oh, come on," Malone said bitterly. "After all, there's no reason to
treat an FBI agent like some kind of a--"

"FBI agent?" Lynch said. "Listen, buster, this is the funniest gag I've
seen since I came on the Force. Who told you to pull it? Jablonski
downstairs? Or one of the boys on the beat? I know those beat patrolmen,
always on the lookout for a new joke. But this tops 'em all. This is
the--"

"You're a disgrace to the Irish," Malone said tartly.

"A what?" Lynch said. "I'm not Irish."

"You talk like an Irishman," Malone said.

"I know it," Lynch said, and shrugged. "Around some precincts, you sort
of pick it up. When all the other cops are ... hey, listen. How'd we get
to talking about me?"

"I said you were a disgrace to the Irish," Malone said.

"I was a--what?"

"Disgrace." Malone looked carefully at Lynch. In a fight, he considered,
he might get in a lucky punch that would kill Malone. Otherwise, Malone
didn't have a thing to worry about except a few months of
hospitalization.

Lynch looked as if he were about to get mad, and then he looked down at
Malone's wallet again and started to laugh.

"What's so funny?" Malone demanded.

He grabbed the wallet and turned it toward him. At once, of course, he
realized what had happened. He had not flipped it open to his badge at
all. He'd flipped it open, instead, to a card in the card-case:

     KNOW ALL MEN BY THESE
     PRESENTS THAT Sir Kenneth
     Malone, Knight, is hereby formally
     installed with the title of
     KNIGHT OF THE BATH
     and this card shall signify his right
     to that title and his high and respected
     position as officer in and of
     THE QUEENS OWN F.B.I.

In a very small voice, Malone said: "There's been a terrible mistake."

"Mistake?" Lynch said.

Malone flipped the wallet open to his FBI shield. Lynch gave it a good
long examination, peering at it from every angle and holding it up to
the light two or three times. He even wet his thumb and rubbed at the
badge with it. At last he looked up.

"I guess you are the FBI," he said. "But what was with the gag?"

"It wasn't a gag," Malone said. "It's just--" He thought of the little
old lady in Yucca Flats, the little old lady who had been the prime
mover in the last case he and Boyd had worked on together. Without the
little old lady, the case might never have been solved--she was an
authentic telepath, about the best that had ever been found.

But with her, Boyd and Malone had had enough troubles. Besides being a
telepath, she was quite thoroughly insane. She had one fixed delusion:
she believed she was Queen Elizabeth I.

She was still at Yucca Flats, along with the other telepaths Malone's
investigation had turned up. And she still believed, quite calmly, that
she was Good Queen Bess. Malone had been knighted by her during the
course of the investigation. This new honor had come to him through the
mail; apparently she had decided to ennoble some of her friends still
further.

Malone made a note mentally to ask Boyd if he'd received one. After all,
there couldn't be too many Knights of the Bath. There was no sense in
letting _everybody_ in.

Then he realized that he was beginning to believe everything again.
There had been times, when he'd been working with the little old lady,
when he had been firmly convinced that he was, in fact, the swaggering,
ruthless swordsman, Sir Kenneth Malone. And even now....

       *       *       *       *       *

"Well?" Lynch said.

"It's too long a story," Malone said. "And besides, it's not what I came
here about."

Lynch shrugged again. "O.K.," he said. "Tell it your way."

"First," Malone said, "what's your job?"

"Me? Precinct Lieutenant."

"Of this precinct?"

Lynch stared. "What else?" he said.

"Who knows?" Malone said. He found the black notebook and passed it
across to Lynch. "I'm on this red Cadillac business, you know," he said
by way of introduction.

"I've been hearing about it," Lynch said. He picked up the notebook
without opening it and held it like a ticking bomb. "And I mean hearing
about it," he said. "We haven't had any trouble at all in this
precinct."

"I know," Malone said. "I've read the reports."

"Listen, not a single red Cadillac has been stolen from here, or been
reported found here. We run a tight precinct here, and let me tell
you--"

"I'm sure you do a fine job," Malone said hastily. "But I want you to
look at the notebook." He opened it to the page with Lynch's name on it.

Lynch opened his mouth, closed it and then took the notebook. He stared
at the page for a few seconds. "What's this?" he said at last. "Another
gag?"

"No gag, lieutenant," Malone said.

"It's your name and mine," Lynch said. "What is that supposed to mean?"

Malone shrugged. "Search me," he said. "The notebook was found only a
couple of feet away from another car theft, last night." That was the
simplest way he could think of to put it. "So I asked the Commissioner
who Peter Lynch was, and he told me it was you."

"And it is," Lynch said, staring at the notebook. He seemed to be
expecting it to rise and strike him.

Malone said: "Have you got any idea who'd be writing about you and me?"

Lynch shook his head. "If I had any ideas I'd feel a lot better," he
said. He wet his finger and turned the notebook pages carefully. When he
saw the list of names on the second page he stopped again, and stared.
This time he whistled under his breath.

Very cautiously, Malone said: "Something?"

"I'll be damned," Lynch said feelingly.

"What's wrong?" Malone said.

The police lieutenant looked up. "I don't know if it's wrong or what,"
he said. "It gives me sort of the willies. I know every one of these
kids."

Malone took out a pill and swallowed it in a hurry. He felt exactly as
if he had been given another concussion, absolutely free and without any
obligation. His mouth opened but nothing came out for a long time. At
last he managed to say: "_Kids?_"

"That's right," Lynch said. "What did you think?"

Malone shrugged helplessly.

"Every single one of them," Lynch said. "Right from around here."

There was a little silence.

"Who are they?" Malone said carefully.

"They're some kind of kid gang, social club, something like that," Lynch
said. "They call themselves the Silent Spooks."

"The what?" It seemed to Malone that the name was just a little fancy,
even for a kid gang.

"The Silent Spooks," Lynch said. "I can't help it. But here they are:
Ramon Otravez, Mario Grito, Silvo Envoz, Felipe Altapor, Alvarez la
Barba, Juan de los Santos and Ray del Este. Right down the line." He
looked up from the notebook with a blank expression on his face.
"There's only one name missing, as a matter of fact. Funny it isn't
there."

Malone tried to look as if he knew what was going on. "Oh?" he said.

"Yeah," Lynch said. "The Fueyo kid--Miguel Fueyo. Everybody calls him
Mike."

While interesting, this did not provide much food for thought. "Why
should his name be on it especially?" Malone said.

"Because he's the leader of the gang," Lynch said. "The boss. The big
shot." He pointed to the list of names. "Except for him, that's all of
them--the Silent Spooks."

Malone considered the missing Mike Fueyo.

He knew perfectly well, now, why Fueyo's name was not in the book.

Who puts his own name on a list?

The notebook was Fueyo's. It had to be.

       *       *       *       *       *

Lynch was looking at him expectantly. Malone thought of a question and
asked it. "They know you?" he said.

"Sure they do," Lynch said. "They all know me. But do they know you?"

Malone thought. "They could have heard of me," he said at last, trying
to be as modest as possible.

"I guess," Lynch said grudgingly.

"How old are they?" Malone said.

"Fourteen to seventeen," Lynch said. "Somewhere in there. You know how
these kid things run."

"The Silent Spooks," Malone said meditatively. It was a nice name, in a
way; you just had to get used to it for a while. When he had been a kid,
he'd belonged to a group that called itself the East Division Street
Kids. There just wasn't much romance in a name like that. Now, the
Silent Spooks--

With a wrench, he brought his mind back to the subject at hand. "Do they
get into much trouble?" he said.

"Well, no," Lynch said reluctantly. "As a matter of fact, they don't.
For a bunch like that, around here, they're pretty well-behaved, as far
as that goes."

"What do you mean?" Malone said.

Lynch's face took on a delicately unconcerned appearance. "I don't
know," he said. "They just don't get into neighborhood trouble. Maybe a
scrap now and then--nothing big, though. Or maybe one of them cuts a
