"As I said before, my job is purely administrative. Out of my
jurisdiction entirely. Each planet has its own police force and handles
its internal crime in its own way. What's legal on Aurora might very
well be illegal on ten thousand other planets, and vice versa."

"I see. Thank you." Jenner cut the connection slowly. He flicked the
switch open again, hesitated, and then closed it.

       *       *       *       *       *

He walked out to where his gyrocar was parked, and in a few minutes set
it down on the roof of Tee's hotel. Tee was just entering the lobby as
Jenner came in and they went up to his room together.

"I'll come right to the point, Tee," he said, as soon as the door had
closed. "I just talked to the local prison administrator for Hades." He
looked closely at Tee.

"What's that got to do with me?" asked Tee, belligerently.

"Wait until I finish," said Jenner, curtly. "I hired you to test-hop our
new ship because you were the best pilot available. I'm not interested
in your past, but most of the company's resources are sunk in that
ship. If something goes wrong because the test pilot is disturbed or
nervous, the company will be bankrupt. I'm not saying you're an escaped
prisoner, but if you were, you'd have nothing to worry about."

"What do you mean?"

"The administrator told me he has no jurisdiction over escaped
prisoners, so you see, if you had escaped, you'd have nothing to fear
here. You're out of their jurisdiction."

Tee began to laugh wildly. "_Out of their jurisdiction! Out of their
jurisdiction!_ So that's the way they put it. _Out of their
jurisdiction!_"

"Stop it!" said Jenner, sharply. "Do you want to tell me now?"

Tee drew in a gasping breath and sobered. "What would I have to tell
you? So I'm the nervous type. So you hired me to test-hop your new ship.
So I'll test-hop it. That's all we agreed on. What more do you want?"

Jenner sighed. "Roj, Tee, if that's the way you want it, but I wish--"

The visiphone buzzed, and when Tee flipped the switch, the worried face
of the chief mechanic sprang into focus. "Oh, there you are, Mr. Jenner.
Glad I caught you before you left. We've run into trouble."

"Well, out with it," barked Jenner. "What is it?"

The mechanic cleared his throat nervously. "We were testing the main
gyroscope when it threw a blade."

"How bad is it?" asked Jenner.

"Pretty bad, I'm afraid. It tore up the subetherscope unit so bad we'll
have to replace it. We can't get any on Aurora either. We'll have to
send to Lennix, and that'll take close to a month."

"Roj! Knock off until I get there," barked Jenner. He slammed over the
switch, viciously. "Of all the rotten luck!"

"Can't you get some plant here on Aurora to hand tool one for you?"
asked Tee.

"No, that's just it," replied Jenner. "It's a special alloy. The owners
of the process wouldn't give us any details on the manufacture. Anyway,
even if we knew how, we couldn't duplicate it without their special
machine tools."

"Does that mean--"

"I'm afraid so. The ship won't be ready for a month, now."

"_A month!_ I can't wait a month."

"_You_ can't wait a month? We've got four million tied up in that ship
and you tell me _you_ can't wait a month."

"Look, Mr. Jenner, I'll test it without the unit."

"That's impossible. The ship would vibrate into a billion pieces as soon
as it went into subspace. No! We'll just have to wait."

"I can't wait," cried Tee. "You'll have to get another pilot."

"Just a minute! You can't walk out on your contract. If it's a matter of
credits--"

Tee shook his head. "That's not it at all. I just can't stay that long."

Jenner looked at him angrily. "Well, your contract isn't up till the
end of the week anyway. We'll see what we can do about a replacement
then."

       *       *       *       *       *

After Jenner had left, Tee sat smoking in the darkness. He placed his
elbow on the couch arm and cupped his chin in his palm. Then restlessly,
he snuffed out his cigarette and rubbed his hands together. They felt
moist and clammy. He jerked nervously as a click sounded out in the
hall. Only a door opening across the way. He bit the fleshy part of his
middle finger and then began to worry his ring with his teeth. He lit
another cigarette and dropped it into the disposal almost immediately.

He got up and began to pace the room. Six steps forward. Turn. Six steps
back. Turn. Six steps forward--or was it five this time? The walls
seemed to be closing in, constricting. His head felt light and his
tongue and palate grew dry. He tried to swallow, and a feeling of nausea
came over him. His throat grew tight and he felt as though he were
choking. Rubbing his forehead with the back of his hand it came away wet
with perspiration. He rushed to the window and struggled futilely with
it, forgetting it was sealed shut in the air-conditioned hotel. He flung
himself at the door, wrenching it open and took the escalator three
steps at a time falling to his knees at the ground floor. A surface cab
was sitting outside just beyond the entrance. He flung himself in,
breathing heavily and fumbling to drop a coin in the slot, pulled the
control lever all the way over.

Twenty minutes later, the _Starduster_ hovered for a moment over Aurora,
then shimmered and vanished as it went into subspace.

       *       *       *       *       *

OCTOBER 2, 435th Year GALACTIC ERA

The _Starduster_ materialized just outside the atmosphere of the planet
Elysia, and fluttered erratically downward, like a wounded bird. A
hundred feet from the surface, the ship hesitated, shuddered throughout
