
Senesin shook his head vehemently. "Don't you see? Legally, the Emperor
is powerless; the Throne hasn't had any say-so in the Government for
over a century--except to sign state papers and such. But suppose an
Emperor came along who wanted power--power such as the old Emperors used
to have. How would he go about getting it? By controlling the
Government! He could slowly force them to give him back the powers that
the people of the Empire have taken so many centuries to obtain."

The colonel shook his head. "Impossible. Not even the Emperor could
control the votes of the whole File for that purpose. It simply couldn't
be done."

"Not that way; of course not," the young man said irritably. "But there
_is_ a way. It's been used before. Are you up on your history?"

"Reasonably well," the colonel said dryly.

"How did Julius Caesar get dictatorial powers? And, after him, Augustus?
Rome was threatened by war, and then actually engaged in it, and the
patricians were glad to give power to a strong man."

"That was in a state ruled by the few patricians," the colonel pointed
out, "not in a democracy."

"Very well, then; what about the United States, during World War II?
Look at the extraordinary powers granted to the President--first to stop
a depression, then to win a war. What might have happened if he hadn't
died? Would he have gone on to a fifth and a sixth term? How much more
power could he have usurped from the hands of Congress?"

The colonel wondered vaguely what history texts young Senesin had read,
but he didn't ask. "All right," he said, "now tie your examples up with
His Majesty."

"It's very simple. By controlling the mind of the Prime Portfolio, the
Emperor can plunge the Empire into war with the Gehan Federation. Once
that has been done, he can begin to ask for extraordinary powers from
the File. If he has a few key men under his thumb, he can swing the
majority of the File any way he wants to. Don't you see that?"

The colonel said: "It does make a certain amount of sense." He paused,
looking at the young man speculatively. "Tell me, son: why did you pick
me to tell this tale to?"

Senesin's sensitive face betrayed his anxiety. "Because you have been my
father's best and oldest friend. If he's really being made a puppet of,
I should think you'd want to help him. Do you like to see him being
destroyed this way?"

"No," said the colonel honestly. "And if he is actually being controlled
illegally, if he is actually being blamed for things he did not do of
his own free will, I'll do everything in my power to expose the
plot--that I promise you."

Jon Senesin's eyes lit up; his face broke into a smile. "I _knew_ I
could depend on you, my lord! I _knew_ it!"

"Just how do you propose to go about this?" asked Colonel Lord Sorban.

       *       *       *       *       *

There was fire in young Senesin's eyes now. "I'll turn the whole case
over to the people! I have some evidence, of course; the queer changes
in behavior that Dad has exhibited during the past few years, and such
things as that. The things that made me suspect in the first place. But
that isn't acceptable evidence." He finished his brandy and got up
excitedly to walk over and pour himself another. He glanced at the
colonel's goblet, but the colonel had three-quarters of his own drink
left.

Senesin talked as he poured. "Did you ever hear of a group called the
Federalist Party?"

"Yes," said Colonel Sorban. "They want to federalize the Empire and get
rid of the Imperial Family. Not a very popular group."

"No, but they're right! They're right! Don't you see that? And nobody
pays any attention to them!"

"Calm down, son. What have the Federalists got to do with this?"

"They have sympathizers in the Palace," Senesin explained. "They've been
able to get proof that the Emperor is illegally tampering with the
Government, that he's been brainwashing my father. And they're going to
turn that proof over to me."

"I don't quite follow the reason for that," the colonel lied easily.
"Why don't they use it themselves?"

"They can't. Nobody'd believe them. Everyone would think that the proof
had been faked for political propaganda.

"On the other hand, if _I_ do it, all I can be accused of is having a
personal motive. And if a man wants to get his father out of a jam, most
people will agree that I have a perfect right to do so. Besides, I have
enough influence to get people to listen to me, to give the evidence a
fair hearing. If the newsies got this stuff from the Federalists, they'd
throw it away without looking at it. But they'll listen to me."

"The newsies?" asked the colonel in a perfect imitation of mild
astonishment. "You intend to turn this stuff over to news publishers?"

"Certainly! That's the only way. Put the evidence before the people, and
they'll see what they're up against. I personally don't care whether we
have an Emperor or not, but at least we can force Hannikar IV to
abdicate in favor of Crown Prince Jaimie."

"I see." The colonel took another sip at his brandy and appeared to
think it over. Wisely, young Senesin said nothing.

"How are we to get this evidence?" the colonel asked at last.

"We're to meet a man," Senesin said, with an air of melodrama. "We will
get a call at fifteen of twelve, telling us where to meet him. We have
to be there at midnight."

_Oh, brother_, thought the colonel, _they really picked their man.
They've got him thinking he's hip-deep in a romantic spy story._

_Was I that way at twenty-two? A romantic? I suppose I must have been;
why else would I have joined the Guards? Not for the pay, certainly._

_Hell, I guess I'm still a romantic, in a way. Being a secret agent
isn't all fun and games, but it has its compensations._

Aloud, he said, "Very well, son; I'll go with you. Did you tell them
there'd be someone accompanying you?"

"I told them I'd have a friend along. I told them it would be you. They
said it was all right, that they knew you were a friend of Dad's. They
even knew you've been a little bitter at being retired from the Guards
so young." He looked embarrassed. "Pardon me, my lord."

"That's all right," said the colonel steadily. He managed to give the
appearance of a man who was doing his best not to look bitter.

"You aren't carrying a gun, are you?" Senesin asked suddenly. "They said
we weren't to be armed. They'll probably search us."

"I haven't been in the habit of carrying a gun lately," said the
