District," he started, waving his hands around. "No more poker. No more
dice. No more Sneaky Pete." I'd never heard of that.

"Shut up!" Anita said. "He'll be here any instant."

Fred was as good as her word. He was holding the door for his telepath
within seconds. Tony Carlucci stopped hamming it up and straightened
importantly in my chair. I had to admit that Anita had found a guy who,
superficially, resembled me more than a little. No one who knew either
of us would ever mistake one for the other, but our general descriptions
were quite similar.

The woman who came in not only was a gypsy, she was dressed as a gypsy.
Her blouse was white, and quite frilly. She had on a billowing red
skirt, liberally encrusted with embroidered beads of a darker red. The
tattered hem of a petticoat hung below it. Her hair had been dark once,
but it was shot with threads of silver. There was a lot of it, and piled
up high so that her ears were exposed. They had pierced lobes, and heavy
gold rings hung from them.

Instinctively I closed my mind as tight as a clam. The mere sight of a
telepath triggers that reaction. Fred closed the door behind him,
continuing to stand just behind his captive. She glanced briefly at me
and then looked for a longer moment at Tony Carlucci, behind my desk.

"Joe," she said to him. "Joe, don't let them do this to me!"

I don't know how much coaching Anita had given Carlucci, but he knew
enough to call her "mother." And I knew enough to watch Fred Plaice the
instant Tony said: "Oh, mother! Why the devil couldn't you keep out of
sight!"

Fred was one mighty confused looking boy. The two-bit word is
consternation. He had it. Anita had given him the business.

"I'm sorry, madame," I said standing and walking over to where Tony was
emoting, with the back of his hand pressed to his eyes. "We threw you a
curve. Meet Mr. Tony Carlucci." Her eyebrows rose in surprise. "And I,
madame, am Joseph Tinker."

"Joe!" she cried, or wailed is a better word, and threw herself around
the desk to seize me in her arms. She smelled faintly of garlic, oregano
and some kind of incense, maybe sandalwood. A nice clean gypsy smell.
Cleaner than a lot of gypsies I can think of.

Fred pulled her off me, not too gently. I'd say he was a little sore
about something. Anita's eyes were slits of fury.

"Thanks, Tony," I said. "See you around."

"Honest Tony Carlucci," he said. "If you need a used 'copter, Joe, jet
on down to my dock. Nothing down. Listen, I got one that was never used
except in the spring by a little old lady who gave up walking for Lent.
I'll tell you what I'll do--"

"Wasting your time," Anita told him. "The Government provides Mr. Tinker
with any kind of transportation he needs. A thousand thanks, Tony. I
won't forget--" The rest was cut off as she gave him one of the more
polite bum's rushes. I think he would have liked to hang around to see
the rest of our little amateur theatrical.

       *       *       *       *       *

Fred had his grin going. "Couldn't get the drift for a minute, Gyp," he
said, clapping me on the shoulder. "Nice work! Now I know why I get such
a kick out of working for you!" He whirled on Maude Tinker. "And you,
you foolish old biddy! How far do you think you would get with an act
like this against another telepath?"

She spat a curse at him in Romany. "So smart!" she sneered. "There isn't
another telepath in the city of Washington!"

That was a laugh. For its own safety the F.B.I. has its own gang of tame
TP's--they are all, of course, exceptionally short-range telepaths, and
we practically keep them under lock and key to make sure some important
thoughts don't leak in and out of their diseased minds.

"Send in Freeda Sayer," I said, leaning down to press the intercommute.
Freeda is a thick-ankled, thick-headed telepath. But stupid or not, she
is telepathic, and _is_ an acid test in these cases.

"Is this woman a telepath?" I asked Freeda, when she stumped in.

Freeda looked at Maude Tinker, her mouth hanging a little open. She
snuffled and walked quite close to the gypsy woman. "Yeah," she said.
"She knows I'm thinking her hem is torn." She turned her head with that
low-thyroid slowness to me. "Is that all, Mr. Tinker?" she asked.

Fred answered. "Swell, Freeda. That's all."

Freeda wandered out.

Fred said: "O.K., Gyp. What'll I do with her?"

"Sit down, Mrs. ... it is Mrs., isn't it? ... Mrs. Tinker, won't you
please?" I said in answer to his question. She took the chair Anita had
been using when Tony was pretending to be me, and I sat down in my
swivel across the desk from her.

"I'm sorry, Mrs. Tinker," I said. "It's bad enough that you have
deliberately stayed in the District after all telepaths were most
stringently warned to register with us so that we could move them to
less sensitive areas. But I take it quite hard that you have tried to
embarrass me."

"That would take a little doing," she said. "You've got a heart like a
piece of flint. Let me see your palm!" she demanded, reaching
imperatively across my desk. Fred started to protest, but I passed my
hand across to her, leaning forward so that she could reach it.

Maude Tinker smoothed out my palm, rubbing her thumb over it as if to
clear away a veil of mystery, and bent close over it, her dark face
intense. She traced a line or two with her fingernail, and dropped my
hand to the walnut. "You have no mercy," she said. "You will use the
excuse that I tried to hinder the work of your department as a reason to
punish me severely--and your real reason is that you feel I might have
damaged you personally."

Fred was moving around the desk. He spoke softly in my ear while I kept
my eye on the gypsy. That was silly. He can't close his mind the way I
can. She could read his thoughts just as well as if he were screaming
them out loud.

[Illustration]

"That's a charge she may repeat, Gyp," he said. "Nobody could blame you,
if you disqualified yourself from this decision. I think we could get
the newscasts to see it as impeccable public behavior. We'll paint you
as the administrator so devoted to pure justice that even potential
resentment will be a barrier to your personal decision. How's that sound
to you, Gyp?"

"The day you have to start painting a picture for them, I've had it,
Fred," I said. I felt sure Anita had overheard his soft words in my ear,
but to be sure, I added, "I think it would be suicide to disqualify
myself from this case. That's just the first step to disqualifying
myself from the job. If there's any hint of telepathic heredity in my
case, ducking this decision would be a public admission that I'm
sensitive in that area. No. I'll handle it."

