uncrystallisable sugar found in many plants.

_Cane Sugar._--This variety of sugar, as its name implies, is found most
abundantly in the sugar cane, but it occurs also in the maple,
beet-root, and various species of palms, from all of which it is
extracted on the large scale. It is extremely soluble in water, and can
be obtained in large transparent prismatic crystals, as in common
sugar-candy. It swells up, and is converted into a brown substance
called caramel, when heated, and by contact with fermenting substances,
yields alcohol and carbonic acid. It contains--

     Carbon    42.22
     Hydrogen   6.60
     Oxygen    51.18
              ------
              100.00

and its chemical formula is C_{12}H_{11}O_{11}.

_Grape Sugar_ is met with in the grape, and most other fruits, as well
as in honey. It is produced artificially when starch is boiled for a
long time with sulphuric acid, or treated with a large quantity of
diastase. It is less soluble in water than cane sugar, and crystallises
in small round grains. Its composition, when dried at 284 deg., is--

     Carbon    40.00
     Hydrogen   6.66
     Oxygen    53.34
              ------
              100.00

and its formula is C_{12}H_{12}O_{12}; but when crystallised it contains
two equivalents of water, and is then represented by the formula
C_{12}H_{12}O_{12} + 2H_{2}O.

The uncrystallisable sugar of plants is closely allied to grape sugar,
and, so far as at present known, has the same composition, although,
from the difficulty of obtaining it quite free from crystallised sugar,
this is still uncertain.

_Mucilage_ is the name applied to the substance existing in linseed,
and in many other seeds, and which communicates to them the property of
swelling up and becoming gelatinous when treated with water. It is found
in a state of considerable purity in gum tragacanth and some other gums.
Its composition is not known with absolute certainty, but it is either
C_{24}H_{19}O_{19}, or C_{12}H_{10}O_{10}; and in the latter case it
must be identical with starch and gum.

It will be observed that all the substances belonging to this class are
very closely related in chemical composition, some of them, as starch
and gum, though easily distinguished by their properties, being
identical in constitution, while others only differ in the quantity of
water, or of its elements which they contain. In fact, they may all be
considered as compounds of carbon and water, and their relations are,
perhaps, more distinctly seen when their formulae are written so as to
show this, as is done in the following table, in the second column of
which those containing twelve equivalents of carbon are doubled, so as
to make them comparable with cellulose:--

                                                            Water.
Grape sugar,   C_{12}H_{12}O_{12}   C_{24}H_{24}O_{24}   C_{24} + 24
Cane sugar,    C_{12}H_{11}O_{11}   C_{24}H_{22}O_{22}   C_{24} + 22
Cellulose,     C_{24}H_{21}O_{21}   C_{24}H_{21}O_{21}   C_{24} + 21
Inuline,       C_{24}H_{21}O_{21}   C_{24}H_{21}O_{21}   C_{24} + 21
Starch,        C_{12}H_{10}O_{10}   C_{24}H_{20}O_{20}   C_{24} + 20
Dextrine,      C_{12}H_{10}O_{10}   C_{24}H_{20}O_{20}   C_{24} + 20
Gum,           C_{12}H_{10}O_{10}   C_{24}H_{20}O_{20}   C_{24} + 20
Mucilage,      C_{12}H_{10}O_{10}   C_{24}H_{20}O_{20}   C_{24} + 20

The relation between these substances being so close, it is not
difficult to understand how one may be converted into another by the
addition or subtraction of water. Thus, cellulose has only to absorb an
equivalent of water to become grape sugar, or to lose an equivalent in
order to be converted into starch, and we shall afterwards see that
such changes do actually occur in the plant during the process of
germination.

_Pectine and Pectic Acid._--These substances are met with in many fruits
and roots, as, for instance, in the apple, the carrot, and the turnip.
They differ from the starch group in containing more oxygen than is
required to form water along with their hydrogen; but their exact
composition is still uncertain, and they undergo numerous changes during
the ripening of the fruit.

_2d. Oily or Fatty Matters._--The oily constituents of plants form a
rather extensive group of substances all closely allied, but
distinguished by minor differences in properties and constitution. Some
of them are very widely distributed throughout the vegetable kingdom,
but others are almost peculiar to individual plants. They are all
compounds of carbon, hydrogen, and oxygen, and are at once distinguished
from the preceding class, by containing much less oxygen than is
required to form water with their hydrogen. The principal constituents
of the fatty matters and oils of plants are three substances, called
stearine, margarine, and oleine, the two former solids, the latter a
fluid; and they rarely, if ever, occur alone, but are mixed together in
variable proportions, and the fluidity of the oils is due principally to
the quantity of the last which they contain. If olive oil be exposed to
cold, it is seen to become partially solid; and if it be then pressed, a
fluid flows out, and a crystalline substance remains; the former is
oleine, though not absolutely pure, and the latter margarine. The
perfect separation of these substances involves a variety of troublesome
chemical processes; and when it has been effected, it is found that each
of them is a compound of a peculiar acid, with another substance having
a sweet taste, and which has received the name of glycerine, or the
sweet principle of oil. Glycerine, as it exists in the fats, appears to
be a compound of C_{3}H_{2}O, and its properties are the same from
whatever source it is obtained. The acids separated from it are known by
the names of margaric, stearic, and oleic acids.

_Margaric Acid_ is best obtained pure by boiling olive oil with an
alkali until it is saponified, and decomposing the soap with an acid,
expressing the margaric acid, which separates, and crystallising it from
alcohol. It is a white crystalline fusible solid, insoluble in water,
but soluble in alcohol and in solutions of the alkalies. Its composition
is--

     Carbon     75.56
     Hydrogen   12.59
     Oxygen     11.85
               ------
               100.00

and its formula C_{34}H_{34}O_{4}.

_Stearic Acid._--Although this acid exists in many plants, it is most
conveniently extracted from lard. It is a crystalline solid less fusible
than margaric acid, but closely resembling it in its other properties.
Its formula is C_{36}H_{36}O_{4}.

_Oleic Acid._--Under this name two different substances appear to be
included. It has been applied generally to the fluid acids of all oils,
while it would appear that the drying and non-drying oils actually
contain substances of different composition. The acid extracted from
olive oil appears to have the formula C_{36}H_{34}O_{4}, while that from
linseed oil is C_{46}H_{38}O_{6}, but this is still doubtful.

Other fatty acids have been detected in palm oil, cocoa-nut oil, &c.
&c., which so closely resemble margaric and stearic acids as to be
easily confounded with them. Though presenting many points of interest,
it is unnecessary to describe them in detail here.

_Wax_ is a substance closely allied to the oils. It consists of two
substances, cerine and myricine, which are separated from one another by
boiling alcohol, in which the former is more soluble. They are extremely
complex in composition, the former consisting principally of an acid
similar to the fatty acids, called cerotic acid, and containing
C_{54}H_{54}O_{4}. The latter has the formula C_{92}H_{92}O_{4}. The wax
found in the leaves of the lilac and other plants appears to consist of
myricine, while that extracted from the sugar-cane is said to be
different, and to have the formula C_{48}H_{50}O_{2}. It is probable
that other plants contain different sorts of wax, but their
investigation is still so incomplete, that nothing definite can be said
regarding them. Wax and fats appear to be produced in the plant from
starch and sugar; at least it is unquestionable that the bee is capable
of producing the former from sugar, and we shall afterwards see that a
similar change is most probably produced in the plant. The fatty matters
contained in animals are identical with those of plants.

_3d. Nitrogenous or Albuminous Constituents of Plants and Animals._--The
nitrogenous constituents of plants and animals are so closely allied,
both in properties and composition, that they may be most advantageously
considered together.

_Albumen._--Vegetable albumen is found dissolved in the juices of most
plants, and is abundant in that of the potato, the turnip, and wheat. In
these juices it exists in a soluble state, but when its solution is
heated to about 150 deg., it coagulates into a flocky insoluble substance.
It is also thrown down by acids and alcohol. Coagulated albumen is
soluble in alkalies and in nitric acid. Animal albumen exists in the
white of eggs, the serum of blood, and the juice of flesh; and from all
these sources is scarcely distinguishable in its properties from
vegetable albumen.

It is a substance of very complicated composition, and chemists are not
agreed as to the formula by which its constitution is to be expressed, a
difficulty which occurs also with most of the other nitrogenous
compounds. The results of the analyses of albumen from different sources
are however quite identical, as may be seen from those subjoined--

             From    From       From    From
             Wheat.  Potatoes.  Blood.  White of Egg.
Carbon        53.7    53.1        53.4      53.0
Hydrogen       7.1     7.2         7.0       7.1
Nitrogen      15.6     ...        15.5      15.6
Oxygen      }      {   ...        22.1      22.9
Sulphur     } 23.6 {  0.97         1.6       1.1
Phosphorus  }      {   ...         0.4       0.3
             -----               -----     -----
             100.0               100.0     100.0

Closely allied to vegetable albumen is the substance known by the name
of _glutin_, which is obtained by boiling the gluten of wheat with
alcohol. It appears to be a sort of coagulated albumen, with which its
composition completely agrees.

_Vegetable Fibrine._--If a quantity of wheat flour be tied up in a piece
of cloth, and kneaded for some time under water, the starch it contains
is gradually washed out, and there remains a quantity of a glutinous
substance called gluten. When this is boiled with alcohol, the _glutin_
above referred to is extracted, and vegetable fibrine is left. It
dissolves in dilute potash, and on the addition of acetic acid is
deposited in a pure state. Treated with hydrochloric acid, diluted with
ten times its weight of water, it swells up into a jelly-like mass.
When boiled or preserved for a long time under water, it cannot be
distinguished from coagulated albumen.

_Animal Fibrine_ exists in the blood and the muscles, and agrees in all
its characters and composition with vegetable fibrine, as is shown by
the subjoined analyses--

             Wheat Flour.     Blood.    Flesh.
Carbon         53.1            52.5      53.3
Hydrogen        7.0             6.9       7.1
Nitrogen       15.6            15.5      15.3
Oxygen         23.2            24.0      23.1
Sulphur         1.1             1.1       1.2
              -----           -----     -----
              100.0           100.0     100.0

_Caseine._--Vegetable caseine exists abundantly in most plants,
especially in the seeds, and remains in the juice after albumen has been
precipitated by heat, from which it may be separated in flocks by the
addition of an acid. It has been obtained for chemical examination,
principally from peas and beans, and from the almond and oats. When
prepared from the pea it has been called _legumine,_ from almonds
_emulsine_, and from oats _avenine_; but they are all three identical in
their properties, although formerly believed to be different, and
distinguished by these names. Vegetable caseine is best obtained by
treating peas or beans with hot water, and straining the fluid. On
standing, the starch held in suspension is deposited, and the caseine is
retained in solution in the alkaline fluid; by the addition of an acid
it is precipitated as a thick curd. Caseine is insoluble in water, but
dissolves readily in alkalies; its solution is not coagulated by heat,
but, on evaporation, becomes covered with a thin pellicle, which is
renewed as often as it is removed.

_Animal Caseine_ is the principal constituent of milk, and is obtained
by the cautious addition of an acid to skimmed milk, by which it is
precipitated as a thick white curd. It is also obtained by the use of
rennet, and the process of curding milk is simply the coagulation of its
caseine. It is soluble in alkalies, and precipitated from its solution
by acids, and in all other respects agrees with vegetable caseine.

The composition of animal caseine has been well ascertained, but
considerable doubt still exists as to that of vegetable caseine, owing
to the difficulty of obtaining it absolutely pure. The analyses of
different chemists give rather discordant results, but we have given
those which appear most trustworthy--

                      From Peas.
     Carbon          50.6    50.7
     Hydrogen         6.8     6.6
     Nitrogen        16.5    15.8
     Oxygen          25.6    23.8
     Sulphur          0.5     0.8
     Phosphorus       ...     2.3
                    -----   -----
                    100.0   100.0

Other results differ considerably from these, and some observers have
even obtained as much as eighteen per cent of nitrogen and fifty-three
of carbon.

The composition of animal caseine differs from this principally in the
amount of carbon. Its composition is--

     Carbon       53.6
     Hydrogen      7.1
     Nitrogen     15.8
     Oxygen       22.5
     Sulphur       1.0
                 -----
                 100.0

The most cursory examination of these analytical numbers is sufficient
to show that a very close relation subsists between the different
substances just described. Indeed, with the exception of vegetable
caseine, they may be said all to present the same composition; and, as
already mentioned, there are analyses of it which would class it
completely with the others. While, however, the quantities of carbon,
hydrogen, nitrogen, and oxygen are the same, differences exist in the
sulphur and phosphorus they contain, and which, though very small in
quantity, are indubitably essential to them. Much importance has been
attributed to these constituents by various chemists, and especially by
Mulder, who has endeavoured to make out that all the albuminous
substances are compounds of a substance to which he has given the name
of _proteine_, with different quantities of sulphur and phosphorus. The
composition of proteine, according to his newest experiments, is--

     Carbon       54.0
     Hydrogen      7.1
     Nitrogen     16.0
     Oxygen       21.4
     Sulphur       1.5
                 -----
                 100.0

and is exactly the same from whatever albuminous compound it is
obtained. Although the importance of proteine is probably not so great
as Mulder supposed, it affords an important illustration of the close
similarity of the different substances from which it is obtained, the
more especially as there is every reason to believe that the different
albuminous compounds are capable of changing into one another, just as
starch and sugar are mutually convertible; and the possibility of this
change throws much light on many of the phenomena of nutrition in plants
and animals. Indeed, it would seem probable that these compounds are
formed from their elements by plants only, and are merely assimilated by
animals to produce the nitrogenous constituents they contain.

_Diastase_ is the name applied to a substance existing in malt, and
obtained by macerating that substance with cold water, and adding a
quantity of alcohol to the fluid, when the diastase is immediately
precipitated in white flocks. It is produced during the malting process,
and is not found in the unmalted barley. Its chemical composition is
unknown, but it is nitrogenous, and is believed to be produced by the
decomposition of gluten. If a very small quantity of diastase be mixed
with starch suspended in hot water, the starch is found gradually to
dissolve, and to pass first into the state of dextrine, then into that
of sugar. The change thus effected takes place also in a precisely
similar manner in the plant, diastase being produced during the process
of germination of all seeds and tubers, for the purpose of effecting
this change, and to fulfil other functions less understood, but no doubt
equally important. Diastase is found in the seeds only during the period
when the starch they contain is passing into sugar; as soon as that
change has taken place, its function is ended, and it disappears.




CHAPTER III.

THE CHANGES WHICH TAKE PLACE IN THE FOOD OF PLANTS DURING THEIR GROWTH.


The simple compounds which the plant absorbs from the atmosphere and
soil are elaborated within its system, and converted into the various
complex substances of which its tissues are composed, by a series of
changes, the details of which are still in some respects imperfectly
known, although their general nature is sufficiently well understood.
They may be best rendered intelligible by reference, in the first
instance, to the changes occurring during germination, when the young
plant is nourished by a supply of food stored up in the seed, in
sufficient quantity to maintain its existence until the organs by which
it is afterwards to draw its nutriment from the air and soil are
sufficiently developed to serve that purpose.

_Changes occurring during Germination._--When a seed is placed in the
soil under favourable circumstances, it becomes the seat of an important
and remarkable series of chemical changes, which result in the
production of the young plant. Experiment and observation have shown
that heat, moisture, and air, are necessary to the production of these
changes, and though probably not absolutely essential, the absence of
light is favourable in the early stages. The temperature required for
germination varies greatly in different seeds, some germinating readily
at a few degrees above the freezing point, and others requiring a
tolerably high temperature. The rapidity with which it takes place
appears to increase with the temperature; but this is true only within
very narrow limits, for beyond a certain point heat is injurious, and
when it exceeds 120 deg. or 130 deg. Fahrenheit, entirely prevents the process.
The presence of oxygen is also essential, for it has been shown that if
seeds are placed in a soil exposed to an atmosphere deprived of that
element, or if they be buried so deep that the air does not reach them,
they may lie without change for an unlimited period; but so soon as they
are exposed to the air, germination immediately commences. Illustrations
of this fact are frequently observed where earth from a considerable
depth has been thrown up to the surface, when it often becomes covered
with plants not usually seen in the neighbourhood, which have sprung
from buried seeds. When all the necessary conditions for germination are
fulfilled, the seed absorbs moisture, swells up, and sends out a shoot
which rises to the surface, and a radicle which descends--the one
destined to develop the leaves, the other the roots, by which the plant
is afterwards to derive its nutriment from the air and the soil. But
until these organs are properly developed, the plant is dependent on the
matters contained in the seed itself. These substances are mostly
insoluble, but are brought into solution by the atmospheric oxygen
acting upon the gluten, and converting it into a soluble substance
called diastase, which in its turn reacts upon the starch, converting it
first into dextrine, and then into cellulose, and the latter is finally
deposited in the form of organised cells, and produces the first little
shoot of the plant. At the first moment of germination, the oxygen
absorbed appears simply to oxidize the constituents of the seed, but
this condition exists only for a very limited period, and is soon
followed by the evolution of carbonic acid, water being at the same time
formed from the organic constituents of the seed, which gradually
diminishes in weight. The amount of this diminution is different with
different plants, but always considerable. Boussingault found that the
loss of dry substance in the pea amounted in 26 days to 52 per cent, and
in wheat to 57 per cent in 51 days. Against this, of course, is to be
put the weight of the young plant produced; but this is never sufficient
to counterbalance the diminished weight of the seed, for Saussure found
