down on them."

"That's thinking," said Bal, moving to the controls. "I'll move the ship
over where they can see it best and then I'll light it up. I'll really
light it up."

"Don't spare power."

"Don't worry about that. They'll see it. Everybody on Earth will see
it." Later, with the ship in position, glowing against the darkness of
space, pulsating with light, Bal said: "You know, I feel better about
this. We may pull it off. Lighting the ship may be just the help we
need."

"It's not we who need help, but the people of Earth," said Ethaniel.
"See you in five days." With that he entered a small landing craft,
which left a faintly luminescent trail as it plunged toward Earth. As
soon as it was safe to do so, Bal left in another craft, heading for the
other side of the planet.

       *       *       *       *       *

And the spaceship circled Earth, unmanned, blazing and pulsing with
light. No star in the winter skies of the planet below could equal it in
brilliancy. Once a man-made satellite came near but it was dim and was
lost sight of by the people below. During the day the ship was visible
as a bright spot of light. At evening it seemed to burn through the
sunset colors.

And the ship circled on, bright, shining, seeming to be a little piece
clipped from the center of a star and brought near Earth to illuminate
it. Never, or seldom, had Earth seen anything like it.

In five days the two small landing craft that had left it arched up from
Earth and joined the orbit of the large ship. The two small craft slid
inside the large one and doors closed behind them. In a short time the
aliens met again.

"We did it," said Bal exultantly as he came in. "I don't know how we did
it and I thought we were going to fail but at the last minute they came
through."

Ethaniel smiled. "I'm tired," he said, rustling.

"Me too, but mostly I'm cold," said Bal, shivering. "Snow. Nothing but
snow wherever I went. Miserable climate. And yet you had me go out
walking after that first day."

"From my own experience it seemed to be a good idea," said Ethaniel. "If
I went out walking one day I noticed that the next day the officials
were much more cooperative. If it worked for me I thought it might help
you."

"It did. I don't know why, but it did," said Bal. "Anyway, this
agreement they made isn't the best but I think it will keep them from
destroying themselves."

"It's as much as we can expect," said Ethaniel. "They may have small
wars after this, but never the big one. In fifty or a hundred years we
can come back and see how much they've learned."

"I'm not sure I want to," said Bal. "Say, what's an angel?"

"Why?"

"When I went out walking people stopped to look. Some knelt in the snow
and called me an angel."

"Something like that happened to me," said Ethaniel.

"I didn't get it but I didn't let it upset me," said Bal. "I smiled at
them and went about my business." He shivered again. "It was always
cold. I walked out, but sometimes I flew back. I hope that was all
right."

In the cabin Bal spread his great wings. Renaissance painters had never
seen his like but knew exactly how he looked. In their paintings they
