They set to work on the crate, its gray plastic material giving in
readily to the application of their tools. But when it was opened, they
stood aside in amazement and consternation.

There were a variety of metal pieces packed within, protected by a filmy
packing material.

"Wait a minute," the general said. "Here's a book--"

He picked up a gray-bound volume, and opened its cover.

"'Instructions for assembling Delegate,'" he read aloud. "'First, remove
all parts and arrange them in the following order. A-1, central nervous
system housing. A-2 ...'" He looked up. "It's an instruction book," he
whispered. "We're supposed to _build_ the damn thing."

       *       *       *       *       *

The Delegate, a handsomely constructed robot almost eight feet tall, was
pieced together some three hours later, by a team of scientists and
engineers who seemed to find the Venusian instructions as elementary as
a blueprint in an Erector set. But simple as the job was, they were
obviously impressed by the mechanism they had assembled. It stood
impassive until they obeyed the final instruction. "Press Button K ..."

They found button K, and pressed it.

The robot bowed.

"Thank you, gentlemen," it said, in sweet, unmetallic accents. "Now if
you will please escort me to the meeting place ..."

       *       *       *       *       *

It wasn't until three days after the landing that Jerry Bridges saw the
Delegate again. Along with a dozen assorted government officials, Army
officers, and scientists, he was quartered in a quonset hut in Fort Dix,
New Jersey. Then, after seventy-two frustrating hours, he was escorted
by Marine guard into New York City. No one told him his destination, and
it wasn't until he saw the bright strips of light across the face of the
United Nations building that he knew where the meeting was to be held.

But his greatest surprise was yet to come. The vast auditorium which
housed the general assembly was filled to its capacity, but there were
new faces behind the plaques which designated the member nations. He
couldn't believe his eyes at first, but as the meeting got under way, he
knew that it was true. The highest echelons of the world's governments
were represented, even--Jerry gulped at the realization--Nikita
Khrushchev himself. It was a summit meeting such as he had never dreamed
possible, a summit meeting without benefit of long foreign minister's
debate. And the cause of it all, a placid, highly-polished metal robot,
was seated blithely at a desk which bore the designation:

                                 VENUS.

The robot delegate stood up.

"Gentlemen," it said into the microphone, and the great men at the
council tables strained to hear the translator's version through their
headphones, "Gentlemen, I thank you for your prompt attention. I come as
a Delegate from a great neighbor planet, in the interests of peace and
progress for all the solar system. I come in the belief that peace is
the responsibility of individuals, of nations, and now of worlds, and
that each is dependent upon the other. I speak to you now through the
electronic instrumentation which has been created for me, and I come to
offer your planet not merely a threat, a promise, or an easy
solution--but a challenge."

The council room stirred.

"Your earth satellites have been viewed with interest by the astronomers
of our world, and we foresee the day when contact between our planets
will be commonplace. As for ourselves, we have hitherto had little
desire to explore beyond our realm, being far too occupied with internal
matters. But our isolation cannot last in the face of your progress, so
we believe that we must take part in your affairs.

"Here, then, is our challenge. Continue your struggle of ideas, compete
with each other for the minds of men, fight your bloodless battles, if
you know no other means to attain progress. But do all this _without_
unleashing the terrible forces of power now at your command. Once
unleashed, these forces may or may not destroy all that you have gained.
But we, the scientists of Venus, promise you this--that on the very day
your conflict deteriorates into heedless violence, we will not stand by
and let the ugly contagion spread. On that day, we of Venus will act
swiftly, mercilessly, and relentlessly--to destroy your world
completely."

Again, the meeting room exploded in a babble of languages.

"The vessel which brought me here came as a messenger of peace. But
envision it, men of Earth, as a messenger of war. Unstoppable,
inexorable, it may return, bearing a different Delegate from Venus--a
Delegate of Death, who speaks not in words, but in the explosion of
atoms. Think of thousands of such Delegates, fired from a vantage point
far beyond the reach of your retaliation. This is the promise and the
challenge that will hang in your night sky from this moment forward.
Look at the planet Venus, men of Earth, and see a Goddess of Vengeance,
poised to wreak its wrath upon those who betray the peace."

The Delegate sat down.

       *       *       *       *       *

Four days later, a mysterious explosion rocked the quiet sands of Los
Alamos, and the Venus spacecraft was no more. Two hours after that, the
robot delegate, its message delivered, its mission fulfilled, requested
to be locked inside a bombproof chamber. When the door was opened, the
