had looked forward to the arrival of her father with the most
affectionate anticipations. She hoped that her filial devotion might
form some compensation for the malignity of his enemies, and she eagerly
assumed the labour of reciting weekly the seven penitentiary psalms
which formed part of her father's sentence. These sacred duties,
however, were destined to terminate almost at the moment they were
begun. She was seized with a fatal illness in the same month in which
she rejoined her parent, and before the month of April she was no more.
This heavy blow, so suddenly struck, overwhelmed Galileo in the deepest
agony. Owing to the decline of his health, and the recurrence of his old
complaints, he was unable to oppose to this mental suffering the
constitutional energy of his mind. The bulwarks of his heart broke down,
and a flood of grief desolated his manly and powerful mind. He felt, as
he expressed it, that he was incessantly called by his daughter--his
pulse intermitted--his heart was agitated with unceasing
palpitations--his appetite entirely left him, and he considered his
dissolution so near at hand, that he would not permit his son Vicenzo to
set out upon a journey which he had contemplated.

From this state of melancholy and indisposition, Galileo slowly, though
partially, recovered, and, with the view of obtaining medical
assistance, he requested leave to go to Florence. His enemies, however,
refused this application, and he was given to understand that any
additional importunities would be visited with a more vigilant
surveillance. He remained, therefore, five years at Arcetri, from 1634
to 1638, without any remission of his confinement, and pursuing his
studies under the influence of a continued and general indisposition.

There is no reason to think that Galileo or his friends renewed their
application to the Church of Rome; but, in 1638, the Pope transmitted,
through the Inquisitor Fariano, his permission that he might remove to
Florence for the recovery of his health, on the condition that he should
present himself at the office of the Inquisitor to learn the terms upon
which this indulgence was granted. Galileo accepted of the kindness thus
unexpectedly proffered. But the conditions upon which it was given were
more severe than he expected. He was prohibited from leaving his house
or admitting his friends; and so sternly was this system pursued, that
he required a special order for attending mass during passion week.

The severity of this order was keenly felt by Galileo. While he remained
at Arcetri, his seclusion from the world would have been an object of
choice, if it had not been the decree of a tribunal; but to be debarred
from the conversation of his friends in Florence--in that city where his
genius had been idolised, and where his fame had become immortal, was an
aggravation of punishment which he was unable to bear. With his
accustomed kindness, the Grand Duke made a strong representation on the
subject to his ambassador at the Court of Rome. He stated that, from his
great age and infirmities, Galileo's career was near its close; that he
possessed many valuable ideas, which the world might lose if they were
not matured and conveyed to his friends; and that Galileo was anxious to
make these communications to Father Castelli, who was then a stipendiary
of the Court of Rome. The Grand Duke commanded his ambassador to see
Castelli on the subject--to urge him to obtain leave from the Pope to
spend a few months in Florence--and to supply him with money and every
thing that was necessary for his journey. Influenced by this kind and
liberal message, Castelli obtained an audience of the Pope, and
requested leave to pay a visit to Florence. Urban instantly suspected
the object of his journey; and, upon Castelli's acknowledging that he
could not possibly refrain from seeing Galileo, he received permission
to visit him in the company of an officer of the Inquisition. Castelli
accordingly went to Florence, and, a few months afterwards, Galileo was
ordered to return to Arcetri.

During Galileo's confinement at Sienna and Arcetri, between 1633 and
1638, his time was principally occupied in the composition of his
"Dialogues on Local Motion," in which he treats of the strength and
cohesion of solid bodies, of the laws of uniform and accelerated
motions, of the motion of projectiles, and of the centre of gravity of
solids. This remarkable work, which was considered by its author as the
best of his productions, was printed by Louis Elzevir, at Amsterdam, and
dedicated to the Count de Noailles, the French ambassador at Rome.
Various attempts to have it printed in Germany had failed; and, in order
to save himself from the malignity of his enemies, he was obliged to
pretend that the edition published in Holland had been printed from a
MS. entrusted to the French ambassador.

Although Galileo had for a long time abandoned his astronomical studies,
yet his attention was directed, about the year 1636, to a curious
appearance in the lunar disc, which is known by the name of the moon's
libration. When we examine with a telescope the outline of the moon, we
observe that certain parts of her disc, which are seen at one time, are
invisible at another. This change or libration is of four different
kinds, viz. the diurnal libration, the libration in longitude, the
libration in latitude, and the spheroidal libration. Galileo discovered
the first of these kinds of libration, and appears to have had some
knowledge of the second; but the third was discovered by Hevelius, and
the fourth by Lagrange.

This curious discovery was the result of the last telescopic
observations of Galileo. Although his right eye had for some years lost
its power, yet his general vision was sufficiently perfect to enable him
to carry on his usual researches. In 1636, however, this affection of
his eye became more serious; and, in 1637, his left eye was attacked
with the same disease. His medical friends at first supposed that
cataracts were formed in the crystalline lens, and anticipated a cure
from the operation of couching. These hopes were fallacious. The disease
turned out to be in the cornea, and every attempt to restore its
transparency was fruitless. In a few months the white cloud covered the
whole aperture of the pupil, and Galileo became totally blind. This
sudden and unexpected calamity had almost overwhelmed Galileo and his
friends. In writing to a correspondent he exclaims, "Alas! your dear
friend and servant has become totally and irreparably blind. These
heavens, this earth, this universe, which by wonderful observation I had
enlarged a thousand times beyond the belief of past ages, are henceforth
shrunk into the narrow space which I myself occupy. So it pleases God;
it shall, therefore, please me also." His friend, Father Castelli,
deplores the calamity in the same tone of pathetic sublimity:--"The
noblest eye," says he, "which nature ever made, is darkened; an eye so
privileged, and gifted with such rare powers, that it may truly be said
to have seen more than the eyes of all that are gone, and to have
opened the eyes of all that are to come."

Although Galileo had been thwarted in his attempt to introduce into the
Spanish marine his new method of finding the longitude at sea, yet he
never lost sight of an object to which he attached the highest
importance. As the formation of correct tables of the motion of
Jupiter's satellites was a necessary preliminary to its introduction, he
had occupied himself for twenty-four years in observations for this
purpose, and he had made considerable progress in this laborious task.
After the publication of his "Dialogues on Motion," in 1636, he renewed
his attempts to bring his method into actual use. For this purpose he
addressed himself to Lorenzo Real, who had been the Dutch
Governor-General in India, and offered the free use of his method to the
States-General of Holland.[36] The Dutch government received this
proposal with an anxious desire to have it carried into effect. At the
instigation of Constantine Huygens, the father of the illustrious
Huygens, and the secretary to the Prince of Orange, they appointed
commissioners to communicate with Galileo; and while they transmitted
him a gold chain as a mark of their esteem, they at the same time
assured him, that if his plan should prove successful it should not pass
unrewarded. The commissioners entered into an active correspondence with
Galileo, and had even appointed one of their number to communicate
personally with him in Italy. Lest this, however, should excite the
jealousy of the court of Rome, Galileo objected to the arrangement, so
that the negociation was carried on solely by correspondence.

     [36] It is a curious fact that Morin had about this time proposed
     to determine the longitude by the moon's distance from a fixed
     star, and that the commissioners assembled in Paris to examine it
     requested Galileo's opinion of its value and practicability.
     Galileo's opinion was highly unfavourable. He saw clearly, and
     explained distinctly, the objection to Morin's method, arising from
     the imperfection of the lunar tables, and the inadequacy of
     astronomical instruments; but he seemed not to be conscious that
     the very same objections applied with even greater force to his own
     method, which has since been supplanted by that of the French
     savant. See Life of Galileo, Library of Useful Knowledge, p. 94.

It was at this time that Galileo was struck with blindness. His friend
and pupil, Renieri, undertook in this emergency to arrange and complete
his observations and calculations; but before he had made much progress
in the arduous task, each of the four commissioners died in succession,
and it was with great difficulty that Constantine Huygens succeeded in
renewing the scheme. It was again obstructed, however, by the death of
Galileo; and when Renieri was about to publish, by the order of the
Grand Duke, the "Ephemeris," and "Tables of the Jovian Planets," he was
attacked with a mortal disease, and the manuscripts of Galileo, which he
was on the eve of publishing, were never more heard of. By such a series
of misfortunes were the plans of Galileo and of the States-General
completely overthrown. It is some consolation, however, to know that
neither science nor navigation suffered any severe loss. Notwithstanding
the perfection of our present tables of Jupiter's satellites, and of the
astronomical instruments by which their eclipses may be observed, the
method of Galileo is still impracticable at sea.

In consequence of the strict seclusion to which Galileo had been
subjected, he was in the practice of dating his letters from his prison
at Arcetri; but after he had lost the use of his eyes, the Inquisition
seems to have relaxed its severity, and to have allowed him the freest
intercourse with his friends. The Grand Duke of Tuscany paid him
frequent visits; and among the celebrated strangers who came from
distant lands to see the ornament of Italy, were Gassendi, Deodati, and
our illustrious countryman Milton. During the last three years of his
life, his eminent pupil Viviani formed one of his family; and in October
1641, the celebrated Torricelli, another of his pupils, was admitted to
the same distinction.

Though the powerful mind of Galileo still retained its vigour, yet his
debilitated frame was exhausted with mental labour. He often complained
that his head was too busy for his body; and the continuity of his
studies was frequently broken with attacks of hypochondria, want of
sleep, and acute rheumatic pains. Along with these calamities, he was
afflicted with another still more severe--with deafness almost total;
but though he was now excluded from all communication with the external
world, yet his mind still grappled with the material universe, and while
he was studying the force of percussion, and preparing for a
continuation of his "Dialogues on Motion," he was attacked with fever
and palpitation of the heart, which, after continuing two months,
terminated fatally on the 8th of January 1642, in the 78th year of his
age.

Having died in the character of a prisoner of the Inquisition, this
odious tribunal disputed his right of making a will, and of being buried
in consecrated ground. These objections, however, were withdrawn; but
though a large sum was subscribed for erecting a monument to him in the
church of Santa Croce, in Florence, the Pope would not permit the design
to be carried into execution. His sacred remains were, therefore,
deposited in an obscure corner of the church, and remained for more than
thirty years unmarked with any monumental tablet. The following epitaph,
given without any remark in the Leyden edition of his Dialogues, is, we
presume, the one which was inscribed on a tablet in the church of Santa
Croce:--


                 GALILAEO GALILAEI Florentino,
             Philosopho et Geometrae vere lynceo,
                        Naturae Oedipo,
          Mirabilium semper inventorum machinatori,
            Qui inconcessa adhuc mortalibus gloria
                   Caelorum provincias auxit
                Et universo dedit incrementum:
               Non enim vitreos spherarum orbes
                Fragilesque stellas conflavit:
                   Sed aeterna mundi corpore
               Mediceae beneficentiae dedicavit,
              Cujus inextincta gloriae cupiditas
                      Ut oculos nationum
                     Saeculorumque omnium
                       Videre doceret,
                  Proprios impendit oculos.
              Cum jam nil amplius haberet natura
                      Quod ipse videret.
      Cujus inventa vix intra rerum limites comprehensa
            Firmamentum ipsum non solum continet,
                      Sed etiam recipit.
           Qui relictis tot scientiarum monumentis
              Plura secum tulit, quam reliquit.
                          Gravi enim
                Sed nondum affecta senectute,
                   Novis contemplationibus
                  Majorem gloriam affectans
                Inexplebilem sapientiae animam
                     Immaturo nobis obitu
                          Exhalavit
                         Anno Domini
                           MCXLII.
                          AEtatis suae
                           LXXVIII.



At his death, in 1703, Viviani purchased his property, with the charge
of erecting a monument over Galileo's remains and his own. This design
was not carried into effect till 1737, at the expense of the family of
Nelli, when both their bodies were disinterred, and removed to the site
of the splendid monument which now covers them. This monument contains
the bust of Galileo, with figures of Geometry and Astronomy. It was
designed by Giulio Foggini. Galileo's bust was executed by Giovanni
Battista Foggini; the figure of Astronomy by Vincenzio Foggini, his son;
and that of Geometry by Girolamo Ticciati.

Galileo's house at Arcetri still remains. In 1821 it belonged to one
Signor Alimari, having been preserved in the state in which it was left
by Galileo; it stands very near the convent of St Matthew, and about a
mile to the S. E. of Florence. An inscription by Nelli, over the door of
the house, still remains.

The character of Galileo, whether we view him as a member of the social
circle, or as a man of science, presents many interesting and
instructive points of contemplation. Unfortunate, and to a certain
extent immoral, in his domestic relations, he did not derive from that
hallowed source all the enjoyments which it generally yields; and it was
owing to this cause, perhaps, that he was more fond of society than
might have been expected from his studious habits. His habitual
cheerfulness and gaiety, and his affability and frankness of manner,
rendered him an universal favourite among his friends. Without any of
the pedantry of exclusive talent, and without any of that ostentation
which often marks the man of limited though profound acquirements,
Galileo never conversed upon scientific or philosophical subjects except
among those who were capable of understanding them. The extent of his
general information, indeed, his great literary knowledge, but, above
all, his retentive memory, stored with the legends and the poetry of
ancient times, saved him from the necessity of drawing upon his own
peculiar studies for the topics of his conversation.

Galileo was not less distinguished for his hospitality and benevolence;
he was liberal to the poor, and generous in the aid which he
administered to men of genius and talent, who often found a comfortable
asylum under his roof. In his domestic economy he was frugal without
being parsimonious. His hospitable board was ever ready for the
reception of his friends; and, though he was himself abstemious in his
diet, he seems to have been a lover of good wines, of which he received
always the choicest varieties out of the Grand Duke's cellar. This
peculiar taste, together with his attachment to a country life, rendered
him fond of agricultural pursuits, and induced him to devote his leisure
hours to the cultivation of his vineyards.

In his personal appearance Galileo was about the middle size, and of a
square-built, but well-proportioned, frame. His complexion was fair, his
eyes penetrating, and his hair of a reddish hue. His expression was
cheerful and animated, and though his temper was easily ruffled, yet the
excitement was transient, and the cause of it speedily forgotten.

One of the most prominent traits in the character of Galileo was his
invincible love of truth, and his abhorrence of that spiritual despotism
which had so long brooded over Europe. His views, however, were too
liberal, and too far in advance of the age which he adorned; and however
much we may admire the noble spirit which he evinced, and the personal
sacrifices which he made, in his struggle for truth, we must yet lament
the hotness of his zeal and the temerity of his onset. In his contest
with the Church of Rome, he fell under her victorious banner; and though
his cause was that of truth, and hers that of superstition, yet the
sympathy of Europe was not roused by his misfortunes. Under the
sagacious and peaceful sway of Copernicus, astronomy had effected a
glorious triumph over the dogmas of the Church; but under the bold and
uncompromising sceptre of Galileo all her conquests were irrecoverably
lost.

The scientific character of Galileo, and his method of investigating
truth, demand our warmest admiration. The number and ingenuity of his
inventions, the brilliant discoveries which he made in the heavens, and
the depth and beauty of his researches respecting the laws of motion,
have gained him the admiration of every succeeding age, and have placed
him next to Newton in the lists of original and inventive genius. To
this high rank he was doubtless elevated by the inductive processes
which he followed in all his inquiries. Under the sure guidance of
observation and experiment, he advanced to general laws; and if Bacon
had never lived, the student of nature Would have found, in the writings
and labours of Galileo, not only the boasted principles of the inductive
philosophy, but also their practical application to the highest efforts
of invention and discovery.




LIFE OF TYCHO BRAHE.




CHAPTER I.

     _Tycho's Birth, Family, and Education--An Eclipse of the Sun turns
     his attention to Astronomy--Studies Law at Leipsic--But pursues
     Astronomy by stealth--His Uncle's Death--He returns to Copenhagen,
     and resumes his Observations--Revisits Germany--Fights a Duel, and
     loses his Nose--Visits Augsburg, and meets Hainzel--Who assists him
     in making a large Quadrant--Revisits Denmark--And is warmly
     received by the King--He settles at his Uncle's Castle of
     Herritzvold--His Observatory and Laboratory--Discovers the new Star
     in Cassiopeia--Account of this remarkable Body--Tycho's Marriage
     with a Peasant Girl--Which irritates his Friends--His Lectures on
     Astronomy--He visits the Prince of Hesse--Attends the Coronation of
     the Emperor Rudolph at Ratisbon--He returns to Denmark._


Among the distinguished men who were destined to revive the sciences,
and to establish the true system of the universe, Tycho Brahe holds a
conspicuous place. He was born on the 14th December 1546, at Knudstorp,
the estate of his ancestors, which is situated near Helsingborg, in
Scania, and was the eldest son and the second child of a family of five
sons and five daughters. His father, Otto Brahe, who was descended from
a noble Swedish family, was in such straitened circumstances, that he
resolved to educate his sons for the military profession; but Tycho
seems to have disliked the choice that was made for him; and his next
brother, Steno, who appears to have had a similar feeling, exchanged the
sword for the more peaceful occupation of Privy Councillor to the King.
The rest of his brothers, though of senatorial rank, do not seem to have
extended the renown of their family; but their youngest sister, Sophia,
is represented as an accomplished mathematician, and is said to have
devoted her mind to astronomy as well as to the astrological reveries of
the age.

George Brahe, the brother of Otto, having no children of his own,
resolved to adopt and to educate one of his nephews. On the birth of
Tycho, accordingly, he was desirous of having him placed under his
wife's care; but his parents could not be prevailed upon to part with
their child till after the birth of Steno, their second son.

Having been instructed in reading and writing under proper masters,
Tycho began the study of Latin in his seventh year; and, in opposition
to his father's views, he prosecuted it for five years under private
teachers, from whom he received also occasional instruction in poetry
and the belles lettres.

In April 1559, about three years after his father's death, Tycho was
sent to the University of Copenhagen, to study rhetoric and philosophy,
with the view of preparing for the study of the law, and qualifying
himself for some of those political offices which his rank entitled him
to expect. In this situation he contracted no fondness for any
particular study; but after he had been sixteen months at college, an
event occurred which directed all the powers of his mind to the science
of astronomy. The attention of the public had been long fixed on a great
eclipse of the sun, which was to happen on the 21st August 1560; and as
in those days a phenomenon of this kind was linked with the destinies of
nations as well as of individuals, the interest which it excited was as
intense as it was general. Tycho watched its arrival with peculiar
anxiety. He read the astrological diaries of the day, in which its
phases and its consequences were described; and when he saw the sun
darkened at the very moment that had been predicted, and to the very
extent that had been delineated, he resolved to make himself master of a
science which was capable of predicting future events, and especially
that branch of it which connected these events with the fortunes and
destinies of man. With this view he purchased the _Tabulae Bergenses_,
calculated by John Stadius, and began with ardour the study of the
planetary motions.

When Tycho had completed his course at Copenhagen, he was sent, in
February 1562, under the charge of a tutor to study jurisprudence at
Leipsic. Astronomy, however, engrossed all his thoughts; and he had no
sooner escaped from the daily surveillance of his master, than he rushed
with headlong impetuosity into his favourite pursuits. With his pocket
money he purchased astronomical books, which he read in secret; and by
means of a celestial globe, the size of his fist, he made himself
acquainted with the stars, and followed them night after night through
the heavens, when sleep had lulled the vigilance of his preceptor. By
means of the Ephemerides of Stadius, he learned to distinguish the
planets, and to trace them through their direct and retrograde
movements; and having obtained the Alphonsine and Prutenic Tables, and
compared his own calculations and observations with those of Stadius, he
observed great differences in the results, and from that moment he seems
to have conceived the design of devoting his life to the accurate
construction of tables, which he justly regarded as the basis of
astronomy.

With this view, he applied himself secretly to the study of arithmetic
and geometry; and, without the assistance of a master, he acquired that
mathematical knowledge which enabled him to realise these early
aspirations. His ardour for astronomy was still farther inflamed, and
the resolution which it inspired still farther strengthened, by the
great conjunction of Jupiter and Saturn, which took place in August
1563. The calculated time of this phenomenon differed considerably from
the true time which was observed; and in determining the instant of
conjunction Tycho felt in the strongest manner the imperfection of the
instruments which he used. For this purpose he employed a sort of
compass, one leg of which was directed to one planet and the second to
the other planet or fixed star; and, by measuring the angular opening
between them, he determined the distance of the two celestial bodies. By
this rude contrivance he found that the Alphonsine Tables erred a whole
month in the time of conjunction, while the Copernican ones were at
least several days in error. To this celebrated conjunction Tycho
ascribed the great plague which in subsequent years desolated Europe,
because it took place in the beginning of _Leo_, and not far from the
nebulous stars of _Cancer_, two of the zodiacal signs which are reckoned
by Ptolemy "suffocating and pestilent!"

There dwelt at this time at Leipsic an ingenious artisan named
Scultetus, who was employed by Homelius, the professor of mathematics in
that city, to assist him in the construction of his instruments. Having
become acquainted with this young man, Tycho put into his hand a wooden
radius, such as was recommended by Gemma Frisius, for the purpose of
having it divided in the manner adopted by Homelius; and with this
improved instrument he made a great number of astronomical observations
out of his window, without ever exciting the suspicions of his tutor.

Having spent three years at Leipsic, he was about to make the tour of
Germany, when, in consequence of his uncle's death, he was summoned to
his native country to inherit the fortune which had been left him. He
accordingly quitted Leipsic about the middle of May 1565, and after
having arranged his domestic concerns in Denmark, he continued his
astronomical observations with the radius constructed for him by
Scultetus. The ardour with which he pursued his studies gave great
umbrage to his friends as well as to his relations. He was reproached
for having abandoned the profession of the law; his astronomical
observations were ridiculed as not only useless but degrading, and,
among his numerous connexions, his maternal uncle, Steno Bille, was the
only one who applauded him for following the bent of his genius. Under
these uncomfortable circumstances he resolved to quit his country, and
pay a visit to the most interesting cities of Germany.

At Wittemberg, where he arrived in April 1566, he resumed his
astronomical observations; but, in consequence of the plague having
broken out in that city, he removed to Rostoch in the following autumn.
Here an accident occurred which had nearly deprived him of his life. On
the 10th December he was invited to a wedding feast; and, among other
guests, there was present a noble countryman of his own, Manderupius
Pasbergius. Some difference having arisen between them on this occasion,
they parted with feelings of mutual displeasure. On the 27th of the same
month they met again at some festive games, and having revived their
former quarrel, they agreed to settle their differences by the sword.
They accordingly met at 7 o'clock in the evening of the 29th, and fought
in total darkness. In this blind combat, Manderupius cut off the whole
of the front of Tycho's nose, and it was fortunate for astronomy that
his more valuable organs were defended by so faithful an outpost. The
quarrel, which is said to have originated in a difference of opinion
respecting their mathematical acquirements, terminated here; and Tycho
repaired his loss by cementing upon his face a nose of gold and silver,
which is said to have formed a good imitation of the original.

During the years 1567 and 1568, Tycho continued to reside at Rostoch,
with the exception of a few months, during which he made a rapid journey
into Denmark. He lived in a house in the college of the Jesuits, which
he had rented on account of its fitness for celestial observations; but,
though he intended to spend the winter under its roof, he had made no
arrangement respecting his future life, leaving it, as he said, in the
hands of Providence. A desire, however, to visit the south of Germany
induced him to quit Rostoch, and having crossed the Danube, he paid a
visit to Augsburg.

Upon entering this ancient city, Tycho was particularly struck with the
grandeur of its fortifications, the splendour of its private houses, and
the beauty of its fountains; and, after a short residence within its
walls, he was still more delighted with the industry of the people, the
refinement of the higher classes, and the love of literature and science
which was cherished by its wealthy citizens. Among the interesting
acquaintances which he formed at Augsburg, were two brothers, John and
Paul Hainzel, the one a septemvir, and the other the consul or
burgomaster. They were both distinguished by their learning, and both of
them, particularly Paul, were ardent lovers of astronomy. Tycho had
hitherto no other astronomical instrument than the coarse radius which
was made for him by Scultetus, and he waited only for a proper occasion
to have a larger and better instrument constructed for his use. Having
now the command of workmen who could execute his plans, he conceived the
bold design of making a divided instrument which should distinctly
exhibit single minutes of a degree. While he was transferring the first
rude conception of his instrument to paper, Paul Hainzel entered his
study, and was so struck with the grandeur of the plan, that he
instantly undertook to have it executed at his own expense. The
projected instrument was a quadrant of fourteen cubits radius! and Tycho
and his friend entered upon its construction with that intense ardour
which is ever crowned with success.

In the village of Gegginga, about half a mile to the south of the city,
Paul Hainzel had a country house, the garden of which was chosen as the
spot where the quadrant was to be fixed. The best artists in Augsburg,
clockmakers, jewellers, smiths, and carpenters, were engaged to execute
the work, and from the zeal which so novel an instrument inspired, the
quadrant was completed in less than a month. Its size was so great that
twenty men could with difficulty transport it to its place of fixture.
The two principal rectangular radii were beams of oak; the arch which
lay between their extremities was made of solid wood of a particular
kind, and the whole was bound together by twelve beams. It received
additional strength from several iron bands, and the arch was covered
with plates of brass, for the purpose of receiving the 5400 divisions
into which it was to be subdivided. A large and strong pillar of oak,
shod with iron, was driven into the ground, and kept in its place by
solid mason work. To this pillar the quadrant was fixed in a vertical
plane, and steps were prepared to elevate the observer, when stars of a
low altitude required his attention. As the instrument could not be
conveniently covered with a roof, it was protected from the weather by a
covering made of skins, but notwithstanding this and other precautions,
it was broken to pieces by a violent storm, after having remained
uninjured for the space of five years.

As this quadrant was fitted only to determine the altitudes of the
celestial bodies, Tycho constructed a large sextant for the purpose of
measuring their distances. It consisted of two radii, which opened and
shut round a centre, and which were nearly four cubits long, and also of
two arches, one of which was graduated, while the other served to keep
the radii in the same plane. After the radii had been opened or shut
till they nearly comprehended the angle between the stars to be
observed, the adjustment was completed by means of a very fine tangent
screw. With this instrument Tycho made many excellent observations
during his stay at Augsburg. He began also the construction of a wooden
globe about six feet in diameter. Its outer surface was turned with
great accuracy into a sphere, and kept from warping by interior bars of
wood supported at its centre.

After receiving a visit from the celebrated Peter Ramus, who
subsequently fell a victim at the massacre of St Bartholomew, Tycho left
Augsburg, having received a promise from his friend Hainzel that he
would communicate to him the observations made with his large quadrant,
and with the sextant which he had given him in a present. He paid a
visit to Philip Appian in passing through Ingolstadt, and returned to
his native country about the end of 1571.

The fame which he had acquired as an astronomer procured for him a
warmer reception than that which he had formerly experienced. The King
invited him to court, and his friends and admirers loaded him with
kindness. His uncle, Steno Bille, who now lived at the ancient convent
of Herritzvold, and who had always taken a deep interest in the
