"True, but it needs constant emphasis or it is forgotten under the
propaganda. Besides, I don't believe in mating people like cattle or
slaves. That's why this whole thing is a travesty of love and marriage.
I hate being used to give it a semblance of scientific authenticity. I'm
going to declare the top four contestants equal. They are, as far as I
am concerned, genetically speaking. The audience will decide the winner.
They'll love it and so will the sponsor. The other three are real
American dream girls. I want you to outsmart them at their own game ...
and tell America later what a farce it all was."

"You really are a romantic, underneath the cynicism," Gloria said
wonderingly. "I didn't think scientists were built with hearts any
more." She reached across and took his hand. "But I like you that way.
Do you think I could do it?"

"Easily. Just pretend you are Ellen the Earthling from that comedy of
yours. That's the type they want."

"Yes, but when I bow out later they'll be calling me Marina the Martian
Menace ... that won't be so funny."

"They won't, Gloria. You can laugh it off as a publicity stunt and get
them laughing with you. Who knows, it might even stop this mad fad of
career women having babies without a proper home and a father to raise
them."

She laughed. "Are you afraid you're going to be replaced by a machine,
George?" her eyes twinkled with amusement.

He grinned. "Oh, we still have our uses. Time to go. Will you do it?"

She stood up. "I'll play it by ear. If the audience is the type you say
they are, it will be a pleasure."

       *       *       *       *       *

The parade was over. Now, as they waited for the banquet and the
speeches to begin, John Harmon spoke to Turner.

"You're a lucky man, George."

"Why?"

"Spending so much time with Gloria. She had me laughing all the way up
Wall Street with her remarks about the parade. If I didn't have to go
back to the base tomorrow I'd steal her for a date." He turned to
Gloria. "I mean it, honey. You really leave me weightless!"

Gloria smiled at him. "I'll take a recount, John. We can blast off some
other time."

After the banquet the Mayor of New York made the major address of the
evening. "And so, ladies and gentleman," he concluded, "you have seen
today two people who represent the end of one era and the beginning of
another. The lovely lady on my right is to be the first Mother America.
For the first time in history, our nation is actively planning our
future citizens. It is true that for years now, with the help of the
Genetics Laboratories, represented so ably by Doctor Turner, individual
citizens have planned their parenthood, but never before have a
President and Congress given their approval, their official blessing,
for such a purpose. This then is a milestone we have passed, a point in
our history we will never forget."

"They'll never forget me either when I back out," Gloria whispered to
George. "I'm getting worried. We're in too deep."

"Don't be scared, baby," George said. "I'll get you out of it, if you
have to fall sick to do it." He patted her arm reassuringly but somehow,
without the rosy glow of a bottle of wine to color this view, the joke
didn't seem as funny as it had the previous night.

The Mayor continued. "Another point in our history was passed when this
young man on my left, at that time Captain, now Major John Harmon of the
Space Force, returned from Mars. He and his crew represent the end of
our isolation in space. The Moon, after all, is a satellite of Earth.
Mars is another planet, and Major Harmon has landed there. We are not
likely in our time to see another such event since the next big step,
beyond the Solar System, will require a technology we do not possess.
So, ladies and gentlemen, you, tonight, are witnessing the beginning of
a new age, an age of supermen borne by women of America, such as Gloria
Manson, and led by heroes such as John Harmon. I propose we drink a
toast to them ... together."

       *       *       *       *       *

Afterwards, in Gloria's apartment, the three of them sat and talked
until late. Then John Harmon looked at his watch and got up to leave.

"I have to catch the ramjet out of La Guardia," he said. "We start
planning the next space trip in Colorado tomorrow, or rather this
morning. It's been fun." He shook George's hand and kissed Gloria
quickly. "I'll be seeing you one of these days."

George shut the door behind him. "I guess I'd better go now," he said.

"No! Have one for the road," Gloria said quickly. "I want to talk to
you."

George poured another Scotch. "You still worried?"

"A bit," she admitted. "What is the next step?"

"Now I'm supposed to pick the male donor."

"I thought you'd done that already."

"No. You see we have to know what blood types the female has and what
her genetic structure is; whether she has any antibodies against sperm
and so on, before we pick the male. To do it before the winner is
picked would entail a lot of unnecessary work."

