what they turn out."

He pulled a pipe and tobacco from his pocket. He filled the pipe. He
squeezed the side of the bowl and puffed as the tobacco glowed. He
relaxed, underneath the wall-sign which sternly forbade smoking by all
military personnel within these premises.

It was nearly three hours--but it could have been hundreds--before
Betsy's screen lighted abruptly.

       *       *       *       *       *

The broadcast came in; a new transmission. The picture-pattern on
Betsy's screen was obviously not the same as other broadcasts from
nowhere. The chirps and peepings and the rumbling deep sounds were not
repetitions of earlier noise-sequences. It should have taken many days
of finicky work by technicians at the Pentagon before the originally
broadcast picture could be seen and the sound interpreted. But a
play-back recorder named Al, and a picture-unscrambler named Gus were in
closed-circuit relationship with Betsy. She received the broadcast and
they unscrambled the sound and vision parts of it immediately.

The translated broadcast, as Gus and Al presented it, was calculated to
put the high brass of the defense forces into a frenzied tizzy. The
anguished consternation of previous occasions would seem like very calm
contemplation by comparison. The high brass of the armed forces should
grow dizzy. Top-echelon civilian officials should tend to talk
incoherently to themselves, and scientific consultants--biologists in
particular--ought to feel their heads spinning like tops.

The point was that the broadcast had to be taken seriously because it
came from nowhere. There was no faintest indication of any signal
outside of Betsy's sedately gray-painted case. But Betsy was not making
it up. She couldn't. There was a technology involved which required the
most earnest consideration of the message carried by it.

And this broadcast explained the danger from which the alleged future
wished to rescue its alleged past. A brisk, completely deracialized
broadcaster appeared on Gus's screen.

In clipped, oddly stressed, but completely intelligible phrases, he
explained that he recognized the paradox his communication represented.
Even before 1972, he observed, there had been argument about what would
happen if a man could travel in time and happened to go back to an
earlier age and kill his grandfather. This communication was an
inversion of that paradox. The world of 2180 wished to communicate back
in time and save the lives of its great-great-great-grandparents so that
it--the world of 2180--would be born.

Without this warning and the information to be given, at least half the
human race of 1972 was doomed.

In late 1971 there had been a mutation of a minor strain of
_staphylococcus_ somewhere in the Andes. The new mutation thrived and
flourished. With the swift transportation of the period, it had spread
practically all over the world unnoticed, because it produced no
symptoms of disease.

Half the members of the human race were carriers of the harmless mutated
_staphylococcus_ now, but it was about to mutate again in accordance
with Gordon's Law (the reference had no meaning in 1972) and the new
mutation would be lethal. In effect, one human being in two carried in
his body a semi-virus organization which he continually spread, and
which very shortly would become deadly. Half the human race was bound to
die unless it was instructed as to how to cope with it. Unless--

       *       *       *       *       *

Unless the world of 2180 told its ancestors what to do about it. That
was the proposal. Two-way communication was necessary for the purpose,
because there would be questions to be answered, obscure points to be
clarified, numerical values to be checked to the highest possible degree
of accuracy.

Therefore, here were diagrams of the transmitter needed to communicate
with future time. Here were enlarged diagrams of individual parts. The
enigmatic parts of the drawing produced a wave-type unknown in 1972. But
a special type of wave was needed to travel beyond the three dimensions
of ordinary space, into the fourth dimension which was time. This
wave-type produced unpredictable surges of power in the transmitter,
wherefore at least six transmitters should be built and linked together
so that if one ceased operation another would instantly take up the
task.

       *       *       *       *       *

The broadcast ended abruptly. Betsy's screen went blank. The colonel was
notified. A courier took tapes to Washington by high-speed jet. Life in
Research Establishment 83 went on sedately. The barracks and the married
quarters and the residences of the officers were equipped with
Mahon-modified machines which laundered diapers perfectly, and with dial
telephones which always rang right numbers, and there were police-up
machines which took perfect care of lawns, and television receivers
tuned themselves to the customary channels for different hours with
astonishing ease. Even jet-planes equipped with Mahon units almost
landed themselves, and almost flew themselves about the sky in simulated
combat with something very close to zest.

But the atmosphere in the room in Communications was tense.

"I think," said Howell, with his lips compressed, "that this answers all
your objections, Graves. Motive--"

"No," said Lecky painfully. "It does not answer mine. My objection is
that I do not believe it."

"Huh!" said Sergeant Bellews scornfully. "O' course, you don't believe
it! It's phoney clear through!"

Lecky looked at him hopefully.

"You noticed something that we missed, Sergeant?"

"Hell, yes!" said Sergeant Bellews. "That transmitter diagram don't have
a Mahon unit in it!"

"Is that remarkable?" demanded Howell.

"Remarkable dumb," said the sergeant. "They'd ought to know--"

The tall young lieutenant who earlier had fetched Sergeant Bellews to
Communications now appeared again. He gracefully entered the room where
Betsy waited for more broadcast matter. Her standby light flickered with
something close to animation, and the similar yellow bulbs on Al and Gus
responded in kind. The tall young lieutenant said politely:

"I am sorry, but pending orders from the Pentagon the colonel has
ordered this room vacated. Only automatic recorders will be allowed
here, and all records they produce will be sent to Washington without
examination. It seems that no one on this post has the necessary
clearance for this type of material."

Lecky blinked. Graves sputtered:

"But--dammit, do you mean we can work out a way to receive a broadcast
and not be qualified to see it?"

"There's a common-sense view," said Sergeant Bellews oracularly, "and a
crazy view, and there's what the Pentagon says, which ain't either." He
stood up. "I see where I go back to my shop and finish rehabilitatin'
the colonel's vacuum cleaner. You gentlemen care to join me?"

Howell said indignantly:

"This is ridiculous! This is absurd!"

"Uh-uh," said Sergeant Bellews benignly. "This is the armed forces.
There'll be an order makin' some sort of sense come along later.
Meanwhile, I can brief you guys on Mahon machines so you'll be ready to
start up again with better information when a clearance order does come
through. And I got some beer in my quarters behind the Rehab Shop. Come
along with me!"

He led the way out of the room. The young lieutenant paused to close the
door firmly behind him and to lock it. A bored private, with side-arms,
took post before it. The lieutenant was a very conscientious young man.

But he did not interfere with the parade to Sergeant Bellews' quarters.
The young lieutenant was very military, and the ways of civilians were
not his concern. If eminent scientists chose to go to Sergeant Bellews'
quarters instead of the Officers Club, to which their assimilated rank
entitled them, it was strictly their affair.

       *       *       *       *       *

They reached the Rehab Shop, and Sergeant Bellews went firmly to a
standby-light-equipped refrigerator in his quarters. He brought out beer
and deftly popped off the tops. The icebox door closed quietly.

"Here's to crime," said Sergeant Bellews amiably.

He drank. Howell sipped gloomily. Graves drank thoughtfully. Lecky
looked anticipative.

"Sergeant," he said, "did I see a gleam in your eye just now?"

Sergeant Bellews reflected, gently shaking his opened beer-can with a
rotary motion, for no reason whatever.

"Uh-uh," he rumbled. "I wouldn't say a gleam. But you mighta seen a
glint. I got some ideas from what I seen during that broadcast. I wanna
get to work on 'em. Here's the place to do the work. We got facilities
here."

Howell said with precise hot anger:

"This is the most idiotic situation I have ever seen even in government
service!"

"You ain't been around much," the sergeant told him kindly. "It happens
everywhere. All the time. It ain't even a exclusive feature of the armed
forces." He put down his beer-can and patted his stomach. "There's guys
who sit up nights workin' out standard operational procedures just to
make things like this happen, everywhere. The colonel hadda do what he
did. He's got orders, too. But he felt bad. So he sent the lieutenant to
tell us. He does the colonel's dirty jobs--and he loves his work."

       *       *       *       *       *

He moved grandly toward the Rehab Shop proper, which opened off the
quarters he lived in--very much as a doctor's office is apt to open off
his living quarters.

"We follow?" asked Lecky zestfully. "You plan something?"

"Natural!" said Sergeant Bellews largely.

He led the way into the Rehab Shop, which was dark and shadowy, and only
very dimly lighted by flickering, wavering lights of many machines
waiting as if hopefully to be called on for action. There were the
shelves of machines not yet activated. Sergeant Bellews led the way
toward his desk. There was a vacuum cleaner on it, on standby. He put it
down on the floor.

Lecky watched him with some eagerness. The others came in, Howell dourly
and Graves wiping his moustache.

The sergeant considered his domain.

"We'll be happy to help you," said Lecky.

"Thanks," said the sergeant. "I'm under orders to help you, too, y'know.
