
The day was coming, not too many years away, when the first of the
aliens would strike the Outer worlds. Then we would unite--on the
League's terms if need be--to crush the invaders and establish mankind
as the supreme race in the galaxy.

But this wasn't important right now. Right now I was the Executive
Officer of a scout ship commanded by a man I didn't trust. He smelled
too much like a stinking coward. I shook my head. Having Chase running
the ship was like putting a moron in a jet car on one of the
superhighways--and then sabotaging the automatics. Just one fearful
mistake and a whole squadron could be loused up. But Chase was the
commander--the ultimate authority on this ship. All I could do was pray
that things were going to come out all right.

We moved out in the lower red. Battles weren't fought in Cth. There was
no way to locate a unit at firing range in that monochromatic madness.
Normal physical laws simply didn't apply. A ship had to come out into
threespace to do any damage. All Cth was was a convenient road to the
battlefront.

With one exception.

By hanging in the infra band, on the ragged edge of threespace, a scout
ship could remain concealed until a critical moment, breakout into
threespace--discharge her weapons--and flick back into Cth before an
enemy could get a fix on her. Scouts, with their high capacity
converters, could perform this maneuver, but the ponderous battlewagons
and cruisers with their tremendous weight of armor, screens, and
munitions couldn't maneuver like this. They simply didn't have the
agility. Yet only they had the ability to penetrate defensive screens
and kill the Rebel heavies. So space battle was conducted on the classic
pattern--the Lines slugging it out at medium range while the screen of
scouts buzzed around and through the battle trying to add their weight
of metal against some overstrained enemy and ensure his destruction. A
major battle could go on for days--and it often did. In the Fifty Suns
action the battle had lasted nearly two weeks subjective before we
withdrew to lick our wounds.

       *       *       *       *       *

For nearly a day we ran into nothing, and such are the distances that
separate units of a fleet, we had the impression that we were alone. We
moved quietly, detectors out, scanning the area for a light-day around
as we moved forward at less than one Lume through Cth. More would have
been fatal for had we been forced to resort to a quick breakout to avoid
enemy action, and if we were travelling above one Lume when we hit
threespace, we'd simply disappear, leaving a small spatial vortex in our
wake.

On the "morning" of the third day the ships at the apex of Quadrant One
ran into a flight of Rebel scouts. There was a brief flurry of action,
the Rebels were englobed, a couple of cruisers drove in, latched onto
the helplessly straining Rebel scouts and dragged them into threespace.
The Rebs kept broadcasting right up to the end--after which they
surrendered before the cruisers could annihilate them. Smart boys.

But the Rebels were warned. We couldn't catch all their scouts and the
disturbance our Line was making in Cth would register on any detector
within twenty parsecs. So they would be waiting to meet us. But that was
to be expected. There is no such thing as surprise in a major action.

We went on until we began to run into major opposition. Half a dozen
scouts were caught in englobements at half a dozen different places
along the periphery as they came in contact with the Rebels' covering
forces. And that was that. The advance halted waiting for the Line to
come up, and a host of small actions took place as the forward screening
forces collided. Chase was in the control chair, hanging in the
blackness of the infra band on the edge of normal space. But we weren't
flicking in and out of threespace like some of the others. We had a
probe out and the main buffeting was taken by the duralloy tube with its
tiny converter at its bulbous tip. With consummate pilotage Chase was
holding us in infra. It was a queasy sensation, hanging halfway between
normalcy and chaos, and I had to admire his skill. The infra band was
black as ink and hot as the hinges of hell--and since the edges of
threespace and Cth are not as knife sharp as they are further up in the
Cth components, we bucked and shuddered on the border, but avoided the
bone-crushing slams and gut-wrenching twists that less skillful skippers
were giving their ships as they flicked back and forth between
threespace and Cth. Our scouting line must have been a peculiar sight to
a threespace observer with the thousand or so scouts flickering in and
out of sight across a huge hemisphere of space.

And then we saw them. Our probe picked up the flicker of enemy scouts.

"Action imminent," Chase said drily. "Stand by."

I clapped the other control helmet over my head and dropped into the
Exec's chair. A quick check showed the crew at their stations, the
torpedo hatches clear, the antiradiation shields up and the ship in
fighting trim. I stole a quick glance at Chase. Sweat stood out on his
gray forehead. His lips were drawn back into a thin line, showing his
teeth. His face was tense, but whether with fear or excitement I didn't
know.

"Stand by," he said, and then we hit threespace, just as the enormous
cone of the Rebel Line flicked into sight. The enemy line had taken the
field, and under the comparatively slow speeds of threespace was rushing
forward to meet our Line which had emerged a few minutes ago. Our
launchers flamed as we sent a salvo of torpedoes whistling toward the
Rebel fleet marking perhaps the opening shots of the main battle. We
twisted back into Cth as one of the scanner men doubled over with agony,
heaving his guts out into a disposal cone. I felt sorry for him. The
tension, the racking agony of our motion, and the fact that he was
probably in his first major battle had all combined to take him for the
count. He grinned greenly at me and turned back to his dials and
instruments. Good man!

"Target--range one eight zero four, azimuth two four oh, elevation one
oh seven," the rangefinder reported. "Mass four." Mass four:--a cruiser.

"Stand by," Chase said. "All turrets prepare to fire." And he took us
down. We slammed into threespace and our turrets flamed. To our left
rear and above hung the mass of an enemy cruiser, her screens glowing on
standby as she drove forward to her place in the line. We had caught her
by surprise, a thousand to one shot, and our torpedoes were on their way
before her detectors spotted us. We didn't stay to see what happened,
but the probe showed an enormous fireball which blazed briefly in the
blackness, shooting out globs of scintillating molten metal that cooled
and disappeared as we watched.

"Scratch one cruiser," someone in fire control yelped.

       *       *       *       *       *

The effect on morale was electric. In that instant all doubts of Chase's
ability disappeared. All except mine. One lucky shot isn't a battle, and
I guess Chase figured the same way because his hands were shaking as he
jockeyed us along on the edge of Cth. He looked like he wanted to vomit.

"Take it easy, skipper," I said.

"Mind your own business, Marsden--and I'll mind mine," Chase snapped.
"Stand by," he ordered, and we dove into threespace again--loosed
another salvo at another Reb, and flicked out of sight. And that was the
way it went for hour after hour until we pulled out, our last torpedo
fired and the crew on the ragged edge of exhaustion. Somehow, by some
miracle compounded of luck and good pilotage, we were unmarked. And
Chase, despite his twitching face and shaking hands, was one hell of a
