way, but from the throat downward his body was completely dead as far as
any power of voluntary movement was concerned.

He twisted his head stiffly to one side, and saw that Helen was standing
there beside him. Just beyond her was the motionless figure of Gil
Mapes. Both the gangster and the girl were in the grip of the same
strange paralysis. Like Blake, they were standing there rigidly
motionless, facing the gold-flecked barrier wall just in front of them.

A moment's painful scrutiny of their position showed Blake that the
posts forming the wall of the enclosure at the end toward the cone had
been brought in nearly a hundred yards toward them while they slept. The
shimmering barrier sheet was now scarcely a yard from their faces, yet
they still stood near the thicket where they had battled the headless
horrors. Blake saw his coat half-buried in the blue-gray dust near his
feet where Helen had discarded the garment to minister to Mapes.

Their unseen captor had obviously made definite preparations for
whatever his next purpose with them was to be, for a long wheeled
platform had been brought to a position opposite them just outside the
shimmering gold-flecked sheet. Blake noted the shattered remains of
Mapes' pistol on the ground at one side of the platform. It had
apparently been fished from the enclosure and rendered harmless after
their captor had seen the weapon's efficient use against the headless
ape-things.

Clustered upon the wheeled platform was an assemblage of intricately
winding coils, glowing tubes, and other apparatus that conveyed no more
meaning to Blake's bewildered gaze than a sight of the interior of a
metropolitan power-house would to a Congo savage.

       *       *       *       *       *

There was only one piece of the apparatus regarding whose probable
function Blake could even guess. This was a pair of long slender arms
that projected through the shimmering walls into the enclosure,
supporting at their end a large thin metal plate located just over the
heads of the three Earthlings. Blake was willing to wager that it was
this overhead plate that was responsible for the odd paralysis that held
them helpless.

Then a figure came slowly into view from where it had been concealed by
the apparatus, and Blake forgot all thought of the strange mechanisms as
he watched the monstrous thing clamber stiffly from the platform and
halt squarely in front of the captives to stare at them through the
transparency of the intervening force sheet.

The thing was a curious blending of human and bestial features. It stood
barely five feet in height, yet its great scale-armored skull was at
least three times as large as that of a grown man. There was colossal
mental power and nameless evil glowing in the dark depths of the two
abnormally large eyes that stared fixedly out from under the heavy
forehead. The thing had no nose. The mouth opening, surrounded by a
rosette of flabby gray skin, was a mere slit. The entire skull and face
were covered with small, closely overlapping scales of lusterless gray.

The head merged directly into a short black torso nearly as wide as the
skull itself. From this trunk there writhed a score of long black
snake-like tentacles, each terminating in a flexible three-fingered
"hand." The trunk was supported by two short thick legs, armored with
gray scales, and ending in broad three-toed feet.

"Greetings, Earthlings!" The voice that emanated from the grotesque
mouth was surprisingly resonant in tone. "Allow me to present myself. I
am Zehru, imperial scientist of Xollar."

       *       *       *       *       *

The monstrosity seemed amused at the expressions of blank surprise upon
the faces of his captives. "I learned your crude language from your
brain cells while you slept under the red ray," he explained. "Also I
learned many other things regarding your planet, Earth. I am glad to
find your world so well adapted to my purpose. Within a few years after
my arrival there I shall be its unquestioned ruler."

Blake started to voice the many questions that were surging through his
mind, but an imperious gesture of an outflung tentacle stopped him.

"Silence, Earthling!" There was tolerant contempt in Zehru's ringing
voice. "I will explain some of the things that puzzle you. There is no
reason why I should trouble myself to do so, yet it may while away the
tedium of the short wait yet remaining before my apparatus becomes
charged to the required point. Listen carefully, Earthling, for at best
you will find many of my thoughts beyond the feeble limits of the word
forms with which you have provided me.

"The world of Xollar, where you now are, is a planet in the island
universe known to your astronomers as the Great Nebula of Andromeda.
Until a short time ago I was one of its ruling scientists. Then I
sinned, and so grave was my sin according to the laws of this planet
that the Council of Three decreed my death. That death sentence upon
Xollar is irrevocable, and no man has yet escaped it no matter where
upon the planet he may be when the appointed time for his execution
comes. I was given the usual period of grace in which to put my affairs
in order. Instead, I have labored unceasingly here in my laboratory, and
my labors have borne fruit. I am the first man in Xollarian history to
find a means of escaping the dread death penalty.

"Briefly, I discovered a way by which I can flee to your far-distant
universe, where not even the powers of the Council of Three can follow
me. That way lies through the door of inter-dimensional Space. In Space
as you know it, the almost unthinkable distance of a million light years
separates Xollar from the dwarf star you call your Sun. Yet, traveling
_between_ Space, the two planets nearly touch each other. The same
situation of being near neighbors in inter-dimensional Space holds true
with Xollar and at least seven other planets located in widely separated
parts of your universe.

       *       *       *       *       *

"Let me try to illustrate what I mean by traveling between Space. We
will assume a nearly two-dimensional universe in the form of a circular
piece of paper three feet in diameter. There is a dot in the exact
center of each side of this paper. To a two-dimensional creature, forced
to travel only on the surface of the paper, the distance between the
two dots can never be less than thirty-six inches. Yet by cutting
_between_ the two surfaces and going directly through the paper the dots
are less than one-hundredth of an inch apart.

"Such is the case with Xollar and the planets in your universe which are
our immediate neighbors in inter-dimensional Space. In order to reach
those planets I had only to develop a method of using sufficient force
to cut _between_ the three dimensions of intervening Space. In solving
this problem I developed both an inter-dimensional net to bring beings
from your universe to mine, and an inter-dimensional gate to permit
beings to pass from here back to worlds in your galaxy.

"You have already seen the workings of the net. It was the device of
green fire that brought you here. The use of the net was a vital part of
my plans, for without the use of a physical body from some world in your
universe I could not hope to live longer than a few minutes after
leaving Xollar via the inter-dimensional gate. The inherent
characteristics and basic elements of your galaxy and the Andromedan
universe are so different in every way that an inhabitant of either
star-group cannot exist in the other. Xollar's purple atmosphere is
characteristic of Andromedan worlds. Your oxygen-saturated air is
typical of worlds in your galaxy. Just as Xollar's purple mists would be
immediately fatal to you, so would your clear oxygen-tainted air be
