tools. The death had been too much for her.

The minutes passed and still the dead man showed no signs of reviving.
Professor Carbonic paced the floor in an agitated manner. He began to be
doubtful of his ability to bring the man back. Worried, he continued his
tramp up and down the room. His heart was affecting him. He was tempted
to return the seventy-five cents to the prostrate wife when--THE DEAD
MAN MOVED!

The professor clasped his hands to his throat, and with his head thrown
back dropped to the floor. A fatal attack of the heart.

He became conscious quickly. "The bottles there," he whispered. "Mix--,
make injection." He became unconscious again.

The stranger found the gimlet and bored a hole in the professor's head,
hastily seizing one of the vials, he poured the contents into the deeply
made hole. He then realized that there was another bottle.

"Mix them!" shrieked the almost hysterical woman.

It was too late, the one vial was empty, and the professor's body lay
lifeless.

In mental agony the stranger grasped the second vial and emptied its
contents also into the professor's head, and stopped the hole with the
cork.

Miraculously Professor Carbonic opened his eyes, and rose to his feet.
His eyes were like balls of fire; his lips moved inaudibly, and as they
moved little blue sparks were seen to pass from one to another. His hair
stood out from his head. The chemical reaction was going on in the
professor's brain, with a dose powerful enough to restore ten men. He
tottered slightly.

Murray Attic, now thoroughly alive, sat up straight in bed. He grasped
the brass bed post with one hand and stretched out the other to aid the
staggering man.

He caught his hand; both bodies stiffened; a slight crackling sound was
audible; a blue flash shot from where Attic's had made contact with the
bed post; then a dull thud as both bodies struck the floor. Both men
were electrocuted, and the formula is still a secret.


THE END




Transcriber's Note:

    This etext was produced from _Amazing Stories_ April 1956 and was
    first published in _Amazing Stories_ March 1927. Extensive research
    did not uncover any evidence that the U.S. copyright on this
    publication was renewed. Minor spelling and typographical errors
    have been corrected without note.





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Advanced Chemistry, by Jack G. Huekels

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK ADVANCED CHEMISTRY ***

***** This file should be named 26955.txt or 26955.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/2/6/9/5/26955/

