ceiling was about twelve feet high.

The floor of the room was simply the asteroidal rock surface, not
completely level and smooth. There were two chairs and a table to the
right of the entry lock, two foldaway cots around the wall beyond them,
the kitchen area next and a cluttered storage area around on the other
side. There was a heater standing alone in the center of the room, but
it certainly wasn't needed now. Sweat was already trickling down the
back of my neck and down my forehead into my eyebrows. I peeled off my
shirt and used it to wipe sweat from my face. "Warm in here," I said.

"You get used to it," he muttered, which I found hard to believe.

He brought over the coffee, and I tasted it. It was rotten, as bitter as
this old hermit's soul, but I said, "Good coffee. Thanks a lot."

"I like it strong," he said.

I looked around at the room again. "All the comforts of home, eh? Pretty
ingenious arrangement."

"Sure," he said sourly. "How about getting to the point, Mister?"

There's only one way to handle a blunt old man. Be blunt right back.
"I'll tell you how it is," I said. "The company isn't accusing you of
anything, but it has to be sure everything's on the up and up before it
pays out any ten thousand credits. And your partner just happening to
fill out that cash-return form just before he died--well, you've got to
admit it is a funny kind of coincidence."

"How so?" He slurped coffee, and glowered at me over the cup. "We made
this strike here," he said. "We knew it was the big one. Jafe had that
insurance policy of his in case he never did make the big strike. As
soon as we knew this was the big one, he said, 'I guess I don't need
that retirement now,' and sat right down and wrote out the cash-return.
Then we opened a bottle of liquor and celebrated, and he got himself
killed."

The way Karpin said it, it sounded smooth and natural. _Too_ smooth and
natural. "How did this accident happen anyway?" I asked him.

"I'm not one hundred per cent sure of that myself," he said. "I was
pretty well drunk myself by that time. But he put on his suit and said
he was going out to paint the X. He was falling all over himself, and I
tried to tell him it could wait till we'd had some sleep, but he
wouldn't pay any attention to me."

"So he went out," I said.

He nodded. "He went out first. After a couple minutes, I got lonesome in
here, so I suited up and went out after him. It happened just as I was
going out the lock, and I just barely got a glimpse of what happened."

       *       *       *

He attacked the coffee again, noisily, and I prompted him, saying, "What
did happen, Mister Karpin?"

"Well, he was capering around out there, waving the paint tube and such.
There's a lot of sharp rock sticking out around here. Just as I got
outside, he lost his balance and kicked out, and scraped right into some
of that rock, and punctured his suit."

"I thought the body was lost," I said.

He nodded. "It was. The last thing in life Jafe ever did was try to
shove himself away from those rocks. That, and the force of air coming
out of that puncture for the first second or two, was enough to throw
him up off the surface. It threw him up too high, and he never got back
down."

My doubt must have showed in my face, because he added, "Mister, there
isn't enough gravity on this place to shoot craps with."

He was right. As we talked, I kept finding myself holding unnecessarily
tight to the arms of the chair. I kept having the feeling I was going to
float out of the chair and hover around up at the top of the dome if I
were to let go. It was silly of course--there was _some_ gravity on that
planetoid, after all--but I just don't seem to get used to low-gee.

Nevertheless, I still had some more questions. "Didn't you try to get
his body back? Couldn't you have reached him?"

"I tried to, Mister," he said. "Old Jafe McCann was my partner for
fifteen years. But I was drunk, and that's a fact. And I was afraid to
go jumping up in the air, for fear _I'd_ go floating away, too."

"Frankly," I said, "I'm no expert on low gravity and asteroids. But
wouldn't McCann's body just go into orbit around this rock? I mean, it
wouldn't simply go floating off into space, would it?"

"It sure would," he said. "There's a lot of other rocks out here, too,
Mister, and a lot of them are bigger than this one and have a lot more
gravity pull. I don't suppose there's a navigator in the business who
could have computed Jafe's course in advance. He floated up, and then he
floated back over the dome here and seemed to hover for a couple
minutes, and then he just floated out and away. His isn't the only body
circling around the sun with all these rocks, you know."

I chewed a lip and thought it all over. I didn't know enough about
asteroid gravity or the conditions out here to be able to say for sure
whether Karpin's story was true or not. Up to this point, I couldn't
attack the problem on a fact basis. I had to depend on _feeling_ now,
the hunches and instincts of eight years in this job, hearing some
people tell lies and other people tell the truth.

And my instinct said Ab Karpin was lying in his teeth. That dramatic
little touch about McCann's body hovering over the dome before
disappearing into the void, that sounded more like the embellishment of
fiction than the circumstance of truth. And the string of coincidences
were just too much. McCann just coincidentally happens to die right
after he and his partner make their big strike. He happens to write out
the cash-return form just before dying. And his body just happens to
float away, so nobody can look at it and check Karpin's story.

       *       *       *

But no matter what my instinct said, the story was smooth. It was smooth
as glass, and there was no place for me to get a grip on it.

What now? There wasn't any hole in Karpin's story, at least none that I
could see. I had to break his story somehow, and in order to do that I
had to do some nosing around on this planetoid. I couldn't know in
advance what I was looking for, I could only look. I'd know it when I
found it. It would be something that conflicted with Karpin's story.

And for that, I had to be sure the story was complete. "You said McCann
had gone out to paint the X," I said. "Did he paint it?"

Karpin shook his head. "He never got a chance. He spent all his time
dancing, up till he went and killed himself."

"So you painted it yourself."

He nodded.

"And then you went on into Atronics City and registered your claim, is
that the story?"

"No. Chemisant City was closer than Atronics City right then, so I went
there. Just after Jafe's death, and everything--I didn't feel like being
alone any more than I had to."

"You said Chemisant City was closer to you _then_," I said. "Isn't it
now?"

"Things move around a lot out here, Mister," he said. "Right now,
Chemisant City's almost twice as far from here as Atronics City. In
about three days, it'll start swinging in closer again. Things keep
shifting around out here."

"So I've noticed," I said. "When you took off to go to Chemisant City,
didn't you make a try for your partner's body then?"

He shook his head. "He was long out of sight by then," he said. "That
was ten, eleven hours later, when I took off."

"Why's that? All you had to do was paint the X and take off."

"Mister, I told you. I was drunk. I was falling down drunk, and when I
saw I couldn't get at Jafe, and he was dead anyway, I came back in here
and slept it off. Maybe if I'd been sober I would have taken the scooter
and gone after him, but I was _drunk_."

"I see." And there just weren't any more questions I could think of to
ask, not right now. So I said, "I've just had a shaky four-hour ride
coming out here. Mind if I stick around a while before going back?"

"Help yourself," he said, in a pretty poor attempt at genial
