
Price of the instrument complete with two pens and glass cover    #$225.00#

#A701a. Chronograph#, the same as A701 but with only one pen. The carriage
is so constructed that a second pen can easily be added later. Price with
glass cover                                                       #$195.00#

#Note.#--Every instrument is carefully tested before being sent out and we
can guarantee the speed not to vary over 1-20 second during the full run of
one hour. Large temperature changes will not affect the speed of the clock.
A large number of the chronographs are in use and have given excellent
satisfaction.

[Illustration: A 702]

#A702. Prof. G. W. Hough's Printing Chronograph.# The instrument consists
of two carefully and accurately constructed clock movements, which are
driven by gravity and controlled electrically by the sidereal clock. The
movements revolve three type wheels. One of these turns once per second,
its edge is divided in 50 parts and it is driven by a separate movement.
The second wheel turns once per minute and the third once per hour and they
will print the seconds and minutes, while the first will give the
hundredths of seconds. A strip of paper is carried over these wheels and
moved forward by the same electro-magnet, which operates the printing
hammers. The paper is sufficiently long for 1200 observations including
spacing between records. The operation of the printing hammers is such that
the uniform motion of the type wheel is not disturbed in the act of
printing. The whole instrument is mounted on a heavy slate plate 45 cm. by
60 cm., and protected by a glass cover.

The manipulation of the apparatus is extremely simple and convenient and
the records obtained are perfectly reliable and accurate within about 0.01
of a second. The saving of time and labor by the printing chronograph is
very considerable and the filing of the records very convenient.

This printing chronograph has been in use at the Dearborn Observatory for
about twenty years and during the last five years the following
observatories have been equipped with the instrument: Amherst College
Observatory; Case School of Applied Science, Cleveland; Philadelphia
Observatory; Durham Observatory, Durham, England; Observatory of LaPlatta,
Argentine; and Dominion Observatory, Ottawa, Canada.

Prof. Hough has kindly consented to inspect every chronograph before it
leaves our shop. Price, complete on stand, glass cover, etc.      #$500.00#

[Illustration: A 801]

[Illustration: A 802]

#A801. Laboratory Clock.# This is an eight-day clock; has a movement of the
best workmanship, is driven by two strong springs, and keeps accurate time.
The dial is 12 inches in diameter and has hour, minute and second hands.
Pendulum beats seconds and makes electric contact by means of an adjustable
mercury cup. It is mounted in a hardwood case with glass door.
Price                                                              #$27.00#

#A802. Laboratory Clock.# The same as preceding one, but with better clock
movement, gravity driven. Price                                    #$35.00#

#A803. Regulator Clock.# This clock has a first-class eight day movement
with cut steel pinions. It is fitted with mercury compensation pendulum and
electrical seconds contact. Price                                 #$200.00#

#Note.#--We can furnish free of duty to educational institutions
astronomical precision clocks made by C. Riefler, Germany, and will be
pleased to quote prices to interested parties.

[Illustration: A 1200]

#A1200. Simple Comparator.# (Fig. A1200.) Built up of #Micrometer Slide#
M301 and #Microscope# M101, #with support# M310 #Fitted with Stage#. The
stage is 150 mm. long and provided with clips for holding objects, such as
spectrum photographs, scales, etc., and is fitted with illuminating mirror.
Price                                                              #$45.00#

#A1201. Small Comparator.# The instrument is intended for measuring spectra
photographs, gratings, divided scales, or such objects which can be focused
by the microscope and will allow rapid measurements of the highest possible
accuracy. The measurement depends on the accuracy of the micrometer screw,
which is cut and corrected with great care. The screw has a pitch of .5 mm.
and diameter of 15 mm. The index head attached to the screw is of
considerable diameter so as to allow the direct reading of .001 mm. The
head is divided on solid silver in 500 parts, and carries two rows of
figures indicating the first and second half of the mm. The full mm. are
read by means of a scale in front of the instrument. The bed plate is
heavy, of cast iron, and the guides are carefully scraped true within 0.001
mm. The carriage has a movement of 80 mm., is made of gun metal and fitted
exactly to the guides; it is also provided with a second or top carriage
with 40 mm. motion. The top carriage can be moved by hand and accurately
set by means of a micrometer screw. The microscope is of variable
magnifying power, focused by rack and pinion. Illumination for transparent
objects is given from below by means of a plane mirror. The instrument is
mounted on heavy supports, under an angle to make it convenient for the
observer. The instrument is finished in first-class manner, and the iron
bed plate heavily copper and nickel plated.

The design of this machine was suggested by Prof. Edwin Frost of the Yerkes
Observatory, where a number of these machines have been in constant use
during the last five years. Careful tests have shown the screw accurate
within .0003 of a mm. throughout the full length. Price           #$175.00#

#Note.#--The micrometer on microscope as shown in cut is not furnished with
instrument.

A tangent screw for revolving the eye piece with the spider thread can be
attached at a cost of $5.00.

[Illustration: A 1201]

