surface of the rock. In hours more, thousands of the tiny,
material-energy driven machines were floating up and out.

       *       *       *

Dawn was breaking again over Denver where this work had been done, when
the main force of the enemy drew near Earth. It was a warm welcome they
were to get, for nearly ten thousand of the tiny ships flew up and out
from Earth to meet them, each a living thing unto itself, each willing
and ready to sacrifice itself for the whole.

Ten thousand giant ships, shining dully in the radiance of a far-off
blue-white sun, met ten thousand tiny, darting motes, ten thousand tiny
machine-ships capable of maneuvering far more rapidly than the giants.
Tremendous induction beams snapped out through the dark, star-flecked
space, to meet tremendous screens that threw them back and checked them.
Then all the awful power of annihilating matter was thrown against them,
and titanic flaming screens reeled back under the force of the beams,
and the screens of the ships from Outside flamed gradually violet, then
blue, orange--red--the interference was getting broader, and ever less
effective. Their own beams were held back by the very screens that
checked the enemy beams, and not for the briefest instant could matter
resist that terrible driving beam.

For F-1 had discovered a far more efficient release-generator than had
the Outsiders. These tiny dancing motes, that hung now so motionlessly
grim beside some giant ship, could generate all the power they
themselves were capable of, and within them strange, horny-skinned men
worked and slaved, as they fed giant machines--poor inefficient giants.
Gradually these giants warmed, grew hotter, and the screened ship grew
hotter as the overloaded generators warmed it. Billions of flaming
horse-power flared into wasted energy, twisting space in its mad
conflict.

Gradually the flaming orange of the screens was dying and flecks and
spots appeared so dully red, that they seemed black. The greenish beams
had been striving to kill the life that was in the machines, but it was
life invulnerable to these beams. Powerful radio interference vainly
attempted to stem imagined control, and still these intelligent machines
clung grimly on.

But there had not been quite ten thousand of the tiny machines, and some
few free ships had turned to the help of their attacked sister-ships.
And one after another the terrestrial machines were vanishing in puffs
of incandescent vapor.

Then--from one after another of the Earth-ships, in quick succession, a
new ray reached out--the ray of green radiance that killed all life
forms, and ship after ship of that interstellar host was dead and
lifeless. Dozens--till suddenly they ceased to feel those beams, as a
strange curtain of waving blankness spread out from the ships, and both
induction-beam and death-beam alike turned as aside, each becoming
useless. From the outsiders came beams, for now that their slowly
created screen of blankness was up, they could work through it, while
they remained shielded perfectly.

Now it was the screens of the Earth-machines that flamed in defense. As
at the one command, they darted suddenly toward the ship each
attacked--nearer--then the watchers from a distance saw them disappear,
and the screens back on Earth went suddenly blank.

Half an hour later, nine thousand six hundred and thirty-three titanic
ships moved majestically on.

They swept over Earth in a great line, a line that reached from pole to
pole, and from each the pale green beams reached down, and all life
beneath them was swept out of existence.

       *       *       *       *

In Denver, two humans watched the screens that showed the movement of
the death and instant destruction. Ship after ship of the enemy was
falling, as hundreds of the terrestrial machines concentrated all their
enormous energies on its screen of blankness.

"I think, Roal, that this is the end," said Trest.

"The end--of man." Roal's eyes were dreaming again. "But not the end of
evolution. The children of men still live--the machines will go on. Not
of man's flesh, but of a better flesh, a flesh that knows no sickness,
and no decay, a flesh that spends no thousands of years in advancing a
step in its full evolution, but overnight leaps ahead to new heights.
Last night we saw it leap ahead, as it discovered the secret that had
baffled man for seven centuries, and me for one and a half. I have
lived--a century and a half. Surely a good life, and a life a man of six
centuries ago would have called full. We will go now. The beams will
reach us in half an hour."

Silently, the two watched the flickering screens.

Roal turned, as six large machines floated into the room, following F-2.

"Roal--Trest--I was mistaken when I said no screen could stop that beam
of Death. They had the screen, I have found it, too--but too late. These
machines I have made myself. Two lives alone they can protect, for not
even their power is sufficient for more. Perhaps--perhaps they may
fail."

The six machines ranged themselves about the two humans, and a
deep-toned hum came from them. Gradually a cloud of blankness grew--a
cloud, like some smoke that hung about them. Swiftly it intensified.

"The beams will be here in another five minutes," said Trest quietly.

"The screen will be ready in two," answered F-2.

The cloudiness was solidifying, and now strangely it wavered, and
thinned, as it spread out across, and like a growing canopy, it arched
over them. In two minutes it was a solid, black dome that reached over
them and curved down to the ground about them.

Beyond it, nothing was visible. Within, only the screens glowed still,
wired through the screen.

The beams appeared, and swiftly they drew closer. They struck, and as
Trest and Roal looked, the dome quivered, and bellied inward under them.

F-2 was busy. A new machine was appearing under his lightning
force-beams. In moments more it was complete, and sending a strange
violet beam upwards toward the roof.

Outside more of the green beams were concentrating on this one point of
