eight months not even Sherlock Holmes could have found a live opium
poppy on the face of the earth. Once current stocks are gone, there'll
be no more narcotics deriving from that particular plant. The government
sensibly outbid all the addicts and operators in order to save what is
left for medical use. It should last for fifty years. All according to
my plan--fine!

But when I tried to collect, they didn't know me from the late Lucky
Luciano. There was no proof whatever, they said, that my virus did the
job. After all, their scientists had not been allowed to check my work.
I could have faked the whole thing, attempting to take credit for a
mutant disease which began naturally, especially since dozens of
bacteriologists were now isolating the virus.

When I pressed harder, they dragged out an F.B.I. file showing I was a
crank and maverick, unable to hold a job, and guilty of signing a peace
petition in 1949. If Bishop or Cavanaugh tried to help, I don't know
about it. I suppose I'm lucky that the Syndicate has been equally
skeptical. Otherwise, being out many millions, they would have
liquidated me by now.

But basically it's your fault--you, the people. I took my case to you,
as a court of last resort. A few papers gave me a fair enough shake to
present the evidence, but you paid no attention. I tried to get your
signatures to a petition to purge the H.E.W. Department, or to start a
Congressional investigation. You just laughed at me. You enjoyed that
headline: "Crackpot Chemist Claims He Killed All Those Poppies. Was it
Self-Defense?"

Well, my jovial friends, I'm going to teach you a lesson. I could easily
wipe out half of you by killing some selected food plants, but I'm not a
mass murderer, and would rather make a more subtle job of it. I've two
more viruses just about perfected; after the first, it's easier. When I
turn them loose, you'll have a real grievance against me. This time,
you're getting notice in advance, so nobody can talk about "natural"
disease. Besides, the appended lab notes will easily convince a few key
men in biochemistry; and they'll confirm me.

Now let me point out the two plants you'll miss badly.

One is yeast. Yes, yeast. When you read this, the one-celled organisms
responsible for wine, beer, and alcohol generally, will be dying as a
race. In a few months, good liquor will be scarcer than an electric
blanket in hell. Sure, grain alcohol can be synthesized, but bouquet
isn't that simple, and you'll pay dearly for it--how you'll pay!--and
decent lab-made whiskey won't be on the shelves tomorrow, either.

The other plant you'll miss even more. I mean tobacco. No more
cigarettes; no more fat cigars--and hallelujah!--no more tobacco
commercials on TV. Did you know, tobacco cannot be synthesized at all,
at any price? Get it, you two-pack-a-day fiends?


THE END




Transcriber's Note:

    This etext was produced from _Amazing Stories_ February 1961.
    Extensive research did not uncover any evidence that the U.S.
    copyright on this publication was renewed. Minor spelling and
    typographical errors have been corrected without note.





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Revenge, by Arthur Porges

