"Why; they--for one thing, we've got to think of those troops! We can't
land them unarmed and let them be slaughtered by the savages!"

Jezef grinned. "I doubt if they'll refuse to let them have enough small
arms to defend themselves. They can't stay where they are."

"But they're military men, and loyal!"

"Are they? The war's over for them, anyway. Why not let them vote on
it?"

Tulan jumped up and strode around the command room, while Jezef and the
staff watched him silently. Gradually, the logic of it forced itself
upon him. "All right," he said wearily, "We'll let them vote."

       *       *       *       *       *

A few hours later he studied the results gloomily. "Well, after all,
they're not Fleet. They don't have the tradition."

Jezef smiled, then lingered, embarrassed.

"Well?" Tulan asked.

"Sir," (that hadn't come out, in private, for years) "I'd like to be
relieved."

It was a blow, but Tulan found he wasn't really surprised. He stared at
his brother-in-law, feeling as if he faced an amputation. "You think I'm
wrong about this whole thing, don't you?"

"I'm not going to judge that, but Sennech's in trouble far worse than
any question of politics, including your own family."

"But if we turn back now Coar will recover! It's only going to take us a
few more hours!"

"How long does it take people to die?"

Tulan looked at the deck for a while. "All right. I'll detach every
ship I can spare, and put you in charge. You'll have the transports too,
as soon as they're unloaded." He stared after Jezef, wanting to call out
to him to be sure to send word about Anatu and the boys, but somehow
feeling he didn't have the right.

       *       *       *       *       *

He took the fighting ships away from Teyr, to where Group Two could join
up without being unmasked, then started sunward as if he were crossing
to intercept Coar. A few miles in, where they'd be hidden in the sun, he
left a few scouts.

As he saw it, the enemy commander on the satellite, noting the armada's
course and finding himself apparently clear, would have no choice but to
lift his ships and start around the sun by some other path to help his
planet.

That other path to Coar could be intercepted, and as soon as Tulan was
lost near the sun he went into heavy drive to change direction. He
drifted across the sun, waiting for word from his scouts. At about the
time he'd expected, they reported ships leaving the satellite.

He looked across the room toward Plot. "Plot! Feed that data to
Communications as it comes in, will you?" And to Communications: "Can we
beam Group Three from here?"

"Not quite, sir; but I can relay through the scouts."

"All right; but make sure it's not intercepted. I want Group Three under
maximum acceleration for Luhin, and I want them to get running reports
on the enemy."

"Right, sir."

Tulan was in the position he wanted, not needing to use his own radar,
but able to pick up that of Coar's fleet at extreme range, too far to
give them a bounce. He'd know their course, speed, and acceleration
fairly well, without even being suspected himself.

He held that position until the enemy was close enough to get a bounce,
then went into drive on an intercepting course.

One of the basic tenets of space maneuver was this: if two fleets were
drawing together, with radar contact, neither (barring interference from
factors such as the sun or planets) could escape the other; for if one
applied acceleration in any direction the other could simply match it
(human endurance being the limitation) and maintain the original
relative closing speed.

When the enemy commander discovered Tulan's armada loafing ahead of
him, he'd been accelerating for about ten hours and had a velocity of a
million miles per hour, while Tulan was going the same direction but at
half the speed. The quarry began decelerating immediately, knowing it
could get back to Luhin with time enough to land.

Tulan didn't quite match the deceleration, preferring to waste a few
hours and lessen the strain on his crews. He let the gap close slowly.

He could tell almost the precise instant when the other jaw of his trap
was discovered, for Plot, Communications, and Intelligence all jerked up
their heads and looked at him. He grinned at them. What they'd picked up
would be an enemy beam from Luhin, recklessly sweeping space to find the
Coar fleet and warn it of the onrushing Group Three.

The enemy commander reacted fast. It was obvious he'd never beat Group
Three to Luhin, and he made no futile attempts at dodging, but reversed
drives and accelerated toward the nearest enemy, which was Tulan. Tulan
was not surprised at that either, for though Coar's fleets had bungled
the war miserably, when cornered they'd always fought and died like men.

He matched their acceleration to hold down the relative speeds. The
swift passing clash would be brief at best. He formed his forces into an
arrangement he'd schemed up long ago but never used: a flat disc of
lighter ships out in front, masking a doughnut-shaped mass behind. He
maneuvered laterally to keep the doughnut centered on the line of
approach.

       *       *       *       *       *

Roboscouts appeared and blossomed briefly as they died. The fuzzy patch
of light on the screens swelled, then began to resolve into individual
points. The first missiles arrived. Intricate patterns of incandescence
formed and vanished as fire-control systems locked wits.

A sudden, brilliantly planned salvo came streaking in, saturating the
defenses along its path. Ships in Tulan's secondary formation swerved
frantically, but one darting, corkscrewing missile homed on a Heavy, and
for an instant there were two suns.
