flame throwers became useless, and even the prosaic artillery pieces had
no more rounds to fire, there were still simple guns and even simpler
bayonets and swords.

The proud armies, the descendents of the Alexanders and Caesars and
Temujins and Wellingtons and Grants and Rommels, relived their evolution
in reverse.

The war went on. Slowly, inevitably, the armies split apart into smaller
and smaller units, until the tortured countryside that so recently had
felt the impact of nuclear war once again knew the tread of bands of
armed marauders. The tiny savage groups, stranded in alien lands, far
from the homes and families that they knew to be destroyed, carried on a
mockery of war, lived off the land, fought their own countrymen if the
occasion suited, and revived the ancient terror of hand-wielded,
personal, one-head-at-a-time killing.

The CIA man watched the world disintegrate. Death was an individual
business now, and none the better for no longer being mass-produced. In
agonized fascination he saw the myriad ways in which a man might die.
Murder was only one of them. Radiation, disease, toxic gases that
lingered and drifted on the once-innocent winds, and--finally--the most
efficient destroyer of them all: starvation.

Three billion people (give or take a meaningless hundred million) lived
on the planet Earth when the war began. Now, with the tenuous thread of
civilization burned away, most of those who were not killed by the
fighting itself succumbed inexorably to starvation.

Not everyone died, of course. Life went on. Some were lucky.

A long darkness settled on the world. Life went on for a few, a pitiful
few, a bitter, hateful, suspicious, savage few. Cities became pestholes.
Books became fuel. Knowledge died. Civilization was completely gone from
the planet Earth.

       *       *       *       *       *

The helmet was lifted slowly off his head. The CIA man found that he was
too weak to raise his arms and help. He was shivering and damp with
perspiration.

"Now you see," Ford said quietly, "why the military men cracked up when
they used the computer."

General LeRoy, even, was pale. "How can a man with any conscience at all
direct a military operation when he knows that _that_ will be the
consequence?"

The CIA man struck up a cigarette and pulled hard on it. He exhaled
sharply. "Are all the war games ... like that? Every plan?"

"Some are worse," Ford said. "We picked an average one for you. Even
some of the 'brushfire' games get out of hand and end up like that."

"So ... what do you intend to do? Why did you call me in? What can _I_
do?"

"You're with CIA," the general said. "Don't you handle espionage?"

"Yes, but what's that got to do with it?"

The general looked at him. "It seems to me that the next logical step is
to make damned certain that _They_ get the plans to this computer ...
and fast!"




Transcriber's Note:

    This etext was produced from _Analog Science Fact & Fiction_ May
    1962. Extensive research did not uncover any evidence that the U.S.
