through a general training exercise, and after a week, I split the class
up into groups. Each group was to concentrate on one talent, but general
sessions for the entire class give everyone practice in all talents. I
think we've made fairly good progress. Some of the older teen-agers have
shown an interest in the talents (he glanced at his girl), and although
progress has not been as rapid as with the younger children, they are
sufficiently developed to help instruct. Now your children are going to
demonstrate what they have learned."

For the next half hour we watched Tommy and fourteen other boys and
girls work. Tommy and the others who had concentrated on telepathy read
silently to us from books and talked to each other, projecting their
thoughts so we could also listen in. The telekinesis group all worked
together to build a small table. All the necessary materials were
stacked at the front of the room. The kids sat in a half circle, their
brows furrowed in concentration as lumber, nails and hammers moved under
the guidance of their minds. When they had finished, the table was
complete, even to the sanding and a coat of varnish.

Finally, the only one with precognition--a girl about six years old,
with long blonde hair--gave the weather forecast for the next two weeks.
Copies of her prediction were passed out to us, so we could check her
accuracy.

Once the kids were gone, he stood up again. "I hope you are all
convinced as to what can be accomplished through the use of psi. The
talents can and should be used for the betterment of society, not for
carnival side shows. Of course, there are more than those just
demonstrated. Unfortunately, I couldn't find them present in this group.
I was hoping for either a healer or a sensitive, but no one had the
necessary ability.

"If you want the class continued, the decision is yours. Thanks for
having open minds, and for giving me a chance." He picked up his jacket
and walked out.

Atherson didn't bother to come to the meeting, so the vote to continue
the class was unanimous.

He stayed on, teaching part-time, helping out with the work at my place,
and seeing his girl. Then, one afternoon two weeks after the council
meeting, she came to see me. "You've got to stop him, Mr. Tranton," she
said. "He's going to leave. He told me he was going right after he
finished the class today. He's probably down at the store right now,
buying things to take with him. You've got to make him stay."

"Why?" I asked quietly, watching the tears well up in her eyes. She
hadn't lost her composure yet, but she felt so strongly about him she
was on the verge of breaking down.

"Because I love him and he loves me," she retorted. "That's why. Won't
you talk to him? At least get him to take me with him. Please."

"You said you love him. Would you rather he stayed here, and was never
fully happy, or left to continue searching, maybe to return someday,
ready to settle down? If you really love him there's no question."

"Couldn't he take me with him?"

I shook my head. "I don't think you should even ask him to take you.
You'd be a burden that would slow him down. He'd worry about you, have
to get your food, find shelter for you. He might let you go with him,
but don't ask him to. He's too young to be tied down. Now go on, and
wish him good luck and kiss him goodbye. He's coming up the road now."

She glanced out the open window, jumped up, and ran out into the
sunlight, to wait at the side of the road. I picked up the book I had
been reading, but the window was too close to the road for me to
concentrate on the pages. She didn't say anything until he was standing
before her.

"I'll be waiting," she said. "Take care of yourself."

He nodded. "I have to go," he told her. "Partly because it was Dad's
last wish, partly because I need others of my own kind. Alone, we can't
help the world much; together, there's a good chance for results. I left
a letter for the council saying you were going to take over the class,
because you have the ability to carry on. Watch Cathy, and help her all
