last anniversary of his coming, we have known the time was not far off.
And it had to come at this moment! But this tells you nothing.

                     *      *      *      *      *

"The signal warns us that the Neens have at last made good their threat
to come down upon us with their great hordes. The Neens were once men
like ourselves, who would have none of Him"--and Artur glanced toward
the gleaming ship upon the dais--"nor His teachings. They did not like
the new order, and they wandered off, to join those outcasts who had
broken His laws, and had been sent to the smaller land of this world,
where it is always warm, and where there are great trees thick with
moss, and the earth underfoot steams, and brings forth wriggling life.
Neen, we call that land, as this larger land is called Libar.

"These men of Neen became the enemies of Libar, and of us who call
ourselves Libars, and follow His ways. In that warm country they became
brown, and their hair darkened. They increased more rapidly than did
the Libars, and as they forgot their learning, their bodies developed
in strength.

"Yet they have always envied us; envied us the beauty of our women, and
of our cities. Envied us those things which He taught us to make, and
which their clumsy hands cannot fashion, and which their brutish brains
do not understand.

"And now they have the overwhelming strength that makes us powerless
against them." His voice broke, he turned his face away, that I might
not see the agony written there.

"Toma annerson!" he muttered. "Ah, toma annerson!" The words were like
a prayer.

"Just a minute, Artur!" I said sharply. "What weapons have they? And
what means of travel?"

He turned with a hopeless gesture.

"They have the weapons we have," he said. "Spears and knives and short
spears shot from bows. And for travel they have vast numbers of
monocars they have stolen from us, generation after generation."

"Monocars?" I asked, startled.

"Yes. He Who Speaks gave us that secret. Ah, He was wise; to hear His
voice was to feel in touch with all the wisdom of all the air!" He made
a gesture as though to include the whole universe.

                     *      *      *      *      *

There were a score of questions in my mind, but there was no time for
them then. I snatched my menore from its clip on my belt, and adjusted
it quickly. It was a huge and cumbersome thing, the menore of that day,
but it worked as well as the fragile, bejeweled things of today. Maybe
better. The guard posted outside the ship responded instantly.

"Commander Hanson emanating," I shot at him. "Present my compliments to
Mr. Correy, and instruct him as follows: He is to withdraw the outside
guard instantly, and proceed with the _Ertak_ to the large domed
building in the center of the city. He will bring the _Ertak_ to rest
at the lowest possible altitude above the building, and receive further
orders at that time. Repeat these instructions."

The guard returned the orders almost word for word, and I removed the
menore with a little flourish. Oh, I was young enough in those days!

"Don't worry any more, Artur," I said crisply. "I don't know who _He_
was, but we'll show you some tricks you haven't seen yet! Come!"

I led the way down the ramp, Hendricks, Artur, and the three Zenians
following. As we came out into the daylight, a silent shadow fell
across the great avenue that ran before the entrance, and there, barely
clearing the shining roof of the auditorium, was the sleek, fat bulk of
the _Ertak_. Correy had wasted no time in obeying orders.

Correy could smell a fight further than any man I ever knew.

                     *      *      *      *      *

From her emergency landing trap, the _Ertak_ let down the cable
elevator, and the six of us, Hendricks, Artur, the three Zenians of the
crew, and myself, were shot up into the hull. Correy was right there by
the trap to greet me.

"What are the orders, sir?" he asked, staring curiously at Artur. "Is
there trouble brewing?"

"I gather that there is, but we'll talk about that in a moment--in the
navigating room." I introduced Artur and Correy as we hurried forward,
and as soon as the door of the navigating room had closed on the three
of us, I turned to Artur with a question.

"Now, where will we find the enemy, these Neens? Have you any idea?"

"Surely," nodded Artur. "They come from their own country, to the
south. The frontier is the narrow strip of land that connects Libar
with Neen, and since the alarm has been sounded, the enemy is already
at the frontier, and the forces of my people and the enemy are already
met."

"I don't know anything about the set-up," put in Correy, "but that
sounds like poor management to me. Haven't you any advance guards, or
spies, or outposts?"

Artur shook his head sadly.

"My people are not warlike. We who spread His teachings have tried to
warn the masses, but they would not listen. The land of the Neens was
far away. The Neens had never risen against the Libars. They never
would. So my people reasoned."

"And you think there is fighting in progress now?" I asked. "How did
the word come?"

"By phone or radio, I presume," said Artur. "We are in communication
with the frontier by both methods, and the signal of the lights has
been arranged for generations. In the day, all lights were to flash on
three times; at night, they were to be darkened three times."

                     *      *      *      *      *

So they had telephones and radios! It was most amazing, but my
questions could wait. They would have to wait. Correy was shuffling his
feet with anxiety for orders to start action.

"All right, Mr. Correy," I said. "Close the ports and ascend to a
height that will enable you to navigate visually. You are sufficiently
familiar with the country to understand our objective?"

"Yes, sir! Studied it coming down. It's that neck of land that
separates the two continents." He picked up the microphone, and started
punching buttons and snapping orders. In twenty seconds we were
rushing, at maximum atmospheric speed, toward the scene of what, Artur
had told us, was already a battle.

Artur proved to be correct. As we settled down over the narrow neck of
land, we could see the two forces locked in frenzied combat; the Libars
fighting with fine military precision, in regular companies, but
outnumbered at least five to one by the mob-like masses of brown Neens.

From the north and from the south slim, long vehicles that moved with
uncanny swiftness were rushing up reserve forces for both sides. There
were far more monocars serving the Libars, but each car brought but a
