to leave for Saukenuk. And I do dread what may happen, but, yes, I still
mean to come back with my wife and my son."




5

Star Arrow


_White Bear. My name is White Bear._

The sun, shining down through branches dotted with budding leaves,
warmed his back. He wore the knife his father had left him sheathed at
his waist. His eyes searched among the branches of the trees. He did not
know exactly what he was looking for, but Owl Carver said that he would
know it when he found it. He stopped at the base of an oak tree and
looked up.

He thought he heard something moving through the bushes on the upriver
side of the island. He stopped peering at the branches and looked up at
the sky.

The black trunks of the oaks and hickories rose above him. He felt as if
he were standing in a circle of wise old men, who were there to advise
and protect him. Ever since that time of sitting in the sacred cave when
his soul had gone out of his body, whenever he was by himself he never
felt alone. He felt the presence of spirits in all things--trees, birds,
plants, rocks, rivers.

After a moment's listening he heard nothing strange and went back to his
search. He had chosen this island because he had come here many times at
different seasons with his mother, gathering plants for medicines. Today
he was looking for one thing. Somewhere on this island grew the branch
from which he would cut his medicine stick. Owl Carver had carefully
instructed him.

_It will call to you out of the forest. It may be of oak or maple or ash
or cedar or even hickory. You will know it because it will not be like
any other branch you see, and your eye will be drawn to it._

A cloud drifted over the sun, and his arms and shoulders suddenly felt
cold. The coldness felt strange, and he remembered that his spirit
guide, the White Bear, was said to live in a very cold place. He stood
still. He felt he should wait for something to happen.

A shaft of sunlight fell on the black trunk of a tree a short distance
in front of him. Where the light struck the tree, a branch was growing
out, pointing right at him. He might not have noticed it if the light
had not fallen in just that way.

At the end of the branch three bright bur oak leaves were growing. This
was the Moon of Buds, and the limbs of most trees bore only the many
round swellings that would, as the days grew warmer, open and spread
into the first leaves.

But the three oak leaves at the end of this branch were fully grown, fat
leaves with deep, irregular lobes.

It was as Owl Carver had said. This branch called out to him from the
forest.

He went up to the tree, and as Owl Carver had taught him, he said,
"Grandfather Oak, please let me have your arm, to take with me to make
strong medicine for our tribe. I promise I will not hurt you, and I will
leave all your other arms untouched so that you can grow strong in this
place."

It was a small, new branch growing out of the tree at eye level. When
trimmed and stripped it would be just the right size for a medicine
stick. He would dry the leaves and keep them, too, he decided, as part
of his medicine bundle.

With his knife he reverently cut the branch away from the tree trunk.

A voice behind him said, "My son."

He jumped, startled.

At once he recognized Sun Woman's voice. As always, a warmth flooded
through him at the sound.

Still, he was angry with himself. How could he let someone slip up on
him like that?

He turned. He looked into his mother's brown eyes, level with his. Not
so long ago, he remembered, he had to look up to see into her eyes.

He saw pain tightening the muscles of her face. Her lips trembled as
they parted. Only a few times had he seen her in such distress, and his
heart beat harder. What was wrong?

"You must come back to Saukenuk, my son," she said.

"I have found my medicine stick, Mother. But now I must trim it here and
peel the bark in the place where I found it. Owl Carver told me how it
must be done."

She swept a hand across her body to say no to that. "It is Owl Carver
who says you must come now. Leave the stick here. The spirits will
protect it, and you can come back to it later. A man has come to our
village. You must meet him."

Tears on her brown cheeks reflected the bright sun.

"What is wrong, Mother? Who is this man?"

Again the hand gesture, rejecting his question. "It is better you see
for yourself."

"But you are sad, Mother. Why?"

She turned away, the fringe of her doeskin skirt swirling about her
shins.

He laid the severed oak branch at the base of the tree he had cut it
from, and with thanks to Grandfather Oak, turned away.

Baffled and apprehensive, he followed Sun Woman through the forest to
the edge of the island, where he saw her small elm-bark canoe pulled up
beside his.

Silently they paddled their canoes side by side upstream along the
narrow stretch of black-green water that separated the island from the
riverbank. The Rock River was in its spring flood. Paddling against the
powerful current strained White Bear's muscles. He glanced over at his
mother and saw with envy how easily she wielded her paddle. She seemed
to know how to do everything well. But an expression of sorrow was
frozen on her face.

They left the island behind, and soon White Bear saw the hundred lodges
of Saukenuk through the weeping willows, hackberries, maples and oaks
that grew along the riverbank.

They grounded their canoes on tree roots growing on the edge of the
river. Sun Woman beckoned, turned her back on him abruptly and started
walking through the woods by the riverbank. White Bear followed.

They passed two newly made graves in the shelter of the trees, mounds of
earth, each marked with a willow wand with a strip of deerskin attached
to it. Coming out of the woods, they walked, amidst the band's grazing
horses, through the blue-grass meadow surrounding the village. Beyond
the meadows, as far up and down the river as White Bear could see,
stretched stockade-fenced fields where the first shoots of corn, beans,
squash and sweet potatoes dotted the freshly turned black earth like
pale green stars in a night sky.

White Bear followed Sun Woman into the concentric rings of long lodges
with peaked roofs, built of wooden poles and walled with bark sheets,
laid out in the sacred circular pattern. Here the Sauk lived all summer,
three or four families to a lodge. But today the outskirts of Saukenuk
seemed empty. White Bear was surprised to see no one at the riverbank or
about the lodges.

Sun Woman walked past the lodges with back straight, legs stiff, her
arms rigid at her sides, her head high. Never once did she look back at
him.

Reaching the heart of Saukenuk, he saw that all the people were gathered
in the central clearing around Owl Carver's medicine lodge. As Sun Woman
approached the crowd, a child spied her and tugged its mother's skirt.
The mother looked first at Sun Woman, then at White Bear, then whispered
to another woman standing next to her. That woman turned, and then the
whispers spread in every direction and more and more people looked. The
crowd parted, making a path through which Sun Woman walked with her
stiff stride. White Bear followed.

At the end of the pathway through the crowd sat Owl Carver and another
man, side by side at the door of the sacred lodge. Owl Carver's long
white hair spread like a snow-covered spruce tree. His chest was bare
save for his necklace of megis shells, and was painted with diagonal
stripes of blue and green, the colors of hope and fear.

White Bear slowed his steps, studying the man seated beside Owl Carver.
His heart thumped hard when he saw who it was.

This was the man he had seen in his vision with the White Bear and the
Turtle. He stood still, his mouth open.

The vision-man had black hair streaked with white, tied with a ribbon at
the back. His face was dominated by a powerful beak of a nose. He must
have spent much time in the sun; his skin was tan, though not as rich
and dark as the skins of White Bear's people.

A beloved face caught White Bear's eye. Redbird was standing among the
people, looking not at the stranger, but at White Bear. Their eyes met,
and hers were wide with worry. He wanted to take Redbird's hand and run
with her into the forest, away from all these people and from whatever
made Redbird and his mother look so miserable.

And especially away from the thin, pale man who was now staring at him
as intently as a hunter with drawn bow watches a stag.

And yet, the pale eyes stranger had been part of the vision that had
given White Bear his new name and put him on the path to becoming a
shaman.

_He must be a good man if he appeared to me with the White Bear and the
Turtle. And he must be important to me._

"Sit here, White Bear," said Owl Carver, and White Bear walked slowly
toward him. Owl Carver gestured that he was to sit beside the pale eyes.
White Bear felt his heart fluttering as he sat down. Owl Carver pointed
to a place beside himself for Sun Woman. The four formed a semicircle,
backs to the medicine lodge, faces toward the crowd of curious people.

As was the way of the Sauk, the four sat for a long time with no one
speaking. White Bear's body grew colder and colder, and he had to fight
to keep from trembling.

After a time, White Bear turned to the stranger and saw in the gaunt
face a mixture of pain and joy. The man's pupils were a strange, almost
frightening gray-blue color. From such eyes, White Bear knew, the Sauk
took their name for this man's people.

As the man looked at White Bear and then over at Sun Woman, it seemed
that his heart was glowing with happiness. But it was a happiness tinged
by regret, the glow of a setting sun.

White Bear's inner sense told him that something was hurting more than
the pale eye's spirit, was draining his life away. White Bear wished at
once that he could work a healing of this good man's body.

But why was Sun Woman so unhappy? And why was Redbird frightened?

Owl Carver whispered to a small boy who stood beside him. The boy ran
off.

Now the shaman sat nodding his head slowly. White Bear could see that
Owl Carver stood at the branching of several paths and was trying to
decide which one to take. White Bear's fear grew.

Owl Carver turned to White Bear. "This man is your father."

_Yes!_

Taught by Owl Carver that rather than puzzle over a vision it is best
to let it reveal its meaning in its own time, White Bear had chosen
months ago not to ponder who the pale eyes in the Turtle's lodge might
be. Owl Carver must have known when White Bear described the vision to
him, but thought it better not to tell him.

White Bear turned and looked again at the man seated beside him, who
raised his arms tentatively, as if he wanted to reach out to him. White
Bear kept his hands in his lap, and the man lowered his arms again.

White Bear felt a strangeness, such as he had never known before. This
man looked at him with love. He was certain, now, that because this man
had come today, everything was going to be changed.

"Your father is called Star Arrow," said Owl Carver. He turned to Star
Arrow and said, "Your son is called White Bear."

"I greet you, White Bear," Star Arrow said. White Bear was glad to hear
this man speaking the Sauk language.

"I greet you, Star Arrow, my father," White Bear said. The word _father_
felt strange on his tongue.

_Star Arrow._ He liked that name and wondered what it meant. _Father._ A
shiver of joy went through him.

He spoke in the English Pere Isaac had taught him. "Good day to you,
Father."

"My son," said Star Arrow in the same tongue. White Bear saw now that
tears were running down his father's face, just as they had in the
vision.

He heard a commotion at the back of the crowd. People were stepping
aside.

A thrill went through White Bear as he saw that Black Hawk was coming
toward them. The leader's careworn face glowed as if he were seeing a
long-lost brother. He shifted his feather-adorned war club to his left
hand and raised his empty right hand in greeting to Star Arrow. White
Bear was amazed. He could not remember seeing Black Hawk smile so
happily.

Star Arrow raised his hand in reply. White Bear felt himself surrounded
by giants--Black Hawk, Star Arrow, Owl Carver. He remembered the circle
of trees he had been standing in when Sun Woman called to him.

"Star Arrow has come back to us," Black Hawk declared. "It is well."

Wolf Paw, Black Hawk's oldest son, now strode down the line of people.
His presence, as always, made White Bear uneasy.

Sun Woman made room for Black Hawk to sit beside Owl Carver. The chief
handed his feathered war club to Wolf Paw, who sat down behind him and
rested the club across his knees.

Three more men pushed their way through the crowd. When they came to the
front, White Bear saw that they were three chiefs, members of the
council that ruled the day-to-day affairs of the Sauk and Fox in
peacetime. One, Jumping Fish, was older than Black Hawk. Another, Broth,
was a deep-chested man and a well-known orator. The third, Little
Stabbing Chief, was a prominent member of the Fox tribe.

With a courteous gesture Black Hawk invited the three chiefs to join the
sitting circle.

The nine sat quietly for a time before their people while a breeze
whistled over the bark rooftops of Saukenuk.

Black Hawk broke the silence. "Our fathers and our grandfathers have
known many kinds of pale eyes. The French pale eyes traded with us. The
British pale eyes made us their allies in war. But the American pale
eyes drive us from our land and kill us when we resist. American pale
eyes are not our friends. But this man, Star Arrow, we call friend. We
trust Star Arrow.

"Thirteen summers ago the British long knives made war on the American
long knives. The great Shawnee chief, Shooting Star, led braves and
warriors of many tribes to fight on the side of the British against the
Americans. We among the Sauk and Foxes who followed Shooting Star have
been known ever since as the British Band. This man was living among us
then, seeking to trade with us and to know us better. When the war began
there were some who said, 'He is an enemy. Kill him.' And I might have
said so, too, but I did not, because already I knew that he was a good
man. We could not send him back to the Americans, but we let him live
among us. We even let him share the bed of Sun Woman.

"After the war, when Star Arrow went back to his own people, he left
with us this boy, White Bear." Black Hawk turned to White Bear, and when
their eyes met, White Bear trembled under Black Hawk's gaze. The chief's
eyes were infinitely black, like a night without stars.

"He left us another gift," Black Hawk said.

He reached into a beaded bag hanging at his belt. He took out a shining
metal disk on a thin silvery chain and held it up so that the people
could see it.

"Inside this disk of metal there is an arrow that points always to the
north. Even on a day when I cannot see the sun, on a night when I cannot
see the stars, I know where the sun should be and I know where the
Council Fire Star is, the star that does not move all night long. He
gave us this magical gift. And so we give him his name among the
Sauk--Star Arrow. His heart is as constant as the Council Fire Star and
as true as the arrow."

There was a murmur of assent among the people.

Black Hawk raised his hand. "Let Star Arrow now tell us why he comes
back." Black Hawk folded his arms.

White Bear, his heart beating as hard as a drum in a dance, turned to
the pale eyes. Star Arrow turned his own head to look long and gravely
at Sun Woman, then at White Bear.

Star Arrow said, "Chief Black Hawk, I lived with Sun Woman as her
husband, and then I left her with a son, this young man, White Bear. I
wronged Sun Woman and White Bear. He should have had a father as well as
a mother. I went back to my people and married a pale eyes woman.
Earthmaker has punished me by giving me no children by my second wife
and at last taking her from me. Because of this my heart is like the
ashes of an old fire."

He held out his arms toward Sun Woman. "Now I want to make it right."

Owl Carver leaned forward into the circle of speakers. "You want to come
and live with us again, Star Arrow?"

At the thought of Star Arrow returning to the band, White Bear's heart
leaped with happiness. All his life he had been hoping to meet his
father, waiting for his father's return, but never believing it
possible. So that his father, returning, might be pleased with him, he
had even let Pere Isaac teach him things he could never use.

To have this strange new man who was so respected by the Sauk living
with him and Sun Woman--this was almost as thrilling a prospect as his
dream of becoming a great shaman.

Star Arrow said, "No, I cannot stay among you. Nothing, I think, would
make me happier, but I have many things to do among my own people. I own
much land."

Owl Carver said, "If your land keeps you from doing what you want, then
it owns _you_."

Star Arrow smiled ruefully. "Owl Carver speaks truly, but I cannot
change this. I must care for my land myself, because there is no one who
can do it for me."

Star Arrow turned to look at White Bear, who sensed a question: _Could
you be one who helps me care for my land?_

Again White Bear felt the presence of a death-with-claws that had its
grip on Star Arrow's body. He must speak to Owl Carver. Perhaps Owl
Carver could tell him how to help his father.

Owl Carver said, "We know about your land, Star Arrow. You traded
honorably with us, and gave us many valuable goods, so that you and your
family could live on that land to the north and farm it and graze your
animals on it."

"That is so," said Chief Jumping Fish. "Star Arrow gave me a fine rifle,
and he made our tribe rich with what he paid us."

White Bear felt a chill of fear when he heard that Star Arrow lived to
the north. There was danger, it seemed, in the north. Three Fox men,
including Sun Fish, a youth his own age who had been a playmate of his,
had gone north two moons ago to work a lead mine and had not been heard
from.

Star Arrow said, "I have come to ask Sun Woman and White Bear to live
with me in my home."

White Bear heard an amazed murmur from the crowd, and he himself felt
his heart drop as if he plummeted unaware into a deep pit.

Leave the tribe? He could not picture it. It made no sense. Being
without the tribe would be like trying to live without his arms or legs.

White Bear's eyes met Redbird's. Her slanting eyes were big with fear,
and he tried to tell her with a look that he did not want this. Now he
understood why she looked so unhappy. She must have guessed what Star
Arrow would ask.

To leave Redbird. No longer to learn from Owl Carver. Give up hope of
being a shaman. Leave the forest. Leave Saukenuk. He had heard that no
spirits lived among the pale eyes. In the land of the pale eyes the tall
prairie grass was burned away and the trees were cut down.

Black Hawk and Owl Carver looked at each other. In the glances that
passed between them White Bear saw surprise, questioning, but no
disapproval. He felt his hopes sink. Would he have to fight this fight
alone?

No--his mother would say no to Star Arrow.

She stood up to speak, tall and stately. She turned to Star Arrow, and
White Bear saw love mingle with the pain in her dark brown eyes.

"I am happy to call Star Arrow husband. He has not wronged me. It is
right that a man should live among his people."

White Bear thought, _Now she will say that we must stay with our people
and cannot go with him_.

"I am glad that Star Arrow remembers me and White Bear, that he comes to
ask us to live with him. But I cannot go. I have my work, the gathering
of medicines, the healing, the teaching of what I know." She turned to
Redbird, who smiled uncertainly.

Sun Woman spoke on. "I could not look into pale eyes faces all day long.
My heart would dry up."

In the long silence that followed, White Bear waited uneasily. Why had
his mother not spoken of him?

Star Arrow unfolded his long, thin limbs, went over and stood before Sun
Woman. He put his hands on her shoulders. A sudden breeze rattled the
bark walls of Saukenuk.

"I understand what Sun Woman says."

Sun Woman and Star Arrow both looked at White Bear. He felt as if the
ground were trembling under him. He wished it would open up and swallow
him.

"This young man," said Sun Woman. "Your son, White Bear. Half of him is
you. It is right that he should see the pale eyes who are also his
people."

The earth was tilting. White Bear was falling.

His own mother--betraying him. Sending him away.

"I have always believed that Earthmaker meant some special destiny for
White Bear," Sun Woman said.

The shout burst from White Bear. "No!" He did not even remember getting
to his feet, but he was standing.

Heads turned toward him. Eyes opened wide. He saw Black Hawk lift a hand
to silence him, then lower it again. The three chiefs stared angrily.

Words tumbled out of him. He spoke to his mother, who had turned against
him.

"Earthmaker meant me to be a shaman. How can I learn to be a shaman if I
live among pale eyes? If I spend many summers and winters away from the
tribe I will no longer be a Sauk."

White Bear could see the pain-taut lines in Sun Woman's face. This was
hurting her, he knew that. But his anger at her burned in his chest. She
was trading his life for hers. She would stay here in Saukenuk, but she
would give Star Arrow part of what he wanted--his son. Why should he be
sacrificed to make Star Arrow happy? It was she who had chosen to take
this pale eyes into her lodge.

Sun Woman turned to Owl Carver. "We need to learn much more about the
pale eyes if we are to protect ourselves from them. Some of us must live
with them and come to understand them from within their tribe. Such a
one must be young enough to learn new ways. And he should be specially
gifted, a favorite of the spirits."

Then Owl Carver stood up to speak, facing White Bear.

"White Bear, listen to the words of your teacher. There is more than one
way to become a shaman. Here in Saukenuk live many people of the Fox and
some of the Winnebago, Piankeshaw and Kickapoo tribes. Who says their
lives are over because they live among the Sauk? If you live with the
tribe of pale eyes, it will make you a man of greater knowledge. To go
among them will take the courage of a warrior and more. Of knowledge, of
courage, is a shaman made."

Owl Carver turned to Black Hawk. "Sun Woman is right. Let the boy go
with Star Arrow. I know Earthmaker has blazed this trail for White
Bear." He crossed his arms before his chest and sat down again.

White Bear cast about desperately for words that would answer Owl
Carver. He felt helpless to fight the current that was sweeping him
away.

"If Earthmaker wants this for me, how is it that _I_ do not know it?" he
cried. He went cold inside, realizing that in his desperation he was
defying Owl Carver before all the people. He was questioning Owl
Carver's powers.

He wanted to say that he hoped to be the great prophet of the Sauk after
Owl Carver had departed to the land of the spirits. But he did not dare
say such a thing. Earthmaker himself might punish him for such
presumption.

"Did I not come back to you from the sacred cave with the very words of
the Turtle?" he said, holding his hands out in appeal. "Surely I will
bring you other great visions if I stay with you. Among the Sauk I have
grown to manhood. Why does this man come now to tear me away from the
only tribe I have known?"

He was surprised to see Star Arrow smile warmly at him.

"This man is your father," Owl Carver declared. "You are a Sauk. A Sauk
never shirks the demands of honor. A Sauk is loyal and respectful and
obedient toward his father."

"I am proud of my son," said Star Arrow. "He speaks with power before
the people."

At that, a hopeless feeling swept over White Bear. Star Arrow was not
fighting him, any more than water fights a drowning man. Star Arrow was
a current dragging him away from his people, his village.

And the village was not trying to hold him. Sun Woman, Owl Carver, Black
Hawk, were pushing him out, as they would a man who was so wicked he
could not be allowed to live with the people. He felt utterly alone.

What did he know of the pale eyes? Only the little that Pere Isaac had
taught him. And that they were great land thieves. Always they were
scheming to take land away from the people who had held it since the
Great River first began to flow from the Turtle's breast. Why must he
live among his people's enemies?

Owl Carver sprang from his seat. He leaped at White Bear and crouched
before him. His eyes opened wide as those of his totem bird. White Bear
felt himself pulled toward their black centers, as if they were
whirlpools in the Great River. Owl Carver's long white hair fanned out
like wings on either side of his head.

"_You will listen!_" Owl Carver said in a soft voice of terrible
intensity. "_You will hear!_"

Silently White Bear stood looking at the shaman.

"You are the son of my spirit as much as you are the son of Star Arrow's
body. I tell you to live with this man as I told you to go to the sacred
cave in the Moon of Ice. This is a far greater test for you. Going to
live with the pale eyes will be like journeying to another sacred cave.
And you will bring back other visions."

White Bear saw in the blackness of Owl Carver's eyes that if he defied
this decision he would lose his place in the tribe. There was no way to
break free from the current that was sweeping him away from Saukenuk.

White Bear felt as if something in him had broken. He held his face
expressionless. He did not want to show his hurt before the tribe. But
he knew he would soon be unable to stop himself from weeping.

Among the witnessing people he saw anguish and determination struggling
in Sun Woman's face. Others looked at him only with curiosity, not
sympathy. In all the people around him, the only face that shared his
unrelieved wretchedness was Redbird's. His gaze met hers, and the pain
they felt together deepened his despair.

Black Hawk spoke in a low voice over his shoulder to Wolf Paw, who stood
up. As he left the circle before Owl Carver's medicine lodge, Wolf Paw
glanced at White Bear, and White Bear saw the light of triumph in his
eyes.

Black Hawk held a hand out to Star Arrow. "If we let you take White
Bear, you must one day let him return to us, bringing his new knowledge
to help the Sauk."

Owl Carver moved from his crouching position before White Bear and sat
down again, facing Star Arrow. "This young man is most precious to us.
The mysteries have been told to him, and he has seen visions of the past
and future."

At this White Bear's heart was eased a bit. The tribe did want him to
return.

_I am both red and white._

And both his tribe and the pale eyes wanted him.

_To go among the pale eyes will make you a man of knowledge_, Owl Carver
had said, and Black Hawk had agreed. Perhaps he could become a star
arrow, pointing the way for his people in the troubled days the Turtle
had foretold.

"I promise to keep him with me only for a time," said Star Arrow.

_He has not long to live. That is why he can promise._

And that meant that White Bear's time of exile from the Sauk would be
short. But knowing that brought White Bear no relief. He did not want
his father, whom he had just met, to die so soon.

"I ask one more thing," said Star Arrow. "It will be harder for the boy
to learn the ways of the pale eyes if he always feels the pull of his
Sauk people. For the first few summers and winters that he is with us, I
ask that he not return to you even for a visit, and that you send no
messages to him and he send none to you."

"That is much to ask," said Owl Carver. "That is hard. The boy may die
of longing for his people."

Star Arrow shook his head. "I would never let that happen. If I see that
it is unbearable for him, I will send him back to you. But I will do
everything I can to make him happy, and if he does not see the British
Band or hear from them, the pain of parting will go away sooner."

"I understand what Star Arrow says," said Black Hawk. "It is granted."

White Bear sat down slowly, feeling as if he had been mortally wounded.
Never to have a word from his mother or from Redbird--how could he bear
it?

Star Arrow continued, "He will go to a fine school in the East. And when
he has learned all he can learn, I will send him back to you."

"Let it be done," Black Hawk said.

Wolf Paw came through the crowd, holding up in both hands a calumet, a
sacred pipe. Its hickory stem was as long as a man's arm, wrapped in
blue and yellow bands, and its high, slender bowl was of dark red
pipestone, quarried in a valley far to the west.

Black Hawk took the pipe from Wolf Paw and filled the bowl with tobacco
from a beaded pouch at his waist. Owl Carver went into his lodge, and
brought back a burning twig that Black Hawk used to light the pipe.

Black Hawk said, "By the smoking of the sacred tobacco let all these
promises be sealed."

White Bear went cold as he saw the light gray smoke curl up from Black
Hawk's pipe and smelled its sweet scent. Once he put the pipe to his
lips and drew the smoke into his mouth, he would be bound to go with
Star Arrow as firmly as he was bound to the Sauk tribe.

Holding the pipestem with one hand in the middle and the other at the
end, Black Hawk ceremoniously drew on the pipe and let a cloud of smoke
out of his mouth. He handed the pipe to Star Arrow, who fixed his gaze
on White Bear and did the same. Next the pipe went to Owl Carver, who
took the single puff that bound him to the agreement. Owl Carver took
the pipe in turn to Jumping Fish, Broth and Little Stabbing Chief. Each
puffed on it, bearing witness.

Then Owl Carver walked over to White Bear and handed him the pipe.

Trembling with fear that what he was about to do might be the ruin of
him, White Bear took the pipe in his hands. His fingers felt the ridged
wrappings and the smooth, warm stone of the bowl. He had never smoked a
sacred pipe before.

He could hand the pipe back to Owl Carver and refuse. But he knew that
this had gone so far that if he did that, not only would he never be
accepted as a shaman, he might not even be accepted as a Sauk.

He wanted to look at Redbird, but he dared not. He looked instead at Sun
Woman and saw her eyes warm with the wish that he would smoke the pipe.

He put the calumet to his lips and pulled the hot smoke into his mouth.
It burned his tongue and the insides of his cheeks. He took the pipe
away and held the smoke for a moment, then puffed it out. As he did so,
a sigh went up from the watchers.

Black Hawk was standing before him. White Bear handed the pipe up to
him.

"May you walk this path on which we send you with courage and honor,"
Black Hawk said.

He turned to the people. "This council is at an end."

White Bear knew he could not hold back his tears any longer. He sprang
to his feet and blindly hurled himself into the crowd that was already
beginning to disperse. He felt a hand on his arm, but he pulled away
from it.

He began to run. He ran through Saukenuk, through the meadow, into the
trees by the river's edge. He ran past the graves. He ran with the hard,
steady stride of one carrying a message.

But a messenger did not run sobbing, with tears streaming down his
face.




6

In the Ancient Grove


Redbird watched, an aching, empty place in her chest, as White Bear
disappeared into the woods at the edge of the Rock River.

"What a fool!" Water Flows Fast, standing nearby, had spoken. "The pale
eyes have steel knives and blankets and big sturdy lodges that are
always warm and never leak. They always have enough food. I would be
happy to go live with a pale eyes if he asked me."

"Is your prattling tongue never still, woman?" said her husband, Three
Horses.

"It was my prattling tongue that agreed to marry you."

Redbird had no heart to listen to them bicker.

"Let me through!" she cried, and the crowd parted before her.

"Where are you going?" cried her mother. "It is shameful to run after
him." She grabbed Redbird's sleeve. "All the people will laugh at you."

"Let me go!"

As Wind Bends Grass pulled at her, Redbird's eyes met those of Wolf Paw,
standing beside his father, the war chief. He glared at her. She knew
he, too, wanted to tell her not to run after White Bear. But if he
showed that he cared that much, the people would make fun of _him_.

She turned her back on all of them--Wind Bends Grass, Wolf Paw, Black
Hawk, Owl Carver--and began to run.

When she reached the riverbank she saw no sign of him. For one
panic-stricken moment she thought, _Did he throw himself into the
river?_

Then, downriver, she saw a canoe gliding over the glistening water. He
was paddling hard and was almost out of sight around a bend.

Her own small bark canoe, on which she had painted a bird's wing in red,
lay a short distance down the riverbank. She pushed it into the water,
jumped into the rear and seated herself in the middle. The canoe's
bottom scraped over the riverbank as she pushed off with her paddle.

She stayed a distance behind White Bear, just close enough to keep him
in sight. He might not want her to follow him. She could not guess what
was in his mind right now.

What would she do when she caught up with him? She had hoped to marry
him, if not this summer, then the next. Ever since she was a small child
she had found him endlessly fascinating. More so than ever since his
return from his spirit journey. Nothing, she thought, would make her
happier than living with him. Sun Woman had told her all about what
happens when a man and a woman lie down together--knowledge that Wind
Bends Grass had insisted that she did not yet need. It sounded painful,
pleasurable, frightening and exciting. She had looked forward to lying
down with White Bear.

But now she was going to lose him. How could Sun Woman send her own son
away from the tribe?

_And send him away from me._ Redbird felt more hurt than if her own
mother had turned against her.

And did White Bear truly mean to go with the pale eyes? He had smoked
the calumet. He must.

The current carried her canoe through the water, brown with silt caught
up in spring flooding, almost faster than she could paddle. Ahead the
river divided, flowing around an island near the right bank, thick with
trees. White Bear turned into the narrow channel that ran between island
and shore, and she backpaddled to slow herself and watch.

His canoe rounded a huge fallen tree, whose exposed roots clutched at
the island's shore like the fingers of a drowning man, and disappeared
behind the trunk.

She let her paddle drag in the water, first on one side then on the
other, holding her canoe back until he had time to land. Then she glided
into the narrow channel and around the dead tree.

He had drawn his canoe up in a small sandy cove, and was gone. She
landed on the patch of sand beside his canoe and pulled her canoe
partway out of the water.

She listened, and for a moment heard nothing but the wind in the trees.
A redbird, her namesake, trilled long and loud, and another answered
from a more distant tree.

Then she heard a human voice. No words, just an outcry. A cry of pain.

She plunged into the forest that covered the island, pushing her way
through the shrubbery toward the sound of his voice.

He was sobbing so loudly that she was sure he could not hear her coming.
She had heard a man sob like that once before, a dying hunter whose leg
had been torn to shreds by a bear.

She moved through some trees and saw him. He was sitting with his back
against the big black trunk of an oak. He was in a grove of trees so big
and so old that little grew in their heavy shade, and there was an open
place to sit. The season was so young that their branches were still
almost bare, and she could see White Bear clearly in the afternoon
sunlight. He held a severed tree branch in his lap. His eyes were
squeezed shut and his lips were drawn back from his teeth, and his cries
of pain came one after another.

She stepped out of the bushes into the grove. He looked up, and the face
he showed her was so twisted that she could not tell whether he saw her.
He went on sobbing hoarsely.

Her heart hurt to see him suffer so. She sat down beside him.

For a long time she listened to him weep, waiting for a chance to speak
to him.

She looked at the branch he was holding. It was almost as long as her
arm, and, surprisingly, it had leaves at its tip, even though this was
only the Moon of Buds. He clutched it as a child clutches a doll for
comfort.

Gradually his weeping subsided. She reached out very carefully and
patted his shoulder lightly. When he did not pull away, she rested her
