not the usual odor left by an exploding blaster-shell.

Bat came back, treading daintily across the carpet, almost on the tips
of his paws. He raised his head as he passed Steena and then he went
confidently beyond to sniff, to sniff and spit twice at the unburned
strips of the spaceall. Having thus paid his respects to the late enemy
he sat down calmly and set to washing his fur with deliberation. Steena
sighed once and dropped into the navigator's seat.

"Maybe now you'll tell me what in the hell's happened?" Cliff exploded
as he took the blaster out of her hand.

"Gray," she said dazedly, "it must have been gray--or I couldn't have
seen it like that. I'm colorblind, you see. I can see only shades of
gray--my whole world is gray. Like Bat's--his world is gray too--all
gray. But he's been compensated for he can see above and below our range
of color vibrations and--apparently--so can I!"


Her voice quavered and she raised her chin with a new air Cliff had
never seen before--a sort of proud acceptance. She pushed back her
wandering hair, but she made no move to imprison it under the heavy net
again.

"That is why I saw the thing when it crossed between us. Against your
spaceall it was another shade of gray--an outline. So I put out mine and
waited for it to show against that--it was our only chance, Cliff.

"It was curious at first, I think, and it knew we couldn't see it--which
is why it waited to attack. But when Bat's actions gave it away it
moved. So I waited to see that flicker against the spaceall and then I
let him have it. It's really very simple...."

Cliff laughed a bit shakily. "But what _was_ this gray thing? I don't
get it."

"I think it was what made the _Empress_ a derelict. Something out of
space, maybe, or from another world somewhere." She waved her hands.
"It's invisible because it's a color beyond our range of sight. It must
have stayed in here all these years. And it kills--it must--when its
curiosity is satisfied." Swiftly she described the scene in the cabin
and the strange behavior of the gem pile which had betrayed the creature
to her.

Cliff did not return his blaster to its holder. "Any more of them on
board, d'you think?" He didn't look pleased at the prospect.

Steena turned to Bat. He was paying particular attention to the space
between two front toes in the process of a complete bath. "I don't think
so. But Bat will tell us if there are. He can see them clearly, I
believe."

But there weren't any more and two weeks later Cliff, Steena and Bat
brought the _Empress_ into the Lunar quarantine station. And that is the
end of Steena's story because, as we have been told, happy marriages
need no chronicles. And Steena had found someone who knew of her gray
world and did not find it too hard to share with her--someone besides
Bat. It turned out to be a real love match.

The last time I saw her she was wrapped in a flame-red cloak from the
looms of Rigel and wore a fortune in Jovan rubies blazing on her wrists.
Cliff was flipping a three-figure credit bill to a waiter. And Bat had a
row of Vernal juice glasses set up before him. Just a little family
party out on the town.




  +--------------------------------------------------------------+
  |                                                              |
  | Transcriber's note:                                          |
  |                                                              |
  | Inconsistent hyphenation (space-all/spaceall) has been       |
