Darl gritted his teeth. He would hold out as long as was humanly
possible.

A shrill rhythmic whistle came from somewhere outside. The blue giant
started and snapped something to the Mercurians. Then he turned to
Darl. "I must leave you for a little while," he said. "You have till
I return to change your mind." With a parting admonition to the
savages he was gone through a side door that Thomas had not noticed
before.

       *       *       *       *       *

Grateful for the postponement, however short, of the inescapable
ordeal, Darl took stock of his situation. He lay, firmly bound, on the
gritty rock floor of a low-ceiled cave about twelve feet square. In
one wall was a door of red metal. The portal through which the Martian
had vanished was next to it. Darl repressed an exclamation when he saw
the opposite wall. It was of solid metal, bluishly iridescent. That
was beryllium steel, the alloy from which the barriers at the
terminals of the surta mine were fashioned. He forced his head higher.
There were the marks of the jointures, the weldings that he himself
had made.

The discovery seemed only to emphasize the helplessness of his
predicament. His faithful Venusians, Ran-los, Ta-ira, and the rest
were just on the other side of the three-inch plate of toughened
steel. Three inches--yet it might have been as many hundred miles for
all the help they could give him.

The yellow pigmies were circling in a macabre dance, their crimson
eyes turned always toward him, hate glowing from their crawling
depths. The whistle beyond changed in character. Darl recognized it.
It was a Martian space-radio, the code of which Earth scientists had
never been able to decipher. The Mercurian circle tightened, the fetid
smell of the dwarfs was overpowering. Low at first, then louder and
louder came the rattling cacophony of their chant. It filled the
confined space with an overpowering clamor.

Darl writhed again, rolling over and over till he had reached the
barrier. The pigmies gave way before him; evidently they had been
warned to keep their claws off. With his insteps Thomas could reach
the helmet of his space suit, where it had been dropped against the
wall. He drove it against the metal and the clangor of its striking
reverberated through the chamber. Darl managed to regulate the sound.
He was now hammering out double knocks, long and short, spaced in the
dots and dashes of the Morse code. "H-E-L-P D-A-R-L H-E-L-P D-A-R-L
H-E-L-P...."

It was like some scene out of a madman's dream, this dim-lit cavern
with its circling, dancing pigmies, the human figure lying sidewise on
the ground, the rattling, savage chant and the metallic tattoo of
Darl's hopeless message. A diabolic orgy of weird sound and
crisscrossing shadows.

       *       *       *       *       *

It seemed hours that he pounded the helmet against the wall, hoping
that the sound of it would be audible above the clamor of the midgets.
His knees and hips were aching and numb, his leg ripped, almost to the
bone by the sharp edges of the jagged floor. A sudden thought struck
him. The fiber thongs that bound him were also rubbing against the
rock. His flesh was terribly torn. Perhaps the thongs, too, had been
frayed, weakened by the long continued friction.

He stopped the pounding signals and began to force his knees apart
with all the power of his burly calves. The cords cut into his bulging
muscles, cut into and through his skin. The veins stood out on his
forehead, his neck was a corded pillar, his teeth bit through his lip
as he stifled a scream of pain. Then, startlingly, the fibers snapped.
His legs at least were free! He could fight, die fighting, and take
these others with him into oblivion!

Darl leaped to his feet. Before the astounded natives realized what
was up he was charging into their circle. A well aimed kick sent one
crashing against the further wall. Another crunched against the rock.
Then they were on him, a frothing wave of tiny furies. A score or
more, they swarmed over him as a pack of African wild dogs swarms over
a huge water-buffalo marked for the kill. Their claws scratched and
tore, their sharp fangs stabbed into his flesh. His arms were still
tightly bound to his sides, and he lashed out with his sandaled feet,
swung his shoulders like battering rams, whirled in a dervish dance.
Their brittle bones cracked under his hammer blows. They dropped from
him like squashed flies. But, small as they were, he was terrifically
outnumbered. By sheer weight of numbers they dragged him down, and
piled on top of him as he lay, quivering and half-conscious, on the
blood-soaked floor.

       *       *       *       *       *

Through the blackness that welled and burst in his brain, one thought
held. He had fooled the Martian, for in another instant the enraged
savages, would kill him and the password to Earth's outposts would be
safe. Already, he felt their fangs at his throat.

A whirring rattle cut through the turmoil like a whip-lash, and the
heap of pigmies swiftly scattered. The man-bird from Mars was in the
room. To Darl he was a blurred blueness from which glittered those two
jet beads of eyes. As from a distance he heard a rumble, its meaning
beating dully to him. "Not so easy, Thomas, not so easy. I want that
signal, and by Tana, I'm going to have it."

The Earthman felt a current of cooler air. Instinctively he drew it
into his lungs. It swept him up from the blackness that was closing in
about him, brought him back to consciousness and despair. The
chattering Mercurians crowded round to commence their interrupted
orgy. "For the last time, Earthman, will you talk?"

Darl shook his head weakly and closed his eyes. In a moment--

Suddenly there was a crash of metal on metal. Another! The clangor of
falling steel. Now someone was shouting, "Darl, Darl, are you alive?"
All about him were shrill twitterings, squeaking calls, squeals and
scutterings. Darl's nostrils stung with the odor of burned flesh. A
door slammed....

He opened his eyes on a confused riot, saw Jim crouched, flashing
ray-gun in hand. There was a hole in the barrier, and a mob of
green-scaled Venusians were crowding through. Jim's ray caught the
last Mercurian and the dwarf vanished in a cloud of acrid, greasy
smoke.

"Thank God you've come!" Darl managed to gasp. Then cool blackness
closed around him.

       *       *       *       *       *

Darl Thomas lay on a cot in the headquarters tent, swathed from head
to foot in an inch-thick wrapping of bandages. Jim's theory was that
if one bandage was good, two were better, and he had cleaned out the
post's slender stock. The red-haired Earthman was seated at the cot's
side, watching the taciturn Scot operating the control board. He was
telling Darl of the stirring message from M-I-T-A, and of the
blanketing interference that marred the completion of the message.

"I didn't know what to do first," he continued, "whether to go down
below and find out what Ran-los was battin' about, or shoot up to you
in the connin' tower with the message. Like the thick-head I am, I
picked the wrong thing. I sure got the gimmicks when I found the
look-out empty, an' a space suit an' ray-gun gone." Jim grinned
mirthlessly. "I was runnin' around in circles. You were outside, God
alone knows how long. Believe me, I had you crossed off the list! That
left two of us. With a war on, somebody had to stand guard in the
look-out, the control board here had to be watched, an' somebody else
