Bliss felt the premature old age that had been crowding upon him of late
fall away like the wool of a sheep at shearing. Here, at last, was
hope--real hope. After almost two and a half centuries of
non-communication, the men of the infant planet had returned to the aid
of the aging planet. For, once they saw the condition of Earth, and
understood it, there could be no question of anything else.

Mars, during the years of space-flight from Earth, had been the outlet
for the mother planet's ablest, toughest, brightest, most aggressive
young men and women. They had gone out to lick a hostile environment,
they had been hand-picked for the job--and they had done it. The ship,
out there in the poisonous Sahara, was living proof of their success.

He turned from the window and went back to his desk. He said, "Myra,
have their leader brought here to see me as soon as possible."

"_Roger!_" she said, leaving him swiftly, gracefully. Again he thought
it was too bad about her third eye. It had made it awfully hard for her
to find a husband. He supposed he should be grateful, since it had made
him an incomparably efficient secretary.

The young man was space-burned and silver-blond of hair. He was broad
and fair of feature and his body was tall and lean and perfect in his
black, skin-tight uniform with the silver rocket-burst on the left
breast. He stood at attention, lifted a gauntleted hand in salute and
said, "Your excellency, Chancellor Bliss--Space-Captain Hon Yaelstrom of
Syrtis City, Mars, bearing official rank of Inter-planetary legate
plenipotentiary. My papers, sir."

He stood stiff as a ramrod and laid a set of imposing-looking documents
on the vast desk before Bliss. His accent was stiff as his spinal
column. Bliss glanced casually at the papers, nodded and handed them
back. So this, he thought, was how a "normal," a pre-atomic, a
non-mutated human, looked. Impressive.

Catching himself wandering, he pushed a box of costly smokes toward the
ambassador.

"_Nein_--no thank you, sir," was the reply.

"Suppose you sit down and tell me what we can do for you," said Bliss,
motioning toward a chair.

"Thank you, sir, I prefer to stand," was the reply. And, when Bliss
motioned that it was all right, "My mission is not a happy one,
excellency. Due to overpopulation on Mars, I have been sent to inform
the government of Earth that room must be made to take care of our
overpopulation."

"I see," Bliss leaned back in his chair, trying to read the situation
correctly. "That may take a little doing. You see, we aren't exactly
awash with real estate here."

The reply was rigid and harsh. Captain Yaelstrom said, "I regret to
remind your excellency that I have circled this planet before landing.
It is incredibly rich in plant growth, incredibly underpopulated. And I
assure your excellency that my superiors have not sent me here with any
idle request. Mars must have room to emigrate."

"And if we find ourselves unable to give it to you?"

"I fear we shall have to take it, your excellency."

Bliss studied the visitor from space, then said, "This is rather sudden,
you know. I fear it will take time. You must have prospered amazingly on
Mars to have overpopulated the planet so soon."

"Conditions have not been wholly favorable," was the cryptic reply. "But
as to time, we are scarcely in condition to move our surplus population
overnight. It will take years--perhaps decades--twenty-five years at a
minimum."

Twenty-five years! That was too soon. If Captain Yaelstrom were a
typical Martian, there was going to be trouble. Bliss recalled again
that Earth had sent only its most aggressive young folk out to the red
planet. He made up his mind then and there that he was somehow going to
salvage for Earth its final half-century of peace.

He said, "How many people do you plan to send here, Captain?"

The ambassador hesitated. Then he said, "According to the computations
of our experts, taking the population curve during the next twenty-five
years into account, there will be seventeen million, three hundred
