
"And they knew you might--and yet they let a crowd congregate!"

Gerri reeled away from the window, sick.

Lane said, "I can do that a couple times more, but it burns out the
force-globe. Then I'm dead."

He heard the 3V newscaster's amplified voice: "--approximately fifty
killed. But Lane is through now. He has been able to outthink police
with the help of his cybrain. Now police are feeding the problem to
their giant analogue computer in the sub-basement of the Court House.
The police analogue computer will be able to outthink Lane's cybrain,
will predict Lane's moves in advance. Four more blaster cannon are
coming down Broadway--"

"Why don't they clear those people out of the Square?" Gerri cried.

"What? Oh, the Fans--nobody clears them out." He paused. "I got one more
chance to try." He raised a mailed glove to his mouth and pressed a
small stud in the wrist. He said, "Trooper HQ, this is Lane."

A voice spoke in his helmet. "Lane, this is Trooper HQ. We figured you'd
call."

"Get me Colonel Klett."

Thirty seconds passed. Lane could hear the clank of caterpillar treads
as the mobile blaster cannon rolled into Tammany Square.

The voice of the commanding officer of the Troopers rasped into Lane's
ear: "Meat-head! You broke out against my orders! _Now_ look at you!"

"I knew you didn't mean them orders, sir."

"If you get out of there alive, I'll hang you for disobeying them!"

"Yes, sir. Sir, there's a girl here--somebody important--from Mars. You
know, the planet. Sir, she told me we could take over the city if we got
loose. That right, sir?"

There was a pause. "Your girl from Mars is right, Lane. But it's too
late now. If we had moved first, captured the city government, we might
have done it. But they're ready for us. They'd chop us down with blaster
cannon."

"Sir, I'm asking for help. I know you're on my side."

"I am, Lane." The voice of Colonel Klett was lower. "I'd never admit it
if you had a chance of getting out of there alive. You've had it, son.
I'd only lose more men trying to rescue you. When they feed the data
into that analogue computer, you're finished."

"Yes, sir."

"I'm sorry, Lane."

"Yes, sir. Over and out."

Lane pressed the stud on his gauntlet again. He turned to Gerri.

"You're okay. I wish I could let you out. Old cybrain says I can't. Says
if I drop the force-globe for a second, they'll fire into the room, and
then we'll both be dead."

       *       *       *       *       *

Gerri stood with folded arms and looked at him. "Do what you have to do.
As far as I can see, you're the only person in this city that has even a
little bit of right on his side."

Lane laughed. "Any of them purple-haired broads I know would be crazy
scared. You're different."

"When my grandparents landed on Mars, they found out that selfishness
was a luxury. Martians can't afford it."

Lane frowned with the effort of thinking. "You said I had a little right
on my side. That's a good feeling. Nobody ever told me to feel that way
about myself before. It'll be better to die knowing that."

"I know," she said.

The amplified voice from below said, "The police analogue computer is
now hooked directly to the controls of the blaster cannon battery. It
will outguess Lane's cybrain and check his moves ahead of time."

Lane looked at Gerri. "How about giving me a kiss before they get us? Be
nice if I kissed a girl like you just once in my life."

She smiled and walked forward. "You deserve it, Lane."

He kissed her and it filled him with longings for things he couldn't
name. Then he stepped back and shook his head. "It ain't right you
should get killed. If I take a dive out that window, they shoot at me,
