front room, hoping that Travail was not there.

To his relief he found the sitting room deserted. The television set
stood silent in a corner and as he passed it Sutter switched it on, then
crossed to the four-position lamp and turned it up full. For a second
time he peered through the ato-glass long and intently.

The bisected shell appeared to be a spinal univalve, resembling the
familiar cephalopoda, _nautilus_, with thin septa dividing the many
chambers.

Behind him the Tanganyika TV swelled on, the screen presenting that same
scene of the beach of shells. As it did so Sutter uttered a startled
exclamation.

Under the magnifying glass the chambers in the bisected shell suddenly
became more than outgrowths of marine organism. _They were rooms!_
Tessellated ceilings, microscopically mosaic inlaid floors, long
sweeping staircases with graceful slender balustrades and tall almost
Ionic columns....

Heart pounding, Sutter looked again.

He saw that it was actually the light from the television set that was
illuminating the interior of the shell, lighting it with a strange
radiance that seemed to extend outward from the shell in a steadily
widening cone. His hand touched this cone, and it possessed a curious
solidity.

He hadn't been mistaken. _There were rooms in that shell!_ Narrow
corridors with arched doorways opened off alcoves and galleries. One
vaulted chamber had a kind of dais in the center of it. The entire inner
structure was fashioned of pastel-tinted walls which caught the light of
the TV and radiated it to every corner in a soft glow of effulgence.

A magnetic lure swept over Sutter. He felt an overwhelming desire to
step into that cone of light....

Whether the exoskeleton expanded to admit his entrance or whether his
own figure magically dwindled he could not tell, but the next instant he
found himself in a fairy palace with all about him a world of silence.

A long broad hallway stretched before him. At the far end a ramp angled
upward to a higher level. Sutter walked forward slowly, aware in a vague
way that he had entered another plane that was at once a microcosm and a
macrocosm. On the second level the way ahead divided. After a moment's
hesitation he chose the left-hand passage, passing through a
keyhole-shaped archway into a broad amphitheater, empty of furnishings,
with a kind of terrace or gallery at the far end. Emerging upon that
gallery, Sutter saw that he had reached the outer limit of the shell.
The edges of the wall before him were cut off, jagged and rough, where
his saw had done its work.

He was looking out upon the normal world that was his living room.

He stiffened as the door to the room opened and Lucien Travail entered.
He sat down before the center table and carefully, systematically began
going through the contents of the table drawer. Startled, Sutter
watched from his strange vantage point. Travail had not noticed that the
television set was turned on, and the high-backed davenport apparently
hid the cone of blue light from his view.

He took a sheet of paper from the drawer, began reading it. With a start
Sutter recognized his letter from the Federal Arts Museum.

And as a wave of wrath swept over him, Sutter saw that the beach scene
on the television set was slowly fading away. Fear and a realization of
his strange position struck him. He turned and ran madly back across the
amphitheater, down the ramp and along the long hallway to the point
where he had entered the shell. Even as he approached it the cone of
blue light dimmed, wavered and was replaced by a wall of partial
blackness.

Sutter sent his hands clawing desperately at that wall as it flickered
twice and momentarily became translucent again. He forced his body
between folds of palpable darkness, slid into the vanishing blue cone.
Instantly he found himself in his normal world, standing in the center
of the sitting room. Travail looked up, startled.

"Hullo. Where did you come from?" he said finally.

Sutter said, "What are you doing in my drawer?"

"I was looking for my tobacco pouch," Travail replied easily. "I'm sure
I left it here on the table last night. I thought the maid might have
put it in the drawer."

In his bedroom Sutter wrapped each of the alien shells in a sheet of
newspaper and restored them to the basket. He placed the basket on the
top shelf of the closet, concealing it with a couple of old hats.

He didn't sleep well that night. His mind reviewed over and over his
strange experience. Toward morning he fell into a deep sleep and dreamed
a wild dream of walking down a broad highway, flanked on one side by an
endless line of television sets and on the other by man-high hills of
