
"Yessir, there is a state trooper here." He turned to the one in charge.
"He wants to speak to you." The trooper took the receiver.

"Hello, Governor. Sgt. Les Johnson of the Highway Patrol." Pause.
"That's right, sir. There's a number of people here who can swear to
it. Yessir." This time the trooper fidgeted. "I seen it too. Blue-white
light, yessir. Nossir, we are not having a drinking party. The light was
reported by the pilot of the Continental Airways early this morning and
we investigated. Yessir." He held the receiver towards Sims. "He wants
to talk to you again."

The Governor was finally convinced something indeed strange was
happening at the Stewart place, but being a solid citizen and faithful
servant of the people who elected him, he couldn't believe the fantastic
story the professor and the trooper told him. He decided to see for
himself and rang for his chauffeur after his telephone conversation with
Professor Sims.

Meanwhile, Mrs. Stewart turned to Sims.

"Will you please tell us if Junius can be milked?"

"I really don't know yet, Mrs. Stewart. I'll have to investigate the
area for harmful radio-activity first, then I'll have to check the cow,
herself. Pardon me." He turned to the phone again.

Trying to keep his voice and emotion under control, Professor Sims
called his laboratory at the University and ordered among other
technical equipment, a Geiger counter, a gamma-ray detector, a portable
lead shield, body and temperature thermometers, a portable X-ray
machine, and a dozen pairs of smoked glasses.

The equipment arrived within the hour, and Professor Sims distributed it
among his assistants with his instructions. It was understood that he
alone would approach Junius, wearing his smoked glasses and carrying the
protective lead shield, to make the initial test. If his tests proved
that Junius could be safely approached, he would go back for the others.

"You look like one of them flying saucer fellas, yerself," Zack laughed,
seeing Professor Sims donned in the lead shield and the dark glasses.

Sims waved at the crowd in the farmyard and walked awkwardly toward the
glow in the north wood, less pronounced now in the daylight. They
watched until his retreating figure disappeared into the woods, and they
were still watching the spot for what seemed a long time afterward. One
of the assistants fidgeted and looked at his watch.

"He's been in there twenty minutes. Wonder what he's doing?"

"I hope he's milking her," Mrs. Stewart said hopefully.

Zack chuckled as a thought struck him.

"What's so funny, Zack?" his wife asked.

"Junius," Zack's chuckle bubbled into laughter, "will be the first cow
to give radiated milk."

       *       *       *       *       *

Finally, after another fifteen minutes, they saw Professor Sims emerge
from the woods. As he came across the pasture they could see that his
smoked glasses were propped above his eyebrows and he was concentrating
on a small notebook in his hand, shaking his head from time to time.

When he finally joined the waiting group, he was flooded with questions.

He gestured them into silence.

"Please, I cannot answer any questions as yet until I have consulted
with my assistants. Sgt. Johnson, will you please have your men guard
the clearing while we hold a conference?"

"Is it safe to get that close to her?" the trooper asked, unbelieving.

"I can assure you that it is. There is just a negligible amount of
radio-activity present, and no more ultra-violet rays then there are in
an average sun lamp. But you must wear your glasses." Turning to his
aides he said, "Come gentlemen," and they followed him into the
farmhouse.

"Can she be milked?" Mrs. Stewart wailed after them.

"What a gadawful situation," Zack muttered, grabbing a pitchfork and
heading for the barn.

The scientists seated themselves around the big dining-room table and
faced Professor Sims.

"Gentlemen, it's the most amazing thing that ever happened. That cow is
