
"We will depart."

"It will mean death to us! The solar system will be wrecked with Neptune
gone and Saturn following it!"

       *       *       *       *       *

Garboreggg made no answer. To that impassive, cold, inhuman thing, it
did not matter if a nation or a whole world perished. Phobar had already
seen with what deliberate calm it destroyed a city, merely to show him
what power the lords of Xlarbti controlled. Besides, what guarantee was
there that the invaders would not loot the Earth of everything they
wanted and then annihilate all life upon it before they departed? Yet
Phobar knew he was helpless, knew that the men of Earth would be forced
to do whatever was asked of them, and trust that the raiders would
fulfill their promise.

"Two hours remain for your stay here," came the ruler's dictum to
interrupt his line of thought. "For the first half of that period you
will tell me of your world and answer whatever questions I may ask.
During the rest of the interval, I will explain some of the things you
wish to learn about us."

Again Phobar felt Garboreggg's disdain, knew that the metal giant
regarded him as a kind of childish plaything for an hour or two's
amusement. But he had no choice, and so he told Garboreggg of the life
on Earth, how it arose and along what lines it had developed; he
narrated in brief the extent of man's knowledge, his scientific
achievements, his mastery of weapons and forces and machines, his social
organization.

When he had finished, he felt as a Stone Age man might feel in the
presence of a brilliant scientist of the thirty-fourth century. If any
sign of interest had shown on the peak of the metallic lord, Phobar
failed to see it. But he sensed an intolerant sneer of ridicule in
Garboreggg, as though the ruler considered these statements to be only
the most elementary of facts.

Then, for three quarters of an hour, in the manner of one lecturing an
ignorant pupil, the giant crowded its thought-pictures into Phobar's
mind so that finally he understood a little of the raiders and of the
sudden terror that had flamed from the abysses into the solar system.

       *       *       *       *       *

"The universe of matter that you know is only one of the countless
universes which comprise the cosmos," began Garboreggg. "In your
universe, you have a scale of ninety-two elements, you have your
color-spectrum, your rays and waves of many kinds. You are subject to
definite laws controlling matter and energy as you know them.

"But we are of a different universe, on a different scale from yours, a
trillion light-years away in space, eons distant in time. The natural
laws which govern us differ from those controlling you. In our universe,
you would be hopelessly lost, completely helpless, unless you possessed
the knowledge that your people will not attain even in millions of
years. But we, who are so much older and greater than you, have for so
long studied the nature of the other universes that we can enter and
leave them at will, taking what we wish, doing as we wish, creating or
destroying worlds whenever the need arises, coming and hurtling away
when we choose.

"There is no vegetable life in our universe. There is only the scale of
elements ranging from 842 to 966 on the extension of your own scale. At
this high range, metals of complex kinds exist. There is none of what
you call water, no vegetable world, no animal kingdom. Instead, there
are energies, forces, rays, and waves, which are food to us and which
nourish our life-stream just as pigs, potatoes, and bread are food to
you.

       *       *       *       *       *

"Trillions of years ago in your time-calculation, but only a few dozen
centuries ago in ours, life arose on the giant world Kygpton in our
universe. It was life, our life, the life of my people and myself,
intelligence animating bodies of pliant metal, existing almost endlessly
on an almost inexhaustible source of energy.

"But all matter wears down. On Kygpton there was a variety of useful
metals, others that were valueless. There was comparatively little of
the first, much of the second. Kygpton itself was a world as large as
your entire solar system, with a diameter roughly of four billion miles.
Our ancestors knew that Kygpton was dying, that the store of our most
precious element Sthalreh was dwindling. But already our ancestors had
mastered the forces of our universe, had made inventions that are beyond
your understanding, had explored the limits of our universe in
space-cars that were propelled by the free energies in space and by the
attracting-repelling influences of stars.

"The metal inhabitants of Kygpton employed every invention they knew to
accomplish an engineering miracle that makes your bridges and mines seem
but the puny efforts of a gnat. They blasted all the remaining ores of
Sthalreh from the surface and interior of Kygpton and refined them. Then
they created a gigantic vacuum, a dead-field in space a hundred million
miles away from their world. The dead-field was controlled from Kygpton
by atomic-projectors, energy-absorbers, gravitation-nullifiers and
cosmotels, range-regulators, and a host of other inventions.

"As fast as it was mined and extracted, the Sthalreh metal was
vaporized, shot into the dead-field by interstellar rays, and solidified
there along an invisible framework which we projected. In a decade of
our time, we had pillaged Kygpton of every particle of Sthalreh. And
then in our skies hung an artificial world, a manufactured sphere, a
giant new planet, the world you yourself are now on--Xlarbti!

       *       *       *       *       *

"We did not create a solid globe. We left chambers, tunnels,
passageways, storerooms throughout it or piercing it from surface to
surface. Thus, even as Xlarbti was being created, we provided for
everything that we needed or could need--experimental laboratories,
sub-surface vaults, chambers for the innumerable huge ray dynamos,
energy storage batteries, and other apparatus which we required.

"And when all was ready, we transferred by space-cars and by atomic
individuation all our necessities from Kygpton to the artificial world
Xlarbti. And when everything was prepared, we destroyed the dead-field
by duplicate control from Xlarbti, turned our repulsion-power on full
against the now useless and dying giant world Kygpton, and swung upon
our path.

"But our whole universe is incredibly old. It was mature before ever
your young suns flamed out of the gaseous nebulae, it was decaying when
your molten planets were flung from the central sun, it was dying before
the boiling seas had given birth to land upon your sphere. And while we
had enough of our own particular electrical food to last us for a
million of your years, and enough power to guide Xlarbti to other
universes, we had exhausted all the remaining energy of our entire
universe. And when we finally left it to dwindle behind us in the black
abysses of space, we left it, a dead cinder, devoid of life, vitiated of
activity, and utterly lacking in cosmic forces, a universe finally run
down.
