
"Correct! I repeat them now!"

"You filed against him, and litigation dragged through the courts for
several years before Carmack finally won out. Shortly thereafter you
disappeared; I believe you took up residence in Europe. About a year ago
you returned, and was hired as Research Consultant in the laboratories
of the Carmack Foundation. This is true?"

       *       *       *       *       *

For a moment Losch avoided looking at the screen. It was obvious he was
considering his answer carefully.

"It's true," he said.

Beardsley said quickly, "It is my understanding that Mr. Mandleco
interceded with Carmack on your behalf--"

"I protest the last statement!" Losch's words exploded from the screen.
"There was no intercession by anyone!" His head lifted defiantly. "Yes,
I came back. I don't mind admitting I came crawling back. Carmack
offered me the position and I accepted!"

"Quite so. And he offered you a hundred thousand a year, didn't he?
Twice the salary of any other top man?"

"You think that's out of line," Losch bristled, "but he must have
thought I was worth it--I think you know why! He owed me ten times as
much!"

"You must have really hated Carmack," murmured Beardsley.

Mandleco thrust forward angrily, gesturing. "Losch, let me caution you
not to answer that!"

"But I will answer it! Yes, I hated him, but if you think I killed the
man you're wrong. Sure--I wanted to kill him--I thought about it often
enough, but I hadn't the courage." Losch glared at Beardsley from the
screen. "No doubt my Augment Index will bear it out," he said bitterly.
"Neuro-thalamic imbalance isn't it called? Pronounced efforts at
emotional suppression?"

"Close enough," Beardsley nodded, refusing to be enticed from his query.
"And you were in Washington prior to and including the day of the
murder. You admit this?"

"Of course, of course I admit it!" Losch sighed wearily and lifted his
hands. "Why deny the obvious? I'm resigned to the fact that my Index
probably makes me a prize Prime!"

"Professor Losch. As a person closely associated with the Carmack
Laboratories, you must be aware of the--shall we say--elaborate
precautions Carmack took to ensure his privacy?"

Losch sank back slowly, but his eyes couldn't conceal a livening
interest. "I don't know what you mean."

"Then I'll tell you. I refer to the frequency barrier which Carmack
installed within the past year. The 'neuro-vibe' I think he called it.
That strikes a note?"

Losch said sullenly, "Perhaps! What about it?"

"Only this. Assuming the killer was a person Carmack had reason to
mistrust--or to fear--he had to solve the neuro-vibe in order to gain
access. Not many persons could have done that, Losch. But _you_ could
have done it."

Losch came up out of his chair with a heavy, angry look. "Now see here,
you--"

"Which pretty well establishes motive, means and method. You were in
Washington the day of the murder! And you left for Bermuda the day
following! Is that substantially correct?"

"_Totally_ correct!" said Losch savagely. "Now may I ask what the hell
you're going to do about it?"

       *       *       *       *       *

Beardsley observed him for a prolonged second. "Remember it," he
answered softly.

Losch opened his mouth to say more, but Beardsley lifted a palm at the
screen and smiled benignly. "Well, sir, I think that about covers it. I
want to thank you very much for the record, and--ah--have a nice
vacation! Goodbye."

With that he clicked off abruptly.

       *       *       *       *       *

He turned to face Mandleco, who was struggling between anger and
distress as he paced away from the screen and back. He confronted
Beardsley with a sad and accusing look. "Now see here, Beardsley! If I'd
known your methods were ... don't you think that was all a bit
high-handed?"

"What? No, not in the least. Didn't you notice?"

"Notice what?"

"Losch was an angry man, yes, indeed."

"Angry," snapped Mandleco. "Good reason!"

"No," Beardsley mused. "The _wrong_ reason. Murder--at least the type
we're concerned with--is a form of release, you know. A killer may
commit his deed in anger, but once the thing is accomplished he never
retains that anger long." Beardsley gazed contemplatively at the screen.
"You know, I admire that man. I really do. He had the convictions at
least, if not the courage."

Mandleco pounced on that. "Then you think Losch is innocent?"

"I didn't say that!" Beardsley paused in a strange hesitation; his eyes
had gone remote beneath the very thick glasses, and his words came slow
and isolated. "But he's part of the record. Yes, it should be quite a
record. In fact, I have a feeling--you know?--that this case is going to
stand as a _monument_ in the annals of crime...."

Mandleco stared at him, searched for the meaning there and then gave it
up. _Why had he ever committed himself to this situation anyway? Did
this little man really know as much as he pretended, or was he merely
fumbling around in the dregs of a forgotten past?_ To be sure, Beardsley
was a pathetic enough figure; but the man had once been great in his
field, and there was something about him even now....

There was the sudden way Beardsley had of losing his abstracted look,
the eyes beneath those ridiculous lenses coming to a sharp bright focus
with tiny livening flecks in the gray of the iris; and the way the
change lifted his features from mediocrity to the alertness of a
terrier. It was absurd, it was farcical ... and it was all very
disturbing.

"You told _me_," Mandleco said testily, "that the killer was someone
Carmack trusted enough to have in his home. Then you bludgeon Losch with
the idea it was a person Carmack had reason to fear! It would seem to
me, Beardsley--"

"No, no. I think my words to Losch were _assuming_ the killer was such a
person." Beardsley looked up brightly, and even through those lenses
Mandleco could see the sharp focus.

"Just the same, I fail to see what's to be gained by these outlandish
methods!"

Beardsley seemed genuinely surprised. "But I've gained a great deal
already! And don't forget, Mrs. Carmack and Pederson should be here
soon."

"_That's_ a prospect I look forward to," Mandleco tried to salvage a
modicum of humor and failed miserably. He extracted a cigar, clamped his
teeth upon it, frowned and glanced at his watch. He strode over and
peered out at the operations room.

Beardsley said innocuously, "I wouldn't count on ECAIAC just yet."

It was Beardsley's first error. He realized it instantly. The remark
seemed to trigger something in Mandleco.

The Minister of Justice turned slowly, rolling the cigar from one corner
of his mouth to the other. "But I may," he said. "You know, I just may!
It's barely possible, Beardsley, that with some luck we'll be able to
dispense with your talents!" He said it with considerable more relish
than conviction, and moved for the door. "I think I'll just see how
Arnold is making out!"

       *       *       *       *       *

Arnold was making out very well, much to Mandleco's delight. No longer
was there chaos and confusion. The new feed-back unit had arrived, and
installation was well under way. Blueprints were spread out as a crew of
techs worked feverishly at all damage areas.

"It looks promising," Arnold hurried up to greet him. "Told you I had a
good crew here! Look--see this?" He indicated one of the variant-tapes
being slowly reversed across the relays.

"What is it?"

"The number eight reject."

"That what caused the trouble?"

"Well ... we think so, but it's problematical. Whether it did or not,
we're safe in resuming the run without any shift in the correlation
total."

Mandleco stared at the number eight. "Throw it out!" he snapped.

"What--what did you say, sir?"

"I said throw it out! Get this thing to functioning!"

Arnold was aghast. "But," he gulped, "we just can't throw out data!
Sure, it was about to be a reject--but everything, even rejects, contain
a factor-balance! You know that, sir."

Mandleco got control of himself with an effort. "Yes--yes, of course. I
know you're right. But damn it, man, those units cost something like
eighty thousand dollars! Suppose the same breakdown occurs?"

"Not a chance of it this time. We'll merely continue with a stepped-up
synaptic check. Take longer for Cumulative, perhaps, but absolutely
fool-proof once we--"

       *       *       *       *       *

For a long instant Mandleco stood musing. Then he nodded brusquely. "All
right. How long to get going?"

"Why, we'll be ready in forty minutes at the most. I told you I had a
good crew, sir! Excuse me--" One of Arnold's techs was motioning to him.
"Excuse me," Arnold said again, and hurried away to consult with the
man.

"Forty minutes!" Mandleco couldn't believe it. He chortled happily, and
swung about to greet Beardsley who approached at that moment. "Hear
that, Beardsley? Forty minutes! Excellent man, Arnold. I'm sorry I ever
doubted--"

Beardsley wasn't listening. He stared about at the miracle of
reconstruction, and there was more of amazement on his face than
distress. Adjusting his glasses, he gazed thoughtfully at Jeff Arnold's
retreating figure.

Mandleco was saying, "Just as well your little experiment didn't go any
further! Dangerous precedent ... don't know what possessed me ... you
realize that in the last analysis I'll have to put my faith in ECAIAC!
No bad feelings?"

"No, sir," Beardsley pronounced somberly. "No bad feelings, because I'm
holding you to your word. ECAIAC hasn't solved your case and it never
will."

Mandleco stood still, open-mouthed. "What's that? Nonsense! Arnold just
assured me--"

"He assured you of nothing! I'm more convinced than ever now. I'm the
only one who can solve this case, and I'm holding you to your word."

Mandleco seemed undecided whether to laugh or censure. His heavy fingers
opened and closed aimlessly, as he stared across the room at Arnold and
back at Beardsley. Finally his teeth snapped together. "Beardsley," he
choked--"I warn you, if this is some sort of trickery--"

Beardsley shook his head solemnly. "You'd do well to believe me, sir. I
was never more serious."

"So you're determined to go on with it! Very well, Beardsley. You have
something like forty minutes, and believe me you'd better prove
yourself! May I remind you"--fraught with meaning, his voice bordered on
anticipation--"may I remind you, Beardsley, that already you've given
sufficient cause for a complete review of your qualifications as
Cooerdinator?"

Beardsley looked at him and smiled. "Yes, sir. And may I remind _you_,
sir," he nodded toward the far door, "that your guests have arrived?"

       *       *       *       *       *

Mrs. Carmack, Beardsley thought as he watched her, was that rare type of
woman who could defy all the current conventions of style and carry it
off successfully; her type of beauty was unostentatious and yet vibrant.
She was dressed impeccably in black and silver, her hair was authentic
honey-blonde in a coronet braid, and her face possessed that pure line
of profile together with the quality of translucence one sees in rare
porcelain.... Sheila Carmack was thirty-five, and she paid her
beauticians that many thousands annually to keep her looking fifteen
years younger. Just now she seemed in buoyant good spirits as she
greeted Mandleco.

Not so the young man who accompanied her. The escort was a person
Beardsley had never seen before, quite handsome and quite aware of it,
with an impudent world-wisdom centered about his sharp eyes. He turned
immediately to Mandleco with a bluster as phony as it was towering:

"This is an outrage, sir! A damned outrage! On Sheila's behalf I deplore
these tactics, and I question your right! Our entire afternoon perfectly
ruined...."

"Correction, darling," purred Mrs. Carmack. "You mean our perfect
afternoon entirely ruined." She turned smiling to the Minister of
Justice. "You really mustn't mind Victor."

"Hello, Sheila," Mandleco greeted her wanly. "I must apologize for the
inconvenience, but I assure you--"

"Oh, but this is thrilling! I mean really!" Mrs. Carmack was gazing
about ECAIAC's room with considerable more delight than suspicion, and
Beardsley watching her was thinking: _Thrilling! Can she really mean it?
She must surely be aware of ECAIAC's task for today--today of all
days...._

       *       *       *       *       *
