
Alone in the control compartment, he tried to relax, but it was not
possible. He flung himself into a comfortable chair and considered the
situation of the people of the planet Dara. Those people were marked by
patches of blue pigment as an inherited consequence of a plague of three
generations past. Dara was a planet of pariahs, excluded from the human
race by those who had been conditioned to fear them.

And now there was famine on Dara for the second time, and they were of
no mind to starve quietly. There was food on the planet Orede, monstrous
herds of cattle without owners. It was natural enough for Darians to
build a ship or ships and try to bring food back to its starving people.
But that desperately necessary enterprise had now roused Weald to a
frenzy of apprehension. Weald was if possible more hysterically afraid
of blueskins than ever before, and even more implacably the enemy of the
starving planet's population. Weald itself throve and prospered.
Ironically, it had such an excess of foodstuffs that it stored them in
unneeded space-ships in orbits about itself. Hundreds of thousands of
tons of grain circled Weald in sealed-tight hulks, while the people of
Dara starved and only dared try to steal--it could be called
stealing--some of the innumerable wild cattle of Orede.

The blueskins on Orede could not trust Calhoun, so they pretended not to
hear--or maybe they didn't hear. They'd been abandoned and betrayed by
all of humanity beyond their world. They'd been threatened and oppressed
by guardships in orbit about them, ready to shoot down any space-craft
they might send aloft.

So Calhoun pondered ...

       *       *       *       *       *

A long time later Calhoun heard small sounds which were not normal on a
Med Ship in overdrive. They were not part of the random noises carefully
generated to keep the silence of the ship endurable. Calhoun raised his
head. He listened sharply. No sound could come from outside.

He knocked on the door of the sleeping-cabin. The noises stopped
instantly.

"Come out," he commanded through the door.

"I'm--I'm all right," said Maril's voice. But it was not quite steady.
She paused. "I was just having a bad dream."

"I wish," said Calhoun, "that you'd tell me the truth occasionally! Come
out, please!"

There were stirrings. After a little the door opened and Maril appeared.
She looked as if she'd been crying. She said quickly;

"I probably look queer, but it's because I was asleep."

"To the contrary," said Calhoun, fuming, "you've been lying awake
crying. I don't know why. I've been out here wishing I could sleep,
because I'm frustrated. But since you aren't asleep maybe you can help
me with my job. I've figured some things out. For some others I need
facts. How about it?"

She swallowed.

"I'll try."

"Coffee?" he asked.

Murgatroyd popped his head out of his miniature sleeping-cabin.

"_Chee?_" he asked interestedly.

"Go back to sleep!" snapped Calhoun.

He began to pace back and forth.

"I need to know something about the pigment patches," he said jerkily.
"Maybe it sounds crazy to think of such things now. First things first,
you know. But that is a first thing! So long as Darians don't look like
the people of other worlds, they'll be considered different. If they
look repulsive, they'll be thought of as evil.... Tell me about those
patches. They're different-sized and different-shaped and they appear in
different places. You've none on your face or hands, anyhow."

"I haven't any at all," said the girl reservedly.

"I thought--"

"Not everybody," she said defensively. "Nearly, yes. But not all. Some
people don't have them. Some people are born with bluish splotches on
their skin, but they fade out while they're children. When they grow up
they're just like--the people of Weald or any other world. And their
children never have them."

Calhoun stared.

"You couldn't possibly be proved to be a Darian, then?"

She shook her head. Calhoun remembered, and started the coffee-maker.

"When you left Dara," he said, "You were carried a long, long way, to
some planet where they'd practically never heard of Dara, and where the
name meant nothing. You could have settled there, or anywhere else and
forgotten about Dara. But you didn't. Why not, since you're not a
blueskin?"

"But I am!" she said fiercely. "My parents, my brothers and sisters, and
Korvan--."

Then she bit her lip. Calhoun took note but did not comment on the name
that she had mentioned.

"Then your parents had the splotches fade, so you never had them," he
said absorbedly. "Something like that happened on Tralee, once! There's
a virus--a whole group of virus particles! Normally we humans are immune
to them. One has to be in terrifically bad physical condition for them
to take hold and produce whatever effects they do. But once they're
established they're passed on from mother to child.... And when they die
out it's during childhood, too!"

He poured coffee for the two of them. As usual, Murgatroyd swung down to
the floor and said impatiently;

"_Chee! Chee! Chee!_"

Calhoun absently filled Murgatroyd's tiny cup and handed it to him.

"But this is marvellous!" he said exuberantly. "The blue patches
appeared after the plague, didn't they? After people recovered--when
they recovered?"

       *       *       *       *       *

Maril stared at him. His mind was filled with strictly professional
considerations. He was not talking to her as a person. She was purely a
source of information.

"So I'm told," said Maril reservedly. "Are there any more humiliating
questions you want to ask?"

He gaped at her. Then he said ruefully;

"I'm stupid, Maril, but you're touchy. There's nothing personal."

"There is to me!" she said fiercely. "I was born among blueskins, and
they're of my blood, and they're hated and I'd have been killed on Weald
if I'd been known as--what I am! And there's Korvan, who arranged for me
to be sent away as a spy and advised me to do just what you
said,--abandon my home world and everybody I care about! Including him!
It's personal to me!"

Calhoun wrinkled his forehead helplessly.

"I'm sorry," he repeated, "Drink your coffee!"

"I don't want it," she said bitterly. "I'd like to die!"

"If you stay around where I am," Calhoun told her, "you may get your
wish. All right. There'll be no more questions, I promise."

She turned and moved toward the door to the sleeping-cabin. Calhoun
looked after her.

"Maril," he called out to her.

"What?"

"Why were you crying?"

"You wouldn't understand," she said evenly.

Calhoun shrugged his shoulders almost up to his ears. He was a
professional man. In his profession he was not incompetent. But there is
no profession in which a really competent man tries to understand women.
Calhoun annoyedly had to let fate or chance or disaster take care of
Maril's personal problems. He had larger matters to cope with.

But he had something to work on, now. He hunted busily in the reference
tapes. He came up with an explicit collection of information on exactly
the subject he needed. He left the control-room to go down into the
storage areas of the Med Ship's hull. He found an ultra-frigid storage
box, whose contents were kept at the temperature of liquid air. He
donned thick gloves, used a special set of tongs, and extracted a tiny
block of plastic in which a sealed-tight phial of glass was embedded. It
frosted instantly he took it out, and when the storage-box was closed
again the block was covered with a thick and opaque coating of frozen
moisture.

He went back to the control-room and pulled down the panel which made
available a small-scale but surprisingly adequate biological laboratory.
He set the plastic block in a container which would raise it very, very
gradually to a specific temperature and hold it there. It was,
obviously, a living culture from which any imaginable quantity of the
same culture could be bred. Calhoun set the apparatus with great
exactitude.

"This," he told Murgatroyd, "may be a good day's work. Now I think I can
rest."

Then, for a long while, there was no sound or movement in the Med Ship.
The girl Maril may have slept, or maybe not. Calhoun lay relaxed in a
chair which at the touch of a button became the most comfortable of
sleeping-places. Murgatroyd remained in his cubbyhole, his tail curled
over his nose. There were comforting, unheard, easily dismissable
murmurings now and again. They kept the feeling of life alive in the
ship. But for such infinitesimal stirrings of sound--carefully recorded
for this exact purpose--the feel of the ship would have been that of a
tomb.

But it was quite otherwise when another ship-day began with the taped
sounds of morning activities as faint as echoes but nevertheless
establishing an atmosphere of their own.

       *       *       *       *       *

Calhoun examined the plastic block and its contents. He read the
instruments which had cared for it while he slept. He put the block--no
longer frosted--in the culture-microscope and saw its enclosed,
infinitesimal particles of life in the process of multiplying on the
food that had been frozen with them when they were reduced to the spore
condition. He beamed. He replaced the block in the incubation oven and
faced the day cheerfully.

Maril greeted him with great reserve. They breakfasted.

"I've been thinking," said Maril evenly. "I think I can get you a
hearing for--whatever ideas you may have to help Dara."

"Kind of you," murmured Calhoun. "May I ask whose influence you'll
exert?"

"There's a man," said Maril reservedly, "who--thinks a great deal of me.
I don't know his present official position, but he was certain to become
prominent. I'll tell him how you've acted up to now, and your attitude,
and of course that you're Med Service. He'll be glad to help you, I'm
sure."

"Splendid!" said Calhoun, nodding. "That will be Korvan."

She started.

"How did you know?"

"Intuition," said Calhoun drily. "All right. I'll count on him."

But he did not. He worked in the tiny biological lab all that ship-day
and all the next. The girl remained quiet.

On the ship-day after, the time for breakfast approached. And while the
ship was practically a world all by itself, it was easy to look forward
with confidence to the future. But when contact and--in a
fashion--conflict with other and larger worlds loomed nearer, prospects
seemed less bright. Calhoun had definite plans, now, but there were so
many ways in which they could be frustrated! Weald's political leaders
could not oppose hysterical demands for action against blueskins, after
a deathship arrived with no signs whatever of blueskins as responsible
for its cargo of corpses. It was certain that a starving Dara would tend
to desperate and fatal measures against hereditary enemies.

Calhoun sat down at the control-board and watched the clock.

"I've got things lined up," he told Maril wrily, "if only they work out.
_If_ I can make somebody on Dara listen and follow my advice and _if_
Weald doesn't get ideas and isn't doing what I suspect it is, maybe
something can be done."

"I'm sure you'll do your best," said Maril politely.

Calhoun managed to grin. He watched the ship-clock. There was no
sensation attached to overdrive travel except at the beginning and the
end. It was now time for the end. He might find that absolutely anything
had happened while he made plans which would immediately be seen to be
hopeless. Weald could have sent ships to Dara, or Dara might be in such
a state of desperation that ...

As it turned out, Dara was desperate. The Med Ship came out nearly a
light-month from the sun about which the planet Dara revolved. Calhoun
went into a short hop toward it. Then Dara was on the other side of the
blazing yellow star. It took time to reach it. He called down,
identifying himself and the ship and asking for coordinates so his ship
could be brought to ground. There was confusion, as if the request were
so unusual that the answers were not ready. The grid, too, was on the
planet's night side. Presently the ship was locked onto by the grid's
force-fields. It went downward without incident.

Calhoun saw that Maril sat tensely, twisting her fingers within each
other, until the ship actually touched ground.

Then he opened the exit-port, and faced armed men in the darkness, with
blast-rifles trained on him. There was a portable cannon trained on the
Med Ship itself.

"Come out!" rasped a voice. "If you try anything you get blasted! Your
ship and its contents are seized by the planetary government!"




CHAPTER 5


It seemed that the smell of hunger was in the air. The armed men were
cadaverous. Lights came on, and stark, harsh shadows lay black upon the
ground. Calhoun's captors were uniformed, but the uniforms hung loosely
upon them. Where the lights struck upon their faces, their cheeks were
hollow. They were emaciated. And there were the splotches of pigment of
which Calhoun had heard. The leader of the truculent group was blue,
except for two fingers which in the glaring illumination seemed whiter
than white.

"Out!" said that man savagely. "We're taking over your stock of food.
You'll get your share of it, like everybody else, but--out!"

Maril spoke over Calhoun's shoulder. She uttered a cryptic sentence or
two. It should have amounted to identification, but there was skepticism
in the the armed party.

"Oh, you're one of us, eh?" said the guard-leader sardonically. "You'll
have a chance to prove that! Come out of there!"

Calhoun spoke abruptly;

"This is a Med Ship," he said. "There are medicines and bacterial
cultures, inside it. They shouldn't be meddled with. Here on Dara you've
had enough of plagues!"

The man with the blue hand said as sardonically as before;

"I said the government was taking over your ship! It won't be looted.
But you're not taking a full cargo of food away! In fact, it's not
likely you're leaving!"

"I want to speak to someone in authority," snapped Calhoun. "We've just
come from Weald." He felt bristling hatred all about him as he named
Weald. "There's tumult there. They're talking about dropping fusion
bombs here. It's important that I talk to somebody with the authority to
take a few sensible precautions!"

He descended to the ground. There was a panicky "_Chee! Chee!_" from
behind him, and Murgatroyd came dashing to swarm up his body and cling
apprehensively to his neck.

"What's that?"

"A _tormal,_" said Calhoun. "He's not a pet. Your medical men will know
something about him. This is a Med Ship and I'm a Med Ship man, and he's
an important member of the crew. He's a Med Ship _tormal_ and he stays
with me!"

The man with the blue hand said harshly;

"There's somebody waiting to ask you questions. Here!"

A ground-car came rolling out from the side of the landing-grid
enclosure. The ground-car ran on wheels, and wheels were not much used
on modern worlds. Dara was behind the times in more ways than one.

"This car will take you to Defense and you can tell them anything you
want. But don't try to sneak back in this ship! It'll be guarded!"

The ground-car was enclosed, with room for a driver and the three from
the Med Ship. But armed men festooned themselves about its exterior and
it went bumping and rolling to the massive ground-layer girders of the
grid. It rolled out under them and there was paved highway. It picked up
speed.

There were buildings on either side of the road, but few showed lights.
This was night-time, and the men at the landing-grid had set a pattern
of hunger, so that the silence and the dark buildings did not seem a
sign of tranquility and sleep, but of exhaustion and despair. The
highway lamps were few, by comparison with other inhabited worlds, and
the ground-car needed lights of its own to guide its driver over a paved
surface that needed repair. By those moving lights other depressing
things could be seen. Untidiness. Buildings not kept up to perfection.
Evidences of apathy. The road hadn't been cleaned lately. There was
litter here and there.

Even the fact that there were no stars added to the feeling of
wretchedness and gloom and--ultimately--of hunger.

Maril spoke nervously to the driver.

"The famine isn't any better?"

He moved his head in negation, but did not speak.

"I left--two years ago," said Maril. "It was just beginning then.
Rationing hadn't started then--."

The driver said evenly;

"There's rationing now!"

       *       *       *       *       *

The car went on and on. A vast open space appeared ahead. Lights about
its perimeter seemed few and pale.

"E-everything seems--worse. Even the lights."

"Using all the power," said the driver, "to warm up ground to grow crops
where it ought to be winter. Not doing too well, either."

Calhoun knew, somehow, that Maril moistened her lips.

"I--was sent," she explained to the driver, "to go ashore on Trent and
then make my way to Weald. I--mailed reports of what I found out back to
Trent. Somebody got them back to here whenever--it was possible."

The driver said;

"Everybody knows the man on Trent disappeared. Maybe he got caught,
maybe somebody saw him without makeup. Or maybe he just quit being one
of us. What's the difference? No use!"

Calhoun found himself wincing a little. The driver was not angry. He was
hopeless. But men should not despair. They shouldn't accept hostility
from those about them as a device of fate for their destruction. They
shouldn't ...

Maril said quickly to him;

"You understand? Dara's a heavy-metals planet. There aren't many light
elements in our soil. Potassium is scarce. So our ground isn't very
fertile. Before the Plague we traded heavy metals and manufactures for
imports of food and potash. But since the Plague we've had no off-planet
commerce. We've been--quarantined."

"I gathered as much," said Calhoun. "It was up to Med Service to see
that that didn't happen. It's up to Med Service now to see that it
stops."

"Too late now for anything," said the driver, "whatever Med Service may
be! They're talking about cutting down our population so there'll be
food enough for some to live. There are two questions about it: who's to
be kept alive and why."

The ground-car aimed now for a cluster of faintly brighter lights on the
far side of the great open space. They enlarged as they grew nearer.
Maril said hesitantly;

"There was someone--Korvan--" Calhoun didn't catch the rest of the name,
Maril said hesitantly; "He was working on food-plants. I--thought he
might accomplish something ..."

The driver said caustically;

"Sure! Everybody's heard about him! He came up with a wonderful thing!
He and his outfit worked out a way to process weeds so they can be
eaten. And they can. You can fill your belly and not feel hungry, but
it's like eating hay. You starve just the same. He's still working. Head
of a government division."

The ground-car passed through a gate. It stopped before a lighted door.
The armed men hanging to its outside dropped off. They watched Calhoun
closely as he stepped out with Murgatroyd riding on his shoulder.

Minutes later they faced a hastily-summoned group of officials of the
Darian government. For a ship to land on Dara was so remarkable an event
that it called practically for a cabinet meeting. And Calhoun noted that
they were no better fed than the guards at the space-port.

They regarded Calhoun and Maril with oddly burning eyes. It was, of
course, because the two of them showed no signs of hunger. They
obviously had not been on short rations.

"My name is Calhoun," said Calhoun briskly. "I've the usual Med Service
credentials. Now ..."

He did not wait to be questioned. He told them of the appalling state of
things in the Twelfth Sector of the Med Service, so that men had been
borrowed from other sectors to remedy the intolerable, and he was one of
them. He told of his arrival at Weald and what had happened there, from
the excessively cautious insistence that he prove he was not a Darian,
to the arrival of the death-ship from Orede. He was giving them the news
affecting them, as they had not heard it before.

He went on to tell of his stop at Orede and his purpose, and his
encounter with the men he found there. When he finished there was
silence. He broke it.

"Now," he said, "Maril's an agent of yours. She can add to what I've
told you. I'm Med Service. I have a job to do here to repair what wasn't
