or well-meaning." His voice became brisker. "The translation is apropos.
I'm here to do you a service. Now, about these monthly premiums ..."

Jack shook himself and stepped out of the mold of fascination that
Mister's glasses seemed to have poured around him. Uncas again, he
crawled on all fours from chair to divan to stool to the fallen log
which the adults thought was an easy chair. He stuck his head from
behind it and sighted along the broomstick-musket at his father. He'd
shoot that white man dead and then take his scalp. He giggled at that,
because his father really didn't have any hairlock to take.

At that moment Mister decided to take off his specs and polish them with
his breast-pocket handkerchief. While he answered one of Mr. Crane's
questions, he let them dangle from his fingers. Accidentally, the lenses
were level with Jack's gaze. One careless glance was enough to jerk his
eyes back to them. One glance stunned him so that he could not at once
understand that what he was seeing was not reality.

There was his father across the room. But it wasn't a room. It was a
space outdoors under the low branch of a tree whose trunk was so big it
was as wide as the wall had been. Nor was the Persian rug there. It was
replaced by a close-cropped bright green grass. Here and there foot-high
flowers with bright yellow petals tipped in scarlet swayed beneath an
internal wind. Close to Mr. Crane's feet a white horse no larger than a
fox terrier bit off the flaming end of a plant.

All those things were wonderful enough--but was that naked giant who
sprawled upon a moss-covered boulder father? No! Yes! Though the
features were no longer pinched and scored and pale, though they were
glowing and tanned and smooth like a young athlete's they were his
father's! Even the thick, curly hair that fell down over a wide forehead
and the panther-muscled body could not hide his identity.

Though it tore at his nerves, and though he was afraid that once he
looked away he would never again seize the vision, Jack ripped his gaze
away from the rosy view.

The descent to the grey and rasping reality was so painful that tears
ran down his cheeks, and he gasped as if struck in the pit of the
stomach. How could beauty like that be all around him without his
knowing it?

He felt that he had been blind all his life until this moment and would
be forever eyeless again, an unbearable forever, if he did not look
through the glass again.

He stole another hurried glance, and the pain in his heart and stomach
went away, his insides became wrapped in a soft wind. He was lifted. He
was floating, a pale red, velvety air caressed him and buoyed him.

He saw his mother run from around the tree. That should have seemed
peculiar, because he had thought she was dead. But there she was, no
longer flat-walking and coughing and thin and wax-skinned, but
golden-brown and curvy and bouncy. She jumped at Daddy and gave him a
long kiss. Daddy didn't seem to mind that she had no clothes on. Oh, it
was so wonderful. Jack was drifting on a yielding and wine-tinted air
and warmed with a wind that seemed to swell him out like a happy
balloon....

Suddenly he was falling, hurtling helplessly and sickeningly through a
void while a cold and drab blast gouged his skin and spun him around and
around. The world he had always known shoved hard against him. Again he
felt the blow in the solar plexus and saw the grey tentacles of the
living reality reach for his heart.

Jack looked up at the stranger, who was just about to put his spectacles
on the bridge of his long nose. His eyelids were closed. Jack never did
see the pink eyes.

That didn't bother him. He had other things to think about. He crouched
beside the chair while his brain tried to move again, tried to engulf a
thought and failed because it could not become fluid enough to find the
idea that would move his tongue to shriek, _No! No! No!_

And when the salesman rose and placed his papers in his case and patted
Jack on the head and bent his opaque rose spectacles at him and said
good-by and that he wouldn't be coming back because he was going out of
town to stay, Jack was not able to move or say a thing. Nor for a long
time after the door had closed could he break through the mass that
gripped him like hardened lava. By then, no amount of screams and
weeping would bring Mister back. All his father could do was to call a
doctor who took the boy's temperature and gave him some pills.


IV

Jack stood inside the wire and bent his neck back to watch a huge black
and silver oyster feel the dusk for a landing-field with its single
white foot and its orange toes. Blindingly, lights sprang to attention
over the camp.

When Jack had blinked his eyes back to normal, he could see over the
flat half-mile between the fence and the ship. It lay quiet and
glittering and smoking in the flood-beams. He could see the round door
in its side swing open. Men began filing out. A truck rumbled across the
plain and pulled up beside the metal bulk. A very tall man stepped out
of the cab and halted upon the running board, from which he seemed to be
greeting the newcomers or giving them instructions. Whatever he was
saying took so long that Jack lost interest.

Lately, he had not been able to focus his mind for any length of time
upon anything except that one event in the past. He wandered around and
whipped glances at his comrades' faces, noting listlessly that their
uniforms and shaved heads had improved their appearance. But nothing
would be able to chill the feverishness of their eyes.

Whistles shrilled. Jack jumped. His heart beat faster. He felt as if the
end of the quest were suddenly close. Somebody would be around the
corner. In a minute that person would be facing him, and then ...

Then, he reflected, and sagged with a wave of disappointment at the
thought, then there was nobody around the corner. It always happened
that way. Besides, there weren't any corners in this camp. He had
reached the wall at the end of the alley. Why didn't he stop looking?

