
"Listen, Gistla," he said, kneeling on the grass in front of her. "It
won't make any difference what anyone thinks or does or says. I love
you, and I'll go on loving you. We'll build our own life the way we want
it."

She shook her head slowly. "No, George. It does make a difference. You
cannot forget your family or your people. That is important to you. I
would only hurt you."

"Do you love me?"

"Yes."

"Then that's all that's important to me. Not what anyone thinks. Not
what my sister thinks or my father or my mother."

"We are different, you and I." She sat unmoving, her smooth face
unchanging. "My people seem strange to yours because we can do things
your people do not understand. We seem strange because we look
differently, we act differently, we value things differently."

"My values are the same as yours," George pleaded. "I love you because
of what you are, not because of some kind of stupid chart for physical
beauty, not because ..."

"George," she said. "Look at me."

George met her eyes suddenly, caught by the urgency in her voice. And
slowly, in front of his eyes, she changed. Her features shifted, until
George saw a beautiful young girl with pink white skin and red lips. He
saw shining blue eyes and shimmering golden hair that fell over her
shoulders. Gistla's body had changed to a lithe, smooth figure that
revealed its contours beneath the gray cape.

He caught his breath and wiped a hand at his eyes.

"What you see," said Gistla softly, "is an illusion. You see what would
be in your values, a beautiful girl."

George opened his mouth but was unable to find his voice.

"Do not be afraid, George. Beneath the illusion of your senses, I am
still Gistla. I am still a Venusian."

George reached out and touched his fingers against a white arm and a
white shoulder bared by the cape. He touched the golden hair. "Gistla,"
he said, amazed. "You're beautiful."

"Yes," she said sadly.

"But--you really are! Your hair and your eyes and your mouth. How did
you do it?"

She shook her head to show its unimportance. "It is something--like your
hypnotism."

George raised himself from his knees and sat beside her. "But I can't
believe it!"

"You can see, you can feel."

"Yes," George said. "Yes."

"You are happy with me this way, aren't you, George?"

"But you're so beautiful."

The golden-haired girl nodded her head, and the shining blue eyes
watched him carefully.

"You see then," Gistla said. "It does make a difference. You love me
more this way."

"No," George said, touching her hair again. "I don't love you more, but
if you can do this, why then, we'll have no more worries. Don't you
see?"

"I think so," Gistla said, looking away.

George's voice was excited, and his eyes darted over her face and body.
"Would other people see you as I do?"

"If I wished, yes."

"Then you see? It's all changed! You are what I see. Golden-haired and
pale-skinned--"

"I am still Gistla. You would always know that. Would you love something
that is not real, just because you see it with your eyes?"

       *       *       *       *       *

"But I can feel that you're real," George said, putting his hands on her
shoulders. He pulled her closer and kissed her hair. "You're Gistla," he
said, "and you're beautiful." He tipped her face up to his and bent to
kiss her mouth.

His lips touched smooth green skin and he looked into Gistla's large
round lidless eyes. He recoiled as though he had been touched by fire.

She watched him as he wiped a trembling hand across his chest, and her
globular head glistened in the reflection of the late sun.

She nodded. "When you see what I really am, the difference _is_
important." She gathered her cloak around her and stood up.

George felt the flush of his face, and he could not meet her eyes. He
