Cappen thought he heard a worried note in the animal growl. "Shall we
have music for the feast?" he asked mildly. He unslung the case of his
harp and took it out.

The troll-wife waved her fists in the air and danced with rage. "Are you
mad? I tell you, you are going to be eaten!"

The minstrel plucked a string on his harp. "This wet air has played the
devil with her tone," he murmured sadly.

The troll-wife roared wordlessly and lunged at him. Hildigund covered
her eyes. Cappen tuned his harp. A foot from his throat, the claws
stopped.

"Pray do not excite yourself, mother," said the bard. "I carry silver,
you know."

"What is that to me? If you think you have a charm which will turn me,
know that there is none. I've no fear of your metal!"

Cappen threw back his head and sang:

    "_A lovely lady full oft lies.
    The light that lies within her eyes
    And lies and lies, in no surprise.
    All her unkindness can devise
    To trouble hearts that seek the prize
    Which is herself, are angel lies--_"

"_Aaaarrrgh!_" It was like thunder drowning him out. The troll-wife
turned and went on all fours and poked up the fire with her nose.

Cappen stepped softly around her and touched the girl. She looked up
with a little whimper.

"You are Svearek's only daughter, are you not?" he whispered.

"Aye--" She bowed her head, a strengthless despair weighting it down.
"The troll stole me away three winters agone. It has tickled her to have
a princess for slave--but soon I will roast on her spit, even as ye,
brave man--"

"Ridiculous. So fair a lady is meant for another kind of, um, never
mind! Has she treated you very ill?"

"She beats me now and again--and I have been so lonely, naught here at
all save the troll-wife and I--" The small work-roughened hands clutched
desperately at his waist, and she buried her face against his breast.

"Can ye save us?" she gasped. "I fear 'tis for naught ye ventured yer
life, bravest of men. I fear we'll soon both sputter on the coals."

Cappen said nothing. If she wanted to think he had come especially to
rescue her, he would not be so ungallant to tell her otherwise.

The troll-wife's mouth gashed in a grin as she walked through the fire
to him. "There is a price," she said. "If you cannot tell me three
things about myself which are true beyond disproving, not courage nor
amulet nor the gods themselves may avail to keep that red head on your
shoulders."

Cappen clapped a hand to his sword. "Why, gladly," he said; this was a
rule of magic he had learned long ago, that three truths were the
needful armor to make any guardian charm work. "Imprimis, yours is the
ugliest nose I ever saw poking up a fire. Secundus, I was never in a
house I cared less to guest at. Tertius, ever among trolls you are
little liked, being one of the worst."

Hildigund moaned with terror as the monster swelled in rage. But there
was no movement. Only the leaping flames and the eddying smoke stirred.

Cappen's voice rang out, coldly: "Now the king lies on the sea, frozen
and wet, and I am come to fetch a brand for his fire. And I had best
also see his daughter home."

The troll shook her head, suddenly chuckling. "No. The brand you may
have, just to get you out of this cave, foulness; but the woman is in my
thrall until a man sleeps with her--here--for a night. And if he does, I
may have him to break my fast in the morning!"

Cappen yawned mightily. "Thank you, mother. Your offer of a bed is most
welcome to these tired bones, and I accept gratefully."

"You will die tomorrow!" she raved. The ground shook under the huge
weight of her as she stamped. "Because of the three truths, I must let
you go tonight; but tomorrow I may do what I will!"

"Forget not my little friend, mother," said Cappen, and touched the cord
of the amulet.

"I tell you, silver has no use against me--"

Cappen sprawled on the floor and rippled fingers across his harp. "_A
lovely lady full oft lies--_"

The troll-wife turned from him in a rage. Hildigund ladled up some
broth, saying nothing, and Cappen ate it with pleasure, though it could
have used more seasoning.

After that he indited a sonnet to the princess, who regarded him
wide-eyed. The troll came back from a tunnel after he finished, and said
curtly: "This way." Cappen took the girl's hand and followed her into a
pitchy, reeking dark.

She plucked an arras aside to show a room which surprised him by being
hung with tapestries, lit with candles, and furnished with a fine broad
featherbed. "Sleep here tonight, if you dare," she growled. "And
