Bishop found Armitage this morning, in his cabin. He came out, very
pale, staring at me.

"You bitch," he said. "Ear to ear. Now what'll I do for a partner?"

"You can't prove it," I said.

"We'll have to confine her to quarters," Max said wearily. "I'll tell
Farragut."

"And let him know the expedition is failing?"

Max sighed. "You're right. We'll tell them Armitage had an accident."

I said seriously, "It was obviously suicide. His mind snapped."

"Oh, God," Max said.

They buried Armitage this afternoon. From my cabin, I watched them dig
the grave.

Cheaters never prosper.

       *       *       *       *       *

_March 2_

Max talked with Senator Farragut this morning. He said Armitage had died
a hero's death. Farragut sounds worried. The Pan-Asians have withdrawn
their embassy from Imperial Africa. Tension is mounting on the home
front. Immigration _must_ start this week. Max was very reassuring.
"Just a few final tests, Senator. We want to make sure."

We puttered in our laboratories all afternoon. Bishop seemed bored.
After dinner he suggested three-handed bridge and Max said he knew a
better game, a friendly game his grandmother had taught him--hearts.

       *       *       *       *       *

_March 5_

It's a plot!

All day long Bishop and Max have managed to give me the queen of spades.
It's deliberate, of course. Three times I've tried for the moon and
Bishop has held out one damned little heart at the end. Once Max was
slightly ahead on points and Bishop demanded to see the score. I thought
for a moment they would come to blows, but Bishop apologized.

"It's just that I hate to lose," he said.

"Quite," Max said.

When we finally turned in, Bishop was ahead on points.

Too far ahead.

       *       *       *       *       *

_March 6_

I suppose it's Bishop's laugh. It has a peculiar horselike stridency
that makes me want to tear out his throat. Twice today I've broken down
and cried when he made a jackpot.

I'm not going to cry any more.

Supper was the usual, beef-yeast and vita-ale. I remember setting
Bishop's plate in front of him, and the way his pale eyes gleamed
between mouthfuls. "Three thousand points ahead," he gloated. "You'll
never catch me now. Never, never!"

That was when he gripped his throat and began writhing on the floor.

Max felt his pulse. He stared at me.

"Very nice," he said. "Quick. Did you use a derivative of that green
fungus?"

I said nothing. Max's nostrils were white and pinched. "Must I make an
autopsy?"

"Why bother?" I said. "It's obviously heart failure."

"Yes, why bother?" he said. He looked tired. "Stay in your cabin,
Greta. I'll bring your meals."

"I don't trust you."

His laughter had a touch of madness.

       *       *       *       *       *

_March 10_

