said, calvishly: "Ah-_hah_! Who is she?--" and opened it.

When the cadet officers reached the room they found Ferguson on the
floor being strangled black in the face by spidery little Grayson. It
took all three of them to pull him off. Ferguson went to the infirmary
and Grayson went to the Commandant's office.

The Commandant glared at the cadet from under the most spectacular pair
of eyebrows in the Service. "Cadet Grayson," he said, "explain what
occurred."

"Sir, Cadet Ferguson began to read a letter from my mother without my
permission."

"That is not accepted by the Corps as grounds for mayhem. Do you have
anything further to say?"

"Sir, I lost my temper. All I thought of was that it was an act of
disrespect to my mother and somehow to the Corps and the Republic
too--that Cadet Ferguson was dishonoring the Corps."

_Bushwah_, the Commandant thought. _A snow job and a crude one._ He
studied the youngster. He had never seen such a brace from an Io-bred
fourth-classman. It must be torture to muscles not yet toughened up to
even Lunar gravity. Five minutes more and the boy would have to give
way, and serve him right for showing off.

He studied Grayson's folder. It was too early to tell about academic
work, but the fourth-classman was a bear--or a fool--for extra duty. He
had gone out for half a dozen teams and applied for membership in the
exacting Math Club _and_ Writing Club. The Commandant glanced up;
Grayson was still in his extreme brace. The Commandant suddenly had the
queer idea that Grayson could hold it until it killed him.

"One hundred hours of pack-drill," he barked, "to be completed before
quarter-term. Cadet Grayson, if you succeed in walking off your tours,
remember that there is a tradition of fellowship in the Corps which its
members are expected to observe. Dismiss."

After Grayson's steel-sharp salute and exit the Commandant dug deeper
into the folder. Apparently there was something wrong with the boy's
left arm, but it had been passed by the examining team that visited Io.
Most unusual. Most irregular. But nothing could be done about it now.

       *       *       *       *       *

The President, softer now in body than on his election day, and
infinitely more cautious, snapped: "It's all very well to create an
incident. But where's the money to come from? Who wants the rest of Io
anyway? And what will happen if there's war?"

Treasury said: "The hoarders will supply the money, Mr. President. A
system of percentage-bounties for persons who report currency-hoarders,
and then enforced purchase of a bond issue."

Raw materials said: "We need that iron, Mr. President. We need it
desperately."

State said: "All our evaluations indicate that the Soviet Premier would
consider nothing less than armed invasion of his continental borders as
occasion for all-out war. The consumer-goods party in the Soviet has
gained immensely during the past five years and of course their
armaments have suffered. Your shrewd directive to put the Republic in a
war-like posture has borne fruit, Mr. President...."

President Folsom XXV studied them narrowly. To him the need for a border
incident culminating in a forced purchase of Soviet Io did not seem as
pressing as they thought, but they were, after all, specialists. And
there was no conceivable way they could benefit from it personally. The
only alternative was that they were offering their professional advice
and that it would be best to heed it. Still, there was a vague, nagging
something....

Nonsense, he decided. The spy dossiers on his Cabinet showed nothing but
the usual. One had been blackmailed by an actress after an affair and
railroaded her off the Earth. Another had a habit of taking bribes to
advance favorite sons in civil and military service. And so on. The
Republic could not suffer at their hands; the Republic and the dynasty
were impregnable. You simply spied on everybody--including the
spies--and ordered summary executions often enough to show that you
meant it, and kept the public ignorant: deaf-dumb-blind ignorant. The
spy system was simplicity itself; you had only to let things get as
tangled and confused as possible until _nobody_ knew who was who. The
executions were literally no problem, for guilt or innocence made no
matter. And mind-control when there were four newspapers, six magazines
and three radio and television stations was a job for a handful of
clerks.

No; the Cabinet couldn't be getting away with anything. The system was
unbeatable.

President Folsom XXV said: "Very well. Have it done."

       *       *       *       *       *

Mrs. Grayson, widow, of New Pittsburgh, Io, disappeared one night. It
was in all the papers and on all the broadcasts. Some time later she was
found dragging herself back across the line between Nizhni-Magnitogorsk
and New Pittsburgh in sorry shape. She had a terrible tale to tell
about what she had suffered at the hands and so forth of the
Nizhni-Magnitogorskniks. A diplomatic note from the Republic to the
Soviet was answered by another note which was answered by the dispatch
of the Republic's First Fleet to Io which was answered by the dispatch
of the Soviet's First and Fifth Fleets to Io.

The Republic's First Fleet blew up the customary deserted target hulk,
