
He wished she would hurry with her drink. He had horrible visions of his
wife at home taking off her telovis and coming to his chair. He would
then have to press the switch that would jerk his shadowy self back
along its invisible connecting cord, jerk him back and leave but a small
mound of clothes upon the chair at the table.

Deep depression laid hold of him. He would not be able to see her after
tonight until he received his monthly dole two weeks hence. She wouldn't
wait that long. Someone else would have her.

Unless ...

Yes, he knew now that he was going to kill his wife as soon as the
opportunity presented itself. It would be a simple matter. With the aid
of the telporter suit, he could establish an iron-clad alibi.

He took a long drink of whiskey and looked at the dancers about him.
Sight of their gay costumes heightened his depression. He was wearing a
cheap suit of satin, all he could afford. But some day soon he would
show them! Some time soon he would be dressed as gaily....

"Something troubling you, honey?"

His gaze shot back to her and she blurred slightly before his eyes. "No.
Nothing at all!" He summoned a sickly smile and clutched her hand in
his. "Come on. Let's dance."

He drew her from the chair and into his arms. She melted toward him as
if desiring to become a part of him. A tremor of excitement surged
through him and threatened to turn his knees into quivering jelly. He
could not make his feet conform to the flooding rhythm of the music. He
half stumbled, half pushed her along past the booths.

In the shelter of the palms he drew her savagely to him. "Let's--let's
go outside." His voice was little more than a croak.

"But, honey!" She pushed herself away, her low voice maddening him.
"Don't you have a private room? A girl doesn't like to be taken
outside...."

Her words bit into his brain like the blade of a hot knife.

No, he didn't have a private room at the club like the others. A private
room for his telporter receiver, a private room where he could take a
willing guest. No! He couldn't afford it! No! _No!_ NO! His lot was a
cheap suit of satin! Cheap whiskey! Cheap champagne! A cheap shack by
the river....

An inarticulate cry escaped his twisted lips. He clutched her roughly to
him and dragged her through the door and into the moonlight, whiskey and
anger lending him brutal strength.

He pulled her through the deserted garden. _All the others had private
rooms!_ He pulled her to the far end, behind a clump of squatty firs.
His hands clawed at her. He tried to smother her mouth with kisses.

She eluded him deftly. "But, _honey_!" Her voice had gone deeper into
her throat. "I just want to be sure about things. If you can't afford
one of the private rooms--if you can't afford to show me a good time--if
you can't come here real often ..."

The whiskey pounded and throbbed at his brain like blows from an unseen
club. His ego curled and twisted within him like a headless serpent.

"I'll have money!" he shouted, struggling to hold her. "I'll have plenty
of money! After tonight!"

"Then we'll wait," she said. "We'll wait until tomorrow night."

"No!" he screamed. "You don't believe me! You're like the others! You
think I'm no good! But I'll show you! I'll show all of you!"

       *       *       *       *       *

She had gone coldly rigid in his arms, unyielding.

Madness added to the pounding in his brain. Tears welled into his eyes.

"I'll show you! I'll kill her! Then I'll have money!" The hands
clutching her shoulders shook her drunkenly. "You wait here! I'll go
home and kill her now! Then I'll be back!"

"Silly boy!" Her low laughter rang hollowly in his ears. "And just who
is it you are going to kill?"
