stand. He had a kitten in his arms; a Scotty followed him.

The alien frowned worriedly. "Sure," he said, "and what kin all this be?
Is it some ordinance I've been after breakin'?"

McCord, Sir Alfred and Andersen hastened to reassure him and made him
comfortable in a chair.

Viljalmar Andersen faced the thousands in the audience and held up his
hands, but it was ten minutes before he was able to quiet the cheering,
stamping delegates from all Earth.

Finally: "Fellow Terrans, I shall not take your time for a lengthy
introduction of the envoy from the stars. I will only say that, without
doubt, this is the most important moment in the history of the human
race. We will now hear from the first being to come to Earth from
another world."

He turned and gestured to Dameri Tass who hadn't been paying overmuch
attention to the chairman in view of some dog and cat hostilities that
had been developing about his feet.

But now the alien's purplish face faded to a light blue. He stood and
said hoarsely. "Faith, an' what was that last you said?"

Viljalmar Andersen repeated, "We will now hear from the first being ever
to come to Earth from another world."

The face of the alien went a lighter blue. "Sure, an' ye wouldn't jist
be frightenin' a body, would ye? You don't mean to tell me this planet
isn't after bein' a member of the Galactic League?"

Andersen's face was blank. "Galactic League?"

"Cushlamachree," Dameri Tass moaned. "I've gone and put me foot in it
again. I'll be after getting _kert_ for this."

Sir Alfred was on his feet. "I don't understand! Do you mean you aren't
an envoy from another planet?"

Dameri Tass held his head in his hands and groaned. "An envoy, he's
sayin', and meself only a second-rate collector of specimens for the
Carthis zoo."

He straightened and started off the speaker's stand. "Sure, an' I must
blast off immediately."

Things were moving fast for President McCord but already an edge of
relief was manifesting itself. Taking the initiative, he said, "Of
course, of course, if that is your desire." He signaled to the bodyguard
who had accompanied the alien to the assemblage.

A dull roar was beginning to emanate from the thousands gathered in the
tremendous hall, murmuring, questioning, disbelieving.

       *       *       *       *       *

Viljalmar Andersen felt that he must say something. He extended a
detaining hand. "Now you are here," he said urgently, "even though by
mistake, before you go can't you give us some brief word? Our world is
in chaos. Many of us have lost faith. Perhaps ..."

Dameri Tass shook off the restraining hand. "Do I look daft? Begorry, I
should have been a-knowin' something was queer. All your weapons and
your strange ideas. Faith, I wouldn't be surprised if ye hadn't yet
established a planet-wide government. Sure, an' I'll go still further.
Ye probably still have wars on this benighted world. No wonder it is ye
haven't been invited to join the Galactic League an' take your place
among the civilized planets."

He hustled from the rostrum and made his way, still surrounded by
guards, to the door by which he had entered. The dog and the cat trotted
after, undismayed by the furor about them.

They arrived about four hours later at the field on which he'd landed,
and the alien from space hurried toward his craft, still muttering. He'd
been accompanied by a general and by the President, but all the way he
had refrained from speaking.

He scurried from the car and toward the spacecraft.

