The storekeeper handed him a small box. Stark opened it to examine the
ring--Carol's birthday present. The single, large diamond set in the
thin precious-metal band dated back to an all-but-forgotten custom
practiced on Earth. Stark thought the engagement ring would please
Carol, though.

Standing in the compressor lock at the Chief's home later, Stark rubbed
the diamond against the sleeve of his tunic. He fumbled with his
breathing globe and then pushed the button that activated the door. The
tele-guard beyond the opening door scanned him rapidly. As he stepped
forward, a red light above the tele-guard flashed on and the door began
to close again.

Stark threw all his strength against the door and squeezed through into
the house.

Throughout the house, Stark could hear the alarm bell. A taped voice,
activated by the tele-guard, said, "Do not enter! Do not enter!"

He found Carol and the Chief in the library alone. Nearly purple with
rage, the Chief drew himself up to his full six feet.

The Chief bellowed, "Stark! Are you crazy?"

The growing feeling of sickness spread through Stark.

"Who do you think you are?" the Chief yelled. "Get back to your office
and consider yourself under arrest as a troublemaker. Give you people an
inch and you try to walk away with everything. Why, I wouldn't let you
touch my daughter if you were the last living being in the Universe!"

Carol didn't look up. She stood through it all, silently, without
moving. Stark knew now where his blind spot had been. He turned and left
them.

       *       *       *       *       *

Back at his office, he waited for the police. Stark stared down at his
reflection in the polished top of the desk. A yellow, moist film of
sweat covered his face. The red eye set in his forehead blinked. But the
pain visible just behind the surface of that eye was not over Carol or
himself.

The pain was for what he was seeing for the first time ... now.

                                                   --BASCOM JONES, JR.




Transcriber's Note:

    This etext was produced from _Galaxy Science Fiction_ February 1955.
    Extensive research did not uncover any evidence that the U.S.
    copyright on this publication was renewed. Minor spelling and
    typographical errors have been corrected without note.





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Blind Spot, by Bascom Jones

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK BLIND SPOT ***

***** This file should be named 30454.txt or 30454.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/3/0/4/5/30454/

