scientist ... but I'm not completely brainless."

"I'm sorry if I gave you that impression--"

"Oh no ... don't be sorry. I didn't mean that to sound so ... well,
the way it sounded ... that is. I know I'm just in your way--" He
started to get up.

       *       *       *       *       *

Leoh waved him back to the couch. "Relax, my boy, relax. You know,
I've been sitting here all afternoon wondering what to do next.
Somehow, just now, I came to a conclusion."

"Yes?"

"I'm going to leave the Acquataine Cluster and return to Carinae."

"What? But you can't! I mean--"

"Why not? I'm not accomplishing anything here. Whatever it is that
this Odal and Kanus have been doing, it's basically a political
problem, and not a scientific one. The professional staff of the
machine here will catch up to their tricks sooner or later."

"But, sir, if you can't find the answer, how can they?"

"Frankly, I don't know. But, as I said, this is a political problem
more than a scientific one. I'm tired and frustrated and I'm feeling
my years. I want to return to Carinae and spend the next few months
considering beautifully abstract problems about instantaneous
transportation devices. Let Massan and the Star Watch worry about
Kanus."

"Oh! That's what I came to tell you. Massan has been challenged to a
duel by Odal!"

"What?"

"This afternoon, Odal went to the Council building. Picked an argument
with Massan right in the main corridor and challenged him."

"Massan accepted?" Leoh asked.

Hector nodded.

Leoh leaned across his desk and reached for the phone unit. It took a
few minutes and a few levels of secretaries and assistants, but
finally Massan's dark, bearded face appeared on the screen above the
desk.

"You have accepted Odal's challenge?" Leoh asked, without
preliminaries.

"We meet next week," Massan replied gravely.

"You should have refused."

"On what pretext?"

"No pretext. A flat refusal, based on the certainty that Odal or
someone else from Kerak is tampering with the dueling machine."

Massan shook his head sadly. "My dear learned sir, you still do not
comprehend the political situation. The Government of the Acquataine
Cluster is much closer to dissolution than I dare to admit openly. The
coalition of star groups that Dulaq had constructed to keep the Kerak
Worlds neutralized has broken apart completely. This morning, Kanus
announced that he would annex Szarno. This afternoon, Odal challenges
me."

"I think I see--"

"Of course. The Acquatainian Government is paralyzed now, until the
outcome of the duel is known. We cannot effectively intervene in the
Szarno crisis until we know who will be heading the Government next
week. And, frankly, more than a few members of our Council are now
openly favouring Kanus and urging that we establish friendly relations
with him before it is too late."

"But, that's all the more reason for refusing the duel," Leoh
insisted.

"And be accused of cowardice in my own Council meetings?" Massan
smiled grimly. "In politics, my dear sir, the _appearance_ of a man
means much more than his substance. As a coward, I would soon be out
of office. But perhaps, as the winner of a duel against the invincible
Odal ... or even as a martyr ... I may accomplish something useful."

Leoh said nothing.

Massan continued, "I put off the duel for a week, hoping that in that
time you might discover Odal's secret. I dare not postpone the duel
any longer; as it is, the political situation may collapse about our
heads at any moment."

"I'll take this machine apart and rebuild it again, molecule by
molecule," Leoh promised.

As Massan's image faded from the screen, Leoh turned to Hector. "We
have one week to save his life."

"And avert a war, maybe," Hector added.

"Yes." Leoh leaned back in his chair and stared off into infinity.

Hector shuffled his feet, rubbed his nose, whistled a few bars of
off-key tunes, and finally blurted, "How can you take apart the
dueling machine?"

"Hm-m-m?" Leoh snapped out of his reverie.

"How can you take apart the dueling machine?" Hector repeated. "Looks
like a big job to do in a week."

"Yes, it is. But, my boy, perhaps we ... the two of us ... can do it."

Hector scratched his head. "Well, uh, sir ... I'm not very ... that
is, my mechanical aptitude scores at the Academy--"

Leoh smiled at him. "No need for mechanical aptitude, my boy. You were
trained to fight, weren't you? We can do the job mentally."


VIII

It was the strangest week of their lives.

Leoh's plan was straightforward: to test the dueling machine, push it
to the limits of its performance, by actually operating it--by
fighting duels.

They started off easily enough, tentatively probing and flexing their
mental muscles. Leoh had used the dueling machine himself many times
in the past, but only in tests of the machines' routine performance.
Never in actual combat against another human being. To Hector, of
course, the machine was a totally new and different experience.

The Acquatainian staff plunged into the project without question,
providing Leoh with invaluable help in monitoring and analyzing the
duels.

At first, Leoh and Hector did nothing more than play hide-and-seek,
with one of them picking an environment and the other trying to find
his opponent in it. They wandered through jungles and cities, over
glaciers and interplanetary voids, seeking each other--without ever
leaving the booths of the dueling machine.

Then, when Leoh was satisfied that the machine could reproduce and
amplify thought patterns with strict fidelity, they began to fight
light duels. The fenced with blunted foils--Hector won, of course,
because of his much faster reflexes. Then they tried other
weapons--pistols, sonic beams, grenades--but always wearing protective
equipment. Strangely, even though Hector was trained in the use of
these weapons, Leoh won almost all the bouts. He was neither faster
nor more accurate, when they were target-shooting. But when the two of
them faced each other, somehow Leoh almost always won.

_The machine project more than thoughts_, Leoh told himself. _It
projects personality._

They worked in the dueling machine day and night now, enclosed in the
booths for twelve or more hours a day, driving themselves and the
machine's regular staff to near-exhaustion. When they gulped their
meals, between duels, they were physically ragged and sharp-tempered.
They usually fell asleep in Leoh's office, while discussing the
results of the day's work.

The duels grew slowly more serious. Leoh was pushing the machine to
its limits now, carefully extending the rigors of each bout. And yet,
even though he knew exactly what and how much he intended to do in
each fight, it often took a conscious effort of will to remind
himself that the battles he was fighting were actually imaginary.

As the duels became more dangerous, and the artificially-amplified
hallucinations began to end in blood and death, Leoh found himself
winning more and more frequently. With one part of his mind he was
driving to analyze the cause of his consistent success. But another
part of him was beginning to really enjoy his prowess.

The strain was telling on Hector. The physical exertion of constant
work and practically no relief was considerable in itself. But the
emotional effects of being "hurt" and "killed" repeatedly were
infinitely worse.

"Perhaps we should stop for a while," Leoh suggested after the fourth
day of tests.

"No, I'm all right."

Leoh looked at him. Hector's face was haggard, his eyes bleary.

"You've had enough," Leoh said quietly.

"Please don't make me stop," Hector begged. "I ... I can't stop now.
Please give me a chance to do better. I'm improving ... I lasted twice
as long in this afternoon's two duels as I did in the ones this
morning. Please, don't end it now ... not while I'm completely lost--"

Leoh stared at him, "You want to go on?"

"Yes, sir."

"And if I say no?"

Hector hesitated. Leoh sensed he was struggling with himself. "If you
say no," he answered dully, "then it will be no. I can't argue against
you any more."

Leoh was silent for a long moment. Finally he opened a desk drawer and
took a small bottle from it. "Here, take a sleep capsule. When you
wake up we'll try again."

       *       *       *       *       *

It was dawn when they began again. Leoh entered the dueling machine
determined to allow Hector to win. He gave the youthful Star Watchman
his choice of weapon and environment. Hector picked one-man
scoutships, in planetary orbits. Their weapons were conventional force
beams.

But despite his own conscious desire, Leoh found himself winning! The
ships spiraled about an unnamed planet, their paths intersecting at
least once in every orbit. The problem was to estimate your opponent's
orbital position, and then program your own ship so that you arrived
at that position either behind or to one side of him. Then you could
train your guns on him before he could turn on you.

The problem should have been an easy one for Hector, with his knack
for intuitive mental calculation. But Leoh scored the first
hit--Hector had piloted his ship into an excellent firing position,
but his shot went wide; Leoh maneuvered around clumsily, but managed
to register an inconsequential hit on the side of Hector's ship.

In the next three passes, Leoh scored two more hits. Hector's ship
was badly damaged now. In return, the Star Watchman had landed one
glancing shot on Leoh's ship.

They came around again, and once more Leoh had outguessed his younger
opponent. He trained his guns on Hector's ship, then hesitated with
his hand poised above the firing button.

_Don't kill him again_, he warned himself. _His mind can't accept
another defeat._

But Leoh's hand, almost of its own will, reached the button and
touched it lightly. Another gram of pressure and the guns would fire.

In that instant's hesitation. Hector pulled his crippled ship around
and aimed at Leoh. The Watchman fired a searing blast that jarred
Leoh's ship from end to end. Leoh's hand slammed down on the firing
button, whether he intended to do it or not, he did not know.

Leoh's shot raked Hector's ship but did not stop it. The two vehicles
were hurtling directly at each other. Leoh tried desperately to avert
a collision, but Hector bored in grimly, matching Leoh's maneuvers
with his own.

The two ships smashed together and exploded.

Abruptly, Leoh found himself in the cramped booth of the dueling
machine, his body cold and damp with perspiration, his hands
trembling.

He squeezed out of the booth and took a deep breath. Warm sunlight was
streaming into the high-vaulted room. The white walls glared
brilliantly. Through the tall windows he could see trees and people
and clouds in the sky.

Hector walked up to him. For the first time in several days, the
Watchman was smiling. Not much, but smiling. "Well, we broke even on
that one."

Leoh smiled back, somewhat shakily. "Yes. It was ... quite an
experience. I've never died before."

Hector fidgeted, "It's uh, not so bad, I guess--It does sort of, well,
shatter you, you know."

"Yes I can see that now."

"Another duel?" Hector asked, nodding his head toward the machine.

"Let's get out of this place for a few hours. Are you hungry?"

"Starved."

They fought seven more duels over the next day and a half. Hector
won three of them. It was late afternoon when Leoh called a halt to
the tests.

"We can still get in another one or two," the Watchman pointed out.

"No need," Leoh said. "I have all the data I require. Tomorrow Massan
meets Odal, unless we can put a stop to it. We have much to do before
tomorrow morning."

Hector sagged into the couch. "Just as well. I think I've aged seven
years in the past seven days."

"No, my boy," Leoh said gently. "You haven't aged. You've matured."


IX

It was deep twilight when the groundcar slid to a halt on its cushions
of compressed air before the Kerak Embassy.

"I still think it's a mistake to go in there." Hector said. "I mean,
you could've called him on the tri-di just as well, couldn't you?"

Leoh shook his head. "Never give an agency of any government the
opportunity to say 'hold the line a moment' and then huddle together
to consider what to do with you. Nineteen times out of twenty, they'll
end by passing your request up to the next higher echelon, and you'll
be left waiting for weeks."

"Still," Hector insisted, "you're simply stepping into enemy
territory. It's a chance you shouldn't take."

"They wouldn't dare touch us."

Hector did not reply, but he looked unconvinced.

"Look," Leoh said, "there are only two men alive who can shed light on
this matter. One of them is Dulaq, and his mind is closed to us for an
indefinite time, Odal is the only other one who knows what happened."

Hector shook his head skeptically. Leoh shrugged, and opened the door
of the groundcar. Hector had no choice but to get out and follow him
as he walked up the pathway to the main entrance of the Embassy. The
building stood gaunt and gray in the dusk, surrounded by a
precisely-clipped hedge. The entrance was flanked by a pair of tall
evergreen trees.

Leoh and Hector were met just inside the entrance by a female
receptionist. She looked just a trifle disheveled--as though she had
been rushed to the desk at a moment's notice. They asked for Odal,
were ushered into a sitting room, and within a few minutes--to
Hector's surprise--were informed by the girl that Major Odal would be
with them shortly.

"You see," Leoh pointed out jovially, "when you come in person they
haven't as much of a chance to consider how to get rid of you."

Hector glanced around the windowless room and contemplated the thick,
solidly closed door. "There's a lot of scurrying going on on the other
side of that door, I'll bet. I mean ... they may be considering how
to, uh, get rid of us ... permanently."

