Belle Bartlett: "Who ever heard of a party without a sell?"

Nancy Stoddard: "Who ever heard of a party going past ten without at
least a warm-up pitch? And Betty promised Fred to send both Ben and
Bennie to the Clinic for their Medchecks. You know we have the newest,
finest diagnosticians--"

Fred Stoddard: "Nancy!"

Nancy Stoddard: "Oh, I'm sorry. I shouldn't be selling you folks at
_their_ party, should I? Come to think, you're all signed with Fred
anyway, aren't you? Well, about Ben, _I_ think--"

Lucy Wilson: "Sh-h-h! Here they come."

       *       *       *       *       *

Smiling, charming--and still not an order form in sight--Ben and Betty
got back to their guests. Another half hour. Barboy was passing around
with nightcaps. Lucy Wilson nervously put a reducegar to her
sophisticated, peppermint-striped lips.

Quickly Ben Tilman was on his feet. He pulled a small, metal cylinder
from his pocket with a flourish and held it out on his open palm toward
Lucy. A tiny robot Statue of Liberty climbed from the cylinder, walked
across Ben's hand, smiled, curtsied and reached out to light the
reducegar with her torch, piping in a high, thin voice, "Amalgamated
reducegars are cooler, lighter, finer."

"Ben! How simply darling!"

"Do you like it? It's a new thing from Amalgamated NovelDiv. You can
program it for up to a hundred selective sell phrases, audio or visio
key. Every salesman should have one. Makes a marvelous gift, and
surprisingly reasonable."

"So that's it, Ben. I just love it!"

"Good! It's yours, compliments of Amalgamated."

"But--then you're not selling them? Well, what on earth--?"

"Damn it, Ben," Fred Stoddard broke in, "come on, man, out with it. What
in hell _are_ you selling? You've given us the shakes. What is it? The
Barboy set? It's great. If I can scrape up the down payment, I'll--"

"_After_ we furnish a nursery with a decent Nana, Fred Stoddard," Nancy
snapped, "and get a second soar-kart. Ben isn't selling Barboys anyway,
are you. Ben? It _is_ that sweet, sweet Nana, isn't it? And I do want
one, the whole nursery, Playmate and all, girl-programmed of course,
for our Polly."

"_Is_ it the nursery, Betty?" Lucy pitched in her credit's worth. "Make
him tell us, darling. We have enjoyed everything so much, the dinner,
the Tri-deo, this whole lovely, lovely place of yours. Certainly the
house warming has been perfectly charming."

"And that's it," said Ben smiling, a sheaf of paper forms suddenly in
his hand.

"What? Not--?"

"The house, yes. Amalgamated's Country Gentleman Estate, complete,
everything in it except Bennie, Betty and me. Your equity in your Center
co-op can serve as down payment, easy three-generation terms, issue
insurance. Actually, I can show you how, counting in your entertainment,
vacation, incidental, and living expenses, the Country Gentleman will
honestly cost you less."

"Ben!"

"How simply too clever!"

Ben let it rest there. It was enough. Fred Stoddard, after a short
scuffle with Scoville Wilson for the pen, signed the contract with a
flourish. Sco followed.

"There!"

"There now, Ben," said Betty, holding Bennie a little awkwardly in her
arms in the soar-kart. They had moved out so the Stoddards could move
right in. Now they were on their way in to their reserved suite at
Amalgamated's Guest-ville. "You were absolutely marvellous. Imagine
selling all three of them!"

"There wasn't anything to it, actually."

"Ben, how can you say that? Nobody else could have done it. It was a
sales masterpiece. And just think. Now salesmen all over the hemisphere
are going to follow your sales plan. Doesn't it make you proud? Happy?
Ben, you aren't going to be like _that_ again?"

No, of course he wasn't. He was pleased and proud. Anyway, the Old Man
would be, and that, certainly, was something. A man had to feel good
about winning the approval of Amalgamated's grand Old Man. And it did
seem to make Betty happy.

But the actual selling of the fool house and even the two other,
identical houses on the other side of the hill--he just couldn't seem to
get much of a glow over it. He had done it; and what had he done? It was
the insurance and the toothbrushes all over again, and the old nervous,
sour feeling inside.

"At least we do have a vacation trip coming out of it, hon. The O.M.
practically promised it yesterday, if our sell sold. We could--"

"--go back to that queer new 'Do It Yourself' camp up on the lake you
insisted on dragging me to the last week of our vacation last summer.
Ben, really!" He _was_ going to be like that. She knew it.

"Well, even you admitted it was some fun."
