
Eve Nolan laughed roughly. "Everybody knows you've been swearing you
won't go the whole way, Grundy. These jungle tactics should be right
up your alley."

"That's enough," Muller cut through the beginnings of the hassle. "I
trust those I appointed--at least more than I do the rest of you. The
question now is whether to return to Earth at once or to go on to
Saturn. We can't radio for help for months yet. We're not equipped
with sharp beams, we're low powered, and we're off the lanes where
Earth's pick-ups hunt. Dr. Pietro wants to go on, since we can't get
back within our period of safety; I favor returning, since there is no
proof that this danger will end with this outrage. We've agreed to let
the result of a vote determine it."

Wilcox stuck up a casual hand, and Muller nodded to him. He grinned
amiably at all of us. "There's a third possibility, Captain. We can
reach Jupiter in about three months, if we turn now. It's offside, but
closer than anything else. From there, on a fast liner, we can be back
on Earth in another ten days."

Muller calculated, while Peters came up to discuss it. Then he nodded.
"Saturn or Jupiter, then. I'm not voting, of course. Bullard is
disqualified to vote by previous acts." He drew a low moan from the
sick figure of Bullard for that, but no protest. Then he nodded. "All
those in favor of Jupiter, your right hands please!"

I counted them, wondering why my own hand was still down. It made some
sort of sense to turn aside now. But none of our group was voting--and
all the others had their hands up, except for Dr. Napier. "Seven,"
Muller announced. "Those in favor of Saturn."

Again, Napier didn't vote. I hesitated, then put my hand up. It was
crazy, and Pietro was a fool to insist. But I knew that he'd never get
another chance if this failed, and....

"Eight," Muller counted. He sighed, then straightened. "Very well, we
go on. Dr. Pietro, you will have my full support from now on. In
return, I'll expect every bit of help in meeting this emergency. Mr.
Tremaine was correct; we cannot remain camps at war."

Pietro's goatee bobbed quickly, and his hand went out. But while most
of the scientists were nodding with him, I caught the dark scowl of
Grundy, and heard the mutters from the deckhands and the engine men.
If Muller could get them to cooperate, he was a genius.

Pietro faced us, and his face was serious again. "We can hasten the
seeding of the plants a little, I think, by temperature and
light-and-dark cycle manipulations. Unfortunately, these aren't
sea-algae plants, or we'd be in comparatively little trouble. That was
my fault in not converting. We can, however, step up their efficiency
a bit. And I'm sure we can find some way to remove the carbon dioxide
from the air."

"How about oxygen to breathe?" Peters asked.

"That's the problem," Pietro admitted. "I was wondering about
electrolyzing water."

Wilcox bobbed up quickly. "Can you do it on AC current?"

Lomax shook his head. "It takes DC."

"Then that's out. We run on 220 AC. And while I can rectify a few
watts, it wouldn't be enough to help. No welders except monatomic
hydrogen torches, even."

Pietro looked sicker than before. He'd obviously been counting on
that. But he turned to Bullard. "How about seeds? We had a crop of
tomatoes a month ago--and from the few I had, they're all seed. Are
any left?"

Bullard rocked from side to side, moaning. "Dead. We're all gonna be
dead. I told him, I did, you take me out there, I'll never get back.
I'm a good man, I am. I wasn't never meant to die way out here.
I--I--"

He gulped and suddenly screamed. He went through the door at an
awkward shuffle, heading for his galley. Muller shook his head, and
turned toward me. "Check up, will you, Mr. Tremaine? And I suggest
that you and Mr. Peters start your investigation at once. I understand
that chromazone would require so little hiding space that there's no
use searching for it. But if you can find any evidence, report it at
once."

Peters and I left. I found the galley empty. Apparently Bullard had
gone to lie on his stomach in his bunk and nurse his terror. I found
the freezer compartments, though--and the tomatoes. There must have
been a bushel of them, but Bullard had followed his own peculiar
tastes. From the food he served, he couldn't stand fresh vegetables;
and he'd cooked the tomatoes down thoroughly and run them through the
dehydrator before packing them away!

       *       *       *       *       *

It was a cheerful supper, that one! Bullard had half-recovered and his
fear was driving him to try to be nice to us. The selection was good,
beyond the inevitable baked beans; but he wasn't exactly a chef at
best, and his best was far behind him. Muller had brought Wilcox,
Napier and Peters down to our mess with himself, to consolidate
forces, and it seemed that he was serious about cooperating. But it
was a little late for that.

Overhead, the fans had been stepped up to counteract the effect of
staleness our minds supplied. But the whine of the motors kept
reminding us our days were counted. Only Jenny was normal; she sat
between Muller and Pietro, where she could watch my face and that of
Napier. And even her giggles had a forced sound.

There were all kinds of things we could do--in theory. But we didn't
have that kind of equipment. The plain fact was that the plants were
going to lose the battle against our lungs. The carbon dioxide would
increase, speeding up our breathing, and making us all seem to
suffocate. The oxygen would grow thinner and thinner, once our
supplies of bottled gas ran out. And eventually, the air wouldn't
support life.

"It's sticky and hot," Jenny complained, suddenly.

"I stepped up the humidity and temperature controls," I told her. She
nodded in quick comprehension, but I went on for Muller's benefit.
"Trying to give the plants the best growing atmosphere. We'll feel
just as hot and sticky when the carbon dioxide goes up, anyhow."

"It must already be up," Wilcox said. "My two canaries are breathing
faster."

"Canaries," Muller said. He frowned, though he must have known of
them. It was traditional to keep them in the engine-room, though the
reason behind it had long since been lost. "Better kill them, Mr.
Wilcox."

Wilcox jerked, and his face paled a bit. Then he nodded. "Yes, sir!"

That was when I got scared. The idea that two birds breathing could
hurt our chances put things on a little too vivid a basis. Only Lomax
seemed unaffected. He shoved back now, and stood up.

"Some tests I have to make, Captain. I have an idea that might turn up
the killer among us!"

I had an idea he was bluffing, but I kept my mouth shut. A bluff was
as good as anything else, it seemed.

At least, it was better than anything I seemed able to do. I prowled
over the ship, sometimes meeting Peters doing the same, but I couldn't
find a bit of evidence. The crewmen sat watching with hating eyes. And
probably the rest aboard hated and feared us just as much. It wasn't
hard to imagine the man who was behind it all deciding to wipe one of
us out. My neck got a permanent crimp from keeping one eye behind me.
But there wasn't a shred of evidence I could find.

In two more days, we began to notice the stuffiness more. My breathing
went up enough to notice. Somehow, I couldn't get a full breath. And
the third night, I woke up in the middle of my sleep with the feeling
something was sitting on my chest; but since I'd taken to sleeping
with the light on, I saw that it was just the stuffiness that was
bothering me. Maybe most of it had been psychological up until then.
But that was the real thing.

The nice part of it was that it wouldn't be sudden--we'd have days to
get closer and closer to death; and days for each one to realize a
little more that every man who wasn't breathing would make it that
much easier for the rest of us. I caught myself thinking of it when I
saw Bullard or Grundy.

       *       *       *       *       *

Then trouble struck again. I was late getting to the scene this time,
down by the engine room. Muller and Bill Sanderson were ahead of me,
trying to separate Hal Lomax and Grundy, and not doing so well. Lomax
brought up a haymaker as I arrived, and started to shout something.
But Grundy was out of Muller's grasp, and up, swinging a wrench. It
connected with a dull thud, and Lomax hit the floor, unconscious.

I picked Grundy up by the collar of his jacket, heaved him around and
against a wall, where I could get my hand against his esophagus and
start squeezing. His eyeballs popped, and the wrench dropped from his
hands. When I get mad enough to act that way, I usually know I'll
regret it later. This time it felt good, all the way. But Muller
pushed me aside, waiting until Grundy could breathe again.

"All right," Muller said. "I hope you've got a good explanation,
before I decide what to do with you."

Grundy's eyes were slitted, as if he'd been taking some of the Venus
drugs. But after one long, hungry look at me, he faced the captain.
"Yes, sir. This guy came down here ahead of me. Didn't think nothing
of it, sir. But when he started fiddling with the panel there, I got
suspicious." He pointed to the external control panel for the engine
room, to be used in case of accidents. "With all that's been going on,
how'd I know but maybe he was gonna dump the fuel? And then I seen he
had keys. I didn't wait, sir. I jumped him. And then you come up."

Wilcox came from the background and dropped beside the still figure of
Lomax. He opened the man's left hand and pulled out a bunch of keys,
examining them. "Engine keys, Captain Muller. Hey--it's my set! He
must have lifted them from my pocket. It looks as if Grundy's found
our killer!"

"Or Lomax found him!" I pointed out. "Anybody else see this start, or
know that Lomax didn't get those keys away from Grundy, when _he_
started trouble?"

"Why, you--" Grundy began, but Wilcox cut off his run. It was a shame.
I still felt like pushing the man's Adam's apple through his medulla
oblongata.

"Lock them both up, until Dr. Lomax comes to," Muller ordered. "And
send Dr. Napier to take care of him. I'm not jumping to any
conclusions." But the look he was giving Lomax indicated that he'd
already pretty well made up his mind. And the crew was positive. They
drew back sullenly, staring at us like animals studying a human
hunter, and they didn't like it when Peters took Grundy to lock him
into his room. Muller finally chased them out, and left Wilcox and me
alone.

Wilcox shrugged wryly, brushing dirt off his too-clean uniform. "While
you're here, Tremaine, why not look my section over? You've been
neglecting me."

I'd borrowed Muller's keys and inspected the engine room from, top to
bottom the night before, but I didn't mention that. I hesitated now;
to a man who grew up to be an engineer and who'd now gotten over his
psychosis against space too late to start over, the engines were
things better left alone. Then I remembered that I hadn't seen
Wilcox's quarters, since he had the only key to them.

I nodded and went inside. The engines were old, and the gravity
generator was one of the first models. But Wilcox knew his business.
The place was slick enough, and there was the good clean smell of
metal working right. I could feel the controls in my hands, and my
nerves itched as I went about making a perfunctory token examination.
I even opened the fuel lockers and glanced in. The two crewmen watched
with hard eyes, slitted as tight as Grundy's, but they didn't bother
me. Then I shrugged, and went back with Wilcox to his tiny cabin.

       *       *       *       *       *

I was hit by the place before I got inside. Tiny, yes, but fixed up
like the dream of every engineer. Clean, neat, filled with books and
luxuries. He even had a tape player I'd seen on sale for a trifle over
three thousand dollars. He turned it on, letting the opening bars of
Haydn's Oxford Symphony come out. It was a binaural, ultra-fidelity
