Mortland, bearing a camp stool and the kettle into which he had tucked a
tin of biscuits and into which the mosquito-bat had tucked itself, its
orange eyes glaring out angrily from beneath the lid. Next came Mrs.
Bernardi with her knitting, her camp stool and her sorrow.

Dfar-Lll followed with two stools and the plastic tea set. Close behind
was Miss Anspacher, with the sugar bowl, the earthenware teapot and an
immense bound volume of the _Proceedings of the Physical Society of
Ameranglis_ for 1993. Professor Bernardi bore a briefcase full of notes
and the table. The rain had damaged the latter's mechanism, so that its
legs kept unfolding from time to time, to the great inconvenience of
Captain Greenfield, who brought up the rear with the blasting equipment.
Behind them and sometimes alongside them came something--or
someone--else.

[Illustration]

"Surely your camp must have been closer to ours than this," Miss
Anspacher finally remarked after they had been slogging through mud and
water and pushing aside reluctant vegetation for over an Earth hour.

"I am very much afraid," Jrann-Pttt admitted, "that our camp has been
lost--that is to say, inundated."

"What are we going to do now?" the captain asked of the company at
large.

Professor Bernardi shrugged. "Our only course would seem to be making
for one of the cities and throwing ourselves upon the na--Jrann-Pttt's
people's hospitality. If Professor Jrann-Pttt has even the vaguest idea
of the direction in which his home lies, we might as well head that
way." _I wonder whether the natives could help us raise the ship._

"I'm sure my people will be more than happy to welcome you," Jrann-Pttt
said smoothly, "and to make you comfortable until your people send
another ship to fetch you."

The terrestrials looked at one another. Dfar-Lll looked at Jrann-Pttt.

Professor Bernardi coughed. "That was the only spaceship we had," he
admitted. "The first experimental model, you know." _We don't expect to
stay on this awful planet forever. After all, as Louisa says, the
government will have to forgive us. Public opinion and all that._

"Oh," the saurian said. "Then we shall have the pleasure of your company
until they build another?"

There was silence. "We have the only plans," the professor said,
gripping his briefcase more tightly. "I am the inventor of the ship, so
naturally I would have them." _If we brought back some specimens of
Venusian life--of intelligent Venusian life--to prove we'd been
here...._

"Matter of fact, old fellow," Mortland said, "we took all the plans with
us so they couldn't build another ship and follow--"

"Mortland!" the professor exclaimed.

"But they're telepaths," Miss Anspacher said. "They must know already."

Everyone turned to look at the saurians.

"I have ... certain information," Jrann-Pttt admitted, "but I cannot
understand it. You are in trouble with your rulers because they would
not give you the funds, claiming space travel was impossible?"

"That's right," Bernardi said. _Not really specimens, you understand.
Guests._

"And you went ahead and appropriated the funds and materials from your
government, since you were in a trusted position where you could do so?"

Bernardi nodded.

"Of course the question is now academic, for the ship is gone, but since
you proved the possibility of space travel by coming here, wouldn't your
government then dismiss the charges against you?"

"That's exactly what I keep telling him!" Mrs. Bernardi exclaimed.

But her husband shook his head. "The law is inflexible. We have broken
it and must be punished, even if by breaking it we proved its
fundamental error." _Why let him know our plans?_

_Why, Jrann-Pttt, that sounds just like our own government, doesn't it?_

_Yes, it does. We should be able to establish a very satisfactory mode
of living with these strangers._

"We'd hoped that after a year or so the whole thing would die down,"
Mortland explained frankly, "and we'd go back as heroes."

"Do you know the way to your home, Jrann-Pttt?" the professor asked
anxiously.

"Since we were able to catch a glimpse of the sun, I think I can figure
out roughly where we are. All we must do is walk some two hundred
kilometers in that direction--" he waved an arm to indicate the
way--"and we should be at the capital."

"Will your people accept us as refugees?" Miss Anspacher demanded
bluntly, "or will we be captives?" _Which is what I'll bet the good
professor is planning for you, if only he can figure some way to get you
and, of course, ourselves back._

"We should be proud to accept you as citizens and to receive the
benefits of your splendid technology. Our laboratories will be placed at
your disposal."

"Well, that's better than we hoped for," the professor said,
brightening. "We had expected to have to carve our own laboratories out
of the wilderness. Now we shall be able to carry on our researches in
comfort." _No need to trouble the natives; we'll be able to raise the
ship ourselves. Or build a new one. And I'll see to it personally that
they have special quarters in the zoo with a considerable amount of
privacy._

"If I were you, I wouldn't trust him too far," the captain warned. "He's
a foreigner."

"You ought to be ashamed of yourself, Captain!" Miss Anspacher said.
"I, for one, trust Jrann-Pttt implicitly. Did you say this direction,
Jrann-Pttt?" She stepped forward briskly. There was a loud splash and
water closed over her head.

Captain Greenfield rushed forward to haul her out. "Well," she said,
daintily coughing up mud, "I was wet to begin with, anyway."

"You're a brave little woman, Miss Anspacher," the captain told her
admiringly.

"This sort of thing may present a problem," Professor Bernardi
commented. "I hope that was only a pot-hole, that the water is not going
to be consistently too deep for wading."

"There might be quicksand, too," Mrs. Bernardi said somberly. "In
quicksand, one drowns slowly."

Dfar-Lll gave a start. _Surely you don't intend to lead them back to
base?_

_Precisely. The swamp is unfit for settlement._

_But to return voluntarily to captivity?_

_Who mentioned anything about captivity? Assisted by our new friends, we
have an excellent chance of taking over the ship and supplies by a
surprise attack._

_But why should these aliens assist us?_

Jrann-Pttt smiled. _Oh, I think they will. Yes, I have every confidence
in Plan C._

"I suggest," the professor said, ignoring his wife's pessimism, "that
each one of us pull a branch from a tree. We can test the ground before
we step on it, to make sure that there is solid footing underneath."

"Good idea," the captain approved. He reached out the arm that was not
occupied with Miss Anspacher and tugged at a tree limb.

And then he and the lady physicist were both floundering in the ooze.

"Well, really, Captain Greenfield!" she cried, refusing his aid in
extricating herself. "I always thought you were at least a gentleman in
spite of your illiteracy!"

"Wha--what happened?" he asked as he struggled out of the mud.
"Something pushed me; I swear it."

Jrann-Pttt mentalized. "It seems the tree did not like your trying to
remove a branch."

"The tree!" Greenfield's pale blue eyes bulged. "You're joking!"

"Not at all. As a matter of fact, I myself have been wondering why there
were so many thought-streams and yet so few animals around here. It
never occurred to me that the vegetation could be sentient and have such
strong emotive defenses. In all my experience as a botanist, I--"

"I thought you were a zoologist," Bernardi interrupted.

"My people do not believe in excessive specialization," the saurian
replied.

"Trees that think?" Mortland inquired incredulously.

"They're not very bright," Jrann-Pttt explained, "but they don't like
having their limbs pulled off. I don't suppose you would, either, for
that matter."

"I propose," Miss Anspacher said, shaking out her wet hair, "that we
break up the camp stools and use the sticks instead of branches to help
us along."

"Good idea," the captain said, trying to get back into her good graces.
"I always knew women could put their brains to use if they tried."

She glared at him.

"I thought we'd use the furniture to make a fire later," Mortland
complained. "For tea, you know."

"The ground's much too wet," Professor Bernardi replied.

"And besides," Miss Anspacher added, "I lost the teapot in that
pot-hole."

"But you managed to save the _Proceedings of the Physical Society_,"
Mortland snarled. "Serve you right if I eat it. And I warn you, if
hard-pressed, I shall."

"How will we cook our food, though?" Mrs. Bernardi demanded
apprehensively. "It's a lucky thing, Mr. Pitt, that we have you with us
to tell us which of the berries and things are edible, so at least we
shan't starve."

The visible portion of Jrann-Pttt's well-knit form turned deeper green.
"But I regret to say I don't know, Mrs. Bernardi. Those 'native' foods I
served you were all synthetics from our personal stores. I never tasted
natural foods before I met you."

