would be even less likely to take their duties seriously than Dirrul's
own unit.

He tried to make the information enigmatic to the curious and at least
suggestive to the Vininese. He used the landing Wave-code 373. The
small red light on the control panel glowed and he knew he had
established contact. In carefully chosen Vininese he spoke into the
teleray mouthpiece.

"Sorgel requires help for Glenna-Hurd Plan. Exactly fifty days, their
time."

He repeated the message. As an afterthought he gave his own position
and asked for emergency repair assistance. The whole meaning hinged
upon the names of Glenna and Hurd. However, since they had been taken
to Vinin, they should already have outlined the Plan to the Vininese
command. If there were any doubts Headquarters could teleray for
clarification. When his speaker remained silent Dirrul assumed he had
been understood.

He began to feel the pull of Vininese gravity, found himself in
trouble with his ship. He tried to keep the disabled cargo carrier
relatively stationary, so that the Vininese repair ships could locate
him. With only one power tube, however, maneuver was impossible. The
battered ship plunged out of control toward the planet.

For an hour Dirrul fought with all the skill he knew. A thousand feet
above the surface he managed to force the ship to level off
temporarily. He had no time to seek a proper landing area and in any
case his gear had been shot away.

There was a wide flat plain directly below him, in the distance the
towering mass of a large city silhouetted against a range of
mountains. Dirrul headed his ship for the open fields, setting the
safety devices for a crash landing.

He hung around his neck the identification disk Sorgel had given him,
tucking it beneath his tunic. If he were hurt in the landing, a
Vininese might find him, and the disk would indicate that he was
important enough to be taken to the Headquarters Command. If his
teleray hadn't been understood there might still be a chance for him
to make his report in person.

The ship crashed against the hard ground. Dirrul felt a wrenching pain
as the automatic safety arms pinioned him fast to cushion the fall,
before hurling him free of the blazing control room. After that he
lost consciousness.


V

When Dirrul opened his eyes it was after dark but the triple moons of
Vinin were full and the landscape glowed with a yellowish light. He
had fallen into a ditch which ran beside a narrow, green-paved road.
In the distance, hidden in a dense copse of blue tree-like
vegetation, he saw the fragments of his wrecked ship. The purple grass
of Vinin spread richly all around him, damp and warm. At the bottom of
the ditch a reddish trickle of liquid washed over his feet.

His throat ached with thirst. His tongue clung like sand to the roof
of his mouth. He knew that an Agronian could live in the Vininese
atmosphere but he was uncertain whether his body could assimilate the
native liquids. Yet to ease the torture he dipped his hand into the
red fluid and rubbed a few drops over his lips. The sting of salt
increased his torment.

His body shuddered with pain as he pulled himself to his feet. He
crept a few feet along the green highway, and slowly his will mastered
his strength so that he could walk erect. He began to orient himself a
little. On the horizon he saw the skyline of the city he had observed
from the air and he knew he was following the road in the right
direction.

But the distance was greater than he had estimated. He walked for an
hour and the city still seemed no closer. Nor had he seen any sign of
habitation where he might go for help, nothing except the towering
endless yellow stone wall which he had been following for more than
half an hour. There was neither gate nor break in the stone. Atop the
wall regularly spaced brackets held three naked wires in place.

The wall probably guarded the estate of a Vininese official, he
decided. In that case the wires were either a warning device or a
charged trap against thieves. Dirrul was puzzled by the obvious
deduction. Such things were necessary on Agron to protect important
installations like the Beam Transmitters--but he had hardly expected
there would be a need for them on Vinin. Yet when he considered it
objectively, why not? Every system of society, no matter how ideal,
would produce inevitable malcontents--there were fools among the
Vininese, as there were among other peoples.

Dirrul saw a towering gate in the wall and ran ahead eagerly, only to
fall in disappointment against the thick metal grille. The gate was
locked by a concealed device he could not locate. At a considerable
distance inside the wall was a second, higher than the first. Dirrul
saw a faint light at the inner gate and assumed there was a guard of
some sort stationed there. He tried with all his strength to cry out
for help but his throat was dust-dry. He could utter only a faint
whisper.

When he tried to go on he was overcome with exhaustion. He staggered a
few feet beyond the gate and collapsed into the ditch. He lay face
down in the warm purple grass, his swollen tongue hanging limply from
his mouth. Imperceptibly the thirst began to diminish. After a
moment's speculation Dirrul understood why and crushed a handful of
the purple grass against his lips. It was warm and sweet--a comforting
liquid began to flow down his throat. He plunged his head luxuriously
into a thick mass of the weed, breathing deeply the sweet odor of the
crushed blades.

A silent grey vehicle darted along the green road and jerked to a stop
in front of the gate. It came so quickly Dirrul had no time to call
out. The Vininese driver stood up and bawled orders at the inner gate.
A faint voice replied. The driver shouted again. The gate swung open
and the vehicle moved inside.

Bewildered, Dirrul sat up, his head reeling. He understood a little
Vininese, not enough to translate exactly what had been said but
enough to make out a tantalizing half-meaning. The driver was
searching all the work camps, he had said, for the Agronian girl,
Glenna. He wanted to check something or other to see if she were here.

Work camp? Dirrul decided he must have got the word wrong. Glenna and
Hurd might still be in hospitals but if they had recovered they would
be honored citizens of Vinin. Still--what sort of hospital would have
both double walls and alarm wires?

Only an asylum for hopeless mental cases! The realization made Dirrul
cold with a terrible fear. Glenna--hopelessly insane!

To save the Movement it was vital for Dirrul to make his report
immediately. What help could the Vininese get from a madwoman? He
sprang up and ran dizzily to the gate. Before he could shout for the
guard shadowy figures rose up around him, silently closing great hairy
hands over his mouth and dragging him back across the road.

Tied and gagged Dirrul watched while the black-robed creatures worked
stealthily at the central bars of the gate with tiny blue-flaming
torches. Beneath their flowing capes they were beings like himself,
which indicated that they were either Agronian or Vininese, for by the
perverse chance of biological adaptation the people of the two planets
were so structurally similar that even intermarriage was possible. One
by one they cut out the bars until the span in the gate was wide
enough for them to work their way through.

For a moment the band stood in the road, apparently talking. At least
their lips moved and their hands fluttered expressively but Dirrul
heard no sound. Reaching a decision they went through the gate in
single file, carrying long vicious weapons with them. Two of the
black-caped men came and stood guard on either side of Dirrul.

Whatever these vandals were doing they were working in stealth and
fear and Dirrul realized their aim must be illegal. He fought to break
free of his bonds so that he might warn the loyal Vininese garrison.
The two guards shoved him back roughly. One of them grabbed Dirrul's
tunic in a claw grip and the cloth tore open, revealing Sorgel's
identification disk.

Both guards bent over him, fingering the disk, talking soundlessly
with their facile fingers. Suddenly they jerked the disk off, snapping
the chain. At the same moment a rolling explosion from within the
wall shook the earth.

Dirrul heard a great noise and a terrifying fear filled his mind. It
was a steady undiminishing fear that gripped every muscle of his body.
His throat was ice-cold. His heart pounded and gasped for breath.
Every nerve-end in his body quivered and his imagination was swamped
with a flood of shattering ephemeral horrors.

Nothing could shake off the terror. Dirrul's skill with reason and
logic failed him. It was impossible to organize his thinking to combat
the sensory shock waves disrupting his thoughts. Logical patterns made
no sense. The very process of trying to build meaning into them--the
process of thinking itself--left him weak and trembling.

The guards watched his terror for a moment, watched while he clung
close to the ground, trying to dig his fingers into it. Then one of
them laughed--a piercing discordant shriek, shrilling louder than the
din behind the wall. The second man, snarling viciously, kicked Dirrul
in the ribs.

For Dirrul the blaze of pain was almost a relief. As his body
responded to it on a level of instinct, the chattering terror in his
mind diminished. A second blow on the head sent him reeling close to
the brink of unconsciousness. His perceptive reactions went slightly
out of focus.

In a wavering mist he saw the black figures emerge from the gate,
dragging a dozen or more captives with them. A second explosion rocked
the earth and flames leaped high behind the yellow wall. In the glare
Dirrul recognized Glenna, struggling frantically in the arms of her
masked captor.

Dirrul's memory after that was a vague patchwork of unrelated
episodes. He saw huge saddled reptilian bipeds dragged out of the
concealing brush. The captives were bound in the saddles and the
black-robed figures mounted behind them. Later two of the men pulled
Dirrul up and tied him across a saddle too.

At a sickening gallop the caravan moved away from the green highway,
striking out over the purple plain. For a while Dirrul lost rational
control of sensation. He felt but without understanding. His brain
pulsed in a continuous terror that seemed to resolve itself into
sound--a continuous high-pitched scream coming from within his own
mind. His body throbbed with pain and nausea wrenched emptily at the
muscles of his stomach. But he could not sort out the feelings,
classify them or adjust to them.

At the edge of the plain the caravan turned up a steep rocky trail
which led into the ragged range of mountains banked behind the
Vininese city. They came to a stop in a stony ravine, concealed
beneath a tangle of gigantic purple-leafed vines.

Dirrul's captors dismounted and removed their black cloaks, hiding
them among the rocks. Underneath they wore the warm gray skintight
workers' clothing of Vinin. The majority left their animals tethered
to the roots of the vine and began the steep descent on foot to the
city. Only three remained behind to guard the prisoners.

They built a small fire and prepared food, serving the hot sweet
chunks of white meat in large wicker baskets. As soon as Dirrul
discovered that he could stomach the food he wolfed his share
hungrily. The guards brought him more. He felt better. Except for the
sing-song ringing in his head he might have been able to think clearly
enough to evaluate his own position.

But that could be done later. He was overcome by an immense
drowsiness. He relaxed and slept.


VI

A shrill scream woke him with a start of horror. His captors had taken
him from his saddle and propped him against a mound of rocks, along
with the other prisoners. His muscles were numb and dead, so limp it
was almost impossible for him to turn his head. Faintly the whirring
terror whispered in his mind.

Dirrul's eyes focused slowly on the clearing. One of the prisoners had
