And then at last, the pickings--growing slimmer always--diminished to
the vanishing point. Merril stood before us and gave the assembled crews
their option.

"The treasure hunt is over," our captain told us, "And those who wish
may withdraw now. Take your women and the space-boats and return to
Mars. You have your shares, and you can live in comfort wherever you
may choose. If you wish it, go now."

Some few did go, but most remained. I watched Merril's face, and saw one
last plan maturing there. Then he spoke again and we all understood. One
last raid ... to take Luna and command the world!

       *       *       *       *       *

    "_Still the unity of Mankind was not secure, and Merril, filled with
    impatience for his great dream, decided on one final stroke. He
    would descend on Luna Base itself with his fleet, and commanding all
    Earth, he would drive men together--even though it might mean his
    own death. With this plan of self-immolation in his heart, the
    Peacemaker ordered his hosts and sought the pumice soil of the
    mother planet's moon...._"

This is the way Quintus Bland, historian and scholar, puts it down for
posterity. I, one of "his hosts," would say it another way.

We had gutted the Solar System of its treasure and at last men were
uniting against us. Our "fleet" was reduced to two small ships and a
bare handful of men and women to fight them. Jaq Merril could see the
handwriting on the wall and he knew that all must be gambled on one last
throw of the dice. Only with Terra herself under our guns could we hope
to continue sucking the juice of the worlds into our mouths. It was all
or nothing, for we had grown used to our life and we could no longer
change it to meet the demands of the dawning age of Soviet-American
amity.

       *       *       *       *       *

Side by side the _Arrow_ and the _Hound_ slanted sunward. Mars behind
us, ahead lay the Earth-Moon system. Ten years had passed since any of
us aboard the Compact ships had seen the home world, and though we no
longer felt a part of it, the sight of the silvery cloud-flecked globe
touched our hearts. Touched them as the sapphires of Mimas or the gold
of Corfu touched them. We saw the planet that gave us birth and we were
filled with hunger for it. To own it, command it, make it our own.

Luna's mountains were white and stark under our keels as Merril led us
across the curve of the southern horizon, seeking to put us into
position to attack the UN Moon Base in Clavius from the direction of the
Moon's hidden face.

We swung low across unnamed mountain ranges and deep sheer valleys
steeped in shadow. The voice of the ranger in the _Arrow_ came softly
through the open intercom into the tiny control room of the _Hound_. A
woman's voice, tense with excitement, but disciplined and controlled.

"Range five hundred miles, four seventy five, four fifty--"

And then Merril's voice, calm and reassuring, giving heart to all the
untried ones aboard with his steady conning commands.

"Four o'clock jet, easy, hold her. Drivers up one half standard. Steady
goes. Meet her. Steady--"

Line astern now, the two ships flashing low across the jagged lunar
landscape, and a world in the balance--

An alarm bell ringing suddenly, and my screen showing the fleeting
outline of a Russian monitor above, running across our stern. My own
voice, sharp with command:

"Gun pointer!"

"Here, sir!"

"Get me that gunboat."

The _Hound's_ turret wound about with agonizing slowness as the monitor
reached for the sky, clawing for altitude and safety. And then there
came a searing blast of fire and the fragments of the Russian gunboat
raining down lazily, seeking their eternal rest in the pumice of Luna's
hidden face.

But they had been warned at the UN Base. The monitor had left one dying
shriek in the ether, and the waiting garrison had heard. Merril knew it,
and so did I. We moved forward calmly, into the jaws of hell.

       *       *       *       *       *

The _Arrow_ attacked from ten o'clock, low on the horizon, the _Hound_
from twelve o'clock high. We swept in over the batteries of pulsating
projectors, raining down our bombs. The ground shuddered and shook with
the fury of exploding uranium and the sky was laced with a net of fiery
