"There used to be hundreds of people on that beach, and now look at
it."

"I don't see anything alive."

"There are still plenty of fish. Most of them did all right, even
through the crash. Come along now. There's more to see."

       *       *       *       *       *

A hidden door popped open and Garth stepped back into the corridor. He
trotted beside The Visitor for several minutes, and then another door
popped open. It led to a ramp. Garth climbed it to find himself again
in wonderland. He was standing in the middle of a village. There were
houses, trees, schools, sidewalks and lawns. Somehow the general
perspective was wrong. It made Garth's eyes water a little, looking at
it.

"Actually, this living level ran all the way around the ship," said
The Visitor. "When I stopped spin--artificial gravity, you know--to
set down here, the various sections swung to keep 'down' pointed
right. This is the bottommost thirty-degree arc. It makes two streets,
with houses on both sides of them--a strip three hundred feet wide and
three-quarters of a mile long."

"But how could you afford so much space for passengers? I thought
they'd be all cramped up in a spaceship."

The Visitor chuckled. "Use your eyes, boy! You've seen this ship. It's
about a mile long and a third of a mile high. In space, she spins
about her long axis. One ring, fifty feet high, takes care of
passengers' quarters. Another ring, split up into several levels,
takes care of all food and air-replenishment needs. These trips take a
year or more. Crowding would drive the people crazy. Remember, this is
basically a cargo ship. Less than a quarter of the available space is
used for passengers. But come on down the street here. I want to show
you my museum."

As they walked along the quiet street, with the leaves of trees moving
in the breeze and leaving sun-dappled shadows on the sidewalk, Garth
realized what a tremendous task it must have been for one crippled man
to repair landing damages. The houses must have been flattened and the
trees shattered during the landing. But with thousands of years in
which to work, even an injured man obviously could do much. At least,
thought the boy compassionately, it must have given the old man
something to do.

"How sorry he must have been," murmured Garth with sudden insight,
"when the job was finally done."

       *       *       *       *       *

Wandering through the museum, they came at last to a room filled with
small hand tools.

"I don't think I've ever seen anything quite like them," said Garth.

"Those are weapons," answered The Visitor. "They are missile-throwing
short-range weapons, and they are in tip-top working order. You just
have to point the end with the hole in it at anything you want to
kill, and pull that little lever there on the bottom. And quite a mess
of things they can make, too, let me tell you."

"They seem very inefficient to me," said Garth wonderingly, and then
stopped in confusion. "I beg your pardon, my Lord," he said, "I didn't
mean to criticize anything; it just seems to me that they would damage
a lot of the food they killed."

"That's true enough, my boy, true enough," said The Visitor. "Your
criticism has a lot of point to it. But, you see, they were never
designed mainly to kill for food, but to make it easy for one human to
shoot another."

"Why would anyone want to do that?"

"Your civilization is a very unusual one," answered The Visitor. "It
is planetwide and has developed without a single war or major
conflict. This is due entirely to the fact that I've been here to help
and teach you. Most civilizations develop only as the result of
struggle and bloodshed, with people killing people by the thousands
and millions. I could have raised your people to the technological
level where they are now in a few hundred years, if I hadn't worried
about killing. To do it the way it has been done--so that you can't
imagine why one human should kill another--has taken most of the time.

"It is only recently, as a matter of fact, that my work has been
complete. Your civilization can now stand alone; my help is no longer
