
"We'll have to hole up somewhere for the night," Duncan said. "There
are screamers on the loose."

       *       *       *       *       *

He didn't like what he was thinking, nor the sharp edge of fear that
was beginning to crowd in upon him. He tried to shrug it off, but it
still stayed with him, just out of reach.

Sipar plucked at his elbow.

"Thorn thicket, mister. Over there. We could crawl inside. We would be
safe from screamers."

It was torture, but they made it.

"Screamers and you are taboo," said Duncan, suddenly remembering. "How
come you are afraid of them?"

"Afraid for you, mister, mostly. Afraid for myself just a little.
Screamers could forget. They might not recognize me until too late.
Safer here."

"I agree with you," said Duncan.

The screamers came and padded all about the thicket. The beasts
sniffed and clawed at the thorns to reach them, but finally went away.

When morning came, Duncan and Sipar climbed the scarp, clambering over
the boulders and the tons of soil and rock that covered their camping
place. Following the gash cut by the slide, they clambered up the
slope and finally reached the point of the slide's beginning.

There they found the depression in which the poised slab of rock had
rested and where the supporting soil had been dug away so that it
could be started, with a push, down the slope above the campfire.

And all about were the deeply sunken pug marks of the Cytha!


IV

Now it was more than just a hunt. It was knife against the throat,
kill or be killed. Now there was no stopping, when before there might
have been. It was no longer sport and there was no mercy.

"And that's the way I like it," Duncan told himself.

He rubbed his hand along the rifle barrel and saw the metallic glints
shine in the noonday sun. One more shot, he prayed. Just give me one
more shot at it. This time there will be no slip-up. This time there
will be more than three sodden hunks of flesh and fur lying in the
grass to mock me.

He squinted his eyes against the heat shimmer rising from the river,
watching Sipar hunkered beside the water's edge.

The native rose to its feet and trotted back to him.

"It crossed," said Sipar. "It walked out as far as it could go and it
must have swum."

"Are you sure? It might have waded out to make us think it crossed,
then doubled back again."

He stared at the purple-green of the trees across the river. Inside
that forest, it would be hellish going.

"We can look," said Sipar.

"Good. You go downstream. I'll go up."

An hour later, they were back. They had found no tracks. There seemed
little doubt the Cytha had really crossed the river.

They stood side by side, looking at the forest.

"Mister, we have come far. You are brave to hunt the Cytha. You have
no fear of death."

"The fear of death," Duncan said, "is entirely infantile. And it's
beside the point as well. I do not intend to die."

They waded out into the stream. The bottom shelved gradually and they
had to swim no more than a hundred yards or so.

They reached the forest bank and threw themselves flat to rest.

Duncan looked back the way that they had come. To the east, the
escarpment was a dark-blue smudge against the pale-blue burnished sky.
And two days back of that lay the farm and the _vua_ field, but they
seemed much farther off than that. They were lost in time and
distance; they belonged to another existence and another world.

All his life, it seemed to him, had faded and become inconsequential
and forgotten, as if this moment in his life were the only one that
counted; as if all the minutes and the hours, all the breaths and
heartbeats, wake and sleep, had pointed toward this certain hour upon
this certain stream, with the rifle molded to his hand and the cool,
calculated bloodlust of a killer riding in his brain.

       *       *       *       *       *

Sipar finally got up and began to range along the stream. Duncan sat
up and watched.

Scared to death, he thought, and yet it stayed with me. At the
campfire that first night, it had said it would stick to the death and
apparently it had meant exactly what it said. It's hard, he thought,
to figure out these jokers, hard to know what kind of mental
operation, what seethings of emotion, what brand of ethics and what
variety of belief and faith go to make them and their way of life.

It would have been so easy for Sipar to have missed the trail and
swear it could not find it. Even from the start, it could have refused
to go. Yet, fearing, it had gone. Reluctant, it had trailed. Without
any need for faithfulness and loyalty, it had been loyal and faithful.
But loyal to what, Duncan wondered, to him, the outlander and
intruder? Loyal to itself? Or perhaps, although that seemed
impossible, faithful to the Cytha?

What does Sipar think of me, he asked himself, and maybe more to the
point, what do I think of Sipar? Is there a common meeting ground? Or
are we, despite our humanoid forms, condemned forever to be alien and
apart?

He held the rifle across his knees and stroked it, polishing it,
petting it, making it even more closely a part of him, an instrument
of his deadliness, an expression of his determination to track and
kill the Cytha.

Just another chance, he begged. Just one second, or even less, to draw
a steady bead. That is all I want, all I need, all I'll ask.

Then he could go back across the days that he had left behind him,
back to the farm and field, back into that misty other life from which
he had been so mysteriously divorced, but which in time undoubtedly
would become real and meaningful again.

Sipar came back. "I found the trail."

Duncan heaved himself to his feet. "Good."

They left the river and plunged into the forest and there the heat
closed in more mercilessly than ever--humid, stifling heat that felt
like a soggy blanket wrapped tightly round the body.

The trail lay plain and clear. The Cytha now, it seemed, was intent
upon piling up a lead without recourse to evasive tactics. Perhaps it
had reasoned that its pursuers would lose some time at the river and
it may have been trying to stretch out that margin even further.
Perhaps it needed that extra time, he speculated, to set up the
necessary machinery for another dirty trick.

Sipar stopped and waited for Duncan to catch up. "Your knife, mister?"

Duncan hesitated. "What for?"

"I have a thorn in my foot," the native said. "I have to get it out."

Duncan pulled the knife from his belt and tossed it. Sipar caught it
deftly.

Looking straight at Duncan, with the flicker of a smile upon its lips,
the native cut its throat.


V

He should go back, he knew. Without the tracker, he didn't have a
chance. The odds were now with the Cytha--if, indeed, they had not
been with it from the very start.

Unkillable? Unkillable because it grew in intelligence to meet
emergencies? Unkillable because, pressed, it could fashion a bow and
arrow, however crude? Unkillable because it had a sense of tactics,
like rolling rocks at night upon its enemy? Unkillable because a
native tracker would cheerfully kill itself to protect the Cytha?

A sort of crisis-beast, perhaps? One able to develop intelligence and
abilities to meet each new situation and then lapsing back to the
level of non-intelligent contentment? That, thought Duncan, would be a
sensible way for anything to live. It would do away with the
inconvenience and the irritability and the discontentment of
intelligence when intelligence was unneeded. But the intelligence, and
the abilities which went with it, would be there, safely tucked away
where one could reach in and get them, like a necklace or a
gun--something to be used or to be put away as the case might be.

Duncan hunched forward and with a stick of wood pushed the fire
together. The flames blazed up anew and sent sparks flying up into the
whispering darkness of the trees. The night had cooled off a little,
but the humidity still hung on and a man felt uncomfortable--a little
frightened, too.

Duncan lifted his head and stared up into the fire-flecked darkness.
There were no stars because the heavy foliage shut them out. He missed
the stars. He'd feel better if he could look up and see them.

When morning came, he should go back. He should quit this hunt which
now had become impossible and even slightly foolish.

But he knew he wouldn't. Somewhere along the three-day trail, he had
become committed to a purpose and a challenge, and he knew that when
morning came, he would go on again. It was not hatred that drove him,
nor vengeance, nor even the trophy-urge--the hunter-lust that prodded
men to kill something strange or harder to kill or bigger than any man
had ever killed before. It was something more than that, some weird
entangling of the Cytha's meaning with his own.

He reached out and picked up the rifle and laid it in his lap. Its
barrel gleamed dully in the flickering campfire light and he rubbed
his hand along the stock as another man might stroke a woman's throat.

"Mister," said a voice.

       *       *       *       *       *

It did not startle him, for the word was softly spoken and for a
moment he had forgotten that Sipar was dead--dead with a half-smile
fixed upon its face and with its throat laid wide open.

"Mister?"

Duncan stiffened.

Sipar was dead and there was no one else--and yet someone had spoken
to him, and there could be only one thing in all this wilderness that
might speak to him.

"Yes," he said.

He did not move. He simply sat there, with the rifle in his lap.

"You know who I am?"

"I suppose you are the Cytha."

"You have done well," the Cytha said. "You've made a splendid hunt.
There is no dishonor if you should decide to quit. Why don't you go
back? I promise you no harm."

