pretended to be busy, but we were all watching to see what he would
do. There is a back door to the Chief's office which he seldom uses
and which he always keeps locked. But it opens into the lab wing right
at my table. It wasn't my fault, in fiddling around a little with the
lock, it came unstuck and the door opened a little so I could hear
what went on.

When the Chief came in, both the boys were busy dismantling the
gadget. Discouragement and hopelessness were written all over their
faces, in the dejected slope of their shoulders, in the lackadaisical
movements of their arms. Piece by piece, through the glass partition
of his office wall, the Chief watched the gadget being taken apart.
Each piece was carefully taken back and placed in stock for re-use.

That alone was enough to create great alarm for their sanity. Imagine
a technician putting a piece back to be used over!

Finally the Chief could bear it no longer. He called them into his
office. He carefully shut the door, but he didn't notice the back door
swung open a little farther. I found it necessary to work close to the
crack, and if I turned around, I could get a good view of the entire
office.

The Chief waved the boys into chairs across from his desk. He sat down
and placed his fingertips together. Even then, I could see his hands
were shaking. He leaned forward and asked with careful sympathy in his
voice.

"Didn't it work?"

"Yeah," Kenzie answered in a bored voice. "It worked." I was surprised
at Kenzie's voice. Usually he talked with the concise enunciation of a
professor. Now he sounded like maybe just a good lab tech.

"Then why are you dismantling it?" the Chief asked with a worried
frown.

"It wouldn't be good for people to know about it," Pringle burst out.

"I don't understand," the Chief faltered. Then desperately, "Look,
fellows. I've given you a lotta leeway. You've sluffed your work
something terrible. That's all right to an extent. I've covered for
you."

"Thanks, Chief," Kenzie said drily.

"But Old Rock--er--the General Manager," the Chief complained, "knows
I've been working on something. Now what with budgets coming on, and
all, I gotta have something to show!"

"_You've_ been working on something--" Pringle exclaimed.

"I mean my department has," the Chief covered himself hastily. "I'm
responsible for what goes on in my department, you know. I gotta have
some kind of an explanation." He was almost wailing now. "What with
budgets coming on, and all."

"Make up your own explanation," Kenzie answered disinterestedly.
"It's a cinch you can't give out with the real one."

The Chief began to wheedle. "You two boys know the explanation. Why
can't you tell me? This is your Chief who's talking, boys. The one who
has always stood by you and covered for you. Remember? You just gotta
tell me, boys." I saw Pringle and Kenzie look at one another.

"I guess he's right, Ken," Pringle said. "That is, if he promises
never to tell anybody."

"Yeah. I guess so." Kenzie nodded his head in agreement. "We owe him
that much for just letting us alone."

The Chief let out a big sigh of relief.

"It's about ants," Kenzie began.

"Now, now, Kenzie boy," the Chief interrupted hurriedly. "Let's stay
on the subject, shall we? Let's not get off on that tangent again,
Kenzie boy. Shall we?"

"Nuts," Kenzie said.

"But this is about ants, Chief," Pringle answered. Then shrewdly, "But
first you gotta promise, Chief."

"All right, I promise," the Chief acceded testily.

"It's about ants," Kenzie repeated stubbornly. The Chief winced, but
he held his peace.

"They're intelligent," Kenzie said profoundly, and stopped.

"I know," the Chief prompted. "I know, Kenzie boy. You've been saying
that all along."

"I communicated with them," Kenzie said flatly.

"You what?" The Chief's eyes bugged out. I guess mine did too.

"Sure," Kenzie answered. "After a fashion, that is. In their anthers
they've got a chitin cell diaphragm. Modified cellular structure. They
communicate with a sort of microwave. Roughly you might say it
generates and radiates like our brain wave. Roughly, very roughly.
