Ellaby shrugged. He was going to say, "I'm sorry, but I don't have to
answer that question." He said, and heard through the earphones: "I'm
sorry (I'm) but I (sorry don't have (but) to ans (I) wer that (don't)
question) (have to answer that question)."

"Again, please. I didn't hear you," the personnel tester said.

It was his own voice Ellaby had heard through the earphones. Playback,
with a fraction of a second lapse. Oddly, it un-nerved him. The
reproduced voice had no right lagging. He shouted, "I'm sorry (I'm)
but I (sorry) don't have (but) to ans (I) wer that (don't question!)
(have to) Shut up! (answer) SHUT UP! (that) PLEASE.... (question).
PLEASE! (please)."

"Once more, if you don't mind."

Ellaby's head was whirling. He blinked sweat from his eyes.
"I--please! (I--please!)"

"The law requires that you make some answer, even if answer is a
refusal."

Criminals confessed, Ellaby thought wildly. Is this why criminals
confessed? Did the sound of their own voices drive them mad? It seemed
such a simple device, and yet ... and yet ... but he could fool it. He
couldn't rush the words out in a quick torrent and: "I don't have to
(I don't answer that ques) (have to) tion (answer that question.)"
Ellaby--and Ellaby's echo. "Well, I (well) don't (I don't)!" Ellaby
blinked more sweat from his eyes. "Mumble (mumble). Sob. (Sob)."

"Relax, Ellaby. You seem upset. Will you read this, please?" the
personnel advisor held a card in front of Ellaby's face.

The words swam, blurred together, fused, were readable and then were
not. Ellaby read aloud: "A code (a) of eth (code) ics for (eth)
mankind (ethics for mankind)." It was, he realized, the preamble to
the constitution. "In the (in) nineteenth (the) centur (nine) y the
(nine) common (teenth)"--faster, faster!--"(century the common)
c-common man was defended (common man) by enlightened liberalism (man
was). In the t-twentieth century (in the t-twen) common man was
championed by (tieth century) enlightened liberalism (the common man
was). In the twenty-first century (championed by enlightened) the
common man assumed his proper place (liberalism) at the top of society
but (in the twenty-first cen) will protect the rights of the (tury the
common man) enlightened liberals or any other minority, (assumed his
proper) encouraging them to become (place at the top of) as common as
possible (society but will protect the rights of the enlightened
liberals or any other minority, encouraging them to become as common
as possible).

"Oh God (Oh)," shouted Ellaby. "Shut (God) it (shut) off (it) make
(off) it (make) stop (it) God (stop--God)!"

"Will you agree to answer my question?"

"Anything (anything)! ANYTHING (anything)." Now the playback was a
faint whisper. Ellaby found himself hysterically fascinated by it,
trying to guess the time-lapse, which varied, trying to guess the
volume, which varied. Ellaby's head slumped forward on his chest. The
unfamiliar wetness at the corners of his mouth was drool. Ellaby
didn't quite know it, of course, but he had given himself a very mild
and very temporary nervous breakdown.

Two hours later he was asked one question. He answered: "I want to be
near the Dictator so I can kill him."

       *       *       *       *       *

Later, Dorcas Sinclair asked: "What else happened at testing, Ellaby?"

"Take your time," Mulden cautioned. "He looks nervous."

"I know it. I want to find out why."

"After my EEG," said Ellaby softly, "they told me I had too much
theta."

"Damn you!" Dorcas Sinclair swore. "Then you weren't cleared for top
secret?"

"No, I wasn't. Not at first. Then a strange thing happened. They said
I was cleared only for secret and asked me why I wanted to be cleared
for top secret."

"You fool!" the woman cried.

"I told them it was because I wanted to work near the Dictator. I
didn't mean to tell them, but--"

The woman shook her head in despair. "Don't bother finishing," she
said. "You can clear out of here, Ellaby. You're through. Ten years.
Ten years wasted."

"If you wish," Ellaby said mildly. "But you're missing the most
interesting part. They asked me why I wanted to be near the Dictator."

Dorcas Sinclair sucked in her breath sharply. Even Mulden seemed
anxious. "You didn't tell them?" the woman asked in a frantic whisper.

"I'm afraid I did."

"We'll have to flee the city," the woman told Mulden, ignoring Ellaby
now. "If he told them that, he probably named names. I have friends in
Hampton Roads--"
