
"Ten percent."

"Why not thirty-six point eight?" Cutter said, his eyes bright and
narrow.

Quay whistled. "Even at ten, at the wage we're paying--"

"Never settle for quarters or thirds," Cutter said. "Get the whole
thing. Send for Bolen. I want to talk to him. And in the meantime, Bob,
this is such a goddamned sweet morning, what do you say we go to lunch
early?"

Quay blinked only once, which proved his adaptability. Cutter had just
asked him to lunch, as though it were their habit to lunch together
regularly, when in reality, Quay had never once gone to lunch with
Cutter before. Quay was quite nonchalant, however, and he said, "Why,
fine, George. I think that's a good idea."

       *       *       *       *       *

Bolen appeared in Cutter's office the next morning, smiling, his eyes
darting quickly about Cutter's desk and walls, so that Cutter felt, for
a moment, that showing Bolen anything as personal as his office, was a
little like letting the man look into his brain.

"Quay tells me you've set ten percent as the top efficiency increase we
can count on, Bolen." Cutter said it directly, to the point.

Bolen smiled, examining Cutter's hands and suit and eyes. "That's right,
Mr. Cutter."

"Why?"

Bolen placed his small hands on his lap, looked at the tapered fingers,
then up again at Cutter. He kept smiling. "It's a matter of saturation."

"How in hell could ten percent more efficiency turn into saturation?"

"Not ten percent more efficiency," Bolen said quietly. "Ten percent
_effect_ on the individual who _creates_ the efficiency. Ten percent
effect of that which _causes_ him to be ten percent more efficient."

Cutter snorted. "Whatever the hell that damned gimmick does, it creates
confidence, drive, strength, doesn't it? Isn't that what you said?"

"Yes," Bolen said politely. "Approximately."

"Can you explain to me then, how ten percent more confidence in a man is
saturation?"

Bolen studied what he was going to say carefully, smiling all the while.
"Some men," he said very slowly, "are different than others, Mr. Cutter.
Some men will react to personality changes as abrupt as this in
different ways than others. You aren't too concerned, are you, with what
those changes might already have done to any of the individuals
affected?"

"Hell, no," Cutter said loudly. "Why should I be? All I'm interested in
is efficiency. Tell me about efficiency, and I'll know what you're
talking about."

"All right," Bolen said. "We have no way of knowing right now which men
have been affected more than others. All we have is an average. The
average right now is eight and nine-tenths percent. But perhaps you have
some workers who do not react, because they really do not suffer the
lacks or compulsions or inhibitions that the Confidet is concerned with.
Perhaps they are working at top efficiency right now, and no amount of
further subjection to the Confidet will change them."

"All right then," Cutter said quickly, "we'll ferret that kind of
deadwood out, and replace them!"

"How will you know which are deadwood?" Bolen asked pleasantly.

"Individual checks, of course!"

Bolen shook his head, looking back at his tapering fingers. "It won't
necessarily work. You see, the work that these men are concerned with is
not particularly demanding work, is it? And that means you want to
strike a balance between capability and demand. It's the unbalance of
these things that creates trouble, and in your case, the demand
outweighed the capability. Now, if you get a total ten-percent increase,
then you're balanced. If you go over that, you'll break the balance all
over again, except that you'll have, in certain cases, capability
outweighing the demand of the work."

"Good," Cutter said. "Any man whose capability outweighs the work he's
doing will simply keep increasing his efficiency."

Bolen shook his head. "No. He'll react quite the other way. He'll lose
interest, because the work will no longer be a challenge, and then the
efficiency will drop."

Cutter's jaw hardened. "All right then. I'll move that man up, and fill
his place with someone else."

Bolen looked at Cutter's eyes, examined them curiously. "Some men have a
great deal of latent talent, Mr. Cutter. This talent released--"

Cutter frowned, studying Bolen carefully. Then he laughed suddenly. "You
think I might not be able to handle it?"

"Well, let's say that you've got a stable of gentle, quiet mares, and
you turn them suddenly into thoroughbreds. You have to make allowances
for that, Mr. Cutter. The same stalls, the same railings, the same
stable boys might not be able to do the job anymore."

"Yes," Cutter said, smiling without humor, "but the _owner_ has nothing
to do with stalls and railings and stable boys, only in the sense that
they are subsidiary. The owner is the owner, and if he has to make a few
subsidiary changes, all right. But nothing really affects the owner, no
matter whether you've got gentle mares or thoroughbreds."

Bolen nodded, as though he had expected that exact answer. "You are a
very certain man, aren't you, Mr. Cutter?"

"Would I be here, in this office, heading this company, if I weren't,
Bolen?"

Bolen smiled.

Cutter straightened in his chair. "All right, do we go on? Do we shoot
for the limit?"

Bolen chose his words carefully. "I am interested in testing my
