"You're late, Josiah. I told you we'd begin at nine."

"Sorry, Burl. I was delayed."

Jasperson paused in the act of raking in the pot, and looked up sharply.

"Anything wrong?"

"No, all serene."

"Anything you need my advice on?"

"No, just a routine conference with the navigator."

"Then pull up a chair and get in the game."

Nearly half the chips were piled in front of Jasperson, and across from
him a modest heap sat before the professor. At his right the baggy-eyed
only son of a deutonium millionaire fingered his dwindling pile
indifferently, and on his left Dr. Willoughby stared unbelievingly at
his few remaining chips, three blues and a couple of whites.

"I'll just watch," said the Captain. "You know I'm not much of a
gambler. Chess is my game."

"Oh, come on, Josiah. I insist that you play. Prove that you've got red
blood in your veins."

Evans hesitated, but remained standing. "I'd rather just look on."

"Now look here, Captain. Doesn't the Star Line always try to please its
passengers? Well, I'm a passenger. Or is it just your native caution
that makes you afraid of losing?" His laugh did not entirely disguise
the irritation in his voice.

"All right, anything to oblige," said Evans wearily, pulling up a chair.
"What stakes are you playing for?"

The Captain lost, slowly and steadily. Mechanically he went through the
motions of dealing, discarding, drawing, and betting, but it was obvious
that his mind was not on the game. Jasperson rarely lost a hand, if he
had stayed at all, while Professor Larrabee's luck was unpredictable,
the pile of chips before him fluctuating, growing or diminishing with
startling swiftness.

They were interrupted once when a waiter came in with a tray of bottles
and glasses. The Captain refused.

"But one drink won't do you any harm," said Jasperson.

"I never drink in space. For one thing, the rules of the Star Line
explicitly forbid it, as you should know."

"Yes, I helped make that rule. That means I can release you from it."

But Evans was firm. "I never drink in space," he repeated. "I'll take
two cards--no, make it three."

The professor surveyed his hand with his customary sprightly air.

"I'll play these," he said.

Jasperson discarded. "I'll take one."

Captain Evans languidly opened the betting, but after the first round he
dropped out, and only Jasperson and the professor remained. Each raised
the other persistently, and while Jasperson grew more and more excited,
the professor smiled as usual, his eyes glinting with amusement.

"And another five," said Larrabee.

For the first time, Jasperson hesitated. "You sure you mean it,
professor? I kind of hate to clean you out, especially because I doubt
if you can afford it."

"Suppose you let me be the judge of what is, after all, a private
matter?"

"All right, it's you that will go bankrupt, not me. And another five."

"See you, and raise you five!"

       *       *       *       *       *

Jasperson sat back and pondered, his cold eyes calculating. "Now let's
review the situation, just among friends. The professor's a smart man,
and he isn't rich. He saw me draw one card, so he can make a pretty good
guess what I probably hold, if I drew the right card, but he's playing a
pat hand, and playing as if he meant it. Well, I've put a lot of credits
in that pot, but I never did believe in throwing good money after bad,
even in a friendly game. I quit."

"What? You mean you're going to drop out without even seeing me?"

"I know when I'm licked. Five credits is five credits, even to me." He
threw down his cards and reached to gather in the deck.

Slowly Professor Larrabee raked in the chips, as Jasperson went on
complacently.

"That's the only principle a practical man can work on. Know when you're
licked. Get all the facts, analyze all the data, and then act on the
logical conclusion, no matter how much you may hate to. It was clear to
me that you must have drawn a pat flush that would top my straight, so I
simply decided not to waste any more money."

"Thank you, Mr. Jasperson. I appreciate the gift."

"It was no gift. You had me beat."

"Did I? Only if you had all the facts, only if you analyzed all the
data, and only if you reached the correct conclusion. Perhaps you ought
to see what I held."

Deliberately he turned over his hand and spread the cards.

Jasperson jumped to his feet in a rage. "But that's a handful of junk!
Not even a pair! You held a bust, and I had you beat!"

"Certainly. But you didn't know it. Without all the facts, you acted on
a faulty conclusion."

Breathing noisily, his plump face flushed, Jasperson smashed his fist
into his pile of chips and scattered them to the floor.

"A pure bluff! I hate bluffing!"

"Then you miss a great deal of fun in life," said Larrabee calmly. "I
find it dull just to analyze data and then bet on a sure thing. I like a
little excitement."

Slowly the financier sank back into his chair. He gulped in a large
breath of air and tried to steady himself, a sickly smile around his
mouth.

"Excuse me, Professor. But you took me by surprise." Hands trembling, he
began to shuffle the deck.

There was a knock at the door, and a crewman entered.

"What is it, Stacey?" said Captain Evans.

"Chief Wyman is waiting to see you in your quarters, sir."

With a sigh of relief, the Captain turned in his few chips. "Time for
me to quit, anyway."

His face still red, Jasperson looked up hopefully. "Shall I come with
you? Any way I can be of use?"

"No thank you, Burl. I'll leave you to your little game."

       *       *       *       *       *

In the Captain's quarters, Chief Wyman was pacing the floor.

"Sir!" he burst out. "This is it! We've hit the Thakura Ripples!"

"Impossible, Wyman! It's too soon. What's happened?"

"You told me to report as soon as we ran across anything suspicious,
sir. Well, look what our screen has been picking up."

He handed over a plastic record tape, perforated by minute notches which
outlined an unsystematic, jagged line of peaks and hollows.

"We've been getting this stuff all evening."

"Doesn't seem to mean anything. It doesn't show any sort of pattern."

"No, sir, and it may not mean anything, but it's different from what
we've been getting up till now. And then another thing. It's probably
not serious, but the number ten Pile has started to heat."

"Begun to heat? What's wrong with Pile Ten? One of your men been getting
careless?"

"I'm positive not, sir. I have complete confidence in all of them."

Captain Evans studied the record tape, a worried frown on his forehead.

"It's just possible, I suppose, that the Ripples--Is Pile Ten heating
fast?"

"No, sir. It's still below the critical level, and of course we're
putting in dampers."

"I wish we _knew_ something definite about the Thakura Ripples," the
Captain burst out, "what they are, what they do, what they look like,
and _how_ they affect our atomic Piles! If only Thakura were still a
sane man, and could finish up his calculations!"

"Maybe Thakura was crazy to start with," said Chief Wyman, "or maybe the
Ripples drove him crazy. I don't know. But I do know Pile Ten is
heating."

"Well, keep watching it. Double the checks on the other Piles, and let
me know of even the slightest rise."

As soon as the door had closed, Evans opened the desk panel and buzzed
Operations.

"Pilot Thayer? Captain Evans here. I am about to give you an order. As
soon as you have executed it, come at once to my cabin, and bring
Navigator Smith with you. Here it comes. Reduce speed immediately,
repeat immediately, to one-half, repeat one-half. That's all."

       *       *       *       *       *

Nobody felt the alteration in the progress of the _Star Lord_. Within
the metal casing of the ship nothing was changed. The sunny scenes in
the walls were just as bright, and the synthetic light of the slowly
moving stars at night was just as soothing. For the passengers, the
black menace outside the ship did not exist. Because change of speed
cannot be felt in hyperspace, they had no way of realizing that the
_Star Lord_ had slackened her pace and was feeling her way cautiously as
a blind man to avoid the ominous barriers of the Thakura Ripples.

On their way to their cabins that night, there were a few people who
noticed that the bulletin which detailed the day's run had not been
posted on the board, but they wondered only for a moment why it had been
omitted, and then forgot the matter.

Going in to breakfast next morning, Burl Jasperson stopped to read the
bulletin as usual, to find how many light years distance had been put
behind him in this interminable journey, and he clenched his fist at
finding a blank board before him.

Abruptly turning his back on the dining room, he proceeded straight to
the Captain's quarters, where Stacey stopped him in the anteroom.

"Where's Captain Evans?"

"I'm sorry, Mr. Jasperson. The Captain left orders he was not to be
disturbed."

"He'll see _me_. Let him know I'm here."

"I'm sorry, sir. My orders were, nobody was to be admitted. He was very
specific."

Stacey did not budge, but the inner door swung open and the Captain's
tired face peered out.

"You have a very penetrating voice, Burl. I suppose you might as well
come in. It's all right, Stacey. Stand by."

He moved to let Jasperson enter, and closed the door.

About the desk sat Chief Engineer Wyman, Chief Pilot Thayer, and Chief
Navigator Smith, all studying a chart laid out before them, and making
computations. They looked up at the interruption.

"What's going on here?" said Jasperson. "If you're having a conference
of some kind, I should be in on it."

"Just routine work, Burl. What is it you want?"

"Somebody is getting careless. The bulletin of yesterday's run has not
been posted. It's little things like that that make all the difference
in the reputation of a shipping line. Somebody ought to be reprimanded.
What was the day's run, by the way? Well, speak up, Josiah! I'm
waiting."

Evans reached for a sheet of paper from the desk and silently handed it
across. Jasperson looked at the figures, frowned, and spoke angrily.

"Have your computers broken down, Captain Evans? Or is this a joke? Why,
that's only about two-thirds our usual distance. At this rate it will
take us from now to eternity to arrive."

"You'd better sit down, Burl." The Captain looked steadily at him.
"Those figures explain why I ordered that the bulletin was not to be
posted. Not one passenger out of a hundred would have noticed much
change in the figures, but I do not want to alarm even that one in a
hundred. I have ordered the ship to proceed at half-speed."

"What? Have you lost your mind?"

"We are approaching the Thakura Ripples. It just isn't safe to go any
faster."

Expelling a long breath, Jasperson spoke more calmly.

"That means we'll be late in reaching Almazin III?"

"Three or four days, perhaps, not more. Eventually we'll get through
this danger zone, and then we can resume speed."

"But we _can't_ be late, Captain Evans! Surely you haven't forgotten
that we're out after the Blue Ribbon? The Light Line's ships have made
it in forty-three days, and we've got to do it in forty-two or less.
This trip is a matter of prime importance to the Star Line, and a delay
of even three days would keep us from breaking the record. I thought you
understood all that?"

       *       *       *       *       *

Sighing, the Captain shook his head. "I know all that. But we are in
dangerous regions, and I can't risk my ship just for a piece of silk!
Last night Pile Ten started heating. It's still hot, and we may have to
expel it. I hadn't expected to reach the Ripples so soon, and had even
hoped we could avoid them entirely, but evidently the limits of the band
haven't been charted very accurately. The only safe thing is to go
slow."

"But the Ripples are imaginary! Why do you think we've hit them?"

"There's the number Ten Pile."

"But why should only that one out of the twenty-four be affected? And
even if it is heating, that's no good reason for slackening speed."

Captain Evans glared back at the plump little man, then his eyes
wavered, and his fingers fiddled uncertainly with the papers on his
desk. His chief officers were watching him intently. At last he
straightened his shoulders and spoke sternly.

"Mr. Jasperson. Surely it will not be necessary to remind you that I am
the Captain of this ship. I am in sole command. Is that correct?"

"Yes, but--"

"Would you seriously advise me to go contrary to my own knowledge, my
own instinct? To run this ship into an area of danger, to risk the lives
of the passengers, all for a piece of ribbon? Would you want to take the
responsibility of giving me such an order, even if I should agree?"
