He had just glimpsed the jagged moonlet rushing obliquely toward them
from the left, bulking suddenly big and monstrous.

_Crash!_ The shock flung them from their feet, and the _Sunsprite_
gyrated crazily in space. There was a blood-chilling shriek of
outrushing air from the fore part of the ship, and the slam-slam-slam
of the automatic air-doors closing, down there.

The cruiser's whole bows had been crushed in by the glancing blow of
the meteor. Now, ironically, the ship was falling clear of the
meteor-swarm for Kenniston's piloting had almost won through it before
the impact. But the _Sunsprite_ was falling helplessly, turning over
and over as it plunged down toward the green surface of the jungled
asteroid.

       *       *       *       *       *

"My God, we're struck!" came Captain Walls' thin yell.

"This is your fault!" Murdock blazed at Kenniston. "You damned pirates
will die for this!"

"Let me at those controls or we'll all die together in five minutes!"
Kenniston cried. "We'll crash to smithereens unless I can make a
tail-tube landing--"

Heedless of Murdock's gun, he jumped to the controls. His hands flew
over the throttles, firing desperate quick bursts of the tail
rocket-tubes to bring them out of the spin in which they were falling.

The brake-rockets in the bow were gone. The ship was crippled, almost
impossible to handle. And the dark green jungles of Vesta's surface
were rushing upward with appalling speed.

Kenniston's frantic efforts brought the _Sunsprite_ out of the spin.
By firing the lateral rockets, he kept it falling tail-downward.

"We're goners!" yelled someone in the stricken ship. "We're going to
crash!"

Air was screaming outside the plummeting ship. Kenniston, his hands
superhumanly tense on the throttles, mechanically estimated their
distance from the uprushing green jungles.

He glimpsed a little black lake in the jungle, and near it the big
circle of an electrified stockade. He recognized it--John Dark's
camp!

Then, a thousand feet above the jungle, Kenniston's hands jerked open
the throttles. The tail rockets spouted fire downward.

Sickening shock of the sudden check almost hurled him away from the
controls. His hands jabbed the throttles in and out with lightning
rapidity, checking their further fall with one quick burst after
another.

A sound of rending branches--a staggering sidewise shock that flung
him from his feet. A jarring thump, then silence. They had landed.


CHAPTER IV

The Vestans


Kenniston picked himself up groggily. The others in the bridge had
been thrown against walls or floor by the shock, but seemed no more
than bruised. Holk Or was nursing his burned arm. But Hugh Murdock,
staggering in a corner, still held his atom-pistol trained on
Kenniston and the Jovian.

"My God, what a landing!" exclaimed Captain Walls, his plump face
still white. "I thought we were done for."

"Maybe we still are," Murdock said grimly. He said savagely to
Kenniston, "You think you've won, don't you? Because you've managed to
crash us on this asteroid where your pirate boss is waiting?"

"Listen, Murdock--," Kenniston began desperately.

"Keep your hands up or I'll kill you both!" blazed Murdock. "March
down to the main cabin."

Kenniston and the Jovian obeyed. The _Sunsprite_ was lying sharply
canted on its side, and it was difficult to scramble down through the
tilted passageways and decks to the big main cabin.

The cabin was a scene of confusion, for it was impossible to stand
upright on its tilted floor. Young Arthur Lanning had been stunned,
and Gloria Loring and the scared blonde girl, Alice Krim, were bathing
his bruised forehead. Robbie Boone was peering wildly through a
porthole at the sunlit tangle of green jungle outside. From Mrs.
Milsom came a shrill, steady wail of terror.

"Stop that screeching," Murdock told the dumpy dowager brutally.
"You're not hurt. Gloria, are you others all right?"

Gloria raised her white face from her task. "Only bruised, Hugh."

She did not look at Kenniston or the big Jovian as she spoke.

Robbie Boone's teeth were chattering. "Murdock, what are we going to
do? We're wrecked, on this hellish jungle asteroid--"

Murdock paid the frightened, chubby youth no attention. Captain Walls,
Bray, and four of the crew were entering the cabin. The captain and
pilot had belted on atom-pistols.

Captain Walls' plump face was paler. "Two of the crew were killed and
our telaudio wrecked by that meteor," he reported. He glared at
Kenniston. "You damned pirate! You're responsible for this!"

"If you hadn't dragged me away from the controls, the cruiser wouldn't
have been struck," Kenniston denied. "And I'm not a pirate--"

Murdock interrupted. "We'll settle with those two later," he told the
enraged captain. "Right now, we'll have to get out of the ship. We
can't stay in here until we get it righted on an even keel."

Holk Or rumbled a warning. "Better be careful about going outside.
Those cursed Vestans are thick in these jungles."

"I'll have no advice from you two pirates!" flamed the captain. "Bray,
you and Thorpe keep your guns on them every minute."

The heavy main space-door was opened. Pale sunlight and warm, steamy
air laden with rank scents of strange vegetation drifted in. Outside
lay a raw clearing the falling ship had crushed out of the jungle.

Captain Walls supervised as they all donned lead-soled weight-shoes to
compensate for the weaker gravity. Then they emerged, young Lanning
being supported by Murdock and Robbie. Kenniston and the Jovian were
last to emerge, under the watchful guns of their guards.

The crew and passengers were looking around with wonder and revulsion.
The silvery bulk of the _Sunsprite_ lay awkwardly heeled on its side.
The symmetrical torpedo shape of the cruiser was now badly marred by
the crumpled condition of its bow.

       *       *       *       *       *

All around them in the thin sunlight rose slender trees whose enormous
green leaves grew directly from the trunks. This grotesque forest was
made more dense by festoons of writhing "snake-vines," weird rootless
creepers which crawled like plant-serpents from one tree to another.
Each stir of wind brought white spore-dust down in a shower from the
trees.

The few living creatures of this forbidding landscape were equally
alien. Big white meteor-rats scurried on their eight legs through the
brush. Phosphorescent flame-birds shot through the upper fronds like
streaks of fire. In the pale sky overhead, there were ceaseless gleams
and flashes of light as the spinning meteor-swarm reflected the
sunlight.

"What a horrible place!" shrilled Mrs. Milsom. "We'll all die
here--we'll never get back to Earth. I knew this would happen!"

"This is certainly a mean spot to be cast away," muttered Captain
Walls. "God knows what queer creatures inhabit it, not to speak of the
mysterious Vestans everybody talks about. And John Dark and his crew
are somewhere here. And the telaudio wrecked, so we can't call for
help."

Kenniston realized that none of the others had glimpsed Dark's camp as
they fell. They didn't know the pirate encampment was only a few miles
away in the jungle.

"What are we going to do, captain?" Gloria was asking, her face still
pale but her voice quite steady. "Can we get away?"

Captain Walls looked hopeless. "We can't take off with the whole bow
of the _Sunsprite_ crushed in."

"We can repair it, can't we?" Hugh Murdock suggested. "Remember, in
the hold is the cargo of machinery and repair-materials that Kenniston
was bringing to repair Dark's ship. Can't we use that equipment?"

The captain looked more hopeful. "Maybe we can. Bray and the crew and
I ought to be able to do an emergency job of patching the bow and
installing new rocket-tubes there. But we'll have to work fast to get
away before Dark's outfit learns we're here."

He pointed vindicatively at Kenniston. "Better lock up that fellow and
his partner to make sure he doesn't signal somehow to his
fellow-pirates."

Kenniston tried again to explain. "Will you all listen to me? I tell
you, I'm no pirate!"

Murdock eyed him sternly. "Do you deny that John Dark sent you to Mars
for repair-equipment, and that you told us that lying treasure-story
to get the equipment here in our ship?"

"No, I don't deny that," Kenniston admitted. "But I'm not one of John
Dark's crew--I never was! I was a prisoner on his ship, captured by
the pirates before they themselves were attacked by the Patrol."

"Do you expect us to believe that?" Murdock said incredulously.

"It's true!" Kenniston insisted. "My kid brother Ricky and I were
captured by John Dark's outfit several weeks ago. We were prisoners on
his ship when it was wrecked by the Patrol. After the wreck drifted
onto Vesta here, Dark wanted to send someone to Mars for
repair-equipment. He wouldn't send one of his own men in charge, for
fear the man would double-cross him and never come back.

"So he sent me, his prisoner, on that errand. Holk Or came along to
help me navigate a ship back. And I had to obey Dark and get the
equipment back here at any cost. For Dark kept my brother Ricky
prisoner here with him, and told me that if I didn't bring back that
equipment, Ricky would be shot!"

Holk Or spoke up. "It's true, what Kenniston's telling you," rumbled
the Jovian. "Me, I'm one of Dark's pirates and I don't care a curse
who knows it. But Kenniston did this only to save his brother."

"I don't believe it," said Captain Walls flatly. "It's another of the
smooth lies this fellow Kenniston makes up so easily."

       *       *       *       *       *

Gloria spoke to Kenniston, her dark eyes still accusing. "If what you
say is true and you're not a pirate, then you brought all of us into
this danger simply to save your own brother?"

Kenniston looked at her miserably. "Yes, I did. I was willing to lead
you all into capture to save Ricky. But I had a reason--"

"Sure, you had a reason," Murdock said bitterly. "What did the safety
of strangers like us mean to you, compared to your precious brother?"

Captain Walls motioned Kenniston and Holk Or angrily toward the ship.
"Bray, take them in and lock them under guard in a cabin," he said.

Holk Or suddenly yelled. "Look out! There's a Vestan!"

Kenniston, his blood chilling with alarm, glanced where the Jovian
pointed. At the west edge of the clearing, a small animal had suddenly
emerged from the dense green jungle.

It was a six-legged, striped, catlike beast, not unordinary as
interplanetary animals go. But its head looked queer, seeming to have
a bulbous gray mass attached behind its ears.

Captain Walls uttered a scoffing exclamation. "That's only an ordinary
asteroid-cat."

"That _is_ a Vestan!" Kenniston cried. "Shoot at its head--"

His warning was too late. The catlike beast had launched itself in a
spring toward their group.

As its striped body shot through the air, Walls triggered his
atom-pistol. The crackling blast of force tore into the body of the
charging asteroid-cat, and the beast fell heavily a few yards away.

But as it fell, the small gray mass upon its neck suddenly detached
itself from the dead animal and scuttled swiftly forward. It moved
with blurring speed toward Bray, the nearest to it of the group.

The little gray creature was no bigger than a man's clenched fists
together. It was a gray, wrinkled featureless thing, except for
pinpoint eyes and the tiny clawlike legs upon which it scurried. It
reached Bray and ran swiftly up his legs and back as he swore
startledly.

Kenniston, made reckless of danger by his horror, yelled and lunged
toward the pilot. Bray was swearing and trying to slap at the gray
thing running up his back. But the little creature had now reached his
