at all.

I said, "Don't get me wrong. If this is what's going into your
playwriting, I'm all for it. And what you do with your money is your own
business. What do you propose?"

"Can you absorb more of my work?" he asked abruptly.

"I'm your agent, aren't I? I'll peddle it if I can't use it myself," I
told him, not that I was so eager for the broker's 10% so much as I
wanted to have the pick of his output for my own productions.

I didn't know what I was taking on. He turned out his third play in just
ten days. _Ten days_, I said. I read to the bottom of page two and
decided to hell with peddling this one. I'd produce it myself.

Before I got into second gear on _Beach Boy_, however, Hillary sends a
messenger over with _Madame President_, a satire so sharp I knew it
would make _Call Me Madame_ look like _Little Women_.

What do you do? There are just so many legitimate theaters in the city.

While I'm pondering this and negotiating with a Hollywood agent to maybe
take _Beach Boy_ off my hands, along comes _Red Rice_, an epic novel of
Communist China that out-Bucked Pearl a hundred heart-wrenches to one.

One phone call sold that one to McMullin, and when they got a look at
the manuscript they raised the advance to $10,000. This was not bad for
a first novel, and I didn't resent my $1000 agent's fee.

Before the summer was over I was about ready to give up show business
and become a one-author agent. Hillary was keeping four secretaries busy
taking dictation and transcribing. He never researched, never revised,
never even glanced at the copy. I've known some prolific writers, but
none could grind it out like Hillary Hardy.

And it was good! Every piece was better than the last. His characters
were strictly 3-D right on paper, and word pictures! When he mentioned
bedbugs, you itched and bled; when the villain slugged the hero a
low-blow, you felt it in your guts; and when boy got girl--brother, turn
up the house-lights, quick.

I got so involved trying to produce five plays at once, making dickers
with publishers and motion picture studios, fighting off television
people and answering mail demanding a chance at foreign rights, that it
was mid-November before I realized that it was over a month since I'd
heard from the golden goose.

In fact Ellie drew my attention to it one morning. "Hadn't you better
call the sanitarium?" she suggested. "Maybe he had a breakdown or
something?"

The thought chilled me. Not only had I sold Hillary's complete output to
date, but I had a file full of contracts for future novels and movie
scripts worth a couple of million dollars.

I didn't phone--I went. To Hoboken.

In the outskirts I found his private hospital, demanded to see Sam
Buckle and was told to sit down and wait. He was in therapy.

       *       *       *       *       *

Two hours later they took me to him. He lay on a hospital bed in his
shorts, staring at the ceiling and the sweat all over him like he had
just stepped out of a showerbath.

"Hello, George," he said, still looking at the ceiling.

"Hi, kid! You sick or something?"

He smiled a little. "The surf at Monterey. The sun fading through the
low morning mist, a golden ghost peering through the somber veil--and
Julia, beside me, clinging to my arm, crying softly--"

"Hey, kid, I'm in New Jersey. Where are you?" I said nervously.

He blinked. "In California, George. Two years ago. I'm there. Do you
understand? _I'm really there!_"

It was a little embarrassing. I felt like an intruder on a beach picnic.
"Well, Hillary, that's just fine," I stammered. "I suppose that means
that--that you've done what you set out to."

"That's right." He nodded slightly. "Total recall, George. Every instant
of my existence re-filed under 'urgent'. Every vision, every sound,
every sensation, laid clean and sharp like a sound film ready for
running. I've done it, George."

"How long ago did you--"

"Three weeks ago I began heavy dosing with the vitamin. Today--just this
last hour--I reached back into prenatal to the first instant of my
cellular existence. And it was like ripping a curtain aside. I--I can't
exactly tell you what it's like. Something like coming out of a black
cellar into the noon-day sun. It's almost blinding."

He closed his eyes, squinting as though to shut out a glare. His blond
hair had grown long, and it lay on the pillow like a woman's. He had
lost some weight, and except for the heavy chest muscles and thick
forearms, he had the appearance of a poet, a delicate soul dedicated to
some ephemeral plane out of this world.

I figured I'd better provide a little ballast. "Congratulations and all
that," I said, "but what about your work?"

"I'm done," he said quietly.

"Done? Are you forgetting that you bought a sanitarium?--some eight
hundred grand worth? And it's only half paid for?"

"Oh, that. The royalties will take care of the payments."

