Monte Bingham turned slowly around and looked toward the big Martian,
Zan Blekeke, who was sitting up with his spindly legs outstretched near
the center of the enclosure.

Blekeke got to his feet and waddled toward us, waving Bingham aside. He
was not smiling. He stood glaring at us.

"Whose?" he said with a swift, half-gesture toward Maxwell.

"Whose?" I repeated. "He's mine. I mean, he's my brother-in-law, John
Maxwell, come to visit me from Sacramento. He's okay. What's going on? I
just wanted to make an appointment to talk with you."

Blekeke heaved his big round bare chest. "Trying still disciple in," he
replied.

"How's that? Discipline, you mean?"

"Yups. Laters out. Strangers out. No excepting. Can't."

"Yeah, but you know me, and John here--"

"Brother law oaks, but both laters. See hall hour halfish. Talk then.
Treatment, yups?"

I said, "Well, I guess that'll be okay. Hour and a half, at the hall,
huh?"

Blekeke said, "Yups," and turned away.

       *       *       *       *       *

He took two steps and stopped. I saw his spine stiffen. His head turned
slowly toward the water's edge where two dogs were running circles
around each other, not far from the enclosure. As the dogs moved,
Blekeke's head moved with them, back and forth and back again....

Suddenly one of the dogs, the smaller one--a black and white spaniel
with flapping ears--turned and raced through the SRI compound, bounding
gracelessly over the sprawled bodies of SRI members. The larger German
shepherd gave two woofs and leaped playfully in pursuit. They passed
within about ten feet of Blekeke.

When the German shepherd barked, I heard a thin, drawn-out squeak, like
a mouse with his tail caught in a trap, come from Blekeke. He turned
around with incredible speed and took a half-step in our direction. His
face was distorted as though in pain, and for an instant I thought he
had stepped on a jagged piece of glass or something.

But then I recognized the expression on his face. It was not pain.

It was terror.

I noticed now that he was trembling violently. He twirled again and
started in the opposite direction, stopped and turned swiftly around
once more. He acted as though he were surrounded on all sides by
invisible Martian-eaters.

The dogs paused at the edge of the enclosure for a moment to stand on
their hind legs and exchange playful blows; then they raced off together
toward the more densely populated beach area.

Blekeke's face suddenly relaxed, and with a final shudder he controlled
the trembling.

He was muttering: "Doggie, doggie, doggie" when he lowered his eyes to
us, and he gave a little start as if he hadn't known we were standing
there.

"Hall. Hour halfish," he said after a moment's pause. Then he turned and
walked rapidly back into the midst of the prostrate SRI members and lay
down.

Maxwell and I exchanged glances and walked away. I felt, all of a
sudden, rather sad and depressed. When we had gone a respectable
distance, I said, "Poor devil! Fear of dogs. It must be awful."

"Fear of dogs? Cynophobia? You think that's what it was?"

"Well, sure," I replied. "Only thing it could be."

Maxwell said, "First case I've ever seen of it."

"Me, too."

       *       *       *       *       *

It was still not quite ten o'clock. We killed the next hour and a half
basking in the Sun and taking occasional dips in the water. We had to go
one at a time, because one of us had to stay and guard the defense
mech.

At 11:30 we kept our appointment with Blekeke. He was alone in the SRI
hall, a long, low, metal building located a half-mile down the beach
from the general bathing area.

       *       *       *       *       *

The hall had once been a storage warehouse of some kind--I have no idea
what kind. But that had been a long time ago; and it was now used
exclusively for SRI meetings.

There was another building near it, the ramshackle, rambling mansion of
a long-dead millionaire, which had been appropriated by the SRI as
housing quarters for the members who did not care to stay in rooms or
hotels in town. And most of them didn't.

Maxwell was interested in the house, but I couldn't tell him anything
about it. I had never been in it, whereas I had been in the hall several
times. Of course, there was nothing much to explain about the hall--it
was practically bare.

The Sun Ray stood like an altar at one end. About thirty-five folding
chairs were lined up in rows facing the Ray. That was all.

Blekeke was doing something to the lamp part of the Ray when we came
in--tightening the bulb, apparently. It was a very simple contraption.
Nothing but a padded, white-sheeted reclining table suspended over the
full length of which was the lamp. The thing was operated by a bank of
controls wired up a few feet away from the table.

"Infra-red heat lamp," Maxwell whispered.

"Sure," I said. "But don't say so."

Blekeke saw us and jumped down from the platform and greeted us with
open arms, apologizing for his rude behavior on the beach.

I told him to forget about it; that I just wanted to ask him a few
questions so I could write up my story about SRI--give him a little free
publicity.

Blekeke beamed. Said he'd be glad to help all he could.

But before I had a chance to ask any questions, he was blabbering: "Give
treatment. New, improve. Much healthier. Give try." And he was pushing
us toward the machine.

I was not the least bit interested in taking a treatment, and I tried to
tell him so, as kindly as I could. But he was insistent.

Finally we agreed to take the treatment, hoping he would get it out of
his system. I handed the defense mech to Maxwell and lay down. Couldn't
tell a damn bit of difference. Ten minutes of warmth and dozy
relaxation, and that's it. You don't feel a bit different after it's
over than you did before.

Unless you're a good cultist, and convince yourself by auto-suggestion
that all your bodily ills have been miraculously--if temporarily--baked
out.

After Maxwell had been given the treatment, I tried again to get Blekeke
pinned down to answering some of my questions, but it was no good.

He was obliging, cooperative and friendly as hell, but his heart just
wasn't in it. He had to tell us about the improvements in the Ray, and
when I threw specific questions at him, he always managed to answer with
some reference to the Ray and start all over again--and it was all pure
gibberish.

I gave up. We parted with mutual benedictions, and John Maxwell and I
walked away, toward the one-track road leading to the old mansion.

"What do _you_ do in a situation like this?" I asked him.

He shrugged. "Try somebody else."

We walked up the front steps of the mansion, and I punched the doorbell.

It was no go there, either. The cultist who opened the door, whom I
remembered as a shoe salesman from Boise, informed us firmly and none
too politely that no one could enter without the explicit and written
permission of President Matl Blekeke. He showed no sign of recognizing
me. He slammed the door.

I gave emphatic utterance to an unprintable word and said, "Let's go
back to town."

       *       *       *       *       *

Johnson showed up in the room promptly at six-thirty, as he had
promised, again slipping in without knocking. He threw his briefcase and
his hat on the bed and pulled up a chair to the cardtable where Maxwell
and I were playing chess.

"How about the defense mechs?" Maxwell asked.

"Hospital in New York is working on 'em," Johnson said. "Promised they'd
have 'em ready tomorrow morning. I'm going up tonight, after I get
through here, so I can pick 'em up right away."

"Quick work," I said.

"Any new developments on this end? I've been too busy today getting
things organized to keep an eye on you."

"Every twelve hours Langston's defense mech starts clicking," Maxwell
said. "Four o'clock this morning and four o'clock this afternoon."

"So he's not giving up on you, anyway," Johnson said. "We know he's
still around. What else? Anything new come up?"

I shrugged. "Spent the whole day on a wild goose chase--from my point of
view. Trying to dig up information for my feature about Suns-Rays
Incorporated."

Johnson nodded. "No luck, huh?"

I told him about the so-called interview with Blekeke that morning, and
how in the afternoon I had tried to contact those SRI members who I knew
had been living in town. That had been futile, too; all of them had
moved to the house on the beach. Then Maxwell and I had spent a couple
of hours in the library, checking reference books for some mention of
SRI or any of its members. With no results.

Johnson recognized the frustration in my voice. "Don't let it get you
down," he said.

I asked him if the C.I.D. had ever investigated the cult.

"Not yet," he said. "Not that I know of. But everyone that you've had
any contact with since you've been here is being checked thoroughly. And
since that includes the SRI cult, it'll get a very complete going-over."

I said, "Well, shucks, then. All I have to do is sit back and let you
fellows dig up the information I need."

"That, of course, depends on how the information is classified after
it's processed," Johnson corrected. "Maybe you can use it and maybe you
can't." He shrugged. "Well, I've got a whole new batch of questions here
for you. That's my job right now. Let's get at 'em."

       *       *       *       *       *

After Johnson was gone and I again felt mentally empty, I turned to
Maxwell, who was pacing the floor restlessly: "Well, shall we go down
and set up your defense barrier again?"

"Let's take a walk," he said. "I've got a headache. Fresh air might
help."

"Suits me," I replied. "I know of a little bar seven or eight blocks
from here...."

I stopped because he was already going out the door, and I had to get up
from the chair, grab the defense mech and run after him.

He wasn't hurrying, just walking casually, but not waiting for anything.

In the elevator, on the way down, he said, "Those defense mechs. God
damn. I wish those defense mechs...."

I nudged him. The elevator operator was looking at him closely, and
there's no use taking any chances. He ought to know better.

He was out of the elevator as soon as the door opened at ground level.
He walked toward the front entrance. I had to run again to catch up
with him.

"Hey, what's the hurry?" I asked. "Can I come along too?"

He didn't answer, just kept walking. Looking straight ahead, still not
hurrying, but moving rapidly nevertheless. When we got outside, he
turned right and continued at the same steady pace.

I tugged at his arm. "Hey, the bar I mentioned is the other way."

He shook my hand loose and kept walking. "I want to go this way."

