
"Working on your car, boys?" Elvin inquired indulgently. He knew the
technique. Put them at their ease, first; then come to the point when
their guard was down.

"Well, not exactly, Mr. Elvin." Donald said.

"Mind if I watch? I always say I can learn as much about motors from you
two as you learn from me about grammar."

Neither of the twins said anything. After an uncomfortable silence,
Elvin cleared his throat pointedly. He had never met with such
disrespect. If they were his kids, they would long ago have been taught
proper courtesy for their superiors! To fill the lengthening void, he
asked.

"What did you think of the little test I gave this morning?"

"It was all right," Donald said.

"You both did pretty well; I'm proud of you."

"We had everything right," David pointed out without a flicker of
expression.

Elvin couldn't seem to engineer the dialogue as he used to. In that
case, this was as appropriate a time as any for the question he had come
to ask. He spoke slowly, with a tone of disinterest. "Do either of you
know anything about hypnotism?" As a shocker, Elvin realized, it left
much to be desired; their faces told him nothing.

"A little," David volunteered.

"We read eight or nine books on it over the weekend," Donald added.

"That's a lot of reading. It must have taken a great deal of time."

"Oh, a couple of hours."

Elvin clenched his fists in futile anger, but he kept his voice steady.
"Is anybody else in the tenth grade reading up on hypnotism?"

"I suppose so," Donald admitted. "I'm not sure. Why don't you ask in
class tomorrow?"

"It occurs to me that a clever hypnotist could be responsible for what
happened at school today."

"Some of it; isn't that rather obvious? We'd like to go on talking, Mr.
Elvin, honest. But we have a lot of work to finish. It'll be bedtime
soon enough."

"But you know about hypnotism, don't you?"

"We know how it's done, yes, and its limitations so far as genuine
telepathy--"

"Who created that ridiculous scene in the auditorium?" Elvin's voice
rose as he tried to put on pressure.

"I wouldn't worry about the principal, Mr. Elvin, if I were you. He's
always been a neurotic."

"Mighty big words you're using these days, Donald. Where'd you hear
them?"

"The principal is a little man--mentally, I mean. He's afraid of people
because he isn't sure of himself. So he makes himself a tin god, a
dictator, just to show the rest of us--"

"I want to know where you picked all this up!"

Patiently the twins began to talk, taking turns at delivering an
improvised lecture in psychology, shot through with an array of highly
technical terms. As Elvin listened to their monotonous voices, he slowly
felt very tired. His head began to ache as his anger ebbed. More than
anything else, he wanted a long night's sleep. Yawning wearily, he
thanked the boys--for what, he wasn't quite sure--and went up to his
room.

       *       *       *       *       *

Some time before dawn Elvin awoke for a moment. He thought he heard the
sound of a motor in the driveway, but he was too sleepy to get up to see
what it was. Two hours later he awoke to chaos.

Mrs. Schermerhorn was shaking his shoulder. He looked up into her white,
terrified face. Her hand trembled as she clutched her quilted robe close
to her throat.

"Mr. Elvin, they'll need your help. Mr. Schermerhorn's waiting for you."

He shook sleep out of his mind sluggishly. "Why? What's happened?"

"The bank's gone. Just--just gone!"

He blinked and shook his head again. "I--I don't think I heard you
right, Mrs. Schermerhorn."

"There's a jungle where the bank used to be. With tigers in it." She
laughed wildly for a moment, but the laughter dissolved into tears and
she reached for the bottle of smelling salts in the pocket of her robe.
"Most of them have been shot by this time, I think. The tigers. Think of
it, Mr. Elvin--tigers in San Benedicto!" She began to laugh again.

When Elvin joined Pop Schermerhorn and the twins in the station wagon,
Mrs. Schermerhorn followed him out of the house with a thermos of hot
coffee. As she put it in the car, she saw the rifles they were taking
with them. She began to weep again, clinging desperately to the side of
the car. Suddenly the twins knelt beside her, and threw their arms
around her neck.

"We're sorry, Mom," David whispered. "Terribly sorry."

"You've nothing to be sorry about," she replied. "It's not your fault."

"Better get back inside," Pop Schermerhorn told her. "Mind, keep the
doors locked. Things ain't safe no more around here."

As they drove into San Benedicto, Elvin was considerably puzzled by the
attitude of the twins. Normally talkative to the point of nausea, they
were now strangely quiet. And this was exactly the sort of thing that
should have inspired their most adolescent repartee.

The sun was rising as they stopped the station wagon among the clutter
of cars filling Main Street. Elvin stared in disbelief at the neat
square of tropical jungle rising cleanly in the heart of San Benedicto.
Not only the bank but a whole block of business houses was gone. This
could be written off neither as insanity nor hypnotism; it was a madness
existing in actual fact. Elvin gave up trying to discover any logic in
what was happening. Both reason and natural law seemed to have
abdicated.

The periphery of jungle was surrounded by armed men. At intervals they
shot at shadows lurking among the trees and, as the sun brightened, the
accuracy of their aim increased. They were not worrying about causes,
either; they were responding with excellent self-discipline to the
emergency of tigers roaming the streets of San Benedicto. Afterwards, at
their leisure, they could speculate on how the jungle had come to be
there.

There was only one fatality. A tiger sprang out of the jungle and mauled
a man who had pressed too close. It happened directly in front of the
Schermerhorn twins. They turned their rifles on the tiger and killed it
instantly; but the man was dead, too.

       *       *       *       *       *

Elvin was surprised to see tears in the eyes of the twins, but he
credited it to the unstable emotions of adolescence. Both of them had
acted with maturity when they faced the tiger; no adult could have done
more. Still they wept, even though the man was a stranger.

By eight o'clock the stirrings in the jungle had stopped. The men began
to relax. Waitresses from the Bid-a-Wee Cafe brought out doughnuts and
coffee and distributed them among the crowd.

There came, then, a new disturbance at the far end of Main Street, a
shouting of tumultuous voices. A mob moved slowly into the center of
town, clinging to the sides of an antiquated dump truck.

"Gold! Gold! Gold!" It was like a chant shouted with ecstatic antiphony.
The dump truck stopped and Elvin saw the unbelievable--gleaming heaps of
gold shoveled like gravel into the back of the vehicle. The driver stood
on the running board, weaving drunkenly.

"The whole damn' desert," he shouted. "All of it, as far as I could
see--all pure gold!"
