us with everything they had, and it cut down the Tabbies pretty well
again, but it didn't touch the spiders, of course.

And then our return radio messages started getting very vague. We were
transmitting Cleve's data hourly as he compiled it, and we had been
getting ordinary chatter and speculation from the Honolulu operator at
the end of our message. That stopped on the sixth of June. Since then,
we've had only curt acknowledgements of our data and sign-offs.

At the same time, we noticed that complete censorship on news of our
situation and progress apparently hit all the long-wave radio
broadcasts. Up to that time the newscasts had been feeding out a dilute
and very cautious pablum about our fight against Tabby. Immediately when
we noticed this news blind spot Cleve went all to pieces and started
drinking again.

Cleve, Sellers and I had the lab tent to ourselves, having moved our
bunks in there, so we got a little out of touch with the others. It
wasn't the way Sellers and I liked it, but none of us liked the trip
from lab to living quarters any more, although it was only fifty feet or
so.

Then Sparks moved in, too. For the same reason. He said it was getting
on his nerves running back and forth to the lab to pick up our outgoing
bulletins. So he shifted the generator, radio gear and all over to a
corner of the lab and brought in his bunk.

By the tenth of June we could see that the spraying was a losing battle.
And it finally took the big tragedy to drive home the truth that was all
about us already. When the crew got ready to go out to their planes on
the eleventh, everyone except the four of us in the lab tent was drafted
to help clear webs between the tents and the beach. We could hear them
shouting from tent to tent as they made up their work party. We could no
longer see across the distance. Everywhere outside, vision was obscured
by the grayish film of webs on which little droplets caught the tropical
sun like a million tiny mirrors. In the shade it was like trying to peer
through thin milk, with the vicious, leggy little shadows skittering
about restlessly.

As usual in the morning, the hum of the Tabbies had risen above the
normal jungle buzzing, and this morning it was the loudest we'd heard
it.

Well, we heard the first screen door squeak open, and someone let out a
whoop as the group moved out with brooms, palm fronds and sticks to
snatch a path through the nightmare of spider webs. The other two doors
opened and slammed, and we could hear many sounds of deep disgust voiced
amid the grunts and thrashings.

They must have been almost to the beach when the first scream reached
us. Cleve had been listening in fascination, and the awful sound tore
him loose of his senses. He screamed back. The rest of us had to sit on
him to quiet him. Then the others outside all began screaming--not
words, just shattering screams of pure terror, mixed with roars of pain
and anger. Soon there was no more anger. Just horror. And in a few
minutes they died away.

       *       *       *       *       *

Sellers and Sparks and I looked at each other. Cleve had vomited and
passed out. Sparks got out Cleve's whiskey, and we spilled half of it
trying to get drinks into us.

Sparks snapped out of it first. He didn't try to talk to us. He just
went to his gear, turned on the generator and warmed up the radio. He
told Honolulu what had happened as we had heard it.

When he finished, he keyed over for an acknowledgment. The operator said
to hold on for a minute. Then he said they would _try_ to dispatch an
air task force to get us off, but they couldn't be sure just when.

While this was coming in Cleve came to his senses and listened. He was
deadly calm now, and when Honolulu finished he grabbed the mike from
Sparks, cut in the TX and asked, "Are they landing discs on the
mainlands?"

The operator answered, "Sorry, that's classified."

"For God's sake," Cleve demanded, "if you are ready to write us off you
can at least answer our questions. Are there any of the green
sonsofbitches on the mainland?"

There was another little pause, and then, "Yes."

That was all. Sparks ran down the batteries trying to raise them again
