same hand had inflicted pain.

"Glad to see you looking so well," the doctor said, taking a stance
against the wall by the porthole. He sounded sincere enough, but Chet,
resuming his chair, wondered how much of the gladness was based on the
doctor's pride in professional handiwork.

There was an awkward pause. Chet remembered to murmur polite replies to
the men who were so obviously sizing him up. Then he asked, "When do you
think I'll be ready for duty?"

His visitors exchanged a glance. "Later," Commander Seymour said. "Take
it easy while you can, Barfield." He smiled unconvincingly at what must
have been meant as a joke.

[Illustration]

Talk again lapsed, and Chet became uncomfortable. "The corpsman said you
wanted to ask me some things," he said. And added, "You've already
questioned me, haven't you?"

"Only a little," Dr. Pine said, flexing his long fingers and looking
down at them. "We--ah--we had to find out about your shipmates.
Commander Seymour wanted to look for them, naturally...."

Naturally.... "Are we going to leave here now, sir?" Chet asked the
commander.

"Not yet," he said. "Dr. Pine has a job to do."

"What's that, Doctor?"

"I'm going to study your Agvar friends, Mr. Barfield. Want to help?"

"Sure," Chet said. "There's nothing I'd rather do than bring you a few
corpses to dissect."

"That--ah--that isn't the idea," Dr. Pine said, bending his fingers and
rocking from toes to heels. "I--ah--I want to do a little
anthropology--study them in the life...."

"Why?" Chet demanded. "I can tell you all about them. I can tell you
what they did to me, too! They don't deserve to live! And this planet
won't be safe for spacemen till they're dead. Why waste time studying
them? It isn't as if you were a professional anthropologist, sir--didn't
you give me medical care?"

"Yes.... But I do anthropology, too. Medical help--ah--gains the
confidence of the people...."

"You mean--?" Chet was at first incredulous, then outraged. "You mean
you're not going to punish them?"

"That's right," Dr. Pine said, smiling.

"That's wrong!" Chet contradicted.

Cheeks burning, he turned to Commander Seymour. "How about you, sir? Do
you want your men chained to a post if they get captured? Do you want me
to dismiss three years of torture as a mistake, or something? Do you
want--"

"Here, here!" Commander Seymour said. He didn't raise his voice. But as
he rose from the cot, Chet rose with him, and found himself at
attention. They eyed each other.

"Relax," Dr. Pine suggested. "Please sit down--both of you."

Commander Seymour obeyed his subordinate. But Chet, still standing,
still angry, turned hotly on the doctor.

"I can't just sit and let you talk about rewarding the Agvars for
torturing me!" he cried. "We don't have to appease them--they can't
fight. You don't have to be afraid--"

"That'll do, Barfield!" Commander Seymour was on his feet again, and his
tone was sharp. It quieted Chet instantly.

In silence he watched Commander Seymour motion Dr. Pine to follow him
out the door. Someone locked it after them.

       *       *       *       *       *

Alternately tossing on the cot and pacing the floor, Chet seethed for
hours. His first interview with the new C.O., and two bawlings-out in
five minutes! Because of Pine--Pine, who kept him confined in this room,
seeing no one but the attendants, having his meals alone....

When a day passed, and then two, and he felt his strength returning,
Chet was sure that Dr. Pine kept him out of the wardroom and away from
the other officers only as punishment. Three years a prisoner--and a
prisoner still! By the time Commander Seymour came to see him again,
Chet had spent hours plotting revenge.

"Barfield," the commander said, "Dr. Pine is going--alone--to the
village you escaped from. He'll pretend he's you, or someone like
you--whichever he can get away with. So here's your chance for a little
fresh air--you can guide us to the village."

"Does that mean I go on active duty, sir?"

"Not quite. Dr. Pine hasn't released you from sickbay."

Pine again! Pine found him good enough to imitate, it seemed, but not
good enough to put on duty.

Suddenly Chet saw the possibilities. So Pine was going to impersonate
him? Then Pine would be taken for an escaped sacrifice, a prisoner who'd
