We were standing on the porch when I kissed Beth. It was the first time
I had ever pressed my lips to those of anyone else. My technique was
good. I felt Beth respond, pressing harder against me.

My mission was on its way to completion. I felt a moment of triumph. And
then suddenly, crazily, my mission was gone from my mind. I felt only a
strange exhilaration that swept over me and made my heart pound and my
head grow hot.

"What's the matter, Marko?" Beth asked as I pulled away.

I didn't know what was wrong. I didn't try to figure it out. I had to
get out of there and try to regain my equilibrium. On a mission like
mine I had to keep my head.

"Shall I see you tomorrow?" I said.

"All the tomorrow's you want," Beth answered.

There was eagerness, and yet a note of regret. It was as though she
instinctively knew that something was wrong. But my work had been well
done; she was in too far, and I had cut her emotional line of retreat.

I saw Beth the next afternoon, and the next evening. My presence on the
porch and in her home became such a common thing that the security agent
hardly gave me a glance now.

Those few days passed by swiftly, and yet each hour in those days was
long. I was very cautious; Beth and I kissed many times but I never
allowed myself to be moved as on that first time.

Sunday loomed larger and larger, closer and closer. I was a constant and
ever present guest. It was an elementary matter to get Beth to invite me
for Sunday dinner. The invitation came on Saturday night, and that night
when I came back to my room I called Ristal for the first time since we
had arrived.

"Tomorrow," I said into the _besnal_. "Early evening."

"Good."

That was all we said, but it was enough. Our frequency was too high to
be picked up. Still, we were taking no chances. Ristal knew precisely
what I meant and he would be ready.

I had the feeling that comes when a mission is about to be completed.
There was a feeling of tension, and yet for the first time in my career
I had a lowering of spirits that I could not explain.

The feeling persisted until late Sunday afternoon. Then I pushed it from
my mind. I dressed carefully, slipped the _besnal_ into my inner pocket,
and put my _del_ gun in my coat pocket.

"Take your coat off," Beth said when I came in. "You ought to know
there's no formality here."

"I'm really quite comfortable," I told her. "Am I late?"

"No. Just on time. Dad will be down in a moment."

He came down the stairs from his study while we were talking. He greeted
me warmly, and yet I felt that this time he was scrutinizing me. All
during the dinner his eyes were on me, weighing me. I felt what was
coming, and as we rose from the table it came.

"I hope you won't be offended, Marko," Copperd said. "But there are some
strange things about you. Do you ever shave?"

"No," I said. I looked out the window and saw it was growing darker.

"That's odd. And about your hair ... have you ever realized that every
strand of it grows in a different direction? You could never comb it.
Your skin is of an unusually fine texture. And when you reached for
something at the table I observed strange folds of skin between your
fingers. You are somehow not like the rest of us."

"Naturally," I said. It didn't matter now. It was dark enough.

"Why naturally?"

"Because," I told him, "I am a Venusian."

       *       *       *       *       *

My tone was matter of fact. Yet they knew that I was not joking. Beth
was staring at me, a growing fear and horror in her eyes. Her father
seemed dazed by the revelation. I took the _del_ gun from my pocket and
showed it to them.

"This is a weapon strange to you. But it is effective at this range.
Please don't make me use it."

"But what do you want?" Copperd asked.

"I want you to take a ride with me. In your car."

I let them put on their coats and then we walked out onto the porch and
down the stairs. Across the street the security agent barely glanced at
us. Then we got into Copperd's car, Beth and he in the front seat and I
in the back. I told him in which direction to go.

At the outskirts of town we lost the car that was following us. I had
planned this part of it perfectly. We pulled into a side road and turned
off our lights. The agent went right past us.

"What is it you want of me?" Copperd said as we started up again.

"We want to have a long discussion with you about some matters on which
you are an authority."

"And that's what this whole affair with me was for? So that you could
get to my father!" Beth said accusingly. I saw her shoulders shake.

"Yes. Now turn off here."

We turned off the main road and followed a rutted trail onto an old
farm.
