without shame! Miss Kitty was astonished at her sudden vehemence, the
red wave of fury which swept over her.

But of course she was right. That was their urgent drive. "A male human
is nothing more than a sex machine!" Wasn't that what her roommate at
college had once said? Or was it her maiden aunt who had dominated her
widowed mother and herself through all the years she was growing up?
What did it matter who said it? She knew it was true. No wonder they
were so anxious to get back to Old Earth! Her lip lifted in cynical
scorn.

"You don't dare leave a young girl alone with a boy for five minutes,"
her aunt had once complained bitterly. "All they ever think about
is...." her voice had dropped to a whisper and she had given that
significant look to Katheryn's mother. But Katheryn had known what she
meant, of course.

And it was true of all men.

Women, back on Old Earth, had looked at her with pity and a little
contempt, because she had never, she had never.... But you didn't have
to have first hand experience to know. She had authoritative knowledge
gleaned from reading between the lines of the very best text books on
abnormal psychology. She hadn't had to read between the lines of sundry
surveys and reports. And if there had been no organized study at all,
the movies, the TV, the published better fiction--all of it centered
around that one theme--that one, alone, romanticize it or obscure it
though they might.

It was all men ever thought about. And many women pandered to it--those
sultry, shameless, undulating....

But Sam and Lt. Harper? It had been almost two months now since they had
left Earth and those vile blondes. How had they restrained themselves
during all this time!

Her fuming anger was suddenly overwhelmed by a warm rush of gratitude, a
sympathy which brought a gush of tears into her eyes to stream down her
cheeks. How blind she had been. Of course! They were still bound by
their gentleman's Word of Honor, given to her on that first night in the
lifeship.

What splendid men! All right, so they had their faults; a little
impractical, dreamers all, but with such nobility of character, truly
they were fit to be the fathers of a proud and noble race. And, in time,
with herself to shape and guide them....

She straightened her aching back from bending over the rice reeds,
thrust out her scrawny chest, and breathed deeply. She lifted her chin
resolutely.

"Katheryn Kittredge," she said firmly. "A woman's place is more than
merely cooking and cleaning and mending!"

       *       *       *       *       *

Supper, that evening, was a dinner, a special dinner. She set before the
two men a whole roast young tom turkey, with a touch of frosted
persimmons mixed with wild honey to enliven the light meat. There was a
dressing of boiled maise and wild rice, seasoned with wild onion and
thyme. There were little red tomatoes, tough but tasty. There were baked
yams. There was a custard of goat milk and turkey eggs sweetened with
honey.

Instead of the usual sassafras tea to which their digestion had finally
adjusted, there was grape wine in their cups. It wasn't a very good
wine, still green and sharp, but the occasion called for it.

Both of them looked at her with wonder, when they came in at her call
and saw the table. But they didn't ask any questions. They just started
eating and, for once, they forgot to talk about warp theory.

She, herself, ate little. She was content to look at them. The
lieutenant, tall and strong, big-boned, dark-complexioned, square-faced,
white even teeth. Sam, smalled-boned, fair-complexioned, hair bleached
straw from the outdoor sun. He had been inclined to be a little stout
when she first saw him, but now he had that muscular wiriness which
comes with hard physical work--and clean living. His daughters would be
delicate, lovely, yet strong. The lieutenant's sons....

She watched, in a kind of rapture, the ripple of muscles beneath their
shirts, the way the pillar of the neck arose from strong shoulders to
support a well-shaped head, the way the muscles of jaws rippled under
their lean cheeks as they chewed. The way their intelligent eyes flashed
appreciation at each savory mouthful.

"It occurs to me, Sam," Lt. Harper said as he washed down some turkey
with a healthy quaff of wine. "We could give a little more attention to
scraping up food for Miss Kitty to cook. Now you take this brown rice,
for example, we could rig up a polishing mill so she'd have white
rice...."

"Nonsense," Miss Kitty said firmly. "All the proper food value lies in
the brown covering. I will not have the children's eating habits spoiled
from the beginning...."

Appalled, she realized what she had said. Both men stopped chewing and
stared at her.

"What children, Miss Kitty?" Lt. Harper asked, and he was looking at her
intently.

She dropped her eyes to her plate. She felt the red flush arising around
her neck, up into her face. She couldn't face him. Yet, it had to be
done. It must be made quite clear to him, both of them, that....

"_Our_ children," she said distinctly, and felt their eyes boring into
the top of her head. "And I wish you both would stop calling me Miss
Kitty, as if--as if you were kindergarten children and I was the old
maid school teacher! All three of us are adults, men and a woman. In
spite of what you may think, I am not a great deal older than either of
you. There will be children! If it works out the way I plan, I believe I
do have time for at least six sons and daughters before I reach ...
before my barren years."

She heard Sam's fork clatter down on the table top as he dropped it. She
heard Lt. Harper's feet scrape, as if he had been about to leap to his
feet. Without seeing it, she almost felt them look at one another.

Well, she had made it plain enough.

But they didn't say anything.

Suddenly she could stand it no longer. Slowly, in dignity, she arose to
her feet and without looking at them she walked, head down, to her door.
Then she realized she had perhaps been too crisp, too businesslike about
it all. A vision of the kind of women they must have known, the kind
which would arouse their passion, the kind which would make it all
unmistakable....

She had a flashing memory of a girl back in college, one smitten with a
football hero, trying to captivate the hero, draw him to her. On
impulse, Miss Kitty imitated that girl now, and a little tableau she
remembered.

At her doorway she turned, and looked at them over her shoulder. She
lifted her shoulder so that it touched her chin. She drooped her eyes
half shut.

"My name is Katheryn," she said, and she tried to make her voice husky
instead of tremulous and frightened. "Call me Kathy, call me Kate, call
me Kay."

Both men were staring at her with wide eyes and open mouths as she
closed her door. She made sure there was no sound of a latch turning to
discourage them.

       *       *       *       *       *

She undressed herself slowly, and, for the first time other than for
bathing, completely. She felt grateful for the time they were giving
her. No doubt they were talking it over, man to man, in the way of
civilized, educated.... She crawled in between the blankets, fresh and
smelling of sunshine from being washed in the clear water of the lake.
