trying to figure out how he could be alive.

He finally slept pushed into it by sheer and utter exhaustion. The bells
called him awake. The bells started him off again. He tried to talk
again to 4901. They avoided him, all of them. But they weren't really
alive any more. How long could he maintain some part of himself that he
knew definitely was Charles Marquis?

He began a ritual, a routine divorced from that to which all those being
indoctrinated were subjected. It was a little private routine of his
own. Dying, and then finding that he was not dead.

He tried it many ways. He took more grains of the poison. But he was
always alive again.

"You--4901! Damn you--talk to me! You know what's been happening to me?"

The man nodded quickly over his little canisters of food-concentrate.

"This indoctrination--you, the girl--you went crazy when I talked about
dying--what--?"

The man yelled hoarsely. "Don't ... don't say it! All this--what you've
been going through, can't you understand? All that is part of
indoctrination. You're no different than the rest of us! We've all had
it! All of us. All of us! Some more maybe than others. It had to end.
You'll have to give in. Oh God, I wish you didn't. I wish you could win.
But you're no smarter than the rest of us. _You'll have to give in!_"

It was 4901's longest and most coherent speech. Maybe I can get
somewhere with him, Marquis thought. I can find out something.

But 4901 wouldn't say any more. Marquis kept on trying. No one, he knew,
would ever realize what that meant--to keep on trying to die when no one
would let you, when you kept dying, and then kept waking up again, and
you weren't dead. No one could ever understand the pain that went
between the dying and the living. And even Marquis couldn't remember it
afterward. He only knew how painful it had been. And knowing that made
each attempt a little harder for Marquis.

He tried the poison again. There was the big stamping machine that had
crushed him beyond any semblance of a human being, but he had awakened,
alive again, whole again. There was the time he grabbed the power cable
and felt himself, in one blinding flash, conquer life in a burst of
flame. He slashed his wrists at the beginning of a number of sleep
periods.

When he awakened, he was whole again. There wasn't even a scar.

He suffered the pain of resisting the eating bells until he was so weak
he couldn't respond, and he knew that he died that time too--from pure
starvation.

_But I can't stay dead!_

"_... You'll have to give in!_"

       *       *       *       *       *

He didn't know when it was. He had no idea now how long he had been
here. But a guard appeared, a cold-faced man who guided Marquis back to
the office where the fat, pink-faced little Manager waited for him
behind the shelf suspended by silver wires from the ceiling.

The Manager said. "You are the most remarkable prisoner we've ever had
here. There probably will not be another like you here again."

Marquis' features hung slack, his mouth slightly open, his lower lip
drooping. He knew how he looked. He knew how near he was to cracking
completely, becoming a senseless puppet of the bells. "Why is that?" he
whispered.

"You've tried repeatedly to--you know what I mean of course. You have
kept on attempting this impossible thing, attempted it more times than
anyone else here ever has! Frankly, we didn't think any human psyche had
the stuff to try it that many times--to resist that long."

The Manager made a curious lengthened survey of Marquis' face. "Soon
you'll be thoroughly indoctrinated. You are, for all practical purposes,
now. You'll work automatically then, to the bells, and think very little
about it at all, except in a few stereotyped ways to keep your brain and
nervous system active enough to carry out simple specialized work
duties. Or while the New System lasts. And I imagine that will be
forever."

"Forever...."

"Yes, yes. You're immortal now," the Manager smiled. "Surely, after all
this harrowing indoctrination experience, you realize _that_!"

_Immortal. I might have guessed. I might laugh now, but I can't. We who
pretend to live in a hell that is worse than death, and you, the
Managerials who live in paradise._ We two are immortal.

"That is, you're immortal as long as we desire you to be. You'll never
grow any older than we want you to, never so senile as to threaten
efficiency. That was what you were so interested in finding out on
Earth, wasn't it? The mystery behind the Managerials? Why they never
seemed to grow old. Why we have all the advantage, no senility, no
weakening, the advantage of accumulative experience without the
necessity of re-learning?"

"Yes," Marquis whispered.

The Manager leaned back. He lit a paraette and let the soothing
nerve-tonic seep into his lungs. He explained.

"Every one of you political prisoners we bring here want, above
everything else, to die. It was a challenge to our experimental social
order here. We have no objection to your killing yourself. We have
learned that even the will to die can be conditioned out of the most
determined rebel. As it has been conditioned out of you. You try to die
enough times, and you do die, but the pain of resurrection is so great
