
It was torture. It had been for a long time, for him, for all the
others. "Let me out of here!" he yelled harshly. "Put me in a room by
myself!"

She moved closer to him and looked into his face. The fragrance of her
hair, the warmth of her reached out to him. Somehow, he never knew how,
he managed to grin. He felt the sweat running down his dirty, bearded,
battered face. His suit was torn and dirty. He could smell himself, the
stale sweat, the filth. He could feel his hair, shaggy and long, down
his neck, over his ears.

Her lips were slightly parted, and wet, and she had a funny dark look in
her eyes, he thought. She turned quickly as the door opened, and a man
came in. He was only slightly taller than Gloria and he nodded, smiled
brightly, bowed a little, moved forward. He carried a big bouquet of
flowers and presented them to her.

She took the flowers, smiled, thanked him, and put them on the table.
The man said. "So sorry, darling, to intrude. But I felt I had to see
you for a few minutes. I left the children with John, and dashed right
up here. I thought we might have lunch together."

"You're so thoughtful, dear," she said.

The man turned a distasteful look upon Bowren. He said. "My dear, what
is _this_?"

"A man," she said, and then added. "From Earth."

"What? Good grief, you mean they've found a way--?"

"I don't know. You'd better go back home and tend the yard today, Dale.
I'll tell you all about it when I come home this evening. All right?"

"Well I--oh, oh yes, of course, if you say so, darling."

"Thank you, dear." She kissed him and he bowed out.

She turned and walked back toward Bowren. "Tell me," she said. "How did
you get here alive?"

Why not tell her? He was helpless here. They'd find out anyway, as soon
as they got back to Earth on the cargo run. And even if they didn't find
out, that wouldn't matter either. They would be on guard from now on. No
man would do again what Bowren had done. The only chance would be to
build secret spaceships of their own and every time one blasted, have
every member of the crew go through what Bowren had. It couldn't last.
Too much injury and shock.

As he talked he studied the office, and he thought of other things. An
office that was like a big beautiful living room. A thoroughly feminine
office. Nor was it the type of office a woman would fix for a man. It
was a woman's office. Everything, the whole culture here, was feminine.
When he had finished she said, "Interesting. It must have been a very
unpleasant experience for you."

He grinned. "I suffered. But even though I've failed, it's worth all the
suffering, if you'll tell me--where did all the ah--men come from?"

She told him. It was, to say the least, startling, and then upon
reflection, he realized how simple it all was. No aliens. No native
Martians. A very simple and thoroughly logical solution, and in a way,
typically feminine.

Hormone treatment and genetic manipulation, plus a thorough
reconditioning while the treatment was taking place.

_And the women had simply turned approximately half of their number into
men!_

She paused, then went on. "It was the only way we could see it, Mr.
Bowren. Earth was a man's world, and we could never have belonged in it,
not the way we wanted to. Men wouldn't stand it anyway, down there,
having us going into space, usurping their masculine role. And
anyway--you men of Earth had become so utterly unsatisfactory as
companions, lovers, and husbands, that it was obvious nothing could ever
be done about it. Not unless we set up our own culture, our own
civilization, our way."

"But meanwhile we die down there," Bowren said. "Logic is nice. But mass
murder, and the death of a whole world civilization seems pretty cold
from where I'm standing. It's pathological, but it's too late to think
about that. It's done now."

"But we're happy here," she said. "For the first time in a long, long
time, we women feel like ourselves. We feel truly independent. The men
around us are the kind of men we want, instead of us being what they
want us to be, or even worse, the men being what we want them to be but
resenting it and making life unbearable for both. All through the
process of being changed into men, our women undergo such a thorough
conditioning that they can never be anything else but model men in every
sense. Their attitude as women with which they started treatment helped.
They knew what they wanted in men, and they became what we wanted them
to be, as men."

"Very logical," Bowren said. "It smells to heaven it's so logical." It
was purely impulse, what he did then. He couldn't help it. It wasn't
logical either. It was emotional and he did it because he had to do it
and because he didn't see any reason why he shouldn't.

He put his arm out suddenly, hooked her slim waist, and pulled her to
him. Her face flushed and his eyes were very wide and dark as she looked
up at him.

"Listen," he said. "The whole thing's insane. The lot of you are mad,
and though I can't help it, I hate to see it happen this way. What kind
of men are these? These smiling robots, these goons who are nothing else
but reflections in a woman's mirror? Who'd want to be a man like that.
Who would really want a man like that? And who would want a woman who
was just what a man wanted her to be? Where's the fire? Where's the
individuality? Where's the conflict, the fighting and snarling and
raging that makes living. All this is apathy, this is death! You don't
grow by being agreeable, but by conflict."

"What are you trying to sell now?" she whispered.

He laughed. It was wild sounding to him, not very humorous really, but
still it was laughter. "Selling nothing, buying nothing." He pulled her
closer and kissed her. Her lips parted slightly and he could feel the
warmth of her and the quick drawing of breath. Then she pushed him away.
She raised her hand and brushed it over his face.

She shook her head slowly. "It feels rather interesting," she said,
"your face. I've never felt a man's face before, that wasn't smooth, the
way it should be."

He laughed again, more softly this time. "Why reform your men? You women
always wanted to do that."

"We don't reform men here," she said. "We start them out right--from the
beginning."

She backed away from him. She raised her hand to her face and her
fingers touched her lips. Wrinkles appeared between her eyes and she
shook her head again. Not at him, but at something, a thought perhaps,
