seem to grow in strength by the hour, and they have a tendency to topple
things, the gravitational 'tug' being most disastrous near the centers
of the fields. The rims, though the angle of gravity is sharper there,
are safer for stability only because they are balanced by more 'tugs'
from adjoining fields...."

Well, he went on this way for an hour or so, and soon his
listeners--those who stayed tuned in--knew what the problem was: "Down"
wasn't going to be "down" much longer. It was going to depend on which
moonplant stump you happened to be near.

       *       *       *       *       *

The prospect didn't seem too much fun, and people started selling their
homes and such, and booking passage to the moon, where life was
controlled, but carefree, and free of annoying vibrations and rolling
oranges.

Lunar Real Estate enjoyed a fabulous boom for weeks after the telecast
by the scientist, but it was soon "all filled up," and further
immigrations would have to await the construction of more Domes to house
the newcomers.

The laggards, understandably, raised a fuss about this callous attitude,
and went moonward anyway until about two-thirds of the Earth's
population was on the moon, the place becoming so hopelessly crowded
that people had to half-rent rooms there, sleeping in alternating shifts
with other half-renters, and spending their waking hours wandering the
streets.

"Things," sighed one realtor to another, "can't get much worse."

And that's when the first meteor landed on Earth. In the general
excitement, first about vibrations, then about gravitational fields,
then about packing up and going to the moon, most newspapers had pushed
to the want-ad pages little articles by eminent astronomers, in which
were noted the odd behaviors of certain large planetoids in the asteroid
belt between Earth and Mars. These cosmic hunks of rock seemed to be
"peeling off" the general formation of the ellipse followed by their
fellows, and moving sunward[1] singly or in small homogenous groupings.

[Footnote 1: (Ergo: Earthward)]

Well, the first one landed and left a dent on Earth where the Congo used
to be, the shock being felt as far north as Oslo, to add to their
vibrational, gravitational and evacuational difficulties.

Scientists on the moon--being as singleminded as scientists
anywhere--became ecstatic. At last the mystery of the ages was solved:
Who put the pocks in the face of the moon? A Peter W. Merrill Moonplant,
of course! They looked down in rapture as meteor after meteor--drawn
across the countless miles of space by the pulsating gravity fields,
plunged into the Earth, leaving pocks visible to the naked moondweller's
eye. And darned if each meteor didn't strike dead center of each plant
network.

       *       *       *       *       *

After about a month, Earth looked almost exactly like the moon had once
looked, with the exception of one locale: Australia, and much of the
Pacific Ocean surrounding it.

"It will indeed be a titanic meteor that hits there!" the moon
scientists enthused. For their careful check of the records showed that
only one plant had been found on the whole continent of Australia,
toward the eastern coast; which meant that its network probably extended
beneath the Pacific itself, with a gigantic field reaching its hungry
magnetic fingers into space.

And then someone noticed that no more asteroids had peeled from the
formation. The void between the asteroid belt and Earth was barren of
hurtling rock.

"Wonderful!" the scientists enthused. "It means that each field down
there on Earth ceased its tug the moment its meteor struck it. That
means that once the final meteor lands, the Peter W. Merrill Moonplant
will be dead, and we can get some of the crowd off this place. Earth's a
bit ragged-looking, but after all, it's Home."
