
They had waited twenty-two years for this show, and now that it had
come they were enjoying every minute of it.

       *       *       *       *       *

Our investigation was pretty rough going. The fireflies overhead all
circled in one direction, which made you dizzy every time you looked up,
and besides that the Quack had remembered that he was a prisoner in an
alien environment and was at the mercy of any outlandish disease that
might creep past his permanent immunization. He muttered and grumbled to
himself about the risk, and his grousing got on our nerves even worse
than usual.

I moved over to shut him up, and blinked when I saw him pop something
into his mouth. My first guess was that he had managed to sneak some
food concentrate out of the ship somehow, and the thought made me
realize how hungry I was.

"What've you got there, Quack?" I demanded. "Come on, give--what are you
hiding out?"

"Antibiotics and stuff," he answered, and pulled a little flat plastic
case out of a pocket.

It was his portable medicine chest, which he carried the way
superstitious people used to carry rabbits' feet, and it was largely
responsible for our calling him the Quack. It was full of patent capsule
remedies that he had gleaned out of his home medical book--a cut thumb,
a surprise headache, or a siege of gas on the stomach would never catch
the Quack unprepared!

"Jerk," I said, and went back to Gibbons and Corelli, who were arguing a
new approach to our problem.

"It's worth a try," Gibbons said. He turned on the two Haslops, who were
bristling like a pair of strange dogs. "This question is for the real
Haslop: Have you ever been put through a Rorschach, thematic
apperception or free association test?"

The real Haslop hadn't. Either of them.

"Then we'll try free association," Gibbons said, and explained what he
wanted of them.

"_Water_," Gibbons said, popping it out quick and sharp.

"Spigot," the Haslops said together. Which is exactly what any spaceman
would say, since the only water important to him comes out of a ship's
tank. "Lake" and "river" and "spring," to him, are only words in books.

Gibbons chewed his lip and tried again, but the result was the same
every time. When he said "payday" they both came back "binge," and when
he said "man" they answered "woman!" with the same gleam in their eyes.

"I could have told you it wouldn't work," one Haslop said when Gibbons
threw up his hands and quit. "I've lived so long with that phony that
he even knows what I'm going to say next."

"I was going to say the same thing," the other one growled. "After
twenty-two years of drinking and arguing with him, we've begun--God help
me!--to think alike."

I tried my own hand just once.

"Gaffa says that they are exactly identical so far as outside appearance
goes," I said. "But he may be wrong, or lying. Maybe we'd better check
for ourselves."

       *       *       *       *       *

The Haslops raised a howl, of course, but it did them no good. Gibbons
and Corelli and I ganged them one at a time--the Quack refused to help
for fear of being contaminated--and examined them carefully. It was a
lively job, since both of them swore they were ticklish, and under
different circumstances it could have been embarrassing.

But it settled one point. Gaffa hadn't lied. They were absolutely
identical, as far as we could determine.

We had given it up and were resting from our labors when Gaffa came
grinning out of the darkness and brought us a big crystal pitcher of
something that would have passed for a first-class Planet Punch except
that it was nearer two-thirds alcohol than the fifty-fifty mix you get
at most interplanetary ginmills.

The two Haslops had a slug of it as a matter of course, being accustomed
to it, and the rest of us followed suit. Only the Quack refused, turning
green at the thought of all the alien bacteria that might be swimming
around in the pitcher.

A couple of drinks made us feel better.

"I've been thinking," Captain Corelli said, "about what Gaffa said when
he limited the time of the test, that we might or might not discover the
reason for ourselves. Now what the hell did the grinning heathen mean by
that? Is there a reason, or was he only dragging a red herring across
the bogus Haslop's track?"

Gibbons looked thoughtful. I sat back while he pondered and watched the
