was beyond that--away way out--somewhere--

It went on a long time and then ... nothing but darkness ... the
lonely song of the gyroscopes. His own voice ... distant, alien ...
raving ... a kind of delirium ... then sometime, an awareness of the
cutting down of power, the brief warning of intuition, the concussion.
And as consciousness came back again, the knowing that he had hit too
hard in spite of the lighter moon gravity.

His head throbbing crazily and around him the absolute darkness and
silence and the warm ache in his head, the dizziness and the warm
stickiness flowing down his face.

He lay there, afraid of retching. He moved his finger to release more
oxygen. He could smell himself, the sharp bite of fear and the odor of
blood.

He felt panic. He experimented. He could move easily here where the
seven-hundred pound suit weighed only 140 pounds. He switched on the
suit's light beam. The anonymous man had said. "_Get out of the rocket
at once, silently!_"

He squeezed out of the barrel, into the larger compartment. He got the
compartment door open. Half blind by shock, he was out in the Lunar
night. "_When you get outside, stop right there. Read the
instructions!_"

He had a panicky desire to fall to his knees, cling to the rocket. He
stood there stiffly. "It isn't fair," he whispered over and over. "I
can't do it!"

_Read the instructions._

       *       *       *       *       *

Alone, a man--one man--on the moon. No movement, no sound, no air, no
life. Only sharp black and white contrast of lifeless shadow to
accentuate the awful and final loneliness. Occasional meteors striking
into the pumice dust--silently, voicing the stillness of his own
terror.

He read the instructions. He hooked the capsule out of the kit, opened
it. The suit's single light beaming like a Cyclopean eye.

The giant walls of Albategnius the center of the moon's visible disk
towered bleakly up around ... everywhere ... lifelessness, just broken
rock ... no water to erode. No voices, no faces, no life anywhere.
Just Barlow. Barlow and a rocket.

And the stars and somewhere, the earth in the sky, sharp as molten
steel in the eyes. The rocket watched him and listened. This was a
target rocket. 240,000 miles away in the New Mexico blockhouse, they
were watching through the rocket's eyes, feeling through the rocket's
mechanical nervous system. The rocket carried instruments to test out
flight calculations, controls, conditions on the moon. It carried
self-operating information about the range of temperatures, radiation,
gravitational influences and other conditions to be encountered on the
journey and here on the moon's surface. It wouldn't return; only the
results of its sensory apparatus were returning now and would keep on
returning until the rocket's power ran out.

The rocket was equipped with every kind of instrument--trackers,
telemeters, and it was sending back sound and sight like a human eye
and ear. Radar stations, television stations, G.E. wagons down there
receiving information from the rocket....

The instructions told Barlow exactly where to stand so the
television-eyes could pick up his image. He found himself leaning in
using the kit, getting the radio apparatus out of his suit connected
properly.

He was starting, making gestures, while the terrible fear of
loneliness and isolation, his Achilles Heel, made the alien
surroundings reel and slip and tremble as though at any moment he was
going to crumble, fail, surrender.

The bleeding from his nose and ears had stopped. No pain; that wasn't
the trouble. It was being alone, the idea of dying alone....

The bulbous suit carried him over the terrain. Clouds of pumice-dust
drifted. He felt like an infant walking, his feet threatening to fold
under him. The rocket seemed to be drawing him back toward it. It
seemed warm and friendly as he walked the required distance away from
it. On Earth they were seeing him now--a man on the moon where there
should be no men. He would explain it to them; that was his job. To
give them an explanation that would frighten them, freeze the
inevitable war-drift for six months more. So the Brotherhood could
act--the Brotherhood only needed time.

But what about Barlow? Sure, everybody had to die, but no one should
have to die the way Barlow is being asked to. He couldn't do it!

But he stood there, and the rocket transmitted his image and his words
back to the blockhouse at White Sands, New Mexico. He said what the
instructions told him to.

"We've been observing you; we saw the rocket coming in. You think
you're the first to send a rocket here, but you're not. We've been
