about her calf were incomprehensible--the only dimly-felt overtones of
projected symbology that accompanied Phildee's emotional reactions, the
alien structure--so many, many things. Her mind floundered vainly
through the complex data.

But all that was nothing. What did it matter? The Time had been, and for
another season, she was a dam.

       *       *       *       *       *

Phildee walked beside her down the path, one fist wrapped in the fur of
her flank, short legs windmilling.

They reached the plain, and Riya struck out across it toward the
greatest concentration of people, her head proudly raised. She stopped
once, and deliberately cropped a mouthful of grass with unconcern, but
resumed her pace immediately thereafter.

With the same unconcern, she nudged Phildee into the center of the group
of people, and, ignoring them, began teaching her calf to feed.

_Eat. (Picture of Phildee/calf on all fours, cropping the plains
grass.)_

Phildee stared at her in puzzlement. Grass was not food. He sent the
data emphatically.

Riya felt the tenuous discontent. She replied with tender understanding.
Sometimes the calf was hesitant.

_Eat. (Gently, understandingly, but firmly. [Repetition of picture.])_
She bent her head and pushed him carefully over, then held his head down
with a gentle pressure of her muzzle. _Eat._

Phildee squirmed. He slipped out from under her nose and regained his
Feet. He looked at the other people, who were staring in puzzlement at
Riya and himself.

He felt himself pushed forward again. _Eat._

Abruptly, he realized the situation. In a culture of herbivores, what
food could there be but herbiage? There would be milk, in time, but not
for--he probed--months.

In probing, too, he found the visualization of his life with her ready
at the surface of Riya's mind.

There was no shelter on the plain. His fur was all the shelter
necessary.

_But I don't have any fur._

In the fall, they would move to the southern range.

_Walk? A thousand miles?_

He would grow big and strong. In a year, he would be a sire himself.

       *       *       *       *       *

His reaction was simple, and practiced. He adjusted his reality concept
to Reimannian topology. Not actually, but subjectively, he felt himself
beginning to slip Earthward.

Riya stiffened in alarm. The calf was straying. The knowledge was
relayed from her mother-centers to the telepathic functions.

_Stop. You cannot go there. You must be with your mother. You are not
grown. Stop. Stay with me. I will protect you. I love you._

       *       *       *       *       *

The universe shuddered. Phildee adjusted frantically. Cutting through
the delicately maintained reality concept was a scrambling, jamming
frequency of thought. In terror, he flung himself backward into Riya's
world. Standing completely still, he probed frantically into Riya's
mind.

And found her mind only fumblingly beginning to intellectualize the
simple formulization of what her instinctive centers had computed,
systematized, and activated before her conscious mind had even begun to
doubt that everything was well.

