points which are called its foci.

In the case of the planetary orbits one focus of the ellipse is vacant,
and, in accordance with the first law, the center of the sun is at the
other focus. In Fig. 17 the dot, inside the orbit of Mercury, which is
marked _a_, shows the position of the vacant focus of the orbit of Mars,
and the dot _b_ is the vacant focus of Mercury's orbit. The orbits of
Venus and the earth are so nearly circular that their vacant foci lie
very close to the sun and are not marked in the figure. The line drawn
from the sun to any point of the orbit (the string from pin to pencil
point) is a _radius vector_. The point midway between the pins is the
_center_ of the ellipse, and the distance of either pin from the center
measures the _eccentricity_ of the ellipse.

Draw several ellipses with the same length of string, but with the pins
at different distances apart, and note that the greater the eccentricity
the flatter is the ellipse, but that all of them have the same length.

If both pins were driven into the same hole, what kind of an ellipse
would you get?

The Second Law was worked out by Kepler as his answer to a problem
suggested by the first law. In Fig. 17 it is apparent from a mere
inspection of the orbit of Mercury that this planet travels much faster
on one side of its orbit than on the other, the distance covered in ten
days between the numbers 10 and 20 being more than fifty per cent
greater than that between 50 and 60. The same difference is found,
though usually in less degree, for every other planet, and Kepler's
problem was to discover a means by which to mark upon the orbit the
figures showing the positions of the planet at the end of equal
intervals of time. His solution of this problem, contained in the second
law, asserts that if we draw radii vectors from the sun to each of the
marked points taken at equal time intervals around the orbit, then the
area of the sector formed by two adjacent radii vectores and the arc
included between them is equal to the area of each and every other such
sector, the short radii vectores being spread apart so as to include a
long arc between them while the long radii vectores have a short arc. In
Kepler's form of stating the law the radius vector is supposed to travel
with the planet and in each day to sweep over the same fractional part
of the total area of the orbit. The spacing of the numbers in Fig. 17
was done by means of this law.

For the proper understanding of Kepler's Third Law we must note that the
"mean distance" which appears in it is one half of the long diameter of
the orbit and that the "periodic time" means the number of days or years
required by the planet to make a complete circuit in its orbit.
Representing the first of these by _a_ and the second by _T_, we have,
as the mathematical equivalent of the law,

    a^{3} ÷ T^{2} = C

where the quotient, _C_, is a number which, as Kepler found, is the same
for every planet of the solar system. If we take the mean distance of
the earth from the sun as the unit of distance, and the year as the unit
of time, we shall find by applying the equation to the earth's motion,
_C_ = 1. Applying this value to any other planet we shall find in the
same units, _a_ = _T_^{2/3}, by means of which we may determine the
distance of any planet from the sun when its periodic time, _T_, has
been learned from observation.

EXERCISE 18.--Uranus requires 84 years to make a revolution in its
orbit. What is its mean distance from the sun? What are the mean
distances of Mercury, Venus, and Mars? (See Chapter III for their
periodic times.) Would it be possible for two planets at different
distances from the sun to move around their orbits in the same time?

A circle is an ellipse in which the two foci have been brought together.
Would Kepler's laws hold true for such an orbit?

34. NEWTON'S LAWS OF MOTION.--Kepler studied and described the motion of
the planets. Newton, three generations later (1727 A. D.), studied and
described the mechanism which controls that motion. To Kepler and his
age the heavens were supernatural, while to Newton and his successors
they are a part of Nature, governed by the same laws which obtain upon
the earth, and we turn to the ordinary things of everyday life as the
foundation of celestial mechanics.

Every one who has ridden a bicycle knows that he can coast farther upon
a level road if it is smooth than if it is rough; but however smooth and
hard the road may be and however fast the wheel may have been started,
it is sooner or later stopped by the resistance which the road and the
air offer to its motion, and when once stopped or checked it can be
started again only by applying fresh power. We have here a familiar
illustration of what is called

THE FIRST LAW OF MOTION.--"Every body continues in its state of rest or
of uniform motion in a straight line except in so far as it may be
compelled by force to change that state." A gust of wind, a stone, a
careless movement of the rider may turn the bicycle to the right or the
left, but unless some disturbing force is applied it will go straight
ahead, and if all resistance to its motion could be removed it would go
always at the speed given it by the last power applied, swerving neither
to the one hand nor the other.

When a slow rider increases his speed we recognize at once that he has
applied additional power to the wheel, and when this speed is slackened
it equally shows that force has been applied against the motion. It is
force alone which can produce a change in either velocity or direction
of motion; but simple as this law now appears it required the genius of
Galileo to discover it and of Newton to give it the form in which it is
stated above.

35. THE SECOND LAW OF MOTION, which is also due to Galileo and Newton,
is:

"Change of motion is proportional to force applied and takes place in
the direction of the straight line in which the force acts." Suppose a
man to fall from a balloon at some great elevation in the air; his own
weight is the force which pulls him down, and that force operating at
every instant is sufficient to give him at the end of the first second
of his fall a downward velocity of 32 feet per second--i. e., it has
changed his state from rest, to motion at this rate, and the motion is
toward the earth because the force acts in that direction. During the
next second the ceaseless operation of this force will have the same
effect as in the first second and will add another 32 feet to his
velocity, so that two seconds from the time he commenced to fall he will
be moving at the rate of 64 feet per second, etc. The column of figures
marked _v_ in the table below shows what his velocity will be at the end
of subsequent seconds. The changing velocity here shown is the change of
motion to which the law refers, and the velocity is proportional to the
time shown in the first column of the table, because the amount of force
exerted in this case is proportional to the time during which it
operated. The distance through which the man will fall in each second is
shown in the column marked _d_, and is found by taking the average of
his velocity at the beginning and end of this second, and the total
distance through which he has fallen at the end of each second, marked
_s_ in the table, is found by taking the sum of all the preceding values
of _d_. The velocity, 32 feet per second, which measures the change of
motion in each second, also measures the _accelerating force_ which
produces this motion, and it is usually represented in formulæ by the
letter _g_. Let the student show from the numbers in the table that the
accelerating force, the time, _t_, during which it operates, and the
space, _s_, fallen through, satisfy the relation

    s = 1/2 gt^{2},

which is usually called the law of falling bodies. How does the table
show that _g_ is equal to 32?

            TABLE

    _t_   _v_   _d_   _s_

     0      0     0     0
     1     32    16    16
     2     64    48    64
     3     96    80   144
     4    128   112   256
     5    160   144   400
    etc.  etc.  etc.  etc.

If the balloon were half a mile high how long would it take to fall to
the ground? What would be the velocity just before reaching the ground?

[Illustration: GALILEO GALILEI (1564-1642).]

Fig. 19 shows the path through the air of a ball which has been struck
by a bat at the point _A_, and started off in the direction _A B_ with a
velocity of 200 feet per second. In accordance with the first law of
motion, if it were acted upon by no other force than the impulse given
by the bat, it should travel along the straight line _A B_ at the
uniform rate of 200 feet per second, and at the end of the fourth second
it should be 800 feet from _A_, at the point marked 4, but during these
four seconds its weight has caused it to fall 256 feet, and its actual
position, 4', is 256 feet below the point 4. In this way we find its
position at the end of each second, 1', 2', 3', 4', etc., and drawing a
line through these points we shall find the actual path of the ball
under the influence of the two forces to be the curved line _A C_. No
matter how far the ball may go before striking the ground, it can not
get back to the point _A_, and the curve _A C_ therefore can not be a
part of a circle, since that curve returns into itself. It is, in fact,
a part of a _parabola_, which, as we shall see later, is a kind of orbit
in which comets and some other heavenly bodies move. A skyrocket moves
in the same kind of a path, and so does a stone, a bullet, or any other
object hurled through the air.

[Illustration: FIG. 19.--The path of a ball.]

36. THE THIRD LAW OF MOTION.--"To every action there is always an equal
and contrary reaction; or the mutual actions of any two bodies are
always equal and oppositely directed." This is well illustrated in the
case of a man climbing a rope hand over hand. The direct force or action
which he exerts is a downward pull upon the rope, and it is the reaction
of the rope to this pull which lifts him along it. We shall find in a
later chapter a curious application of this law to the history of the
earth and moon.

It is the great glory of Sir Isaac Newton that he first of all men
recognized that these simple laws of motion hold true in the heavens as
well as upon the earth; that the complicated motion of a planet, a
comet, or a star is determined in accordance with these laws by the
forces which act upon the bodies, and that these forces are essentially
the same as that which we call weight. The formal statement of the
principle last named is included in--

37. NEWTON'S LAW OF GRAVITATION.--"Every particle of matter in the
universe attracts every other particle with a force whose direction is
that of a line joining the two, and whose magnitude is directly as the
product of their masses, and inversely as the square of their distance
from each other." We know that we ourselves and the things about us are
pulled toward the earth by a force (weight) which is called, in the
Latin that Newton wrote, _gravitas_, and the word marks well the true
significance of the law of gravitation. Newton did not discover a new
force in the heavens, but he extended an old and familiar one from a
limited terrestrial sphere of action to an unlimited and celestial one,
and furnished a precise statement of the way in which the force
operates. Whether a body be hot or cold, wet or dry, solid, liquid, or
gaseous, is of no account in determining the force which it exerts,
since this depends solely upon mass and distance.

The student should perhaps be warned against straining too far the
language which it is customary to employ in this connection. The law of
gravitation is certainly a far-reaching one, and it may operate in every
remotest corner of the universe precisely as stated above, but
additional information about those corners would be welcome to
supplement our rather scanty stock of knowledge concerning what happens
there. We may not controvert the words of a popular preacher who says,
"When I lift my hand I move the stars in Ursa Major," but we should not
wish to stand sponsor for them, even though they are justified by a
rigorous interpretation of the Newtonian law.

The word _mass_, in the statement of the law of gravitation, means the
quantity of matter contained in the body, and if we represent by the
letters _m´_ and _m´´_ the respective quantities of matter contained in
the two bodies whose distance from each other is _r_, we shall have, in
accordance with the law of gravitation, the following mathematical
expression for the force, _F_, which acts between them:

    F = k {m´m´´/r^{2}}.

This equation, which is the general mathematical expression for the law
of gravitation, may be made to yield some curious results. Thus, if we
select two bullets, each having a mass of 1 gram, and place them so that
their centers are 1 centimeter apart, the above expression for the force
exerted between them becomes

    F = k {(1 × 1)/1^{2}} = k,

from which it appears that the coefficient _k_ is the force exerted
between these bodies. This is called the gravitation constant, and it
evidently furnishes a measure of the specific intensity with which one
particle of matter attracts another. Elaborate experiments which have
been made to determine the amount of this force show that it is
surprisingly small, for in the case of the two bullets whose mass of 1
gram each is supposed to be concentrated into an indefinitely small
space, gravity would have to operate between them continuously for more
than forty minutes in order to pull them together, although they were
separated by only 1 centimeter to start with, and nothing save their own
inertia opposed their movements. It is only when one or both of the
masses _m´_, _m´´_ are very great that the force of gravity becomes
large, and the weight of bodies at the surface of the earth is
considerable because of the great quantity of matter which goes to make
up the earth. Many of the heavenly bodies are much more massive than the
earth, as the mathematical astronomers have found by applying the law of
gravitation to determine numerically their masses, or, in more popular
language, to "weigh" them.

The student should observe that the two terms mass and weight are not
synonymous; mass is defined above as the quantity of matter contained in
a body, while weight is the force with which the earth attracts that
body, and in accordance with the law of gravitation its weight depends
upon its distance from the center of the earth, while its mass is quite
independent of its position with respect to the earth.

By the third law of motion the earth is pulled toward a falling body
just as strongly as the body is pulled toward the earth--i. e., by a
force equal to the weight of the body. How much does the earth rise
toward the body?

38. THE MOTION OF A PLANET.--In Fig. 20 _S_ represents the sun and _P_ a
planet or other celestial body, which for the moment is moving along the
straight line _P 1_. In accordance with the first law of motion it would
continue to move along this line with uniform velocity if no external
force acted upon it; but such a force, the sun's attraction, is acting,
and by virtue of this attraction the body is pulled aside from the line
_P 1_.

Knowing the velocity and direction of the body's motion and the force
with which the sun attracts it, the mathematician is able to apply
Newton's laws of motion so as to determine the path of the body, and a
few of the possible orbits are shown in the figure where the short cross
stroke marks the point of each orbit which is nearest to the sun. This
point is called the _perihelion_.

Without any formal application of mathematics we may readily see that
the swifter the motion of the body at _P_ the shorter will be the time
during which it is subjected to the sun's attraction at close range, and
therefore the force exerted by the sun, and the resulting change of
motion, will be small, as in the orbits _P 1_ and _P 2_.

On the other hand, _P 5_ and _P 6_ represent orbits in which the
velocity at _P_ was comparatively small, and the resulting change of
motion greater than would be possible for a more swiftly moving body.

What would be the orbit if the velocity at _P_ were reduced to nothing
at all?

What would be the effect if the body starting at _P_ moved directly away
from _1_?

[Illustration: FIG. 20.--Different kinds of orbits.]

The student should not fail to observe that the sun's attraction tends
to pull the body at _P_ forward along its path, and therefore increases
its velocity, and that this influence continues until the planet reaches
perihelion, at which point it attains its greatest velocity, and the
force of the sun's attraction is wholly expended in changing the
direction of its motion. After the planet has passed perihelion the sun
begins to pull backward and to retard the motion in just the same
measure that before perihelion passage it increased it, so that the two
halves of the orbit on opposite sides of a line drawn from the
perihelion through the sun are exactly alike. We may here note the
explanation of Kepler's second law: when the planet is near the sun it
moves faster, and the radius vector changes its direction more rapidly
than when the planet is remote from the sun on account of the greater
force with which it is attracted, and the exact relation between the
rates at which the radius vector turns in different parts of the orbit,
as given by the second law, depends upon the changes in this force.

When the velocity is not too great, the sun's backward pull, after a
planet has passed perihelion, finally overcomes it and turns the planet
toward the sun again, in such a way that it comes back to the point _P_,
moving in the same direction and with the same speed as before--i. e.,
it has gone around the sun in an orbit like _P 6_ or _P 4_, an ellipse,
along which it will continue to move ever after. But we must not fail to
note that this return into the same orbit is a consequence of the last
line in the statement of the law of gravitation (p. 54), and that, if
the magnitude of this force were inversely as the cube of the distance
or any other proportion than the square, the orbit would be something
very different. If the velocity is too great for the sun's attraction to
overcome, the orbit will be a hyperbola, like _P 2_, along which the
body will move away never to return, while a velocity just at the limit
of what the sun can control gives an orbit like _P 3_, a parabola, along
which the body moves with _parabolic velocity_, which is ever
diminishing as the body gets farther from the sun, but is always just
sufficient to keep it from returning. If the earth's velocity could be
increased 41 per cent, from 19 up to 27 miles per second, it would have
parabolic velocity, and would quit the sun's company.

The summation of the whole matter is that the orbit in which a body
moves around the sun, or past the sun, depends upon its velocity and if
this velocity and the direction of the motion at any one point in the
orbit are known the whole orbit is determined by them, and the position
of the planet in its orbit for past as well as future times can be
determined through the application of Newton's laws; and the same is
true for any other heavenly body--moon, comet, meteor, etc. It is in
this way that astronomers are able to predict, years in advance, in what
particular part of the sky a given planet will appear at a given time.

It is sometimes a source of wonder that the planets move in ellipses
instead of circles, but it is easily seen from Fig. 20 that the planet,
_P_, could not by any possibility move in a circle, since the direction
of its motion at _P_ is not at right angles with the line joining it to
the sun as it must be in a circular orbit, and even if it were
perpendicular to the radius vector the planet must needs have exactly
the right velocity given to it at this point, since either more or less
speed would change the circle into an ellipse. In order to produce
circular motion there must be a balancing of conditions as nice as is
required to make a pin stand upon its point, and the really surprising
thing is that the orbits of the planets should be so nearly circular as
they are. If the orbit of the earth were drawn accurately to scale, the
untrained eye would not detect the slightest deviation from a true
circle, and even the orbit of Mercury (Fig. 17), which is much more
eccentric than that of the earth, might almost pass for a circle.

[Illustration: FIG. 21. An impossible orbit.]

The orbit _P 2_, which lies between the parabola and the straight line,
is called in geometry a hyperbola, and Newton succeeded in proving from
the law of gravitation that a body might move under the sun's attraction
in a hyperbola as well as in a parabola or ellipse; but it must move in
some one of these curves; no other orbit is possible.[1] Thus it would
not be possible for a body moving under the law of gravitation to
describe about the sun any such orbit as is shown in Fig. 21. If the
body passes a second time through any point of its orbit, such as _P_ in
the figure, then it must retrace, time after time, the whole path that
it first traversed in getting from _P_ around to _P_ again--i. e., the
orbit must be an ellipse.

  [1] The circle and straight line are considered to be special cases
      of these curves, which, taken collectively, are called the conic
      sections.

Newton also proved that Kepler's three laws are mere corollaries from
the law of gravitation, and that to be strictly correct the third law
must be slightly altered so as to take into account the masses of the
planets. These are, however, so small in comparison with that of the
sun, that the correction is of comparatively little moment.

39. PERTURBATIONS.--In what precedes we have considered the motion of a
planet under the influence of no other force than the sun's attraction,
while in fact, as the law of gravitation asserts, every other body in
the universe is in some measure attracting it and changing its motion.
The resulting disturbances in the motion of the attracted body are
called _perturbations_, but for the most part these are insignificant,
because the bodies by whose disturbing attractions they are caused are
either very small or very remote, and it is only when our moving planet,
