"Completing a unified theory of life. Why a crystal grows but isn't
alive, why an organism that dies isn't like a crystal. What is the
process we call life? What is its relationship to the space-time
continuum--"

He said it so casually that Walker was caught off his guard completely.
"Are you serious, Millet?" he said.

"Certainly. I expect to publish in about two years."

"Is this an independent effort?"

"Not entirely. Others have contributed. Some pioneers long dead, some
among the living." His eyes twinkled. "You see, important things beside
the development of weapons of destruction do continue in the scientific
world. Did you think that was the end of everything for me, ten years
ago?" He shook his head in mock gravity. "It was just the beginning. I
_wanted_ out, you see."

"You wanted out?" Walker leaned forward, unwilling to believe what he
had heard. "Are you trying to tell me that you _arranged_ your
discharge?"

Millet shrugged. "Why, of course. Nobody ever has bothered to ask me
about that up to now, but I certainly did arrange it. It wasn't hard,
you know. All I had to do was set up some sort of relationship with a
so-called security risk, and I was on my way out."

"Why ... that's damned near treason."

"Don't be silly. I had other important things to do. In order to do
them--to continue work on the unified life theory--it was necessary for
me to contact scientists with whom professional relationships were made
illegal by security regulations. The choice was simple; besides, I
didn't enjoy the idea of spending my life developing ways of destroying
the very thing I wanted most to understand."

"This is fantastic, Millet, utterly fantastic."

"But true nonetheless. Walker, you look like you could use a drink."

"By all means." He stared emptily into the air, thinking about the good
old days.

"Walker, a toast," said Millet, holding a tall glass out to him. "To
scientific freedom."

Walker blinked. "By all means," he repeated hoarsely, and there was a
blurriness to his vision. "To scientific freedom."

They drank, and Walker said: "I feel a bit freer to say what I have come
for."

"Shoot," nodded Millet, sipping his drink.

"For security reasons, I'll talk in generalities. But the basic fact is,
United Terra is faced with a serious situation. It is most desirable
that the research you were conducting when you left us, be continued."

"There are a lot of other capable physicists, both eager to be a part of
such activity and blessed with security clearances."

"You know very well, Millet, that this was an unique, almost independent
line of development that comes to a stop in your brain. Besides," and
suddenly he felt silly, "the lines of communication for research which
might enable us to pick up where you left off, in time--too much
time--are somewhat entangled in security." He glared. "Don't laugh,
Millet; it's a fact of life which must be faced."

Millet finished his drink and set the glass on an end table. "What
you're doing is asking me to come back if you can arrange it."

Walker spread his hands. "Dr. Millet, you have put it in a nutshell."

Millet shook his head, and for the first time since their conversation
had started he frowned. "Walker, you know how I feel about developing
weapons. I'm just plain opposed to it."

"The soldier is opposed to losing his life, but many have to do just
that in the interests of civilization."

"That serious, eh?"

Walker crumpled under the weight of his fear. "That serious," he said
wearily.

Millet thoughtfully relit his pipe. "Of course, I'm not at all sure that
United Terra is very right in this thing."

"In times like these, that kind of thought is out of bounds," snapped
Walker. "Whether you like it or not, you are a part of this culture. You
might disapprove of many things in it, but you don't want to see it
