"Lord!" said the landlord; "what's the hurry?  I'm selling my bit
of a pig.  Two pounds, and you bring it back?  What's going on now?"

I explained hastily that I had to leave my home, and so secured the
dog cart.  At the time it did not seem to me nearly so urgent that the
landlord should leave his.  I took care to have the cart there and
then, drove it off down the road, and, leaving it in charge of my wife
and servant, rushed into my house and packed a few valuables, such
plate as we had, and so forth.  The beech trees below the house were
burning while I did this, and the palings up the road glowed red.
While I was occupied in this way, one of the dismounted hussars came
running up.  He was going from house to house, warning people to
leave.  He was going on as I came out of my front door, lugging my
treasures, done up in a tablecloth.  I shouted after him:

"What news?"

He turned, stared, bawled something about "crawling out in a thing
like a dish cover," and ran on to the gate of the house at the crest.
A sudden whirl of black smoke driving across the road hid him for a
moment.  I ran to my neighbour's door and rapped to satisfy myself of
what I already knew, that his wife had gone to London with him and had
locked up their house.  I went in again, according to my promise, to
get my servant's box, lugged it out, clapped it beside her on the tail
of the dog cart, and then caught the reins and jumped up into the
driver's seat beside my wife.  In another moment we were clear of the
smoke and noise, and spanking down the opposite slope of Maybury Hill
towards Old Woking.

In front was a quiet sunny landscape, a wheat field ahead on either
side of the road, and the Maybury Inn with its swinging sign.  I saw
the doctor's cart ahead of me.  At the bottom of the hill I turned my
head to look at the hillside I was leaving.  Thick streamers of black
smoke shot with threads of red fire were driving up into the still
air, and throwing dark shadows upon the green treetops eastward.  The
smoke already extended far away to the east and west--to the Byfleet
pine woods eastward, and to Woking on the west.  The road was dotted
with people running towards us.  And very faint now, but very distinct
through the hot, quiet air, one heard the whirr of a machine-gun that
was presently stilled, and an intermittent cracking of rifles.
Apparently the Martians were setting fire to everything within range
of their Heat-Ray.

I am not an expert driver, and I had immediately to turn my
attention to the horse.  When I looked back again the second hill had
hidden the black smoke.  I slashed the horse with the whip, and gave
him a loose rein until Woking and Send lay between us and that
quivering tumult.  I overtook and passed the doctor between Woking and
Send.



CHAPTER TEN

IN THE STORM


Leatherhead is about twelve miles from Maybury Hill.  The scent of
hay was in the air through the lush meadows beyond Pyrford, and the
hedges on either side were sweet and gay with multitudes of dog-roses.
The heavy firing that had broken out while we were driving down
Maybury Hill ceased as abruptly as it began, leaving the evening very
peaceful and still.  We got to Leatherhead without misadventure about
nine o'clock, and the horse had an hour's rest while I took supper
with my cousins and commended my wife to their care.

My wife was curiously silent throughout the drive, and seemed
oppressed with forebodings of evil.  I talked to her reassuringly,
pointing out that the Martians were tied to the Pit by sheer
heaviness, and at the utmost could but crawl a little out of it; but
she answered only in monosyllables.  Had it not been for my promise to
the innkeeper, she would, I think, have urged me to stay in
Leatherhead that night.  Would that I had!  Her face, I remember, was
very white as we parted.

For my own part, I had been feverishly excited all day.  Something
very like the war fever that occasionally runs through a civilised
community had got into my blood, and in my heart I was not so very
sorry that I had to return to Maybury that night.  I was even afraid
that that last fusillade I had heard might mean the extermination of
our invaders from Mars.  I can best express my state of mind by saying
that I wanted to be in at the death.

It was nearly eleven when I started to return.  The night was
unexpectedly dark; to me, walking out of the lighted passage of my
cousins' house, it seemed indeed black, and it was as hot and close as
the day.  Overhead the clouds were driving fast, albeit not a breath
stirred the shrubs about us.  My cousins' man lit both lamps.  Happily,
I knew the road intimately.  My wife stood in the light of the
doorway, and watched me until I jumped up into the dog cart.  Then
abruptly she turned and went in, leaving my cousins side by side
wishing me good hap.

I was a little depressed at first with the contagion of my wife's
fears, but very soon my thoughts reverted to the Martians.  At that
time I was absolutely in the dark as to the course of the evening's
fighting.  I did not know even the circumstances that had precipitated
the conflict.  As I came through Ockham (for that was the way I
returned, and not through Send and Old Woking) I saw along the western
horizon a blood-red glow, which as I drew nearer, crept slowly up the
sky.  The driving clouds of the gathering thunderstorm mingled there
with masses of black and red smoke.

Ripley Street was deserted, and except for a lighted window or so
the village showed not a sign of life; but I narrowly escaped an
accident at the corner of the road to Pyrford, where a knot of people
stood with their backs to me.  They said nothing to me as I passed.  I
do not know what they knew of the things happening beyond the hill,
nor do I know if the silent houses I passed on my way were sleeping
securely, or deserted and empty, or harassed and watching against the
terror of the night.

From Ripley until I came through Pyrford I was in the valley of the
Wey, and the red glare was hidden from me.  As I ascended the little
hill beyond Pyrford Church the glare came into view again, and the
trees about me shivered with the first intimation of the storm that
was upon me.  Then I heard midnight pealing out from Pyrford Church
behind me, and then came the silhouette of Maybury Hill, with its
tree-tops and roofs black and sharp against the red.

Even as I beheld this a lurid green glare lit the road about me and
showed the distant woods towards Addlestone.  I felt a tug at the
reins.  I saw that the driving clouds had been pierced as it were by a
thread of green fire, suddenly lighting their confusion and falling
into the field to my left.  It was the third falling star!

Close on its apparition, and blindingly violet by contrast, danced
out the first lightning of the gathering storm, and the thunder burst
like a rocket overhead.  The horse took the bit between his teeth and
bolted.

A moderate incline runs towards the foot of Maybury Hill, and down
this we clattered.  Once the lightning had begun, it went on in as
rapid a succession of flashes as I have ever seen.  The thunderclaps,
treading one on the heels of another and with a strange crackling
accompaniment, sounded more like the working of a gigantic electric
machine than the usual detonating reverberations.  The flickering
light was blinding and confusing, and a thin hail smote gustily at my
face as I drove down the slope.

At first I regarded little but the road before me, and then
abruptly my attention was arrested by something that was moving
rapidly down the opposite slope of Maybury Hill.  At first I took it
for the wet roof of a house, but one flash following another showed it
to be in swift rolling movement.  It was an elusive vision--a moment
of bewildering darkness, and then, in a flash like daylight, the red
masses of the Orphanage near the crest of the hill, the green tops of
the pine trees, and this problematical object came out clear and sharp
and bright.

And this Thing I saw!  How can I describe it?  A monstrous tripod,
higher than many houses, striding over the young pine trees, and
smashing them aside in its career; a walking engine of glittering
metal, striding now across the heather; articulate ropes of steel
dangling from it, and the clattering tumult of its passage mingling
with the riot of the thunder.  A flash, and it came out vividly,
heeling over one way with two feet in the air, to vanish and reappear
almost instantly as it seemed, with the next flash, a hundred yards
nearer.  Can you imagine a milking stool tilted and bowled violently
along the ground?  That was the impression those instant flashes gave.
But instead of a milking stool imagine it a great body of machinery on
a tripod stand.

Then suddenly the trees in the pine wood ahead of me were parted,
as brittle reeds are parted by a man thrusting through them; they were
snapped off and driven headlong, and a second huge tripod appeared,
rushing, as it seemed, headlong towards me.  And I was galloping hard
to meet it! At the sight of the second monster my nerve went
altogether.  Not stopping to look again, I wrenched the horse's head
hard round to the right and in another moment the dog cart had heeled
over upon the horse; the shafts smashed noisily, and I was flung
sideways and fell heavily into a shallow pool of water.

I crawled out almost immediately, and crouched, my feet still in
the water, under a clump of furze.  The horse lay motionless (his neck
was broken, poor brute!) and by the lightning flashes I saw the black
bulk of the overturned dog cart and the silhouette of the wheel still
spinning slowly.  In another moment the colossal mechanism went
striding by me, and passed uphill towards Pyrford.

Seen nearer, the Thing was incredibly strange, for it was no mere
insensate machine driving on its way.  Machine it was, with a ringing
metallic pace, and long, flexible, glittering tentacles (one of which
gripped a young pine tree) swinging and rattling about its strange
body.  It picked its road as it went striding along, and the brazen
hood that surmounted it moved to and fro with the inevitable
suggestion of a head looking about.  Behind the main body was a huge
mass of white metal like a gigantic fisherman's basket, and puffs of
green smoke squirted out from the joints of the limbs as the monster
swept by me.  And in an instant it was gone.

So much I saw then, all vaguely for the flickering of the
lightning, in blinding highlights and dense black shadows.

As it passed it set up an exultant deafening howl that drowned the
thunder--"Aloo!  Aloo!"--and in another minute it was with its
companion, half a mile away, stooping over something in the field.  I
have no doubt this Thing in the field was the third of the ten
cylinders they had fired at us from Mars.

For some minutes I lay there in the rain and darkness watching, by
the intermittent light, these monstrous beings of metal moving about
in the distance over the hedge tops.  A thin hail was now beginning,
and as it came and went their figures grew misty and then flashed into
clearness again.  Now and then came a gap in the lightning, and the
night swallowed them up.

I was soaked with hail above and puddle water below.  It was some
time before my blank astonishment would let me struggle up the bank to
a drier position, or think at all of my imminent peril.

Not far from me was a little one-roomed squatter's hut of wood,
surrounded by a patch of potato garden.  I struggled to my feet at
last, and, crouching and making use of every chance of cover, I made a
run for this.  I hammered at the door, but I could not make the people
hear (if there were any people inside), and after a time I desisted,
and, availing myself of a ditch for the greater part of the way,
succeeded in crawling, unobserved by these monstrous machines, into
the pine woods towards Maybury.

Under cover of this I pushed on, wet and shivering now, towards my
own house.  I walked among the trees trying to find the footpath.  It
was very dark indeed in the wood, for the lightning was now becoming
infrequent, and the hail, which was pouring down in a torrent, fell in
columns through the gaps in the heavy foliage.

If I had fully realised the meaning of all the things I had seen I
should have immediately worked my way round through Byfleet to Street
Cobham, and so gone back to rejoin my wife at Leatherhead.  But that
night the strangeness of things about me, and my physical
wretchedness, prevented me, for I was bruised, weary, wet to the skin,
deafened and blinded by the storm.

I had a vague idea of going on to my own house, and that was as
much motive as I had.  I staggered through the trees, fell into a
ditch and bruised my knees against a plank, and finally splashed out
into the lane that ran down from the College Arms.  I say splashed,
for the storm water was sweeping the sand down the hill in a muddy
torrent.  There in the darkness a man blundered into me and sent me
reeling back.

He gave a cry of terror, sprang sideways, and rushed on before I
could gather my wits sufficiently to speak to him.  So heavy was the
stress of the storm just at this place that I had the hardest task to
win my way up the hill.  I went close up to the fence on the left and
worked my way along its palings.

Near the top I stumbled upon something soft, and, by a flash of
lightning, saw between my feet a heap of black broadcloth and a pair
of boots.  Before I could distinguish clearly how the man lay, the
flicker of light had passed.  I stood over him waiting for the next
flash.  When it came, I saw that he was a sturdy man, cheaply but not
shabbily dressed; his head was bent under his body, and he lay
crumpled up close to the fence, as though he had been flung violently
against it.

Overcoming the repugnance natural to one who had never before
touched a dead body, I stooped and turned him over to feel for his
heart.  He was quite dead.  Apparently his neck had been broken.  The
lightning flashed for a third time, and his face leaped upon me.  I
sprang to my feet.  It was the landlord of the Spotted Dog, whose
conveyance I had taken.

I stepped over him gingerly and pushed on up the hill.  I made my
way by the police station and the College Arms towards my own house.
Nothing was burning on the hillside, though from the common there
still came a red glare and a rolling tumult of ruddy smoke beating up
against the drenching hail.  So far as I could see by the flashes, the
houses about me were mostly uninjured.  By the College Arms a dark
heap lay in the road.

Down the road towards Maybury Bridge there were voices and the
sound of feet, but I had not the courage to shout or to go to them.  I
let myself in with my latchkey, closed, locked and bolted the door,
staggered to the foot of the staircase, and sat down.  My imagination
was full of those striding metallic monsters, and of the dead body
smashed against the fence.

I crouched at the foot of the staircase with my back to the wall,
shivering violently.



CHAPTER ELEVEN

AT THE WINDOW


I have already said that my storms of emotion have a trick of
exhausting themselves.  After a time I discovered that I was cold and
wet, and with little pools of water about me on the stair carpet.  I
got up almost mechanically, went into the dining room and drank some
whiskey, and then I was moved to change my clothes.

After I had done that I went upstairs to my study, but why I did so
I do not know.  The window of my study looks over the trees and the
railway towards Horsell Common.  In the hurry of our departure this
window had been left open.  The passage was dark, and, by contrast with
the picture the window frame enclosed, the side of the room seemed
impenetrably dark.  I stopped short in the doorway.

The thunderstorm had passed.  The towers of the Oriental College
and the pine trees about it had gone, and very far away, lit by a
vivid red glare, the common about the sand pits was visible.  Across
the light huge black shapes, grotesque and strange, moved busily to
and fro.

It seemed indeed as if the whole country in that direction was on
fire--a broad hillside set with minute tongues of flame, swaying and
writhing with the gusts of the dying storm, and throwing a red
reflection upon the cloud-scud above.  Every now and then a haze of
smoke from some nearer conflagration drove across the window and hid
the Martian shapes.  I could not see what they were doing, nor the
clear form of them, nor recognise the black objects they were busied
upon.  Neither could I see the nearer fire, though the reflections of
it danced on the wall and ceiling of the study.  A sharp, resinous
tang of burning was in the air.

I closed the door noiselessly and crept towards the window.  As I
did so, the view opened out until, on the one hand, it reached to the
houses about Woking station, and on the other to the charred and
blackened pine woods of Byfleet.  There was a light down below the
hill, on the railway, near the arch, and several of the houses along
the Maybury road and the streets near the station were glowing ruins.
The light upon the railway puzzled me at first; there were a black
heap and a vivid glare, and to the right of that a row of yellow
oblongs.  Then I perceived this was a wrecked train, the fore part
smashed and on fire, the hinder carriages still upon the rails.

Between these three main centres of light--the houses, the train,
and the burning county towards Chobham--stretched irregular patches of
dark country, broken here and there by intervals of dimly glowing and
smoking ground.  It was the strangest spectacle, that black expanse set
with fire.  It reminded me, more than anything else, of the Potteries
at night.  At first I could distinguish no people at all, though I
peered intently for them.  Later I saw against the light of Woking
station a number of black figures hurrying one after the other across
the line.

And this was the little world in which I had been living securely
for years, this fiery chaos!  What had happened in the last seven
hours I still did not know; nor did I know, though I was beginning to
guess, the relation between these mechanical colossi and the sluggish
