scientist knew it. Man advances only when he sees how it will help him
stuff his gut.

"Beep, three." For a full minute, the senator had sat lost in
speculation.

And what could he personally gain? A plan, full-formed, sprang into his
mind. This whole deal could be taken out of the hands of the military
on charges of waste and corruption. It could be brought back into the
control of private industry, where it belonged. He thought of vast
tracts of land in his own state, tracts he could buy cheap, through
dummy companies, places which could be made very suitable for the giant
factories necessary to manufacture spaceships.

As chairman of the appropriations committee, it wouldn't be difficult to
sway the choice of site. And all that extra employment for the people of
his own state. The voters couldn't forget plain, simple, honest O'Noonan
after that!

"Beep, two."

       *       *       *       *       *

Jennings felt the sweat beads increase on his forehead. His collar was
already soaking wet. He had been watching the senator through two long
minutes, terrible eon-consuming minutes, the impassive face showing only
what the senator wanted it to show. He saw the face now soften into
something approaching benignity, nobility. The head came up, the silvery
hair tossed back.

"Son," he said with a ringing thrill in his voice. "Mankind must reach
the stars! We must allow nothing to stop that! No personal
consideration, no personal belief, nothing must stand in the way of
mankind's greatest dream!"

His eyes were shrewdly watching the effect upon Jennings' face,
measuring through him the effect such a speech would have upon the
voters. He saw the relief spread over Jennings' face, the glow. Yes, it
might work.

"Now, son," he said with kindly tolerance, "tell me what you want me to
do about pressing this key when the time comes."

"Beep, one."

And then the continuous drone while the seconds were being counted off
aloud.

"Fifty-nine, fifty-eight, fifty-seven--"

The droning went on while Jennings showed the senator just how to press
the dummy key down, explaining it in careful detail, and just when.

"Thirty-seven, thirty-six, thirty-five--"

"Major!" Jennings called questioningly.

"Ready, sir."

"Professor!"

"Ready, sir."

"Three, two, one, ZERO!"

"Press it, Senator!" Jennings called frantically.

Already the automatic firing stud had taken over. The bellowing, roaring
flames reached down with giant strength, nudging the ship upward,
seeming to hang suspended, waiting.

"_Press it!_"

The senator's hand pressed the dummy key. He was committed.

As if the ship had really been waiting, it lifted, faster and faster.

"Major?"

"I have it, sir." The major's hands were flying over his bank of
controls, correcting the slight unbalance of thrusts, holding the ship
as steady as if he were in it.

Already the ship was beyond visual sight, picking up speed. But the pip
on the radar screens was strong and clear. The drone of the IFF
returning signal was equally strong.

The senator sat and waited. He had done his job. He felt it perhaps
would have been better to have had the photographers on the spot, but
realized the carefully directed and rehearsed pictures to be taken later
would make better vote fodder.

"It's already out in space now, Senator," Jennings found a second of
time to call it to the senator.

The pips and the signals were bright and clear, coming through the
ionosphere, the Heaviside layer as they had been designed to do.
Jennings wondered if the senator could ever be made to understand the
simple honesty of scientists who had worked that out so well and true.
Bright and strong and clear.

And then there was nothing! The screens were blank. The sounds were
gone.

       *       *       *       *       *

Jennings stood in stupefied silence.

"It shut! It shut off!" Major Eddy's voice was shrill in amazement.

"It cut right out, Colonel. No fade, no dying signal, just out!" It was
the first time Jennings had ever heard a note of excitement in Professor
Stein's voice.

The phone began to ring, loud and shrill. That would be from the
General's observation post, where he, too, must have lost the signal.

The excitement penetrated the senator's rosy dream of vast acreages
being sold at a huge profit, giant walls of factories going up under his
