quality reproductions, a Capehart, and fine, massive furniture. It was a
tasteful layout. He looked a little more closely at three pictures on
the mantel: a middle-aged woman and two young men in uniform.

"My wife," said Kennedy, "and my boys. They're all dead. Would you like
a drink?"

"No. I came to talk."

"I'm not Satan, you know," said Kennedy. "I like books and music, good
wine, good conversation. I'm as human as you are, only I have a
purpose."

Fraser sat down and began charging his pipe. "Go ahead," he said. "I'm
listening."

Kennedy pulled a chair over to face him. The big smooth countenance
behind the rimless glasses held little expression. "Why have you been
annoying me?" he asked.

"I?" Fraser lifted his brows.

Kennedy made an impatient gesture. "Let's not chop words. There are no
witnesses tonight. I intend to talk freely, and want you to do the same.
I know that you've got Martinez sufficiently convinced to help you with
this very childish persecution-campaign. What do you hope to get out of
it?"

"I want my girl back," said Fraser tonelessly. "I was hoping my
nuisance-value--"

       *       *       *       *       *

Kennedy winced a bit. "You know, I'm damned sorry about that. It's the
one aspect of my work which I hate. I'd like you to believe that I'm not
just a scientific procurer. Actually, I have to satisfy the minor
desires of my clients, so they'll stay happy and agree to my major
wishes. It's the plain truth that those women have been only the
minutest fraction of my job."

"Nevertheless, you're a free-wheeling son, doing something like that--"

"Really, now, what's so horrible about it? Those girls are in love--the
normal, genuine article. It's not any kind of zombie state, or whatever
your overheated imagination has thought up. They're entirely sane,
unharmed, and happy. In fact, happiness of that kind is so rare in this
world that if I wanted to, I could pose as their benefactor."

"You've got a machine," said Fraser; "it changes the mind. As far as I'm
concerned, that's as gross a violation of liberty as throwing somebody
into a concentration camp."

"How free do you think anyone is? You're born with a fixed heredity.
Environment molds you like clay. Your society teaches you what and how
to think. A million tiny factors, all depending on blind, uncontrollable
chance, determine the course of your life--including your love-life....
Well, we needn't waste any time on philosophy. Go on, ask some
questions. I admit I've hurt you--unwittingly, to be sure--but I do want
to make amends."

"Your machine, then," said Fraser. "How did you get it? How does it
work."

"I was practicing in Chicago," said Kennedy, "and collaborating on the
side with Gavotti. How much do you know of cybernetics? I don't mean
computers and automata, which are only one aspect of the field; I mean
control and communication, in the animal as well as in the machine."

"Well, I've read Wiener's books, and studied Shannon's work, too."
Despite himself, Fraser was thawing, just a trifle. "It's exciting
stuff. Communications-theory seems to be basic, in biology and
psychology as well as in electronics."

"Quite. The future may remember Wiener as the Galileo of neurology. If
Gavotti's work ever gets published, he'll be considered the Newton. So
far, frankly, I've suppressed it. He died suddenly, just when his
machine was completed and he was getting ready to publish his results.
Nobody but I knew anything more than rumors; he was inclined to be
secretive till he had a _fait accompli_ on hand. I realized what an
opportunity had been given me, and took it; I brought the machine here
without saying much to anyone."

Kennedy leaned back in his chair. "I imagine it was mostly luck which
took Gavotti and me so far," he went on. "We made a long series of
improbably good guesses, and thus telescoped a century of work into a
decade. If I were religious, I'd be down on my knees, thanking the Lord
for putting this thing of the future into my hands."

"Or the devil," said Fraser.

Briefly, anger flitted across Kennedy's face. "I grant you, the machine
is a terrible power, but it's harmless to a man if it's used
properly--as I have used it. I'm not going to tell you just how it
works; to be perfectly honest, I only understand a fraction of its
theory and its circuits myself. But look, you know something of
encephalography. The various basic rhythms of the brain have been
measured. The standard method is already so sensitive that it can detect
abnormalities like a developing tumor or a strong emotional disturbance,
that will give trouble unless corrected. Half of Gavotti's machine is a
still more delicate encephalograph. It can measure and analyze the
minute variations in electrical pulses corresponding to the basic
emotional states. It won't read thoughts, no; but once calibrated for a
given individual, it will tell you if he's happy, sorrowful, angry,
disgusted, afraid--any fundamental neuro-glandular condition, or any
combination of them."

He paused. "All right," said Fraser. "What else does it do?"

"It does _not_ make monsters," said Kennedy. "Look, the specific
emotional reaction to a given stimulus is, in the normal individual,
largely a matter of conditioned reflex, instilled by social environment
or the accidental associations of his life.

"Anyone in decent health will experience fear in the presence of
danger; desire in the presence of a sexual object, and so on. That's
basic biology, and the machine can't change that. But most of our
evaluations are learned. For instance, to an American the word 'mother'
has powerful emotional connotations, while to a Samoan it means nothing
very exciting. You had to develop a taste for liquor, tobacco,
coffee--in fact most of what you consume. If you're in love with a
particular woman, it's a focusing of the general sexual libido on her,
brought about by the symbolizing part of your mind: she _means_
something to you. There are cultures without romantic love, you know.
And so on. All these specific, conditioned reactions can be changed."

"How?"

       *       *       *       *       *

Kennedy thought for a moment "The encephalographic part of the machine
measures the exact pulsations in the individual corresponding to the
various emotional reactions. It takes me about four hours to determine
those with the necessary precision; then I have to make statistical
analyses of the data, to winnow out random variations. Thereafter I put
the subject in a state of light hypnosis--that's only to increase
suggestibility, and make the process faster. As I pronounce the words
and names I'm interested in, the machine feeds back the impulses
corresponding to the emotions I want: a sharply-focused beam on the
brain center concerned.

"For instance, suppose you were an alcoholic and I wanted to cure you.
I'd put you in hypnosis and stand there whispering 'wine, whisky, beer,
gin,' and so on; meanwhile, the machine would be feeding the impulses
corresponding to your reactions of hate, fear, and disgust into your
brain. You'd come out unchanged, except that your appetite for alcohol
would be gone; you could, in fact, come out hating the stuff so much
that you'd join the Prohibition Party--though, in actual practice, it
would probably be enough just to give you a mild aversion."

"Mmmm--I see. Maybe." Fraser scowled. "And the--subject--doesn't
remember what you've done?"

"Oh, no. It all takes place on the lower subconscious levels. A new set
of conditioned neural pathways is opened, you see, and old ones are
closed off. The brain does that by itself, through its normal
symbolizing mechanism. All that happens is that the given symbol--such
as liquor--becomes reflectively associated with the given emotional
state, such as dislike."

Kennedy leaned forward with an air of urgency. "The end result is in no
way different from ordinary means of persuasion. Propaganda does the
same thing by sheer repetition. If you're courting a girl, you try to
identify yourself in her mind with the things she desires, by
appropriate behavior.... I'm sorry; I shouldn't have used that
example.... The machine is only a direct, fast way of doing this,
producing a more stable result."

"It's still--tampering," said Fraser. "How do you know you're not
creating side-effects, doing irreparable long-range damage?"

"Oh, for Lord's sake!" exploded Kennedy. "Take your mind off that shelf,
will you? I've told you how delicate the whole thing is. A few
microwatts of power more or less, a frequency-shift of less than one
percent, and it doesn't work at all. There's no effect whatsoever." He
