anything but his gas is of no account. He will keep on cutting out items
from the newspapers whenever he finds it recorded that an electric light
somewhere failed to flicker.

He will still maintain that there is not a company in the country making
anything out of electric lighting, and that it is only a matter of time
when some fellow slips into his town and, noting things, works up an arc
light company, captures the street lighting and some of our friend's best
consumers. The price of gas is lowered; all kinds of patent gas burners
are invested in to recapture those lost consumers; a fight ensues,
factions are made in the town, and the arc light company adds an
incandescent plant to the arc light, and captures more of our friend's
consumers. To cap the climax, another fellow comes along and proposes to
supply fuel gas to the citizens, gets a franchise, puts in pipes and
services, and our friend wakes up some fine morning to find that what the
electric light fellow has left him in the shape of lighting has been
captured by the fellow with the fuel gas plant, who puts in the
incandescent gas burners.

Evidence is cropping up all around us that tends to this change. We find
manufacturers of fireclay goods now making carbons for electric lighting;
we also find gas fixture manufacturers now making and selling electric
wires of all kinds, besides other apparatus connected with the electrical
field. Manufacturers of meters have not yet devised a meter for measuring
electrical currents, but perhaps it would pay them to devote a portion of
their time to studying one out. As far as the present meter business is
concerned, I think, if this transformation of the gas business is brought
about, the demand for gas meters would be quadrupled and the use of the
larger sizes of meters would be made necessary; but if accuracy could be
insured with a much smaller meter with quicker action, I think it would be
better adapted for the purpose. Fuel gas, if it can be manufactured at a
price at which it could be sold with profit at a lower or as low price as
coal, would prove a larger field than all the kinds of lighting put
together, and is certainly worth our while to investigate thoroughly. The
owners of the smallest houses of our cities would become our patrons, and
a small profit per thousand would represent a wide margin when taking into
consideration the large amount that would be consumed.

But is the fuel gas practical, and has there been sufficient progress made
to date to warrant gas companies taking hold of it with any assurance of
success?

In the first place, what assurance do we require? Do we want some one to
come along and guarantee us a profit of 20 per cent. on our investment if
we enter the field? If so, the patentees of the different processes might
just as well negotiate with the shoe maker as with the gas company. I
think all the assurance we want in the premises is that with certain
apparatus we can get certain results from a ton of coal (the kind of coal
being specified), or that from a ton of coal we can get a certain amount
of available deliverable heat units.

The balance we should be capable of working out ourselves, such as labor,
leakage, cost of gas at consumers' meters, and such other data that we
certainly should be more familiar with than any one else.

Of course, the fuel gas will have to have an odor, and must be delivered
at a proper pressure; and proper appliances for governing supply and
insuring perfect safety will have to be calculated on. In fact, the gas
man must try to improve on methods adopted, and do his best to hasten the
day when solid fuel in our homes shall be no more--in other words, we have
to take hold of the fuel gas business in its infancy or it will get weaned
away from us.

Mr. McMillin, with others, has given us some figures on fuel gas which
have been verified by practical tests. For instance, he gives us as his
opinion that a mixed gas is more adapted for all-round purposes than
either coal or water gas alone.

From experiments made we find that from a ton of bituminous coal, making a
mixed gas, we can realize as salable gas 63 or 64 per cent. of the total
heat units in the original ton of coal, or about 17,000,000 heat units,
besides a residue of heat sufficient to produce the steam for making the
above amount.

Of this mixture 20 per cent. is coal gas, made in the ordinary way, which
is the only objectionable feature the writer can see in the process. I am
inclined to think that Mr. McMillin rather strained a point here in order
not to alarm coal gas men, or else to avoid a too radical change in the
apparatus now in vogue for making coal gas.

By his statement we find that in water gas, labor and repairs cost but 7
cents per M, while coal gas costs for the same items 15 cents per M. Of
course, the proportion of coal gas made by the old method is of more value
in heat units than the water gas made by the new method; but what I wished
to suggest was this, that if the whole process be made in the cupola as
water gas is now made, whether the result would be the same number, or
nearly so, of heat units in amount of gas made, with a large reduction in
labor making the coal gas cost no more than the water gas for the item of
labor repairs. If the mixture can be made in this manner, and I have some
assurance that it can be done successfully, then I think it would pay any
company to abandon the use of the present style of gas benches, and use
the space now occupied by them with more improved apparatus, rather than
use them at a loss, simply because we have them on hand.

We have pictured an ideal burner for our homes in the fore part of this
paper, and I cannot refrain from holding up to your view this ideal fuel,
which has no smoke, no dirt, no ashes, and entails on the housewife no
extra labor, can be regulated automatically to one steady temperature, and
does not require a workingman, after doing a hard day's work, to come home
and find a ton of coal dumped on the front sidewalk, which has to be
wheeled or carried in before night comes on.

Now that we have seen an ideal street light, an ideal house light, and an
ideal fuel, we will endeavor to show you an ideal gas company; and we
cannot do it in a more concise way than to say that an ideal gas company
is one that keeps all these ideal commodities for sale at a reasonable
price.

This may look visionary on my part to some of you, perhaps all of you;
but, nevertheless, I feel that this is the place and time to talk over
"our future prospects," and if this paper is the cause of any one
investigating the subjects spoken of or bringing forth discussion
regarding the same, I shall feel I have not written in vain.




        THE APPLICATION OF ELECTRICITY TO LIGHTING AND WORKING.[5]

                        By W. H. PREECE, F.R.S.

                                LECTURE I.


I appear before you to give a short course of two lectures on the
application of electricity to lighting and working. To-night I shall
confine my attention entirely to lighting, and if we succeed in getting
through our subject, we shall devote ourselves next Wednesday to the
application of electricity for working tramways, to the transmission of
power for various purposes, and generally to working.

[5] Two juvenile lectures recently delivered before the Society of Arts,
London.--_From the Journal of the Society._

Many people imagine the electric light to be a cold light. It is a
delusion. It is called a cold light because in many of its forms it gives
what we may call a cheerless light; it has not got the warmth, the
comfortable look, of other artificial means of illumination.

The electric light owes its existence to the intense heat that the
electric current produces, and heat lies at the root of every system of
artificial illumination. For instance, suppose we take a common match and
light it, we light it simply because by the friction of the two surfaces
together we generate heat, the heat burns the substance of which the match
is made. We are able to light a common candle because we have applied heat
to the wick, the heat liquefies the wax of which the candle is made, the
wax is decomposed, it combines with the oxygen of the air, intense heat is
produced at that point, carbon is consumed, and the consequence is light.
So with all our various modes of artificial illumination. Gas, as you are
well aware, produces intense heat, and the result of that heat is light.
There are various ways in which gas is applied to produce heat and the
necessary consequence--light. Here is a Sellon gas burner, in which the
combustion of gas raises the temperature of a fine platinum cap, and the
result is, as you see, a very beautiful light. In one lamp we have a cap
or mantle, in the other case there is merely a flat disk gauze of
platinum. The combustion of the gas produces intense heat, which raises
the network to a very high state of temperature, though in the present
case the light is not so good as it should be, probably through the
pressure in the supply main not being sufficiently great.

In another case we have a gas jet surrounded with a network of some
vegetable matter, linen or cambric, steeped in a solution of salts of
zirconium, and a few other rare earths, and the intense heat of the gas
causes a very high temperature, and, as you see, a very brilliant effect
is produced.

You will see from this that in all cases of artificial illumination bodies
have to be raised to a high state of temperature. I hold in my hand a
piece of magnesium wire; it is really flat magnesium tape, but it is
called wire. If I heat that, you will observe that a very brilliant light
is produced, due to the very high temperature at which it burns. Now, if I
take a lump of coal and heat it--it requires to be raised to a certain
temperature before the oxygen is directed upon it--and subject it to a jet
of oxygen, you will see that it burns with very much more intense light
than you are accustomed to in the ordinary fire. If I take a piece of iron
wire and place it in a jar of oxygen, you see what a very brilliant effect
the combination of oxygen and iron produces through the iron being raised
to a very high temperature.

I have now shown you that in order to produce light we must, by some means
or other, raise the temperature of a body. But the high temperature that
we have to deal with is not that produced by the combination of the oxygen
of the air and carbon, and other bodies such as I have shown you, but it
is produced by the aid of the electric current. In all these cases the
result of the combustion you have seen has been to remove oxygen from the
air, but now I want to show you how a body can be raised to a high state
of temperature without combustion of any kind. In front of me I have a
fine platinum wire. In my hand I hold a wire that is in connection with a
battery upstairs, the other wire in connection with the battery is
attached to the far end of the fine platinum wire; now, when I make
contact with the near end of the platinum wire, you observe that the wire
is raised to redness, its temperature is high, and as I reduce the length
of the platinum wire it gets brighter and brighter, the amount of
electricity passing through it is greater and greater, and presently the
wire is fused. I should have pointed out that as the quantity of heat
generated in a wire increases, so does the color of the light. When heat
is applied to a body, that body is first warmed, then it gets gradually
hotter and hotter, until it becomes red hot, and the first color that
appears is always red. The temperature is further raised, and the body
assumes the color of orange, then at a little higher temperature it
appears yellow, and so the different colors of the rainbow are perceived
according to the different temperatures to which the body tested with is
raised. Now, I want to show you the most intense form in which heat can be
produced on this earth. There is no hotter object that we can obtain than
that of the electric arc. I will try and produce this arc. You observe
that when I bring these two pieces of carbon together, a current of
electricity passes between them, and the passage of the current of
electricity between them creates such an intense temperature that a
brilliant white light, as you see, is produced. Incandescent particles of
carbon pass between the two points, forming a sort of bridge or arch,
which is called the electric arc. But the temperature of this arc is, as I
said before, the highest temperature that we can produce; it has been
measured, and is found to be 8,500 deg. Fahr. That is a temperature that can
hardly be conceived; the melting point of iron is only about 1,200 deg. Fahr.;
the melting point of platinum, which is one of the most refractory metals
we have, is about 3,000 deg. Fahr.; but here in the arc we have the intense
temperature that nothing can withstand, equal to 8,500 deg. Fahr. The color is
really due to the combustion that takes place between the materials
forming the arc. I have just used two pieces of carbon, but I will now try
other materials--copper, iron, and zinc. You will see a difference in the
color of the light, due to the fact that metal is burned in the arc
instead of carbon. Every metal has its own distinct and particular color,
and the presence of the different metals can be detected by the character
of the small arcs produced.

I have shown you that we have two modes of producing intense heat, and
therefore light, by electricity. I want now to show you how we produce
electricity. The first essential for the production of electricity with a
hand machine like this is a good dinner. The energy provided by beef or
mutton enables the operator to turn the big wheel of the machine, whence
motion is transmitted to the apparatus for producing the electricity. This
machine when rotated causes a coil of copper wire to be whirled in a
magnetic field, and that rotation of the coil in a magnetic field converts
the energy derived from the grass and from the mutton through the machine
into electric currents; those electric currents flow through wires that
are under the table, they will appear in the two wires I hold in my hand,
and will, I hope, reappear in the little glow-lamps I have before me in
the shape of heat, and then of light when I attach the wires. The light of
the glow-lamp is of just the same form of energy as that which passed from
the sun to the earth, and by beginning backward from the lamps we have
light, heat, electric currents, mechanical motion, food or fuel in the
shape of mutton, grass on the South Downs, to the sun. Whichever way it is
taken, you will find there is direct action between the sun and the
glow-lamp. The lamps are now burning, and you see that we are able to
produce electricity to our hearts' content. Down-stairs there is a
gas-engine; the gas-engine is at work; the gas-engine works because the
gas supplies energy which, stored up in the bowels of the earth in the
form of coal for ages and ages, has been extracted; it has been converted
into gas at the large gas works down the River Thames, it has been brought
up here, it is burned in the gas-engine, and produces energy in the
gas-engine exactly in the same way as the mutton or beef produced energy
just now. There is a dynamo down-stairs exactly like the dynamo that we
have upon the platform, and the current that is produced is exactly as the
current we just obtained, and is sending electricity through all the lamps
in this room. The currents of electricity passing through the lamps are
producing intense heat, the heat is producing the incandescence of a fine
carbon filament, such as I will show you directly, and the consequence is
that we are now being lighted in this room by the energy that unmistakably
and undisputably arrived on this earth millions of years ago in the form
of sunshine.

We can store up the energy in batteries. I shall show you to-night two or
three different forms of battery. Here is what is called a primary
battery. The only difference between a primary battery and a secondary
battery is this, that a primary battery consists of chemical elements that
at once combine and produce electricity by combustion, whereas a secondary
battery involves some anterior electrical action, which prepares the
surfaces of two bodies to put them in exactly the same condition as a
primary battery. Here is a primary battery known as the Schanschieff,
which is charged with a solution of sulphate of mercury, and into that
sulphate of mercury we will dip plates of zinc and plates of carbon. Zinc
has a greater affinity for the sulphuric acid of the sulphate of mercury
than mercury has; the sulphuric acid will at once combine with the zinc;
it will burn the zinc just as the gas burned just now, but instead of
burning with heat and light in the battery, it burns in the form of
electricity, which appears in the glow-lamps attached. You see that the
moment the zinc and carbons are placed in the cell electricity is
produced, and the lamp is lighted. The form of battery from which we are
drawing our electricity to-night is the accumulator, or the storage or
secondary battery. The secondary battery simply consists of plates or
"grids," as they are called, one filled with litharge, and the other with
red lead; the one becomes pure lead, the other becomes peroxide of lead;
the plates are combined in this form, and then placed in a glass cell, and
upstairs there are 52 of these E.P.S. cells, which have been charged all
day long by the gas-engine of which I spoke, and which now contain a store
of electricity that I shall make considerable use of to-night before I
finish.

I showed you the form of electric light which we call the arc, and I have
here to-night two or three different forms of arc lamps, which I will show
in action. But I want you to see this arc light for yourselves, and I want
you to feel, as I feel, that in all nature there is nothing more wonderful
and nothing more beautiful than the action of electric currents in the
arc. The light is, as I attempted to show you, the very same light that
came from the sun. I can show you that it is of the same character as the
light of the sun, and in the lantern on the table there is an arc lamp the
light of which we will throw on the paper before me in the form of a
spectrum. There you see the spectrum in all its purity; the spectrum from
the sun is no purer as regards light than what you now see. There you see
all the colors of the rainbow, and I had intended, if it were possible, to
show you in the first experiment, in which we raised platinum wire to
incandescence, that the first color would be the red, then the orange,
then the yellow, then the green, then the blue, then the indigo, and
lastly the violet. Beyond the violet there are rays of light which we
cannot see; they are the rays that produce the photographic pictures, and,
had time permitted it, we would probably have taken to-night a picture by
means of the arc lamps, but it requires a long time to do so, and it
really is no more interesting than an ordinary photographic picture. There
are all the different colors of the rainbow. Those who are anxious to
remember the order of the colors can very easily do so if they will
remember this simple sentence, "Read over your good book in verse." The
first letter of each word in that sentence gives the first letter of the
color in the order of the spectrum. It would be a very good thing if some
of our artists were to study and remember the colors of the rainbow, for
it is an extremely rare thing indeed to find a picture with the colors of
the rainbow properly depicted, sometimes they are upside down, sometimes
they are mixed, and if you discuss the fact with an artist, he will say,
"I do not care about your science. I simply paint my own impressions."

I will now show you the arc in another form. We are to-night connected in
this room--I have told you there is a gas-engine down-stairs; there are
also secondary batteries upstairs--but we are in connection with the
Grosvenor Gallery in Bond Street. The Grosvenor Gallery has a central
station where a very large dynamo is at work, from which electricity is
supplied to different parts of London; many thousand lamps are fed, in a
great many clubs, theaters, and private houses; they are all lit up by the
currents generated underneath the Grosvenor Gallery. The Grosvenor Gallery
Company, through their engineer, Mr. Ferranti, have very kindly undertaken
to supply us to-night with a current. The current is supposed to be a very
dangerous one, in reality it is not; there is no electric current that has
ever been produced that is one-tenth as dangerous as a steam boiler, and
all these currents, however immense they may be, are very simply
controlled, and very easily brought within the region of safety. There is
no doubt that with the apparatus that is now being handled in this room,
if anybody were deliberately to put one wire in his mouth and the other in
his hand, he would have the funeral service performed over him in two or
three days; but those who know what they are about no more handle electric
light wires carelessly than they put their hands in a furnace or their
noses in boiling water. We acquire experience by practice, and we know by
this time pretty well how to deal with electric currents. Now, you see in
the lower arrangement there that safety catches are being put in, which
render any accident quite impossible. Passing through each of those boxes
there is what is called a "cut-out" safety fuse, or safety valve, and
should, from any accident, anything go wrong in this theater, or in any
way with the system outside the theater, the safety fuses would burst, and
would so remove all danger from inside. The switch has now been turned,
and by it the current from the Grosvenor Gallery has been brought within
our reach. You see an arc light produced by it, and you see how intensely
bright and brilliant that light is. I do not want you so much to see that
light itself, but I want you to see its projection, or picture; and if Mr.
Wickham will kindly direct it on that white paper, at the end of the room
furthest from the table, you will see a picture of the carbons which are
now emitting that intense and brilliant light. You will see that between
what appears to you as the top carbon (but which is in reality the bottom
carbon of the two) and the bottom one there is playing, apparently, a
shower of minute fragments of something, but which are in reality
innumerable minute flashes of lightning, there is a constant uninterrupted
shower of electric shocks passing, that produce that intense brilliancy,
and that very bright appearance. There is intense commotion, a terrible
surging about of matter in a molten condition. Well, that arc that you see
is produced by the currents from the Grosvenor Gallery. They are
alternating currents of electricity, currents that are constantly and
suddenly circulating backward and forward. The arc that we have at this
other end of the room is a direct current one, and it is now projected on
to another sheet of paper, where you see a different form of are
altogether. This arc is produced by the direct current from a battery. You
will see the form is quite different from that in the alternate current
arc. You heard a peculiar hissing sound just now; that is a peculiar
phenomenon in arc lamps that has attracted a good deal of attention from
physicists, but nobody has yet arrived at a satisfactory conclusion as to
the cause. The lamp sometimes sings and sometimes hisses, and while thus
behaving it produces an intense and variable inverse electro-motive force,
that has to be overcome before the current can produce a steady and silent
arc. You will notice in the upper carbon of this form of lamp a kind of
cup, or "crater." The lower carbon forms a kind of point, a raised
surface, and between the two there is on the projection that which appears
as a glow, but which in reality has very intense heat, reaching, as I told
you, a temperature of 8,500 deg. Fahr. In those two projections you have, I
think, within my experience for the first time, been shown in public an
alternate current arc and a direct current arc at the same time, so that
you are really able to see what I do not think most people have seen
before.

There are a great many different arc lamps. I have not time to bring
before you all the various lamps that I might have secured for your
inspection. There is the Brush lamp, that for a long time lit up the
streets of our city, and I sincerely hope very soon is going to light up
the city again. There was the Jablochkoff lamp, that lighted up our Thames
Embankment, and which can be seen, on going down the Strand, at the Tivoli
Restaurant, not far from here. The offices of the _Daily Telegraph_, in
Fleet Street, and many other places, are lighted up by different lamps,
many of them excellent. Our experience of the last two or three years at
the exhibitions has taught us that there are a great many different kinds
of arc lamps, but all these arc lamps are lamps so constructed that they
cause the pair of carbons to be fed, to be kept together, as they consume,
at the same rate as they do consume. The mechanism is of great delicacy,
it acts with great promptitude, and the one that we have here to-night is
one of the last and one of the best; it is known as the Brockie-Pell lamp.
The lamp now at work is a Brockie-Pell, and for those who are interested,
a diagram representing it is upon the wall, and its operation I shall be
very happy to explain after the lecture; it feeds with great rapidity,
with great convenience, and is one of the steadiest lamps we have.

There are objections to the arc light; it is extremely dazzling and
irritating to the eye. Although the arc lamps we have here to-night are of
the very best of their kind, and are certainly almost steady, still they
have little irregularities in their action, and worst of all, they throw
intense shadows. The light from them is not very well diffused, still the
light is very brilliant, and it raises the envy of a good many people. For
instance, the Brush Company were once establishing a light in the
neighborhood of Cork, and an Irish farmer was remarkably struck by the
appearance and the steadiness of the light, so he came to the engineer in
charge and asked him, as a great favor, if he could kindly tell him where
he got his oil from.

I must now go from this to the next branch, the glow-lamp, the lamp that
is burning so steadily and so nicely above us. For this lamp we do not use
platinum, such as I heated before you just now, but we use carbon, so fine
that although I have probably one hundred or more in my hand, they feel no
heavier than a feather. These extremely fine filaments of carbon are made
with very great care from cotton. I cannot show you the whole operation of
making carbons and some of the preliminary operations connected with the
making of the lamp; but owing to the kindness of the Anglo-American Brush
Company, their manager, Mr. Sillar, is here to-night, and we shall have
the pleasure of seeing how the whole operation of the manufacture of one
of these glow lamps, such as we have above us now, is carried out. The
carbons have already been formed, but the first process is that the cotton
fiber is carefully tied and wrapped around pieces of carbon, as you see.
It is then placed in a furnace and carbonized. After being thus prepared,
a glass tube of special quality selected for the purpose is used to form
the glass globe. Mr. Donaldson will take a piece of the glass tube before
you, and will blow it into the shape similar to the lamp I hold, which is
of the very familiar pear-like form. The carbon filament will then be
fixed in the glass bulb, the latter will be exhausted and sealed, and the
whole process be passed through before your eyes. I must first of all show
you why it is necessary to take all this care. We have in front of the
board one of these carbon filaments suspended, and we will now pass a
current through it, and the carbon filament is raised to incandescence, it
combines with the oxygen of the air, it is at once consumed, and, as you
saw, we only had a light for a few seconds. Now, in order to make that
light permanent, it is necessary to inclose the carbon filament in a glass
globe, and to exhaust from that glass globe all the air, or as much of it
as possible, and then, instead of having a life of a few seconds, the life
of a lamp frequently continues for 4,000 or 5,000 hours. The first
process, as I said, in making an incandescent lamp, after the carbon
filament has been prepared, is that of blowing a glass bulb. The blowpipe
has now been put on, and the intense heat of the Bunsen burner raises the
glass to incandescence, to a soft, plastic condition, so plastic that the
manipulator can do with it just whatever he likes. Having got the glass
to this particular shape, the filament will be placed inside it, first of
all mounting the filament, which is an operation requiring a great deal of
care and great skill in handling. It is an extremely pretty operation, and
I beg to call your attention to it. The carbon is fixed inside a fine
spiral of platinum, which is at the same time subjected to an intense
current which decomposes the oil or the hydrocarbon in which it is placed,
the carbon deposits on the carbon filament, and cements it to the platinum
spiral. That is called mounting the filament. When that is done, the
filament is fixed in the glass globe, and the platinum and glass are fused
together. The brilliance of the platinum can be seen during this
operation, and it is very pretty. I do not know how it would have been
possible for us to have glow-lamps if it had not been for the fact that
the coefficients or rates of expansion of platinum and glass are
practically exactly the same, and the result is that when the platinum and
glass are combined together, as they are in a glow-lamp, the two contract
and expand at the same rate, and the result is there is no leakage; if
there had been leakage through the glass, it would have been quite
impossible to have made a glow-lamp. The success of a glow-lamp depends
upon the vacuum produced, and the next process is to cement the lamp so
far to a vacuum tube connected to a mercurial air-pump. The one before you
is Mr. Lane Fox's. It would have been also impossible to have produced
these beautiful glow-lamps without the mercurial air-pump, so that the
success of electric lighting and its perfection depend upon, first, the
similarity of expansion of glass and platinum, and secondly upon our power
of producing a vacuum. As it takes ten minutes or a quarter of an hour to
carry out the process of exhaustion, I will proceed with other portions of
my subject, and presently, when the time is ready, Mr. Sillar will inform
me, and we will light up the lamp that has been made before you this
evening, and, I hope, with success. The operation we have just seen is one
that has been just as interesting to me as it has been to you. There are
very few who are permitted to see this operation. We once had it before in
this hall when General Webber read a paper on glow-lamps, but with that
exception I am not aware that the manufacture of glow-lamps has ever been
shown in public before. It is most wonderful to watch the marvelous way in
which glass can be twisted and turned to our ways and to our wants, and
the skill with which the blower is able to manipulate glass in its plastic
condition, and to shape it in any form he likes, is an operation which
never ceases to excite one's wonderment. The form of lamp that is being
