
"There are ways to get along here, I found out. I didn't get arrested
this time, did I? So why can't you take a chance with me to Mars?"

"Take an eclipse on that," said Dudley with a flat sweep of his hand.
"It's just out of the question. For one thing, there are four of us
going, and you can't hide for the whole trip without _somebody_ catching
on."

"All right," she said quietly. "Why not?"

"What do you mean, 'Why not?'"

"I'm willing to earn my passage. What if there _are_ four of you?"

For a long moment, Dudley discovered things about himself, with the
sudden realization that the idea appealed to some suppressed part of his
mind. He had never kidded himself about being a saint. The thing had
possibilities. _Maybe one of the others can be talked into restraint
into her._

He snapped out of it. "Don't be a little fool!" he grated. "If you want
my advice, you'll--."

"Well, I _don't_ want your goddam advice! If you're too yellow to try
it, I'll find somebody else. There'll be another rocket after yours, you
know. Maybe they'll have a _man_ on it!"

He felt his face go white and then flush as he stared at her. He did not
know what to say. She looked like a child, but the outburst was more
than a mere tantrum.

_Sounds as if she's never been crossed before_, he thought. _I ought to
haul off and slap a little self-restraint into her._

Instead, he beckoned to the three men, who had been edging closer with
aggrieved expressions.

"How about taking your girl friend along?" he said flatly.

One of them took her by the elbow and tried to murmur something in her
ear, but Kathi shook him off.

"If you are afraid for your license, Dudley, I'll say I hid without your
knowing it. I'll say one of the others let me in. Please, Dudley. I'm
sorry I talked to you like that."

She was making a fool of him, and of herself, he decided. And in
another minute, she would spill the whole thing, the way she was
sounding off. And her friends were beginning to look hostile as it was.

"What's the trouble?" asked one of them.

"Nothing that won't clear up if you pour a couple of drinks into her,"
said Dudley disgustedly.

He walked away, and they held her from following.

"_Dudley!_" she yelled after him. "They'll send me back! Please, Dudley.
I won't go. You remember what I said about going back--."

Her voice was getting too shrill. Someone in the group must have put his
hand over her mouth, for when Dudley looked back, they were rounding a
corner of the corridor more or less silently.

Eileen waited in the half-open door, watching him quizzically. "Friend
of yours?" she drawled.

"After a fashion," admitted Dudley, pulling out a handkerchief to wipe
his forehead. "Spoiled brat!"

He fumbled in a pocket of his jacket, and withdrew a small package.
"Here's the bracelet that matches that necklace," he said. "I knew I had
it in my locker somewhere."

Her thanks were very adequate.

"Aren't you coming in?" Eileen asked after the pause.

"No ... I don't ... I have to get a good night's sleep, you know. We
kick off tomorrow."

She pursed her lips in a small pout, but shrugged. "Then look me up when
you get back, Pete."

"Yeah. Sure."

He kissed her quickly and walked away, drumming the fingers of his right
hand against his thigh.

Except for the tenseness of blasting off and landing, the round trip to
Mars was as boring as he expected. Campiglia won too many chess games at
one move per watch, and the deck of cards wore out. For a few days,
Wells had a slightly infected finger after cutting himself, but it was a
small crisis. The layover on Mars was short, and the thrill was no
longer new.

Dudley was glad to step out of the big rocket on Luna.

They had come in during the sleeping period at Ericsson, so the four of
them had gone to their quarters for a few hours of sleep after the first
babble of welcome from those on duty when they landed. Dudley was
awakened by Jack Fisher.

"So early?" he grunted, squinting at his watch. "What brings you
around?"

Fisher settled his bulk in the only chair of the bedroom that was to be
Dudley's until his next Terra-bound rocket.

