
"It wasn't obvious to me, but I couldn't get any more than that out of
him. The thing I couldn't figure out was the reason for his claim. He
wasn't trying to sell anything to anybody, as far as I could see; he
wasn't anxious to tell the world about his time-machine, either. He
didn't mind talking in his oblique fashion about his trips. He did talk
about New Amsterdam as if he had a pretty good acquaintance with the
place. But then, he was known as a minor authority on the customs of the
Dutch colony.

"He was touched, obviously. Just the same, he challenged me, in a way. I
wanted to know something more about him, how his machine worked, how he
took off, and so on. I made up my mind the next time I was in the
neighborhood to look him up, hoping he wouldn't be home.

"When I made it, his sister was alone, and in fine fettle, as
cantankerous as a flea-bitten mastiff.

"'He's gone again,' she complained bitterly.

"Clearly the two of them were at odds. I asked her whether she had seen
him go. She hadn't; he had just marched out to his shop and that was an
end to him as far as she was concerned.

"I haggled around quite a lot and finally got her permission to go out
and see what I could see for myself. Of course, the shop was locked. I
had counted on that and had brought along a handy little skeleton key. I
was inside in no time. The machine wasn't there. Not a sign of it, or of
Vanderkamp either.

"Now, I looked around all over, but I couldn't for the life of me figure
out how he could have taken it out of that place; it was too big for
doors or windows, and the walls and roof were solid and immovable. I
figured that he couldn't have got such a large machine away without his
sister's seeing him; so I locked the place up and went back to the
house.

"But she was immovable; she hadn't seen a thing. If he had taken
anything larger than pocket-size out of that shop of his, she had missed
it. I could hardly doubt her sincerity. There was nothing to be had from
that source; so I had no alternative but to wait for him another time."

       *       *       *       *       *

_Anna Van Tromp, considerably chastened, watched her strange suitor--she
looked upon all men as suitors, without exception; for so her father had
conditioned her to do--as he reached into his sack and brought out
another wonder._

_"Now this," said Vanderkamp, "is an alarm clock. You wind it up like
this, you see; set it, and off it goes. Listen to it ring! That will
wake you up in the morning."_

_"More magic," she cried doubtfully._

_"No, no," he explained patiently. "It is an everyday thing in my
country. Perhaps some day you would like to join me in a little visit
there, Anna?"_

_"Ja, maybe," she agreed, looking out the window to his weird and
frightening carriage, which had no animal to draw it and which vanished
so strangely, fading away into the air, whenever Vanderkamp went into
it. "This clothes-washing machine you talk about," she admitted. "This I
would like to see."_

_"I must go now," said Vanderkamp, gazing at her with well-simulated
coyness. "I'll leave these things here with you, and I'll just take
along that bench over there."_

_"Ja, ja," said Anna, blushing._

_"Six of one and half a dozen of the other," muttered Vanderkamp,
comparing Anna with his sister._

_He got into his time-machine and set out for home in the twentieth
century. There was some reluctance in his going. Here all was somnolent
peace and quiet, despite the rigors of living; in his own time there
were wars and turmoil and the ultimate threat of the greatest war of
all. New Amsterdam had one drawback, however--the presence of Anna Von
Tromp. She had grown fond of him, undeniably, perhaps because he was so
much more interested in her circumstances than in herself. What was a
man to do? Julie at one end, Anna at the other. But even getting rid of
Julie would not allow him to escape the warfare to come._

_He thought deeply of his problem all the way home._

_When he got back, he found his sister waiting up, as usual, ready to
deliver the customary diatribe._

_He forestalled her. "I've been thinking things over, Julie. I believe
you'd be much happier if you were living with brother Carl. I'll give
you as much money as you need, and you can pack your things and I'll
take you down to Louisiana."_

_"Take me!" she exclaimed. "How? In that crazy contraption of yours?"_

_"Precisely."_

_"Oh no!" she said. "You don't get me into that machine! How do I know
what it will do to me? It's a time machine, isn't it? It might make an
old hag of me--or a baby!"_
