squatted and peered through the maze of ducts and cables at the
shielded mechanism.

Sy crawled back out of the metallic web. "Not yet," he grunted. "I was
just testing my brainstorm--works like a charm."

"To me," sneered Rilth, "it looks clumsy and inefficient. Could not your
addled brain devise an electronic circuit, instead of a mechanical
device subject to frictional wear?"

Sy wiped the perspiration from a dripping brow and spoke boldly. "This
simplifies the master controls for your stupid crewmen. See those little
plates on the shaft--like a butterfly's wings? When they fold up, the
ship revolves; the closer together they get, the greater the artificial
gravity. When they touch, you've got normal gravity in the ship. They
function perfectly--and if you don't like them, rip them out of every
boat and design your own G control!"

Rilth smiled coldly. "I suppose we must accept some of the more
imbecilic aspects of your warped genius." He turned on his heel and
left.

Sy whispered at his retreating back. "You'll never know _how_ warped
until that butterfly folds its wings _down_--and they kiss like little
angels."

As the gigantic task of installation hummed and whined and boiled its
way to completion, Sy and Arna found time to slip away into sprawling,
dirty Dirik, where war-feverish activity catered to the whims and
desires of teeming, pleasure-seeking officers and common warriors. In
the boisterous cafes the Earth couple sat close together and whispered
freely, relaxing from their grueling pace. They watched the dull,
surging masses of characteristically thin Sur-Malic commoners ebb and
flow along the dim, moonless, star-canopied streets, seeking surcease
from the demands of their cruel and exacting lords. Under the sting of
stimulants, listless, drab women became as gay as their noisy
companions. There was endless bicker and chatter.

Frequently the Earth pair walked along winding country lanes, hand in
hand, inhaling deeply of cool, sweet air beneath the everlasting ebon
arch of the heavens. On one such evening Sy turned in to a farmer's
dimly lit cottage, almost concealed in a stygian grove of fruit trees,
and called its occupant to the door. He introduced Arna to a lean,
toothless, grinning man.

"This is Loor, darling, our loyal Venusian agent--our contact with young
Tel and the League."

Loor served them with simple wine. He showed Arna the delicate
telepathic amplifier which carried his mental transmissions across the
dust-voids of space, to be received by the unaided mind of a youthful
Unique. Afterward, he returned the apparatus to its place of
concealment beneath the floor.

It was but a few days before the scheduled space trials of the fleet
when Arna brought Sy disquieting news.

"I overheard Rilth say he was going to investigate the ships' G
mechanism," she whispered rapidly. "He seems to be suspicious of--"

"Poor kid," Sy said loudly. "You can't work when you feel like that. You
go on home and sleep." He added casually, "I may be late tonight--lots
of work to do." He located Rilth in a great noisy hangar and piloted him
away from a crowd of noisy engineers. "Filthy vermin," he said by way of
greeting, "you look like you need an airing." He lowered his voice.
"Let's dodge our females tonight and slice up Dirik a bit--it'd do us
both good."

Rilth grimaced. "It is unfortunate, gutter-born, that Ruza wants to
celebrate tonight. Some miserable party or other."

"You can always work late, can't you, son of cattle? We'll snag a couple
of lively young peasants from one of the pleasure dens."

Rilth's cold eye glittered. "Your vile mouth speaks temptingly."

"I'll meet you at a sidewalk table of the Wild Snake, on the Street of
Delight. We'll blast the town!"

It was completely dark when the two met at the cafe. They finished a
goblet of wine, and Sy suggested they move on to a place he knew. They
threaded their way through jostling crowds and walked along side streets
which led away from the city's riotous heart. Pedestrians became fewer.
Rilth cursed Sy for not thinking to use a vehicle.

"It's just around the next corner, slimehead," Sy assured him. "And I've
already made arrangements."

But there was a narrow, lightless alleyway a few steps ahead. Had Arna
been following them, instead of at home worrying, she would have seen Sy
stumble sideways at the mouth of the alley, bumping hard against his
companion. She would have seen them both disappear into the blackness
for an instant, and then would have seen Sy emerge from the shadows and
reel onward alone, obviously drunk. Had she then rushed into the alley,
she would have found Rilth's corpse sprawled on a pile of rubbish, still
oozing gore from death wounds in throat and heart, and she might have
noticed that his needle gun was gone, and that his empty money pouch lay
on another wet stain of his uniform where a blade had been wiped clean.

By the time Sy returned to the Street of Delight his staggering gait had
almost disappeared, and by the time he located a group of technicians
whom he knew, dicing in a gambling establishment, it was gone entirely.
He was welcomed with hearty curses into the group--and he began to
play....

It is not known how far the story eventually traveled--and certainly it
did not penetrate even all of the city for many hours, or every gambling
den would have bolted its doors--but by morning a goodly sector of
Pronuleon II was buzzing with the tale. It seemed that a certain group
of Fleet Technicians, led by a High Technician--an Earth renegade--known
as Sykin Supcel, had broken the hearts and some of the furniture of
every gambling proprietor in Dirik. Each player had made good every cast
of the dice in a run of luck unequaled in the known universe, and had
returned to their quarters in groaning ground vehicles only when there
was no more gold coin to be found on the Street of Delight, the Avenue
of Pleasure or the Way of Joy.

But Sy's exuberance was dulled the next day when he heard of the brutal
robbery-assassination of his friend, Commandant Rilth. "Not that I bore
any love for the reptile," he said sorrowfuly to Lord Krut, thus
spreading a counter-irritant for possible suspicion, "but he had a good
head--a keen and valuable mind we would have missed sorely a month ago.
