"Oh, yes," said Kormt. "You have been very nice about it. It would have
been easier, in a way, if you'd come with fire and gun and chains for
us, like the barbarians did long ago. We could have understood you
better then."

"At best, it will be hard for your people," said Jorun. "It will be a
shock, and they'll need leaders to guide them through it. You have a
duty to help them out there, good sir."

"Maybe." Kormt blew a series of smoke rings at his youngest descendant,
three years old, who crowed with laughter and climbed up on his knee.
"But they'll manage."

"You can't seem to realize," said Jorun, "that you are the _last man on
Earth_ who refuses to go. You will be _alone_. For the rest of your
life! We couldn't come back for you later under any circumstances,
because there'll be Hulduvian colonies between Sol and Sagittarius which
we would disturb in passage. You'll be alone, I say!"

Kormt shrugged. "I'm too old to change my ways; there can't be many
years left me, anyway. I can live well, just off the food-stores that'll
be left here." He ruffled the child's hair, but his face drew into a
scowl. "Now, no more of that, good sir, if you please; I'm tired of this
argument."

       *       *       *       *       *

Jorun nodded and fell into the silence that held the rest. Terrans would
sometimes sit for hours without talking, content to be in each other's
nearness. He thought of Kormt, Gerlaug's son, last man on Earth,
altogether alone, living alone and dying alone; and yet, he reflected,
was that solitude any greater than the one in which all men dwelt all
their days?

Presently the Speaker set the child down, knocked out his pipe, and
rose. "Come, good sir," he said, reaching for his staff. "Let us go."

They walked side by side down the street, under the dim lamps and past
the yellow windows. The cobbles gave back their footfalls in a dull
clatter. Once in a while they passed someone else, a vague figure which
bowed to Kormt. Only one did not notice them, an old woman who walked
crying between the high walls.

"They say it is never night on your worlds," said Kormt.

Jorun threw him a sidelong glance. His face was a strong jutting of
highlights from sliding shadow. "Some planets have been given luminous
skies," said the technician, "and a few still have cities, too, where it
is always light. But when every man can control the cosmic energies,
there is no real reason for us to live together; most of us dwell far
apart. There are very dark nights on my own world, and I cannot see any
other home from my own--just the moors."

"It must be a strange life," said Kormt. "Belonging to no one."

They came out on the market-square, a broad paved space walled in by
houses. There was a fountain in its middle, and a statue dug out of the
ruins had been placed there. It was broken, one arm gone--but still the
white slim figure of the dancing girl stood with youth and laughter,
forever under the sky of Earth. Jorun knew that lovers were wont to meet
here, and briefly, irrationally, he wondered how lonely the girl would
be in all the millions of years to come.

The City Hall lay at the farther end of the square, big and dark, its
eaves carved with dragons, and the gables topped with wing-spreading
birds. It was an old building; nobody knew how many generations of men
had gathered here. A long, patient line of folk stood outside it,
shuffling in one by one to the registry desk; emerging, they went off
quietly into the darkness, toward the temporary shelters erected for
them.

Walking by the line, Jorun picked faces out of the shadows. There was a
young mother holding a crying child, her head bent over it in a timeless
pose, murmuring to soothe it. There was a mechanic, still sooty from his
work, smiling wearily at some tired joke of the man behind him. There
was a scowling, black-browed peasant who muttered a curse as Jorun went
by; the rest seemed to accept their fate meekly enough. There was a
priest, his head bowed, alone with his God. There was a younger man, his
hands clenching and unclenching, big helpless hands, and Jorun heard him
saying to someone else: "--if they could have waited till after harvest.
I hate to let good grain stand in the field."

       *       *       *       *       *

Jorun went into the main room, toward the desk at the head of the line.
Hulking hairless Zarek was patiently questioning each of the hundreds
who came hat in hand before him: name, age, sex, occupation, dependents,
special needs or desires. He punches the answers out on the recorder
machine, half a million lives were held in its electronic memory.

"Oh, there you are," his bass rumbled. "Where've you been?"

"I had to do some concy work," said Jorun. That was a private code term,
among others: concy, conciliation, anything to make the evacuation go
smoothly. "Sorry to be so late. I'll take over now."

"All right. I think we can wind the whole thing up by midnight." Zarek
smiled at Kormt. "Glad you came, good sir. There are a few people I'd
like you to talk to." He gestured at half a dozen seated in the rear of
the room. Certain complaints were best handled by native leaders.

Kormt nodded and strode over to the folk. Jorun heard a man begin some
long-winded explanation: he wanted to take his own plow along, he'd made
it himself and there was no better plow in the universe, but the
star-man said there wouldn't be room.

"They'll furnish us with all the stuff we need, son," said Kormt.

"But it's _my_ plow!" said the man. His fingers twisted his cap.

Kormt sat down and began soothing him.

The head of the line waited a few meters off while Jorun took Zarek's
place. "Been a long grind," said the latter. "About done now, though.
And will I be glad to see the last of this planet!"

"I don't know," said Jorun. "It's a lovely world. I don't think I've
ever seen a more beautiful one."

Zarek snorted. "Me for Thonnvar! I can't wait to sit on the terrace by
the Scarlet Sea, fern-trees and red grass all around, a glass of oehl in
my hand and the crystal geysers in front of me. You're a funny one,
Jorun."

The Fulkhisian shrugged slender shoulders. Zarek clapped him on the back
and went out for supper and sleep. Jorun beckoned to the next Terran and
settled down to the long, almost mindless routine of registration. He
was interrupted once by Kormt, who yawned mightily and bade him
goodnight; otherwise it was a steady, half-conscious interval in which
one anonymous face after another passed by. He was dimly surprised when
the last one came up. This was a plump, cheerful, middle-aged fellow
with small shrewd eyes, a little more colorfully dressed than the
others. He gave his occupation as merchant--a minor tradesman, he
explained, dealing in the little things it was more convenient for the
peasants to buy than to manufacture themselves.

"I hope you haven't been waiting too long," said Jorun. Concy statement.

"Oh, no." The merchant grinned. "I knew those dumb farmers would be here
for hours, so I just went to bed and got up half an hour ago, when it
was about over."

"Clever." Jorun rose, sighed, and stretched. The big room was
