
Alongside the outside lane the little car sped, moving on an independent
rail, sliding gently past other cars resting on the middle lane. An
opening appeared, and Krenner's car slid over another notch, disengaged
its rail, and settled to a stop on the central lane of the Road. The
speedometer fell to nothing, for the car's motion was no longer
independent, but an integral part of the speeding Road itself. Three
hundred miles per hour on a constant, nonstop flight across the rolling
land.

A loudspeaker suddenly piped up in his car. "Welcome to the Roads," it
said. "Your fare collector will be with you in a short while. After he
has arrived, feel free to leave your car and be at ease on the Road
outside. Eating, resting, and sleeping quarters will be found at regular
intervals. You are warned, however, not to cross either the barriers to
the outside lanes, nor the barriers to the freight-carrying areas front
and rear. Pleasant travelling."

Krenner chuckled grimly, and settled down in his car, his automatic in
his hand. His fare collector would get a surprise. Down the Road a short
distance he saw the man approaching, wearing the green uniform of the
Roads. And then he stiffened. Three blue uniforms were accompanying him.
Opening the car door swiftly, he slipped out onto the soft carpeting of
the Road, and raced swiftly away from the approaching men.

They saw him when he started to run. Ahead he could see a crowd of
passengers around a dining area. A shout went up as he knocked a woman
down in his pell-mell flight, but he was beyond them in an instant. His
foot hindered him, and his pursuers were gaining. Suddenly before him he
saw a barrier--a four foot metal wall. No carpet beyond it, no
furnishings along the sides. A freight area! He hopped over the barrier
and plunged into the blackness of the freight tunnel as he heard the
shouts of his pursuers. "Stop! Come back! Stop or we'll shoot!"

They didn't shoot. In a moment Krenner came to the first freight
carrier, one of the standard metal containers resting on the steel of
the Road. He ran past it, and the next. The third and fourth were open
cars, stacked high with machinery. He ran on for several moments before
he glanced back.

They weren't following him any more. He could see them, far back, where
the light began, a whole crowd of people at the barrier he had crossed.
But no one followed him. Odd that they should stop. He centered his mind
more closely on his surroundings. Freight might conceal him to get him
off the Roads where no passenger station would ever let him through. He
climbed to the top of a nearby freight container and slipped down in.
Chunks of rock were under his feet, and he fell in a heap on the hard
bed. What possible kind of freight--? He slipped a lighter from his
pocket and snapped it on.

Coal! A normal freight load. He climbed back up and looked along the
road. No pursuit. An uneasy chill went through him--this was too easy.
To ride a coal car to safety, without a single man pursuing him--to
where? He examined the billing on the side of the car, and he forgot his
fears in the rush of excitement. The billing read, "Consignment: Coal,
twenty tons, Markson Foundries, via Pittsburgh private cutoff."

His car was carrying him to Markson!

His mind was full of the old, ugly hate, the fearful joy of the
impending revenge. Fortune's boy, he thought to himself. Even Sherman
could not have done so well, to ride the Rolling Roads, not just to
Pittsburgh, not to the mountains, but right to Markson's backyard! He
shivered with anticipation. Pittsburgh was only a few hundred miles
away, and at three hundred miles an hour--Krenner clenched his fists in
cruel pleasure. He hadn't long to wait.

       *       *       *       *       *

An hour passed slowly. Krenner's leg was growing stiff after the
exertion of running. Still no sign of life. He eased his position, and
stiffened when he heard the little relay box above the consignment sheet
give a couple of sharp clicks.

Near the end! He hugged himself in excitement. What a neat trick, to
ride a consignment of coal to the very yards where Markson would be! The
coal yards which he might have owned, the furnaces, the foundry--. There
would be men there to receive the car from the line, well he could
remember the men, day and night, working and sweating in those yards and
mills! There would be men there to brake the car and empty it. He was in
old clothes, farm clothes--he would fit in so well; as soon as the car
slowed he could jump off, and simply join the other men. Or he could
shoot, if he had to. A little agility in getting out of the car, and a
little care in inquiring the way to Markson's office--

