the curb. Pain lapped over him. Pain and a vast tide of blackness.
Desperately, he fought it off. He struggled to his knees and then slid
down again. The bus had stopped. People were getting off.

Loyce groped around. His fingers closed over something. A rock, lying in
the gutter. He crawled to his feet, grunting with pain. A shape loomed
before him. A man, the bright-eyed man with the book.

Loyce kicked. The man gasped and fell. Loyce brought the rock down. The
man screamed and tried to roll away. "_Stop!_ For God's sake listen--"

He struck again. A hideous crunching sound. The man's voice cut off and
dissolved in a bubbling wail. Loyce scrambled up and back. The others
were there, now. All around him. He ran, awkwardly, down the sidewalk,
up a driveway. None of them followed him. They had stopped and were
bending over the inert body of the man with the book, the bright-eyed
man who had come after him.

Had he made a mistake?

But it was too late to worry about that. He had to get out--away from
them. Out of Pikeville, beyond the crack of darkness, the rent between
their world and his.

       *       *       *       *       *

"Ed!" Janet Loyce backed away nervously. "What is it? What--"

Ed Loyce slammed the door behind him and came into the living room.
"Pull down the shades. Quick."

Janet moved toward the window. "But--"

"Do as I say. Who else is here besides you?"

"Nobody. Just the twins. They're upstairs in their room. What's
happened? You look so strange. Why are you home?"

Ed locked the front door. He prowled around the house, into the kitchen.
From the drawer under the sink he slid out the big butcher knife and ran
his finger along it. Sharp. Plenty sharp. He returned to the living
room.

"Listen to me," he said. "I don't have much time. They know I escaped
and they'll be looking for me."

"Escaped?" Janet's face twisted with bewilderment and fear. "Who?"

"The town has been taken over. They're in control. I've got it pretty
well figured out. They started at the top, at the City Hall and police
department. What they did with the _real_ humans they--"

"What are you talking about?"

"We've been invaded. From some other universe, some other dimension.
They're insects. Mimicry. And more. Power to control minds. Your mind."

"My mind?"

"Their entrance is _here_, in Pikeville. They've taken over all of you.
The whole town--except me. We're up against an incredibly powerful
enemy, but they have their limitations. That's our hope. They're
limited! They can make mistakes!"

Janet shook her head. "I don't understand, Ed. You must be insane."

"Insane? No. Just lucky. If I hadn't been down in the basement I'd be
like all the rest of you." Loyce peered out the window. "But I can't
stand here talking. Get your coat."

"My coat?"

"We're getting out of here. Out of Pikeville. We've got to get help.
Fight this thing. They _can_ be beaten. They're not infallible. It's
going to be close--but we may make it if we hurry. Come on!" He grabbed
her arm roughly. "Get your coat and call the twins. We're all leaving.
Don't stop to pack. There's no time for that."

White-faced, his wife moved toward the closet and got down her coat.
"Where are we going?"

Ed pulled open the desk drawer and spilled the contents out onto the
floor. He grabbed up a road map and spread it open. "They'll have the
highway covered, of course. But there's a back road. To Oak Grove. I got
onto it once. It's practically abandoned. Maybe they'll forget about
it."

"The old Ranch Road? Good Lord--it's completely closed. Nobody's
supposed to drive over it."

"I know." Ed thrust the map grimly into his coat. "That's our best
chance. Now call down the twins and let's get going. Your car is full of
gas, isn't it?"

Janet was dazed.

"The Chevy? I had it filled up yesterday afternoon." Janet moved toward
the stairs. "Ed, I--"

"Call the twins!" Ed unlocked the front door and peered out. Nothing
stirred. No sign of life. All right so far.

"Come on downstairs," Janet called in a wavering voice. "We're--going
out for awhile."

"Now?" Tommy's voice came.

"Hurry up," Ed barked. "Get down here, both of you."

Tommy appeared at the top of the stairs. "I was doing my home work.
We're starting fractions. Miss Parker says if we don't get this done--"

"You can forget about fractions." Ed grabbed his son as he came down the
stairs and propelled him toward the door. "Where's Jim?"
