was unimaginable! But Burl was too shaken to think of it now.

Rather quaintly, the first sensation that forced itself into his
consciousness was that his feet hurt. The gluey stuff from the web still
stuck to his soles, picking up small objects as he went along. Old,
ant-gnawed fragments of insect armor pricked him so persistently, even
through his toughened foot-soles, that he paused to scrape them away,
staring fearfully about all the while. After a dozen steps more he was
forced to stop again.

It was this nagging discomfort, rather than vanity or an emergency which
caused Burl to discover--imagine--blunder into a new activity as
epoch-making as anything else he had done. His brain had been uncommonly
stimulated in the past twenty-some hours. It had plunged him into at
least one predicament because of his conceiving the idea of stabbing
something, but it had also allowed him escape from another even more
terrifying one just now. In between it had led to the devising of a
purpose--the bringing of Saya here--though that decision was not so
firmly fixed as it had been before the encounter with the web-spider.
Still, it had surely been reasoning of a sort that told him to grease
his body with the fish. Otherwise he would now be following the
tarantula as a second course for the occupant of the web.

Burl looked cautiously all about him. It seemed to be quite safe. Then,
quite deliberately, he sat down to think. It was the first time in his
life that he had ever deliberately contemplated a problem with the idea
of finding an answer to it. And the notion of doing such a thing was
epoch-making--on this planet!

He examined his foot. The sharp edges of pebbles and the remnants of
insect-armor hurt his feet when he walked. They had done so ever since
he had been born, but never before had his feet been sticky, so that the
irritation from one object persisted for more than a step. He carefully
picked away each sharp-pointed fragment, one by one. Partly coated with
the half-liquid gum, they even tended to cling to his fingers, except
where the oil was thick.

Burl's reasoning had been of the simplest sort. He had contemplated a
situation--not deliberately but because he had to--and presently his
mind showed him a way out of it. It was a way specifically suited to the
situation. Here he faced something different. Presently he applied the
answer of one problem to a second problem. Oil on his body had let him
go free of things that would stick to him. Here things stuck to his
feet; so he oiled them.

And it worked. Burl strode away, almost--but not completely--untroubled
by the bothersome pebbles and bits of discarded armor. Then he halted to
regard himself with astonished appreciation. He was still thirty-five
miles from his tribe; he was naked and unarmed, utterly ignorant of wood
and fire and weapons other than the one he had lost. But he paused to
observe with some awe that he was very wonderful indeed.

He wanted to display himself. But his spear was gone. So Burl found it
necessary to think again. And the remarkable thing about it was that he
succeeded.

In a surprisingly brief time he had come up with a list of answers. He
was naked, so he would find garments for himself. He was weaponless: he
would find himself a spear. He was hungry and he would seek food. Since
he was far from his tribe, he would go to them. And this was, in a
fashion, quite obviously thought; but it was not oblivious on the
forgotten planet because it had been futile--up to now. The importance
of such thought in the scheme of things was that men had not been
thinking even so simply as this, living only from minute to minute. Burl
was fumbling his way into a habit of thinking from problem to problem.
And that was very important indeed.

Even in the advanced civilization of other planets, few men really used
their minds. The great majority of people depended on machines not only
for computations but decisions as well. Any decisions not made by
machines most men left to their leaders. Burl's tribesfolk thought
principally with their stomachs, making few if any decisions on any
other basis--though they did act, very often, under the spur of fear.
Fear-inspired actions, however, were not thought out. Burl was thinking
out his actions.

There would be consequences.

He faced upstream and began to move again, slowly and warily, his eyes
keenly searching out the way ahead, ears alert for the slightest sound
of danger. Gigantic butterflies, riotous in coloring, fluttered overhead
through the hazy air. Sometimes a grasshopper hurtled from one place to
another like a projectile, its transparent wings beating frantically.
Now and then a wasp sped by, intent upon its hunting, or a bee droned
heavily alone, anxious and worried, striving to gather pollen in a
nearly flowerless world.

Burl marched on. From somewhere far behind him came a very faint sound.
It was a shrill noise, but very distant indeed. Absorbed in immediate
and nearby matters, Burl took no heed. He had the limited local
viewpoint of a child. What was near was important and what was distant
could be ignored. Anything not imminent still seemed to him
insignificant--and he was preoccupied.

The source of this sound was important, however. Its origin was a myriad
of clickings compounded into a single noise. It was, in fact, the
far-away but yet perceptible sound of army ants on the march. The
locusts of Earth were very trivial nuisances compared to the army ants
of this planet.

Locusts, in past ages on Earth, had eaten all green things. Here in the
lowlands were only giant cabbages and a few rank, tenacious growths.
Grasshoppers were numerous here, but could never be thought of as a
plague; they were incapable of multiplying to the size of locust hordes.
Army ants, however....

But Burl did not notice the sound. He moved forward briskly though
cautiously, searching the fungus-landscape for any sign of garments,
food, and weapons. He confidently expected to find all of them within a
short distance. Indeed, he did find food very soon. No more than a half
mile ahead he found a small cluster of edible fungi.

With no special elation, Burl broke off a food supply from the largest
of them. Naturally, he took more than he could possibly eat at one time.
He went on, nibbling at a big piece of mushroom abstractedly, past a
broad plain, more than a mile across and broken into odd little hillocks
by gradually ripening mushrooms which were unfamiliar to him. In several
places the ground had been pushed aside by rounded objects, only the
tips showing. Blood-red hemispheres seemed to be forcing themselves
through the soil, so they might reach the outer air. Careful not to
touch any of them, Burl examined the hillocks curiously as he entered
the plain. They were strange, and to Burl most strange things meant
danger. In any event, he had two conscious purposes now. He wanted
garments and weapons.

Above the plain a wasp hovered, dangling a heavy object beneath its
black belly across which ran a single red band. It was the gigantic
descendant of the hairy sand-wasp, differing only in size from its
far-away, remote ancestors on Earth. It was taking a paralyzed gray
caterpillar to its burrow. Burl watched it drop down with the speed and
sureness of an arrow, pull aside a heavy, flat stone, and descend into
the burrow with its caterpillar-prey momentarily laid aside.

It vanished underground into a vertical shaft dug down forty feet or
more. It evidently inspected the refuge. Reappearing, it vanished into
the hole again, dragging the gray worm after it. Burl, marching on over
the broad plain spotted with some eruptive disease, did not know what
passed below. But he did observe the wasp emerge again to scratch dirt
and stones previously excavated laboriously back into the shaft until it
was full.

The wasp had paralyzed a caterpillar, taken it into the ready-prepared
burrow, laid an egg upon it, and sealed up the entrance. In time the egg
would hatch into a grub barely the size of Burl's forefinger. And the
grub, deep underground, would feed upon the living but helpless
caterpillar until it waxed large and fat. Then it would weave itself a
cocoon and sleep a long sleep, only to wake as a wasp and dig its way
out to the open air.

Reaching the farther side of the plain, Burl found himself threading the
aisles of a fungus forest in which the growths were misshapen travesties
of the trees which could not live here. Bloated yellow limbs branched
off from rounded swollen trunks. Here and there a pear-shaped puffball,
Burl's height and half his height again, waited until a chance touch
should cause it to shoot upward a curling puff of infinitely fine dust.

He continued to move with caution. There were dangers here, but he went
forward steadily. He still held a great mass of edible mushroom under
one arm and from time to time broke off a fragment, chewing it
meditatively. But always his eyes searched here and there for threats of
harm.

Behind him the faint, shrill outcry had risen only slightly in volume.
It was still too far away to attract his notice. Army ants, however,
were working havoc in the distance. By thousands and millions, myriads
of them advanced across the fungoid soil. They clambered over every
eminence. They descended into every depression. Their antennae waved
restlessly. Their mandibles were extended threateningly. The ground was
black with them, each one more than ten inches long.

A single such creature, armored and fearless as it was, could be
formidable enough to an unarmed and naked man like Burl. The better part
of discretion would be avoidance. But numbering in the thousands and
millions, they were something which could not be avoided. They advanced
steadily and rapidly; the chorus of shrill stridulations and clickings
marking their progress.

Great, inoffensive caterpillars crawling over the huge cabbages heard
the sound of their coming, but were too stupid to flee. The black
multitudes blanketed the rank vegetables. Tiny, voracious jaws tore at
the flaccid masses of greasy flesh.

The caterpillars strove to throw off their assailants by writhings and
contortions--uselessly. The bees fought their entrance into the monster
hives with stings and wing-beats. Moths took to the air in daylight with
dazzled, blinded eyes. But nothing could withstand the relentless hordes
of small black things that reeked of formic acid and left the ground
behind them empty of life.

Before the horde was a world of teeming life, where mushrooms and other
fungi fought with thinning numbers of cabbages and mutant earth-weeds
for a foothold. Behind the black multitude was--nothing. Mushrooms,
cabbages, bees, wasps, crickets, grubs--every living thing that could
not flee before the creeping black tide reached it was lost, torn to
bits by tiny mandibles.

Even the hunting spiders and tarantulas fell before the black host. They
killed many in their desperate self-defense, but the army ants could
overwhelm anything--anything at all--by sheer numbers and ferocity.
Killed or wounded ants served as food for their sound comrades. Only the
web spiders sat unmoved and immovable in their collossal snares, secure
in the knowledge that their gummy webs could not be invaded along the
slender supporting cables.




_3. THE PURPLE HILLS_


The army ants flowed over the ground like a surging, monstrous, inky
tide. Their vanguard reached the river and recoiled. Burl was perhaps
five miles away when they changed their course. The change was made
without confusion, the leaders somehow communicating the altered line of
march to those behind them.

Back on Earth, scientists had gravely debated the question of how ants
conveyed ideas to each other. Honeybees, it was said, performed
elaborate ritual dances to exchange information. Ants, it had been
observed, had something less eccentric. A single ant, finding a bit of
booty too big for it to manage alone, would return to its city to secure
the help of others. From that fact men had deduced that a language of
gestures made with crossed antennae must exist.

Burl had no theories. He merely knew facts, but he did know that ants
could and did pass information to one another. Now, however, he moved
cautiously along toward the sleeping-place of his tribe in complete
ignorance of the black blanket of living creatures spreading over the
ground behind him.

A million tragedies marked the progress of the insect army. There was a
tiny colony of mining bees, their habits unchanged despite their greater
size, here on the forgotten planet. A single mother, four feet long, had
dug a huge gallery with some ten offshooting cells, in which she had
laid her eggs and fed her grubs with hard-gathered pollen. The grubs had
waxed fat and large, become bees, and laid eggs in their turn within the
same gallery their mother had dug out for them.

Ten bulky insects now foraged busily to feed their grubs within the
ancestral home, while the founder of the colony had grown draggled and
wingless with the passing of time. Unable to bring in food, herself, the
old bee became the guardian of the hive. She closed the opening with her
head, making a living barrier within the entrance. She withdrew only to
grant admission or exit to the duly authorized members,--her daughters.

The ancient concierge of the underground dwelling was at her post when
the wave of army ants swept over. Tiny, evil-smelling feet trampled upon
her and she emerged to fight with mandible and sting for the sanctity of
her brood. Within moments she was a shaggy mass of biting ants. They
rent and tore at her chitinous armor. But she fought on madly, sounding
a buzzing alarm to the colonists yet within.

They came out, fighting as they came: ten huge bees, each four to five
feet long and fighting with legs and jaws, with wing and mandible, and
with all the ferocity of so many tigers. But the small ants covered
them, snapping at their multiple eyes, biting at the tender joints in
their armour,--and sometimes releasing the larger prey to leap upon an
injured comrade, wounded by the monster they battled together.

Such a fight, however, could have but one end. Struggle as the bees
might, they were powerless against their un-numbered assailants. They
were being devoured even as they fought. And before the last of the ten
was down the underground gallery had been gutted both of the stored food
brought by the adult defenders and the last morsels of what had been
young grubs, too unformed to do more than twitch helplessly,
inoffensively, as they were torn to shreds.

When the army ants went on there were merely an empty tunnel and a few
fragments of tough armor, unappetizing even to the ants.

Burl heard them as he meditatively inspected the scene of a tragedy of
not long before. The rent and scraped fragments of a great beetle's
shiny casing lay upon the ground. A greater beetle had come upon the
first and slain him. Burl regarded the remains of the meal.

Three or four minims, little ants barely six inches long, foraged
industriously among the bits. A new ant-city was to be formed and the
queen lay hidden half a mile away. These were the first hatchlings. They
would feed their younger kindred until they grew large enough to take
over the great work of the ant-city. Burl ignored the minims. He
searched for a weapon of some sort. Behind him the clicking,
high-pitched roar of the horde of army ants increased in volume.

He turned away disgustedly. The best thing he could find in the way of
a weapon was a fiercely-toothed hind-leg. When he picked it up an angry
whine rose from the ground. One of the minims had been struggling to
detach a morsel of flesh from the leg-joint. Burl had snatched the
tidbit from him.

The little creature was surely no more than half a foot long, but it
advanced angrily upon Burl, shrilling a challenge. He struck with the
beetle's leg and crushed the ant. Two of the other minims appeared,
attracted by the noise the first had made. They discovered the crushed
body of their fellow, unceremoniously dismembered it, and bore it away
in triumph.

Burl went on, swinging the toothed limb in his hand. The sound behind
him became a distant whispering, high-pitched and growing steadily
nearer. The army ants swept into a mushroom forest and the yellow,
umbrella-like growths soon swarmed with the black creatures.

A great bluebottle fly, shining with a metallic lustre, stood beneath a
mushroom on the ground. The mushroom was infected with maggots which
exuded a solvent pepsin that liquefied the firm white meat. They swam
ecstatically in the liquid gruel, some of which dripped and dripped to
the ground. The bluebottle was sipping the dark-colored liquid through
its long proboscis, quivering with delight as it fed on the noisomeness.

Burl drew near and struck. The fly collapsed in a quivering heap. Burl
stood over it for an instant and pondered.

The army ants were nearer, now. They swarmed down into a tiny valley,
rushing into and through a little brook over which Burl had leaped.
Since ants can remain underwater for a long time without drowning, the
small stream was not even dangerous. Its current did sweep some of them
away. A great many of them, however, clung together until they chocked
its flow by the mass of their bodies, the main force marching across the
bridge they constituted.

The ants reached a place about a quarter of a mile to the left of Burl's
line of march, perhaps a mile from the spot where he stood over the dead
bluebottle. There was an expanse of some acres in which the giant, rank
cabbages had so far succeeded in their competition with the world of
fungi. The pale, cross-shaped flowers of the cabbages formed food for
