implements--agricultural implements, as he fondly believed. He
instituted other reforms, but these were the most important things he
did: he instilled in Gorm a desire to see the civilized lands of the
world; he taught the Picts how to work in iron; and he established
contact between them and the civilized world. At the chiefs request he
conducted him and some of his warriors through the Bossonian marches,
where the honest villagers stared in amazement, into the glittering
outer world.

Arus no doubt thought that he was making converts right and left,
because the Picts listened to him, and refrained from smiting him with
their copper axes. But the Pict was little calculated to seriously
regard teachings which bade him forgive his enemy and abandon the
warpath for the ways of honest drudgery. It has been said that he lacked
artistic sense; his whole nature led to war and slaughter. When the
priest talked of the glories of the civilized nations, his dark-skinned
listeners were intent, not on the ideals of his religion, but on the
loot which he unconsciously described in the narration of rich cities
and shining lands. When he told how Mitra aided certain kings to
overcome their enemies, they paid scant heed to the miracles of Mitra,
but they hung on the description of battle-lines, mounted knights, and
maneuvers of archers and spearmen. They harkened with keen dark eyes and
inscrutable countenances, and they went their ways without comment, and
heeded with flattering intentness his instructions as to the working of
iron, and kindred arts.

Before his coming they had filched steel weapons and armor from the
Bossonians and Zingarans, or had hammered out their own crude arms from
copper and bronze. Now a new world opened to them, and the clang of
sledges re-echoed throughout the land. And Gorm, by virtue of this new
craft, began to assert his dominance over other clans, partly by war,
partly by craft and diplomacy, in which latter art he excelled all other
barbarians.

Picts now came and went freely into Aquilonia, under safe-conduct, and
they returned with more information as to armor-forging and
sword-making. More, they entered Aquilonia's mercenary armies, to the
unspeakable disgust of the sturdy Bossonians. Aquilonia's kings toyed
with the idea of playing the Picts against the Cimmerians, and possibly
thus destroying both menaces, but they were too busy with their policies
of aggression in the south and east to pay much heed to the vaguely
known lands of the west, from which more and more stocky warriors
swarmed to take service among the mercenaries.

These warriors, their service completed, went back to their wilderness
with good ideas of civilized warfare, and that contempt for civilization
which arises from familiarity with it. Drums began to beat in the hills,
gathering-fires smoked on the heights, and savage sword-makers hammered
their steel on a thousand anvils. By intrigues and forays too numerous
and devious to enumerate, Gorm became chief of chiefs, the nearest
approach to a king the Picts had had in thousands of years. He had
waited long; he was past middle age. But now he moved against the
frontiers, not in trade, but in war.

Arus saw his mistake too late; he had not touched the soul of the pagan,
in which lurked the hard fierceness of all the ages. His persuasive
eloquence had not caused a ripple in the Pictish conscience. Gorm wore a
corselet of silvered mail now, instead of the tiger-skin, but underneath
he was unchanged--the everlasting barbarian, unmoved by theology or
philosophy, his instincts fixed unerringly on rapine and plunder.

The Picts burst on the Bossonian frontiers with fire and sword, not clad
in tiger-skins and brandishing copper axes as of yore, but in
scale-mail, wielding weapons of keen steel. As for Arus, he was brained
by a drunken Pict, while making a last effort to undo the work he had
unwittingly done. Gorm was not without gratitude; he caused the skull of
the slayer to be set on the top of the priest's cairn. And it is one of
the grim ironies of the universe that the stones which covered Arus's
body should have been adorned with that last touch of barbarity--above a
man to whom violence and blood-vengeance were revolting.

But the newer weapons and mail were not enough to break the lines. For
years the superior armaments and sturdy courage of the Bossonians held
the invaders at bay, aided, when necessary, by imperial Aquilonian
troops. During this time the Hyrkanians came and went, and Zamora was
added to the empire.

Then treachery from an unexpected source broke the Bossonian lines.
Before chronicling this treachery, it might be well to glance briefly at
the Aquilonian empire. Always a rich kingdom, untold wealth had been
rolled in by conquest, and sumptuous splendor had taken the place of
simple and hardy living. But degeneracy had not yet sapped the kings and
the people; though clad in silks and cloth-of-gold, they were still a
vital, virile race. But arrogance was supplanting their former
simplicity. They treated less powerful people with growing contempt,
levying more and more tributes on the conquered. Argos, Zingara, Ophir,
Zamora and the Shemite countries were treated as subjugated provinces,
which was especially galling to the proud Zingarans, who often revolted,
despite savage retaliations.

Koth was practically tributary, being under Aquilonia's 'protection'
against the Hyrkanians. But Nemedia the western empire had never been
able to subdue, although the latter's triumphs were of the defensive
sort, and were generally attained with the aid of Hyperborean armies.
During this period Aquilonia's only defeats were: her failure to annex
Nemedia; the rout of an army sent into Cimmeria; and the almost complete
destruction of an army by the AEsir. Just as the Hyrkanians found
themselves unable to withstand the heavy cavalry charges of the
Aquilonians, so the latter, invading the snow-countries, were
overwhelmed by the ferocious hand-to-hand fighting of the Nordics. But
Aquilonia's conquests were pushed to the Nilus, where a Stygian army was
defeated with great slaughter, and the king of Stygia sent tribute--once
at least--to divert invasion of his kingdom. Brythunia was reduced in a
series of whirlwind wars, and preparations were made to subjugate the
ancient rival at last--Nemedia.

With their glittering hosts greatly increased by mercenaries, the
Aquilonians moved against their old-time foe, and it seemed as if the
thrust were destined to crush the last shadow of Nemedian independence.
But contentions arose between the Aquilonians and their Bossonian
auxiliaries.

As the inevitable result of imperial expansion, the Aquilonians had
become haughty and intolerant. They derided the ruder, unsophisticated
Bossonians, and hard feeling grew between them--the Aquilonians
despising the Bossonians and the latter resenting the attitude of their
masters--who now boldly called themselves such, and treated the
Bossonians like conquered subjects, taxing them exorbitantly, and
conscripting them for their wars of territorial expansion--wars the
profits of which the Bossonians shared little. Scarcely enough men were
left in the marches to guard the frontier, and hearing of Pictish
outrages in their homelands, whole Bossonian regiments quit the Nemedian
campaign and marched to the western frontier, where they defeated the
dark-skinned invaders in a great battle.

This desertion, however, was the direct cause of Aquilonia's defeat by
the desperate Nemedians, and brought down on the Bossonians the cruel
