of gold coins, and replaced all but the largest. She nodded, much
relieved. It was perhaps natural for men to slay and die; her flesh
crawled at the thought of watching the butchery of a woman.

Presently a woman appeared around the crook of the trail--a tall, slim
Galzai girl, straight as a young sapling, bearing a great empty gourd.
She stopped short and the gourd fell from her hands when she saw them;
she wavered as though to run, then realized that Conan was too close to
her to allow her to escape, and so stood still, staring at them with a
mixed expression of fear and curiosity.

Conan displayed the gold coin.

'If you will give this woman your garments,' he said, 'I will give you
this money.'

The response was instant. The girl smiled broadly with surprize and
delight, and, with the disdain of a hill-woman for prudish conventions,
promptly yanked off her sleeveless embroidered vest, slipped down her
wide trousers and stepped out of them, twitched off her wide-sleeved
shirt, and kicked off her sandals. Bundling them all in a bunch, she
proffered them to Conan, who handed them to the astonished Devi.

'Get behind that rock and put these on,' he directed, further proving
himself no native hillman. 'Fold your robes up into a bundle and bring
them to me when you come out.'

'The money!' clamored the hill-girl, stretching out her hands eagerly.
'The gold you promised me!'

Conan flipped the coin to her, she caught it, bit, then thrust it into
her hair, bent and caught up the gourd and went on down the path, as
devoid of self-consciousness as of garments. Conan waited with some
impatience while the Devi, for the first time in her pampered life,
dressed herself. When she stepped from behind the rock he swore in
surprize, and she felt a curious rush of emotions at the unrestrained
admiration burning in his fierce blue eyes. She felt shame,
embarrassment, yet a stimulation of vanity she had never before
experienced, and a tingling when meeting the impact of his eyes. He laid
a heavy hand on her shoulder and turned her about, staring avidly at her
from all angles.

'By Crom!' said he. 'In those smoky, mystic robes you were aloof and
cold and far off as a star! Now you are a woman of warm flesh and blood!
You went behind that rock as the Devi of Vendhya; you come out as a
hill-girl--though a thousand times more beautiful than any wench of the
Zhaibar! You were a goddess--now you are real!'

He spanked her resoundingly, and she, recognizing this as merely another
expression of admiration, did not feel outraged. It was indeed as if the
changing of her garments had wrought a change in her personality. The
feelings and sensations she had suppressed rose to domination in her
now, as if the queenly robes she had cast off had been material shackles
and inhibitions.

But Conan, in his renewed admiration, did not forget that peril lurked
all about them. The farther they drew away from the region of the
Zhaibar, the less likely he was to encounter any Kshatriya troops. On
the other hand he had been listening all throughout their flight for
sounds that would tell him the vengeful Wazulis of Khurum were on their
heels.

Swinging the Devi up, he followed her into the saddle and again reined
the stallion westward. The bundle of garments she had given him, he
hurled over a cliff, to fall into the depths of a thousand-foot gorge.

'Why did you do that?' she asked. 'Why did you not give them to the
girl?'

'The riders from Peshkhauri are combing these hills,' he said. 'They'll
be ambushed and harried at every turn, and by way of reprisal they'll
destroy every village they can take. They may turn westward any time. If
they found a girl wearing your garments, they'd torture her into
talking, and she might put them on my trail.'

'What will she do?' asked Yasmina.

'Go back to her village and tell her people that a stranger attacked
her,' he answered. 'She'll have them on our track, all right. But she
had to go on and get the water first; if she dared go back without it,
they'd whip the skin off her. That gives us a long start. They'll never
catch us. By nightfall we'll cross the Afghuli border.'

'There are no paths or signs of human habitation in these parts,' she
commented. 'Even for the Himelians this region seems singularly
deserted. We have not seen a trail since we left the one where we met
the Galzai woman.'

For answer he pointed to the northwest, where she glimpsed a peak in a
notch of the crags.

'Yimsha,' grunted Conan. 'The tribes build their villages as far from
the mountain as they can.'

She was instantly rigid with attention.

'Yimsha!' she whispered. 'The mountain of the Black Seers!'

'So they say,' he answered. 'This is as near as I ever approached it. I
have swung north to avoid any Kshatriya troops that might be prowling
through the hills. The regular trail from Khurum to Afghulistan lies
farther south. This is an ancient one, and seldom used.'

She was staring intently at the distant peak. Her nails bit into her
pink palms.

'How long would it take to reach Yimsha from this point?'

'All the rest of the day, and all night,' he answered, and grinned. 'Do
you want to go there? By Crom, it's no place for an ordinary human, from
what the hill-people say.'

'Why do they not gather and destroy the devils that inhabit it?' she
demanded.

'Wipe out wizards with swords? Anyway, they never interfere with people,
unless the people interfere with them. I never saw one of them, though
I've talked with men who swore they had. They say they've glimpsed
people from the tower among the crags at sunset or sunrise--tall, silent
men in black robes.'

'Would you be afraid to attack them?'

'I?' The idea seemed a new one to him. 'Why, if they imposed upon me, it
would be my life or theirs. But I have nothing to do with them. I came
to these mountains to raise a following of human beings, not to war with
wizards.'

Yasmina did not at once reply. She stared at the peak as at a human
enemy, feeling all her anger and hatred stir in her bosom anew. And
another feeling began to take dim shape. She had plotted to hurl against
the masters of Yimsha the man in whose arms she was now carried. Perhaps
there was another way, besides the method she had planned, to accomplish
her purpose. She could not mistake the look that was beginning to dawn
in this wild man's eyes as they rested on her. Kingdoms have fallen when
a woman's slim white hands pulled the strings of destiny. Suddenly she
stiffened, pointing.

'Look!'

Just visible on the distant peak there hung a cloud of peculiar aspect.
It was a frosty crimson in color, veined with sparkling gold. This cloud
was in motion; it rotated, and as it whirled it contracted. It dwindled
to a spinning taper that flashed in the sun. And suddenly it detached
itself from the snow-tipped peak, floated out over the void like a
gay-hued feather, and became invisible against the cerulean sky.

'What could that have been?' asked the girl uneasily, as a shoulder of
rock shut the distant mountain from view; the phenomenon had been
disturbing, even in its beauty.

'The hill-men call it Yimsha's Carpet, whatever that means,' answered
Conan. 'I've seen five hundred of them running as if the devil were at
their heels, to hide themselves in caves and crags, because they saw
that crimson cloud float up from the peak. What in--'

They had advanced through a narrow, knife-cut gash between turreted
walls and emerged upon a broad ledge, flanked by a series of rugged
slopes on one hand, and a gigantic precipice on the other. The dim trail
followed this ledge, bent around a shoulder and reappeared at intervals
far below, working a tedious way downward. And emerging from the cut
that opened upon the ledge, the black stallion halted short, snorting.
Conan urged him on impatiently, and the horse snorted and threw his head
up and down, quivering and straining as if against an invisible barrier.

Conan swore and swung off, lifting Yasmina down with him. He went
forward, with a hand thrown out before him as if expecting to encounter
unseen resistance, but there was nothing to hinder him, though when he
tried to lead the horse, it neighed shrilly and jerked back. Then
Yasmina cried out, and Conan wheeled, hand starting to knife-hilt.

Neither of them had seen him come, but he stood there, with his arms
folded, a man in a camel-hair robe and a green turban. Conan grunted
with surprize to recognize the man the stallion had spurned in the
ravine outside the Wazuli village.

'Who the devil are you?' he demanded.

The man did not answer. Conan noticed that his eyes were wide, fixed,
and of a peculiar luminous quality. And those eyes held his like a
magnet.

Khemsa's sorcery was based on hypnotism, as is the case with most
Eastern magic. The way has been prepared for the hypnotist for untold
centuries of generations who have lived and died in the firm conviction
of the reality and power of hypnotism, building up, by mass thought and
practise, a colossal though intangible atmosphere against which the
individual, steeped in the traditions of the land, finds himself
helpless.

But Conan was not a son of the East. Its traditions were meaningless to
him; he was the product of an utterly alien atmosphere. Hypnotism was
not even a myth in Cimmeria. The heritage that prepared a native of the
East for submission to the mesmerist was not his.

He was aware of what Khemsa was trying to do to him; but he felt the
impact of the man's uncanny power only as a vague impulsion, a tugging
and pulling that he could shake off as a man shakes spiderwebs from his
garments.

Aware of hostility and black magic, he ripped out his long knife and
lunged, as quick on his feet as a mountain lion.

But hypnotism was not all of Khemsa's magic. Yasmina, watching, did not
see by what roguery of movement or illusion the man in the green turban
avoided the terrible disembowelling thrust. But the keen blade whickered
between side and lifted arm, and to Yasmina it seemed that Khemsa merely
brushed his open palm lightly against Conan's bull-neck. But the
Cimmerian went down like a slain ox.

Yet Conan was not dead; breaking his fall with his left hand, he slashed
at Khemsa's legs even as he went down, and the Rakhsha avoided the
scythe-like swipe only by a most unwizardly bound backward. Then Yasmina
cried out sharply as she saw a woman she recognized as Gitara glide out
from among the rocks and come up to the man. The greeting died in the
Devi's throat as she saw the malevolence in the girl's beautiful face.

Conan was rising slowly, shaken and dazed by the cruel craft of that
blow which, delivered with an art forgotten of men before Atlantis sank,
would have broken like a rotten twig the neck of a lesser man. Khemsa
gazed at him cautiously and a trifle uncertainly. The Rakhsha had
learned the full flood of his own power when he faced at bay the knives
of the maddened Wazulis in the ravine behind Khurum village; but the
Cimmerian's resistance had perhaps shaken his new-found confidence a
trifle. Sorcery thrives on success, not on failure.

He stepped forward, lifting his hand--then halted as if frozen, head
tilted back, eyes wide open, hand raised. In spite of himself Conan
followed his gaze, and so did the women--the girl cowering by the
trembling stallion, and the girl beside Khemsa.

Down the mountain slopes, like a whirl of shining dust blown before the
wind, a crimson, conoid cloud came dancing. Khemsa's dark face turned
ashen; his hand began to tremble, then sank to his side. The girl beside
him, sensing the change in him, stared at him inquiringly.

The crimson shape left the mountain slope and came down in a long
arching sweep. It struck the ledge between Conan and Khemsa, and the
Rakhsha gave back with a stifled cry. He backed away, pushing the girl
Gitara back with groping, fending hands.

The crimson cloud balanced like a spinning top for an instant, whirling
in a dazzling sheen on its point. Then without warning it was gone,
vanished as a bubble vanishes when burst. There on the ledge stood four
men. It was miraculous, incredible, impossible, yet it was true. They
were not ghosts or phantoms. They were four tall men, with shaven,
vulture-like heads, and black robes that hid their feet. Their hands
were concealed by their wide sleeves. They stood in silence, their naked
heads nodding slightly in unison. They were facing Khemsa, but behind
them Conan felt his own blood turning to ice in his veins. Rising, he
backed stealthily away, until he could feel the stallion's shoulder
trembling against his back, and the Devi crept into the shelter of his
arm. There was no word spoken. Silence hung like a stifling pall.

All four of the men in black robes stared at Khemsa. Their vulture-like
faces were immobile, their eyes introspective and contemplative. But
Khemsa shook like a man in an ague. His feet were braced on the rock,
his calves straining as if in physical combat. Sweat ran in streams down
his dark face. His right hand locked on something under his brown robe
so desperately that the blood ebbed from that hand and left it white.
His left hand fell on the shoulder of Gitara and clutched in agony like
the grasp of a drowning man. She did not flinch or whimper, though his
fingers dug like talons into her firm flesh.

Conan had witnessed hundreds of battles in his wild life, but never one
like this, wherein four diabolical wills sought to beat down one lesser
but equally devilish will that opposed them. But he only faintly sensed
the monstrous quality of that hideous struggle. With his back to the
wall, driven to bay by his former masters, Khemsa was fighting for his
life with all the dark power, all the frightful knowledge they had
taught him through long, grim years of neophytism and vassalage.

He was stronger than even he had guessed, and the free exercise of his
powers in his own behalf had tapped unsuspected reservoirs of forces.
And he was nerved to super-energy by frantic fear and desperation. He
reeled before the merciless impact of those hypnotic eyes, but he held
his ground. His features were distorted into a bestial grin of agony,
and his limbs were twisted as on a rack. It was a war of souls, of
frightful brains steeped in lore forbidden to men for a million years,
of mentalities which had plumbed the abysses and explored the dark stars
where spawn the shadows.

Yasmina understood this better than did Conan. And she dimly understood
why Khemsa could withstand the concentrated impact of those four hellish
wills which might have blasted into atoms the very rock on which he
stood. The reason was the girl that he clutched with the strength of his
despair. She was like an anchor to his staggering soul, battered by the
waves of those psychic emanations. His weakness was now his strength.
His love for the girl, violent and evil though it might be, was yet a
tie that bound him to the rest of humanity, providing an earthly
leverage for his will, a chain that his inhuman enemies could not break;
at least not break through Khemsa.

They realized that before he did. And one of them turned his gaze from
the Rakhsha full upon Gitara. There was no battle there. The girl shrank
and wilted like a leaf in the drought. Irresistibly impelled, she tore
herself from her lover's arms before he realized what was happening.
Then a hideous thing came to pass. She began to back toward the
precipice, facing her tormentors, her eyes wide and blank as dark
gleaming glass from behind which a lamp has been blown out. Khemsa
groaned and staggered toward her, falling into the trap set for him. A
divided mind could not maintain the unequal battle. He was beaten, a
straw in their hands. The girl went backward, walking like an automaton,
and Khemsa reeled drunkenly after her, hands vainly outstretched,
groaning, slobbering in his pain, his feet moving heavily like dead
things.

On the very brink she paused, standing stiffly, her heels on the edge,
and he fell on his knees and crawled whimpering toward her, groping for
her, to drag her back from destruction. And just before his clumsy
fingers touched her, one of the wizards laughed, like the sudden, bronze
note of a bell in hell. The girl reeled suddenly and, consummate climax
of exquisite cruelty, reason and understanding flooded back into her
eyes, which flared with awful fear. She screamed, clutched wildly at her
lover's straining hand, and then, unable to save herself, fell headlong
with a moaning cry.

Khemsa hauled himself to the edge and stared over, haggardly, his lips
working as he mumbled to himself. Then he turned and stared for a long
minute at his torturers, with wide eyes that held no human light. And
then with a cry that almost burst the rocks, he reeled up and came
rushing toward them, a knife lifted in his hand.

One of the Rakhshas stepped forward and stamped his foot, and as he
stamped, there came a rumbling that grew swiftly to a grinding roar.
Where his foot struck, a crevice opened in the solid rock that widened
instantly. Then, with a deafening crash, a whole section of the ledge
gave way. There was a last glimpse of Khemsa, with arms wildly upflung,
and then he vanished amidst the roar of the avalanche that thundered
down into the abyss.

The four looked contemplatively at the ragged edge of rock that formed
the new rim of the precipice, and then turned suddenly. Conan, thrown
off his feet by the shudder of the mountain, was rising, lifting
Yasmina. He seemed to move as slowly as his brain was working. He was
befogged and stupid. He realized that there was a desperate need for him
to lift the Devi on the black stallion and ride like the wind, but an
unaccountable sluggishness weighted his every thought and action.

And now the wizards had turned toward him; they raised their arms, and
to his horrified sight, he saw their outlines fading, dimming, becoming
hazy and nebulous, as a crimson smoke billowed around their feet and
rose about them. They were blotted out by a sudden whirling cloud--and
then he realized that he too was enveloped in a blinding crimson
mist--he heard Yasmina scream, and the stallion cried out like a woman
in pain. The Devi was torn from his arm, and as he lashed out with his
knife blindly, a terrific blow like a gust of storm wind knocked him
sprawling against a rock. Dazedly he saw a crimson conoid cloud spinning
up and over the mountain slopes. Yasmina was gone, and so were the four
men in black. Only the terrified stallion shared the ledge with him.




7 On to Yimsha


As mists vanish before a strong wind, the cobwebs vanished from Conan's
brain. With a searing curse he leaped into the saddle and the stallion
reared neighing beneath him. He glared up the slopes, hesitated, and
then turned down the trail in the direction he had been going when
halted by Khemsa's trickery. But now he did not ride at a measured gait.
He shook loose the reins and the stallion went like a thunderbolt, as if
frantic to lose hysteria in violent physical exertion. Across the ledge
and around the crag and down the narrow trail threading the great steep
they plunged at breakneck speed. The path followed a fold of rock,
winding interminably down from tier to tier of striated escarpment, and
once, far below, Conan got a glimpse of the ruin that had fallen--a
mighty pile of broken stone and boulders at the foot of a gigantic
cliff.

The valley floor was still far below him when he reached a long and
lofty ridge that led out from the slope like a natural causeway. Out
upon this he rode, with an almost sheer drop on either hand. He could
trace ahead of him the trail and made a great horseshoe back into the
river-bed at his left hand. He cursed the necessity of traversing those
miles, but it was the only way. To try to descend to the lower lap of
the trail here would be to attempt the impossible. Only a bird could get
to the river-bed with a whole neck.

So he urged on the wearying stallion, until a clink of hoofs reached his
