
"_Ymir! Oh, my father, save me!_"

Amra was leaping forward, arms spread to seize her, when with a crack
like the breaking of an ice mountain, the whole skies leaped into icy
fire. The girl's ivory body was suddenly enveloped in a cold blue flame
so blinding that the warrior threw up his hands to shield his eyes. A
fleeting instant, skies and snowy hills were bathed in crackling white
flames, blue darts of icy light, and frozen crimson fires. Then Amra
staggered and cried out. The girl was gone. The glowing snow lay empty
and bare; high above him the witch-lights flashed and played in a
frosty sky gone mad and among the distant blue mountains there sounded a
rolling thunder as of a gigantic war-chariot rushing behind steeds whose
frantic hoofs struck lightning from the snows and echoes from the skies.

Then suddenly the borealis, the snowy hills and the blazing heavens
reeled drunkenly to Amra's sight; thousands of fireballs burst with
showers of sparks, and the sky itself became a titanic wheel which
rained stars as it spun. Under his feet the snowy hills heaved up like a
wave, and the Akbitanan crumpled into the snows to lie motionless.

       *       *       *       *       *

In a cold dark universe, whose sun was extinguished eons ago, Amra felt
the movement of life, alien and un-guessed. An earthquake had him in its
grip and was shaking him to and fro, at the same time chafing his hands
and feet until he yelled in pain and fury and groped for his sword.

"He's coming to, Horsa," grunted a voice. "Haste--we must rub the frost
out of his limbs, if he's ever to wield sword again."

"He won't open his left hand," growled another, his voice indicating
muscular strain. "He's clutching something--"

Amra opened his eyes and stared into the bearded faces that bent over
him. He was surrounded by tall golden-haired warriors in mail and furs.

"Amra! You live!"

"By Crom, Niord," gasped he, "am I alive, or are we all dead and in
Valhalla?"

"We live," grunted the Aesir, busy over Amra's half-frozen feet. "We had
to fight our way through an ambush, else we had come up with you before
the battle was joined. The corpses were scarce cold when we came upon
the field. We did not find you among the dead, so we followed your
spoor. In Ymir's name, Amra, why did you wander off into the wastes of
the north? We have followed your tracks in the snow for hours. Had a
blizzard come up and hidden them, we had never found you, by Ymir!"

"Swear not so often by Ymir," muttered a warrior, glancing at the
distant mountains. "This is his land and the god bides among yonder
mountains, the legends say."

"I followed a woman," Amra answered hazily. "We met Bragi's men in the
plains. I know not how long we fought. I alone lived. I was dizzy and
faint. The land lay like a dream before me. Only now do all things seem
natural and familiar. The woman came and taunted me. She was beautiful
as a frozen flame from hell. When I looked at her I was as one mad, and
forgot all else in the world. I followed her. Did you not find her
tracks. Or the giants in icy mail I slew?"

Niord shook his head.

"We found only your tracks in the snow, Amra."

"Then it may be I was mad," said Amra dazedly. "Yet you yourself are no
more real to me than was the golden haired witch who fled naked across
the snows before me. Yet from my very hands she vanished in icy flame."

"He is delirious," whispered a warrior.

"Not so!" cried an older man, whose eyes were wild and weird. "It was
Atali, the daughter of Ymir, the frost-giant! To fields of the dead she
comes, and shows herself to the dying! Myself when a boy I saw her, when
I lay half-slain on the bloody field of Wolraven. I saw her walk among
