       *       *       *       *       *

They saw the web at once. It was slung from between the opposite
cliff-walls by cables two hundred feet long. Its radiating cables
reached down to anchorages on stone. The snare-threads, winding out and
out in that logarithmic spiral which men on other planets had noted
thousands of years before--the snare-threads were a yard apart. The web
was set for giant game. It was empty now, but Burl searched keenly and
saw the tight-rope-cable leading from the very center of the web to a
rocky shelf some fifty feet above the canyon's floor. At its end he saw
the spider. It waited there, almost invisible against the stone, with
one furry leg touching the cable that led to its waiting-place so that
the slightest touch on any part of the web would warn it instantly.

Burl's followers accumulated behind him. They stared. They knew, of
course, that a web-spider will not leave its snare under any normal
circumstances. They were not afraid of that. But they looked at the
ground between the web and themselves.

It was a charnel-house of murdered creatures. Half-inch-thick wing-cases
of dead beetles. The cleaned-out carcasses of other giants. The
ovipositor of an ichneumon-fly--six feet of slender, springy,
deadly-pointed tube--and abdomen-plates of bees and draggled antennae of
moths and butterflies.

Something very terrible lived in this small place. The mountainsides
were barren of food for big flying things. Anything which did fly so
high for any reason would never land on sloping, foodless stone. It
would land here. And very obviously it would die. Because
something--something--killed them as they came. It denned back in the
canyon where they could not see. It dined here.

The humans looked and shivered. All but Burl. He deliberately chose for
himself a magnificent lance grown by one dead creature for its own
defense. He pulled it out of the ground and cleaned it with his hands.
He seemed absorbed, but he was terribly aware of the inner depths of the
canyon. He was actually pretending, for the sake of what he believed his
dignity.

Fearfully, the other humans imitated him in choosing weapons from the
armory of the devoured. Then Burl stalked grandly to one side and began
to climb again. His people followed him in numbed silence. They were
filled with dread, but it was not quite terror. Insects do not stalk
their prey. The deadly unseen monster of the canyon had not attacked
them. Therefore, it did not know they were there. And therefore they
were safe from it until it appeared. But none of them desired to stay.

The slope lessened here, and half a mile further on there was a small
thicket of mushrooms. From within it came the cheerful loud clicking of
some small beetle, arrived at this spot nobody could possibly know how,
but happily ensconced in a twenty-yard patch of jungle above a hollow
that had gathered soil through the centuries. There were edible
mushrooms in the thicket.

The humans ate. Naturally. And here they realized that they were no
longer doomed by the creatures in the valley. Since their climb began
they had seen no dangerous thing except the one gigantic, motionless
web-spider. They had left the valley and its particular dangers behind.

A man exclaimed in naive astonishment. He was eating raw mushroom at the
moment, and his mouth was full. But abruptly it occurred to him that
their doom was lifted. He mentioned the fact in a sort of startled
wonder.

"We will stay here," he added happily. "There is food."

And Burl regarded him with knitted brows. Burl was well on the way to
becoming spoiled. He had tasted power over his folk, and he found
himself jealous of any decision by anybody else.

"I go on," he said haughtily. "Now! You may stay behind if you
wish--alone!"

He broke off food for the journey. He held out his hand to Saya. He went
on. And again he went upward because to go back was to go to the canyon
of the unknown killer. And his folk docilely followed him. They did not
really reason about it. To follow him had become a pattern, more or less
precarious. In time it could become a habit. Over a period of years it
could even become a tradition.

The procession marched on and up. Burl noticed that the air seemed
clearer, here. It was not the misty, quasi-transparent stuff of the
valley. He could see for miles to right and left, and the curvatures of
the mountain-face. But he could not see the valley.

Then he realized that the cloud-bank he saw was finite--an object. He
had never thought of it specifically before. To him it had seemed simply
the sky.

Now he saw an indefinite lower surface which yet definitely hid the
heights toward which he moved. He and his followers were less than a
thousand feet below it. It appeared to Burl that presently he would run
into an obstacle that would simply keep him from going any further. But
until that happened he obstinately continued to climb.

The thing which was the sky appeared to stir. It moved. A little higher,
and he could see that there were parts of it which were lower than he
was. They moved also. But they did not approach him. And he had no
experience of anything inimical which did not plunge upon its victims.
Therefore he was not afraid.

In fact, a little later he observed that the whiteness retreated before
him, and he was pleased. Weak things such as humans fled aside when
predators approached. Here was something which fled aside at his
approach. His followers undoubtedly observed the same phenomenon. He had
killed a spider. He was a remarkable person. This unknown white stuff
was afraid of him.

Burl, with bland conceit, marched confidently through the cloud-bank,
ever climbing. At its thickest, he could see only feet in each
direction, but always when he advanced threateningly upon opacity, it
cleared before him.

Presently the gray light grew brighter. Burl and his folk were
accustomed to a shadowless illumination such as fungi could endure--the
equivalent of a heavily overcast day on an Earth-type planet. Now the
mist about him took on a luminosity which was of a different kind.
Suddenly he noticed the silence. He had never known even comparative
silence before in all his life. His ears had been assailed every minute
since he had been born by a din which was the noise of creatures. By
stridulations, by chirpings, by screams, or at the least by the clicking
of armor or the deep-toned pulsations of wings. He had always lived in
the uproar of frenzied struggle. Now, that hellish chorus of shrieks and
cries and mating-calls was cut off. The lower surface of the cloud-bank
reflected it. Burl and his people moved upward through an unparalleled
stillness.

They fell silent, marveling. They heard each other's movements. They
could hear each other's voices. But they moved in a vast quietness over
stones which here were not even lichen-covered, but glistened with wet.
And all about them a golden glow hung in the very air. Stillness, and
quietude, and golden light which grew stronger and stronger and
stronger....

It was very remarkable when they came up through the sea of mist upon a
shore of sunshine, and saw blue sky and sunlight for the first time. The
light smote upon their pink skins and brilliantly colored furry
garments. It glinted in changing, ever-more-colorful flashes upon the
cloaks made of butterfly wings. It sparkled upon the great lance carried
by Burl in the lead, and the quite preposterous weapons borne by his
followers.

The little party of twenty humans waded ashore through the last of the
thinning white stuff which was cloud. They gazed about them with
blinking, wondering, astounded eyes. The sky was blue. There was green
grass. And there was sound. The sound was of wind blowing in the trees
and sunshine.

They heard insects, too, but they did not know what it was they heard.
The shrill, small musical whirrings, the high-pitched small cries which
made up a strange new elfin melody, were totally strange. All things
were novel to their eyes, and an enormous exultation filled them. From
deep-buried ancestral memories, they knew that this was somehow right,
was somehow normal. And they breathed clean air for the first time in
many generations.

Burl even shouted, in triumph, and his voice rang echoing among rocks.

The plateau rang with the shouting of a man in triumph!

       *       *       *       *       *

They had enough food for days. They had brought it from the isolated
thicket not too far beneath the clouds. Had they found other food
immediately, they would have settled down comfortably, in the fashion
normal to creatures whose idea of bliss is a secure hiding-place and
food on hand. Somehow they believed that this high place was secure. But
it was not a hiding-place. And though they did accept, with the
simplicity of children and savages, that they had no enemies here, their
first quest, nevertheless, was for a place in which they could conceal
themselves.

[Illustration]

They found a cave. It was small to hold all of them, so that they would
be crowded in it, but, as it turned out, that was fortunate.

At some time it had been occupied by some other creature, but the dirt
which floored it had settled flat and there were no recent tracks. It
retained faint traces of an odor which was unfamiliar but not
unpleasant. It had no connotation of danger.

Ants stank of formic acid plus the musky odor of their particular city
and kind. One could tell not only the kind of ant but what hill they
came from, from a mere sniff at a well-traveled ant-trail. Spiders had
their own hair-raising odor. The smell of a praying-mantis was acrid,
and of beetles decay, and of course those bugs whose main defense was
smell gave off an effluvium which tended to strangle all but themselves.

The cave's smell was quite different. The humans thought vaguely that it
might be another kind of man. Actually, it _was_ the smell of a
warm-blooded animal. But Burl and his fellows knew of no warm-blooded
creatures but themselves.

They had come above the clouds a bare two hours before sunset--of which
they knew nothing. For an hour they marveled, staying close together.
They were astounded by the sun, more particularly since they could not
look at it. But presently, being savages, they accepted it with the
matter-of-factness of children.

They could not cease to wonder at the vegetation about them. They were
accustomed only to gigantic fungi, and a few feverishly growing plants
striving to flower and bear seed before being devoured. Here they saw
many plants, and at first no insects at all. However, they looked only
for the large things they were accustomed to.

They were astounded by the slenderness of the plants. Grass fascinated
them, and weeds. A large part of their courage came from the absence of
debris upon the ground. In the valley, the habitation of a trapdoor
spider was marked by grisly trophies--armor emptied of all meat but not
yet rotted by the highly specialized bacteria which flourished upon
chitin. The hunting-ground of even a mantis was marked by discarded,
transparent beetle-wings and sharp spiny bits of armor, and mandibles
