
       *       *       *       *       *

It worked beautifully. Not even a faint hum. The only way we could tell
it was working was from the needle on the--rebuilt again--scale, as it
dropped lazily down to the zero mark. Our ears didn't sting, no glass
went dusting into crystalline powder, and a quick peek through the door
showed no ring of fire surrounding the lab.

"We may just have _done_ it!" I said, hopefully, as the silver-nosed
machine began to float upward (We hadn't _had_ to mount the parabolic
reflector in the position of a nose-cone, but it made the thing look
neater, somehow.)

It seemed a little torpid in its ascent, but that could be credited to
the extra weight of the reflector and cornflakes, not to mention the
fact that the helices had to suck all their air in under the lip of the
silvery nose-cone before they could thrust properly. But its rise was
steady. Six inches, ten inches--

Then, at precisely one foot in height, something unexpected happened.
Under the base of the machine, where the sound-heated air was at its
most torrid, a shimmering disc-like thing began to materialize, and
warp, and hollow out slightly, and beside it, a glinting metal rod-thing
flattened at one end, then the flat end went concave in the center and
kind of oval about the perimeter, and something brownish and shreddy
plopped and hissed into the now-very-concave disc-like thing.

"Artie--!" I said, uneasily, but by then, he, too, had recognized the
objects for what they were.

"Burt--" he said excitedly. "Do you realize what we've done? We've
invented a _syntheticizer_!"

Even as he was saying it, the objects completed their mid-air
materialization (time: five seconds, start to finish), and clattered
and clinked onto the scale. We stood and looked down at them: A bowl of
cornflakes and a silver spoon.

"How--?" I said, but Artie was already figuring it out, aloud.

"It's the soundwaves," he said. "At ultrasonic, molecule-disrupting
vibrations, they're doing just what that Philosopher's Stone was
supposed to: Transmuting. Somehow, we didn't clean out the reflector
sufficiently, and some of the traces of our other trial insulations
remained inside. The ceramics formed the bowl, the metals formed the
spoon, the cornflakes formed the cornflakes!"

"But," I said logically (or as logically as could be expected under the
circumstances), "what about the rubber, or the fabrics?"

       *       *       *       *       *

Artie's face lit up, and he nodded toward the machine, still hovering at
one foot above the scale. In its wake, amid the distorting turbulence of
the sound-tortured air, two more objects were materializing: a neatly
folded damask napkin, and a small rubber toothpick. As they dropped down
to join their predecessors, the machine gave a satisfied shake, and
rose steadily to the two-foot level. I was scribbling frantically in my
notebook: _Bowl + cereal + spoon: 5 seconds. Lag: 10 seconds. Napkin +
toothpick: 3 seconds. Total synthesizing time: 18 seconds. Allowance for
rise of machine per foot: 2 seconds._

"Burt--!" Artie yelled joyously, just as I completed the last item,
"Look at that, will you?!"

I looked, and had my first presentiment of disaster. At two feet, the
machine was busily fabricating--out of the air molecules themselves, for
all I knew--_two_ bowls, _two_ spoons, and _two_ bowlfuls of cereal.

"Hey, Artie--" I began, but he was too busy figuring out this latest
development.

"It's the altimeter," he said. "We had it gauged by the foot, but it's
taking the numerical calibrations as a kind of output-quota, instead!"

"Look, Artie," I interrupted, as twin napkins and toothpicks dropped
down beside the new bowls on the table where the scale lay. "We're going
to have a little problem--"

"You're telling _me_!" he sighed, unhappily. "All those damned _random_
factors! How many times did the machine have to be repaired after each
faulty test! What thickness of ceramics, or fabric, or rubber, or metal
remained! What was the precise distribution and dampness of each of
those soggy cornflakes! Hell, Burt, we may be _forever_ trying to make a
duplicate of this!"

"Artie--" I said, as three toothpick-napkin combinations joined the
shattered remains of triple bowl-cereal-spoon disasters from the
one-yard mark over the scale, "that is _not_ the problem I had in mind."

"Oh?" he said, as four shimmering discs began to coalesce and shape
themselves. "What, then?"

"It's not that I don't appreciate the side-effect benefits of free
cornflake dinners," I said, speaking carefully and somberly, to hold
his attention. "But isn't it going to put a crimp in our anti-gravity
machine sales? Even at a mere mile in height, it means that the spot
beneath it is due for a deluge of five-thousand-two-hundred-eighty bowls
of cornflakes. Not to mention all those toothpicks, napkins and spoons!"

Artie's face went grave. "Not to mention the
five-thousand-two-hundred-seventy-nine of the same that the spot beneath
would get from the gadget when it was just one foot _short_ of the mile!"

"Of course," I said, calculating rapidly as the five-foot mark produced
a neat quintet of everything, a quintet which crashed noisily onto the
ten lookalikes below it as the machine bobbed silently to the six-foot
mark, "we have one interesting thing in our favor: the time element."

"How so?" said Artie, craning over my shoulder to try and read my lousy
calligraphics on the pad.

       *       *       *       *       *

"Well," I said, pointing to each notation in turn, "the first batch,
bowl-to-toothpick, took twenty seconds, if we include the time-lapse
while the machine was ascending to the one-foot mark."

"Uh-huh," he nodded. "I see. So?"

"So the second batch took double. Forty seconds. Not only did it require
thirty-six seconds for the formation of the stuff, it took the machine
twice as many seconds to reach the two-foot mark."

"I get it," he said. "So I suppose it took three times the base number
for the third batch?"

"Right. A full minute. And the materialization of the objects is--Boy,
that's noisy!" I interrupted myself as batch number six came smashing
down. "--always at a point where the objects fit into a theoretical
conical section below the machine."

"How's that again?" said Artie.
