those who pay highest prices, cannot afford to have any other house
carry better articles than they do. The use of perfect appliances and
the best material and the employment of the highest skill are not yet
the first step and an absolute necessity, as it should be, in America.
The supply of such machinery, material, and labor can be had if those
who propose to enter the production of first class articles will insist
upon it, and if such supplies are appreciated by the payment of their
higher value. The American standard of production is not the highest,
and it can be materially elevated, and while, as at present, too many
common articles are supplied, the leading manufacturers should turn to
producing finer, the finest, and in smaller quantities, to take the
place of many articles now imported, and to supply the new market which
such productions will always create in any country.

       *       *       *       *       *




                    =The Wool Product of the World.=

From an interesting article on the wool trade of the Pacific coast,
published in a recent number of the San Francisco _Journal of Commerce_,
we learn that the number of sheep in the world is now estimated at from
four hundred and eighty-four to six hundred millions, of which the
United States has about 36,000,000, and Great Britain the same number.
From 1801 to 1875 the wool clip of Great Britain and Ireland increased
from 94,000,000 to 325,000,000 pounds. That of France has increased
almost as rapidly, though the wool is finer, as a rule, and hence the
superiority of French cloths. Australia produces nearly as much wool as
the parent country--Great Britain. The United States product increased
from very little at the beginning of the century to about 200,000,000
pounds at the present time. Of this California has produced about one
fourth, and the Pacific coast as a whole almost one third. If the ratio
of growth shown in the past prevails in the future, the day is not far
distant when the Pacific coast will produce at least one half the wool
produced in the United States, as not only California and Oregon, but
also Washington, Idaho, Montana, Utah, and New Mexico are well adapted
to its production. The wool clip of Australia is about 284,000,000
pounds; that of Buenos Ayres and the river Plata, 222,500,000 pounds;
other countries not previously given, 463,000,000 pounds. The total clip
of the world last year was about 1,497,500,000 pounds, worth
$150,000,000. This when scoured would yield about 852,000,000 pounds of
clean wool.

       *       *       *       *       *




                         =Street Main Joints.=

At the annual meeting of the New England Association of Gas Engineers,
Mr. Thomas, of Williamsburg, made the following remarks on this subject:
"In my early experience with the Williamsburg Gaslight Company, with
which I became connected in the year 1854, I found pretty nearly all the
street mains that were laid were connected with cement joints. While
there is no doubt in my own mind that a joint can be made perfectly
tight with cement, I much prefer the lead joint. Another thing to be
taken into consideration to keep tight joints is that the mains should
be laid a sufficient depth under the surface to protect them from the
action of severe frosts. A great many of the mains were not more than 18
inches or 2 feet below the surface of the streets, and at this depth in
our climate it is a matter of impossibility to keep joints tight, as the
action of the frost in winter will displace the mains and cause the
joints to leak. From the bad manner in which our mains were laid, and
the cement joints leaking so much, we could not afford to turn gas on
during the day. Had we done so we should not have had any to supply the
city at night, and we were thus compelled to shut off the gas just as
soon as there was any apology for daylight, and keep it shut off as late
as possible in the evening.

"With the most careful working in this manner, for a period of nine or
twelve months, our losses from leakage amounted to about 52 to 55 per
cent of the gas manufactured. A great part of this loss was caused by
the cement joints leaking, and also a part due to the fact that the
mains were not at sufficient depth under the surface to protect them
from the action of the frost. As soon as we possibly could I went over
the whole of our mains (there was about 17 miles in all), stripping
them, cutting out the cement, and rejointing them with lead. In one
season we got the loss from leakage down to 20 per cent, and this with
the gas turned on during the 24 hours of the day.

"One great objection to cement joints is the rigidity of them; in cases
where pipes have been disturbed by other excavations and settled, I
found in all cases that the mains were broken. In a leading main from
our old works, with cement joints, the main, a 10-inch one, was broken
entirely off and fractured lengthwise besides, by the upheaval of the
ground from frost. In some of the same mains that we had rejointed with
lead the mains were drawn apart, drawing the lead out, but with very
little loss of gas, as the gasket being driven in tight prevented any
great leakage. In cases of this kind the lead was easily driven back,
and the joint made perfectly tight again. I have never in our city put
in any street mains that I have not used lead in the joints, and in
laying mains we always make them gas tight with the gasket used.

"At the present time we have over 90 miles of street mains laid, and
outside of our loss from street lamps (we get paid for three foot
burners and they average about 3-1/4 foot) our loss from leakage will not
exceed 6 per cent. We have suffered severe loss of gas from sewering in
our city. In some cases where there are railroad tracks in the streets,
the sewers have been run on both sides of the street, alongside and
parallel with our pipes; these excavations are much deeper than our
mains lie, and the earth is always filled in loosely and left to settle.

"In cases of this kind, whole blocks of mains were dragged down, the
pipe broken, and the joints partially pulled apart; at the same time the
leakage from the joints was not so great, the gasket preventing the
leakage. In laying street mains, what you want particularly to attend
to, and especially in the East here, where you have colder weather than
we have (we have not seen much winter until we came on here), is to get
them down under the surface a sufficient depth to protect them from the
frost. With us the least depth is 2 feet 9 inches under the surface of
the street, and I am confident, could our mains remain in the ground as
we put them down, our loss from leakage by them would be very small
indeed. While, as I stated in the beginning, I have no doubt that a
cement joint can be made tight, I can see no benefit in using cement for
the purpose, as I consider lead far superior in accommodating itself to
any upheaval or settling of the earth where the mains are laid down."

       *       *       *       *       *




                      =Successful Shad Hatching.=

Professor J. W. Milner, who has charge of the shad hatching operations
under the direction of the United States Fish Commissioner, Professor
Baird, is now engaged in the preparation of the report of the work for
the season just completed. Speaking of the work on the Atlantic
seaboard, and the distribution of young fish, the report says that at
the Salmon Creek Station, on Albemarle Sound, they obtained 12,730,000
eggs, and turned out 3,000,000 young fish. At the Havre de Grace Station
12,230,000 eggs were obtained, and 9,575,000 young fish were turned out.
About 6,000,000 young shad have been distributed in the rivers emptying
into the Atlantic and Gulf of Mexico during the season. The distribution
of shad during the past season has been carried on on a much larger
scale than in any previous year, and with great success. The restocking
of the rivers of the Atlantic is only the work of a few years.

       *       *       *       *       *




                      =New Use for Lemon Verbena.=

The well known fragrant garden favorite, the sweet-scented or lemon
verbena (_Lippia citriodora_), seems to have other qualities to
recommend it than those of the fragrance for which it is usually
cultivated. The author of a recent work, entitled "Among the Spanish
People," describes it as being systematically gathered in Spain, where
it is regarded as a fine stomachic and cordial. It is used either in the
form of a cold decoction, sweetened, or five or six leaves are put into
a teacup, and hot tea poured upon them. The author says that the flavor
of the tea thus prepared "is simply delicious, and no one who has drunk
his Pekoe with it will ever again drink it without a sprig of lemon
verbena." And he further states that if this be used one need "never
suffer from flatulence, never be made nervous or old-maidish, never have
cholera, diarrhea, or loss of appetite."

       *       *       *       *       *




                   =A VELOCIPEDE FEAT EXTRAORDINARY.=

Two intrepid velocipedists, M. le Baron Emanuel de Graffenried de
Burgenstein, aged twenty years and six months, and a member of the
Society of Velocipede Sport, of Paris, has accomplished, with M. A.
Laumaille d'Angers, the greatest distance that has been made with a
velocipede in France.

Leaving Paris on March 16, they returned on the 24th of April, after
having traveled a distance of more than three thousand miles.

[Illustration: =A VELOCIPEDE FEAT EXTRAORDINARY.=]

Their route extended through a part of the west, the middle, and the
south of France, Italy, and southern Switzerland. They traveled through
Orleans, Tours, Poitiers, Angouleme, Bordeaux, Montauban, Toulouse,
Montpellier, Marseilles, Toulon, Nice, Menton, San-Remo, Genoa, Turin,
Milan, the Simplon--where they barely escaped destruction by an
avalanche--Vevay, Berne, Lausanne, Geneva, Dijon, Troy, and Provins. The
longest distance that they accomplished in a single day, was between
Turin and Milan, a distance of 90 miles, which they made in 9-1/2 hours.

       *       *       *       *       *




                =Superior Excellence of American Goods.=

The _Post_, of Birmingham, England, remarks with regard to American
competition, that "perhaps the most humiliating feature of the business
for British manufacturers is the fact that their competitors are
prevailing, not through the cheapness, but through the excellence of
their goods. Time was when English workmanship ranked second to none,
and the names of our great manufacturing firms were a guarantee for the
sterling quality of the goods they turned out; but competitions, trades
unions, piece work, short hours, and other incidents of the 'march of
progress' have altered all that. Complaints, received by hardware
merchants from their customers abroad, are not confined to the goods of
second class firms. Manufacturers who have obtained a world-wide
reputation for their products are frequently convicted of sending out
scamped and unfinished work, and they do not venture to deny the
impeachment, pleading only that the most vigilant must be sometimes at
fault, and that their men, unfortunately, are not to be depended upon.
In other cases it is the merchants or their customers who are to blame
for the inferior quality of the articles by cutting prices so low as to
preclude the possibility of honest work, thinking, probably, that
anything is good enough for a foreign or colonial market. But whatever
the cause, the fact is now undeniable, that a great deal of the
manufactured produce shipped from this country of late years has been of
a very low standard, and that the American manufacturers have
consequently had an easy task in beating it."

       *       *       *       *       *




                    =Petroleum Oils as Lubricators.=

Oils from petroleum are now produced suitable for nearly every
mechanical process for which animal oils have heretofore been used, not
excepting those intended for cylinder purposes. A serious objection
attaching to the animal oils is present in petroleum. If, through the
exhaust steam, some of the oil be carried into the boiler, foaming or
priming is the consequence, but the same thing happening in the case of
petroleum is rather a benefit than otherwise, for it not only does not
cause foaming, but it prevents incrustation or adhesion of the scale or
deposit, and this aids in the preservation of the boiler, and is perhaps
the best preventive of the many everywhere suggested.

Often, in removing the cylinder head and the plate covering the valves
of an engine, we see evidences of corrosion or action on the surfaces,
differing entirely from ordinary wear, and the engineer is generally at
a loss how to account for it. According to the general impression grease
or animal oil is the preservative of the metal, and is the last thing
suspected of being the cause of its general disintegration. The reason
of this is that vegetable and animal oils consist of fatty acids, such
as stearic, magaric, oleic, etc. They are combined with glycerin as a
base, and, under ordinary conditions, are neutrals to metals generally,
and on being applied they keep them from rusting by shielding them from
the action of air and moisture. But in the course of time the influence
of the air causes decomposition and oxidation, the oils become rancid,
as it is called, which is acid, and they act on the metals. What happens
at the ordinary temperature slowly goes on rapidly in the steam
cylinder, where a new condition is reached. The oils are subjected to
the heat of high pressure steam, which dissociates or frees these acids
from their base, and in this condition they attack the metal and hence
destroy it.

This applies as well to vegetable as to oils of animal origin, fish or
sperm oil included. Petroleum and oils derived therefrom (generally
called mineral oils) are entirely free from this objection. Petroleum
contains no oxygen, and hence it cannot form an acid, and therefore
cannot attack metal. It is entirely neutral, and so bland that it may be
and is used medicinally as a dressing to wounds and badly abraded
surfaces where cerates of ordinary dressing would give pain.--_Coal
Trade Journal._

       *       *       *       *       *




              =Influence of Light on Plants and Animals.=

Professor Paul Bert, who has recently devoted a great deal of attention
to the study of the influence of light on animals and plants, denies
that the leaves of the sensitive plant close on the approach of evening,
the same as if they had been touched by the hand. On the contrary, he
finds that from 9 in the evening, after drooping, they expand again and
attain the maximum of rigidity at 2 in the morning. What is commonly
called the "sensitiveness" of plants is but the external manifestations
of the influences of light. Professor Bert placed plants in lanterns of
different colored glass; those under the influence of green glass
drooped in the course of a few days as completely as if placed in utter
darkness, proving that green rays are useless, and equal to none at all.
In a few weeks all plants without exception thus treated died. It has
been proved by the experiments of Zimiriareff that the reducing power of
the green matter of plants is proportionate to the quantity of red rays
absorbed, and Bert shows that green glass precisely intercepts these
colored rays, and that plants exist more or less healthily in blue and
violet rays. In the animal world phenomena of a directly opposite nature
are found, and of a more complex character. Here the light acts on the
skin and the movements of the body, either directly or through the
visual organs. M. Pouchet has shown the changes in color that certain
animals undergo, according to the medium in which they live. For
instance, young turbots resting on white sand assume an ashy tint, but
when resting on a black bottom become brown; when deprived of its eyes
the fish exhibits no change of color in its skin; the phenomenon,
therefore, seems to be nervous or optical. Professor Bert placed a piece
of paper with a cut design on the back of a sleeping chameleon; on
bringing a lamp near the animal the skin gradually became brown, and on
removing the paper a well defined image of the pattern appeared. In this
case the light acted directly, and without nervous intervention. If,
however, the eye of the chameleon be extracted, the corresponding side
of the animal becomes insensible to the influence of the light.

Professor Bert's conclusion, therefore, is that the circulation in the
transparent layers of the skin must be affected by light. According to
Dr. Bouchard a sunstroke is the effect of the direct action of light
upon the skin, produced by the blue and violet rays. The heat producing
rays have no part in such accidents, as proved by the fact that workmen
exposed to intense heats do not feel their fatal effect. Professor Bert,
in a series of experiments on a variety of animals, found that none
avoided light, but all rather sought it; and the lowest forms, like the
highest, absorbed the same rays. As regards intensity of color, however,
there was a difference, some being more partial to one ray than another.
Thus the microscopic daphne of the pond preferred yellow; violet was
less in request; spiders seemed to enjoy blue rather than red rays--so
resembling people suffering from color blindness. No two persons are
sensible to the same shades or tones, while absorbing the same light;
and this would seem to indicate that the retina possesses a selective
power.

       *       *       *       *       *




                      =New Mechanical Inventions.=

An improved Weighing Scale has been patented by Hosea Willard, of
Vergennes, Vt. The object of this invention is to economize time in
ascertaining the weight of an article by avoiding the necessity for
shifting the poise on the scale beam. It consists in providing a scale
beam with a number of dishes suspended from different points on said
beam, and representing or corresponding with different weights, so that
the weight of an article may be ascertained by placing it in one or more
of said dishes and observing which dish is depressed.

William John, of Rigdon, Ind., has patented an improved Tire Setting and
Cooling Apparatus, by which the tire may be set by one person, easily
and quickly, without burning the fellies, and without straining the
wheel by the unequal cooling of the tire.

Joseph A. Mumford, of Avondale, Nova Scotia, Canada, has patented an
improved machine for Sawing and Jointing Shingles. This machine cannot
be properly described without engravings. It has an ingenious feeding
device, and its flywheel carries the jointing knives.

       *       *       *       *       *




                       =Ill-balanced Production.=

The Philadelphia _Record_ sensibly remarks that the popular complaint of
over-production is a mistake. Though of a few things we make or mine too
much, our main trouble arises from not producing enough, in variety if
not in quantity.

"The wants of mankind never can be satisfied. Every new means of
supplying a want creates new wants. They grow by what they feed on. As
long as humanity is so constituted, over-production, in a general and
enlarged sense, is impossible. It is this impossible thing with which
the reformers would deal who propose to work fewer hours each day, or
fewer hours in the week. The trouble they deplore does not exist; the
remedy they propose defeats itself. A man cannot get rid of his load by
shifting it from his right hand to his left hand. Production will not be
stopped by making men their own employers certain hours in the day or
certain days in the week, instead of allowing them to pursue their usual
avocations.

"The real trouble, which the labor reformers seem incompetent to fathom,
is that there is not enough diversity in employments. What is desired is
more work in productive enterprises, a more diffused industry, and a
closer commercial connection with those countries wherein we can make
desirable exchanges both of our raw material and our manufactured
products. Every miner that drops his pick and takes up a hoe, every idle
man that turns himself into an earner of wages, every person that picks
up some loose thread of employment, every capitalist that takes
advantage of stagnating industry and cheap material to build a house or
beautify or improve a country seat, or set on foot some new process of
manufacture, does something toward working out the problem which is
puzzling the economists. In good time the surplus iron and coal will be
sold; new populations will want new railroads; recuperated capital will
gather confidence and take hold of new enterprises, and the whole nation
will move forward again to more assured prosperity and to vaster
undertakings."

       *       *       *       *       *




                          =Labor in Germany.=

The consul at Barmen reports that for agricultural labor the pay varies
greatly, according to the proximity to or remoteness from manufacturing
centers; and ranges from fifty-six cents a day in the neighborhood of
Barmen to thirty-one cents a day in the lower Rhine valley, and as low
as eighteen cents in parts of Silesia. At Barmen, Crefeld and
Duesseldorf, carpenters, coppersmiths, plumbers, machinists and
wagonsmiths earn fifty-one to seventy-five cents daily; saddlers and
shoemakers forty-seven to fifty-two cents daily; bakers and brewers,
with board and lodging, from $1.42 to $2.14 weekly, and without board
from sixty cents a day to $4.28 a week; farm hands are paid from $107 to
$215 yearly, with maintenance; railroad laborers from fifty-six to
eighty-three cents per day, and as high as ninety-five cents daily for
piece work on tunnels; silk weavers can earn $2.15 to $2.85 a week per
loom; factory women $2.15, and children $1 a week. Business and wages
are very low. In good times wages are eighty per cent higher. The cost
of the necessaries of life has increased some fifty per cent in thirteen
years, although it is now but little higher than five years ago. A man
and wife with two or three children can live in two or three rooms in a
poor and comfortless manner for $275 a year, and to support such an
establishment all the members have to work ten or twelve hours daily.
For a family of six persons the cost is about $7 per week--an amount but
few families can earn, as the depression of trade and the reduction of
time allow few to do a full week's work, although wages are nominally a
trifle higher than five years ago.

       *       *       *       *       *




                        =Petroleum June Review.=


                         DRILLING WELL ACCOUNT.

The low price of oil and large accumulation of stock in the producing
regions have had the effect to lessen operations in this department
during the month of June.

The total number of drilling wells in all the districts, at the close of
the month, was 266, which was 110 less than in the preceding month. Rigs
erected and being erected 243, against 309 last month. The number of
drilling wells completed during the month was 269, being 151 less than
in May. Aggregate production of the new wells was 3,788 barrels, against
6,851 barrels in May. The total number of dry holes developed in the
month was 22, against 42 in May.

The operators in the great northern field (Bradford district) have
curtailed operations to an extent which will compare favorably with the
operators in the other portions of the producing regions, as will be
seen by the following statement, namely:

Number of wells drilling at the close of the month, 187, against 284 at
the close of the previous month. Number of drilling wells completed in
June, 193, against 346 in May. Number of rigs erected and being erected,
196, against 234 in May.


                              PRODUCTION.

The daily average production for the month was 40,575 barrels, being a
decrease of 227 barrels. The new wells completed in June failed to make
good the falling off of the old ones, by decreasing the daily average
227 barrels. Bradford district shows a daily average production of
16,000 barrels, being an increase of 1,280 barrels over last month.

The aggregate production in June of all the other districts combined,
with the aid of 76 new wells, decreased the daily average 1,507 barrels.


                               SHIPMENTS.

The shipments in June, out of the producing regions, were 174,225
barrels larger than in the preceding month. The total shipments of
crude, and refined reduced to crude equivalent, by railroad, river and
pipes to the following points, were 1,135,119 barrels:

  New York took            555,794 bbls.
  Pittsburg    "           153,182  "
  Cleveland    "           239,389  "
  Philadelphia "            73,426  "
  Boston       "            29,266  "
  Baltimore    "            26,623  "
  Richmond     "             7,000  "
  Ohio River refiners took   5,200  "
  Other local points took   45,239  "
                         ---------
  Total shipments        1,135,119  "

Included in the above shipments there were 140,299 barrels of refined
from Titusville and Oil City, which is equal to 187,065 barrels of
crude.--_Stowell's Petroleum Reporter._

       *       *       *       *       *




                   =Remarkable Poisoning of a Lake.=

A contributor to _Nature_ describes the remarkable poisoning of Lake
Alexandrina--one of the bodies of water which form the estuary of the
Murray river, Australia. This year the water of the river has been
unusually warm and low, and the inflow to the lakes very slight. The
consequence has been an excessive growth of a conferva which is
indigenous to these lakes and confined to them. This alga, _Nodularia
spumigera_, is very light and floats on the water, except during
breezes, when it becomes diffused, and being driven to the lee shores,
forms a thick scum like green oil paint.

This scum, which is from two to six inches thick, and of a pasty
consistency, being swallowed by cattle when drinking, acts poisonously
and rapidly causes death. The symptoms of the poisoning are stupor and
unconsciousness, falling and remaining quiet (as if asleep), unless
touched, when convulsions are induced, the head and neck being drawn
back by a rigid spasm, subsiding before death. The poison causes the
death of sheep in from one to six or eight hours; of horses, in from
eight to twenty-four hours; of dogs, in from four to five hours; and of
pigs in three or four hours. A _post mortem_ shows the plant is rapidly
absorbed into the circulation, where it must act as a ferment, and
causes disorganization. As the cattle will not touch the puddle where
the plant scum has collected and become putrid, all they take is quite
fresh, and the poisoning is therefore not due to drinking a putrescent
fluid full of bacteria, as was suggested.

When the scum collects and dries on the banks it forms a green crust.
When, however, it is left in wet pools it rapidly decomposes, emitting a
most horrible stench, like putrid urine; but previous to reaching this
stage it gives out a smell like that of very rancid butter.

A blue pigment exudes from this decomposing matter, having some
remarkable properties. It is remarkably fluorescent, being red by
reflected and blue by transmitted light; it appears to be a product of
the decomposition, and allied to the coloring matter found in some
lichens.

       *       *       *       *       *




                         =ASTRONOMICAL NOTES.=

                          BY BERLIN H. WRIGHT.

              PENN YAN, N. Y., Saturday, August 10, 1878.

The following calculations are adapted to the latitude of New York city,
and are expressed in true or clock time, being for the date given in the
caption when not otherwise stated.

                                PLANETS.

                          H.M.                                H.M.
  Mercury sets            8 03 eve. |  Saturn Rises           8 89 eve.
  Venus rises             2 42 mo.  |  Saturn in meridian     2 58 mo.
  Jupiter in meridian    10 52 eve. |  Neptune rises         10 27 eve.

                         FIRST MAGNITUDE STARS

                           H.M.                               H.M.
  Alpheratz rises          6 54 eve. |  Regulus sets          7 29 eve.
  Algol (var.) rises       8 34 eve. |  Spica sets            9 24 eve.
  7 stars (Pleiades) rise 10 53 eve. |  Arcturus sets         0 08 mo.
  Aldebaran rises          0 17 mo.  |  Antares sets         11 24 eve.
  Capella rises            9 40 eve. |  Vega in meridian      9 15 eve.
  Rigel Rises              2 23 mo.  |  Altair in meridian   10 27 eve.
  Betelgeuse rises         2 08 mo.  |  Deneb in meridian    11 19 eve.
  Sirius rises             4 24 mo.  |  Fomalhaut rises       9 34 eve.
  Procyon rises            3 59 mo.  |

