jungle that cloaks the Ancient Cities, the Cities that no man knows
who built, there in the steaming swamps. Men have said that I was
beautiful, yet, ironically, he for whom I have wrecked my empire
scorned me. It was then I bethought me of this flask made in the
immemorial years agone, which figured in legend as containing the
essence of Beauty. Perhaps, I thought, with this I might win him from
my rival. Today you have returned; successfully, I grant you; and
demand yield of my power for that which I desire. I have been told
bitter things--that I have ruled mercilessly and tyrannically. That I
have, but I cared little for affairs of state since I became enamoured
of my prince. He has neglected no indignity to impose upon me, but I
cannot forget him. On the night of my Feast of Peacocks he sneered at
the priceless dishes and fed his monkey from the place. The gutter-rat
he has an infatuation for entertains him most skillfully, but he
shares her with the soldiers. He prefers her florid charms to me. This
I do not understand, but I command you, _give me that flagon_."

He slowly shook his head. "No, Majesty, I cannot betray their faith.
Fever took many lives in those crumbling ruins."

"I warn you, I am desperate," she said imperiously, "give, or I shall
take."

He lowered his gaze and remained silent. Seeing he was adamant, she
made a gesture with her head, and a slave stepped from the curtained
alcove. "Take this man to the Room of Pain," she ordered. In
consternation, he sought to dash the frail vessel to the tiles, but it
was dexterously twisted from his grasp by the blackamoor.

The princess laughed insanely.


"My men did well to steal you from under his nose, my wench," she
sneered to the helpless woman at her feet. "Let me see those carmine
lips smile at this!" she added contemptuously, breaking the ancient
seal covered with writing none could interpret. "You are startled?
Yes, it is the Flagon! Watch, if you wish, for you may not see when I
am finished with you." She drained the very dregs, and flung the
stopper in her captive's face. For a long moment there was no change
apparent in her flushed countenance. Then she noticeably paled. Her
hair swiftly grew leaded and grey, her lips assumed a ghastly pallor,
and a score of tiny wrinkles appeared on her smooth skin.

She became an old hag, quite out of place in the splendour of the
throne-room.




SUPERNATURAL HORROR IN LITERATURE

by H. P. Lovecraft

(Copyright 1927 by W. Paul Cook)

Part Three


This type of fear-literature must not be confounded with a type
externally similar but psychologically widely different; the
literature of mere physical fear and the mundanely gruesome. Such
writing, to be sure, has its place, as has the conventional or even
whimsical or humorous ghost story where formalism or the author's
knowing wink removes the true sense of the morbidly unnatural; but
these things are not the literature of cosmic fear in its purest
sense. The true weird tale has something more than secret murder,
bloody bones, or a sheeted form clanking chains according to rule. A
certain atmosphere of breathless and unexplainable dread of outer,
unknown forces must be present; and there must be a hint, expressed
with a seriousness and portentousness becoming its subject, of that
most terrible conception of the human brain--a malign and particular
suspension or defeat of those fixed laws of Nature which are our only
safeguard against the assaults of chaos and daemons of unplumbed
space.

Naturally we cannot expect all weird tales to conform absolutely to
any theoretical model. Creative minds are uneven, and the best fabrics
have their dull spots. Moreover, much of the choicest weird work is
unconscious; appearing in memorable fragments scattered through
material whose massed effect may be of a very different cast.
Atmosphere is the all-important thing, for the final criterion of
authenticity is not the dovetailing of a plot but the creation of a
given sensation. We may say, as a general thing, that a weird story
whose intent is to teach or produce a social effect, or one in which
the horrors are finally explained away by natural means, is not a
genuine tale of cosmic fear; but it remains a fact that such
narratives often possess, in isolated sections, atmospheric touches
which fulfil every condition of the true supernatural horror-literature.
Therefore we must judge a weird tale not by the author's intent, or by
the mere mechanics of the plot; but by the emotional level which it
attains at its least mundane point. If the proper sensations are
excited, such a "high spot" must be admitted on its own merits as
weird literature, no matter how prosaically it is later dragged down.
The one test of the really weird is simply this--whether or not there
be excited in the reader a profound sense of dread, and of contact
with unknown spheres and powers; a subtle attitude of awed listening,
as if for the beating of black wings or the scratching of outside
shapes and entities on the known universe's utmost rim. And, of
course, the more completely and unifiedly a story conveys this
atmosphere, the better it is as a work of art in the given medium.

(Next month Mr. Lovecraft takes up "The Dawn of the Horror Tale.")




Spurs of Death

by Natalie H. Wooley


The warden leaned back in his chair as he watched the door close, then
turned to the man who stood looking out of the window.

"Well, Jim?" he queried. The other came slowly back to the desk and
reseated himself. His face was puzzled.

"Who was that, Tom? He seems strangely familiar, and yet I can't seem
to place him."

"That man was Cliff Williams, the cowboy murderer," said the warden.
"You may have seen his picture in the papers. He gets the chair next
month for the three murders he has committed."

Jim Kelton registered surprise.

"He doesn't look like the sort of person to do such a thing like that.
He seems almost a kid."

The warden smiled grimly. "His looks are deceiving. He has killed
three men in the last ten years, and as far as anyone knows, without
any reason. I'll tell you the story, if you care to hear it."

The other assented.

"Well, the first one was a cow hand down in Texas about ten years ago.
He was working on a ranch down there and he and this fellow got in an
argument over something. He shot him. Then he raked his face open with
his spurs. That was the thing that trapped him in the end. Every time
he killed, he marked his victim's face. Horrible, I grant you. Well,
he disappeared, and finally the case was forgotten. He was a kid of
nineteen or twenty then. Five years later he turned up in Oregon.
Worked on the Lazy T ranch there. All the men liked him, too. He was
quiet, knew his business, and never talked much. Then one day, he came
in from line camp and the foreman gave him his pay. There seemed to be
some mistake in it, and he went to the ranch house to see Danby, the
owner. None of the boys noticed him come out, but when the cook went
