He took the glass, and at one gulp downed the contents. I do not know
what the doctor had dropped into it. Chick revived suddenly, and a
strange light blazed up in his eyes, like life rekindled.

"Ah, now I am better. So?"

He turned to us all; then to the doctor.

"So you say the secret of life is impossible?"

"I--"

Chick smiled wanly. "May I ask you: what it is that has just flared up
within me? I am weak, anaemic, fallen to pieces; my muscles have lost
the power to function, my blood runs cold, I have been more than two
feet over the border. And yet--a few drinks of brandy, of stimulants,
and you have drawn me back, my heart beats strongly, for an hour. By
means of drugs you have infused a new life--which of course is the
old--and driven the material components of my body into correlation. You
are successful for a time; so long as nature is with you; but all the
while you are held aghast by the knowledge that the least flaw, the
least disarrangement, and you are beaten.

"It is your business to hold this life or what you may. When it has
gone your structures, your anatomy, your wonderful human machine is
worthless. Where has it come from? Where has it gone? I have drunk four
glasses of brandy; I have a lease of four short hours. Ordinarily it
would bring reaction; it is poison, to be sure; but it is driving back
my spirit, giving me life and strength enough to tell my story--in the
morning I shall be no more. By sequence I am a dead man already. Four
glasses of brandy; they are speaking. Whence comes this affinity of
substance and of shadow?"

We all of us listened, the doctor most of all. "Go on," he said.

"Can't you see?" repeated Watson. "There is affinity between substance
and shadow; and therefore your spirit or shadow or what you will is
concrete, is in itself a substance. It is material just as much as you
are. Because you do not see it is no proof that it is not substance.
That pot palm yonder does not see you; it is not blessed with eyes."

The doctor looked at Watson; he spoke gently.

"This is very old stuff, my boy, out of your abstract philosophy. No man
knows the secret of life. Not even yourself."

The light in Watson's eyes grew brighter, he straightened; he began
slipping the ring from his finger.

"No," he answered. "I don't. I have tried and it was like playing with
lightning. I sought for life and it is giving me death. But there is one
man living who has found it."

"And this man?"

"Is Dr. Holcomb!"

We all of us started. We had every one given the doctor up as dead. The
very presence of Watson was tragedy. We did not doubt that he had been
through some terrible experience. There are things in the world that may
not be unriddled. Some power, some sinister thing was reaching for his
vitality. What did he know about the professor? Dr. Holcomb had been a
long time dead.

"Gentlemen. You must hear my story; I haven't long to tell it. However,
before I start here is a proof for a beginning."

He tossed the ring upon the table.

It was Hobart who picked it up. A beautiful stone, like a sapphire; blue
but uncut and of a strange pellucid transparency--a jewel undoubtedly;
but of a kind we have never seen. We all of us examined it, and were
all, I am afraid, a bit disappointed. It was a stone and nothing else.

Watson watched us. The waiter had brought more brandy, and Watson was
sipping it, not because he liked it, he said, but just to keep himself
at the proper lift.

"You don't understand it, eh? You see nothing? Hobart, have you a match?
There, that's it; now give me the ring. See--" He struck the match and
held the flame against the jewel. "Gentlemen, there is no need for me
to speak. The stone will give you a volume. It's not trickery, I assure
you, but fact. There, now, perfect. Doctor, you are the sceptic. Take a
look at the stone."

The doctor picked it up casually and held it up before his eyes. At
first he frowned; then came a look of incredulity; his chin dropped and
he rose in his chair.

"My God," he exclaimed, "the man's living! It--he--"

But Hobart and I had crowded over. The doctor held the ring so we could
see it. Inside the stone was Dr. Holcomb!

It was a strenuous moment, and the most incredible. We all of us
knew the doctor. It was not a photograph, nor a likeness; but the man
himself. It was beyond all reason that he could be in the jewel; indeed
there was only the head visible; one could catch the expression of life,
the movements of the eyelids. Yet how could it be? What was it? It was
Hobart who spoke first.

"Chick," he asked, "what's the meaning? Were it not for my own eyes I
would call it impossible. It's absurd on the face. The doctor! Yet I can
see him--living. Where is he?"

Chick nodded.

"That's the whole question. Where is he? I know and yet I know nothing.
You are now looking into the Blind Spot. The doctor sought the secret of
life--and found it. He was trapped by his own wisdom!"




VIII

THE NERVINA


For a moment we were silent. The jewel reposed upon the table. What was
the secret of its phenomena? I could think of nothing in science that
would explain it. How had Watson come into its possession? What was the
tale he had to tell? The lean, long finger that clutched for brandy!
What force was this that had driven him to such a verge? He was
resigned; though he was defiant he had already conceded his surrender.
Dr. Hansen spoke.

"Watson," he asked, "what do you know about the Blind Spot?"

"Nothing."

We all turned to Chick. Hobart ordered more brandy. The doctor's eyes
went to slits. I could not but wonder.

"Chick," I asked, "who is Rhamda Avec?"

Watson turned.

"You saw him a few minutes ago? You saw him with me? Let me ask you."

"Yes," I answered, "I saw him. Most people did. Is he invisible? Is he
really the phantom they say?"

Somehow the mention of the name made him nervous; he looked cautiously
about the room.

"That I don't know, Harry. It--If I can only get my wits together. Is he
a phantom? Yes, I think so. I can't understand him. At least, he has the
powers we attribute to an apparition. He is strange and unaccountable.
Sometimes you see him, sometimes you don't. The first known of him was
on the day Professor Holcomb was to deliver his lecture on the Blind
Spot. He was tracked, you know, to the very act. Then came in the
Nervina."

"And who is the Nervina?"

Watson looked at me blankly.

"The Nervina?" he asked, "The Nervina--what do you know about the
Nervina?"

"Nothing. You mentioned her just now."

His mind seemed to ramble. He looked about the room rather fearfully.
Perhaps he was afraid.

"Did I mention her? I don't know, Harry, my wits are muddled. The
Nervina? She is a goddess. Never was and never will be woman. She loves;
she never hates, and still again she does not love. She is beautiful;
too beautiful for man. I've quit trying."

"Is she Rhamda's wife?"

His eyes lit fire.

"No!"

"Do you love her?"

He went blank again; but at last he spoke slowly.

"No, I don't love her. What's the use? She's not for me. I did; but I
learned better. I was after the professor--and the Blind Spot. She--"

Again that look of haunted pursuit. He glanced about the room. Whatever
had been his experience, it was plain that he had not given up. He held
something and he held it still. What was it?

"You say you didn't find the Blind Spot?"

"No, I did not find it."

"Have you any idea?"

"My dear Harry," he answered, "I am full of ideas. That's the trouble.
I am near it. It's the cause of my present condition. I don't know just
what it is nor where. A condition, or a combination of phenomena. You
remember the lecture that was never delivered? Had the doctor spoken
that morning the world would have had a great fact. He had made a great
discovery. It is a terrible thing." He turned the ring so we could all
see it--beyond all doubt it was the doctor. "There he is--the professor.
If he could only speak. The secret of the ages. Just think what it
means. Where is he? I have taken that jewel to the greatest lapidaries
and they have one and all been startled. Then they all come to the same
conclusion--trickery--Chinese or Hindu work, they say; most of them want
to cut."

"Have you taken it to the police?"

"No."

"Why?"

"I would simply be laughed at."

"Have you ever reported this Rhamda?"

"A score of times. They have come and sought; but every time he has gone
out--like a shadow. It's got to be an old story now. If you call them up
and tell them they laugh."

"How do you account for it?"

"I don't. I--I--I'm just dying."

"And not one member of the force--surely?"

"Oh, yes. There's one. You have heard of Jerome. Jerome followed the
professor and the Rhamda to the house of the Blind Spot, as he calls it.
He's not a man to fool. He had eyes and he saw it. He will not leave it
till he's dead."

"But he did not see the Blind Spot, did he? How about trickery? Did it
ever occur to you that the professor might have been murdered?"

"Take a look at that, Harry. Does that look like murder? When you see
the man living?"

Watson reached over and turned up the jewel.

Here Hobart came in.

"Just a minute, Chick. My wise friend here is an attorney. He's always
the first into everything, especially conversation. It's been my job
pulling Harry out of trouble. Just one question."

"All right."

"Didn't you--er--keep company, as they say, with Bertha Holcomb while at
college?"

A kind look came into the man's eyes; he nodded; his whole face was soft
and saddened.

"I see. That naturally brought you to the Blind Spot. You are after her
father. Am I correct?"

"Exactly."

"All right. Perhaps Bertha has taken you into some of her father's
secrets. He undoubtedly had data on this Blind Spot. Have you ever been
able to locate it?"

"No!"

"I see. This Rhamda? Has he ever sought that data?"

"Many, many times."

"Does he know you haven't got it?"

"No."

"So. I understand. You hold the whip hand through your ignorance. Rhamda
is your villain--and perhaps this Nervina? Who is she?"

"A goddess."

Hobart smiled.

"Oh, yes!" He laughed. "A goddess. Naturally! They all are. There are
about forty in this room at the present moment, my dear fellow. Watch
them dance!"

Now I had picked up the ring. It just fitted the natural finger. I tried
it on and looked into the jewel. The professor was growing dimmer. The
marvellous blue was returning, a hue of fascination; not the hot flash
of the diamond, but the frozen light of the iceberg. It was frigid,
cold, terrible, blue, alluring. To me at the moment it seemed alive and
pulselike. I could not account for it. I felt the lust for possession.
Perhaps there was something in my face. Watson leaned over and touched
me on the arm.

"Harry," he asked, "do you think you can stand up under the burden? Will
you take my place?"

I looked into his eyes; in their black depths was almost entreaty. How
haunting they were, and beseeching.

"Will you take my place?" he begged. "Are you willing to give up all
that God gives to the fortunate? Will you give up your practice? Will
you hold out to the end? Never surrender? Will--"

"You mean will I take this ring?"

He nodded.

"Exactly. But you must know beforehand. It would be murder to give it to
you without the warning. Either your death or that of Dr. Holcomb. It is
not a simple jewel. It defies description. It takes a man to wear it.
It is subtle and of destruction; it eats like a canker; it destroys the
body; it frightens the soul--"

"An ominous piece of finery," I spoke. "Wherein--"

But Watson interrupted. There was appeal in his eyes.

"Harry," he went on, "I am asking. Somebody has got to wear this ring.
He must be a man. He must be fearless; he must taunt the devil. It is
hard work, I assure you. I cannot last much longer. You loved the old
doctor. If we get at this law we have done more for mankind than either
of us may do with his profession. We must save the old professor. He
is living and he is waiting. There are perils and forces that we do not
know of. The doctor went at it alone and fearless; he succumbed to his
own wisdom. I have followed after, and I have been crushed down--perhaps
by my ignorance. I am not afraid. But I don't want my work to die.
Somebody has got to take it on and you are the man."

They were all of them looking at me. I studied the wonderful blue
and its light. The image of the great professor had dimmed almost
completely. It was a sudden task and a great one. Here was a law; one of
the great secrets of Cosmos. What was it? Somehow the lure caught into
my vitals. I couldn't picture myself ever coming to the extremity of
my companion. Besides, it was a duty. I owed it to the old doctor. It
seemed somehow that he was speaking. Though Watson did the talking I
could feel him calling. Would I be afraid? Besides, there was the jewel.
It was calling; already I could feel it burning into my spirit. I looked
up.

"Do you take it, Harry?"

I nodded.

"I do. God knows I am worthless enough. I'll take it up. It may give me
a chance to engage with this famous Rhamda."

"Be careful of Rhamda, Harry. And above all don't let him have the
ring."

"Why?"

"Because. Now listen. I'm not laying this absolutely, understand.
Nevertheless the facts all point in one direction. Hold the ring.
Somewhere in that lustre lies a great secret; it controls the Blind
Spot. The Rhamda himself may not take it off your finger. You are immune
from violence. Only the ring itself may kill you."

He coughed.

"God knows," he spoke, "it has killed me."

It was rather ominous. The mere fact of that cough and his weakness was
enough. One would come to this. He had warned me, and he had besought me
with the same voice as the warning.

"But what is the Blind Spot?"

"Then you take the ring? What is the time? Twelve. Gentlemen--"

Now here comes in one of the strange parts of my story--one that I
cannot account for. Over the shoulder of Dr. Hansen I could watch the
door. Whether it was the ring or not I do not know. At the time I did
not reason. I acted upon impulse. It was an act beyond good breeding. I
had never done such a thing before. I had never even seen the woman.

The woman? Why do I say it? She was never a woman--she was a girl--far,
far transcendent. It was the first time I had ever seen her--standing
there before the door. I had never beheld such beauty, such profile,
poise--the witching, laughing, night-black of her eyes; the perfectly
bridged nose and the red, red lips that smiled, it seemed to me, in
sadness. She hesitated, and as if puzzled, lifted a jewelled hand to
her raven mass of hair. To this minute I cannot account for my action,
unless, perchance, it was the ring. Perhaps it was. Anyway I had risen.

How well do I remember.

It seemed to me that I had known her a long, long time. There was
something about her that was not seduction; but far, far above it.
Somewhere I had seen her, had known her. She was looking and she was
waiting for me. There was something about her that was super feminine. I
thought it then, and I say it now.

Just then her glance came my way. She smiled, and nodded; there was a
note of sadness in her voice.

"Harry Wendel!"

There is no accounting for my action, nor my wonder; she knew me. Then
it was true! I was not mistaken! Somewhere I had seen her. I felt a
vague and dim rush of dreamy recollections. Ah, that was the answer! She
was a girl of dreams and phantoms. Even then I knew it; she was not
a woman; not as we conceive her; she was some materialisation out of
Heaven. Why do I talk so? Ah! this strange beauty that is woman! From
the very first she held me in the thrall that has no explanation.

"Do we dance?" she asked simply.

The next moment I had her in my arms and we were out among the dancers.
That my actions were queer and entirely out of reason never occurred
to me. There was a call about her beautiful body and in her eyes that
I could not answer. There was a fact between us, some strange bond
that was beyond even passion. I danced, and in an extreme emotion of
happiness. A girl out of the dreams and the ether--a sprig of life woven
out of the moonbeams!

"Do you know me?" she asked as we danced.

"Yes," I answered, "and no. I have seen you; but I do not remember; you
come from the sunshine."

She laughed prettily.

"Do you always talk like this?"

"You are out of my dreams," I answered: "it is sufficient. But who are
you?"

She held back her pretty head and looked at me; her lips drooped
slightly at the corners, a sad smile, and tender, in the soft wonderful
depths of her eyes--a pity.

"Harry," she asked, "are you going to wear this ring?"

So that was it. The ring and the maiden. What was the bond? There was
weirdness in its colour, almost cabalistic--a call out of the occult.
The strange beauty of the girl, her remarkable presence, and her
concern. Whoever and whatever she was her anxiety was not personal. In
some way she was woven up with this ring and poor Watson.

"I think I shall," I answered.

Again the strange querulous pity and hesitation; her eyes grew darker,
almost pleading.

"You won't give it to me?"

How near I came to doing it I shall not tell. It would be hard to say
it. I knew vaguely that she was playing; that I was the plaything. It is
hard for a man to think of himself as being toyed with. She was certain;
she was confident of my weakness. It was resentment, perhaps, and pride
of self that gave the answer.

"I think I shall keep it."

"Do you know the danger, Harry? It is death to wear it. A thousand
perils--"
