give full attention to Safety. What did you think of Script-Lab?"

"Well, it's very efficient."

"I knew that," said Ludwig. "Machines are built to be efficient. But
what do you think of their output? How does it compare with the work of
the Writers?"

Carre cleared his throat. "John, don't you read the magazines any more?"

"No. No time. Do you?"

"I haven't, until yesterday. I read them, all night. I hardly know how
to express myself. John, something is wrong with the machines."

"Nonsense! There can't be anything wrong with them. They're fed the
plots, fed the variations, and then with perfect logic they create
their stories. You're not an electronics expert, you know."

Carre stared at the floor. Ludwig sighed.

"I'm sorry, Herbert. I'm just too tired to be decently courteous. But
what I wanted from you, after all, was a literary evaluation and not a
scientific one."

"I express myself so badly. There's something wrong, something I can't
exactly define, with what they write."

Ludwig looked exasperated. "But _what_, man? Be concrete."

"I'll try. Here's a short story that was made yesterday. Glance over
it, please, and tell me how it strikes you."

Ludwig read through the manuscript with his accustomed rapidity. "I
don't see anything particularly wrong about it," he said. "Murder
mysteries have never been to my taste, and I don't know that I exactly
approve of the hero's killing his benefactress with an undetectable
poison, and then inheriting her fortune and marrying her niece.
Undetectable poisons are all nonsense, anyway."

"The story doesn't seem to you--unhealthy?"

"I don't know what you're getting at! It's on the grim side, I suppose,
but isn't most modern fiction a little grim? How about your own stuff?"

"I think there's a difference. I know I've written a few mysteries,
and even some tragic stories, but I don't believe I've ever written
anything exactly like this. And this is typical. They're doing
reprints, too, of books that were destroyed or lost during the Atomic
Wars. Do you remember Joan of Arc? Mark Twain's version? Here is a page
from Script-Lab's manuscript."

Ludwig took the sheet and read aloud: "By-and-by a frantic man in
priest's garb came wailing and lamenting and tore through the crowd and
the barrier of soldiers and flung himself on his knees by Joan's cart
and put up his hands in supplication, crying out--

'"O, forgive, forgive!"

'It was Loyseleur!

'And Joan's heart knew nothing of forgiveness, nothing of compassion,
nothing of pity for all that suffer and have been offensive--'"

Ludwig looked up with a frown. "That's odd. It's been so long since I
saw that book--I was only a boy--but that isn't just the way I remember
it."

"That's what Script-Lab is writing."

"But the machines, don't--"

"I know. They don't make mistakes."

The buzz of the visi-sonor interrupted them, and the Commissioner of
Public Safety spoke from the screen.

"For heaven's sake, Ludwig, shelve the book-business and get over
here. We've had a rash of robberies with violence, a dozen bad street
accidents, and two suspicious deaths of diabetics in coma. We need
help."

Ludwig was already reaching for his brief case. "Right away," he said,
and flicked the switch.

"John!" Carre begged, "This book matter is serious. You can't just drop
it! Come with me to Hartridge's lab and see for yourself!"

"I can't. No time. You heard the Commissioner."

"Tomorrow morning?"

"Can't make it. Have to go to a funeral. A niece of mine who died
suddenly of cancer. Poor girl. We thought she was doing so well, too,
with the hormone injections. Not that her husband will break his heart,
from what I know of the scoundrel."

Carre followed him towards the door. "Then make it tomorrow afternoon!
It's vital!"

