you could hear these tame Venusians slobbering as they thirsted for
human blood.

"I'll dance you ... for the right ... to keep our ship ... on your
dancing ground ... until it is repaired ..." Molock said.

"The hopeless fool!" Wilkerson gasped. "The utter idiot ..."

"You will dance _me_?" You could have heard Shad Brisbee scream for
miles around. The idea appalled him, because it was a direct challenge,
and it also appealed to him because he was absolutely certain that he,
or any other Venusian could out-dance any human who had ever put foot
on the Veiled Planet. "I'll do it!" Shad Brisbee roared. "Make room for
the dancers!" His voice was a howl that shook wondering echoes out of
the jungle.

Molock came back into the galley. "You can't do it," Wilkerson gasped.
"These dances are endurance contests. That big baboon has done nothing
but dance all his life. He can dance straight into next week ..."

"I'm stalling for time," Molock said. "I want you to get on that radio
again and convince that damned Cooper he's got to get here and help
us. All he has to do is swoop low in a ship over this place and these
baboons will take to the jungle or the swamp to dodge the rocket blast.
Tell him."

"I'll tell him," Wilkerson said grimly. "The question is--will he act
on what I tell him."

Molock's eyes went to Rita. "Honey, I want you to get those cameras
going and keep them going. I want this recorded for posterity, if for
nobody else."

Rita was shaken and scared. But there was good stuff down inside that
girl. "Will do," she whispered. She got to her feet and headed for the
observation dome in the top of the ship where the cameras were located.

Molock turned to me. "I've got a little job for you, Sam." Out of his
pocket, he slipped the little needle gun. "I'm going to have to dance
against that six-eyed baboon. When he gets to dancing real good and
everybody is all excited, I want you to shoot him in the butt with one
of these needles."

"But--" I whispered.

"Exactly," Molock said. "It won't kill him, but a couple of these
needles will slow him down considerably."

I regarded the weapon with horror. "But that means I'll have to go out
there where all those Venusians are!" Maybe this wasn't a heroic thing
to say but the thought just popped out of my mind. Anyhow, I wasn't
feeling very heroic.

"Yah!" Molock said.

"But--"

"I'll be out there," Molock said. "I'll be out there dancing. All
you've got to do is squat on the ground."

"Okay," I said. The word cost me a desperate effort but I said it.

We went out together....

The Venusians had already cleared a circle fifty yards in diameter.
They clustered around this circle like hungry dogs waiting for the
kill. Shad Brisbee, stark naked, grinning out of all of his six
eyes, looking nine feet tall and fit to dance all month, grinned as
he waited. In Shad Brisbee's mind, here was a lamb being led to the
slaughter.

Shad Brisbee and I had one thing in common--we both agreed on this lamb
led to the slaughter idea.

I squatted on the ground at the edge of the circle and tried to lose
myself between the legs of the Venusians towering over me.

Have you ever seen a Venusian dance? If you haven't, you have missed
one of the weirdest sights in the solar system. They do everything in
the books on ballets, ball room dancing, tap dancing, they also turn
flip-flops and walk on their hands. They do things that no human being
will ever believe until he sees it.

As big and as ponderous as he was, Shad Brisbee went into his act by
turning three quick back flips.

I'll give Molock credit, he could do tricks I had never guessed he
could do. He kept even with Shad. But within thirty minutes he was
beginning to pant. Going round the circle, dancing every step of the
way, he found wind to yell at Wilkerson, who was peering from the lock.

"Any news ... from that damned Cooper?"

"Operations contacted him ... in a bar!" Wilkerson yelled. "Cooper said
you could dance your own way out of this ..."

"The dirty dog!" Molock screamed.

The next time he came around the circle, waving his hands and bending
double as he imitated one of Shad Brisbee's more intricate steps, he
whispered to me, "Bunt him...."

Keeping the little spring gun out of sight in my hand, I waited until
the Venusian's back was turned to me, and pressed the trigger. The
spring clicked softly. I caught a glint of the needle as it went home
in Shad's backside.

He went right on dancing as if nothing had happened.

The next time he came around the circle, Molock whispered, "Let him
have another one...."
