
"Yes," agreed the man. "That is because I am different."

"He can read your head like a crystal ball and light up like a neon
sign," John Drinkard heard himself babbling.

Evers, though he sensed the strangeness of the situation, turned to
Drinkard with concern. "Easy, boy," he said soothingly. "You've slipped
on the ice before. Sit down and let's quit being funny."

The stranger smiled, but his curving lips seemed more a studied
imitation than any indication of mirth. "Let us all sit and I will tell
you why I am Dzell. I will do it because I know, when you repeat my
words, that you will not be believed."

Evers started to speak, thought better of it, and closed his mouth
with an exaggerated snap of teeth. John Drinkard sat wearily on the
soft tundra vegetation.

"You came up to climb the peak," said the man Dzell, "but also you came
to see what caused the lights. If you had not had misfortune, you would
have climbed the peak, but there would have been no lights."

       *       *       *       *       *

He glanced away, up and across the rocky ride and to the upper reaches
of the glacier. A dull red glow moved down the route he and John
Drinkard had recently taken. Keen eyes could readily see that it had
the shape of a man.

"That is Dzorr," said Dzell. "We grew in the same membrane. He is
erasing our trail across the ice, John Drinkard."

Drinkard watched the glow until it slowly faded. "Very smart. We can
tell tales, but there won't be any proof, eh?"

"That is correct," said the strange man. He turned to Chuck Evers. "You
wonder about the statement that we grew in the same membrane. I should
have said that we are twins."

Evers caught his breath. "Telepathy," he breathed. "John wasn't out of
his head."

The chill night wind rippled across the alpine field. The little fire
flickered and glowed. Overhead, the stars were blue and red and yellow
ice.

"The truth is simple," said the man called Dzell. "We have told it
before, but no one believed, and it has not seemed wise to support
our facts. We, Dzorr and I, with our companions Dzinn and Dzett, are
explorers."

John Drinkard slapped his hand against the boulder beside him and
seemed reassured by its solidity. He shook his head to clear it.

"I don't get it," he objected. "Chuck and I could call ourselves
explorers, too, if rambling around the mountains every chance we get
falls under that heading."

"We do not explore the mountains," said Dzell. "Here we rest and allow
ourselves to behave normally. We explore in the towns and in the
cities, where people gather. It is strenuous," he added, with a sound
almost like a sigh. "We cannot tolerate it for long. Then we must go
into seclusion and renew ourselves."

Keen interest was replacing puzzlement in both Evers and Drinkard. They
smiled now and Chuck said: "I know what you mean. Ten days in Denver--a
fine town, mind you--and I feel like I'd been staked with a short rope."

"You do not exactly know what I mean," said Dzell. "Your problems are
simply matters of preference. Ours are physiological. We cannot long
maintain metabolic balance in the company of people. Thus, Dzinn and
Dzett are now in the world you inhabit. When they must rest, then our
turn comes."

       *       *       *       *       *

Dzell had gathered a pile of small flat stones and he sat sorting them
with his gauntleted fingers. They were simply flakes of weathering
gneiss, fire- and pressure-derived from some granite as ancient as the
range. Neither man noticed the idle movements until Dzell raised a
piece to his mouth and bit into it with a grinding sound, like a man
cracking nuts. His teeth were large and square, and they had a metallic
gleam. They made short work of the gneiss. Dzell flexed his fingers,
selected another piece of the rock.

"Among people," he observed, "this would be conspicuous. You are not
adapted to get oxygen from quartz. We are."

"You make Houdini look like a piker," big John told him admiringly. "I
admit that's tougher cereal than I'd want to try. But the point of the
gag still escapes me."

"I am aware of that," said the strange man. "You cannot comprehend
because your mind is shackled. Yet it must be evident that we are not
too much alike."

He rose to his feet.

"There is the matter of the body glow. I can control my body
temperature, raising and lowering it as I choose. The greatest
difficulty when I am among people is to keep it down to human body
heat. Normally it is very much higher than yours. And when, due to
exercise and metabolic speed-up, excess energy is accumulated, it is
