"I wonder if I had better go in," he thought. "Perhaps, after all, it
was only rats, as Jack said."

But, even as he listened he again heard the odd sound coming from the
room. This determined him. He would solve the mystery if possible.

Cautiously he turned the knob. The door was slowly swinging open when
Mark was startled by a noise from behind him. He turned suddenly to see
Professor Henderson confronting him.

"What is it, Mark? Is the ship on fire? What's the matter? Is any one
hurt?"

"I was just going in this room to----" began Mark.

"Don't do it! Don't do it!" exclaimed the professor in an excited
whisper. "No one must go in that room. I forgot to tell you and Jack
about it. No one must enter. It contains a secret!"

"I heard a strange noise and----" Mark began again.

"It could make no noise! It would be impossible for it to make a noise!"
the professor exclaimed.

"I heard something," the boy insisted.

"You were dreaming!" said the professor. "Now go back to bed, Mark, and
don't let this happen again. Remember, no one must enter that room
unless I give permission!"

Somewhat crestfallen at the outcome of his investigations, but realizing
that the professor could do what he wanted to aboard his own ship, Mark
went back to bed. But he could not sleep. All the rest of the night he
was wondering whether Mr. Henderson had some strange creature hidden
aboard the _Mermaid_. He feared lest the old scientist's mind might be
affected and, in his wildness he had made some infernal machine that
would, in time, blow the whole ship apart.

But tired nature asserted itself at last, and, weary with vain
imaginings, Mark fell into a slumber. The next morning he awoke with a
start from a dream that he was being devoured by an immense water snake.

He said nothing to the others about his night's adventure, for, as it
transpired, no one else had been awakened by his investigations. The
professor did not refer to his conversation with Mark.

"There's something queer going on aboard the ship this trip," said Mark
to himself. "But I guess it's none of my business. Professor Henderson
seems to know what he is doing and I guess I can trust him."

He resolved to think no more of the strange noises and movements, and,
for several nights thereafter he was not disturbed by them.

The weather, which, up to this time had been fair, took a sudden turn
for the worse about the fourth day after Mark's little night expedition.
One evening the sun sank in a mass of dull lead-colored clouds and a
sharp wind sprang up.

"We're going to have a storm," said Mr. Henderson. "It's liable to be a
bad one, too, from the way the barometer is falling."

He looked at the glass, and scanned the various instruments that told
how high up the _Mermaid_ was and how fast she was traveling.

"We're pretty high up in the air," he said, "and scooting along at about
fifty miles an hour. We are going against the wind, too, but fortunately
it is not blowing hard."

At that moment there sounded from without a peculiar howling sound, as
if a siren whistle was being blown.

"'Pears like there's goin' t' be a tumultuous demonstration of
sub-maxiliary contortions in th' empherial regions contiguous t' th'
upper atmosphere!" exclaimed Washington, entering from the engine room
into the conning tower.

"What's the trouble?" asked Mr. Henderson.

"Terrible big black cloud chasin' us from behind!" exclaimed the colored
man.

Noting the alarm in Washington's voice the professor glanced from the
rear window. What he saw caused him to exclaim:

"It's a cyclone! We must drop down to avoid it!"

He sprang to a lever controlling the gas and yanked it toward him. There
was a shrill hissing sound, and a second later the _Mermaid_ began to
sink. The boys watching the gages on the wall of the tower, saw that the
craft was falling rapidly.

But, with a rush and roar, the terrible wind was upon them. It caught
the craft in its fearful grip and heeled it over as a ship careens to
the ocean blast.

"It's a storm in the upper regions! We'll find it calm below!" cried the
professor above the howling of the gale. He opened the gas outlet wider
and the ship fell more rapidly.

"Are you sure we're over the ocean?" asked Mark.

"Positive!" the professor called back. "We have been traveling straight
south over the Atlantic for the last week. We will land in the midst of
the waters and float safely."

Lower and lower went the _Mermaid_. The wind was now blowing with the
force of a tornado, and, as the craft had to slant in order to descend,
it felt the power of the gale more than if it had scudded before it.
But, by skilful use of the directing tube, the professor was able to
keep the boat from turning over. As they came further down toward the
earth the force of the wind was felt less and less, until, as they came
within two hundred feet of the water which they saw below them in the
gathering dusk, it died out altogether.

"Now we are free from it," said the professor as the _Mermaid_ came down
on the waves like an immense swan.

"Are you going ahead or going to stop here?" asked Mark.

"We'll keep right on," Mr. Henderson answered. "No telling when the
storm may strike down here. We'll go as far as we can to-night."




                              CHAPTER VII

                              A QUEER SAIL


Now that the fear and worriment was over they all began to feel hungry,
and, while Mark and Jack took charge of the conning tower Washington got
breakfast. The professor seemed preoccupied during the meal, and several
times, when Mark spoke to him, he did not reply.

"I wonder if he is worried about something, or is thinking of something
which seems to be concealed in the storeroom," the boy thought.

But, after a while, the professor seemed to be more like himself. He was
busy over several maps and charts, and then announced the ship would try
air-sailing again for a while.

"We can make better time above than we can on the water," he said, "and
I am anxious to get to the mysterious island and learn what is in store
for us."

Perhaps if the professor had been able to look ahead, and see what was
soon going to happen, he would not have been so anxious for it to occur.

It was shortly after dinner when, the gas container having been filled,
the ship rose in the air, and began sailing over the ocean, about a mile
up. The day was a fine one, and, as they were moving south, it was
constantly growing warmer. Down on the water, in fact, it was quite hot,
but in the air it was just right.

Like some immense bird the _Mermaid_ went flying through the air. The
boys and the professor sat upon the deck in easy chairs. It was like
being on the top of some tall "sky-scraper" building which, by some
strange power, was being moved forward. Below them the ocean tumbled in
long, lazy swells.

Suddenly Mark, who was looking through a telescope at the expanse of
water stretched out under them, gave a cry.

"There's a ship! She's on fire!"

"Where?" asked the professor, stretching out his hand for the glass.

"Just to the port of the forward tube. See the smoke!" exclaimed Mark.

Mr. Henderson looked. Through the lens he saw a column of black vapor
rising skyward. Mingled with it were red flames.

"Lower the _Mermaid_!" he cried. "We must save those on board if we
can!"

Mark ran to the conning tower, where Washington was, to give the order.
The colored man, who was looking ahead, intent on guiding the ship, did
not at first hear what Mark called.

"Lower us! Send the _Mermaid_ down!" Mark cried again.

The sudden shout and the excited voice of Mark so startled Washington,
that, fearing some accident had happened, he pulled the lever,
controlling the gas supply, with more force than necessary.

There was a loud explosion, followed by a crackling sound, a flash of
light, and the _Mermaid_ came to a sudden stop.

"What's the matter?" cried Mark, feeling that something was wrong.

"I don't know!" Washington replied, as he dashed toward the engine room.

The _Mermaid_, her forward flight checked, hung in the air, suspended,
neither rising or falling.

"Why don't we go on down?" the professor asked, hurrying to the tower.

"There has been an explosion--an accident!" exclaimed Mark. "I guess we
can't go down!"

"But we must!" Mr. Henderson insisted, seizing the lever which should
have produced a downward motion. The handle swung to and fro. It was
disconnected from the apparatus it operated.

The ship was now stationary in the air, moving neither forward nor
backward, neither rising nor falling. Washington had stopped the air
pumps as soon as he learned something was wrong.

When Mr. Henderson saw the useless lever, which had controlled the
outlet of gas from the holder, he ran out on deck. One glance told him
what had happened. One of the electric wires had become
short-circuited,--that is, the insulation had worn off and allowed the
current to escape. This had produced a spark, which had exploded the gas
which was in the pipe leading from the generator up into the aluminum
holder. Fortunately there was an automatic cut-off for the supply of
vapor, or the whole tank would have gone up.

As it was, only a small quantity had blown up, but this was enough to
break the machinery at the point where the lever in the conning tower
joined the pipe. If it had not been for the automatic cut-off all the
gas in the holder would have poured out in a great volume, and the ship
would have fallen like a shot.

"Can we do nothing to save those on the burning vessel?" asked Mark,
pointing to where a cloud of smoke hung over the ocean.

"I fear not, now," answered the professor. "We are in a bad plight
ourselves."

"Are we in any danger?" asked Jack.

"Not specially," Mr. Henderson replied. "But we must find a means of
lowering ourselves gradually."

"Then it will be too late to save any of those on the ship," observed
Mark.

"I'm afraid so," the scientist made reply.

The _Mermaid_ rested some distance above the surface of the waters. She
moved slightly to and fro with the wind, and rocked gently. The
professor was examining the broken machinery.

"I have a plan!" suddenly cried Mark.

"What is it?" asked Mr. Henderson.

"Can't we bore a hole in the tank, insert a small faucet or tap, and let
the gas out that way gradually?" asked the boy. "When we get down we can
rescue those in danger of fire, and, later, can repair the break."

"The very thing!" exclaimed Mr. Henderson. "I never thought of that!
Here, Washington! Bring me a drill, and a small stop-cock!"

The drill was obtained from the engine room. Working rapidly Mr.
Henderson bored a hole in the lower part of the holder. As soon as the
metal was penetrated the gas, which was under considerable pressure,
rushed from the tank with a hissing sound. At once the _Mermaid_ began
to settle rapidly.

But the professor was prepared for this. He thrust the end of the
stop-cock into the hole. It was screwed fast and the valve turned. This
stopped the flow of gas and checked the descent of the ship. Then, by
opening the tap the vapor was allowed to escape gradually, bringing the
_Flying Mermaid_ gently to the water.

As the adventurers approached they could see that the vessel was now a
mass of flames. The wind was driving the fire toward the forecastle, and
the crew had sought refuge aft. But this expedient could not last long,
for, already the tongues of fire were licking the sides of the craft and
coming nearer and nearer the seemingly doomed men. The vessel was a
large one, and heavily laden.

As those in peril caught sight of the _Mermaid_ settling down into the
water, apparently from the clouds, their fears gave place to
astonishment. So great was this that they ceased their cries of terror.
Then, as they saw that the strange craft navigated the ocean, for the
engines were started aboard the _Mermaid_, they began to call for help.




                              CHAPTER VIII

                      THE FLYING MERMAID DISABLED


"We'll save you!" shouted Mr. Henderson, who was on the deck, while Mark
was steering the craft. "Hold on a few minutes longer and we'll be
alongside!"

"They're real! They're real!" some of those aboard the burning ship
could be heard to shout. Evidently more than one of them had taken the
_Mermaid_ for a delusion of their fear-crazed brain.

"They are real persons!" they called again and again. "They are coming
to save us!"

Mr. Henderson ran his ship as near the burning craft as he dared. Then
he called to the crew to leap into the water and swim to him. He, with
Washington, Jack, Bill and Tom, stood ready to haul aboard any who were
too weak to help themselves.

In a few minutes all of those left alive on the sailing vessel--fourteen
in all--had come safely aboard the _Mermaid_. The ship was now
completely enveloped in flames.

"Are there any more left on her?" asked Mr. Henderson of one who
appeared to be a mate of the burning craft.

"Not a soul!" was the answer. "The captain and ten men perished in the
flames. The fire broke out a week ago in the lower hold. We fought it as
well as we could but it got the best of us. Then it suddenly broke
through the decks, almost like an explosion, a little while ago, and the
captain and others were lost, and so were our small boats. We managed to
get aft but were about to give up when you appeared."

"What ship is it and where are you from?"

"The _Good Hope_, laden with logwood, hides, jute and other materials
from South America," the mate answered. "We were bound for New York."

"It is more like the _Last Hope_ instead of the _Good Hope_," observed
Mr. Henderson in a quiet voice, as he saw the flames mount higher and
higher over the ship. A few seconds later the craft seemed rent by an
internal explosion. It appeared to break in two parts, and, amid a
shower of sparks and a cloud of black smoke, the vessel sank under the
water and was seen no more.

The rescued men turned to behold the final end of their ship. They
betrayed no particular emotion, and some of them even laughed, which the
professor thought, at the time, was rather strange. But there was little
opportunity for speculation. The men were in a sad plight. Few of them
had more than the clothes they stood in, though each one wore about his
waist a belt, and all of them seemed to guard the leather circlets
jealously.

The professor and his crew were soon busy supplying remedies for burns,
since several of the men were seared by the flames. Then, as it was
learned they had eaten nothing for many hours, it having been impossible
to use the galley, a meal was prepared and the survivors of the wreck
were well fed.

The hunger of the newcomers having been appeased, they showed much
curiosity over the strange craft that had so opportunely come to their
rescue. Most of the sailors were ignorant men, and the professor had
little fear of them learning anything concerning his secrets. He
