hurled from the cliffs above.  Such being the case, Caprona was
inhabitable, if not inhabited, by man; but how to reach the inhabitable
interior!  That was the question.  A closer view of the cliffs than had
been afforded me from the deck of the U-33 only confirmed my conviction
that no mortal man could scale those perpendicular heights; there was
not a finger-hold, not a toe-hold, upon them.  I turned away baffled.

Nobs and I met with no sharks upon our return journey to the submarine.
My report filled everyone with theories and speculations, and with
renewed hope and determination.  They all reasoned along the same lines
that I had reasoned--the conclusions were obvious, but not the water.
We were now thirstier than ever.

The balance of that day we spent in continuing a minute and fruitless
exploration of the monotonous coast.  There was not another break in
the frowning cliffs--not even another minute patch of pebbly beach.  As
the sun fell, so did our spirits. I had tried to make advances to the
girl again; but she would have none of me, and so I was not only
thirsty but otherwise sad and downhearted.  I was glad when the new day
broke the hideous spell of a sleepless night.

The morning's search brought us no shred of hope.  Caprona was
impregnable--that was the decision of all; yet we kept on.  It must
have been about two bells of the afternoon watch that Bradley called my
attention to the branch of a tree, with leaves upon it, floating on the
sea.  "It may have been carried down to the ocean by a river," he
suggested.

"Yes," I replied, "it may have; it may have tumbled or been thrown off
the top of one of these cliffs."

Bradley's face fell.  "I thought of that, too," he replied, "but I
wanted to believe the other."

"Right you are!" I cried.  "We must believe the other until we prove it
false.  We can't afford to give up heart now, when we need heart most.
The branch was carried down by a river, and we are going to find that
river." I smote my open palm with a clenched fist, to emphasize a
determination unsupported by hope. "There!" I cried suddenly.  "See
that, Bradley?"  And I pointed at a spot closer to shore.  "See that,
man!"  Some flowers and grasses and another leafy branch floated toward
us.  We both scanned the water and the coastline.  Bradley evidently
discovered something, or at least thought that he had.  He called down
for a bucket and a rope, and when they were passed up to him, he
lowered the former into the sea and drew it in filled with water.  Of
this he took a taste, and straightening up, looked into my eyes with an
expression of elation--as much as to say "I told you so!"

"This water is warm," he announced, "and fresh!"

I grabbed the bucket and tasted its contents.  The water was very warm,
and it was fresh, but there was a most unpleasant taste to it.

"Did you ever taste water from a stagnant pool full of tadpoles?"
Bradley asked.

"That's it," I exclaimed, "--that's just the taste exactly, though I
haven't experienced it since boyhood; but how can water from a flowing
stream, taste thus, and what the dickens makes it so warm?  It must be
at least 70 or 80 Fahrenheit, possibly higher."

"Yes," agreed Bradley, "I should say higher; but where does it come
from?"

"That is easily discovered now that we have found it," I answered. "It
can't come from the ocean; so it must come from the land. All that we
have to do is follow it, and sooner or later we shall come upon its
source."

We were already rather close in; but I ordered the U-33's prow turned
inshore and we crept slowly along, constantly dipping up the water and
tasting it to assure ourselves that we didn't get outside the
fresh-water current.  There was a very light off-shore wind and
scarcely any breakers, so that the approach to the shore was continued
without finding bottom; yet though we were already quite close, we saw
no indication of any indention in the coast from which even a tiny
brooklet might issue, and certainly no mouth of a large river such as
this must necessarily be to freshen the ocean even two hundred yards
from shore.  The tide was running out, and this, together with the
strong flow of the freshwater current, would have prevented our going
against the cliffs even had we not been under power; as it was we had
to buck the combined forces in order to hold our position at all.  We
came up to within twenty-five feet of the sheer wall, which loomed high
above us. There was no break in its forbidding face.  As we watched the
face of the waters and searched the cliff's high face, Olson suggested
that the fresh water might come from a submarine geyser.  This, he
said, would account for its heat; but even as he spoke a bush, covered
thickly with leaves and flowers, bubbled to the surface and floated off
astern.

"Flowering shrubs don't thrive in the subterranean caverns from which
geysers spring," suggested Bradley.

Olson shook his head.  "It beats me," he said.

"I've got it!" I exclaimed suddenly.  "Look there!"  And I pointed at
the base of the cliff ahead of us, which the receding tide was
gradually exposing to our view.  They all looked, and all saw what I
had seen--the top of a dark opening in the rock, through which water
was pouring out into the sea.  "It's the subterranean channel of an
inland river," I cried.  "It flows through a land covered with
vegetation--and therefore a land upon which the sun shines.  No
subterranean caverns produce any order of plant life even remotely
resembling what we have seen disgorged by this river.  Beyond those
cliffs lie fertile lands and fresh water--perhaps, game!"

"Yis, sir," said Olson, "behoind the cliffs!  Ye spoke a true word,
sir--behoind!"

Bradley laughed--a rather sorry laugh, though.  "You might as well call
our attention to the fact, sir," he said, "that science has indicated
that there is fresh water and vegetation on Mars."

"Not at all," I rejoined.  "A U-boat isn't constructed to navigate
space, but it is designed to travel below the surface of the water."

"You'd be after sailin' into that blank pocket?" asked Olson.

"I would, Olson," I replied.  "We haven't one chance for life in a
hundred thousand if we don't find food and water upon Caprona. This
water coming out of the cliff is not salt; but neither is it fit to
drink, though each of us has drunk.  It is fair to assume that inland
the river is fed by pure streams, that there are fruits and herbs and
game.  Shall we lie out here and die of thirst and starvation with a
land of plenty possibly only a few hundred yards away?  We have the
means for navigating a subterranean river.  Are we too cowardly to
utilize this means?"

"Be afther goin' to it," said Olson.

"I'm willing to see it through," agreed Bradley.

"Then under the bottom, wi' the best o' luck an' give 'em hell!" cried
a young fellow who had been in the trenches.

"To the diving-stations!"  I commanded, and in less than a minute the
deck was deserted, the conning-tower covers had slammed to and the U-33
was submerging--possibly for the last time.  I know that I had this
feeling, and I think that most of the others did.

As we went down, I sat in the tower with the searchlight projecting its
seemingly feeble rays ahead.  We submerged very slowly and without
headway more than sufficient to keep her nose in the right direction,
and as we went down, I saw outlined ahead of us the black opening in
the great cliff.  It was an opening that would have admitted a
half-dozen U-boats at one and the same time, roughly cylindrical in
contour--and dark as the pit of perdition.

As I gave the command which sent the U-33 slowly ahead, I could not but
feel a certain uncanny presentiment of evil.  Where were we going?
What lay at the end of this great sewer?  Had we bidden farewell
forever to the sunlight and life, or were there before us dangers even
greater than those which we now faced?  I tried to keep my mind from
vain imagining by calling everything which I observed to the eager ears
below.  I was the eyes of the whole company, and I did my best not to
fail them.  We had advanced a hundred yards, perhaps, when our first
danger confronted us. Just ahead was a sharp right-angle turn in the
tunnel.  I could see the river's flotsam hurtling against the rocky
wall upon the left as it was driven on by the mighty current, and I
feared for the safety of the U-33 in making so sharp a turn under such
adverse conditions; but there was nothing for it but to try. I didn't
warn my fellows of the danger--it could have but caused them useless
apprehension, for if we were to be smashed against the rocky wall, no
power on earth could avert the quick end that would come to us. I gave
the command full speed ahead and went charging toward the menace.  I
was forced to approach the dangerous left-hand wall in order to make
the turn, and I depended upon the power of the motors to carry us
through the surging waters in safety.  Well, we made it; but it was a
narrow squeak.  As we swung around, the full force of the current
caught us and drove the stern against the rocks; there was a thud which
sent a tremor through the whole craft, and then a moment of nasty
grinding as the steel hull scraped the rock wall.  I expected
momentarily the inrush of waters that would seal our doom; but
presently from below came the welcome word that all was well.

In another fifty yards there was a second turn, this time toward the
left! but it was more of a gentle curve, and we took it without
trouble.  After that it was plain sailing, though as far as I could
know, there might be most anything ahead of us, and my nerves strained
to the snapping-point every instant.  After the second turn the channel
ran comparatively straight for between one hundred and fifty and two
hundred yards.  The waters grew suddenly lighter, and my spirits rose
accordingly.  I shouted down to those below that I saw daylight ahead,
and a great shout of thanksgiving reverberated through the ship.  A
moment later we emerged into sunlit water, and immediately I raised the
periscope and looked about me upon the strangest landscape I had ever
seen.

We were in the middle of a broad and now sluggish river the banks of
which were lined by giant, arboraceous ferns, raising their mighty
fronds fifty, one hundred, two hundred feet into the quiet air.  Close
by us something rose to the surface of the river and dashed at the
periscope.  I had a vision of wide, distended jaws, and then all was
blotted out.  A shiver ran down into the tower as the thing closed upon
the periscope.  A moment later it was gone, and I could see again.
Above the trees there soared into my vision a huge thing on batlike
wings--a creature large as a large whale, but fashioned more after the
order of a lizard.  Then again something charged the periscope and
blotted out the mirror.  I will confess that I was almost gasping for
breath as I gave the commands to emerge.  Into what sort of strange
land had fate guided us?

The instant the deck was awash, I opened the conning-tower hatch and
stepped out.  In another minute the deck-hatch lifted, and those who
were not on duty below streamed up the ladder, Olson bringing Nobs
under one arm.  For several minutes no one spoke; I think they must
each have been as overcome by awe as was I. All about us was a flora
and fauna as strange and wonderful to us as might have been those upon
a distant planet had we suddenly been miraculously transported through
ether to an unknown world. Even the grass upon the nearer bank was
unearthly--lush and high it grew, and each blade bore upon its tip a
brilliant flower--violet or yellow or carmine or blue--making as
gorgeous a sward as human imagination might conceive.  But the life!
It teemed. The tall, fernlike trees were alive with monkeys, snakes,
and lizards. Huge insects hummed and buzzed hither and thither.  Mighty
forms could be seen moving upon the ground in the thick forest, while
the bosom of the river wriggled with living things, and above flapped
the wings of gigantic creatures such as we are taught have been extinct
throughout countless ages.

"Look!" cried Olson.  "Would you look at the giraffe comin' up out o'
the bottom of the say?"  We looked in the direction he pointed and saw
a long, glossy neck surmounted by a small head rising above the surface
of the river.  Presently the back of the creature was exposed, brown
and glossy as the water dripped from it. It turned its eyes upon us,
opened its lizard-like mouth, emitted a shrill hiss and came for us.
The thing must have been sixteen or eighteen feet in length and closely
resembled pictures I had seen of restored plesiosaurs of the lower
Jurassic.  It charged us as savagely as a mad bull, and one would have
thought it intended to destroy and devour the mighty U-boat, as I
verily believe it did intend.

We were moving slowly up the river as the creature bore down upon us
with distended jaws.  The long neck was far outstretched, and the four
flippers with which it swam were working with powerful strokes,
carrying it forward at a rapid pace.  When it reached the craft's side,
the jaws closed upon one of the stanchions of the deck rail and tore it
from its socket as though it had been a toothpick stuck in putty.  At
this exhibition of titanic strength I think we all simultaneously
stepped backward, and Bradley drew his revolver and fired.  The bullet
struck the thing in the neck, just above its body; but instead of
disabling it, merely increased its rage.  Its hissing rose to a shrill
scream as it raised half its body out of water onto the sloping sides
of the hull of the U-33 and endeavored to scramble upon the deck to
devour us.  A dozen shots rang out as we who were armed drew our
pistols and fired at the thing; but though struck several times, it
showed no signs of succumbing and only floundered farther aboard the
submarine.

I had noticed that the girl had come on deck and was standing not far
behind me, and when I saw the danger to which we were all exposed, I
turned and forced her toward the hatch.  We had not spoken for some
days, and we did not speak now; but she gave me a disdainful look,
which was quite as eloquent as words, and broke loose from my grasp.  I
saw I could do nothing with her unless I exerted force, and so I turned
with my back toward her that I might be in a position to shield her
from the strange reptile should it really succeed in reaching the deck;
and as I did so I saw the thing raise one flipper over the rail, dart
its head forward and with the quickness of lightning seize upon one of
the boches.  I ran forward, discharging my pistol into the creature's
body in an effort to force it to relinquish its prey; but I might as
profitably have shot at the sun.

Shrieking and screaming, the German was dragged from the deck, and the
moment the reptile was clear of the boat, it dived beneath the surface
of the water with its terrified prey. I think we were all more or less
shaken by the frightfulness of the tragedy--until Olson remarked that
the balance of power now rested where it belonged.  Following the death
of Benson we had been nine and nine--nine Germans and nine "Allies," as
we called ourselves, now there were but eight Germans.  We never
counted the girl on either side, I suppose because she was a girl,
though we knew well enough now that she was ours.

And so Olson's remark helped to clear the atmosphere for the Allies at
least, and then our attention was once more directed toward the river,
for around us there had sprung up a perfect bedlam of screams and
hisses and a seething caldron of hideous reptiles, devoid of fear and
filled only with hunger and with rage. They clambered, squirmed and
wriggled to the deck, forcing us steadily backward, though we emptied
our pistols into them. There were all sorts and conditions of horrible
things--huge, hideous, grotesque, monstrous--a veritable Mesozoic
nightmare. I saw that the girl was gotten below as quickly as possible,
and she took Nobs with her--poor Nobs had nearly barked his head off;
and I think, too, that for the first time since his littlest puppyhood
he had known fear; nor can I blame him.  After the girl I sent Bradley
and most of the Allies and then the Germans who were on deck--von
Schoenvorts being still in irons below.

The creatures were approaching perilously close before I dropped
through the hatchway and slammed down the cover.  Then I went into the
tower and ordered full speed ahead, hoping to distance the fearsome
things; but it was useless.  Not only could any of them easily
outdistance the U-33, but the further upstream we progressed the
greater the number of our besiegers, until fearful of navigating a
strange river at high speed, I gave orders to reduce and moved slowly
and majestically through the plunging, hissing mass.  I was mighty glad
that our entrance into the interior of Caprona had been inside a
submarine rather than in any other form of vessel.  I could readily
understand how it might have been that Caprona had been invaded in the
past by venturesome navigators without word of it ever reaching the
outside world, for I can assure you that only by submarine could man
pass up that great sluggish river, alive.

We proceeded up the river for some forty miles before darkness overtook
us.  I was afraid to submerge and lie on the bottom overnight for fear
that the mud might be deep enough to hold us, and as we could not hold
with the anchor, I ran in close to shore, and in a brief interim of
attack from the reptiles we made fast to a large tree.  We also dipped
up some of the river water and found it, though quite warm, a little
sweeter than before. We had food enough, and with the water we were all
quite refreshed; but we missed fresh meat.  It had been weeks, now,
since we had tasted it, and the sight of the reptiles gave me an
idea--that a steak or two from one of them might not be bad eating.  So
I went on deck with a rifle, twenty of which were aboard the U-33.  At
sight of me a huge thing charged and climbed to the deck.  I retreated
to the top of the conning-tower, and when it had raised its mighty bulk
to the level of the little deck on which I stood, I let it have a
bullet right between the eyes.

The thing stopped then and looked at me a moment as much as to say:
"Why this thing has a stinger!  I must be careful." And then it reached
out its long neck and opened its mighty jaws and grabbed for me; but I
wasn't there.  I had tumbled backward into the tower, and I mighty near
killed myself doing it.  When I glanced up, that little head on the end
of its long neck was coming straight down on top of me, and once more I
tumbled into greater safety, sprawling upon the floor of the centrale.

Olson was looking up, and seeing what was poking about in the tower,
ran for an ax; nor did he hesitate a moment when he returned with one,
but sprang up the ladder and commenced chopping away at that hideous
face.  The thing didn't have sufficient brainpan to entertain more than
a single idea at once. Though chopped and hacked, and with a bullethole
between its eyes, it still persisted madly in its attempt to get inside
the tower and devour Olson, though its body was many times the diameter
of the hatch; nor did it cease its efforts until after Olson had
succeeded in decapitating it.  Then the two men went on deck through
the main hatch, and while one kept watch, the other cut a hind quarter
off Plesiosaurus Olsoni, as Bradley dubbed the thing.  Meantime Olson
cut off the long neck, saying that it would make fine soup.  By the
time we had cleared away the blood and refuse in the tower, the cook
had juicy steaks and a steaming broth upon the electric stove, and the
aroma arising from P. Olsoni filled us all with a hitherto unfelt
admiration for him and all his kind.



Chapter 5

The steaks we had that night, and they were fine; and the following
morning we tasted the broth.  It seemed odd to be eating a creature
that should, by all the laws of paleontology, have been extinct for
several million years.  It gave one a feeling of newness that was
almost embarrassing, although it didn't seem to embarrass our
appetites.  Olson ate until I thought he would burst.

The girl ate with us that night at the little officers' mess just back
of the torpedo compartment.  The narrow table was unfolded; the four
stools were set out; and for the first time in days we sat down to eat,
and for the first time in weeks we had something to eat other than the
monotony of the short rations of an impoverished U-boat.  Nobs sat
between the girl and me and was fed with morsels of the Plesiosaurus
steak, at the risk of forever contaminating his manners.  He looked at
me sheepishly all the time, for he knew that no well-bred dog should
eat at table; but the poor fellow was so wasted from improper food that
I couldn't enjoy my own meal had he been denied an immediate share in
it; and anyway Lys wanted to feed him.  So there you are.

Lys was coldly polite to me and sweetly gracious to Bradley and Olson.
She wasn't of the gushing type, I knew; so I didn't expect much from
her and was duly grateful for the few morsels of attention she threw
upon the floor to me.  We had a pleasant meal, with only one
unfortunate occurrence--when Olson suggested that possibly the creature
we were eating was the same one that ate the German.  It was some time
before we could persuade the girl to continue her meal, but at last
Bradley prevailed upon her, pointing out that we had come upstream
nearly forty miles since the boche had been seized, and that during
that time we had seen literally thousands of these denizens of the
river, indicating that the chances were very remote that this was the
same Plesiosaur.  "And anyway," he concluded, "it was only a scheme of
Mr. Olson's to get all the steaks for himself."

We discussed the future and ventured opinions as to what lay before us;
but we could only theorize at best, for none of us knew.  If the whole
land was infested by these and similar horrid monsters, life would be
impossible upon it, and we decided that we would only search long
enough to find and take aboard fresh water and such meat and fruits as
might be safely procurable and then retrace our way beneath the cliffs
to the open sea.

And so at last we turned into our narrow bunks, hopeful, happy and at
peace with ourselves, our lives and our God, to awaken the following
morning refreshed and still optimistic.  We had an easy time getting
away--as we learned later, because the saurians do not commence to feed
until late in the morning.  From noon to midnight their curve of
activity is at its height, while from dawn to about nine o'clock it is
lowest.  As a matter of fact, we didn't see one of them all the time we
were getting under way, though I had the cannon raised to the deck and
