quick and sure in his motions; before I knew it, he had bit his ax deep
into my side.

And in another moment or two it was over. For, as soon as I felt the
pain of that gash, I flung my own blade away; and with a roar such as
would have shaken a stouter heart than his, I charged the man, took a
second fearful blow full on my chest and heeding it not at all I
snatched the ax from his hands. Then, as he turned to run, I dropped
that tool also.

And I ran him down, and felled him, and broke his head with my hands.



VI

THE FITTEST

[Footnote: This chapter was originally as long as the others, but an
unfortunate accident of Mr. Smith's, before he was thoroughly familiar
with the machine, mutilated a large portion of the tape so badly that it
was made worthless. This explains why something appears to be missing
from the account, and also why this chapter begins in the middle of a
sentence.]

slaves; but the most were slain. Neither could we bother with their
women and others left behind.

Now, by this time the empire was as one man in its worship of me. I had
been emperor but a year, and already I had made it certain that only the
men of Vlamaland, and no others, should live in the sight of Jon. So
well thought they of me, I might fair have sat upon my reputation, and
have spent my last days in feasting like the man before me.

But I was still too young and full of energy to take my ease. I found
myself more and more restless; I had naught to do; it had all been done.
At last I sent for old Maka.

"Ye put me up to this, ye old fraud," I told him, pretending to be
wrathful. "Now set me another task, or I'll have thy head!"

He knew me too well to be affrighted. He said that he had been
considering my case of late.

"Strokor, thy father was right when he told thee to have naught to do
with women. That is to say, he were right at the time. Were he alive
today"--I forgot to say that my father was killed in the battle across
the sea--"he would of a certainty say that it were high time for thee to
pick thy mate.

"Remember, Strokor; great though thou art, yet when death taketh thee
thy greatness is become a memory. Methinks ye should leave something
more substantial behind."

It took but little thought to convince me that Maka were right once
more. Fact; as soon as I thought upon it, it were a woman that I was
restless for. The mere notion instantly gave me something worth while to
look forward to.

"Jon bless thee!" I told the old man. "Ye have named both the trouble
and the remedy. I will attend to it at once."

He sat thinking for some time longer. "Has thought of any woman in
special, Strokor?" said he.

I had not. The idea was too new to me. "The best in the world shall be
mine, of course," I told him. "But as for which one--hast any notion
thyself?"

"Aye," he quoth. "'Tis my own niece I have in mind. Perchance ye
remember her; a pretty child, who was with me when thou didst save my
life up there on the mountainside."

I recalled the chit fairly well. "But she were not a vigorous woman,
Maka. Think you she is fit for me?"

"Aye, if any be," he replied earnestly. "Ave is not robust, true, but
her muscles are as wires. It is because of what lies in her head,
however, that I commend her. I have taught her all I know."

"So!" I exclaimed, much pleased. "Then she is indeed fit to be the
empress. And as I recall her, she were exceedingly good to look at."

"Say no more. Ave shall be the wife of Strokor!" And so it was arranged.

Well, and there ye have the story of Strokor, the mightiest man in the
world, and the wisest. More than this I shall not tell with my own lips;
I shall have singers recite my deeds until half the compartments in the
House of Words is filled with the records thereof. But it were well that
I should tell this much in mine own way.

My ambition is fulfilled. Let the hand of Jon descend upon our world, if
it may; I care not if presently the sun come nearer, and the water dry
up, and the days grow longer and longer, till the day and the year
become of the same length. I care not; my people, such as be left of
them, shall own what there is, and shall live as long as life is
possible.

I shall leave behind no race of weaklings. Every man shall be fit to
live, and the fittest of them all shall live the longer. And he, no
matter how many cycles hence, shall look back to Strokor, and to Ave,
his wife, and shall say:

"I am what I am, the last man on the world, because Strokor was the
fittest man of his time!"

Aye; my fame shall live as long as there be life. Tonight, as I speak
these things into the word machine, my heart is singing with the joy of
it all. Thank Jon, I were born a man, not a woman!

Tomorrow I go to fetch Ave. I shall not send for her; I cannot trust her
beauty to the hands of my crew. The more I think of her, the more I see
that mine whole life hath been devised for this one moment. I see that,
insignificant though she be, Ave is a needed link in the chain. I have
come to want her more than food; I am become a lovesick fool!

Aye! I can afford to poke fun at myself. I can afford anything in this
world; for I be its greatest man.

Its greatest man! Here is the place to stop. There is no more I can say,
the story is done; the story of Strokor, the greatest man in the whole
world!



VII

THE GOING


'Tis several years since last I faced this machine, many and many a day
since I said that my story was done, and placed the record on the shelf
of my anteroom, my heart full of satisfaction. And today I must needs
add another record, perhaps two, to the pile.

When I set out for the highlands on the morn following what I last
related I took with me but two or three men; not that I had any need for
guards, but because it looketh not well for the emperor to travel
without retainers, however few. Practically, I was alone.

I reached the locality as the sun went down. The sky was a brilliant
color; I remember it well. Darkness would come soon, though not as
quickly as farther south. Commonly, I think not upon such trifles; but I
were nearing my love, and tender things came easily to my mind.

My chariot kept to the road which lay alongside the irrigating flume, a
stone trough which runs from the snow-covered hills to the dry country
below. I had already noted this flume where it emptied into the basin in
the valley below; for it had had a new kind of a spillway affixed to it,
a broad, smooth platform with a slightly upward curve, over which the
water was shooting. I saw no sense in the arrangement, and made up my
mind to ask Maka about it; for the empire prized this trough most
highly. It ran straight and true, over expensive bridges where needed,
with scarce a bend to hold back the flow.

When I stopped my car outside the house I was surprised that none should
come out to greet me. Maka had sent word of my coming; all should have
been in readiness. But I was forced to use my whistle. There was no
stir. I became angry; I told my bullies to stay where they were, and
myself burst in the door.

The house was a sturdy stone affair of one floor, set against the side
of the mountain, a short distance above the flume. I looked about the
interior in surprise; for not a soul was in sight in any of the
compartments. There were signs that people had been there but a few
moments before. I called it strange, for I had seen no one leave the
house as I approached.

At last, as I was inspecting the eating place, I noted a small door let
into the outer wall. It was open; and by squeezing I managed to get
through. I found that it let into a long, dark passage.

I followed this, going steadily down a flight of stairs, and all of a
sudden bumped into an iron grating. At the same moment I saw that the
passageway made a turn just beyond; and by craning my neck and straining
my eyes I could see a faintly lighted chamber just a few feet away.

And before my eyes could scarce make out the figures of some people in
the middle of the place, a voice came to my ear.

"Hail, Strokor!" it said; and great was my astonishment as I recognized
the tones of Edam, the young dreamer whom Maka had brought to my house.

"Edam!" I cried. "What do ye here? Come and open these bars!"

He made no reply, save to laugh in a way I did not like. I shook the
grating savagely, so that I felt it give. "Edam!" I roared. "Open this
grating at once; and tell me, where is Ave?"

"I am here," came another voice; and I stopped in sheer surprise, to
peer closer and to see, for the first time, that it were really the
dreamer and the chit, these two and no more, who sat there in the
underground chamber. They seemed to be sitting in some sort of a box,
with glass windows.

"Ave--come here!" I spoke much more gently than to Edam; for my heart
was soft with thoughts of her. "It is thy lord, Strokor, the emperor,
who calls thee. Come!"

"I stay here," said she in the same clear voice, entirely unshaken by my
presence. "Edam hath claimed me, and I shall cleave to him. I want none
of ye, ye giant!"

For a moment I was minded to throw my weight against the barrier, such
was my rage. Then I thought better on it, and closely examined the bars.
Two were loose.

"Ave," said I, contriving to keep my voice even, although my hands were
busy with the bars as I spake. "Ave--ye do wrong to spite me thus. Know
ye not that I am the emperor, and that these bars cannot stand before
me? I warn ye, if I must call my men to help me, and to witness my
shame, it will go hard with ye! Better that ye should come willingly. Ye
are not for such as Edam."

"No?" quoth the young man, speaking up for the chit. "Ye are wrong,
Strokor. We defy thee to do thy worst; we are prepared to flee from ye
at all costs!"

I had twisted one of the bars out of my way without their seeing it. I
strove at the next as I answered, still controlling my voice: "'Twill do
ye no good to flee, Edam; ye know that. And as for Ave--she shall wish
she had never been born!"

"So I should," she replied with spirit, "if I were to become thy woman.
But know you, Strokor, that Ave, the daughter of Durok, would rather die
than take the name of one who had spurned her, as ye did me!"

So I had; it had slipped my mind. "But I want thee now, Ave," said I
softly, preparing to slip through the opening I had made. "Surely ye
would not take thine own life?"

"Nay," she answered, with a laugh in her voice. "Rather I would go with
Edam here. I would go," she finished, her voice rising in her
excitement, "away from this horrible man's world; away from it all,
Strokor, and to Jeos! Hear ye? To Jeos! And--"

But at that instant I burst through the grating. Without a sound I
charged straight for the pair of them. And without a sound they slipped
away from before my grasp. Next second I was gazing stupidly at the
rushing, swirling water of the flume.

And I saw that they had been sitting in the cabin of a tiny boat, and
that they had got away!

There was an opening into the outer air; I rushed through, and stared in
the growing twilight down the black furrow of the flume. Far in the
distance, and going like a streak, I spied the glittering glass windows
of the little craft. Once I made out the flutter of a saucy hand.

"We shall get them when they reach the valley!" I shouted to the men.
Then I reached for my tube, and sighted it on the lower end of the
flume, far, far below, almost too far away to be clear to the naked eye.

In an incredibly short time the craft reached the end. It traveled at an
extraordinary rate; perchance 'twas weighted; I marveled that its
windows could stand the force of the air. And I scarce had time to fear
that the twain should be destroyed on that upturned spillway before it
was there.

And then an awesome thing happened. As the boat struck the incline it
shot upward into the air at a steep slant. Up, up it went; my heart
jumped into my mouth; for surely they must be crushed when they came
down.

But the craft did not come down. It went on and on, up and up; its speed
scarcely slackened; 'twas like that of a shooting star. And in far less
time than it takes to tell it, the little boat was high up among the
stars, going higher every instant, and farther away from me. And
suddenly the sweat broke cold on my forehead; for dead ahead, directly
in line with their travel, lay the bluish white gleam of Jeos.

So great was my rage over the escape of the dreamer with my woman, at
first I felt no sorrow. Later, after days and days of search in and
about the basin, I came to grieve most terribly over my loss. When I
came home to the palace, I was well-nigh ill.

In vain did I make the most generous of rewards. The whole empire turned
out to search for the missing ones, but nothing came of it all. Yet I
never ceased to hope, especially after my talk with Maka.

"Aye," he said, when I questioned him, "it were barely possible that
they have left this world for all time. I have calculated the speed
which their craft might have attained, had it the right proportions,
and, in truth, it might have left the spillway at such a speed that it
entirely overcame the draw of the ground.

"But I think it were a slim chance. It is more than likely, Strokor,
that Ave shall return to thee."

Was I not the fitter man? Surely Edam's purpose could not succeed; Jon
would not have it so. The woman was mine, because I had chosen her; and
she must come back to me, and in safety, or I should tear Edam into
bits.

But as time went on and naught transpired, I became more and more
melancholy. Life became an empty thing; it had been empty enough before
I had craved the girl, but now it was empty with hopelessness.

After a while I got to thinking of some of the things Maka had told me.
The more I thought of the future, the blacker it seemed. True, there
were many other women; but there had been only one Ave. No such beauty
had ever graced this world before. And I knew I could be happy with no
other.

Now I saw that all my fame had been in vain. I had lost the only woman
that was fit for me, and when I died there would be naught left but my
name. Even that the next emperor might blot out, if he chose. It had all
been in vain!

"It shall not be!" I roared to myself, as I strode about my compartment,
gnawing at my hands in my misery. And in just such a fit of helpless
anger the great idea came to me.

No sooner conceived than put into practice. I will not go closely into
details; I will relate just the outstanding facts. What I did was to
select a very tall mountain, located almost on the equator, and
proclaimed my intention to erect a monument to Jon upon its summit. I
caused vast quanities of materials to be brought to the place; and for a
year a hundred thousand men labored to put the pieces together.

When they had finished, they had made a mammoth tower partly of wood and
partly of alloy. It was made in sections so that it might be placed,
piece upon piece, one above another high into the sky.

It was an enormous task. When it was complete, I had a tower as high as
the mountain itself erected upon its summit.

And next I caused section after section of the long, iron, pole-to-pole
rod, which had tricked Klow, to be hauled up into the tower. I was only
careful to begin the process from the top and work downward. I gave word
that the last three sections be inserted at midday at a given day.

And at that hour I was safe inside a non-magnetic room.

I know right well when the deed was done. There was a most terrific
earthquake. All about me, though I could see nothing at all, I could
hear buildings falling. The din was appalling.

At the same time the air was fairly shattered with the rattle of the
lightning. Never have I heard the like before. The rod had loosed the
wrath of the forces above our air!

And as suddenly the whole deafening storm ended. Perchance the rod was
destroyed by the lightning; I never went to see. For I know, the
electricity split the very ground apart. But I gazed out of a window in
the top of my palace, and saw that I had succeeded.

Not a soul but myself remained alive.

None but buildings made of the alloy were standing. Not only man, but
most of his works had perished in that awful blast. I, alone, remained!

I, Strokor, am the survivor! I, the greatest man; it were but fit that I
should be the last! No man shall come after me, to honor me or not as he
chooses. I, and no other, shall be, the last man!

And when Ave returns--as she must, though it be ages hence--when she
comes, she shall find me waiting. I, Strokor, the mighty and wise, shall
be here when she returns. I shall wait for her forever; here I shall
always stay. The stars may move from their places, but I shall not go!
For it is my intention to make use of another secret Maka taught me. In
brief--[Footnote: The record ends here. It may be that Strokor left the
machine for some trivial reason, and forgot to finish his story. At all
events, it is necessary to refer to the further discoveries of the
expedition in order to learn the outcome of it all.]



PART III

THE SURVIVOR


Provided with a sledge-hammer, a crowbar, and a hydraulic jack, and even
with drills and explosives as a last resort, Jackson, Kinney, and Van
Emmon returned the same day to the walled-in room in the top of that
mystifying mansion. The materials they carried would have made
considerable of a load had not Smith removed enough of the weights from
their suits to offset their burden. They reached the unopened door
without special exertion, and with no mishap.

They looked in vain for a crack big enough to hold the point of the
crowbar; neither could the most vigorous jabbing loosen any of the
material. They dropped that tool and tried the sledge. It got no
results; even in the hands of the husky geologist, the most vigorous
blows failed to budge the door. They did not even dent it.

So they propped the powerful hydraulic jack, a tool sturdy enough to
lift a house, at an angle against the door. Then, using the crowbar as a
lever, the architect steadily turned up the screw, the mechanism
multiplying his very ordinary strength a hundredfold. In a moment it
could be seen that he was getting results; the door began to stir. Van
Emmon struck one edge with the sledge-hammer, and it gave slightly.

In another minute the whole door, weighing over a ton, had been pushed
almost out of its opening. The jack overbalanced, toppled over; they did
not readjust it, but threw their combined weight upon the barrier.

There was no need to try again. With a shiver the huge slab of metal
slid, upright, into the space beyond, stood straight on end for a second
or so, then toppled to the floor.

AND THIS TIME THEY HEARD THE CRASH.

For, as the door fell, a great gust of wind rushed out with a hissing
shriek, almost overbalancing the men from the earth. They stood still
for a while, breathing hard from their exertion, trying in vain to peer
into the blackness before them. Under no circumstances would either of
them have admitted that he was gathering courage.

In a minute the architect, his eyes sparkling with his enthusiasm for
the antique, picked up the electric torch and turned it into the
compartment. As he did so the other two stepped to his side, so that the
three of them faced the unknown together. It was just as well. Outlined
in that circle of light, and not six feet in front of them, stood a
great chair upon a wide platform; and seated in it, erect and alert, his
wide open eyes staring straight into those of the three, was the
frightful mountainous form of Strokor, the giant, himself.

For an indeterminable length of time the men from the earth stood there,
speechless, unbreathing, staring at that awful monster as though at a
nightmare. He did not move; he was entirely at ease, and yet plainly on
guard, glaring at them with an air of conscious superiority which held
them powerless. Instinctively they knew that the all-dominating voice in
the records had belonged to this Hercules. But their instinct could not
tell them whether the man still lived.

It was the doctor's brain that worked first. Automatically, from a
lifelong habit of diagnosis, he inspected that dreadful figure quite as
though it were that of a patient. Bit by bit his subconscious mind
pieced together the evidence; the man in the chair showed no signs of
life. And after a while the doctor's conscious mind also knew.

"He is dead," he said positively, in his natural voice; and such was the
vast relief of the other two that they were in no way startled by the
sound. Instantly all three drew long breaths; the tension was relaxed;
and Van Emmon's curiosity found a harsh and unsteady voice.

"How under heaven has he been preserved all this time? Especially," he
added, remembering, "considering the air that we found in the room?"

The doctor answered after a moment, his reply taking the form of
advancing a step or two and holding out a hand. It touched glass.

For the first time since the discovery, the builder shifted the light.
He had held it as still as death for a full minute. Now he flashed it
all about the place, and they saw that the huge figure was entirely
encased in glass. The cabinet measured about six feet on each of its
sides, and about five feet in height; but such were the squat
proportions of the occupant that he filled the whole space.

A slight examination showed that the case was not fixed to the platform,
but had a separate bottom, upon which the stumplike chair was set. Also,
they found that, thanks to the reduced pull of the planet, it was not
hard for the three of them to lift the cabinet bodily, despite its
weight of almost a thousand pounds. They left the tools lie there,
discarded as much weight as they could, and proceeded to carry that
ages-old superman out into the light.

Here they could see that the great man was all but a negro in color. It
was equally clear, however, from an examination of his mammoth cranium
and extraordinary expression, that he was as highly developed along most
mental lines as the greatest men on earth. It was the back of his head,
however, so flat that it was only a continuation of his neck, or,
rather, shoulders, that told where the flaw lay. That, together with the
hardness of his eye, the cruelty of his mouth, and the absolute lack of
softness anywhere in the ironlike face or frame--all this condemned the
monster for what he was; inhuman.

It was not easy to get him down the two flights of stairs. More than
once they had to prop the case on a step while they rested; and at one
time, just before they reached that curious heap of rubbish at the foot
of the upper stairs, Jackson's strength gave way and it looked as though
the whole thing would get away from them. Van Emmon saved it at the cost
of a bruised shoulder.

Once at the bottom of the lower flight, the rest was easy. Within a very
few minutes the astonished face of the engineer was peering into the
vestibule; he could hardly wait until the air-tight door was locked
before opening the inner valves. He stared at the mammoth figure in the
case long and hard, and from then on showed a great deal of respect for
his three friends.

Of course, at that time the members of the expedition did not understand
the conditions of Mercury as they are now known. They had to depend upon
the general impression they got from their first-hand investigations;
and it is remarkable that the doctor should have guessed so close to the
truth.

"He must have made up his mind to outlast everybody else," was the way
he put it as he kicked off his suit. He stepped up to the cabinet and
felt of the glass. "I wish it were possible, without breaking the case,
to see how he was embalmed."

His fingers still rested on the glass. Suddenly his eyes narrowed; he
ran his fingers over the entire surface of the pane, and then whirled to
stare at a thermometer.

"That's mighty curious!" he ejaculated. "This thing was bitter cold when
we brought it in! Now it's already as warm as this car!"

Smith's eyes lit up. "It may be," he offered, "that the case doesn't
contain a vacuum, but some gas which has an electrical affinity for our
atmosphere."

"Or," exclaimed the geologist suddenly, "the glass itself may be totally
different from ours. It may be made of--"

"GOD!" shouted the doctor, jerking his hand from the cabinet and leaping
straight backward. At the same instant, with a grinding crash, all three
sides of the case collapsed and fell in splinters to the floor.

"Look out!" shrieked Jackson. He was staring straight into the now
unhooded eyes of the giant. He backed away, stumbled against a stool,
and fell to the floor in a dead faint. Smith fumbled impotently with a
hammer. The doctor was shaking like a leaf.

But Van Emmon stood still in his tracks, his eyes fixed on the Goliath;
his fingernails gashed the palms of his hands but he would not budge.
And as he stared he saw, from first to last, the whole ghastly change
that came, after billions of years of waiting, to the sole survivor of
Mercury.

A glaze swept over the huge figure. Next instant every line in that
adamant frame lost its strength; the hardness left the eyes and mouth.
The head seemed to sink lower into the massive shoulders, and the
irresistible hands relaxed. In another second the thing that had once
been as iron had become as rubber.

But only for an instant. Second by second that huge mountain of muscle
slipped and jellied and actually melted before the eyes of the humans.
At the same time a curious acrid odor arose; Smith fell to coughing. The
doctor turned on more oxygen.

In less than half a minute the man who had once conquered a planet was
reduced to a steaming mound of brownish paste. As it sank to the floor
of the case, it touched a layer of coarse yellow powder sprinkled there;
and it was this that caused the vapor. In a moment the room was filled
with the haze of it; luckily, the doctor's apparatus worked well.

And thus it came about that, within five minutes from being exposed to
the air of the sky-car, that whole immense bulk, chair and all, had
vanished. The powder had turned it to vapor, and the purifying chemicals
had sucked it up. Nothing was left save a heap of smoking, grayish ashes
in the center of the broken glass.

Van Emmon's fingers relaxed their grip. He stirred to action, and turned
briskly to Smith.

"Here! Help me with this thing!"

Between them they got the remains of the cabinet, with its gruesome
load, into the vestibule. As for the doctor, he was bending over
Jackson's still unconscious form. When he saw what the others were
doing, he gave a great sigh of relief.

"Good!" He helped them close the door. "Let's get away from this damned
place!"

The outer door was opened. At the same time Smith started the machinery;
and as the sky-car shot away from the ground he tilted it slightly, so
that the contents of the vestibule was slid into space. Down it fell
like so much lead.

The doctor glanced through a nearby window, and his face brightened as
he made out the distant gleam of another planet. He watched the receding
surface of Mercury with positive delight.

"Nice place to get away from," he commented. "And now, my friends, for
Venus, and then--home!"

But the other's eyes were fixed upon a tiny sparkle in the dust outside
the palace, where the vestibule had dropped its load. It was the sun
shining upon some broken bits of glass; the glass which, for untold
ages, had enclosed the throne of the Death-lord.



Part IV

THE QUEEN OF LIFE

I

NEXT STOP, VENUS!


When he first got the idea of the sky-car, the doctor never stopped to
consider whether he was the right man for such an excursion. Personally,
he hated travel. He was merely a general practitioner, with a great
