well illustrated.

A full account will be given in the next chapter of the effects of heat
on the leaves, and I need here only state that leaves immersed for a
short time in water at a temperature of 120oFahr. (48o.8 Cent.), which,
as we have seen, does not immediately induce aggregation, were then
placed in a few drops of a strong solution of one part of carbonate of
ammonia to 109 of water, and became finely aggregated. On the other
hand, leaves, after an immersion in water at 150o (65o.5 Cent.), on
being placed in the same strong solution, did not undergo aggregation,
the cells becoming filled with brownish, pulpy, or muddy matter. With
leaves subjected to temperatures between these two extremes of 120o and
150o Fahr. (48o.8 and 65o.5 Cent.), there were gradations in the
completeness of the process; the former temperature not preventing
aggregation from the subsequent action of carbonate of ammonia, the
latter quite stopping it. Thus, leaves immersed in water, heated to
130o (54o.4 Cent.), and then in the solution, formed perfectly defined
spheres, but these were decidedly smaller than in ordinary cases. With
other leaves heated to 140o (60o Cent.), the spheres were extremely
small, yet well defined, but many of the cells contained, in addition,
some brownish pulpy matter. In two cases of leaves heated to 145o
(62o.7 Cent.), a few tentacles could be found with some of their cells
containing a few minute spheres; whilst the other cells and other whole
tentacles included only the brownish, disintegrated or pulpy matter.

The fluid within the cells of the tentacles must be in an oxygenated
condition, in order that the force or [page 59] influence which induces
aggregation should be transmitted at the proper rate from cell to cell.
A plant, with its roots in water, was left for 45 m. in a vessel
containing 122 oz. of carbonic acid. A leaf from this plant, and, for
comparison, one from a fresh plant, were both immersed for 1 hr. in a
rather strong solution of carbonate of ammonia. They were then
compared, and certainly there was much less aggregation in the leaf
which had been subjected to the carbonic acid than in the other.
Another plant was exposed in the same vessel for 2 hrs. to carbonic
acid, and one of its leaves was then placed in a solution of one part
of the carbonate to 437 of water; the glands were instantly blackened,
showing that they had absorbed, and that their contents were
aggregated; but in the cells close beneath the glands there was no
aggregation even after an interval of 3 hrs. After 4 hrs. 15 m. a few
minute spheres of protoplasm were formed in these cells, but even after
5 hrs. 30 m. the aggregation did not extend down the pedicels for a
length equal to that of the glands. After numberless trials with fresh
leaves immersed in a solution of this strength, I have never seen the
aggregating action transmitted at nearly so slow a rate. Another plant
was left for 2 hrs. in carbonic acid, but was then exposed for 20 m. to
the open air, during which time the leaves, being of a red colour,
would have absorbed some oxygen. One of them, as well as a fresh leaf
for comparison, were now immersed in the same solution as before. The
former were looked at repeatedly, and after an interval of 65 m. a few
spheres of protoplasm were first observed in the cells close beneath
the glands, but only in two or three of the longer tentacles. After 3
hrs. the aggregation had travelled down the pedicels of a few of the
tentacles [page 60] for a length equal to that of the glands. On the
other hand, in the fresh leaf similarly treated, aggregation was plain
in many of the tentacles after 15 m.; after 65 m. it had extended down
the pedicels for four, five, or more times the lengths of the glands;
and after 3 hrs. the cells of all the tentacles were affected for
one-third or one-half of their entire lengths. Hence there can be no
doubt that the exposure of leaves to carbonic acid either stops for a
time the process of aggregation, or checks the transmission of the
proper influence when the glands are subsequently excited by carbonate
of ammonia; and this substance acts more promptly and energetically
than any other. It is known that the protoplasm of plants exhibits its
spontaneous movements only as long as it is in an oxygenated condition;
and so it is with the white corpuscles of the blood, only as long as
they receive oxygen from the red corpuscles;* but the cases above given
are somewhat different, as they relate to the delay in the generation
or aggregation of the masses of protoplasm by the exclusion of oxygen.

Summary and Concluding Remarks.--The process of aggregation is
independent of the inflection of the tentacles and of increased
secretion from the glands. It commences within the glands, whether
these have been directly excited, or indirectly by a stimulus received
from other glands. In both cases the process is transmitted from cell
to cell down the whole length of the tentacles, being arrested for a
short time at each transverse partition. With pale-coloured leaves the
first change which is perceptible, but only

* With respect to plants, Sachs, 'Trait de Bot.' 3rd edit., 1874, p.
864. On blood corpuscles, see 'Quarterly Journal of Microscopical
Science,' April 1874, p. 185.' [page 61]

under a high power, is the appearance of the finest granules in the
fluid within the cells, making it slightly cloudy. These granules soon
aggregate into small globular masses. I have seen a cloud of this kind
appear in 10 s. after a drop of a solution of carbonate of ammonia had
been given to a gland. With dark red leaves the first visible change
often is the conversion of the outer layer of the fluid within the
cells into bag-like masses. The aggregated masses, however they may
have been developed, incessantly change their forms and positions. They
are not filled with fluid, but are solid to their centres. Ultimately
the colourless granules in the protoplasm which flows round the walls
coalesce with the central spheres or masses; but there is still a
current of limpid fluid flowing within the cells. As soon as the
tentacles fully re-expand, the aggregated masses are redissolved, and
the cells become filled with homogeneous purple fluid, as they were at
first. The process of redissolution commences at the bases of the
tentacles, thence proceeding upwards to the glands; and, therefore, in
a reversed direction to that of aggregation.

Aggregation is excited by the most diversified causes,--by the glands
being several times touched,--by the pressure of particles of any kind,
and as these are supported by the dense secretion, they can hardly
press on the glands with the weight of a millionth of a grain,*--by the
tentacles being cut off close beneath

* According to Hofmeister (as quoted by Sachs, 'Trait de Bot.' 1874, p.
958), very slight pressure on the cell-membrane arrests immediately the
movements of the protoplasm, and even determines its separation from
the walls. But the process of aggregation is a different phenomenon, as
it relates to the contents of the cells, and only secondarily to the
layer of protoplasm which flows along the walls; though no doubt the
effects of pressure or of a touch on the outside must be transmitted
through this layer.  [page 62]

the glands,--by the glands absorbing various fluids or matter dissolved
out of certain bodies,--by exosmose,--and by a certain degree of heat.
On the other hand, a temperature of about 150o Fahr. (65o.5 Cent.) does
not excite aggregation; nor does the sudden crushing of a gland. If a
cell is ruptured, neither the exuded matter nor that which still
remains within the cell undergoes aggregation when carbonate of ammonia
is added. A very strong solution of this salt and rather large bits of
raw meat prevent the aggregated masses being well developed. From these
facts we may conclude that the protoplasmic fluid within a cell does
not become aggregated unless it be in a living state, and only
imperfectly if the cell has been injured. We have also seen that the
fluid must be in an oxygenated state, in order that the process of
aggregation should travel from cell to cell at the proper rate.

Various nitrogenous organic fluids and salts of ammonia induce
aggregation, but in different degrees and at very different rates.
Carbonate of ammonia is the most powerful of all known substances; the
absorption of 1/134400 of a grain (.000482 mg.) by a gland suffices to
cause all the cells of the same tentacle to become aggregated. The
first effect of the carbonate and of certain other salts of ammonia, as
well as of some other fluids, is the darkening or blackening of the
glands. This follows even from long immersion in cold distilled water.
It apparently depends in chief part on the strong aggregation of their
cell-contents, which thus become opaque, and do not reflect light. Some
other fluids render the glands of a brighter red; whilst certain acids,
though much diluted, the poison of the cobra-snake, &c., make the
glands perfectly white and opaque; and this seems to depend on the
coagulation of their contents without [page 63] any aggregation.
Nevertheless, before being thus affected, they are able, at least in
some cases, to excite aggregation in their own tentacles.

That the central glands, if irritated, send centrifugally some
influence to the exterior glands, causing them to send back a
centripetal influence inducing aggregation, is perhaps the most
interesting fact given in this chapter. But the whole process of
aggregation is in itself a striking phenomenon. Whenever the peripheral
extremity of a nerve is touched or pressed, and a sensation is felt, it
is believed that an invisible molecular change is sent from one end of
the nerve to the other; but when a gland of Drosera is repeatedly
touched or gently pressed, we can actually see a molecular change
proceeding from the gland down the tentacle; though this change is
probably of a very different nature from that in a nerve.  Finally, as
so many and such widely different causes excite aggregation, it would
appear that the living matter within the gland-cells is in so unstable
a condition that almost any disturbance suffices to change its
molecular nature, as in the case of certain chemical compounds. And
this change in the glands, whether excited directly, or indirectly by a
stimulus received from other glands, is transmitted from cell to cell,
causing granules of protoplasm either to be actually generated in the
previously limpid fluid or to coalesce and thus to become visible.

Supplementary Observations on the Process of Aggregation in the Roots
of Plants.

It will hereafter be seen that a weak solution of the carbonate of
ammonia induces aggregation in the cells of the roots of Drosera; and
this led me to make a few trials on the roots of other plants. I dug up
in the latter part of October the first weed which I met with, viz.
Euphorbia peplus, being care- [page 64] ful not to injure the roots;
these were washed and placed in a little solution of one part of
carbonate of ammonia to 146 of water. In less than one minute I saw a
cloud travelling from cell to cell up the roots, with wonderful
rapidity. After from 8 m. to 9 m. the fine granules, which caused this
cloudy appearance, became aggregated towards the extremities of the
roots into quadrangular masses of brown matter; and some of these soon
changed their forms and became spherical. Some of the cells, however,
remained unaffected. I repeated the experiment with another plant of
the same species, but before I could get the specimen into focus under
the microscope, clouds of granules and quadrangular masses of reddish
and brown matter were formed, and had run far up all the roots. A fresh
root was now left for 18 hrs. in a drachm of a solution of one part of
the carbonate to 437 of water, so that it received 1/8 of a grain, or
2.024 mg. When examined, the cells of all the roots throughout their
whole length contained aggregated masses of reddish and brown matter.
Before making these experiments, several roots were closely examined,
and not a trace of the cloudy appearance or of the granular masses
could be seen in any of them. Roots were also immersed for 35 m.  in a
solution of one part of carbonate of potash to 218 of water; but this
salt produced no effect.

I may here add that thin slices of the stem of the Euphorbia were
placed in the same solution, and the cells which were green instantly
became cloudy, whilst others which were before colourless were clouded
with brown, owing to the formation of numerous granules of this tint. I
have also seen with various kinds of leaves, left for some time in a
solution of carbonate of ammonia, that the grains of chlorophyll ran
together and partially coalesced; and this seems to be a form of
aggregation.

Plants of duck-weed (Lemna) were left for between 30 m. and 45 m. in a
solution of one part of this same salt to 146 of water, and three of
their roots were then examined. In two of them, all the cells which had
previously contained only limpid fluid now included little green
spheres. After from 1 1/2 hr. to 2 hrs. similar spheres appeared in the
cells on the borders of the leaves; but whether the ammonia had
travelled up the roots or had been directly absorbed by the leaves, I
cannot say. As one species, Lemna arrhiza, produces no roots, the
latter alternative is perhaps the most probable. After about 2 1/2 hrs.
some of the little green spheres in the roots were broken up into small
granules which exhibited Brownian movements. Some duck-weed was also
left for 1 hr. 30 m. in a solution of one part of [page 65] carbonate
of potash to 218 of water, and no decided change could be perceived in
the cells of the roots; but when these same roots were placed for 25 m.
in a solution of carbonate of ammonia of the same strength, little
green spheres were formed.

A green marine alga was left for some time in this same solution, but
was very doubtfully affected. On the other hand, a red marine alga,
with finely pinnated fronds, was strongly affected. The contents of the
cells aggregated themselves into broken rings, still of a red colour,
which very slowly and slightly changed their shapes, and the central
spaces within these rings became cloudy with red granular matter. The
facts here given (whether they are new, I know not) indicate that
interesting results would perhaps be gained by observing the action of
various saline solutions and other fluids on the roots of plants.
[page 66]




                          CHAPTER IV.

               THE EFFECTS OF HEAT ON THE LEAVES.

Nature of the experiments--Effects of boiling water--Warm water causes
rapid inflection-- Water at a higher temperature does not cause
immediate inflection, but does not kill the leaves, as shown by their
subsequent re-expansion and by the aggregation of the protoplasm-- A
still higher temperature kills the leaves and coagulates the albuminous
contents of the glands.

IN my observations on Drosera rotundifolia, the leaves seemed to be
more quickly inflected over animal substances, and to remain inflected
for a longer period during very warm than during cold weather. I
wished, therefore, to ascertain whether heat alone would induce
inflection, and what temperature was the most efficient. Another
interesting point presented itself, namely, at what degree life was
extinguished; for Drosera offers unusual facilities in this respect,
not in the loss of the power of inflection, but in that of subsequent
re-expansion, and more especially in the failure of the protoplasm to
become aggregated, when the leaves after being heated are immersed in a
solution of carbonate of ammonia.*

* When my experiments on the effects of heat were made, I was not aware
that the subject had been carefully investigated by several observers.
For instance, Sachs is convinced ('Trait de Botanique,' 1874, pp. 772,
854) that the most different kinds of plants all perish if kept for 10
m. in water at 45o to 46o Cent., or 113o to 115o Fahr.; and he
concludes that the protoplasm within their cells always coagulates, if
in a damp condition, at a temperature of between 50oand 60o Cent., or
122o to 140o Fahr. Max Schultze and Khne (as quoted by Dr. Bastian in
'Contemp. Review,' 1874, p. 528) "found that the protoplasm of
plant-cells, with which they experimented, was always killed and [[page
67]] altered by a very brief exposure to a temperature of 118 1/2o
Fahr. as a maximum." As my results are deduced from special phenomena,
namely, the subsequent aggregation of the protoplasm and the
re-expansion of the tentacles, they seem to me worth giving. We shall
find that Drosera resists heat somewhat better than most other plants.
That there should be considerable differences in this respect is not
surprising, considering that some low vegetable organisms grow in hot
springs--cases of which have been collected by Prof. Wyman ('American
Journal of Science,' vol. xliv. 1867). Thus, Dr. Hooker found Confervae
in water at 168o Fahr.; Humboldt, at 185o Fahr.; and Descloizeaux, at
208o Fahr.) [page 67]

[My experiments were tried in the following manner. Leaves were cut
off, and this does not in the least interfere with their powers; for
instance, three cut off leaves, with bits of meat placed on them, were
kept in a damp atmosphere, and after 23 hrs. closely embraced the meat
both with their tentacles and blades; and the protoplasm within their
cells was well aggregated. Three ounces of doubly distilled water was
heated in a porcelain vessel, with a delicate thermometer having a long
bulb obliquely suspended in it. The water was gradually raised to the
required temperature by a spirit-lamp moved about under the vessel; and
in all cases the leaves were continually waved for some minutes close
to the bulb. They were then placed in cold water, or in a solution of
carbonate of ammonia. In other cases they were left in the water, which
had been raised to a certain temperature, until it cooled. Again in
other cases the leaves were suddenly plunged into water of a certain
temperature, and kept there for a specified time. Considering that the
tentacles are extremely delicate, and that their coats are very thin,
it seems scarcely possible that the fluid contents of their cells
should not have been heated to within a degree or two of the
temperature of the surrounding water. Any further precautions would, I
think, have been superfluous, as the leaves from age or constitutional
causes differ slightly in their sensitiveness to heat.

It will be convenient first briefly to describe the effects of
immersion for thirty seconds in boiling water. The leaves are rendered
flaccid, with their tentacles bowed backwards, which, as we shall see
in a future chapter, is probably due to their outer surfaces retaining
their elasticity for a longer period than their inner surfaces retain
the power of contraction. The purple fluid within the cells of the
pedicels is rendered finely granular, but there is no true aggregation;
nor does this follow [page 68] when the leaves are subsequently placed
in a solution of carbonate of ammonia. But the most remarkable change
is that the glands become opaque and uniformly white; and this may be
attributed to the coagulation of their albuminous contents.

My first and preliminary experiment consisted in putting seven leaves
in the same vessel of water, and warming it slowly up to the
temperature of 110o Fahr. (43o.3 Cent.); a leaf being taken out as soon
as the temperature rose to 80o (26o.6 Cent.), another at 85o, another
at 90o, and so on. Each leaf, when taken out, was placed in water at
the temperature of my room, and the tentacles of all soon became
slightly, though irregularly, inflected. They were now removed from the
cold water and kept in damp air, with bits of meat placed on their
discs.  The leaf which had been exposed to the temperature of 110o
became in 15 m. greatly inflected; and in 2 hrs. every single tentacle
closely embraced the meat. So it was, but after rather longer
intervals, with the six other leaves. It appears, therefore, that the
warm bath had increased their sensitiveness when excited by meat.

I next observed the degree of inflection which leaves underwent within
stated periods, whilst still immersed in warm water, kept as nearly as
possible at the same temperature; but I will here and elsewhere give
only a few of the many trials made. A leaf was left for 10 m. in water
at 100o (37o.7 Cent.), but no inflection occurred. A second leaf,
however, treated in the same manner, had a few of its exterior
tentacles very slightly inflected in 6 m., and several irregularly but
not closely inflected in 10 m. A third leaf, kept in water at 105o to
106o (40o.5 to 41o.1 Cent.), was very moderately inflected in 6 m. A
fourth leaf, in water at 110o (43o.3 Cent.), was somewhat inflected in
4 m., and considerably so in from 6 to 7 m.

Three leaves were placed in water which was heated rather quickly, and
by the time the temperature rose to 115o-116o (46o.1 to 46o.06 Cent.),
all three were inflected. I then removed the lamp, and in a few minutes
every single tentacle was closely inflected. The protoplasm within the
cells was not killed, for it was seen to be in distinct movement; and
the leaves, having been left in cold water for 20 hrs., re-expanded.
Another leaf was immersed in water at 100o (37.7o Cent.), which was
raised to 120o (48o.8 Cent.); and all the tentacles, except the extreme
marginal ones, soon became closely inflected. The leaf was now placed
in cold water, and in 7 hrs. 30 m. it had partly, and in 10 hrs. fully,
re-expanded. On the following morning it was immersed in a weak
solution of carbonate of [page 69] ammonia, and the glands quickly
became black, with strongly marked aggregation in the tentacles,
showing that the protoplasm was alive, and that the glands had not lost
their power of absorption. Another leaf was placed in water at 110o
(43o.3 Cent.) which was raised to 120o (48o.8 Cent.); and every
tentacle, excepting one, was quickly and closely inflected. This leaf
was now immersed in a few drops of a strong solution of carbonate of
ammonia (one part to 109 of water); in 10 m. all the glands became
intensely black, and in 2 hrs. the protoplasm in the cells of the
pedicels was well aggregated. Another leaf was suddenly plunged, and as
usual waved about, in water at 120o, and the tentacles became inflected
in from 2 m. to 3 m., but only so as to stand at right angles to the
disc. The leaf was now placed in the same solution (viz. one part of
carbonate of ammonia to 109 of water, or 4 grs. to 1 oz., which I will
for the future designate as the strong solution), and when I looked at
it again after the interval of an hour, the glands were blackened, and
there was well-marked aggregation. After an additional interval of 4
hrs. the tentacles had become much more inflected. It deserves notice
that a solution as strong as this never causes inflection in ordinary
cases. Lastly a leaf was suddenly placed in water at 125o (51o.6
Cent.), and was left in it until the water cooled; the tentacles were
rendered of a bright red and soon became inflected. The contents of the
cells underwent some degree of aggregation, which in the course of
three hours increased; but the masses of protoplasm did not become
spherical, as almost always occurs with leaves immersed in a solution
of carbonate of ammonia.]

We learn from these cases that a temperature of from 120o to 125o
(48o.8 to 51o.6 Cent.) excites the tentacles into quick movement, but
does not kill the leaves, as shown either by their subsequent
re-expansion or by the aggregation of the protoplasm. We shall now see
that a temperature of 130o (54o.4 Cent.) is too high to cause immediate
inflection, yet does not kill the leaves.

[Experiment 1.--A leaf was plunged, and as in all cases waved about for
a few minutes, in water at 130o (54o.4 Cent.), but there was no trace
of inflection; it was then placed in cold water, and after an interval
of 15 m. very slow movement was [page 70] distinctly seen in a small
mass of protoplasm in one of the cells of a tentacle.* After a few
hours all the tentacles and the blade became inflected.

Experiment 2.--Another leaf was plunged into water at 130o to 131o, and
as before there was no inflection. After being kept in cold water for
an hour, it was placed in the strong solution of ammonia, and in the
course of 55 m. the tentacles were considerably inflected. The glands,
which before had been rendered of a brighter red, were now blackened.
The protoplasm in the cells of the tentacles was distinctly aggregated;
but the spheres were much smaller than those generated in unheated
leaves when subjected to carbonate of ammonia. After an additional 2
hrs. all the tentacles, excepting six or seven, were closely
inflected.

Experiment 3.--A similar experiment to the last, with exactly the same
results.

Experiment 4.--A fine leaf was placed in water at 100o (37o.7 Cent.),
which was then raised to 145o (62o.7 Cent.). Soon after immersion,
there was, as might have been expected, strong inflection. The leaf was
now removed and left in cold water; but from having been exposed to so
high a temperature, it never re-expanded.

Experiment 5.--Leaf immersed at 130o (54o.4 Cent.), and the water
raised to 145o (62o.7 Cent.), there was no immediate inflection; it was
then placed in cold water, and after 1 hr. 20 m. some of the tentacles
on one side became inflected. This leaf was now placed in the strong
solution, and in 40 m. all the submarginal tentacles were well
inflected, and the glands blackened. After an additional interval of 2
hrs. 45 m. all the tentacles, except eight or ten, were closely
inflected, with their cells exhibiting a slight degree of aggregation;
but the spheres of protoplasm were very small, and the cells of the
exterior tentacles contained some pulpy or disintegrated brownish
matter.

Experiments 6 and 7.--Two leaves were plunged in water at 135o (57o.2
Cent.) which was raised to 145o (62o.7 Cent.); neither became
inflected. One of these, however, after having been left for 31 m. in
cold water, exhibited some slight inflection, which increased after an
additional interval of 1 hr. 45 m., until

* Sachs states ('Trait de Botanique,' 1874, p. 855) that the movements
of the protoplasm in the hairs of a Cucurbita ceased after they were
exposed for 1 m. in water to a temperature of 47o to 48o Cent., or 117o
to 119o Fahr.  [page 71]

all the tentacles, except sixteen or seventeen, were more or less
inflected; but the leaf was so much injured that it never re-expanded.
The other leaf, after having been left for half an hour in cold water,
was put into the strong solution, but no inflection ensued; the glands,
however, were blackened, and in some cells there was a little
aggregation, the spheres of protoplasm being extremely small; in other
cells, especially in the exterior tentacles, there was much
greenish-brown pulpy matter.

Experiment 8.--A leaf was plunged and waved about for a few minutes in
water at 140o (60oCent.), and was then left for half an hour in cold
water, but there was no inflection. It was now placed in the strong
solution, and after 2 hrs. 30 m. the inner submarginal tentacles were
well inflected, with their glands blackened, and some imperfect
aggregation in the cells of the pedicels. Three or four of the glands
were spotted with the white porcelain-like structure, like that
produced by boiling water. I have seen this result in no other instance
after an immersion of only a few minutes in water at so low a
temperature as 140o, and in only one leaf out of four, after a similar
immersion at a temperature of 145o Fahr. On the other hand, with two
leaves, one placed in water at 145o (62o.7 Cent.), and the other in
water at 140o (60oCent.), both being left therein until the water
cooled, the glands of both became white and porcelain-like. So that the
duration of the immersion is an important element in the result.

Experiment 9.--A leaf was placed in water at 140o (60o Cent.), which
was raised to 150o(65o.5 Cent.); there was no inflection; on the
contrary, the outer tentacles were somewhat bowed backwards. The glands
became like porcelain, but some of them were a little mottled with
purple. The bases of the glands were often more affected than their
summits. This leaf having been left in the strong solution did not
undergo any inflection or aggregation.

Experiment 10.--A leaf was plunged in water at 150o to 150 1/2o (65o.5
Cent.); it became somewhat flaccid, with the outer tentacles slightly
reflexed, and the inner ones a little bent inwards, but only towards
their tips; and this latter fact shows that the movement was not one of
true inflection, as the basal part alone normally bends. The tentacles
were as usual rendered of a very bright red, with the glands almost
white like porcelain, yet tinged with pink. The leaf having been placed
in the strong solution, the cell-contents of the tentacles became of a
muddy-brown, with no trace of aggregation.  [page 72]

Experiment 11.--A leaf was immersed in water at 145o (62o.7 Cent.),
which was raised to 156o (68o.8 Cent.). The tentacles became bright red
and somewhat reflexed, with almost all the glands like porcelain; those
on the disc being still pinkish, those near the margin quite white. The
leaf being placed as usual first in cold water and then in the strong
solution, the cells in the tentacles became of a muddy greenish brown,
with the protoplasm not aggregated. Nevertheless, four of the glands
escaped being rendered like porcelain, and the pedicels of these glands
were spirally curled, like a French horn, towards their upper ends; but
this can by no means be considered as a case of true inflection. The
protoplasm within the cells of the twisted portions was aggregated into
distinct though excessively minute purple spheres. This case shows
clearly that the protoplasm, after having been exposed to a high
temperature for a few minutes, is capable of aggregation when
afterwards subjected to the action of carbonate of ammonia, unless the
heat has been sufficient to cause coagulation.]

Concluding Remarks.--As the hair-like tentacles are extremely thin and
have delicate walls, and as the leaves were waved about for some
minutes close to the bulb of the thermometer, it seems scarcely
possible that they should not have been raised very nearly to the
temperature which the instrument indicated. From the eleven last
observations we see that a temperature of 130o (54o.4 Cent.) never
causes the immediate inflection of the tentacles, though a temperature
from 120o to 125o (48o.8 to 51o.6 Cent.) quickly produces this effect.
But the leaves are paralysed only for a time by a temperature of 130o,
as afterwards, whether left in simple water or in a solution of
carbonate of ammonia, they become inflected and their protoplasm
undergoes aggregation. This great difference in the effects of a higher
and lower temperature may be compared with that from immersion in
strong and weak solutions of the salts of ammonia; for the former do
not excite movement, whereas the latter act energetically. A temporary
suspension of the [page 73] power of movement due to heat is called by
Sachs* heat-rigidity; and this in the case of the sensitive-plant
(Mimosa) is induced by its exposure for a few minutes to humid air,
raised to 120o-122o Fahr., or 49o to 50o Cent. It deserves notice that
the leaves of Drosera, after being immersed in water at 130o Fahr., are
excited into movement by a solution of the carbonate so strong that it
would paralyse ordinary leaves and cause no inflection.

The exposure of the leaves for a few minutes even to a temperature of
145o Fahr. (62o.7 Cent.) does not always kill them; as when afterwards
left in cold water, or in a strong solution of carbonate of ammonia,
they generally, though not always, become inflected; and the protoplasm
within their cells undergoes aggregation, though the spheres thus
formed are extremely small, with many of the cells partly filled with
brownish muddy matter. In two instances, when leaves were immersed in
water, at a lower temperature than 130o (54o.4 Cent.), which was then
raised to 145o (62o.7 Cent.), they became during the earlier period of
immersion inflected, but on being afterwards left in cold water were
incapable of re-expansion. Exposure for a few minutes to a temperature
of 145o sometimes causes some few of the more sensitive glands to be
speckled with the porcelain-like appearance; and on one occasion this
occurred at a temperature of 140o (60o Cent.). On another occasion,
when a leaf was placed in water at this temperature of only 140o, and
left therein till the water cooled, every gland became like porcelain.
Exposure for a few minutes to a temperature of 150o (65o.5 Cent.)
generally produces this effect, yet many glands retain a

* 'Trait de Bot.' 1874, p. 1034.  [page 74]

pinkish colour, and many present a speckled appearance. This high
temperature never causes true inflection; on the contrary, the
tentacles commonly become reflexed, though to a less degree than when
