first in contact with the copper cone and then with the refractory cap,
becomes raised to an exceedingly high temperature before it is consumed.

In the modified burner represented in Fig. 3, the metal cone and the
fire-cap are truncated. The tube, i, is provided with a number of small
perforations, r, at its upper end, the sum of whose areas is at least
equal to the area of the tube, and by which the gaseous mixture is
distributed within the chamber, k. Upon the upper closed end of the tube
is fixed a cup or inverted thimble, o, of fire-clay. A refractory cone,
l, surrounds this cup and rests by its base upon the cup. This flanged
base is perforated with small vertical holes, m, and upon it is fixed a
platinum wire cage or envelope, q. An annular space is left between the
cone and cup for the passage of the gaseous mixture, which, on escaping
from the orifices, r, passes over the exterior surface of o, the
interior of which is already heated by the flame which has not passed
through the wire gauze, and has been forced by the pressure of the
mixture into the interior of o. The gaseous mixture before passing
through the annular space thus attains such a temperature that on
escaping from the orifice its combustion is greatly promoted.

       *       *       *       *       *




PREVENTING IRON FROM RUSTING.


In the present state of civilization the use of iron has reached a very
wide extension, and in a great number of cases iron is used where wood
or stone was formerly used. It is certainly an important question how
this metal can be protected under all circumstances against rust or
oxidation, so that the many costly iron structures may retain their
usefulness and strength, and be handed down uninjured to posterity.

Wherever bright iron comes into contact with air and moisture it
immediately begins to rust, and this rust is not content to continually
rob it of its substance in its persistent progress by scaling off the
surface, but at the same time it injures the remainder of the iron by
making it brittle. Attempts have hitherto been made to protect the iron
by covering it with other and less easily oxidizable metals. For this
purpose tin was first selected, then lead and zinc, and recently nickel.
Furthermore, earthy glazings and enamels, such as are used on stone
ware, have been applied to iron vessels, and they have already found
extensive use in the household. In most cases these coatings, either
metallic or vitreous, are inapplicable, either because they cannot be
applied or are too expensive, so that on a large scale recourse must be
had to paints made by mixing oils with metallic oxides, earths, etc.,
for protecting the surface of the iron from air and moisture.

It has been observed that iron does not rust in _dry_ air, not even in
dry oxygen. In like manner it frequently happens that unpainted iron,
such as weather vanes, fences, etc., is exposed to the air for a century
with very little injury, being covered with a thin coating of the
magnetic oxide (proto-sesquioxide), which acts as a protection and
prevents farther action. Hence it has been proposed to produce a layer
of this magnetic oxide on the surface artificially, and it was found
that superheated steam furnished the means for doing this. But it is not
to be supposed that such a process would find use on a large scale, and
besides this protection could only serve for iron tolerably exposed to
the open air and not for that in direct contact with carbonic acid and
water.

An interesting observation has been made on railways that the iron
rails, ties, bolts, etc., rust until the road begins to be used. Here we
must assume that anything made of iron is more inclined to rust when at
rest than if occasionally caused to vibrate, when an electrical action
probably comes into play and decreases the affinity of iron for oxygen.

In tearing down old masonry iron bonds and clamps are often found which
are as free from rust, so far as they are covered with mortar, as they
were the day they left the blacksmith's hands. A French engineer met
with such a phenomenon when he uncovered the anchor plates of several
chain bridges which had been built about thirty years. Where the anchors
were covered with the fatty lime mortar of the masonry they showed no
traces of rust, but the prolongations of the anchors in empty spaces
were rusted to such an extent that they were only one-third of their
original thickness.

It has been repeatedly observed that iron does not rust in water in
which are dissolved small quantities of caustic alkalies or alkaline
earths, which neutralize every trace of acid. It seems that these
experiences are the basis of A. Riegelmann's (Hanau) new protection
against rust. The paint that he uses contains caustic alkaline earths
(baryta, strontia, etc.), so that the iron is in a condition similar to
the iron anchors of the chain bridges that were embedded in lime mortar.
Although a paint is not thick enough to inclose so much alkali as the
masonry did that the iron was embedded in, nevertheless the alkaline
action will make itself felt as long as the coating has a certain
consistence. Under all circumstances, however, these new paints will
be free from active acids, which is more than can be said of our iron
paints hitherto in use. Besides this, the rust protector has such
a composition that it could serve its intended purpose without the
addition of any alkali. If experience confirms this claim, it will be an
interesting step forward in the preservation of iron, and contribute to
an extension in the use of iron.--_Polytechn. Notizblatt_.

       *       *       *       *       *

[Illustration: SUGGESTIONS IN DECOTATIVE ART.--A CUPBOARD IN ITALIAN
WALNUT WITH DARKER PANELING.--_From The Workshop_.]

       *       *       *       *       *




AN ELASTIC MASS FOR CONFECTIONERS' USE.


It should be made in a well glazed earthen crock; metallic vessels are
not good, as the gelatine burns too easily on the sides, and dries
out where it gets too hot. Nor is a water bath to be recommended for
dissolving the gelatine, for the sides get too hot and dry out the
gelatine.

A quart of water is put in the crock and heated to boiling; it is then
taken off the open fire and two pounds of the finest gelatine stirred
in, a little at a time. After the gelatine is completely dissolved there
is to be added eight or ten pounds (according to the quality of the
gelatine) of the finest white sirup previously warmed, and constantly
stirred. The mass must not boil, as it would easily burn, or turn brown
and acquire a bad color.

Thirty or forty pounds of a beautiful white elastic mass can be made by
this recipe in an hour at a cost of ten or twelve cents. Its chief use
is for making figures and ornaments to put on bridal cakes and other
fanciful productions of the confectioner. It contains no harmful
ingredients and can be eaten without danger. If coloring is added,
cochineal, plant green (chlorophyl), and turmeric are safer than aniline
colors.

       *       *       *       *       *




CAOUTCHOUC.


A. Levy contributes the following brief account of this subject to the
_Moniteur Scientifique_:

The crude gum cut in irregular strips is passed five or six times
between two strong rolls sixteen inches in diameter, and making two
or three revolutions per minute. These rolls are kept wet by water
trickling on them. This broad strip of gum is perforated with foreign
substances and looks like a sieve. It is next put in the cutting
machine, a horizontal drum provided with an axle having knives on it. So
much heat is produced by this cutting that the water would soon boil if
it were not renewed. A second machine of this kind completes the cutting
and subdividing, and expels the air and water from it. The mass is then
pressed in round or quadrangular blocks.

The vulcanization of thin articles from one twenty-fifth to
one-sixteenth inch thick, is done by Parkes' patented process, that is,
dipping it in carbon disulphide for a short time, to which chloride or
bromide of sulphur has been added, and when the solvent has evaporated
the sulphur remains behind. Balls, ornamental articles, and surgical
apparatus are dipped into melted sulphur at 275 deg. or 300 deg. Fahr.

The third most important process consists in mixing in the sulphur
mechanically with the gum in the cutting machine.

After the pieces have received the form they are to have they are heated
with steam or hot air to 275 deg. Flat articles are vulcanized between
press plates heated by steam. This vulcanization is said to have been
discovered accidentally by searching different colored stuffs, some of
which were dyed yellow with sulphur; the latter stood well.

Hard rubber contains more sulphur, and is heated longer and higher.
Small or fine tubes and hose are made by a continuous machine that
presses it through a hole with a core to it. Large hose is made by
wrapping strips around iron rods or tubes. The little air balloons
are made in Paris (their value is $300,000) by Brissonet from English
Mackintosh cloth. Powdered soapstone is strewed over it in cutting. The
edges are united by hammering on a horn anvil, or by machinery through
simple adhesion, and the cut surfaces are smooth.

       *       *       *       *       *




PHOTOGRAPHIC ACTION STUDIED SPECTROSCOPICALLY.


At the last meeting of the Chemical Society Captain Abney gave a lecture
on the above subject to a large audience. We may premise by saying that
the demonstrations he gave were carried out principally by means of
experiments on paper, to enable his hearers to understand the different
points he wished to enforce. The lecture was commenced by insisting on
the fact that all photographic action took place within the molecules of
the compound acted upon and not on the molecule itself, and from this
he deduced that the absorption of radiation which take place by such
compounds is principally caused by the atoms composing the molecule.
This was found to be the case in the organic liquids, which the lecturer
to some extent had investigated, where he had further traced the
absorption to the vibrating atoms of hydrogen in those bodies. In
order to properly investigate the action of light it was necessary to
ascertain which components of light in the spectrum were the chief
agents in causing it, and this led him to consider the means to be
employed to obtain a spectrum.

The effects of diffraction gratings were first discussed, and in two
which were shown it was found that in some spectra the visible portions
were dimmed; in others the ultra-violet and the infra-red were almost
entirely absent. It thus became necessary to investigate the condition
of a grating before placing any confidence in the results obtained. This
was the first pitfall into which an experimentalist was liable to fall.
If prisms were used for obtaining the spectrum, then precautions had
also to be taken, since all glass absorbed a portion of the ultra-violet
rays and some the infra-red. On the whole, he considered that the best
glass to use was pure white flint glass for the collimator, the prisms,
and the camera lens. Another inquiry that was necessary was the
source of radiation which it was proposed to use. Diagrams showed the
unsatisfactory nature of solar radiation, and a photograph of the whole
spectrum, taken with it under certain atmospheric conditions in which
the effect of the green rays were almost _nil_, demonstrated the false
conclusions that might be deduced as to the sensitiveness of any
particular compound.

Captain Abney also showed the satisfactory conditions which existed in
using the crater of the positive pole of the electric arc light as a
source, and by diagrams illustrated the inferiority of an incandescent
light for the purpose, owing to the deficiency of violet and
ultra-violet rays. Having thus settled the source of illumination and
the kind of apparatus to employ, he next considered the conditions under
which the sensitive salts were to be exposed. The action of ordinary
sensitizers was explained and demonstrated by experiments, from which
point the results of certain colored sensitizers were considered. Thus,
various aniline dyes were proved to be bromine absorbents, and likewise,
more or less, to be capable of being acted upon by light in those
regions of the spectrum they absorbed. The result of the two effects was
to produce a developable image of the spectrum just in those parts to
which the salt of silver was sensitive, and also in the parts where the
dye itself was acted upon. The latter effect was traced to the organic
matter being oxidized in the presence of the sensitive silver salt.

The sensitizing effect of one silver compound upon another was then gone
into, and experiments and photographs showed where two salts of silver
were in contact with one another, and without an energetic sensitizer
being at hand, that the one when acted upon by light absorbed the
halogen liberated from the other through the same cause and that a new
molecule was formed. This was of importance, since in photographic
spectroscopic researches a conclusion might be arrived at that a
body suffered absorption in those regions of the spectrum where this
interesting reaction took place, whereas in reality the phenomenon might
be due to the silver salts employed. This was another pitfall for the
unwary. Again, it became necessary in studying photographic action to
make sure that the effect of radiation was only a reducing action, and
that the results were not vitiated by some other action.

The destruction by oxidizing agents of the effect produced by light was
then experimentally demonstrated, and photographs of the spectrum showed
that this effect was increased by the action of light itself. Thus, when
immersing a plate sensitive to all radiations, visible and invisible,
in a very dilute solution of nitric acid, bichromate of potash, or
hydroxyl, it was shown that if the plate were exposed to light, first
the parts acted upon by the red rays were reduced before the parts not
acted upon at all by the spectrum, thus conclusively proving that light
itself helped forward the oxidation or so-called solarization of the
image. It thus became a struggle, under ordinary circumstances, between
the reducing action on the normal salt and the oxidizing action on the
altered salt as to which should gain the mastery. If the reducing action
of any particular ray were the most active, then a negative image
resulted, whereas if the oxidizing action were in the ascendant, a
positive image resulted. Thus, in determining the action of light on
a particular salt, this antagonism had to be taken into account, and
exposure made with such precautions that no oxidizing action could
occur, as would be the case if an inorganic sensitizer, such as sulphite
of soda, were used.

The reversal of the image by soluble haloid salts, such as bromide of
potassium, was then dwelt upon with experimental demonstration. It was
shown that the merest trace of soluble haloid would reverse an image
by the extraction of bromine from it, and the fact that the most
refrangible part of the spectrum was principally efficacious in
completing this action showed how necessary it was to avoid falling
into error when analyzing photographic action by the spectroscope. A
reference was next made to gelatine plates, in which, owing to their
preparation, reversal through the above cause was most likely to take
place, and a plate soaked in sulphite of soda and exposed in the camera
for a couple of minutes--a time largely in excess of that necessary to
give a reversal under ordinary circumstances--proved the efficacy of
the oxygen absorber, the image remaining in its normal condition after
development.

The lecturer closed his remarks by showing the different molecular
states of iodide, bromide, and chloride of silver, as produced by
different modes of preparation. The color of the film by transmitted
light in every case indicated the effect which was likely to be produced
on them, and the photographed spectrum in each of them showed the
remarkable differences that were found. The points raised by Captain
Abney at different times are well worthy the study of scientific
photographers, since strict attention to the modes of exposure to the
spectrum, to the instruments employed, and to the source of light used
can alone insure accuracy in comparative experiments.--_Br. Jour. of
Photo_.

       *       *       *       *       *




SALT AND LIME.


M.F.K. communicates the following interesting circumstance to _Neueste
Erfindung_.: A few years ago it was decided to whitewash the walls
and ceiling of a small cellar to make it lighter. For this purpose a
suitable quantity of lime was slaked. A workman who had to carry a
vessel of common salt for some other purpose stumbled over the lime
cask and spilled some of his salt into it. To conceal all traces of his
mishap he stirred in the salt as quickly as possible. The circumstance
came to my knowledge afterward, and this unintentional addition of salt
to the lime excited my liveliest curiosity, for the whitewash was not
only blameless, but hard as cement, and would not wash off.

After this experience I employed a mixture of milk of lime and salt
(about three parts of stone lime to one part of salt), for a court or
light well. To save the trouble and expense of a scaffold to work on, I
had it applied with a hand fire engine (garden syringe?) to the opposite
walls. The results were most satisfactory. For four years the weather
has had no effect upon it, and I have obtained a good and cheap means of
lighting the court in this way.

       *       *       *       *       *




RENEWING PAINT WITHOUT BURNING.


It is stated in the _Gewerbeblatte fur Hessen_ that paint can be renewed
and refreshed in the following manner:

When cracks and checks appear in the paint on wooden articles, this
usually indicates that the varnish has cracked. If this is the case, the
article can easily be prepared for a fresh coat by sponging it over with
strong ammonia water, and two or three minutes later scraping off the
varnish with the broad end of a spatula before the ammonia has dried up.

In this way the first coat is removed. If it is necessary to remove the
next coating, the same operation is repeated. After the last coat
has been scraped off that is to be removed, it must be washed with
sufficient water to render the ammonia inactive, and then the surface is
rubbed with pulverized pumice to make it smooth. Any desired paint or
varnish can be applied to a surface prepared in this way.

       *       *       *       *       *




TESTING OLIVE OIL.

By DR. O. BACH.


There is no department in analytical chemistry in which so little
success has been attained as in the testing of commercial fats and oils.
All methods that have been proposed for distinguishing and recognizing
the separate oils, alone or mixed, bear upon them the stamp of
uncertainty.

The facts observed by J. Koenig, and described by him in his excellent
book entitled "_Die Menschlichen Nahrungs und Genussmittel_" (p. 248),
excited great expectations; viz., that the quantity of glycerine in
vegetable fats was much less than the amount required to combine with
all the fatty acids, and that the quantity of oleic acid in the oils
that he examined exhibited essential differences. Koenig himself asserts
that the fats have hitherto been too little investigated to found upon
it a method for distinguishing them, but that nevertheless it may
possibly do good service in some cases.

My own estimation of the amount of glycerine in different olive oils, by
Koenig's method, has shown, unfortunately, that the percentage may vary
from 1.6 to 4.68, according to the origin and quality of the oil. In
like manner the estimation of the oleic acid, which was conducted
essentially in the manner proposed by Koenig, showed that the amount of
oleic acid in different olive oils varied from 45 to 54 per cent. But
since cotton seed oil, for example, which is most frequently used to
adulterate olive oil, contains 5 per cent. of glycerine, and 59.5 per
cent. of oleic acid, it is easy to see an admixture of cotton seed oil
cannot be detected by this method, which appeared to be so exact.

The method of analysis that I am about to describe is based chiefly upon
the determination of the melting point of the fatty acids contained in
the oils, and upon their solubility in a mixture of alcohol and acetic
acid.

The oils employed in adulterating olive oil, and to which regard must be
had in testing it, are the following: Cotton seed oil, sesame, peanut,
sun flower, rape, and castor oils. The tests for the two last named
have hitherto never presented any difficulty, as rape seed is easily
detected, owing to the sulphur in it, by saponifying it in a silver
dish, and castor oil by its solubility in alcohol. But in recent times
another product has come into the market called sulphur oil or pulpa
oil, obtained by extracting the pressed olive cake with sulphide of
carbon. This also gives a sulphur reaction when saponified, while it
resembles castor oil by its solubility in alcohol. When this oil is
mixed with ordinary olive oil, it can easily deceive any one who uses
the ordinary tests.

My method of testing olive oil is as follows:

First, the so-called elaidine test is made, and then the test with
nitric acid. About 5 c. c. (a teaspoonful) of the oil is mixed in a test
tube with its own volume of nitric acid, spec. gr. 1.30, and shaken
violently for one minute. At the expiration of this time the oils will
have acquired the following colors: Olive oil, pale green; cotton seed
oil, yellowish brown; sesame, white; sun flower, dirty white; peanut,
rape, and castor oils, pale pink or rose.

As soon as the color has been observed, the test glass is put in a water
bath at the full boiling temperature and left there five minutes. It was
found that the action of nitric acid upon cotton seed and sesame oil was
the most violent, sometimes so violent as to throw the oil out of the
glass. At the end of another five minutes after the test tube is taken
out of the water bath, the following colors are seen: olive and rape
oils are red; castor oil is golden yellow; sun flower oil, reddish
yellow; sesame and peanut, brownish yellow; cotton seed, reddish brown.

After standing 12 to 18 hours at about 60 deg. Fahr. the olive, rape, and
peanut oils will have solidified; sun flower, castor, and cotton seed
will be like salve (sticky), while sesame will remain perfectly liquid.
Mixtures of olive oil with small quantities of cotton seed or sesame are
distinguished by this characteristic--that, although the whole mass,
which is darker in color than olive oil, solidifies at first, at the end
of 24 or 36 hours a brown oil will be found floating upon the surface of
the solid mass, while the lower strata exhibit the yellow color of pure
olive oil. Oil of rosemary has no effect when shaken with cold nitric
acid, and imparts to it only a slightly darker color on heating. Oils
treated with lye act just like pure oils.

Far the purpose of determining the melting point of the fatty acids, 10
grammes of oil were saponified with 5 grammes of caustic potash on the
water bath; some water and alcohol being added. After all the alcohol
had been expelled the soap was dissolved in hot water, and the fatty
acids separated from the clear solution by adding hydrochloric acid.
After prolonged heating these acids will swim on the salt solution as
a perfectly clear oil, a portion of which is then put into a little,
narrow, thin walled tube and allowed to solidify. The point at with it
melts and solidifies is determined by putting this tube in a beaker
glass filled with water and warming with a small flame. A thermometer
is placed _in_ the fatty acids and moved gently about during the
observation, and the point accurately observed at which the whole mass
becomes perfectly clear, and also when the mercury bulb begins to be
clouded. It was found that the acids from pure olive oil melt between
261/2 and 281/2 deg. C. (= 80 deg. to 83 deg. Fahr.) and solidify at a point not lower
than 22 deg. C. (72 deg. Fahr.). The melting point of the fatty acids in the
oils used to adulterate olive oil differs considerably from this. The
melting and solidifying points of the acids in cotton seed, sesame,
and peanut oils lie considerably higher, those of sunflower, rape, and
castor oils decidedly lower than those of olive oil.

The melting and solidifying points of these acids are as follows:

  Cotton seed melts at 38.0 deg.C.  solidifies 35.0 deg.C.
  Sesame       do.     35.0 do.    do.     32.5 do.
  Peanut       do.     33.0 do.    do.     31.0 do.
  Sunflower    do.     23.0 do.    do.     17.0 do.
  Rape         do.     20.7 do.    do.     15.0 do.
  Castor oil   do.     13.0 do.    do.      2.0 do.

The above figures differ so much from those of olive oil, that
adulteratious carried to the extent that they are in trade can easily
be detected by the aid of an estimation of the melting point, for a
Gallipoli olive oil, mixed with 20 per cent. of sunflower oil, melted at
24 deg. C. and solidified at 18 deg. C. (of course, the fatty acids are meant).
A Nizza oil, mixed with 20 per cent. cotton seed oil, melted at 311/2 deg. C.
and solidified at 28 deg. C. A Gallipoli oil with 33-1/3 per cent. of rape
oil melted at 231/2 deg. C. and solidified at 161/2 deg. C. When 0.50 per cent. of
rape is added, it melts as low as 20 deg. and solidifies at 131/2 deg. C., etc.

In testing the solubility of the fatty acids in alcohol and acetic acid,
I employ the method proposed by David (in _Comptes Rendus_, 1878, p.
1416) for estimating stearic acid.

