Moccasin Flower; Pink, Venus', or Stemless Lady's Slipper

_Cypripedium acaule_

_Flowers_--Fragrant, solitary, large, showy, drooping from end of scape,
6 to 12 in. high. Sepals lance-shaped, spreading, greenish purple, 2 in.
long or less; petals narrower and longer than sepals. Lip an inflated
sac, often more than 2 in. long, slit down the middle, and folded
inwardly above, pale magenta, veined with darker pink; upper part of
interior crested with long white hairs. Stamens united with style into
unsymmetrical declined column, bearing an anther on either side, and a
dilated triangular petal-like sterile stamen above, arching over the
broad concave stigma. _Leaves:_ 2, from the base; elliptic, thick, 6 to
8 in. long.

_Preferred Habitat--Deep_, rocky, or sandy woods.

_Flowering Season_--May-June.

_Distribution_--Canada southward to North Carolina, westward to
Minnesota and Kentucky.

Because most people cannot forbear picking this exquisite flower that
seems too beautiful to be found outside a millionaire's hothouse, it is
becoming rarer every year, until the finding of one in the deep forest,
where it must now hide, has become the event of a day's walk. Once it
was the commonest of the orchids.

"Cross-fertilization," says Darwin, "results in offspring which vanquish
the offspring of self-fertilization in the struggle for existence." This
has been the motto of the orchid family for ages. No group of plants has
taken more elaborate precautions against self-pollination or developed
more elaborate and ingenious mechanism to compel insects to transfer
their pollen than this.

The fissure down the front of the Pink Lady's Slipper is not so wide but
that a bee must use some force to push against its elastic sloping sides
and enter the large banquet chamber where he finds generous
entertainment secreted among the fine white hairs in the upper part.
Presently he has feasted enough. Now one can hear him buzzing about
inside, trying to find a way out of the trap. Toward the two little
gleams of light through apertures at the end of a passage beyond the
nectary hairs he at length finds his way. Narrower and narrower grows
the passage until it would seem as if he could never struggle through;
nor can he until his back has rubbed along the sticky, overhanging
stigma, which is furnished with minute, rigid, sharply pointed papillae,
all directed forward, and placed there for the express purpose of
combing out the pollen he has brought from another flower on his back
or head. The imported pollen having been safely removed, he still has to
struggle on toward freedom through one of the narrow openings, where an
anther almost blocks his way.

As he works outward, this anther, drawn downward on its hinge, plasters
his back with yellow granular pollen as a parting gift, and away he
flies to another lady's slipper to have it combed out by the sticky
stigma as described above. The smallest bees can squeeze through the
passage without paying toll. To those of the Andrena and Halictus tribe
the flower is evidently best adapted. Sometimes the largest bumblebees,
either unable or unwilling to get out by the legitimate route, bite
their way to liberty. Mutilated sacs are not uncommon. But when unable
to get out by fair means, and too bewildered to escape by foul, the
large bee must sometimes perish miserably in his gorgeous prison.


Showy, Gay, or Spring Orchis

_Orchis spectabilis_

_Flowers_--Purplish pink, of deeper and lighter shade, the lower lip
white, and thick of texture; from 3 to 6 on a spike; fragrant. Sepals
pointed, united, arching above the converging petals, and resembling a
hood; lip large, spreading, prolonged into a spur, which is largest at
the tip and as long as the twisted footstem. _Stem:_ 4 to 12 in. high,
thick, fleshy, 5-sided. _Leaves:_ 2, large, broadly ovate, glossy green,
silvery on underside, rising from a few scales from root. _Fruit:_ A
sharply angled capsule, 1 in. long.

_Preferred Habitat_--Rich, moist woods, especially under hemlocks.

_Flowering Season_--April-June.

_Distribution_--From New Brunswick and Ontario southward to our Southern
states, westward to Nebraska.

Of the six floral leaves which every orchid, terrestrial or aerial,
possesses, one is always peculiar in form, pouch-shaped, or a cornucopia
filled with nectar, or a flaunted, fringed banner, or a broad platform
for the insect visitors to alight on. Some orchids look to imaginative
eyes as if they were masquerading in the disguise of bees, moths, frogs,
birds, butterflies. A number of these queer freaks are to be found in
Europe. Spring traps, adhesive plasters, and hair-triggers attached to
explosive shells of pollen are among the many devices by which orchids
compel insects to cross-fertilize them, these flowers as a family
showing the most marvellous mechanism adapted to their requirements from
insects in the whole floral kingdom. No other blossoms can so well
afford to wear magenta, the ugliest shade nature produces, the "lovely
rosy purple" of Dutch bulb growers.


Large, or Early, Purple-fringed Orchis

_Habenaria fimbriata (H. grandiflora)_

_Flowers_--Pink-purple and pale lilac, sometimes nearly white; fragrant,
alternate, clustered in thick, dense spikes from 3 to 15 in. long. Upper
sepal and toothed petals erect; the lip of deepest shade, 1/2 in. long,
fan-shaped, 3-parted, fringed half its length, and prolonged at base
into slender, long spur; stamen united with style into short column; 2
anther sacs slightly divergent, the hollow between them glutinous,
stigmatic. _Stem:_ 1 to 5 ft. high, angled, twisted. _Leaves:_ Oval,
large, sheathing the stem below; smaller, lance-shaped ones higher up
bracts above. _Root:_ Thick, fibrous.

_Preferred Habitat_--Rich, moist meadows, muddy places, woods.

_Flowering Season_--June-August.

_Distribution_--New Brunswick to Ontario; southward to North Carolina,
westward to Michigan.

Because of the singular and exquisitely unerring adaptations of orchids
as a family to their insect visitors, no group of plants has greater
interest for the botanist since Darwin interpreted their marvellous
mechanism, and Gray, his instant disciple, revealed the hidden purposes
of our native American species, no less wonderfully constructed than the
most costly exotic in a millionaire's hothouse.

A glance at the spur of this orchid, one of the handsomest and most
striking of its clan, and the heavy perfume of the flower, would seem to
indicate that only a moth with a long proboscis could reach the nectar
secreted at the base of the thread-like passage. Butterflies, attracted
by the conspicuous color, sometimes hover about the showy spikes of
bloom, but it is probable that, to secure a sip, all but possibly the
very largest of them must go to the smaller Purple-fringed Orchis, whose
shorter spur holds out a certain prospect of reward; for, in these two
cases, as in so many others, the flower's welcome for an insect is in
exact proportion to the length of its visitor's tongue. Doubtless it is
one of the smaller sphinx moths, such as we see at dusk working about
the evening primrose and other flowers deep of chalice, and heavily
perfumed to guide visitors to their feast, that is the great
Purple-fringed Orchid's benefactor, since the length of its tongue is
perfectly adapted to its needs. Attracted by the showy, broad lower
petal, his wings ever in rapid motion, the moth proceeds to unroll his
proboscis and drain the cup that is frequently an inch and a half deep.
Thrusting in his head, either one or both of his large, projecting eyes
are pressed against the sticky button-shaped discs to which the pollen
masses are attached by a stalk, and as he raises his head to depart,
feeling that he is caught, he gives a little jerk that detaches them,
and away he flies with these still fastened to his eyes.

Even while he is flying to another flower, that is to say, in half a
minute, the stalks of the pollen masses bend downward from the
perpendicular and slightly toward the centre, or just far enough to
require the moth, in thrusting his proboscis into the nectary, to strike
the glutinous, sticky stigma. Now, withdrawing his head, either or both
of the golden clubs he brought in with him will be left on the precise
spot where they will fertilize the flower. Sometimes, but rarely, we
catch a butterfly or moth from the smaller or larger purple orchids with
a pollen mass attached to his tongue, instead of to his eyes; this is
when he does not make his entrance from the exact centre--as in these
flowers he is not obliged to do--and in order to reach the nectary his
tongue necessarily brushes against one of the sticky anther sacs. The
performance may be successfully imitated by thrusting some blunt point
about the size of a moth's head, a dull pencil or a knitting-needle,
into the flower as an insect would enter. Withdraw the pencil, and one
or both of the pollen masses will be found sticking to it, and already
automatically changing their attitude. In the case of the large,
round-leaved orchis, whose greenish-white flowers are fertilized in a
similar manner by the sphinx moth, the anther sacs converge, like little
horns; and their change of attitude while they are being carried to
fertilize another flower is quite as exquisitely exact.


White-fringed Orchis

_Habenaria blephariglottis_

_Flowers_--Pure white, fragrant, borne on a spike from 3 to 6 in. long.
Spur long, slender; oval sepals; smaller petal toothed; the oblong lip
deeply fringed. _Stem:_ Slender, 1 to 2 ft. high. _Leaves:_
Lance-shaped, parallel-veined, clasping the stem; upper ones smallest.

_Preferred Habitat_--Peat-bogs and swamps.

_Flowering Season_--July-August.

_Distribution_--Northeastern United States and eastern Canada to
Newfoundland.

One who selfishly imagines that all the floral beauty of the earth was
created for man's sole delight will wonder why a flower so exquisitely
beautiful as this dainty little orchid should be hidden in inaccessible
peat-bogs, where overshoes and tempers get lost with deplorable
frequency, and the water-snake and bittern mock at man's intrusion of
their realm by the ease with which they move away from him. Not for man,
but for the bee, the moth, and the butterfly, are orchids where they are
and what they are.


Yellow-fringed Orchis

_Habenaria ciliaris_

_Flowers_--Bright yellow or orange, borne in a showy, closely set,
oblong spike, 3 to 6 in. long. The lip of each flower copiously fringed;
the slender spur 1 to 1-1/2 in. long; similar to White-fringed Orchis
(see above); and between the two, intermediate pale yellow hybrids may
be found. _Stem:_ Slender, leafy, 1 to 2-1/2 feet high. _Leaves:_
Lance-shaped, clasping.

_Preferred Habitat_--Moist meadows and sandy bogs.

_Flowering Season-_--July-August.

_Distribution_--Vermont to Florida; Ontario to Texas.

Where this brilliant, beautiful orchid and its lovely white sister grow
together in the bog--which cannot be through a very wide range, since
one is common northward, where the other is rare, and _vice versa_--the
Yellow-fringed Orchis will be found blooming a few days later. In
general structure the plants closely resemble each other.

From Ontario and the Mississippi eastward, and southward to the Gulf,
the Tubercled or Small Pale Green Orchis _(H. flava)_ lifts a spire of
inconspicuous greenish-yellow flowers, more attractive to the eye of the
structural botanist than to the aesthete. It blooms in moist places, as
most orchids do, since water with which to manufacture nectar enough to
fill their deep spurs is a prime necessity. Orchids have arrived at that
pinnacle of achievement that it is impossible for them to fertilize
themselves. More than that, some are absolutely sterile to their own
pollen when it is applied to their stigmas artificially! With insect
aid, however, a single plant has produced more than 1,000,700 seeds. No
wonder, then, that as a family, they have adopted the most marvellous
blandishments and mechanism in the whole floral kingdom to secure the
visits of that special insect to which each is adapted, and, having
secured him, to compel him unwittingly to do their bidding. In the
steaming tropical jungles, where vegetation is luxuriant to the point of
suffocation, and where insect life swarms in myriads undreamed of here,
we can see the best of reasons for orchids mounting into trees and
living on air to escape strangulation on the ground, and for donning
larger and more gorgeous apparel to attract attention in the fierce
competition for insect trade waged about them. Here, where the struggle
for survival is incomparably easier, we have terrestrial orchids, small,
and quietly clad, for the most part.


Calopogon; Grass Pink

_Calopogon pulchellus (Limodorum tuberosum)_

_Flowers_--Purplish pink, 1 in. long, 3 to 15 around a long, loose
spike. Sepals and petals similar, oval, acute; the lip on upper side of
flower is broad at the summit, tapering into a claw, flexible as if
hinged, densely bearded on its face with white, yellow, and magenta
hairs (_Calopogon_ = beautiful beard). Column below lip (ovary not
twisted in this exceptional case); sticky stigma at summit of column,
and just below it a 2-celled anther, each cell containing 2 pollen
masses, the grain lightly connected by threads. _Scape:_ 1 to 1-1/2 ft.
high, slender, naked. _Leaf:_ Solitary, long, grass-like, from a round
bulb arising from bulb of previous year.

_Preferred Habitat_--Swamps, cranberry bogs, and low meadows.

_Flowering Season_--June-July.

_Distribution_--Newfoundland to Florida, and westward to the
Mississippi.

Fortunately this lovely orchid, one of the most interesting of its
highly organized family, is far from rare, and where we find the Rose
Pogonia and other bog-loving relatives growing, the Calopogon usually
outnumbers them all. _Limodorum_ translated reads meadow-gift; but we
find the flower less frequently in grassy places than those who have
waded into its favorite haunts could wish.


Arethusa; Indian Pink

_Arethusa bulbosa_

_Flowers_--1 to 2 in. long, bright purple pink, solitary, violet
scented, rising from between a pair of small scales at end of smooth
scape from 5 to 10 in. high. Lip dropping beneath sepals and petals,
broad, rounded, toothed, or fringed, blotched with purple, and with
three hairy ridges down its surface. _Leaf:_ Solitary, hidden at first,
coming after the flower, but attaining length of 6 in. _Root:_ Bulbous.
_Fruit:_ A 6-ribbed capsule, 1 in. long, rarely maturing.

_Preferred Habitat_--Northern bogs and swamps.

_Flowering Season_--May-June.

_Distribution_--From North Carolina and Indiana northward to the Fur
Countries.

One flower to a plant, and that one rarely maturing seed; a temptingly
beautiful prize which few refrain from carrying home, to have it wither
on the way; pursued by that more persistent lover than Alpheus, the
orchid-hunter who exports the bulbs to European collectors--little
wonder this exquisite orchid is rare, and that from certain of those
cranberry bogs of eastern New England, which it formerly brightened with
its vivid pink, it has now gone forever. Like Arethusa, the nymph whom
Diana changed into a fountain that she might escape from the infatuated
river god, Linnaeus fancied this flower a maiden in the midst of a
spring bubbling from wet places where presumably none may follow her.


Nodding Ladies' Tresses or Traces

_Spiranthes cernua_

_Flowers_--Small, white or yellowish, without a spur, fragrant, nodding
or spreading in 3 rows on a cylindrical, slightly twisted spike 4 or 5
in. long. Side sepals free, the upper ones arching, and united with
petals; the oblong, spreading lip crinkle-edged, and bearing minute,
hairy callosities at base. _Stem:_ 6 in. to 2 ft. tall, with several
pointed, wrapping bracts. _Leaves:_ From or near the base, linear,
almost grass-like.

_Preferred Habitat_--Low meadows, ditches, and swamps.

_Flowering Season_--July-October.

_Distribution_--Nova Scotia to the Gulf of Mexico, and westward to the
Mississippi.

This last orchid of the season, and perhaps the commonest of its
interesting tribe in the eastern United States, at least, bears flowers
that, however insignificant in size, are marvellous pieces of mechanism,
to which such men as Charles Darwin and Asa Gray have devoted hours of
study and, these two men particularly, much correspondence.

Just as a woodpecker begins at the bottom of a tree and taps his way
upward, so a bee begins at the lower and older flowers on a spike and
works up to the younger ones; a fact on which this little orchid, like
many another plant that arranges its blossoms in long racemes, depends.
