nothing on Farenheit's scale, and coming from thence into our latitude
must bring great degrees of cold along with them. If we add to this the
quantity of cold produced by the evaporation of the water as well as by
the solution of the ice, we cannot doubt but that the northern ice is
the principle source of the coldness of our winters, and that it is
brought hither by the regions of air blowing from the north, and which
take an apparent easterly direction by their coming to a part of the
surface of the earth which moves faster than the latitude they come
from. Hence the increase of the ice in the polar regions by increasing
the cold of our climate adds at the same time to the bulk of the
Glaciers of Italy and Switzerland.

If the nations who inhabit this hemisphere of the globe, instead of
destroying their sea-men and exhausting their wealth in unnecessary
wars, could be induced to unite their labours to navigate these immense
masses of ice into the more southern oceans, two great advantages would
result to mankind, the tropic countries would be much cooled by their
solution, and our winters in this latitude would be rendered much milder
for perhaps a century or two, till the masses of ice became again
enormous.

Mr. Bradley describes the cold winds and wet weather which sometimes
happen in May and June to the solution of ice-islands accidentally
floating from the north. Treatise on Husbandry and Gardening, Vol. II.
p. 437. And adds, that Mr. Barham about the year 1718, in his voyage
from Jamaica to England in the beginning of June, met with ice-islands
coming from the north, which were surrounded with so great a fog that
the ship was in danger of striking upon them, and that one of them
measured fifty miles in length.

We have lately experienced an instance of ice-islands brought from the
Southern polar regions, on which the Guardian struck at the beginning of
her passage from the Cape of Good Hope towards Botany Bay, on December
22, 1789. These islands were involved in mist, were about one hundred
and fifty fathoms long, and about fifty fathoms above the surface of the
water. A part from the top of one of them broke off and fell into the
sea, causing an extraordinary commotion in the water and a thick smoke
all round it.]

[_Threefold train_. l. 539. The river Niger after traversing an immense
tract of populous country is supposed to divide itself into three other
great rivers. The Rio Grande, the Gambia, and the Senegal. Gold-dust is
obtained from the sands of these rivers.]

[_Wide wastes of sand_. l. 547. When the sun is in the Southern tropic
36 deg. distant from the zenith, the thermometer is seldom lower than 72
deg. at Gondar in Abyssinia, but it falls to 60 or 53 deg. when the sun
is immediately vertical; so much does the approach of rain counteract
the heat of the sun. Bruce's Travels, Vol. 3. p. 670.]


       XII. Should SOLSTICE, stalking through the sickening bowers,
550  Suck the warm dew-drops, lap the falling showers;
     Kneel with parch'd lip, and bending from it's brink
     From dripping palm the scanty river drink;
     NYMPHS! o'er the soil ten thousand points erect,
     And high in air the electric flame collect.
555  Soon shall dark mists with self-attraction shroud
     The blazing day, and sail in wilds of cloud;
     Each silvery Flower the streams aerial quaff,
     Bow her sweet head, and infant Harvest laugh.


[_Ten thousand points erect_. l. 553. The solution of water in air or in
calorique, seems to acquire electric matter at the same time, as appears
from an experiment of Mr. Bennet. He put some live coals into an
insulated funnel of metal, and throwing on them a little water observed
that the ascending steam was electrised plus, and the water which
descended through the funnel was electrised minus. Hence it appears that
though clouds by their change of form may sometimes become electrised
minus yet they have in general an accumulation of electricity. This
accumulation of electric matter also evidently contributes to support
the atmospheric vapour when it is condensed into the form of clouds,
because it is seen to descend rapidly after the flashes of lightning
have diminished its quantity; whence there is reason to conclude that
very numerous metallic rods with fine points erected high in the air
might induce it at any time to part with some of its water.

If we may trust the theory of Mr. Lavoisier concerning the composition
and decomposition of water, there would seem another source of thunder-
showers; and that is, that the two gasses termed oxygene gas or vital
air, and hydrogene gas or inflammable air, may exist in the summer
atmosphere in a state of mixture but not of combination, and that the
electric spark or flash of lightning may combine them and produce water
instantaneously.]


       "Thus when ELIJA mark'd from Carmel's brow
560  In bright expanse the briny flood below;
     Roll'd his red eyes amid the scorching air,
     Smote his firm breast, and breathed his ardent prayer;
     High in the midst a massy altar stood,
     And slaughter'd offerings press'd the piles of wood;
565  While ISRAEL'S chiefs the sacred hill surround,
     And famish'd armies crowd the dusty ground;
     While proud Idolatry was leagued with dearth,
     And wither'd famine swept the desert earth.--
     "OH, MIGHTY LORD! thy woe-worn servant hear,
570  "Who calls thy name in agony of prayer;
     "Thy fanes dishonour'd, and thy prophets slain,
     "Lo! I alone survive of all thy train!--
     "Oh send from heaven thy sacred fire,--and pour
     "O'er the parch'd land the salutary shower,--
575  "So shall thy Priest thy erring flock recal,--
     "And speak in thunder, "THOU ART LORD OF ALL."--
     He cried, and kneeling on the mountain-sands,
     Stretch'd high in air his supplicating hands.
     --Descending flames the dusky shrine illume;
580  Fire the wet wood, the sacred bull consume;
     Wing'd from the sea the gathering mists arise,
     And floating waters darken all the skies;
     The King with shifted reins his chariot bends,
     And wide o'er earth the airy flood descends;
585  With mingling cries dispersing hosts applaud,
     And shouting nations own THE LIVING GOD."

       The GODDESS ceased,--the exulting tribes obey,
     Start from the soil, and win their airy way;
     The vaulted skies with streams of transient rays
590  Shine, as they pass, and earth and ocean blaze.
     So from fierce wars when lawless Monarch's cease,
     Or Liberty returns with laurel'd Peace;
     Bright fly the sparks, the colour'd lustres burn,
     Flash follows f
595  Blue serpents sweep along the dusky air,
     Imp'd by long trains of scintillating hair;
     Red rockets rise, loud cracks are heard on high,
     And showers of stars rush headlong from the sky,
     Burst, as in silver lines they hiss along,
600  And the quick flash unfolds the gazing throng.




                    _Argument of the Second Canto._


Address to the Gnomes. I. The Earth thrown from a volcano of the Sun;
it's atmosphere and ocean; it's journey through the zodiac; vicissitude
of day-light, and of seasons, 11. II. Primeval islands. Paradise, or the
golden Age. Venus rising from the sea, 33. III. The first great
earthquakes; continents raised from the sea; the Moon thrown from a
volcano, has no atmosphere, and is frozen; the earth's diurnal motion
retarded; it's axis more inclined; whirls with the moon round a new
centre. 67. IV. Formation of lime-stone by aqueous solution; calcareous
spar; white marble; antient statue of Hercules resting from his labours.
Antinous. Apollo of Belvidere. Venus de Medici. Lady Elizabeth Foster,
and Lady Melbourn by Mrs. Damer. 93. V. 1. Of morasses. Whence the
production of Salt by elutriation. Salt-mines at Cracow, 115. 2.
Production of nitre. Mars and Venus caught by Vulcan, 143. 3. Production
of iron. Mr. Michel's improvement of artificial magnets. Uses of Steel
in agriculture, navigation, war, 183. 4. Production of acids, whence
Flint. Sea-sand. Selenite. Asbestus. Fluor. Onyx, Agate, Mocho, Opal,
Sapphire, Ruby, Diamond. Jupiter and Europa, 215. VI. 1. New
subterraneous fires from fermentation. Production of Clays; manufacture
of Porcelain in China; in Italy; in England. Mr. Wedgwood's works at
Etruria in Staffordshire. Cameo of a Slave in Chains; of Hope. Figures
on the Portland or Barberini vase explained, 271. 2. Coal; Pyrite;
Naphtha; Jet; Amber. Dr. Franklin's discovery of disarming the Tempest
of it's lightning. Liberty of America; of Ireland; of France, 349.  VII.
Antient central subterraneous fires. Production of Tin, Copper, Zink,
Lead, Mercury, Platina, Gold and Silver. Destruction of Mexico. Slavery
of Africa, 395. VIII. Destruction of the armies of Cambyses, 431. IX.
Gnomes like stars of an Orrery. Inroads of the Sea stopped. Rocks
cultivated. Hannibal passes the Alps, 499. X. Matter circulates. Manures
to Vegetables like Chyle to Animals. Plants rising from the Earth. St.
Peter delivered from Prison, 537. XI. Transmigration of matter, 565.
Death and resuscitation of Adonis, 575. Departure of the Gnomes, 601.




                                  THE
                         ECONOMY OF VEGETATION.


                               CANTO II.


       AND NOW THE GODDESS with attention sweet
     Turns to the GNOMES, that circle round her feet;
     Orb within orb approach the marshal'd trains,
     And pigmy legions darken all the plains;
  5  Thrice shout with silver tones the applauding bands,
     Bow, ere She speaks, and clap their fairy hands.
     So the tall grass, when noon-tide zephyr blows,
     Bends it's green blades in undulating rows;
     Wide o'er the fields the billowy tumult spreads,
 10  And rustling harvests bow their golden heads.

       I. "GNOMES! YOUR bright forms, presiding at her birth,
     Clung in fond squadrons round the new-born EARTH;
     When high in ether, with explosion dire,
     From the deep craters of his realms of fire,
 15  The whirling Sun this ponderous planet hurl'd,
     And gave the astonish'd void another world.
     When from it's vaporous air, condensed by cold,
     Descending torrents into oceans roll'd;
     And fierce attraction with relentless force
 20  Bent the reluctant wanderer to it's course.


[_From the deep craters_. l. 14. The existence of solar volcanos is
countenanced by their analogy to terrestrial, and lunar volcanos; and by
the spots on the sun's disk, which have been shewn by Dr. Wilson to be
excavations through its luminous surface, and may be supposed to be the
cavities from whence the planets and comets were ejected by explosions.
See additional notes, No. XV. on solar volcanos.]

[_When from its vaporous air_. l. 17. If the nucleus of the earth was
thrown out from the sun by an explosion along with as large a quantity
of surrounding hot vapour as its attraction would occasion to accompany
it, the ponderous semi-fluid nucleus would take a spherical form from
the attraction of its own parts, which would become an oblate spheroid
from its diurnal revolution. As the vapour cooled the water would be
precipitated, and an ocean would surround the spherical nucleus with a
superincumbent atmosphere. The nucleus of solar lava would likewise
become harder as it became cooler. To understand how the strata of the
earth were afterwards formed from the sediments of this circumfluent
ocean the reader is referred to an ingenious Treatise on the Theory of
the Earth by Mr. Whitehurst, who was many years a watch-maker and
engineer at Derby, but whose ingenuity, integrity, and humanity, were
rarely equalled in any station of life.]


         "Where yet the Bull with diamond-eye adorns
     The Spring's fair forehead, and with golden horns;
     Where yet the Lion climbs the ethereal plain,
     And shakes the Summer from his radiant mane;
 25  Where Libra lifts her airy arm, and weighs,
     Poised in her silver ballance, nights and days;
     With paler lustres where Aquarius burns,
     And showers the still snow from his hoary urns;
     YOUR ardent troops pursued the flying sphere,
 30  Circling the starry girdle of the year;
     While sweet vicissitudes of day and clime
     Mark'd the new annals of enascent Time.

       II. "You trod with printless step Earth's tender globe,
     While Ocean wrap'd it in his azure robe;
 35  Beneath his waves her hardening strata spread,
     Raised her PRIMEVAL ISLANDS from his bed,
     Stretch'd her wide lawns, and sunk her winding dells,
     And deck'd her shores with corals, pearls, and shells.


[_While ocean wrap'd_. l. 34. See additional notes, No. XVI. on the
production of calcareous earth.]

[_Her hardening srata spread_.  l. 35. The granite, or moor-stone, or
porphory, constitute the oldest part of the globe, since the limestone,
shells, coralloids, and other sea-productions rest upon them; and upon
these sea-productions are found clay, iron, coal, salt, and siliceous
sand or grit-stone. Thus there seem to be three divisions of the globe
distinctly marked; the first I suppose to have been the original nucleus
of the earth, or lava projected from the sun; 2. over this lie the
recrements of animal and vegetable matter produced in the ocean; and, 3.
over these the recrements of animal and vegetable matter produced upon
the land. Besides these there are bodies which owe their origin to a
combination of those already mentioned, as siliceous sand, fluor,
alabaster; which seem to have derived their acids originally from the
vegetable kingdom, and their earthy bases from sea-productions. See
additional notes, No. XVI. on calcareous earth.]

[_Raised her primeval islands_. l. 36. The nucleus of the earth, still
covered with water, received perpetual increase by the immense
quantities of shells and coralloids either annually produced and
relinquishied, or left after the death of the animals. These would
gradually by their different degrees of cohesion be some of them more
and others less removable by the influence of solar tides, and gentle
tropical breezes, which then must have probably extended from one pole
to the other; for it is supposed the moon was not yet produced, and that
no storms or unequal winds had yet existence.

Hence then the primeval islands had their gradual origin, were raised
but a few feet above the level of the sea, and were not exposed to the
great or sudden variations of heat and cold, as is so well explained in
Mr. Whitehurst's Theory of the Earth, chap. xvi. Whence the paradise of
the sacred writers, and the golden age of the profane ones, seems to
have had a real existence. As there can be no rainbow, when the heavens
are covered with clouds, because the sun-beams are then precluded from
falling upon the rain-drops opposite to the eye of the spectator, the
rainbow is a mark of gentle or partial showers. Mr. Whitehurst has
endeavoured to show that the primitive islands were only moistened by
nocturnal dews and not by showers, as occurs at this day to the Delta of
Egypt; and is thence of opinion, that the rainbow had no existence till
after the production of mountains and continents. As the salt of the sea
has been gradually accumulating, being washed down into it from the
recrements of animal and vegetable bodies, the sea must originally have
been as fresh as river water; and as it is not yet saturated with salt,
must become annually more saline. See note on l. 119 of this Canto.]


       "O'er those blest isles no ice-crown'd mountains tower'd,
 40  No lightnings darted, and no tempests lower'd;
     Soft fell the vesper-drops, condensed below,
     Or bent in air the rain-refracted bow;
     Sweet breathed the zephyrs, just perceiv'd and lost;
     And brineless billows only kiss'd the coast;
 45  Round the bright zodiac danced the vernal hours,
     And Peace, the Cherub, dwelt in mortal bowers!

         "So young DIONE, nursed beneath the waves,
     And rock'd by Nereids in their coral caves,
     Charm'd the blue sisterhood with playful wiles,
 50  Lisp'd her sweet tones, and tried her tender smiles.
     Then, on her beryl throne by Triton's borne,
     Bright rose the Goddess like the Star of morn;
     When with soft fires the milky dawn He leads,
     And wakes to life and love the laughing meads;--
 55  With rosy fingers, as uncurl'd they hung
     Round her fair brow, her golden locks she wrung;
     O'er the smooth surge on silver sandals flood,
     And look'd enchantment on the dazzled flood.--
     The bright drops, rolling from her lifted arms,
 60  In slow meanders wander o'er her charms,
     Seek round her snowy neck their lucid track,
     Pearl her white shoulders, gem her ivory back,
     Round her fine waist and swelling bosom swim,
     And star with glittering brine each crystal limb.--
 65  --The immortal form enamour'd Nature hail'd,
     And Beauty blazed to heaven and earth, unvail'd.


[_So young Dione_. l. 47. There is an antient gem representing Venus
rising out of the ocean supported by two Tritons. From the formality of
the design it would appear to be of great antiquity before the
introduction of fine taste into the world. It is probable that this
beautiful allegory was originally an hieroglyphic picture (before the
invention of letters) descriptive of the formation of the earth from the
ocean, which seems to have been an opinion of many of the most antient
philosophers.]


       III. "You! who then, kindling after many an age,
     Saw with new fires the first VOLCANO rage,
     O'er smouldering heaps of livid sulphur swell
 70  At Earth's firm centre, and distend her shell,
     Saw at each opening cleft the furnace glow,
     And seas rush headlong on the gulphs below.--
     GNOMES! how you shriek'd! when through the troubled air
     Roar'd the fierce din of elemental war;
 75  When rose the continents, and sunk the main,
     And Earth's huge sphere exploding burst in twain.--
     GNOMES! how you gazed! when from her wounded side
     Where now the South-Sea heaves its waste of tide,
     Rose on swift wheels the MOON'S refulgent car,
 80  Circling the solar orb; a sister-star,
     Dimpled with vales, with shining hills emboss'd,
     And roll'd round Earth her airless realms of frost.


[_The first volcano_. l. 68. As the earth before the existence of
earthquakes was nearly level, and the greatest part of it covered with
sea; when the first great fires began deep in the internal parts of it,
those parts would become much expanded; this expansion would be
gradually extended, as the heat increased, through the whole terraqueous
globe of 7000 miles diameter; the crust would thence in many places open
into fissures, which by admitting the sea to flow in upon the fire,
would produce not only a quantity of steam beyond calculation by its
expansion, but would also by its decomposition produce inflammable air
and vital air in quantities beyond conception, sufficient to effect
those violent explosions, the vestiges of which all over the world
excite our admiration and our study; the difficulty of understanding how
subterraneous fires could exist without the presence of air has
disappeared since Dr. Priestley's discoveries of such great quantities
of pure air which constitute all the acids, and consequently exist in
all saline bodies, as sea-salt, nitre, lime-stone, and in all calciform
ores, as manganese, calamy, ochre, and other mineral substances. See an
ingenious treatise by Mr. Michel on earthquakes in the Philos. Trans.

In these first tremendous ignitions of the globe, as the continents were
heaved up, the vallies, which now hold the sea, were formed by the earth
subsiding into the cavities made by the rising mountains; as the steam,
which raised them condensed; which would thence not have any caverns of
great extent remain beneath them, as some philosophers have imagined.
The earthquakes of modern days are of very small extent indeed compared
to those of antient times, and are ingeniously compared by M. De Luc to
the operations of a mole-hill, where from a small cavity are raised from
time to time small quantities of lava or pumice stone. Monthly Review,
June, 1790.]

[_The moon's refulgent car_. l. 79. See additional notes, No. XV. on
solar volcanos.]

[_Her airless realms of frost_. l. 82. If the moon had no atmosphere at
the time of its elevation from the earth; or if its atmosphere was
afterwards stolen from it by the earth's attraction; the water on the
moon would rise quickly into vapour; and the cold produced by a certain
quantity of this evaporation would congeal the remainder of it. Hence it
is not probable that the moon is at present inhabited, but as it seems
to have suffered and to continue to suffer much by volcanos, a
sufficient quantity of air may in process of time be generated to
produce an atmosphere; which may prevent its heat from so easily
escaping, and its water from so easily evaporating, and thence become
fit for the production of vegetables and animals.

That the moon possesses little or no atmosphere is deduced from the
undiminished lustre of the stars, at the instant when they emerge from
behind her disk. That the ocean of the moon is frozen, is confirmed from
there being no appearance of lunar tides; which, if they existed, would
cover the part of her disk nearest the earth. See note on Canto III. l.
61.]


        "GNOMES! how you trembled! with the dreadful force
     When Earth recoiling stagger'd from her course;
 85  When, as her Line in slower circles spun,
     And her shock'd axis nodded from the sun,
     With dreadful march the accumulated main
     Swept her vast wrecks of mountain, vale, and plain;
     And, while new tides their shouting floods unite,
 90  And hail their Queen, fair Regent of the night;
     Chain'd to one centre whirl'd the kindred spheres,
     And mark'd with lunar cycles solar years.


[_When earth recoiling_. l. 84. On supposition that the moon was thrown
from the earth by the explosion of water or the generation of other
vapours of greater power, the remaining part of the globe would recede
from its orbit in one direction as the moon receded in another, and that
in proportion to the respective momentum of each, and would afterwards
revolve round their common centre of gravity.

If the moon rose from any part of the earth except exactly at the line
or poles, the shock would tend to turn the axis of the earth out of its
previous direction. And as a mass of matter rising from deep parts of
the globe would have previously acquired less diurnal velocity than the
earth's surface from whence it rose, it would receive during the time of
its rising additional velocity from the earth's surface, and would
consequently so much retard the motion of the earth round its axis.

When the earth thus receded the shock would overturn all its buildings
and forests, and the water would rush with inconceivable violence over
its surface towards the new satellite, from two causes, both by its not
at first acquiring the velocity with which the earth receded, and by the
attraction of the new moon, as it leaves the earth; on these accounts at
first there would be but one tide till the moon receded to a greater
distance, and the earth moving round a common centre of gravity between
them, the water on the side furthest from the moon would acquire a
centrifugal force in respect to this common centre between itself and
the moon.]


       IV. "GNOMES! you then bade dissolving SHELLS distil
     From the loose summits of each shatter'd hill,
 95  To each fine pore and dark interstice flow,
     And fill with liquid chalk the mass below.
     Whence sparry forms in dusky caverns gleam
     With borrow'd light, and twice refract the beam;
     While in white beds congealing rocks beneath
100  Court the nice chissel, and desire to breathe.--


