during the night time. In applying the invention to these and other
like purposes there may be used either phosphorescent grounds with
dark figures or dark grounds and phosphorescent figures or letters,
preferring the former. In like manner there may be produced figures and
letters for use on house-doors and ends of streets, wherever it is not
convenient or economical to have external source of light, signposts,
and signals, and names or marks to show entries to avenues or gates, and
the like.

The invention is also applicable to the illumination of railway
carriages by painting with phosphorescent paint a portion of the
interior, thus obviating the necessity for the expense and inconvenience
of the use of lamps in passing through tunnels. It may also be applied
externally as warning-lights at the front and end of trains passing
through tunnels, and in other similar cases, also to ordinary carriages,
either internally or externally. As a night-light in a bed-room or in a
room habitually dark, the application has been found quite effectual, a
very small proportion of the surface rendered phosphorescent affording
sufficient light for moving about the room, or for fixing upon and
selecting an article in the midst of a number of complicated scientific
instruments or other objects.

The invention may also be applied to private and public buildings in
cases where it would be economical and advantageous to maintain for a
short time a waning or twilight, so as to obviate the necessity for
lighting earlier the gas or other artificial light. It may also be
used in powder-mills and stores of powder, and in other cases where
combustion or heat would be a constant source of danger, and generally
for all purposes of artificial light where it is applicable.

In order to produce and maintain the phosphorescent light, full sunshine
is not necessary, but, on the contrary, is undesirable. The illumination
is best started by leaving the article or surface exposed for a short
time to ordinary daylight or even artificial light, which need not be
strong in order to make the illumination continue for many hours, even
twenty hours, without, the necessity of renewed exposure.

The advantages of the invention consist in obtaining for the purposes of
daily life a light which is maintained at no cost whatever, is free from
the defects and contingent dangers arising from combustion or heat, and
can be applied in many cases where all other sources of light would be
inconvenient or incapable of application.

Heretofore phosphorus has been mixed with earthy oxides, carbonates,
and sulphates, and with oxides and carbonates of metal, as tin, zinc,
magnesia, antimony, and chlorides of the same, also crystallized acids
and salts and mineral substances, and same have been inclosed and
exhibited in closely-stopped bottles as a phosphorus; but such union I
do not claim; but what I claim is:

A luminous paint, the body of which is a phosphorescent substance, or
composed in part of such substance, the vehicle of which is such as is
ordinarily used in paints, viz., one which will become dry by oxidation
or evaporation, substantially as herein described.

A. Krause, of Buffalo, N.Y., obtained a patent for improvement in
phosphorescent substances dated December 30, 1879. The patentee says:
This invention relates to a substance which, by exposure to direct or
indirect sun-light, or to artificial light, is so affected or brought
into such a peculiar condition that it will emit rays of light or become
luminous in the dark.

It is a well-known fact that various bodies and compositions of matter,
more especially compositions containing sulphur in combination with
earthy salts, possess the property of emitting rays of light in the
dark after having been exposed to sun-light. All of these bodies and
compositions of matter are, however, not well adapted for practical
purposes, because the light emitted by them is either too feeble to be
of any practicable utility, or because the luminous condition is not
of sufficient duration, or because the substances are decomposed by
exposure to the atmosphere.

Among the materials which have been employed with the best results
for producing these luminous compositions are sea-shells, especially
oyster-shells. I have found by practical experiments that only the inner
surface of these shells is of considerable value in the production
of luminous compositions, while the body of the shell, although
substantially of the same chemical composition, does not, to any
appreciable extent, aid in producing the desired result. It follows from
this observation that the smallest shells, which contain the largest
surface as compared with their cubic contents, will be best adapted for
this purpose.

I have found that chalk, which is composed of the shells of microscopic
animals, possesses the desired property in the highest degree; and my
invention consists, therefore, of a luminous substance composed of such
chalk, sulphur, and bismuth, as will be hereinafter fully set forth.

In preparing my improved composition I take cleaned or precipitated
chalk, and subject it to the process of calcination in a suitable
crucible over a clear coal or charcoal fire for three or four hours,
or thereabout. I then add to the calcined chalk about one-third of its
weight of sulphur, and heat the mixture for from forty-five to ninety
minutes, or thereabout. A small quantity of bismuth, in the proportion
of about one per cent, or less of the mixture, is added together with
the sulphur.

The metal may be introduced in the metallic form in the shape of
fillings, or in the form of a carbonate, sulphuret, sulphate, or
sulphide, or oxide, as may be most convenient.

The substance produced in this manner possesses the property of emitting
light in the dark in a very high degree. An exposure to light of very
short duration, sometimes but for a moment, will cause the substance
to become luminous and to remain in this luminous condition, under
favorable circumstances, for upward of twenty-four hours.

The intensity of the light emitted by this composition after exposure is
considerable, and largely greater than the light produced by any of the
substances heretofore known.

The hereinbefore described substance may be ground with oil and used
like ordinary paint; or it may be ground with any suitable varnish or be
mixed in the manner of water colors; or it may be employed in any other
suitable and well-known manner in which paints are employed.

My improved luminous substance is adapted for a great variety of
uses--for instance, for painting business and other signs, guide boards,
clock and watch dials, for making the numbers on houses and railway
cars, and for painting all surfaces which are exposed periodically to
direct or indirect light and desired to be easily seen during the night.

When applied with oil or varnish, my improved luminous substance can
be exposed to the weather in the same manner as ordinary paint without
suffering any diminution of its luminous property. I claim as my
invention the herein described luminous substance, consisting of
calcined chalk, sulphur, and bismuth, substantially as set forth.

Merrill B. Sherwood, Jr., of Buffalo, N. Y., obtained a patent for a
phosphorescent composition, dated August 9, 1881.

The author says: My invention relates to an improvement in
phosphorescent illuminants.

I have taken advantage of the peculiar property which obtains in many
bodies of absorbing light during the day and emitting it during the
night time.

The object of my invention is the preparation by a prescribed formula,
to be hereinafter given, of a composition embodying one of the
well-known phosphorescent substances above referred to, which will be
applicable to many practical uses.

With this end in view my invention consists in a phosphorescent
composition in which the chief illuminating element is monosulphide of
calcium.

The composition obtained by the formula may be used either in a powdered
condition by dusting it over articles previously coated, in whole or in
part, with an adhesive substance, or it may be intimately mixed with
paints, inks, or varnishes, serving as vehicles for its application, and
in this way be applied to bodies to render them luminous.

The formula for obtaining the composition is as follows: To one hundred
parts of unslaked lime, that obtained from calcined oyster shells
producing the best results, add five parts of carbonate of magnesia and
five parts of ground silex. Introduce these elements into a graphite or
fire-clay crucible containing forty parts of sulphur and twenty-five
parts of charcoal, raise the whole mass nearly or quite to a white heat,
remove from the fire, allow it to cool slowly, and, when it is cold or
sufficiently lowered in temperature to be conveniently handled,
remove it from the crucible and grind it. The method of reducing the
composition will depend upon the mode of its use. If it is to be applied
as a loose powder by the dusting process, it should be simply ground
dry; but if it is to be mixed with paint or other similar substance,
it should be ground with linseed or other suitable oil. In heating the
elements aforesaid, certain chemical combinations will have taken place,
and monosulphide of calcium, combined with carbonate of lime, magnesia,
and silex, will be the result of such ignition.

If, in the firing of the elements, as above set forth, all of the
charcoal does not unite with the other elements, such uncombined portion
should be removed from the fused mass before it is ground.

If it is designed to mix the composition with paints, those composed of
zinc-white and baryta should be chosen in preference to those composed
of white lead and colored by vegetable matter, as chemical action will
take place between the composition and paint last mentioned, and
its color will be destroyed or changed by the gradual action of the
sulphureted hydrogen produced. However, by the addition of a weak
solution of gum in alcohol or other suitable sizing to the composition,
it may be used with paints containing elements sensitive to sulphureted
hydrogen without danger of decomposing them and destroying their color.

In many, and possibly in a majority of cases, the illuminating
composition applied as a dry powder will give the most satisfactory
results, in view of the tendency to chemical action between the paint
and composition when intimately mixed; in view of the fact that by
the addition to paint of any color of a sufficient quantity of the
composition to render the product luminous, the original color of the
paint will be modified or destroyed; and, also, in view of the fact that
the illuminating composition is so greatly in excess of the paint, the
proportions in which they are united being substantially ten parts
of the former to one of the latter, it will be difficult to impart a
particular color to the product of the union without detracting from
its luminosity. On the other hand, the union of dry powder with a body
already painted by the simple force of adhesion does not establish
a sufficiently intimate relation between it and the paint to cause
chemical action, the application of a light coat of powder does not
materially change the color of the article to which it is applied; and,
further, by the use of the powder in an uncombined state its greatest
illuminating effects are obtained. Again, if the appearance in the
daytime of the article which it is desired to have appear luminous at
night is not material, it may be left unpainted and simply sized to
retain the powder.

In printing it is probable that the composition will be employed almost
exclusively in the form of dry powder, as printing-ink, normally pasty,
becomes too thick to be well handled when it is combined with powder in
sufficient quantity to render the printed surface luminous. However, the
printed surface of a freshly printed sheet may be rendered luminous by
dusting the sheet with powder, which will adhere to all of the inked and
may be easily shaken from the unmoistened surfaces thereof.

I am aware that monosulphide of calcium and magnesia have before
been used together in phosphorescent compounds. What I claim is a
phosphorescent composition consisting of monosulphide of calcium,
combined with carbonate of lime, magnesia, and silex, substantially as
described.

Orlando Thowless, of Newark, N.J., obtained a patent for a process of
manufacturing phosphorescent substances dated November 8, 1881.
The inventor says: The object of my invention is to manufacture
phosphorescent materials of intense luminosity at low cost and little
loss of materials.

I first take clam shells and, after cleaning, place them in a solution
composed of about one part of commercial nitric acid and three parts of
water, in which the shells are allowed to remain about twenty minutes.
The shells are then to be well rinsed in water, placed in a crucible,
and heated to a red heat for about four hours. They are then removed and
placed, while still red-hot, in a saturated solution of sea salt, from
which they are immediately removed and dried. After this treatment and
exposure to light the shells will have a blood-red luminous appearance
in the dark. The shells thus prepared are used with sulphur and
the phosphide and sulphide of calcium to produce a phosphorescent
composition, as follows: One hundred parts, by weight, of the shells,
prepared as above, are intimately mixed with twenty parts, by weight, of
sulphur. This mixture is placed in a crucible or retort and heated to a
white heat for four or five hours, when it is to be removed and forty
parts more of sulphur, one and one-half parts of calcium phosphide, and
one-half part of chemically pure sulphide of calcium added. The mixture
is then heated for about ninety minutes to an extreme white heat. When
cold, and after exposure to light, this mixture will become luminous.
Instead of these two ignitions, the same object may be in a measure
accomplished by the addition of the full amount of sulphur with the
phosphide and sulphide of calcium and raising it to a white heat but
once. The calcium phosphide is prepared by igniting phosphorus in
connection with newly slaked lime made chemically pure by calcination.
The condition of the shells when the sulphur is added is not material;
but the heat renders them porous and without moisture, so that they will
absorb the salt to as great an extent as possible. Where calcined shells
are mixed with solid salt, the absorbing power of the shells is greatly
diminished by the necessary exposure, and there will be a lack of
uniformity in the saturation. On the contrary, by plunging the red-hot
shells in the saline solution the greatest uniformity is attained.

Instead of using clam shells as the base of my improved composition, I
may use other forms of sea shells--such as oyster shells, etc.

I claim as new:

1. The herein described process of manufacturing phosphorescent
materials, which consists in heating sea shells red-hot, treating them
while heated with a bath of brine, then, after removal from the bath,
mixing sulphur and phosphide and sulphide of calcium therewith, and
finally subjecting the mixture to a white heat, substantially as and for
the purpose described.

2. The described process, which consists in placing clean and red-hot
clam shells in a saturated solution of sea salt, and then drying them,
for the purpose specified.

       *       *       *       *       *




BOXWOOD AND ITS SUBSTITUTES.

[Footnote: Prize essay written for the International Forestry
Exhibition, Edinburgh.]

By JOHN R. JACKSON. A.L.S., Curator of the Museums, Royal Gardens, Ken.


The importance of the discovery of a hard, compact, and even grained
wood, having all the characteristics of boxwood, and for which it would
form an efficient substitute, cannot be overestimated; and if such
a discovery should be one of the results of the present Forestry
Exhibition, one of its aims will have been fulfilled.

For several years past the gradual diminution in the supplies of
boxwood, and the deterioration in its quality, have occupied the
attention of hardwood merchants, of engravers, and of scientific men.

Of merchants, because of the difficulties in obtaining supplies to meet
the ever increasing demand; of engravers, because of the higher prices
asked for the wood, and the difficulty of securing wood of good size and
firm texture, so that the artistic excellence of the engraving might be
maintained; and of the man of science, who was specially interested
in the preservation of the indigenous boxwood forests, and in the
utilization of other woods, natives, it might be, of far distant
countries, whose adaptation would open not only a new source of revenue,
but would also be the means of relieving the strain upon existing
boxwood forests.

While by far the most important use of boxwood is for engraving
purposes, it must be borne in mind that the wood is also applied to
numerous other uses, such, for instance, as weaving shuttles, for
mathematical instruments, turnery purposes, carving, and for various
ornamental articles, as well as for inlaying in cabinet work. The
question, therefore, of finding suitable substitutes for boxwood divides
itself into two branches, first, directly for engraving purposes, and,
secondly, to supply its place for the other uses to which it is now put.
This, to a certain extent, might set free some of the boxwood so used,
and leave it available for the higher purposes of art. At the same time,
it must not be forgotten that much of the wood used for general purposes
is unsuited for engraving, and can only therefore be used by the turner
or cabinet maker. Nevertheless, the application of woods other than box
for purposes for which that wood is now used would tend to lessen the
demand for box, and thus might have an effect in lowering the price.

So far back as 1875 a real uneasiness began to be felt as to the future
supplies of box. In the _Gardeners' Chronicle_ for September 25, of that
year, page 398, it is said that the boxwood forests of Mingrelia in the
Caucasian range were almost exhausted. Old forests, long abandoned, were
even then explored in search of trees that might have escaped the notice
of former proprietors, and wood that was rejected by them was, in 1875,
eagerly purchased at high prices for England. The export of wood was at
that time prohibited from Abhasia and all the government forests in
the Caucasus. A report, dated at about the same period from Trebizond,
points out that the Porte had prohibited the cutting of boxwood in the
crown forests. (_Gardeners' Chronicle_, Aug. 19, 1876, p. 239.) Later
on, the British Consul at Tiflis says: "_Bona fide_ Caucasian boxwood
may be said to be commercially non-existent, almost every marketable
tree having been exported." (_Gardeners' Chronicle_, Dec. 6, 1879, p.
726.)

The characters of boxwood are so marked and so distinct from those of
most other woods that some extracts from a report of Messrs. J. Gardner
& Sons, of London and Liverpool, addressed to the Inspector-General of
Forests in India, bearing on this subject, will not be without value;
indeed, its more general circulation than its reprint in Mr. J.S.
Gamble's "Manual of Indian Timbers" will, it is hoped, be the means of
directing attention to this very important matter, and by pointing
out the characters that make boxwood so valuable, may be the means of
directing observation to the detection of similar characters in other
woods. Messrs. Gardner say:

"The most suitable texture of wood will be found growing upon the sides
of mountains. If grown in the plains the growth is usually too quick,
and consequently the grain is too coarse, the wood of best texture being
of slow growth, and very fine in the grain.

"It should be cut down in the winter, and, if possible, stored at once
in airy wooden sheds well protected from sun and rain, and not to have
too much air through the sides of the sheds, more especially for the
wood under four inches diameter.

"The boxwood also must not be piled upon the ground, but be well skidded
under, so as to be kept quite free from the effects of any damp from the
soil.

"After the trees are cut down, the longer they are exposed the more
danger is there afterward of the wood splitting more than is absolutely
necessary during the necessary seasoning before shipment to this
country.

"If shipped green, there is great danger of the wood sweating and
becoming mildewed during transit, which causes the wood afterward to dry
light and of a defective color, and in fact rendering it of little value
for commercial purposes.

"There is no occasion to strip the bark off or to put cowdung or
anything else upon the ends of the pieces to prevent their splitting.

"Boxwood is the nearest approach to ivory of any wood known, and will,
therefore, probably gradually increase in value, as it, as well
as ivory, becomes scarcer. It is now used very considerably in
manufacturing concerns, but on account of its gradual advance in price
during the past few years, cheaper woods are in some instances being
substituted.

"Small wood under four inches is used principally by flax spinners for
rollers, and by turners for various purposes, rollers for rink skates,
etc., etc., and if free from splits, is of equal value with the larger
wood. It is imported here as small as one a half inches in diameter, but
the most useful sizes are from 21/2 to 31/2 inches, and would therefore,
we suppose, be from fifteen to thirty or forty years in growing, while
larger wood would require fifty years and upward at least, perhaps we
ought to say one hundred years and upward. It is used principally for
shuttles, for weaving silk, linen, and cotton, and also for rule making
and wood engraving. _Punch, The Illustrated London News, The Graphic_,
and all the first class pictorial papers use large quantities of
boxwood."

In 1880, Messrs. Churchill and Sim reported favorably on some
consignments of Indian boxwood, concluding with the remarks that if the
wood could be regularly placed on the market at a moderate figure, there
was no reason why a trade should not be developed in it. Notwithstanding
these prospects, which seemed promising in 1877 and 1880, little or
nothing has been accually done up to the present time in bringing Indian
boxwood into general use, in consequence, as Mr. Gamble shows, of
the cost of transit through India. The necessity, therefore, of the
discovery of some wood akin to box is even more important now than ever
it was.


BOXWOOD SUBSTITUTES.

First among the substitutes that have been proposed to replace boxwood
may be mentioned an invention of Mr. Edward Badoureau, referred to in
the _Gardeners' Chronicle_, March 23, 1878, p. 374, under the title of
artificial boxwood. It is stated to consist of some soft wood which has
been subject to heavy pressure. It is stated that some English engravers
have given their opinion on this prepared wood as follows:

It has not the power of resistance of boxwood, so that it would be
imposible to make use of it, except in the shape of an electro obtained
from it, as it is too soft to sustain the pressure of a machine, and
would be easily worn out. In reply to these opinions, Mr. Badoureau
wrote: "My wood resists the wear and tear of the press as well as
boxwood, and I can show engravings of English and French artists which
have been obtained direct from the wood, and are as perfect as they are
possible to be; several of them have been drawn by Mr. Gustave Dore."

Mr. Badoureau further says that "while as an engraver he has so high an
opinion of the qualities of compressed wood as a substitute for boxwood,
as the inventor of the new process he considered that it possesses
numerous advantages both for artistic and industrial purposes." In
short, he says, "My wood is to other wood what steel is to iron."

The following woods are those which have, from time to time, been
proposed or experimented upon as substitutes for boxwood, for engraving
