central spine straight, subulate, somewhat shorter, but scarcely
stouter: flowers yellow, 3.5 to 5 cm. long: fruit unknown.  Type
unknown.

Sandy ridges in the valley of the Rio Grande (both sides of the
river), from the mouth to Eagle Pass.  Fl. from March throughout
the season.

Specimens examined: Texas (Schott of 1852): also specimens
cultivated in St. Louis in 1845 and 1861.

Dietrich's description was taken from plants collected by
Poselger at Corpus Christi.  The Schott specimens are from Eagle
Pass.  Dr. Engelmann calls attention to the fact that this
species approaches Coryphantha in its exserted ovary and large
flower, but the flowers are clearly from the growth of the
preceding season.  The species is said to be too near the Mexican
C. longimamma of central and southern Mexico, but in the absence
of type specimens of either the question can not be settled. The
usual characterization of C. longimamma is as follows, which
seems to make it distinct enough:

36. Cactus longimamma  (DC.) Kuntze, Rev. Gen. Pl. 260 (1891).

  Mamillaria longimamma  DC. Rev. Cact. 113 (1829).

Ovate or at length cylindrical, simple or cespitose: tubercles
oblong-ovate, large at base, 4 to 5 cm. long: radial spines 7 or
8, radiant and equal, 8 to 10 mm. long or more, more or less
pubescent; central spines 1 to 3, somewhat longer and spreading:
flower 4 cm. long, becoming 6 cm. broad when fully expanded,
yellow.  (Ill. DC. Mem. Cact. t. 5.)

II. CORYPHANTHA. Flowers from the base of a groove on young or
nascent tubercles (hence appearing terminal), mostly large:
spines never hooked (except in the doubtful C. brunneus).

  * Flowers yellow.
  + The originally central flowers pushed aside by the continuous
    development of new tubercles: usually a single prominent
    central spine.

37. Cactus missouriensis (Sweet) Kuntze, Rev. Gen. Pl. 259
    (1891).

  Cactus mamillaris  Nutt. Gen. i. 295 (1818), not Linn. (1753).
  Mamillaria missouriensis  Sweet, Hort. Brit. 171 (1827).
  Mamillaria simplex  Torr. & Gray, Fl. N. Am. i. 553 (1840).
  Mamillaria nuttallii  Engelm. Pl. Fendl. 49 (1849).
  Mamillaria notesteinii  Britton, Bull. Torr. Bot. Club, xviii,
    367 (1891).

Globose, 3.5 cm. in diameter, simple or nearly so: tubercles
ovate-cylindrical, 12 to 14 mm. long, slightly grooved: radial
spines 13 to 17, straight, whitish, setaceous, somewhat unequal,
8 to 10 mm. long; central spine more robust, straight and
porrect, puberulent, 10 to 12 mm. long, often wanting: flowers
about 2.5 cm. long, yellow or reddish: stigmas 2 to 5: fruit
globose, scarlet, 6 to 8 mm. in diameter: seeds globose, black
and pitted, 0.8 to 1.1 mm. in diameter. (Ill. Cact. Mex. Bound.
t. 74., f. 6, seeds.)  Type unknown.

High prairies of the Upper Missouri, from Montana to South Dakota
and southward through western Nebraska to western Kansas and the
eastern slopes of the mountains of Colorado.  Fl. May.

Specimens examined: Montana (Notestein of 1893): National Park
(Tweedy 423): South Dakota, (collector unknown, in 1847, 1848,
1853): Nebraska (Hayden of 1855).

38. Cactus missouriensis similis (Engelm.).

  Mamillaria similis  Engelm. Pl. Lindh. 246 (1845).
  Mamillaria nuttallii caespitosa  Engelm. Syn. Cact. 265 (1856).

  Mamillaria missouriensis caespitosa  Watson, Bibl. Index,
    403 (1878).

Cespitose, with 12 to 15 puberulent radial spines, the central
very often wanting, larger flowers (2.5 to 5 cm. long), fruit and
seeds (1.6 to 2.2 mm. in diameter), and 5 stigmas. (Ill. Cact.
Mex. Bound. t. 74. f 7, seeds)  Type, Lindheimer, of 1845 (?) in
Herb. Mo. Bot. Gard.

From the Kansas River, Kansas, and eastern Colorado, southward
through Oklahoma to the San Antonio River, Texas.

Specimens examined: Colorado (Greene of 1870): Kansas (Carleton
551 of 1891, from Kingman County, distributed as Mamillaria
dasyacantha): Oklahoma (Carleton 120 of 1891): Texas (Lindheimer
of 1845, 1850; Wright of 1850; Reverchon 725): also specimens
cultivated in Goebel's Garden in 1846; and in St. Louis in 1846,
1847, 1851.

The cespitose masses are often a foot broad.

39. Cactus missouriensis robustior (Engelm.).

  Mamillaria similis robustior Engelm. Pl. Lindh. 200 (1850).
  Mamillaria nuttallii robustior  Engelm. and Bigel. Pacif. R.
    Rep. iv. 28 (1856).
  Mamillaria missouriensis robustior  Watson, Bibl. Index,
    440 (1878).

Almost simple, with longer aid looser tubercles, 10 to 12 stouter
radial spines (6 to 16 mm. long), a single stout central, larger
flowers, and 7 or 8 stigmas.  Type, Lindheimer of 1845 in Herb.
Mo. Bot. Gard.

From southeastern Colorado and the Canadian River (Oklahoma and
Indian Territory), to the Colorado River of Texas.

Specimens examined: Texas (Lindheimer of 1845, 1846; Bigelow of
1853): also specimens cultivated in St. Louis in 1847.

In Bigelow's specimens the central spine is mostly lacking.

40. Cactus scheerii  (Muhlenpf.) Kuntze, Rev. Gen. Pl. 261
(1891).

  Mamillaria scheerii  Muhlenpf. Allg. Gart. Zeit. xv. 97 (1847).
  Mamillaria scheerii valida  Engelm. Syn. Cact. 265 (1856).

Ovate-globose, 7.5 to 17.5 cm. high, 7.5 to 12.5 cm. in diameter,
simple or sparingly proliferous at base: tubercles large (2.5 to
3.5 cm. long), from a broad base and suddenly contracted and
almost cylindric (10 to 14 mm. in diameter), deeply grooved (1 to
5 orbicular glands in the groove), distant, spreading and
ascending, the lower ones shorter, more conical and somewhat
imbricated, with broad axils and the younger densely woolly:
radial spines 6 to 16, straight or slightly curved, stout, rigid,
bulbous at base, whitish or yellowish (sometimes reddish) with
dark tip, the 2 to 5 lower and lateral ones stouter and
compressed (18 to 30 mm. long), the 4 to 11 upper ones weaker and
terete (10 to 20 mm. long); central spines 1 to 5, stout and
angled, 20 to 36 mm. long,,mostly yellow (sometimes reddish), a
single one very stout and porrect: flowers 5 cm. long, yellow
(sometimes reddish tinged): fruit ovate or subglobose, green:
seeds large (3 mm. long), flat and obovate, red.  Type unknown;
that of the old var. valida is the Wright material in Herb. Mo.
Bot. Gard.

Sandy ridges, southwestern Texas, from Eagle Pass and head of
the Limpia to El Paso, and southward into Chihuahua, Coahuila,
and San Luis Potosi; also southern Mexico (fide Hemsley).  Fl.
July.

Specimens examined: Texas (Wright 416, 478, of 1851, 1852; Evans
of 1891): San Luis Potosi (Eschanzier of 1891).

The var. valida was described by Dr. Engelmann without having
seen C. scheerii, the only knowledge of that species being
obtained from the description of Prince Salm-Dyck in Cact. Hort.
Dyck., which seemed to indicate a smaller form, with fewer spines
than the Texan form.  However, when visiting the collections of
Prince Salm-Dyck, Dr. Engelmann found original specimens of C.
scheerii which were exactly his var. valida.  So far as
collections show the Texan form seems to be more robust than the
Mexican, but the material is too scanty to justify such a
generalization.  Dr. Engelmann speaks of this species as "a
stately plant, by far the largest, of the northern Mamillariae"
Its tubercles are bright green and in beautiful contrast with the
showy yellow spines.

41. Cactus robustispinus (Schott) Kuntze, Rev. Gen. Pl. 261
    (1891).

  Mamillaria robustispina  Schott in Engelm. Syn. Cact. 265
(1856).

A large stout plant, simple or cespitose: tubercles large,
subterete, nearly 2.5 cm. long (and about the same distance from
each other): radial spines 12 to 15, stout and rigid, 18 to 30
mm. long, the lower ones the stouter, more dusky, straight or
often curved downwards, the upper straight and fascicled; the
solitary central spine stout, compressed, curved downwards
(occasionally an additional straighter upper one), not much
longer than the radials, the base nearly 2 mm. wide; all the
spines horny and black-tipped; flowers 3.5 to 5 cm. long with
very slender and constricted tube, saffron-yellow: fruit green
seeds large (3 to 3.2 mm, long and 2 mm. in diameter), obliquely
obovate and curved, smooth and brownish. (Ill. Cact. Mex. Bound.
t. 74. fig. 8, seeds)  Type, Schott specimens in Herb. Mo. Bot.
Gard.

"On grassy prairies on the south side of the Babuquibari
Mountains," Sonora.  Fl. July.

Specimens examined: Sonora (Schott of 1853-4).

Dr. Engelmann remarks that the seeds of this species are larger
than those of any other Mamillaria known to him.

42. Cactus recurvatus (Engelm.) Kuntze Rev. Gen. Pl. 259 (1891).

  Mamillaria recurvispina  Engelm. Syn. Cact. 265 (1856), not
    Vries.
  Mamillaria recurvata  Engelm. Trans. St. Louis Acad. ii.
    202 (1863).

Globose or depressed-globose, 7.5 to 20 cm. in diameter, simple:
tubercles ovate, deeply grooved, crowded, somewhat imbricate, 10
to 12 mm. long: radial spines 12 to 20, bulbous at base,
compressed, rigid, recurved or flexuous, 8 to 18 mm. long,
whitish or horny, interwoven with adjacent clusters; central
spine solitary (sometimes an additional upper one), stouter and
longer (12 to 20 mm.), dark, mostly strongly recurved and
appressed (rarely straightish): flowers about 3.5 cm. long,
yellow (brownish-tinged outside): fruit unknown.  Type, Schott
specimens in Herb. Mo. Bot. Gard.

From Sonora to southern Mexico.  Fl. June-August.

Specimens examined: Sonora (Schott of 1855).

43. Cactus salm-dyckianus  (Scheer) Kuntze. Rev. Gen. Pl. 261
    (1891).

  Mamillaria salm-dyckiana  Scheer in Salm, Cact. Hort. Dyck. 134
    (1850).

Subglobose: tubercles very broad and retuse, almost 2-parted by
the tomentose groove, with axillary floccose wool: radial spines
7 or 8, very rigid, widely radiant, somewhat curved, 3 to 3.5 cm.
long, in older tubercles 3 to 6 additional slender and straight
or twisted spines; the solitary central spine very stout, erect,
almost 5 cm. long: flowers and fruit unknown.  Type: Scheer says
that this plant, brought from Chihuahua by Potts, "unfortunately
perished," and the description was drawn from fragments, which in
those days were not apt to be preserved.

Chihuahua.

Specimens examined: Chihuahua ("Salm of 1857 ").

The specimen referred to is in Herb. Mo. Bot. Gard., and reveals
no additional characters; nor can the label be interpreted,
except that it indicates that the specimen is from plants
cultivated successfully in the gardens of Prince Salm-Dyck.

  ++ Flower and fruit remaining central in the very woolly vertex
     of the plant.
  ++ Central spine solitary or wanting.

44. Cactus compactus (Engelm.) Kuntze Rev. Gen. Pl. 260 (1891).

  Mamillaria compacta  Engelm. Wisliz. Rep. 21 (1848).

Depressed-globose, 5 to 10 cm. in diameter, simple: tubercles
short-conical, crowded, 8 mm. long: radial spines 13 to 16,
rigid, recurved and appressed, interwoven with adjacent clusters,
whitish or horny, 10 to 20 mm. long; the erect central spine
often wanting: flowers 3 to 3.5 cm. long and broad, yellow
(brownish without): fruit oval, green: seeds 1.4 mm. long, smooth
and yellow. (Ill. Cact. Mex. Bound. t. 74. fig. 2, seeds)  Type,
Wislizenus of 1846 in Herb. Mo. Bot. Gard.

Mountains of Chihuahua.  Fl. June-July.

Specimens examined: Chihuahua (Wislizenus of 1846): also
specimens cultivated in St. Louis in 1848, 1850, 1854.

45. Cactus radians. (DC.) Kuntze, Rev. Gen. Pl. 261 (1891).

  Mamillaria radians  DC. Rev. Cact. 111 (1829).
  Mamillaria pectinata  Engelm Syn. Cact. 266 (1856).

Globose, 3.5 to 7.5 cm. in diameter, simple: tubercles conical,
from a 4-angled base, lower ones short (4 to 6 mm.), upper
flower-bearing ones longer (10 to 12 mm.), terete and grooved:
radial spines 16 to 24, somewhat recurved from a bulbous
compressed base, stiff and pectinate, horny or whitish (at length
ashy), interwoven with adjacent clusters, those on lower
tubercles about equal (6 to 10 mm.), on flower-bearing tubercles
elongated, mixed with a few stouter ones and fasciculated (lower
ones 10 to 12 mm. long, upper ones 12 to 18 mm. long and forming
an apical tuft); centrals none: flowers over 5 cm. long and about
6 to 7.5 cm. in diameter when expanded, bright sulphur-yellow:
fruit ovate and green, about 12 mm. long: seeds compressed,
brownish smooth and shining, 1.8 mm. long. (Ill. Cact. Mex.
Bound. t. 11)  Type unknown; that of M. pectinata Engelm. is the
Wright material in Herb. Mo. Bot. Gard.

Extending from the hills along the Lower Pecos to El Paso,
southwestern Texas, southward through Coahuila and San Luis
Potosi to southern Mexico.

Specimens examined: Texas (Wright 226 of 1849, also of 1852;
