
IX

THE FACE OF DEATH


I MUST HAVE FALLEN ASLEEP FROM EXHAUSTION.  When I awoke I was very
hungry, and after busying myself searching for fruit for a while, I set
off through the jungle to find the beach.  I knew that the island was
not so large but that I could easily find the sea if I did but move in
a straight line, but there came the difficulty as there was no way in
which I could direct my course and hold it, the sun, of course, being
always directly above my head, and the trees so thickly set that I
could see no distant object which might serve to guide me in a straight
line.

As it was I must have walked for a great distance since I ate four
times and slept twice before I reached the sea, but at last I did so,
and my pleasure at the sight of it was greatly enhanced by the chance
discovery of a hidden canoe among the bushes through which I had
stumbled just prior to coming upon the beach.

I can tell you that it did not take me long to pull that awkward craft
down to the water and shove it far out from shore.  My experience with
Ja had taught me that if I were to steal another canoe I must be quick
about it and get far beyond the owner's reach as soon as possible.

I must have come out upon the opposite side of the island from that at
which Ja and I had entered it, for the mainland was nowhere in sight.
For a long time I paddled around the shore, though well out, before I
saw the mainland in the distance.  At the sight of it I lost no time in
directing my course toward it, for I had long since made up my mind to
return to Phutra and give myself up that I might be once more with
Perry and Ghak the Hairy One.

I felt that I was a fool ever to have attempted to escape alone,
especially in view of the fact that our plans were already well
formulated to make a break for freedom together.  Of course I realized
that the chances of the success of our proposed venture were slim
indeed, but I knew that I never could enjoy freedom without Perry so
long as the old man lived, and I had learned that the probability that
I might find him was less than slight.

Had Perry been dead, I should gladly have pitted my strength and wit
against the savage and primordial world in which I found myself.  I
could have lived in seclusion within some rocky cave until I had found
the means to outfit myself with the crude weapons of the Stone Age, and
then set out in search of her whose image had now become the constant
companion of my waking hours, and the central and beloved figure of my
dreams.

But, to the best of my knowledge, Perry still lived and it was my duty
and wish to be again with him, that we might share the dangers and
vicissitudes of the strange world we had discovered.  And Ghak, too;
the great, shaggy man had found a place in the hearts of us both, for
he was indeed every inch a man and king.  Uncouth, perhaps, and brutal,
too, if judged too harshly by the standards of effete twentieth-century
civilization, but withal noble, dignified, chivalrous, and loveable.

Chance carried me to the very beach upon which I had discovered Ja's
canoe, and a short time later I was scrambling up the steep bank to
retrace my steps from the plain of Phutra.  But my troubles came when I
entered the canyon beyond the summit, for here I found that several of
them centered at the point where I crossed the divide, and which one I
had traversed to reach the pass I could not for the life of me remember.

It was all a matter of chance and so I set off down that which seemed
the easiest going, and in this I made the same mistake that many of us
do in selecting the path along which we shall follow out the course of
our lives, and again learned that it is not always best to follow the
line of least resistance.

By the time I had eaten eight meals and slept twice I was convinced
that I was upon the wrong trail, for between Phutra and the inland sea
I had not slept at all, and had eaten but once.  To retrace my steps to
the summit of the divide and explore another canyon seemed the only
solution of my problem, but a sudden widening and levelness of the
canyon just before me seemed to suggest that it was about to open into
a level country, and with the lure of discovery strong upon me I
decided to proceed but a short distance farther before I turned back.

The next turn of the canyon brought me to its mouth, and before me I
saw a narrow plain leading down to an ocean.  At my right the side of
the canyon continued to the water's edge, the valley lying to my left,
and the foot of it running gradually into the sea, where it formed a
broad level beach.

Clumps of strange trees dotted the landscape here and there almost to
the water, and rank grass and ferns grew between.  From the nature of
the vegetation I was convinced that the land between the ocean and the
foothills was swampy, though directly before me it seemed dry enough
all the way to the sandy strip along which the restless waters advanced
and retreated.

Curiosity prompted me to walk down to the beach, for the scene was very
beautiful.  As I passed along beside the deep and tangled vegetation of
the swamp I thought that I saw a movement of the ferns at my left, but
though I stopped a moment to look it was not repeated, and if anything
lay hid there my eyes could not penetrate the dense foliage to discern
it.

Presently I stood upon the beach looking out over the wide and lonely
sea across whose forbidding bosom no human being had yet ventured, to
discover what strange and mysterious lands lay beyond, or what its
invisible islands held of riches, wonders, or adventure.  What savage
faces, what fierce and formidable beasts were this very instant
watching the lapping of the waves upon its farther shore!  How far did
it extend?  Perry had told me that the seas of Pellucidar were small in
comparison with those of the outer crust, but even so this great ocean
might stretch its broad expanse for thousands of miles.  For countless
ages it had rolled up and down its countless miles of shore, and yet
today it remained all unknown beyond the tiny strip that was visible
from its beaches.

The fascination of speculation was strong upon me.  It was as though I
had been carried back to the birth time of our own outer world to look
upon its lands and seas ages before man had traversed either.  Here was
a new world, all untouched.  It called to me to explore it.  I was
dreaming of the excitement and adventure which lay before us could
Perry and I but escape the Mahars, when something, a slight noise I
imagine, drew my attention behind me.

As I turned, romance, adventure, and discovery in the abstract took
wing before the terrible embodiment of all three in concrete form that
I beheld advancing upon me.

A huge, slimy amphibian it was, with toad-like body and the mighty jaws
of an alligator.  Its immense carcass must have weighed tons, and yet
it moved swiftly and silently toward me.  Upon one hand was the bluff
that ran from the canyon to the sea, on the other the fearsome swamp
from which the creature had sneaked upon me, behind lay the mighty
untracked sea, and before me in the center of the narrow way that led
to safety stood this huge mountain of terrible and menacing flesh.

A single glance at the thing was sufficient to assure me that I was
facing one of those long-extinct, prehistoric creatures whose
fossilized remains are found within the outer crust as far back as the
Triassic formation, a gigantic labyrinthodon.  And there I was,
unarmed, and, with the exception of a loin cloth, as naked as I had
come into the world.  I could imagine how my first ancestor felt that
distant, prehistoric morn that he encountered for the first time the
terrifying progenitor of the thing that had me cornered now beside the
restless, mysterious sea.

Unquestionably he had escaped, or I should not have been within
Pellucidar or elsewhere, and I wished at that moment that he had handed
down to me with the various attributes that I presumed I have inherited
from him, the specific application of the instinct of self-preservation
which saved him from the fate which loomed so close before me today.

To seek escape in the swamp or in the ocean would have been similar to
jumping into a den of lions to escape one upon the outside.  The sea
and swamp both were doubtless alive with these mighty, carnivorous
amphibians, and if not, the individual that menaced me would pursue me
into either the sea or the swamp with equal facility.

There seemed nothing to do but stand supinely and await my end.  I
thought of Perry--how he would wonder what had become of me.  I thought
of my friends of the outer world, and of how they all would go on
living their lives in total ignorance of the strange and terrible fate
that had overtaken me, or unguessing the weird surroundings which had
witnessed the last frightful agony of my extinction.  And with these
thoughts came a realization of how unimportant to the life and
happiness of the world is the existence of any one of us.  We may be
snuffed out without an instant's warning, and for a brief day our
friends speak of us with subdued voices.  The following morning, while
the first worm is busily engaged in testing the construction of our
coffin, they are teeing up for the first hole to suffer more acute
sorrow over a sliced ball than they did over our, to us, untimely
demise.  The labyrinthodon was coming more slowly now.  He seemed to
realize that escape for me was impossible, and I could have sworn that
his huge, fanged jaws grinned in pleasurable appreciation of my
predicament, or was it in anticipation of the juicy morsel which would
so soon be pulp between those formidable teeth?

He was about fifty feet from me when I heard a voice calling to me from
the direction of the bluff at my left.  I looked and could have shouted
in delight at the sight that met my eyes, for there stood Ja, waving
frantically to me, and urging me to run for it to the cliff's base.

I had no idea that I should escape the monster that had marked me for
his breakfast, but at least I should not die alone.  Human eyes would
watch me end.  It was cold comfort I presume, but yet I derived some
slight peace of mind from the contemplation of it.

To run seemed ridiculous, especially toward that steep and unscalable
cliff, and yet I did so, and as I ran I saw Ja, agile as a monkey,
crawl down the precipitous face of the rocks, clinging to small
projections, and the tough creepers that had found root-hold here and
there.

The labyrinthodon evidently thought that Ja was coming to double his
portion of human flesh, so he was in no haste to pursue me to the cliff
and frighten away this other tidbit.  Instead he merely trotted along
behind me.

As I approached the foot of the cliff I saw what Ja intended doing, but
I doubted if the thing would prove successful.  He had come down to
within twenty feet of the bottom, and there, clinging with one hand to
a small ledge, and with his feet resting precariously upon tiny bushes
that grew from the solid face of the rock, he lowered the point of his
long spear until it hung some six feet above the ground.

To clamber up that slim shaft without dragging Ja down and
precipitating both to the same doom from which the copper-colored one
was attempting to save me seemed utterly impossible, and as I came near
the spear I told Ja so, and that I could not risk him to try to save
myself.

But he insisted that he knew what he was doing and was in no danger
himself.

"The danger is still yours," he called, "for unless you move much more
rapidly than you are now, the sithic will be upon you and drag you back
before ever you are halfway up the spear--he can rear up and reach you
with ease anywhere below where I stand."

Well, Ja should know his own business, I thought, and so I grasped the
spear and clambered up toward the red man as rapidly as I could--being
so far removed from my simian ancestors as I am.  I imagine the
slow-witted sithic, as Ja called him, suddenly realized our intentions
and that he was quite likely to lose all his meal instead of having it
doubled as he had hoped.

When he saw me clambering up that spear he let out a hiss that fairly
shook the ground, and came charging after me at a terrific rate.  I had
reached the top of the spear by this time, or almost; another six
inches would give me a hold on Ja's hand, when I felt a sudden wrench
from below and glancing fearfully downward saw the mighty jaws of the
monster close on the sharp point of the weapon.

I made a frantic effort to reach Ja's hand, the sithic gave a
tremendous tug that came near to jerking Ja from his frail hold on the
surface of the rock, the spear slipped from his fingers, and still
clinging to it I plunged feet foremost toward my executioner.

At the instant that he felt the spear come away from Ja's hand the
creature must have opened his huge jaws to catch me, for when I came
down, still clinging to the butt end of the weapon, the point yet
rested in his mouth and the result was that the sharpened end
transfixed his lower jaw.

With the pain he snapped his mouth closed.  I fell upon his snout, lost
my hold upon the spear, rolled the length of his face and head, across
his short neck onto his broad back and from there to the ground.

Scarce had I touched the earth than I was upon my feet, dashing madly
for the path by which I had entered this horrible valley.  A glance
over my shoulder showed me the sithic engaged in pawing at the spear
stuck through his lower jaw, and so busily engaged did he remain in
this occupation that I had gained the safety of the cliff top before he
was ready to take up the pursuit.  When he did not discover me in sight
within the valley he dashed, hissing, into the rank vegetation of the
swamp and that was the last I saw of him.



X

PHUTRA AGAIN


I HASTENED TO THE CLIFF EDGE ABOVE JA AND helped him to a secure
footing.  He would not listen to any thanks for his attempt to save me,
which had come so near miscarrying.

"I had given you up for lost when you tumbled into the Mahar temple,"
he said, "for not even I could save you from their clutches, and you
may imagine my surprise when on seeing a canoe dragged up upon the
beach of the mainland I discovered your own footprints in the sand
beside it.

"I immediately set out in search of you, knowing as I did that you must
be entirely unarmed and defenseless against the many dangers which lurk
upon the mainland both in the form of savage beasts and reptiles, and
men as well.  I had no difficulty in tracking you to this point.  It is
well that I arrived when I did."

"But why did you do it?" I asked, puzzled at this show of friendship on
the part of a man of another world and a different race and color.

"You saved my life," he replied; "from that moment it became my duty to
protect and befriend you.  I would have been no true Mezop had I evaded
my plain duty; but it was a pleasure in this instance for I like you.
I wish that you would come and live with me.  You shall become a member
of my tribe.  Among us there is the best of hunting and fishing, and
you shall have, to choose a mate from, the most beautiful girls of
Pellucidar.  Will you come?"

I told him about Perry then, and Dian the Beautiful, and how my duty
was to them first.  Afterward I should return and visit him--if I could
ever find his island.

"Oh, that is easy, my friend," he said.  "You need merely to come to
the foot of the highest peak of the Mountains of the Clouds.  There you
will find a river which flows into the Lural Az.  Directly opposite the
mouth of the river you will see three large islands far out, so far
that they are barely discernible, the one to the extreme left as you
face them from the mouth of the river is Anoroc, where I rule the tribe
of Anoroc."

"But how am I to find the Mountains of the Clouds?" I asked.  "Men say
that they are visible from half Pellucidar," he replied.

"How large is Pellucidar?" I asked, wondering what sort of theory these
primitive men had concerning the form and substance of their world.

"The Mahars say it is round, like the inside of a tola shell," he
answered, "but that is ridiculous, since, were it true, we should fall
back were we to travel far in any direction, and all the waters of
Pellucidar would run to one spot and drown us.  No, Pellucidar is quite
flat and extends no man knows how far in all directions.  At the edges,
so my ancestors have reported and handed down to me, is a great wall
that prevents the earth and waters from escaping over into the burning
sea whereon Pellucidar floats; but I never have been so far from Anoroc
as to have seen this wall with my own eyes.  However, it is quite
reasonable to believe that this is true, whereas there is no reason at
all in the foolish belief of the Mahars.  According to them
Pellucidarians who live upon the opposite side walk always with their
heads pointed downward!" and Ja laughed uproariously at the very
thought.

It was plain to see that the human folk of this inner world had not
advanced far in learning, and the thought that the ugly Mahars had so
outstripped them was a very pathetic one indeed.  I wondered how many
ages it would take to lift these people out of their ignorance even
were it given to Perry and me to attempt it.  Possibly we would be
killed for our pains as were those men of the outer world who dared
challenge the dense ignorance and superstitions of the earth's younger
days.  But it was worth the effort if the opportunity ever presented
itself.

And then it occurred to me that here was an opportunity--that I might
make a small beginning upon Ja, who was my friend, and thus note the
effect of my teaching upon a Pellucidarian.

"Ja," I said, "what would you say were I to tell you that in so far as
the Mahars' theory of the shape of Pellucidar is concerned it is
correct?"

"I would say," he replied, "that either you are a fool, or took me for
one."

"But, Ja," I insisted, "if their theory is incorrect how do you account
for the fact that I was able to pass through the earth from the outer
crust to Pellucidar.  If your theory is correct all is a sea of flame
beneath us, wherein no peoples could exist, and yet I come from a
great world that is covered with human beings, and beasts, and birds,
and fishes in mighty oceans."

"You live upon the under side of Pellucidar, and walk always with your
head pointed downward?" he scoffed.  "And were I to believe that, my
friend, I should indeed be mad."

I attempted to explain the force of gravity to him, and by the means of
the dropped fruit to illustrate how impossible it would be for a body
to fall off the earth under any circumstances.  He listened so intently
that I thought I had made an impression, and started the train of
thought that would lead him to a partial understanding of the truth.
But I was mistaken.

"Your own illustration," he said finally, "proves the falsity of your
theory."  He dropped a fruit from his hand to the ground.  "See," he
said, "without support even this tiny fruit falls until it strikes
something that stops it.  If Pellucidar were not supported upon the
flaming sea it too would fall as the fruit falls--you have proven it
yourself!" He had me, that time--you could see it in his eye.

It seemed a hopeless job and I gave it up, temporarily at least, for
when I contemplated the necessity explanation of our solar system and
the universe I realized how futile it would be to attempt to picture to
Ja or any other Pellucidarian the sun, the moon, the planets, and the
countless stars.  Those born within the inner world could no more
conceive of such things than can we of the outer crust reduce to
factors appreciable to our finite minds such terms as space and
eternity.

"Well, Ja," I laughed, "whether we be walking with our feet up or down,
here we are, and the question of greatest importance is not so much
where we came from as where we are going now.  For my part I wish that
you could guide me to Phutra where I may give myself up to the Mahars
once more that my friends and I may work out the plan of escape which
the Sagoths interrupted when they gathered us together and drove us to
the arena to witness the punishment of the slaves who killed the
guardsman.  I wish now that I had not left the arena for by this time
my friends and I might have made good our escape, whereas this delay
may mean the wrecking of all our plans, which depended for their
consummation upon the continued sleep of the three Mahars who lay in
the pit beneath the building in which we were confined."

"You would return to captivity?" cried Ja.

"My friends are there," I replied, "the only friends I have in
Pellucidar, except yourself.  What else may I do under the
circumstances?"

He thought for a moment in silence.  Then he shook his head sorrowfully.

"It is what a brave man and a good friend should do," he said; "yet it
seems most foolish, for the Mahars will most certainly condemn you to
death for running away, and so you will be accomplishing nothing for
your friends by returning.  Never in all my life have I heard of a
prisoner returning to the Mahars of his own free will.  There are but
few who escape them, though some do, and these would rather die than be
recaptured."

"I see no other way, Ja," I said, "though I can assure you that I would
rather go to Sheol after Perry than to Phutra.  However, Perry is much
too pious to make the probability at all great that I should ever be
called upon to rescue him from the former locality."

Ja asked me what Sheol was, and when I explained, as best I could, he
said, "You are speaking of Molop Az, the flaming sea upon which
Pellucidar floats.  All the dead who are buried in the ground go there.
Piece by piece they are carried down to Molop Az by the little demons
who dwell there.  We know this because when graves are opened we find
that the bodies have been partially or entirely borne off.  That is why
we of Anoroc place our dead in high trees where the birds may find them
and bear them bit by bit to the Dead World above the Land of Awful
Shadow.  If we kill an enemy we place his body in the ground that it
may go to Molop Az."

As we talked we had been walking up the canyon down which I had come to
the great ocean and the sithic.  Ja did his best to dissuade me from
returning to Phutra, but when he saw that I was determined to do so, he
consented to guide me to a point from which I could see the plain where
lay the city.  To my surprise the distance was but short from the beach
where I had again met Ja.  It was evident that I had spent much time
following the windings of a tortuous canyon, while just beyond the ridge
lay the city of Phutra near to which I must have come several times.

As we topped the ridge and saw the granite gate towers dotting the
flowered plain at our feet Ja made a final effort to persuade me to
abandon my mad purpose and return with him to Anoroc, but I was firm in
my resolve, and at last he bid me good-bye, assured in his own mind
that he was looking upon me for the last time.

I was sorry to part with Ja, for I had come to like him very much
indeed.  With his hidden city upon the island of Anoroc as a base, and
his savage warriors as escort Perry and I could have accomplished much
in the line of exploration, and I hoped that were we successful in our
effort to escape we might return to Anoroc later.

There was, however, one great thing to be accomplished first--at least
it was the great thing to me--the finding of Dian the Beautiful.  I
wanted to make amends for the affront I had put upon her in my
ignorance, and I wanted to--well, I wanted to see her again, and to be
with her.

Down the hillside I made my way into the gorgeous field of flowers, and
then across the rolling land toward the shadowless columns that guard
the ways to buried Phutra.  At a quarter-mile from the nearest entrance
I was discovered by the Sagoth guard, and in an instant four of the
gorilla-men were dashing toward me.

Though they brandished their long spears and yelled like wild Comanches
I paid not the slightest attention to them, walking quietly toward them
as though unaware of their existence.  My manner had the effect upon
them that I had hoped, and as we came quite near together they ceased
their savage shouting.  It was evident that they had expected me to
turn and flee at sight of them, thus presenting that which they most
enjoyed, a moving human target at which to cast their spears.

"What do you here?" shouted one, and then as he recognized me, "Ho!  It
is the slave who claims to be from another world--he who escaped when
the thag ran amuck within the amphitheater.  But why do you return,
having once made good your escape?"

"I did not 'escape'," I replied.  "I but ran away to avoid the thag, as
did others, and coming into a long passage I became confused and lost
my way in the foothills beyond Phutra.  Only now have I found my way
back."

"And you come of your free will back to Phutra!" exclaimed one of the
guardsmen.

"Where else might I go?" I asked.  "I am a stranger within Pellucidar
and know no other where than Phutra.  Why should I not desire to be in
Phutra?  Am I not well fed and well treated?  Am I not happy?  What
better lot could man desire?"

The Sagoths scratched their heads.  This was a new one on them, and so
being stupid brutes they took me to their masters whom they felt would
be better fitted to solve the riddle of my return, for riddle they
still considered it.

I had spoken to the Sagoths as I had for the purpose of throwing them
off the scent of my purposed attempt at escape.  If they thought that I
was so satisfied with my lot within Phutra that I would voluntarily
return when I had once had so excellent an opportunity to escape, they
would never for an instant imagine that I could be occupied in
arranging another escape immediately upon my return to the city.

So they led me before a slimy Mahar who clung to a slimy rock within
the large room that was the thing's office.  With cold, reptilian eyes
the creature seemed to bore through the thin veneer of my deceit and
read my inmost thoughts.  It heeded the story which the Sagoths told of
my return to Phutra, watching the gorilla-men's lips and fingers during
the recital.  Then it questioned me through one of the Sagoths.

"You say that you returned to Phutra of your own free will, because you
think yourself better off here than elsewhere--do you not know that you
may be the next chosen to give up your life in the interests of the
wonderful scientific investigations that our learned ones are
continually occupied with?"

I hadn't heard of anything of that nature, but I thought best not to
admit it.

"I could be in no more danger here," I said, "than naked and unarmed in
the savage jungles or upon the lonely plains of Pellucidar.  I was
fortunate, I think, to return to Phutra at all.  As it was I barely
escaped death within the jaws of a huge sithic.  No, I am sure that I
am safer in the hands of intelligent creatures such as rule Phutra.  At
least such would be the case in my own world, where human beings like
myself rule supreme.  There the higher races of man extend protection
and hospitality to the stranger within their gates, and being a
stranger here I naturally assumed that a like courtesy would be
accorded me."

The Mahar looked at me in silence for some time after I ceased speaking
and the Sagoth had translated my words to his master.  The creature
seemed deep in thought.  Presently he communicated some message to the
Sagoth.  The latter turned, and motioning me to follow him, left the
presence of the reptile.  Behind and on either side of me marched the
balance of the guard.

"What are they going to do with me?" I asked the fellow at my right.

"You are to appear before the learned ones who will question you
regarding this strange world from which you say you come."

After a moment's silence he turned to me again.

"Do you happen to know," he asked, "what the Mahars do to slaves who
lie to them?"

"No," I replied, "nor does it interest me, as I have no intention of
lying to the Mahars."

"Then be careful that you don't repeat the impossible tale you told
Sol-to-to just now--another world, indeed, where human beings rule!" he
concluded in fine scorn.

"But it is the truth," I insisted.  "From where else then did I come?
I am not of Pellucidar.  Anyone with half an eye could see that."

"It is your misfortune then," he remarked dryly, "that you may not be
judged by one with but half an eye."

"What will they do with me," I asked, "if they do not have a mind to
believe me?"

