have been properly carried out; in several mining installations where
this motive power had been long used, more or less imperfect attempts
had been made to heat the air; in one instance only, recorded by
Professor Riedler, was an efficient means employed. In this case a
spray of boiling water was injected into the cylinder and mixed with
the air at each stroke, with the result that a very marked economy was
obtained.

After a number of experiments, Mr. Popp arrived at the conclusion that
the simplest mode of heating, if not the most efficient, was at all
events the most suitable, as it was a matter of the first importance
that subscribers should not be troubled with the charge of any
apparatus involving complication or careful management; he therefore
adopted a simple form of cast iron stove lined with fireclay, heated
either by a gas jet or by a small coke fire. It was found that this
apparatus, crude as it was, answered the desired purpose, until some
better arrangement was perfected, and the type was accordingly adopted
throughout the whole system. It was quite recognized that this method
still left much to be desired, and the economy resulting from the use
of an improved form was very marked.

From a large number of trials very carefully carried out by Professor
Gutermuth, it was found that more than 70 per cent. of the total
number of calories in the fuel employed was absorbed by the air and
transformed into useful work. Whether gas or coal be employed as the
fuel, the amount required is so small as to be scarcely worth
consideration; according to the experiments carried out, it does not
exceed 0.09 kilo. per horse power and per hour, but it is scarcely to
be expected that in regular practice this quantity is not largely
exceeded. Professor Weyrauch has also carefully investigated this part
of the subject and fully confirms, if he, indeed, does not go beyond
Professor Gutermuth. He claims that the efficiency of fuel consumed in
this way is six times greater than when burnt under a boiler to
generate steam. He goes so far as to assert that with a good method of
heating the air, not only can all the losses due to the production and
the transmission of the compressed air be made good, but also that it
will actually contain more useful energy at the motor than was
expended at the central station in compressing it.

According to Professor Riedler, from 15 to 20 per cent. above the
power at the central station can be obtained by means at the disposal
of the power users, and it has been shown by experiment that by
heating the air to 250 deg. Cent. an increased efficiency of 30 per
cent. can be obtained. Better results than those heretofore obtained
may, therefore, be confidently expected with a more perfect and
economical application of the fuel in heating the air, and a better
means of regulation in admitting it to the motors. In his report
Professor Riedler indicates a method by the use of which he considers
considerable advantages may be secured. This is the heating the air in
two stages instead of at one operation, and passing it through two
motors, to the first of which the air is admitted heated only to a
moderate extent; the exhaust from this motor then passes into a second
heater and thence into the second motor. A series of experiments with
this arrangement were recently carried out.

The consumption of air per brake horse power was reduced from 812
cubic feet per hour, a favorable duty in the single motor, to 720, and
in the best result to 646 cubic feet with the two motors and double
heaters. It should be added that these trials were carried out with
steam engines but ill adapted for the purpose. It is to be regretted
that the experiments of Professor Riedler could not have been
conducted with more perfect appliances, but it must be borne in mind
that the utilization of compressed air, especially as regards the
motors, is still in a very imperfect stage, and that a great deal
remains to be done before the maximum power available at the motor can
be obtained. Investigations in this direction for a considerable time
to come must be directed, therefore, toward improving the design and
construction of the motors and the treatment of the air at the point
of delivery into the engine.

A large number of motors in use among the subscribers to the
Compressed Air Company, of Paris, are rotary engines developing one
horse power and less, and these in the early times of the industry
were extravagant in their consumption, to a very high degree. To some
extent this condition of things has been improved, chiefly by the
addition of better regulating valves to control the air admission.

As altered, the two horse power rotary motors, when employed as cold
air engines, a method often desired in special industries, consume
1,059 cubic feet per hour and per indicated horse power; with a
moderate degree of heating, say to 50 deg. Cent., this consumption
falls to 847 cubic feet. The efficiency of this type of rotary motors
with air heated to 50 deg. may now be assumed at 43 per cent., not a
very economical result, it is true, and one that may be largely
improved, yet it is evident that with such an efficiency the use of
small motors in many industries becomes possible, while in cases where
it is necessary to have a constant supply of cold air, economy ceases
to be a matter of the first importance.

Some useful results were obtained with compressed air used in crank
engines; it is to be regretted that with this, also, apologies have to
be made for the imperfect design and construction; they were old steam
engines, some of those of two horse power losing from 25 to 30 per
cent. by their own friction; some of the others tried, however, were
far better, a newer type losing only from 8 to 10 per cent., while the
80 horse power referred to below showed an efficiency of 91 per cent.
From these trials Prof. Riedler deduces--assuming 85 per cent.
efficiency--a consumption of 611, 752, and 720 cubic feet per brake
horse power. It is very evident from the foregoing that the Compressed
Air Company, of Paris, will never do itself justice until as much
thought and care has been devoted to the economical use of the motive
power as has been expended in the means of producing it, and Professor
Riedler's recent investigations should be especially useful in this
respect. The question has indeed attracted the attention of more than
one manufacturer, and reference is made to a particular type of small
rotary motors which are being constructed by MM. Riedinger & Co., and
which is stated have given very excellent results. These engines were
specially used for working sewing machines and developed on the brake
an efficiency of 34.07 and 51.63 foot pounds per second. Trials were
made with a half horse power variable expansion Riedinger engine.


  TRIALS OF A SMALL ROTARY RIEDINGER ENGINE.
 ______________________________________________________________
                                               |       |
  Number of trials.                            |   I.  |   II.
 ______________________________________________|_______|_______
                                               |       |
 Initial air pressure.     lb. per square inch |    86 | 71.8
      "      temperature.           deg. Cent. |   +12 |  +170
 Ft. pounds per second  measured on the brake. | 51.63 | 34.07
 Revolutions per minute.                       |   384 |  300
 Consumption of air for one horse power per    |       |
    hour.                                      | 1,377 |  988
 ______________________________________________|_______|_______


  TRIALS OF A 0.5 HORSE POWER RIEDINGER ROTARY ENGINE.
 _____________________________________________________________________
                                           |      |      |      |
  Number of trials.                        |  I.  |  II. | III. |  IV.
 __________________________________________|______|______|______|_____
                                           |      |      |      |
 Initial pressure of air.  lb. per sq. in. |   54 | 69.7 |   85 | 71.8
      "  temperature of air.    deg. Cent. |  170 |  180 |  198 |    8
 Final        "        "            "      |   25 |   20 |  ... |   25
 Revolutions per minute.                   |  335 |  350 |  310 |  243
 Foot pounds per second measured on        |      |      |      |
    brake.                                 |  271 |  477 |  376 |  316
 Consumption of air per horse power        |      |      |      |
    and per hour.                          |  883 |  791 |  900 |1,148
 __________________________________________|______|______|______|______

  TRIAL OF AN 80 HORSE POWER (NOMINAL) FARCOT STEAM ENGINE.
 ___________________________________________________________________
                  | R p  |      |                  |
                  | e e  | I    |                  | Consumption of
                  | v r  | n    |   Temperature    |  air per horse
                  | o    | d h p|      of air.     |  power and per
                  | l m  | i o o|                  |      hour.
                  | u i  | c r w|__________________|________________
                  | t n  | a s e|         |        |       |
    Motor.        | i u  | t e r|Admission|Exhaust.|Nominal| Brake
                  | o t  | e   .|         |        | horse | horse
                  | n e  | d    |         |        | power.| power.
 _________________|_s_.__|______|_________|________|_______|________
                  |      |      |  deg. C | deg. C |       |
 Nominal 80 horse | 54.3 | 72.3 |    129  |   21   |  469  |  517
 power single     | 54.3 | 72.3 |    152  |   29   |  437  |  475
 cylinder Farcot  | 54.0 | 72.3 |    160  |   35   |  424  |  465
 engine.          | 40   | 65.0 |    170  |   49   |  438  |  477
 _________________|______|______|_________|________|_______|________


These motors, it may be assumed, represent the best practice that has
been obtained up to the present time in the construction of compressed
air motors; with the smallest of them, indicating about one-tenth of a
horse power, the consumption of air, when admitted cold, was 1377
cubic feet and 988 cubic feet when the air was heated before
admission. The half horse power engine consumed 1148 cubic feet of
cold air, and of heated air 791 cubic feet per horse power and per
hour. It should be mentioned that these, the most valuable and
suggestive of all the trials carried out by Professor Riedler, were
conducted with the greatest care, two distinct modes of measuring the
air supplied being followed on two occasions for each test; it may
therefore be considered that the results given are absolutely correct.
The trials were made with an old single cylinder Farcot engine,
nominally of 80 horse power, but indicating over 72.3. With this
engine the consumption of air varied from 465 to 517 cubic feet, the
larger consumption being due to the lower temperature (129 deg. Cent.)
to which the air was raised before admission; in the most economical
result the temperature was 160 deg. Cent. The volumes of air referred
to are, of course, in all cases taken at atmospheric pressure.

Among the important losses that have to be reckoned with in every
system of distributing motive power from a central station--whether by
steam or by electricity, water, or compressed air--losses must occur
in the mains by which the power generated is transferred from the
point of production to that of consumption. In the case we are now
considering very careful tests were conducted in 1889 by Professor
Kennedy, to whose report we have already referred. Since that time
important changes have been made by the Compressed Air Company, at
Paris, in the details of distribution, and on this account the later
investigations of Professor Riedler on the losses due to this cause
are of special interest.

Before its admission into the mains a certain loss occurs at the St.
Fargeau station, in the large reservoirs to which the air is delivered
from the compressors. This question of preliminary storage was one
that received considerable attention when the designs of the new
station on the Quai de la Gare were being considered. It was intended
to construct very large receivers in the basement of the station, and
the foundations for these were even commenced. It was decided,
however, that for the 10,000 horse power which is to form the first
section of the new station, and for which the complete system of mains
has already been laid down, storage reservoirs would be unnecessary,
and a saving both in first cost and subsequent loss of air would be
effected. The length of mains of 19.69 in. diameter is so considerable
that they will contain at all times a sufficient reserve of air to
prevent any irregularities in pressure at the motors.

With reference to these mains it may be mentioned that, unlike the
11.81 in. conductors of the St. Fargeau system, of which 17 kilometers
are laid in the Paris subways, the new mains are entirely laid in the
streets, it having been found impossible to make room for these large
pipes in the subways already crowded with telegraph and telephone
wires, water mains, etc.

Professor Riedler investigated the two causes of loss in the
mains--leakage and resistance. It was superficially evident that the
mains of the old system were so well laid, and the joints so well
designed, that the loss from leakage was never a serious one. In
order, however, to ascertain the amount accurately, a series of
careful experiments were carried out by Professor Gutermuth with the
11.81 in. mains of the St. Fargeau system.


  EXPERIMENTS ON LEAKAGE IN MAINS.

---------------------------------------------------------------------
| |                 |         |               |             | L P A |
| |                 |         | Air Pressure  |   Loss of   | o e i |
| |                 |         |  in Mains.    |  Pressure.  | s r r |
| |                 |         |---------------|-------------| s     |
| |                 |         |  B    |       |      |      |   C D |
| |System of Mains  | Length. |  e   T|       |      |      | o e e |
|N|    Tried.       |         |  g   r|  At   |      |      | f n l |
|u|                 |         |A i o i| End   |During| Per  |   t i |
|m|                 |         |t n f a|  of   |Trials|Hour. | A . v |
|b|                 |         |  n   l|Trials.|      |      | i   e |
|e|                 |         |  i   s|       |      |      | r o r |
|r|                 |         |  n   .|       |      |      |   f e |
| |                 |         |  g    |       |      |      |     d |
--+-----------------+---------+-------+-------+------+------+-------|
| |                 | yards.  | atm.  |  atm. |      |      |       |
|1|Southern reseau  |         |       |       |      |      |       |
| | to Place de la  |         |       |       |      |      |       |
| | Concorde.       |  9,980  | 6.5   |  6.0  | 0.5  | 1.5  |  3    |
|2| Total reseau    | 18,500  | 6.9   |  5.9  | 1.0  | 1.5  |  6.3  |
|3|To Place de      |         |       |       |      |      |       |
| | la Concorde     |  9,980  | 7.0   |  6.43 | 0.57 | 0.75 |  2.16 |
|4|Total reseau     | 18,500  | 6.7   |  5.28 | 0.88 | 1.32 |  5.5  |
|5|Northern reseau  |         |       |       |      |      |       |
| | to Rue de Belle-|         |       |       |      |      |       |
| | ville.          |  1,530  | 6.0   |  5.0  | 1.0  | 0.6  |  2.3  |
|6|To the Rue des   |         |       |       |      |      |       |
| | Pyrenees.       |    600  | 6.1   |  3.7  | 2.4  | 0.56 |  2.2  |
---------------------------------------------------------------------


These trials refer to the mains running from the St. Fargeau station
to the Place de la Concorde, a length of 9.142 kilometers; to the
whole system of mains, 16.5 kilometers; to the northern mains running
from St. Fargeau to the Rue de Belleville, 1.4 kilometers; and from
St. Fargeau to the Rue des Pyrenees, 6.5 kilometers. It will be seen
from the figures given in the table that the actual loss is small, and
it is stated that this is due chiefly to the elastic joint employed
throughout the system, excepting in the Rue de Belleville, where rigid
couplings are used, and continual trouble is experienced from loss by
leakage. In all cases the losses given are the maximum, which only
occur under the most unfavorable conditions.

It was found, during the first, second, and fourth tests, that
considerable leakage occurred between the St. Fargeau central station
and the Rue de Belleville. During the trials two and four, an
uncertain amount of loss occurred from the consumption of air required
to work the pneumatic clocks, and also motors in the circuit, that
could not be stopped. The tests two and four include all losses in the
service pipes, as well as the mains.

The production of compressed air at the central station is assumed at
30,000 cubic feet per hour (atmospheric pressure), and in all cases
the loss in the mains is taken as a percentage of the total
production.

The losses due to resistance in the mains were also examined with
great care, over independent sections, as well as through the complete
_reseau_. During the early part of these trials, an unusual and
excessive loss was recorded, the cause of which could not be at first
ascertained. At intervals along these mains are placed a number of
water reservoirs which receive the water injected into the mains; in
addition to these the direct flow of the air is interrupted by
numerous siphons, the stop valves to branches, etc. Investigation
showed that the presence of these reservoirs created considerable
resistance on account of an increased and subsequently reduced
section. The exact loss from this cause was, therefore, carefully
measured, as well as the losses existing in the mains not so
interrupted. The results show that the loss by expansion at one
reservoir, when the speed of the air flow was 23 ft. per second, was
equal to 0.15 atmosphere; with a speed of 29 ft. 6 in. per second, it
amounted to 0.2 atmosphere.

Therefore, the presence of five such reservoirs would cause a loss in
pressure equal to one atmosphere. This very undesirable arrangement is
not repeated in the new system, the sumphs being connected in such a
way as not to modify the section of the tube, nor consequently the
pressure of the air. The presence of the siphons and stop valves did
not seem to affect the pressure to any measurable extent. The
following table contains a list of the more important mains tested,
and it may be mentioned that the resistance, due to the reservoirs,
was at first partially included. The trials were carried out while the
mains were not being drawn upon by subscribers.


-----------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                   |            |
Section of Mains Tested.                           |  Length.   |No. of
                                                   |            |Tests.
                                                   |            |
---------------------------------------------------+------------+------
                                                   |  yards.    |
From the central station to the end of reseau and  |            |
  back to central station by return circuit        |  18,100    |   7
From the central station to the Rue Fontaine au    |\ 14,600    |/  3
  Roi                                              |/  9,900    |\  4
From the central station to the Rue de la          |            |
  Charonne                                         |   9,490    |   5
From the Rue de la Charonne to Fontaine au         |            |
  Roi                                              |   4,770    |   3
From the central station to the Avenue de la       |            |
  Republique                                       |   1,860    |   8
Various trials on different lengths of mains       |770 to 8,000|  11
-----------------------------------------------------------------------


Over the whole system of 16.5 kilometers, which was also tested when
no air was being taken off, there were four reservoirs of considerable
size, and which offered a large resistance with a corresponding loss
of pressure; on the line there were also 23 siphons and 42 stop
valves.

These trials were repeated several times to secure accuracy, and the
speed of the air was brought to 49 ft. a second. The results obtained
in one of these trials may be taken as an example. The main between
the Rue St. Fargeau and the Fontaine au Roi, on which there are no
collecting reservoirs, but three siphons and eight stop valves, gave,
with an average speed of 21 ft. 3 in., a loss in pressure of 0.05
atmosphere for each kilometer of main.

From these experiments it would appear that, assuming a speed of 21
ft. per second, a loss in pressure of one atmosphere would correspond
to a distance of 20 kilometers; that is to say, a central station
could extend its mains on all sides with a radius of 20 kilometers,
and the motors at the ends of the lines would receive the air at a
pressure 15 lb. less than at the central station. Professor Riedler
states that as an actually measured result, the velocity of the air
through the mains of the St. Fargeau system is 19 ft. 8 in. per
second, and that the loss in pressure per kilometer is 0.07
atmosphere. From this it follows that including the resistances due to
the four reservoirs, and other obstructions actually existing, an
allowance of one atmosphere loss on a 14 kilometer radius is ample. By
increasing the initial pressure of the air, much better results can be
obtained, and future attention in practice should be devoted to this
point. The amount of work required to compress air does not increase
in the same ratio as the pressure, and for this reason considerable
economy can be effected at the first stage, and the loss in the mains
will be reduced.

Passing to another point of the same subject, Professor Riedler
considers the best dimensions that should be given to the mains.
Resistance decreases with an increase in the diameter of these and in
direct ratio to their diameter; for this reason--still assuming a
pressure corresponding to a velocity of 20 ft. per second--with a fall
of one atmosphere, a length of 40 kilometers could be succesfully
worked.

The mains of the new _reseau_ for the Quai de la Gare station are
19.69 in. in diameter; they are built up of steel plates riveted, and
this Professor Riedler considers to have been a serious error on
account of the extra resistance offered by the large number of rivet
heads.

The following may be taken as a brief summary of Professor Riedler's
conclusions: Recent improvements in central station practice have
resulted in an increased efficiency of about 30 per cent. in the
compressors, but this benefit can only be realized when the new
station is in operation. That the small and very imperfect air engines
in use on the system give an efficiency of 50 per cent., while with
ordinary steam engines driven by air an efficiency of 80 per cent. can
be reached with a very small expenditure of fuel for heating the air
before admitting it into the motor. That special attention should be
given to the improvement of air engines, and that with increased
initial pressures at the central station the distance of the
transmission can be very considerably augmented. Finally, Professor
Riedler claims that power can be transmitted by compressed air more
conveniently and more economically than by any other means.

       *       *       *       *       *

[Continued from SUPPLEMENT, No. 802, page 12810.]




THE BUILDERS OF THE STEAM ENGINE--THE FOUNDERS OF MODERN INDUSTRIES
AND NATIONS.[1]

[Footnote 1: An address delivered at the Centennial Celebration of the
American Patent System, Washington, April, 1891.]

By Dr. R.H. THURSTON, Director of Sibley College, Cornell University.


Papin, Worcester, Savery, were the authors of the period of
application of the power of steam to useful work in our later days.
The world was, in their time, just waking into a new life under the
stimulus of a new freedom that, from the time of Shakespeare, of
Newton, and of Gilbert, the physicist, has steadily become wider,
higher, and more fruitful year by year. All the modern sciences and
all the modern arts had their reawakening with the seventeenth
century. Every aspect of freedom for humanity came into view in those
days of a new birth. Both the possibility of the introduction of new
sciences and of new arts and the power of utilizing all new
intellectual and physical forces came together. The steam engine could
not earlier have taken form, and, taking form, it could not have
promoted the advance of civilization in the earlier centuries. The
invention becoming possible of development and application, the
promotion of the arts and of all forms of human activity became a
possible consequence of its final successful introduction into the
rude arts that it was to so effectively promote and improve.

But the work of these inventors was in itself but little more
important than that of the Greek inventor of the steam aelopile, for
each brought forward a machine which was, from a business point of
view, utterly impracticable, and which, in each case, only served to
show that a better device might prove useful and lead the way to its
introduction. The merit of the inventors of the eighteenth century was
that they were _able_ to lead the way, to point out the path to
success, to furnish evidence of the value of the coming, crowning
invention. The "fire engines," as they were then called, of these now
famous men were merely contrivances by the use of which the pressure
of confined steam of high tension could be brought to act on the
surface of a mass of confined water, forcing it downward into pipes
through which it was led off and upward to a higher level; and thus a
mine could be drained, ineffectively and expensively to be sure, but
vastly more satisfactorily than by the animal power of the time. The
machine of Savery was the best of all; but that was only a somewhat
improved and manageable rearrangement of the engines of Papin and
Worcester. And, after all, Papin, the greatest man of science perhaps
of his time, died in poverty; Worcester languished in prison his whole
life, and the later efforts of his widow brought nothing by way of a
return for his invention; nor did either they or their successor,
Morland, make the introduction of the engine either general or
remunerative.

Savery, coming on the stage at more nearly the right time to seize
upon an opportunity, gained more than either of his predecessors; but
we have no evidence that he ever acquired any large compensation or
met with any remarkable business success in the introduction of the
rude engine which bore his name; nor did Desaguliers, the great
philosopher, or even Smeaton, the great engineer, of the later years
of that century, make any great success of it. It was reserved for
Watt to reap the harvest. But, though he so effectively reaped where
his predecessors had sown, Watt is not the greatest of the inventors
of the steam engine, if we rate his standing by the magnitude of the
improvement which marked his reconstruction of the engine.

