varied from 161/2 feet in diameter at the upper shaft to 21 feet at the
lowest shaft. The water-wheel moved only in one direction; the pinion on
the wheel-shaft drove the spur-wheel, to which the pitman of the pump-bob
was attached. On the spur-wheel shaft was a friction-gear, driving the
hoisting-reel; this reel was mounted on sliding blocks, so that hoisting
was done by putting it in gear, the empty load being dropped by a
friction-band. Changing the size of the water-wheel as the pressure
increased permitted the use of the same pattern of machinery at the
different shafts. The water was brought to the wheel by a discharge-pipe,
some nine feet long, having a vertical movement by ball-and-socket joint,
so that at pleasure, by dropping the pipe, the machinery could be run at
various speeds, or entirely stopped. At the end of this discharge-pipe
was a cast tapered nozzle, about 31/2 inches in diameter, in which was
inserted a ring of saw-plate steel having the desired diameter, and which
was held in place by an annular screw-cap. By changing the ring, which
only required a few moments' time, any desired amount of water, up to 3 or
4 cubic feet a second, could be discharged against the wheel. The
stop-gate was left wide open while the machinery was running. The pumping
was done by eighteen pumps, of Cornish pattern; the largest amount of
water pumped from any one shaft was something over 30 cubic feet a minute;
the power at hand, however, was ample to pump more than twice that
quantity. It was rather curious at, this shaft to see more water coming
from the pumps than was used on the wheel. The two diamond drills were
driven by a small hurdy-gurdy set on the rear of the drill carriage. This,
but at another tunnel, was afterward modified by placing a separate
hurdy-gurdy on a sleeve on each drill-rod; the advance movement of the
drill being given by hydrostatic pressure on an annular piston, thus doing
away with all gearing. These eight sets of machinery were run for nearly
21/2 years' time; the only break being that of a spur-wheel, doubtless
caused by the careless dropping of a steel bar between it and its pinion.
Aside from this accident, practically not a dollar was spent for repairs,
and the machinery, including the pipe, was in about as good order when the
tunnel was finished as when it was first erected. One man, on a twelve
hour shift, operated the machinery at each shaft, besides dumping the
cars; two men kept the 18 pumps on the line in order, the principal work
being in keeping the suction-pipes for the down-grade headings tight; thus
a force of 18 men was only required for the eight shafts. The cost of the
pipe, gates, etc., when put in place, was $14,631, and of the machinery
about $60,000.

[Illustration: FIG. 14.]

At the Idaho gold quartz mine, situated near Grass Valley, California,
water-power has been introduced during the past year (1883), taking the
place of steam. The supply main is of wrought-iron, 22 inches in diameter,
8,764 feet long, buried in the ground below frost-line. The joints, as a
rule, are riveted together, with occasional lead joints to admit of slight
movements in the pipe.[4] The pipe was coated by placing each joint in a
bath of boiling tar and asphaltum; to insure the most thorough coating, it
is necessary to keep the pipe for ten or fifteen minutes in the boiling
mixture. A cast-iron stop-gate is placed at the lower end of the main, and
also one at each of the branches. Cast-iron man-holes are attached to the
main, which, although they have given no trouble in this particular case,
are very objectionable for high pressures, as it is difficult to avoid
ruptures with cast and wrought-iron combined, owing to the great
difference in the elasticity of the two metals. The long seams of this
pipe are double-riveted, and the round seams single riveted; at the lower
end, iron of No. 6 gauge is used. From the end of the main, the water is
led to the several wheels by branches of smaller diameter.

[Footnote 4: With buried wrought-iron pipe this precaution is unnecessary,
as the elasticity of the iron will admit of the movement due to changes of
temperature, without injury to the rivets.]

The water is delivered at the hoisting-wheel with a total head of 542.6
feet. For power and for mill uses, etc., the required supply is about 8
cubic feet a second; this draught reduces the effective head to say 523
feet.

The work done consists in driving the following described machinery:

A large air-compressor--2 cylinders, double acting, air compressed to 75
pounds--requiring about 140 horse-power.

A line of Cornish pumps, forcing the water from a depth of 1,450 feet
vertical; 12-inch plungers for upper 800 feet, 6-inch plungers for lower
650 feet, with 6-foot stroke, requiring from 55 to 70 horse-power.

Hoisting from a double-compartment shaft--two connected winding reels,
moving separate cages--requiring 35 horse-power, or more.

A few small machine-tools and smithy forges, requiring 3 or 4 horse-power.

A 35-stamp mill, with concentrating apparatus, etc., requiring about 70
horse-power.

The total amount of power required being say 320 horse-power, for which
seven Pelton hurdy-gurdy wheels are employed.

The power in all cases is transmitted by systems of Manila rope belting;
the rope is 2 inches in diameter; the grooves in the sheaves or pulleys
are slightly oval, so that the rope does not go quite to the bottom; the
ropes are horizontal, and run very slack (no tighteners), with no
appreciable slip; the splices are made very long, to obtain uniformity in
diameter.

[Illustration: FIG. 15.]

This method of transmitting power appears to work most perfectly and has
given excellent satisfaction. It is thought, at the Idaho, to be greatly
preferable to the gearing formerly in use when the works were driven by
steam (for such work as pumping or hoisting, leather or rubber belting is
never used), besides being much cheaper in first cost.

The wheel driving the air-compressor is 6 feet in diameter, running 300
turns[5] per minute, with 1-15/18-inch nozzle; three ropes are used from
the wheel shaft to the counter-shaft, and six ropes from the latter to the
fly-wheel shaft.

[Footnote 5: The revolutions per minute, of these wheels, as here given,
are only approximate, as the design was to have the bucket speed=1/2
2(gh)^{1/2}.]

For driving the pumps, there are two water-wheels, set on the same shaft,
one 5 feet and the other 7 feet in diameter, either of which can be used
at will, thus permitting different rates of speed; two nozzles are placed
on each wheel, so that if necessary the power can at any time be doubled.
The smaller wheel has a 1-1/4 inch nozzle, and runs 360 turns a minute;
the larger has 1-1/8-inch nozzle, and makes 270 turns a minute. There are
two ropes from the wheel-shaft to a counter-shaft, and four ropes to the
fly-wheel shaft, on which is the pinion driving the spur-wheel attached to
the pitman of the pump-bob. Hoisting is done by two wheels placed side by
side on the same shaft, the buckets and nozzle of each wheel being placed
in opposite directions. Both wheels are 8 feet in diameter, with
15/16-inch nozzles, and make at full speed about 225 turns a minute.
Reversing the movement of the shaft is done by shutting off water from one
wheel, and turning water on the other wheel; the two water-gates for these
nozzles are quickly opened or closed by hydrostatic pressure, afforded
from the water main. In addition to the usual brakes on the winding-reels,
a brake is placed on the wheel-shaft, so that it can be stopped in a very
short period of time.

The shock to the pipe by the almost instantaneous cutting off the water at
these hoisting-wheels (nearly one cubic foot per second) has not
apparently had any injurious, effect. To lessen this shock, a compensating
balance was designed, but which is not now in use. A wheel, of small
diameter, is used for the smithy, etc., running at a very high velocity.
The wheel driving the stamp-mill is 6 feet in diameter, makes 300
revolutions a minute, and is supplied through a 1-3/16 inch nozzle. The
head of water at this point is a few feet greater than at the other
wheels. Power is transmitted from the hoisting and mill-wheel shafts by
two and four ropes, the same as with the pumping rig. The amount of work
done, or of water used, has not been carefully determined; judging from
the indicator cards taken from the old steam-engines, the managers of the
Idaho believe that an efficiency of fully 80 per cent. of the theoretic
power of the water is obtained on the main driving-shafts of the
machinery. The substitution of water for steam-power has resulted in a
large saving of expense. Although the hills near by are covered with fine
forests, thus making wood cheap, and although a round price is charged for
water by the company furnishing it, the cost of the water is considerably
less than that of the wood formerly used as fuel. The cost of attendance
is altogether in favor of the water-wheels, which hardly require any
attention. The cost of the change from steam to water-power was
$46,496.32.

       *       *       *       *       *




TEXAS CREEK PIPE AND AQUEDUCT.


A description of this work will be of interest in showing the general
practice followed in California for carrying water across deep mountain
gorges. In order to augment its water supply, the North Bloomfield Gravel
Mining Company desired to conduct water from a stream known as Texas
Creek, in Nevada County, California, across the Big Canon branch of the
South Yuba River into the main Bloomfield flume or aqueduct, which was
located on the side of Big Canon Creek, at a vertical elevation of 620
feet above the bed of the latter stream. The quantity of water to be
carried was about 32 cubic feet a second (1,250 miner's inches), which
could be diverted from Texas Creek at a point 480 feet vertical above the
Bloomfield flume. An aqueduct about 4,000 feet long, partly of ditch and
partly of flume, was needed to bring the water from the catchment dam on
the creek to the brow of the gorge. The vertical head for the pipe could
therefore be from a maximum of 460 feet down to any lesser head; with a
head of 460 feet, the pipe would be 4,790 feet long; and with a head of
220 feet, the length would be 4,290 feet. Assuming a maximum tensile
strain upon the iron of 16,500 pounds per square inch, with the formula
for the greatest head of about

d = (.359 l/h)^{1/5}, [or, v = 68 (dh/l)^{1/2}, and Q = 32],

and a lower value of the coefficient in the last equation for the lesser
heads, it was found, by calculation, that the least cost could be obtained
with a head from 300 to 350 feet. The head fixed upon was 303.6 feet, with
a length of 4,438.7 feet. A profile of the pipe, with nearly the same
horizontal and vertical scales (horizontal scale, showing slope lengths),
is given in Fig. 14; details are given in Figs. 15 and 16. The pipe was of
double riveted sheet iron, made in lengths of about 20 feet, and of the
following thicknesses:

  1,349 linear feet,    0.083 inch thick.
    220    "            0.095     "
    240    "            0.109     "
    250    "            0.120     "
    320    "            0.134     "
    610    "            0.148     "
  1,450    "            0.165     "

Some of the iron was of the very poorest quality; the pipe was made by
contract in San Francisco, without the supervision of an inspector, as the
contractors were a firm of good reputation; the bad quality of the iron
was not detected until too late to have it corrected. Since then, the
writer has always had such pipes--the mines of which he has been the
manager using large quantities--made directly on the ground where they are
to be used; the pipe makers, in the latter case, always reject such sheets
as are too much below in thickness the standard gauge, and those which
show in passing through the rolls the bad quality of iron; tests of each
joint by hydrostatic pressure would add too much to the cost.

[Illustration: FIG. 16.]

The maximum tensile strain upon each of the seven thicknesses of iron used
was intended to be 16,500 pounds per square inch. Some of the sheets were
below the standard gauge, so that, in reality, the tensile strain is
sometimes as high as 18,000 pounds. The mean diameter of the pipe was
1.416 feet. The entrance into the pen-stock was tapered, so that the
coefficient of contraction was about 0.92. For pressures not exceeding say
380 feet, the joints were put together stove-pipe fashion. For greater
pressures, the joints were made by an inner sleeve riveted on one end of
the joint, with an outer lap-welded band, as shown by Fig. 15; lead was
run into the space between the outer band and the pipe, and then tightly
driven up by calking-irons. The pipe was laid under the bed of the Big
Canon Creek, a large stream when in freshet, where the head below the
hydraulic grade line was 760 feet. Some of the lead joints leaked slightly
at first, but this was soon remedied by more careful calking. No man-holes
or escape-gates were used. The pipe for the larger part of the year is not
filled at its upper end; when such is the case, the water at the inlet
carries down the pipe a great quantity of air, for which escapes must be
provided to prevent a jarring or throbbing, which would soon destroy the
pipe. The escape air-valves used are shown by Fig. 16. They consist simply
of a heavy flap valve of cast-iron, with recess for lead filling to give
greater weight set on top the pipe, seating on a vulcanized rubber
cushion, and swinging on a loose hinge. When the pipe is only partly
filled with water, the valves drop down by their own weight, allowing the
air to freely escape; when the water rises above the level of a valve, it
is tightly closed by the resulting pressure. There are fourteen of these
valves, those on the lower end being designed to allow air to freely enter
the pipe in case it should burst in the deeper portion, and thus prevent
any collapse from atmospheric pressure. The valves have answered the
desired purposes most effectually. The pipe was hauled over a road built
to the inlet end, and shot down the mountain side by means of a V-shaped
trough of wood. For the lower end, the joints were hauled up the cliff
side into place by a crab worked by horse-power. On steep inclinations,
the pipe was held firmly in place by wire ropes fastened to iron pins in
the solid rock, as shown by the sketch. The covering of earth and stone
was 1 foot to 2 feet in depth; with steep slopes, the earth was kept from
sliding by rough dry walls, or by cedar plank placed crosswise. The pipe
was laid in 1878; the first year it broke twice, owing to the wretched
quality of the iron; since then, it has given no trouble, and has required
practically no attention. The cost of this work--ditch and flume 4,000
feet, and pipe 4,440 feet--was $23,779.53.

A comparison of the relative values of n, in the formula v = n (r s)^{1/2},
for the foregoing ditch, flume, and pipe will be instructive. The ditch
has a width on the bottom of 3 feet, on the top of 6 feet, with a depth of
3 feet, and an inclination of 20 feet per mile; its sides are rough, being
cut in part through the rock and with sharp curves, although fairly
regular; with a flow of about 1,300 miner's inches (32.8 cubic feet per
second) the ditch runs about full.

Therefore:

      6 + 3
  a = ----- x 3 = 13.5 ;
        2

[TEX: a = \frac{6+3}{2} \times 3 = 13.5;]

           a
  r = ------------- = 1.41 ;
      3.3 + 3 + 3.3

[TEX: r = \frac{a}{3.3 + 3 + 3.3} = 1.41;]

        20       1
  s = ------ = ----- ;
       5280     264

[TEX: s = \frac{20}{5280} = \frac{1}{264};]

  Q = 32.8, hence

       Q
  v = --- = 2.43;
       a

[TEX: v = \frac{Q}{a} = 2.43;]

and

     /              {1/2} \
  n ( in v = n (r s)^    ) = 33.
     \                  /

[TEX: n\ (\text{in}\ v = n (r s)^\frac{1}{2}) = 33.]

The flume is of unplaned boards, rectangular, 2.67 wide x 2.83 deep, with
an inclination of 32 feet per mile. There are sharp curves, although these
were made as regular as practicable; the boiling action of the water
passing around these curves brought the flow line (Q = 32.8) nearly up to
the top of the sides; with a straight flume of the same size, the water
would have doubtless stood several inches lower.

Therefore:

    a = 2.67 x 2.83 = 7.56 ;

                a
    r =  -------------------- = 0.908 ;
        2.83 + 2.67 + 2.83

[TEX: r = \frac{a}{2.83 + 2.67 + 2.83} = 0.908;]

           32       1
    s =  ------ = ----- ;
          5280     165

[TEX: s = \frac{32}{5280} = \frac{1}{165};]

    Q = 32.8, hence

         Q
    v = --- = 4.34;
         a

[TEX: v = \frac{Q}{a} = 4.34;]

    and n = 59.

With the pipe,[6] 1.416 diameter,

         d
    r = --- = 0.354; Q = 31.69; v = 20.13.
         4

[TEX: r = \frac{d}{4} = 0.354;\ Q = 31.69;\ v = 20.13.]

[Footnote 6: _Vide_ pages 120-122, Transactions American Society of Civil
Engineers for 1883.]

Allowing for loss of head due to imparting velocity to water, and for
contraction,

         296.1
    s= --------; and n = 131.
        4438.7

[TEX: s = \frac{296.1}{4438.7};\ \text{and}\ n = 131.]

We hence have the following values of n, in v = n (r s)^{1/2}, Q being
constant:

    Rough ditch, with sharp curves.                    33
    Rectangular flume, with sharp curves.              59
    Wrought-iron pipe, with easy curves, coated with
    asphalt, but with rivet-heads forming noteworthy
    obstructions (m = 65.5, and 2m = n)               131

       *       *       *       *       *




PARACHUTE HYDRAULIC MOTOR.


The very singular and simple hydraulic motor which we illustrate herewith
is the invention of a Russian engineer, Mr. Jagn. It is scarcely as yet
known in Western Europe, where, however, something will probably be heard
of it ere long. Its true field would seem to be Egypt, India, or any
country where canals or rivers are used for irrigation, and where it is
desired to draw water from them at particular spots in the simplest and
cheapest manner. At present in nearly all such cases water is raised by
hand or steam power; nevertheless it must be obvious that the current of
the canal itself, slow though it may be, is quite sufficient to raise a
small portion of the discharge to the very moderate height generally
needed to lift it over the banks into the adjoining fields. Why then is it
not employed for the purpose? The answer is obvious, when we consider the
various hydraulic motors at present in use. Of course, motors worked by
water pressure must here be excluded; and we are left with scarcely
anything but the undershot wheel, the turbine, and the screw pump. All
these require expensive buildings and erections to set them to work,
present but a very small fraction of their surface to the water at any one
time, and must be very large and costly if they are to draw even a very
moderate amount of power from such a source. There is no possibility of
adjusting them readily to suit variations in the speed of the current or
in the quantity of water required, nor of moving them from place to place
should this be convenient.

[Illustration: PARACHUTE HYDRAULIC MOTOR.]

The motor of Mr. Jagn is on a totally different principle. Its essential
features consist, as shown, of an endless rope made of hemp or aloe fiber,
which takes a turn or two round a pair of drums mounted on a barge or
pontoon, and then passes down the channel to return over a pulley hung
from a floating punt, at such a depth that the whole of the rope is
immersed in the water. Along this rope are suspended at equal intervals a
number of parachutes made of sail cloth. The rope passes through the
center of each of these, and to it are attached a series of strings, the
other ends of which are connected to the outside edge of the parachute.
Thus they act like the spokes of an umbrella to prevent the parachute from
opening too far under the pressure of the current. The parachutes must be
placed so far apart that the current may act fairly on each, and the sum
of the pressures forms the force which draws the rope through the water.
The moment, however, that any parachute has passed round the return
pulley, the current acts upon it in the opposite direction. It then shuts
up like an umbrella, and assumes a volume so small that its resistance on
the return journey is insignificant. After passing round the drum at the
upper end, it at once opens afresh of its own accord, and once more
becomes part of the moving power of the whole system. The parachutes are
formed by first cutting out a complete circle of cloth, and then taking
from this a sector equal to one-fifth or one-sixth of the total area. Such
parachutes are found to keep their form when stretched by the water better
than a surface originally spherical, although the latter would be
theoretically more correct. The motion of the drum is transmitted by spur,
gear, or otherwise as may be required, to give the requisite speed.

It will be seen that the advantages of the system are as follows: First,
the facility it offers for obtaining a large working area, which may be
increased or diminished at will, according to the requirements of the
moment, by lengthening or shortening the rope. Secondly, the ease with
which it is erected and set to work. Thirdly, the small part of the river
section which it occupies, so as to present no obstacle to navigation.
Fourthly, the ease with which it can be mounted on a barge of any kind,
and carried wherever it may be needed. Fifthly, it is not stopped, like
all other hydraulic motors, by the appearance of ice--it has, in fact,
already been worked under ice in the Neva. At the same time, winds and
waves have no influence upon it.

The principle of the apparatus is not altogether new. In 1872 there was
tried on the Ohio River an arrangement termed the Brooks motor. It was
composed of two drums, placed horizontally and parallel to each other.
Round these there passed endless chains at equal spaces apart on the
length of the drums, and to these chains were fixed wooden blades or arms
of a curved form, and so jointed to the frames that they opened when
moving in one direction, and closed down on the chain when moving in the
other. In this machine the weight of the chains was a serious obstacle to
obtaining any large amount of power. The whole apparatus was mounted on a
heavy wooden scaffold, which proved an impediment to the flow of the
river. Again, the resistance due to the surface of the returning blades
and to their stiffness was found to be far from insignificant.

In the present system Mr. Jagn has found, after many experiments, that the
best effect was obtained when the parachutes were spaced apart at twice
their diameter, and when the rope made an angle of 8 degrees to 10 degrees
with the current. It is found that when open and in motion the parachutes
never touch the bottom. This was the case with a rope containing 180
parachutes of 4 feet diameter, and working in a depth of only 6 feet. This
is easily explained by the fact that the velocity of a current always
diminishes as it approaches the bottom. Hence the pressure on the lower
part of the parachute will be less than that on the upper part; but the
former pressure tends to draw the parachute downward, while the latter
tends to raise it to the top of the water. Thus, the latter being the
larger, the parachute will always have a tendency to rise. In fact, it is
necessary to sink the return pulley sufficiently deep to make sure that
the parachutes will not emerge from the surface. For the same reason no
intermediate supports are needed over the driving span; if any are needed
