supplementary mould, and permits of increasing the thickness by about 2/5
of an inch. The piece is held, as at first, by vacuum, and the paste is
introduced again until the desired thickness is obtained.

Whatever be the care taken, accidents are frequent in both processes. They
are due, in general, to the irregular contraction of the pieces, caused by
a want of homogeneousness in the plaster of the moulds. In fact, as the
absorption of the water does not proceed regularly over the entire surface
of the piece, zones of dry paste are found in contact with others that are
still soft, and hence the formation of folds, and finally the cracking and
breaking of the piece. The joints of the moulds are also a cause of
frequent loss, on account of the marks that they leave, and that injure
the beauty of the form as well as the purity of the profile.

Mr. Renard has devised a remedy for all such inconveniences. He takes
unglazed muslin, cuts it into strips, and, before beginning operations,
fixes it with a little liquid paste to the interior of the mould. This
light fabric in no wise prevents the absorption of the water, and so the
operation goes on as usual; but, at the moment of contraction, the piece
of porcelain being, so to speak, supported by the muslin, comes put of the
mould more easily and with extreme regularity. Under such circumstances
all trace of the joint disappears, the imperfections in the mould are
unattended with danger, and the largest pieces are moulded with entire
safety. In a word, we have here a very important improvement in the
process of moulding. The use of muslin is to be recommended, not only in
the manufacture of vases, but also in the difficult preparation of large
porcelain plates. It is likewise advantageous in the moulding of certain
pieces of sculpture that are not very delicate, and, finally, it is very
useful when we have to do with a damaged mould, which, instead of being
repaired with plaster, can be fixed with well ground wet sand covered with
a strip of muslin.

_Drying of the Moulded Pieces._--When the moulded pieces become of a
proper consistency in the mould, they are exposed to the air and then
taken to the drying room. But, as with plaster, the surface of the paste
dries very quickly, and this inconvenience (which amounts to nothing in
pieces that are to be polished) is very great in pieces that carry
ornaments in relief, since the finishing of these is much more difficult,
the hardened paste works badly, and frequently flakes off. In order to
remedy this inconvenience, it suffices to dust the places to be preserved
with powdered dry paste.--_Revue Industrielle._

       *       *       *       *       *




PHOTO-TRICYCLE APPARATUS.


[Illustration: A PHOTO-TRICYCLE APPARATUS.]

This consists of a portable folding camera, with screw focusing
arrangement, swing back, and an adapter frame placed in the position of
the focus screen, allowing the dark slide to be inserted so as to give the
horizontal or vertical position to the dry plate when in the camera. To
the front and base-board a brass swiveled side bar, made collapsible by
means of a center slot, is attached by hinges, and this renders the camera
rigid when open or secure when closed. The base-board is supported on a
brass plate within which is inserted a ball-and-socket (or universal joint
in a new form), permitting the camera to be tilted to any necessary angle,
and fixed in such position at will. The whole apparatus is mounted upon a
brass telescopic draw-stand, which, by means of clamps, is attached to the
steering handle or other convenient part of the tricycle, preferably the
form made by Messrs. Rudge & Co., of Coventry, represented in the
cut.--_Photo. News._

       *       *       *       *       *




A PHOTO PRINTING LIGHT.


[Illustration]

A printing frame is placed in the carrier, and exposed to the light of a
gas burner kept at a fixed distance, behind which is a spherical
reflector. The same frame may be used for other purposes.-_Photographic
News._

       *       *       *       *       *




A NEW ACTINOMETER.


A selenium actinometer has been described in the _Comptes Rendus_ in a
communication from M. Morize, of Rio de Janeiro. The instrument is used to
measure the actinic power of sunlight when the sun is at various
altitudes; but the same principle is applicable to other light sources.
The sensitive part of the apparatus consists of a cylinder formed of 38
disks of copper, isolated from each other by as many disks of mica. The
latter being of smaller diameter than the copper disks, the annular spaces
between the two are filled with selenium, by the simple process of rubbing
a stick of this substance over the edges, and afterward gently warming.
The selenium then presents a grayish appearance, and is ready for use.
Connection is made by conductors, on opposite sides, with the odd and even
numbers of the disks, which diminishes the resistance of the selenium. The
cylinder thus formed is insulated by glass supports in the inside of a
vacuum tube, for the purpose of preserving it from the disturbing
influence of dark rays. The whole is placed upon a stand, and shielded
from reflected light, but fully exposed to that which is to be measured
for actinic intensity. If now a constant current of electricity is passed
through the apparatus, as indicated by a galvanometer, the variations of
the latter will show the effect produced upon the selenium. A scale must
be prepared, with the zero point at the greatest possible resistance of
the selenium, which corresponds with absolute darkness. The greatest
effect of the light would be to annul the resistance of the selenium.
Consequently, the cylinder must be withdrawn from the circuit to represent
this effect; and the maximum deviation of the galvanometer is then to be
observed, and marked 100. By dividing the range of the galvanometer thus
obtained into 100 equal parts, the requisite actinometric scale will be
established. In practice, the Clamond battery is used to supply the
constant current required.

       *       *       *       *       *




ASTRONOMICAL PHOTOGRAPHY.


During the last few years, or rather decades of years, it has become
rather a trite saying that to advance far in any branch of physical
research a fair proficiency in no inconsiderable number of the sister
sciences is an absolute necessity. But if this is true in general, none, I
think, will question the assertion that a proficient in any of the
physical sciences must be fairly conversant with photography as a science,
or at least as an art. If we take for example a science which has of late
years made rapid strides both in Europe and America, the science of
astronomy, we shall not have far to go to find convincing proof that a
great portion of the best work that is being done by its votaries is
effected by the aid of photography. One eminent astronomer has quite
lately gone so far as to declare that we no longer require observers of
the heavens, but that their place can be better supplied by the gelatine
plate of the photographer; and his words have been echoed by others not
less able than himself. "Abolish the observer, and substitute the
sensitive plate," is a sensational form of expressing the revolution in
observational astronomy that is taking place under our eyes; but, although
it suggests a vast amount of truth, it might leave upon the mind an
exaggerated impression inimical to the best interests of science.

The award of the highest distinction in astronomy, the gold medal of the
Royal Astronomical Society, two years in succession, to those who have
been most successful in celestial photography is no doubtful sign of the
great value attached to such work. Last year it was Mr. Common who
received the highest testimony of the merit due to his splendid
photographs of the nebula of Orion; and this year Dr. Huggins, who has
drawn much attention to celestial photography, by his successful attempts
to picture the solar corona in full daylight, has received a similar
acknowledgment of his labors in photographing the spectra of stars and
comets and nebulae.

An adequate idea of the progress astronomy is now making by aid of
photography can only be formed by a comprehensive view of all that is
being at present attempted; but a rapid glance at some of the work may
prepare the way for a more thorough investigation. A few years since, the
astronomers who had advanced their science by aid of photography were few
in number, and their results are soon enumerated. Some good pictures of
the solar corona taken during solar eclipses, a series or two of sun-spot
photographs, and a very limited number of successful attempts made upon
the moon, and planets, and star clusters, were all the fruits of their
labors. But now each month we learn of some new and efficient laborer in
this field, which gives promise of so rich a harvest.

Each day the sun is photographed at Greenwich, at South Kensington, in
India, and at the Physical Observatory of Potsdam, and thus a sure record
is obtained of all the spots upon its surface, which may serve for the
study of the periodicity of its changes, and for their probable connection
with the important phenomena of terrestrial magnetism and meteorology. In
France the splendid sun-pictures obtained by Dr. Janssen at the Physical
Observatory of Meudon have thrown into the shade all other attempts at a
photographic study of the most delicate features of the solar surface.

Dr. Huggins has shown that it is possible to obtain a daily photographic
record of the solar prominences, and only lately he has secured results
that justified a special expedition to the Alps to photograph the sun's
corona, and he has now moved the Admiralty to grant a subsidy to Dr. Gill,
the government astronomer at the Cape, by aid of which Mr. Woods can carry
on the experiments that were so encouraging last summer in Switzerland.

We may, then, reasonably hope to obtain before long a daily picture of the
sun and a photographic record of its prominences, and even of a certain
portion of the solar corona; but the precious moments of each solar
eclipse will always be invaluable for picturing those wondrous details in
the corona that are now shown us by photography, and which can be obtained
by photography alone.

Again, how very much is to be learnt in solar physics from the marvelous
photographs of the sun's spectrum exhibited last summer by Professor
Rowland; photographs that show as many as one hundred and fifty lines
between H and K, and which he is still laboring to improve! The extension,
too, of the visible solar spectrum into the ultra-violet by Corun,
Mascart, and others, adds much to our knowledge of the sun; while the
photographs of Abney in the ultrared increase our information in a
direction less expected and certainly less easy of attainment. Both these
extensions we find most ably utilized in the recent discussion of the very
interesting photographs of the spectra of the prominences and of the
corona taken during the total eclipse of May 18, 1882; and the
photographic results of this eclipse afford ample proof that we can not
only obtain pictures of the corona by photography that it would be
impossible otherwise to procure, but also that in a few seconds
information concerning the nature of the solar atmosphere may be furnished
by photography that it would otherwise take centuries to accumulate, even
under the most favorable circumstances.

The advantages to be gained by accurate photographs of the moon and
planets, that will permit great enlargements, are too obvious to call for
lengthened notice in such a rapid sketch as the present; for it is
principally in the observation of details that the eye cannot grasp with
the required delicacy, or with sufficient rapidity, that photography is so
essential for rapid and sure progress.

Like the sketches of a solar eclipse, the drawings that are made of
comets, and still more of nebulae, even by the most accomplished artists,
are all, to say the least, open to doubt in their delicate details. And
the truth of this is so obvious, that it is the expressed opinion of an
able astronomer that a single photograph of the nebula of Orion, taken by
Mr. Common, would be of more value to posterity than the collective
drawings of this interesting object so carefully made by Rosse, Bond,
Secchi, and so many others.

Another most important branch of astronomy, that is receiving very great
attention at present, is the mapping of the starry heavens; and herein
photography will perhaps do its best work for the astronomer. The trial
star map by the brothers Henry, of a portion of the Milky Way, which they
felt unable to observe satisfactorily by the ordinary methods, is so near
absolute perfection that it alone proves the immense superiority of the
photographic method in the formation of star maps. Fortunately this
subject, which is as vast as it is fundamental, is being taken up
vigorously. The Henries are producing a special lens for the work; Mr.
Grubb is constructing a special Cassgrain reflector for Mr. Roberts of
Maghull; and the Admiralty have instructed Mr. Woods to make this part of
his work at the Cape Observatory, under the able direction of Dr. Gill.
Besides star maps, clusters, too, and special portions of the heavens are
being photographed by the Rev. T.E. Espin, of West Kirby; and such
pictures will be of the greatest value, not only in fixing the position at
a given date, but also aiding in the determination of magnitude, color,
variability, proper motion, and even of the orbits of double and multiple
stars, and the possible discovery of new planets and telescopic comets.

Such are some of the many branches of astronomy that are receiving the
most valuable aid at present from photography; but the very value of the
gift that is bestowed should make exaggeration an impossibility.
Photography can well afford to be generous, but it must first be just, in
its estimate of the work that has still to be done in astronomy
independently of its aid; and although the older science points with just
pride to what is being done for her by her younger sister, still she must
not forget that now, as in the future, she must depend largely for her
progress, not only on the skill of the photographer and the mathematician,
but also on the trained eye and ear and hand of her own indefatigable
observers.--_S.J. Perry, S.J., F.R.S., in Br. Jour. of Photography._

       *       *       *       *       *




ELECTRICITY AS A PREVENTIVE OF SCALE IN BOILERS.


The mineral sediment that generally sticks to the sides of steam boilers,
and the presence of which is fraught with the utmost danger, resulting in
many instances in great injury to life and property, besides eating away
the substance of the iron plate, was referred to in a paper lately read by
M. Jeannolle before the Paris Academy of Sciences, in which the author
described a new method for keeping boilers clean. This method is as
follows:

The inside of a steam boiler is placed, by means of piles of a certain
power, in reciprocal communication, the current passing at one end through
positive, and at the other through negative, wires. In incrusted steam
boilers, at a temperature ranging from 212 deg. to 300 deg. Fahr., and a pressure
of from 30 to 90 lb. to the square inch, the current thus engendered
decomposes the accumulated salts, and precipitates them, from which they
may easily be removed, either by means of a special siphon or by means of
some other mechanical process. When boilers are free from fur, and where
it is intended to keep them free from such, a continuous current may be
set up, by means of which the sedimentary salts may be decomposed, and a
precipitate produced in a pulverized form, which can be removed with equal
facility.

From a series of minute experiments made by M. Jeannolle, it appears that
in order to render the various actions of electricity, perfect, it is
necessary to coat either with red lead or with pulverized iron, or with
any other conductor of electricity, an operation which must be repeated
whenever the boiler is emptied with a view to cleaning out. The above
system Is being advantageously applied in Calais for removing the
incrustations of boilers. The two poles of a battery of ten to twelve
Bunsen elements are applied to the ends of the boilers, and after thirty
to forty hours the deposits fall from the sides to the bottom. When a
boiler has been thus cleared, the formation of new deposits may be
prevented by applying a much less energetic current under the same
conditions.

       *       *       *       *       *




ALPHABET DESIGNED BY GODFREY SYKES.


[Illustration: SUGGESTIONS IN DECORATIVE ART.--ALPHABET DESIGNED BY
GODFREY SYKES.]

Among the many designs which have been issued by the South Kensington
Museum authorities is the alphabet which we have illustrated here to-day.
The letters appear frequently among the decorations of the museum
buildings, especially in the refreshment rooms and the Ceramic gallery,
where long inscriptions in glazed terra cotta form ornamental friezes. The
alphabet has also been engraved to several sizes, and is used for the
initial letters in the various official books and art publications
relating to the museum, which are published by the Science and Art
Department.--_Building News._

       *       *       *       *       *




OLD WROUGHT IRON GATE.


[Illustration: OLD WROUGHT IRON GATE]

This gate forms the entrance to Scraptoft Hall, a building of the
eighteenth century, now the seat of Captain Barclay, and which stands at
about five miles from Leicester, England.--_The Architect._

       *       *       *       *       *




BRIEF SANITARY MATTERS IN CONNECTION WITH ISOLATED COUNTRY HOUSES.[4]

[Footnote 4: Read before the Boston Society of Civil Engineers, April 1884
_Journal A. of E. Societies_.]

By E.W. BOWDITCH, C.E.


I am unable to tell you what is generally considered the best practice,
for I am not sure there are any definitely established rules; therefore I
can only explain _my_ ways of doing such work, which, though I try to make
as complete and at the same time as simple as possible, I know to be far
from perfect.

Plumbing and drainage work has grown up unconsciously with my landscape
gardening, and not finding any texts or practice that seemed wholly
satisfactory, I have been forced to devise new arrangements from time to
time, according to the requirements of the case in hand.

To give all the details of house plumbing this evening, or any _one_
evening, would be impossible, for lack of time, and not worth while even
if there was time, as much of it would prove matter of little or no
interest. I will confine my remarks, therefore, to certain elements of the
work where my practice differs, I believe, essentially from that of most
engineers, and where perhaps my experience, if of no assistance to other
members of the Society, may excite their friendly criticism in such a way
as to help me.

There are two kinds of country places that I am liable to be called upon
to prescribe for:

_First._ A new place where nothing has been arranged.

_Second._ An old place where the occupants have been troubled either by
their outside arrangements or by fixtures or pipes within.

Under the first head let us suppose a small tract of perhaps two acres of
land in some inland town, where the family intends to live but six months
in the year, though they are liable to reside there the whole twelve.

There are no sewers and no public water. The soil is a stiff, retentive
clay, rather wet in spring. The desire is expressed to have plumbing and
drainage that shall be as inexpensive as possible, but that shall be
entirely safe.

In considering the arrangements inside the house, I find myself in the
same predicament as the French surgeon, a specialist upon setting the
bones of the arm, who, when a patient was brought him with his right arm
broke, expressed his sorrow at being unable to be of assistance, as his
specialty was the left arm.

I have endeavored to post myself thoroughly upon house plumbing, but
confess to only knowing partially about the wastes; the supplies I do not
feel competent to pass upon.

One class of annoyance caused by plumbing, perhaps the principal one, is
due to the soil pipe or some of its fittings.

Second quality of iron, poor hanging, insufficient calking, careless
mechanics, putty, cement, rag, or paper joints--all these and a dozen
other things are liable to be sources of trouble. Subordinate wastes are
apt to be annoying, occasionally, too, to a less extent.

The mechanical work can always be superintended, and within certain limits
may be made secure and tight; not so easy, however, with the materials.

There is seldom a valid excuse for ever making waste pipes, within a
building, of anything but metal.

Earthen tile is frequently used; also, to a limited extent, brick, stone,
and wood; twice I have found canvas--all these, however, are inferior, and
should never be accepted or specified. The writer believes that at the
present time, hereabouts, lead and iron are more used for wastes than any
other materials, and are found the most satisfactory on the whole.

One or two arrangements, relative to the wastes, I have made use of that
are not, so far as known, in general use, and that may not be the best,
though they have served me many good turns, and I have not succeeded in
devising any better.

