forget that they ever were officers themselves. It is the general
opinion that the strict ship is the most comfortable one, and as a
rule the master who will take the trouble to enforce proper discipline
fore and aft is just the very man who will also be considerate and
courteous to those who sail under his command--whatever be their rank.

To govern others well a man _must_ first have learned to govern
himself. The first lesson for a young seaman to learn is obedience,
and unless he does learn this lesson he will not know how to enforce
it when he becomes an officer, and still less will he be fit for his
position when he obtains command. It is to be feared that many _never_
learn this lesson, and that this is the cause of much of the
insubordination rife in these days.

If the modern hard-driven shipmaster would exercise greater care as to
his health and habits, and would strive more after being a true
_master_ over his ship's company, and this is easier to be gained by
respect than fear, things would go on more smoothly, and when he did
get away for a time from all the petty annoyances of shore, which are
more especially felt in his home port, he would have a time of
comparative comfort, would live longer and happier, and, possibly,
escape the terrible attacks of nervous depression which have finished
the career of many a too finely strung _fin de siecle_ shipmaster.
--_Nautical Magazine._

       *       *       *       *       *




ALFRED TENNYSON.


Alfred Tennyson, the poet laureate of England, was born at Sornersby,
Lincolnshire, April 9, 1810, and was the third of a large family of
children, eight of whom were boys and three girls. His father was a
clergyman, a man of remarkably fine abilities; his mother, as should
be the mother of a great poet, was a deeply religious woman with a
sensitive spirit that was keenly attuned to the aspects of nature. It
was from her that Tennyson inherited his poetic temperament combined
with the love of study that was a characteristic of his father.
Tennyson's brother, Charles, superintended the construction of his
younger brother's first poetic composition, which was written upon a
slate when the great laureate was a child of seven. Tennyson's parents
were people who had sufficient of this world's wealth to educate their
sons well, and Alfred was sent to Trinity College, where he as a mere
lad won the gold medal for a poem in blank verse entitled "Timbuctoo,"
which is to be found in all the volumes of his collected works, though
many of the other poems produced in that period are not given place.

[Illustration: ALFRED TENNYSON, POET LAUREATE OF ENGLAND.]

His first volume of poems was published in 1827, and in them the
influence of Byron, whom he passionately admired, is everywhere
visible. In 1830 he issued another volume, which defined his position
as a poet of great promise, but which was criticised by Christopher
North with the most biting sarcasm, and which was held up to ridicule
by the great Lockhart. More than ten years followed in which the poet
wrote nothing, then he began a literary career which lifted him to the
highest place in the literary world, a place which he has since held,
and as a lyric poet he has never been equaled.

In 1850 he issued that most wonderful production in any language, "In
Memoriam," which has enriched the English language by hundreds of
quotations and which in its delicate sentiment, its deep sorrow, its
reflective tenderness, has been the voice of many a soul similarly
bereft.

Had Tennyson never written anything but "In Memoriam," his fame would
have been assured, but "The Idylls of the King," "Enoch Arden," "The
Princess," and other great compositions will stand forever to his
credit. Of Tennyson's personal character much has been said and
written. As pure and sweet as his poetry, beloved by a large circle of
friends, active still in literary work, it may be said of him that he
has always worn

    "without reproach
    The grand old name of gentleman,"

and that his mellow old age is the ripening into fruit of "the white
flower of a blameless life."--_Chicago Graphic._

       *       *       *       *       *




FIFTIETH YEAR OF THE PRINCE OF WALES.


In the case of a distinguished person whose public life has a claim to
be regarded with national and social interest, his fiftieth birthday
must be considered a jubilee; and Monday, Nov. 9, in the present year,
completing that number of anniversaries for the eldest son of her
Majesty the Queen, the heir apparent to the crown of the United
Kingdom, is manifestly an occasion demanding such congratulations as
must arise from sentiments of loyalty to the monarchical constitution
and of respect for the reigning family. His Royal Highness, it is
understood, has preferred to have it treated simply as a private and
domestic affair, entertaining a party of his personal friends, and not
inviting any formal addresses from the representatives of municipal
corporations or other public bodies. Nevertheless, it may be permitted
to journalists, taking note of this period in the life of so important
a contemporary personage, to express their continued good wishes for
his health and happiness, and to indulge in a few retrospective
observations on his past career.

Born on Nov. 9, 1841, second of the offspring of Queen Victoria by her
marriage with the late Prince Consort, Albert Edward, Prince of Wales,
inherited the greatest blessing of humanity, that of having good
parents and wise guardians of his childhood and youth. His instruction
at home was, no doubt, wider in range of studies than that of ordinary
English boys, including an acquaintance with several European
languages and with modern history, needful to qualify him for the
duties of a prince. He was further educated at Christ Church, Oxford,
and at Trinity College, Cambridge; was enrolled a law student of the
Middle Temple and held a commission in the army.

His earliest appearance in a leading part on any public occasion was
in 1858 or 1859, we think at the laying of the foundation stone of the
Lambeth School of Art at Vauxhall; but after the lamented death of his
father, in December, 1861, the Prince of Wales naturally became the
most eminent and desirable performer of all ceremonies in which
beneficent or useful undertakings were to be recognized by royal
approval. This work has occupied a very large share of his time during
thirty years; and we can all testify that it has been discharged with
such frank good will, cordiality, and unaffected graciousness, with
such patient attention, diligence, and punctuality, as to deserve the
gratitude of large numbers of her Majesty's subjects in almost every
part of the kingdom. No prince of any country in any age has ever
personally exerted himself more constantly and faithfully, in
rendering services of this kind to the community, than the Prince of
Wales. The multiplicity and variety of his engagements, on behalf of
local and special objects of utility, would make a surprising list,
and they must have involved a sacrifice of ease and leisure, and
endurance of self-imposed restraint, a submission to tedious
repetitions of similar acts and scenes, and to continual requests and
importunities, which few men of high rank would like to undergo.

[Illustration: THE PRINCE OF WALES AND FAMILY--FROM THE PHOTOGRAPH OF
MESSRS. BYRNE, RICHMOND.]

The marriage of his Royal Highness to Princess Alexandra of Denmark,
on March 10, 1863, was one of the happiest events within the memory of
this generation. It tended visibly, of course, to raise and confirm
his position as leader of English society, and as the active dispenser
of that encouragement which royalty can bestow on commendable public
objects. Charity, education, science, art, music, industry,
agriculture, and local improvements are in no small measure advanced
by this patronage. The Prince of Wales may not be so learned in some
of these matters as his accomplished father, but he has taken as much
trouble to assist the endless labors of the immediate agents, in doing
which he has shown good judgment and discretion, and a considerable
degree of business talent--notably, in the British preparations for
the Paris Exhibition of 1867, the Indian and Colonial Exhibition of
1886 in London, and the organization of the Imperial Institute. The
last-named institution and the Royal College of Music will be
permanent memorials of the directing energy of the Prince of Wales.

These are but a few examples or slight indications of the work he has
actually done for us all. It is unnecessary to mention the incidental
salutary influences of his visits to Canada and to India, which have
left an abiding favorable impression of English royalty in those
provinces of the empire. Nor can it be requisite to observe the manner
in which the prince's country estate and mansion at Sandringham, with
his care of agricultural improvement, of stock breeding, studs, and
other rural concerns, has set an example to landowners, the value of
which is already felt. We refrain upon this occasion from speaking of
the Princess of Wales, or of the sons and daughters, whose lives, we
trust, will be always good and happy. It is on the personal merits and
services of the head of their illustrious house, with reference only
to public interests, that we have thought it needful to dwell, in view
of the fiftieth birthday of his Royal Highness; and very heartily to
wish him, in homely English phrase, "Many happy returns of the
day!"--_Illustrated London News._

       *       *       *       *       *




DEVELOPMENT WITH SUCRATE OF LIME.


I have experimented with carbonate of lithia as an accelerator, and I
have obtained with it rather favorable results. However, in opposition
to Mr. Wickers, I have always found that carbonate of lithia, used
even in larger doses than those recommended by this author, was not
sufficiently active, and that development had to be too much prolonged
in order to obtain prints of good intensity. I have also observed that
the prints developed by this process were as often fogged as when I
made use of carbonate of potash. The oxides of alkaline metals or
their alkaline salts are not the only accelerators susceptible of
being used in pyro development. Two oxides of the earthy alkaline
metals, lime and hydrate of barytes, may also be used as accelerators.
I will not insist upon the second, which, although giving some
results, should be rejected from photographic practice on account of
its caustic properties, and of its too great affinity for the carbonic
acids in the air, which prevents the keeping of its solutions. This
objection does not obtain for the first, provided, however, that
ordinary lime water is not used, but a solution of succharate or
sucrate of lime. In my experiments I have made use of the following
solutions:

                    _Solution A._

Pyrogallic acid.                           10 grms.
Sulphite of soda.                          20   "
Citric acid.                                2   "
Water.                                    120   "

                    _Solution B._
Water.                                   1000  "
Sugar.              sufficient quantity to triturate.

To which add a sufficient quantity of pure lime to saturate the sugar
solution.

In this manner we get a highly concentrated liquid, very alkaline, and
which keeps for a considerable time. To develop, I mix:

Water.                   80 cubic cent.
Solution A.               2    "       "

I throw this over the plate, and allow it to remain for a few moments,
agitating, then I add to this bath gradually and according to the
results obtained, from one to two cubic centimeters of the solution B.
These solutions should be made with a great deal of care and prudence,
as the sucrate of lime is an accelerator of very great energy.
Moreover, according as the plate has been more or less exposed, we may
add to the developing bath a few drops of a solution of citric acid,
or of a solution of an alkaline bromide. We obtain in this way very
soft prints, sometimes too soft, which, however, are not more free
from fogging than plates developed with hydrochinon (new bath), or
pyro having for accelerators ammonia, potash, soda, carbonate of
potash, of soda, or of lithia. I do not give this process with sucrate
of lime as perfect, but I give it as perfectable and susceptible of
application. If I have undertaken to write these few lines it is
because it has never been brought to my knowledge that up to the
present time the oxides and the alkaline salts of the earthy alkaline
metals have been studied from a photographic point of view.--_Leon
Degoix in Photo. Gazette._

       *       *       *       *       *




DUCK HUNTING IN SCOTLAND.


The wild duck is a shy bird, apt to spread his wings and change his
quarters when a noble sportsman is seen approaching his habitation
with a fowling piece. You have heard of the ass who put on a lion's
skin, and wandered out into the wilderness and brayed. I have
elaborated a device of equal ingenuity and more convincing realism. It
is my habit during the duck-shooting season to put on the skin of a
Blondin donkey and so roam among the sedges bordering on the lakes
where wild ducks most do congregate. I have cut a hole in the face to
see through, and other holes in the legs to put my hands
through.--_London Graphic_

[Illustration: WILDFOWL SHOOTING IN SCOTLAND.]

       *       *       *       *       *




A PLEA FOR THE COMMON TELESCOPE.[1]

By G.E. LUMSDEN.

  [Footnote 1: Paper read before the Astronomical and Physical
  Society of Toronto, Canada, April 18, 1891.]


These are the palmiest days in the eventful history of physical and
observational astronomy. Along the whole line of professional and
amateur observation substantial progress is being made, but in certain
new directions, and in some old ones, too, the advance is very rapid.
As never before, public interest is alive to the attractions and value
of the work of astronomers. The science itself now appeals to a
constituency of students and readers daily increasing in numbers and
importance. Evidence of this gratifying fact is easily obtained. There
is at the libraries an ever-growing demand for standard astronomical
works, some of them by no means intended to be of a purely popular
character. Some of the most influential and conservative magazines on
both sides of the Atlantic now find it to be in their interest to
devote pages of space to the careful discussion of new theories, or to
the results of the latest work of professional observers. Even the
daily press in some cities has caught the infection, if infection it
may be called. There are in New York, Philadelphia, St. Louis, and
other centers of population on this continent leading newspapers
which, every week or so, publish columns of original matter
contributed by writers evidently able to place before their readers in
an attractive form articles dealing accurately, and yet in a popular
vein, with the many-sided subject of astronomy. In scientific matters
generally, there is abroad in this and other countries a spirit of
inquiry, never more apparent than at the present time.

Readers and thinkers may, no doubt, be numbered by thousands. So far,
however, as astronomy is concerned, the majority of readers and
thinkers is composed of non-observers, most of whom believe they must
be content with studying the theoretical side of the subject only.
They labor under the false impression that unless they have telescopes
of large aperture and other costly apparatus, the pleasures attaching
to practical work are denied them. The great observatories, to which
every intelligent eye is directed, are, in a measure, though
innocently enough, responsible for this. Anticipation is ever on
tiptoe. People are naturally awaiting the latest news from the giant
refracting and reflecting telescopes of the day. Under these
circumstances, it may be that the services rendered, and capable of
being rendered, to science by smaller apertures may be overlooked,
and, therefore, I ask to be permitted to put in a modest plea for the
common telescope. What little I shall have to say will be addressed to
you more for the purpose of arousing interest in the subject than for
communicating to you any information of a novel or special character.

When making use of the term "common telescope," I would like to be
understood as referring to good refractors with object glasses not
exceeding three or three and one-half inches in diameter. In some
works on the subject telescopes as large as five inches or even five
and one-half inches are included in the description "common," but
instruments of such apertures are not so frequently met with in this
country as to justify the classing of them with smaller ones, and,
perhaps, for my purpose, it is well that such is the fact, for the
expense connected with the purchase of first rate telescopes increases
very rapidly in proportion to the size of the object glass, and soon
becomes a serious matter. Should ever the larger apertures become
numerous on this continent, let us hope it shall be found to have been
as one of the results of societies like this, striving to make more
popular the study of astronomy.

It is not by any means proposed to inflict upon you a history of the
telescope, but your indulgence is asked for a few moments while
reference is made to one or two matters connected with its invention,
or, rather, its accidental discovery and subsequent improvement.

The opening years of the seventeenth century found the world without a
telescope, or, at least, such an instrument as was adapted for
astronomical work. It is true that long years before, Arabian and some
other eastern astronomers, for the purpose, possibly, of enabling them
to concentrate their gaze upon celestial objects and follow their
motions, had been accustomed to use a kind of tube consisting of a
long cylinder without glasses of any kind and open at both ends. For
magnifying purposes, this tube was of no value. Still, it must have
been of some kind of service, or else the first telescopes, as
constructed by the spectacle makers, who had stumbled upon the
principle involved, were exceedingly sorry affairs, for, soon after
their introduction, the illustrious Kepler, in his work on "Optics,"
recommended the employment of plain apertures, without lenses, because
they were superior to the telescope on account of their freedom from
refraction.

But as soon as the principle by which distant objects could,
apparently, be brought nearer the eye became known and its value
recognized by philosophers, telescopes ceased to be regarded as toys,
and underwent material improvements in the hands of such men as
Galilei, and, later, even of Kepler himself, Cassini, Huyghens, and
others. Galilei's first telescope magnified but three times, and his
best not much above thirty times. If I comprehend aright what has been
written upon the subject, I am justified in saying that this little
instrument in my hand, with an aperture of one inch and one-quarter,
and a focus, with an astronomical eye-piece, of about ten inches, is a
better magnifier than was Galilei's best. With it I can see the moons
of Jupiter, some spots on the sun, the phases of Venus, the
composition, in some places, of the Milky Way, the seas, the valleys,
the mountains, and, when in bold relief upon the terminator, even some
of the craters and cones of the moon. Indeed, I am of opinion I can
see even more than he could, for I can readily make out a considerable
portion of the Great Nebula in Orion, some double stars, and enough of
the Saturnian system to discern the disk of the planet and see that
there is something attached to its sides.

For nearly one hundred and fifty years all refracting telescopes
labored under one serious difficulty. The images formed by them were
more or less confused by rainbow tints, due to the bending, or
refracting, by the object glass of the rays of light. To overcome this
obstacle to clear vision, and also to secure magnification, the focal
lengths of the instruments were greatly extended. Telescopes 38, 50,
78, 130, 160, 210, 400, and even 600 feet long were constructed. I
can, however, find nothing on record indicating that the object
glasses of these enormously attenuated instruments ever exceeded in
diameter two and one-half inches. Yet, with unwieldy and ungainly
telescopes, nearly always defining badly, wonders were accomplished by
the painstaking and indomitable observers of the time.

In 1658, Huyghens, using a telescope twenty-three feet long and two
and one-third inches in diameter, with a power of 100, solved the
mystery of Saturn's rings, which had resisted all of Galilei's efforts
as well as his own with a shorter instrument, though he had discovered
Titan, Saturn's largest moon, and fixed correctly its period of
revolution at sixteen days. Fifteen years later, Ball, with a
telescope thirty-eight feet long, discovered the principal division in
the rings. Ten years still later, Cassini, with an instrument twenty
feet long and an object glass two and one-half inches in diameter,
rediscovered the division, which was named after him, rather than
after Ball, who had taken no pains to make widely known his discovery,
which, in the meantime, had been forgotten. Though we have no record,
there is no doubt that the lamented Horrocks and Crabtree, in England,
in 1639, with glasses no better than these, watched with exultant
emotions the first transit of Venus ever seen by human eyes.

In 1722, Bradley, with a telescope 2231/4 feet long, succeeded in
measuring the diameter of the same planet. Yet Grant assures us that,
in spite of all their difficulties, such was the industry of the
astronomers that when, at the commencement of this century, it became
possible to construct larger refracting telescopes, there was nothing
to be discovered that could have been discovered with the means at
their disposal. So far as we now know, a good three-inch telescope,
nay, a first-rate two inch one, will show far more than our
great-grandfathers ever saw, or dreamed of seeing, with their
refractors.

Toward the middle of the seventeenth century the reflecting telescope
had been so much improved as nearly to crowd out its refracting rival,
but, just as its success seemed to be assured, Dollond, working along
lines partially followed up by Hall, found a combination of lenses by
which the chromatic aberration of the refractor could be very
perfectly corrected. While Dollond's invention was of immense value,
it remained that flint object glasses larger than two and one-half
inches in diameter could not, for some years, be manufactured, but
about the opening of the nineteenth century, Guinand, a Swiss,
discovered a process of making masses of optical flint glass
sufficiently large as to admit of the construction from them of
excellent lenses of sizes gradually increasing as time and
experimenting went on. The making of three-inch objectives, achromatic
and of short focus, wrought a revolution in telescopes and renewed the
demand for refractors, though prices, as compared with those of the
present day, were very great. But improvement was succeeded by
improvement. Larger and still larger objectives were made, yet
progress was not so rapid as not to justify Grant, in 1852, in
declaring to be a "munificent gift" the presentation, about 1838, to
Greenwhich Observatory, of a six and seven-tenths object glass alone,
and so it was esteemed by Mr. Airy, the astronomer royal. Improvement
is still the order of the day, and, as a result of keen competition,
very excellent telescopes of small aperture can be purchased at
reasonable prices. Great telescopes are enormously expensive, and will
probably be so until they are superseded by some simple invention
which shall be as superior to them as they are to the "mighty"
instruments which, from time to time, caused such sensations in the
days of Galilei, Cassini, Huyghens, Bradley, Dollond, and those who
came after them.

But, notable as are the services rendered to science by giant
telescopes, it remains that by far the greater bulk of useful work has
been done by apertures of less than twelve inches in diameter. Indeed,
it may be asserted that most of such work has been done by instruments
of six inches or less in size. After referring with some detail to
this, Denning tells us that "nearly all the comets, planetoids, double
stars, etc., owe their detection to small instruments; that our
knowledge of sun spots, lunar and planetary features is also very
largely derived from similar sources; that there is no department
which is not indebted to the services of small telescopes, and that of
some thousands of drawings of celestial objects, made by observers
employing instruments from three to seventy-two inches in diameter, a
careful inspection shows that the smaller instruments have not been
outdone in this interesting field of observation, owing to their
excellent defining powers and the facility with which they are used."
Aperture for aperture, the record is more glorious for the "common
telescope" than for its great rivals. Let us for a moment recall
something of what has been done with instruments which may be embraced
under the designation "common" as such a statement may serve to remove
impressions that small telescopes are but of little use in
astronomical work.

In his unrivaled book, Webb declares that his observations were
chiefly made with a telescope five and one-half feet long, carrying an
object glass of a diameter of three and seven-tenths inches. The
instrument was of "fair defining quality," and one has but to read his
delightful pages in order to form an idea of the countless pleasures
Webb derived from observation with it. Speaking of it, he says that
smaller ones will, of course, do less, especially with faint objects,
but are often very perfect and distinct, and that even diminutive
glasses, if good, will, at least, show something never seen without
them. He adds: "I have a little hand telescope twenty-two and
one-quarter inches long, when fully drawn out, with a focus of about
fourteen inches, and one and one-third inches aperture; this, with an
astronomical eye-piece, will show the _existence_ of sun spots, the
mountains in the moon, Jupiter's satellites and Saturn's ring." In
another place, speaking of the sun, he says that an object glass of
