oils, resins, etc., serve as a protection against the attacks of browsing
animals, birds, caterpillars, snails, etc. These nauseous substances are
most abundant in the bark, husk, skin and outer parts. It is commonly
supposed that the food on which each animal, including man, subsists, is
especially produced by Nature for the purpose. This is an error, for each
species of plant and animal lives for itself alone, and protects itself,
with more or less success, against destruction by its competitors and
enemies. Each species of animal selects from its surroundings such food as
is most suitable. Such food may not be theoretically perfect; that is, it
may not contain the maximum of nourishment free from innutritious matter;
but during the long period of evolution, each species of animal has become
possessed of organs suited to its environment. If to such animals be given
food containing less indigestible matter, or food which is more readily
digested by laboratory tests made independently of the living animal,
their digestive system will be thrown out of gear, become clogged up or
refuse to work properly, just as the furnace of a steam boiler, made to
burn coal, will act badly with wood or petroleum. Many scientific men have
overlooked this fact, and have endeavoured to produce food substances for
general consumption, in the most concentrated and soluble form, thinking
such food would be more easily assimilated.

The Volatile and Essential Oils are contained in minute quantity in a
very large number of animal and vegetable foods. They contribute in part
to the flavour of fruits. They are the cause of the pungency and aroma of
mustard, horse-radish, cloves, nutmegs, cinnamon, caraway seeds, mint,
sage and other spices. Onions contain a notable quantity. When extracted
the essential oils become powerful drugs. In moderate quantities they are
stomachic and carminative, in larger quantities irritant and emetic.
Condiments and spices not only add flavour to food, but stimulate the
secretion of gastric juice and peristaltic movement.

The Alkaloids most used are those of tea, coffee, kola-nut, cocoa, coca,
tobacco and opium. Although the two last are generally smoked, they must
be classed amongst the food adjuncts. It is of little consequence whether
their active principles enter the body by the mouth and saliva or the
lungs; their action on the blood and nervous system is the same.

The Extractives, as they are called, comprise a number of bodies of
varying nature. They especially exist in flesh and flesh extracts. Amongst
these are the purins. They will be treated at greater length hereafter.

Alcohol is to some extent a true food, but its stimulant and other
action quite overshadows any food value it may possess.

There are other bodies such as the resins and bitters. The active
principle of Indian hemp is a resin.

There is a great difference of opinion as to the extent to which
stimulants may advantageously be used. It is remarkable that amongst
nearly all nations, either alcohol in some form or one of the stronger
alkaloids is in common use. From this fact it is sometimes argued that
stimulants must supply a physiological need. The same method of reasoning
will apply with greater force to the use of condiments. Such conclusions
appear to us to be scarcely warranted. If the extensive or even universal
practice of a thing proves its necessity, then has there been
justification, either now or in the past, for war, lying, avarice and
other vices. It is strange that drugs differing so greatly in their
immediate and obvious effects as, for example, alcohol and opium, or
coffee and tobacco should be used. Should it he said that only some of the
much used stimulants are useful, there is an end to the argument based on
their universal use. There is no doubt that the use of stimulants in more
than very small quantities is distinctly injurious, and it is difficult to
see what physiological advantage there can be in their habitual use, to
what is vaguely called a moderate extent. Sometimes they are taken for a
supposed medical necessity, and where taste attracts, little evidence
satisfies. Those in the habit of taking them, if honest, must confess that
it is chiefly on account of the apparent enjoyment. The ill-nourished and
the depressed in body and mind crave most for stimulants. A food creates
energy in the body, including the nervous system, and this is the only
legitimate form of stimulation. A mere stimulant does not create but draws
on the reserve forces. What was latent energy--to become in the natural
course gradually available--under stimulation is rapidly set free; there
is consequently, subsequent depletion of energy. There may occasionally be
times when a particular organ needs a temporary stimulus to increased
action, notwithstanding it may suffer an after depression; but such cases
are so rare that they may be left out of our present argument, and
stimulants should only be used, like other powerful drugs, under medical
advice. In the last 25 years the use of alcohol by the medical profession
has steadily diminished, its poisonous properties having become more
evident.

There is a general similarity in the effects of stimulants on the
digestive and nervous systems. The most largely used stimulant is ethyl
alcohol, and as its action is best known, it may be useful to name the
principal effects. Alcohol in the form of wine and spirits, in small
quantities, first stimulates the digestive organs. Large quantities
inflame the stomach and stop digestion. (Beer, however, retards digestion,
altogether out of proportion to the alcohol it contains.) Alcohol
increases the action of the heart, increases the blood pressure, and
causes the vessels of the whole body to dilate, especially those of the
skin; hence there is a feeling of warmth. It the person previously felt
cold he now feels warm. The result of the increased circulation through
the various organs is that they work with greater vigour, hence the mental
faculties are brightened for a time, and the muscular strength seems
increased. The person usually feels the better for it, though this is not
always the case; some have a headache or feel very sleepy. It has been
repeatedly proved that these good results are but transitory. The heart,
although at first stimulated, is more exhausted after the action of the
alcohol has passed away than it was at first. This is true of all the
organs of the body which were stimulated. In consequence of the dilatation
of the blood vessels of the skin, an unusual quantity of heat is lost and
the body is cooled. After taking alcohol persons are less able to stand
cold. When overtaken by snowstorms or subjected to excessive or prolonged
cold, it has often happened that those who resorted to spirit drinking
have succumbed, whilst the others have survived. Insurance statistics
have conclusively shown that teetotallers are longer livers than the
so-called moderate drinkers. The terrible effects on both body and mind of
the excessive drinking of alcohol, or the use of other strong stimulants
or narcotics, are too obvious to need allusion to here; we are only
concerned with what is vaguely called their moderate use.

The stimulation produced by tea and coffee is in some respects like that
of alcohol. The heart is stimulated and the blood pressure rises. The
kidneys are strongly affected in those unaccustomed to the drug, but this
ceases after a week or more of use. Their chief effect is on the brain and
nervous system.

Many have boasted that they can take of what they call the good things of
life to their full, without any bad effect, and looking over a few years,
or even many years, it seems a fact. Some of us have known of such men,
who have been esteemed for their joviality and good nature, who have
suddenly broken down at what should have been a hearty middle life. On the
other hand there are men who were badly equipped for the battle of life,
with indifferent constitutions, who never had the buoyancy and overflow of
animal spirits, but who with care have long outlived all their formerly
more robust but careless companions.

Simple versus Highly-flavoured Foods.--It is very difficult to decide to
what extent condiments and flavourings should be used. These have
stimulating properties, although differing from the more complex
properties of alcohol and the alkaloids. The great differences in the
dietetic practices of nations does not appear to be in conformity with any
general rule. It varies with opportunity, climate and national
temperament; though doubtless the national temperament is often due in
part to the dietetic habits. Some races are content with the simplest
foods, large numbers subsist chiefly on rice, others on the richer
cereals, wheat, oatmeal, etc., and fruit. On the other hand there are
races who enjoy stronger flavoured food, including such things as garlic,
curry, pickles, pepper, strong cheese, meat extracts, rancid fats, dried
and smoked fish, high game or still more decomposed flesh, offal and
various disgusting things. The Greenlanders will eat with the keenest
appetite, the half-frozen, half-putrid head and fins of the seal, after
it has been preserved under the grass of summer. In Burmah and Sumatra a
mess is made by pounding together prawns, shrimps, or any cheap fish; this
is frequently allowed to become partially putrid. It is largely used as a
condiment for mixing with their rice. Numerous examples of this sort could
be given. There is scarcely anything that it is possible to eat, but has
been consumed with relish by some tribe or other. The strongest flavoured,
and to our minds most disgusting foods are eaten by the least intelligent
and most brutal races. It is hunger that compels the poor African bushman
to eat anything he can get, and the Hottentot not only the flesh, but the
entrails of cattle which die naturally, and this last he has come to think
exquisite when boiled in beast-blood. All this shows a wonderful range of
adaptability in the human body, but it would not be right to say that all
such food is equally wholesome. The most advanced and civilised races,
especially the more delicately organised of them are the most fastidious,
whilst it is the most brutal, that take the most rank and strongly
flavoured foods. Even amongst the civilised there are great differences.
The assimilative and nervous systems can be trained to tolerate injurious
influences to a remarkable degree. A striking example is seen in the
nausea commonly produced by the first pipe of tobacco, and the way the
body may in time be persuaded, not only to tolerate many times such a
quantity without manifesting any unpleasant feelings, but to receive
pleasure from the drug. Opium or laudanum may be taken in gradually
increasing quantities, until such a dose is taken as would at first have
produced death, yet now without causing any immediate or very apparent
harm. Nearly all drugs loose much of their first effect on continued use.
Not only is this so, but a sudden discontinuance of a drug may cause
distress, as the body, when free from the artificial stimulation to which
it has become habituated, falls into a sluggish or torpid condition. For
the enjoyment of food two things are equally necessary, a healthy and keen
appetite and suitable food; without the first no food, however good and
skilfully prepared, will give satisfaction. The sense of taste resides in
certain of the papilloe of the tongue, and to a much less degree in the
palate. Tastes may be classified into sweet, bitter, acid and saline.
Sweet tastes are best appreciated by the tip, acid by the side, and bitter
by the back of the tongue. Hot or pungent substances produce sensations of
general feeling, which obscure any strictly gustatory sensations which may
be present at the same time. To affect the taste the food must enter into
solution. Like the other senses, taste may be rendered more delicate by
cultivation. Flavours are really odours, and the word smell would be more
appropriate. For example, what we call the taste of an onion, the flavour
of fruit, etc. (independent of the sweetness or sourness of the fruit) is
due to the nose.

Much has been written on the necessity of making food tasty, so as to
stimulate the appetite and digestion. It is urged that unless this is done
food will not be eaten in sufficient quantity. Innumerable receipts (some
very elaborate) have been published for this purpose. All this is supposed
to increase the enjoyment of food. The Anglo-Saxon race--the race whose
dietary is the most elaborate--is especially subject to digestive
derangements, and without good digestion and the consequent healthy
appetite, no food will give full gustatory pleasure. The most wholesome
food, and that which can be eaten most frequently without weariness, is
mildly flavoured and simply prepared. Plain bread is an example; whereas
sweet bread, currant bread, etc., though agreeable in small quantity, or
as an occasional delicacy, soon palls on the appetite. Rice is the poorest
and mildest flavoured of the cereals, it is therefore often, perhaps
generally, made more tasty by the addition of fish, curry, etc. The bulk
of the Chinese live on rice, with the exception of only 3 or 4 ounces of
fish per day, and they are a fine, big and strong race. The Japanese
labourer lives on similar food. In India rice is the food most in use,
though many other cereals are eaten there. Other races live chiefly on
fruits. It appears that the digestive organs will perform their functions
perfectly with the mildest flavoured food. There is nothing surprising in
this. The strongest, most intelligent, and largest animals are those which
feed on grass, herbs and fruits. Even the African lion is no match for the
gorilla. The lion and tiger are capable of great strength, but they cannot
put it forth for long periods as can the herbivora. Our most useful
animal, the horse, can exert much more muscular energy, weight for weight,
than any of the carnivora. The cost of feeding one of the herbivora is
much less than that of one of the carnivora of the same weight. This is so
whether we take the cost of purchasing the food; or the expenditure of
time, labour and energy on the part of man or of natural forces in the
production of the food. Herbs, roots, corn and fruit are produced much
more abundantly and freely than the corresponding quantity of sheep, deer,
etc., on which the carnivora feed.

The restlessness, craving for novelty, and love of excitement, so
characteristic of the Anglo-Saxon, and to a less extent of some other
European races, has its correspondence in the food of these races.
Highly-seasoned and nitrogenous foods act as a stimulant and favour
spasmodic, and for a time perhaps, great intellectual and physical
exertion, with a succeeding period of exhaustion. Simpler food favours
long, sustained, uniform muscular strength, clearness of intellect, and
contentment. Let no one misunderstand us; we do not assert that all who
live on simple food have either clear intellects or are contented, because
there are other factors besides food, but that such qualities are more
easily retained or obtained under that condition. It is well known that
the over-fed and badly fed are the most irritable and discontented Those
living on a stimulating dietary consisting largely of flesh have their
chief successes in feats of short duration. Simple and abstemious living
individuals or races excel in laborious work requiring endurance over long
periods, such as long walking, cycling, and other athletic feats and long
military campaigns.

The digestive and assimilative organs need the food constituents of which
we have written, in proper proportion and quantity, and in a fairly
digestible condition. Within these very wide and comprehensive limits, the
organs can be trained. Very much of the great difference in food is due to
the non-essential flavouring and stimulating part, rather than to that
part which is essential and nourishing. What is the best, interests but
few; whilst what is at present the pleasantest, influences the many. The
ego, the superphysical conscious and reasoning entity should rule its
material body, its temporary vehicle. The body, being the servant of the
ego, just as a horse, dog, or other of the lower animals recognises its
master, becomes a docile subject. The body can be led into good habits
nearly as easily as into bad ones; often more easily, as bad habits are
sometimes painfully acquired. The body being once habituated to certain
movements, conditions, foods or drinks, within reasonable limits, derives
pleasure therefrom and resists change. It is only when the food, etc.,
transgresses certain elementary principles, that the result is more or
less painful. We may on scientific principles condemn flesh-foods,
stimulants and elaborately prepared foods; but after ruling all this out,
there is still left a very great variety of foods and methods of preparing
them: hereon each individual must form his own opinion. Of the foods thus
left, the same kind is not equally suitable to everyone, nor even to the
same person at different periods.

A delicately balanced, fine-grained, high-toned mind and body responds to
every tender influence, and is painfully jarred by that which is coarse.
To such, fruits and delicately flavoured and easily digested foods are
doubtless best and conducive to purity and clearness of thought. A
coarse-grained, badly poised, roughly working body and spirit, is
non-responsive except to loud or coarse impulses; and such a one's
appetite is gratified, not by simple but by coarsely seasoned foods.

A person who is accustomed to a stimulating dietary of flesh-foods,
especially if well-seasoned, finds a simple diet unsatisfying. Should such
persons dine off simple vegetarian food, there is a tendency to
over-eating. The less stimulating food fails to rouse the digestive organs
and to appease the appetite; although an ample supply of nourishment be
consumed. This is the reason why so many imagine that it is necessary to
eat a larger quantity of food if it be vegetable. Should a distressing
fulness and flatulence result from their over-feeding, they lay the blame
to the vegetarian dietary instead of to themselves. Most persons, on
changing to a vegetarian dietary, commence by imitating flesh dishes in
appearance and flavour and even in the names. There is the additional
inducement that the food may be attractive and palatable to friends who
lack sympathy with the aesthetic and humane principles of the diet. After
a while many of them incline to simpler flavoured foods. They revert to
the unperverted taste of childhood, for children love sweets, fruits, and
mild-flavoured foods rather than savouries. One who loves savouries, as a
rule, cares much less for fruits. By compounding and cooking, a very great
variety of foods can be prepared, but the differences in taste are much
less than is usually, supposed. The effect of seasoning instead of
increasing the range, diminishes it, by dulling the finer perception of
flavours. The predominating seasoning also obscures everything else. The
mixture of foods produces a conglomeration of tastes in which any
particular or distinct flavours are obscured, resulting in a general
sameness. It is often stated that as an ordinary flesh-eater has the
choice of a greater range of foods and flavours than a vegetarian, he can
obtain more enjoyment, and that the latter is disagreeably restricted.
Certainly he has the choice, but does he avail himself of it to any
considerable extent? No one cares to take all the different kinds of food,
whether of animal or vegetable that are possible. Of edible animals but a
very few kinds are eaten. A person who particularly relishes and partakes
largely of flesh-foods will reject as insipid and unsatisfying many
mild-flavoured foods at one end of the scale. The vegetarian may abstain
from foods at the opposite end of the scale, not always from humane
reasons, but because they are unpleasant. Thus there may be little to
choose between the mere range of flavours that give enjoyment to each
class of persons. The sense of taste is in its character and range lower
than the sense of sight and hearing. The cultivation of the taste for
savouries seems to blunt the taste for fruits and the delicate foods. The
grass and herbs on which the herbivora subsist, seems to our imagination
of little flavour and monotonous; but they eat with every sign of
enjoyment, deliberately munching their food as though to get its full
flavour. In all probability they find a considerable range of flavours in
the great varieties of grasses commonly found together in a pasture.

Our elaborate cooking customs entail a vast amount of labour. They
necessitate the cost, trouble and dirt from having fires in great excess
of that required for warmth: the extra time in preparing, mixing and
attending to food which has to be cooked: and the large number of greasy
and soiled utensils which have to be cleaned. Cooked savoury food is
generally much nicer eaten hot, and this necessitates fires and attention
just previous to the meal. We have already said that soft cooked food
discourages mastication and leads to defective teeth. Our elaborate
cookery is mainly due to our custom of eating so largely of flesh, whilst
the eating of flesh would receive a great impetus on the discovery of the
art of cooking. Flesh can only be eaten with relish and with safety when
cooked. Such a large proportion of it is infected with parasites, or is
otherwise diseased, that it would he dangerous to eat it raw, even were it
palatable in such a state. In those countries where man eats flesh in a
raw or semi-cooked form, parasitic diseases are common. There is not the
least doubt that our habit of eating so much cooked food is responsible
for much over-eating, hasty eating, dyspepsia and illness. In regard to
the making of bread, porridge, and many other comparatively simple
prepared foods, the advantages of cooking seem overwhelmingly great. With
our present imperfect knowledge and conflicting opinions, it is
impossible to arrive at any satisfactory conclusion, and the whole
question requires careful and impartial investigation. Experiments have
been made with animals, chiefly pigs, with cooked and uncooked clover,
hay, corn, meal, etc. (U.S. Department of Agriculture). It was found that
the food was more or less diminished in digestibility by cooking. At least
13 separate series of experiments with pigs in different part of the
country have been reported. In 10 of these trials there has been a
positive loss from cooking the food. The amount of food required to
produce in the animal a pound gain in weight was larger when the food had
been cooked than when it was given raw. In some cases, the increased
quantity of food required after cooking was considerable.

Those who live on uncooked food contend that a smaller quantity of
nourishment is required. As uncooked food requires more mastication and is
eaten more slowly, there is a better flow of saliva and time is given for
the digestive organs to be gradually brought into complete action, and
finally for the appeasing of the appetite. In the case of the members of
the fruitarian family, whose food was uncooked, and of whom we have
previously written, the quantity of nutriment taken was much less than
that thought necessary, even after making full allowance for their small
stature and weight.

Meat Extracts.--Justus von Liebig, the great German chemist, was the
first to attempt to make these on the commercial scale. He described a
method in 1847, and this not proving satisfactory, another one in 1865. He
stated that the only practicable plan on a manufacturing scale, was to
treat the chopped flesh with eight to ten times its weight of water, which
was to be raised to 180 deg. F. In another passage he says it is to be
boiled for half-an-hour. After straining from all the undissolved meat
fibre, etc., and carefully cleansing from all fat, the decoction is to be
evaporated to a soft extract; such a preparation is practically free from
albumin, gelatin and fat; all the nutritive principles except the saline
matter having been extracted. Liebig states that 34 pounds of meat are
required to produce 1 pound of extract. In 1872, he wrote "neither tea nor
extract of meat are nutritive in the ordinary sense," and he went on to
speak of their medicinal properties. Druit, in 1861, in describing the
effect of a liquid preparation of meat, states that it exerted a rapid and
stimulating action on the brain, and he proposed it as an auxiliary and
