
How should you sit, stand, and walk?--"Erect."

Why should you not eat too much food?--"Because, if I eat too much food, my
stomach will have too much work to do in changing it into chyme."

Why should you eat slowly?--"That I may have time to masticate the food
thoroughly."

Why should you masticate your food thoroughly?--"That it may be well
prepared to enter the stomach."

Why should the food be well prepared to enter the stomach?--"Because, if it
is not well prepared in the mouth, the stomach will have too much work to
change it into chyme."

Why should you eat regularly, but not too often?--"Because the stomach
needs rest, which it cannot have, if I eat too often."

Why should you avoid eating just before bedtime?--"Because, while I am
asleep, the stomach cannot do the work of changing the food as it ought to
be changed; because the stomach should rest with the other parts of the
body."

Why should you breathe pure air?--"Because pure air helps to make pure
blood, which the stomach needs to make it strong and healthy."

Why should you sit, stand, and walk erect?--"That the stomach may not be
crowded out of its place, or pressed upon by other parts of the body."

In what way does tobacco hurt the stomach?--"It poisons the saliva and
prevents it from preparing the food to enter the stomach."

What harm does tobacco do inside the stomach?--"It weakens the stomach and
makes it unfit to change the food into chyme."

How will wise children treat tobacco?--"Let it alone. They will not chew,
snuff, or smoke the vile weed."

Is alcohol food or poison?--"It is poison."

How do we know it is not food?--"Because it cannot be changed into blood."

How has this been proved?--"Alcohol has been found in the brain, and other
parts of drunkards, with the same smell and the same power to burn easily
which it had when it was taken into the mouth."

How do you know it is a poison?--"Because it does harm to every part of the
body, beginning in the stomach."

What harm does alcohol do in the stomach?--"It hinders the stomach from
doing its work; it burns the coats of the stomach; it destroys the gastric
juice; it hardens the food, so that it cannot be dissolved by the gastric
juice."

What does the stomach do with alcohol?--"Drives it out as soon as
possible."

Where does the stomach send it?--"Into the liver."

Where does the liver send it?--"To the heart; and the heart sends it to the
lungs."

What do the lungs do with the alcohol?--"They drive it out as soon as they
can."

Where do the lungs send some of it?--"Through the nose and mouth, into the
air."

What harm does the alcohol do in the breath?--"It poisons the air; it tells
that some kind of alcoholic liquor has been taken into the stomach."

From what you have learned about alcohol, what do you think is the only
safe rule to obey concerning cider, beer, wine, and all alcoholic
liquors?--"I must not drink them, if I wish to have a strong and healthy
stomach."

       *       *       *       *       *

[Illustration: THE NERVOUS SYSTEM.--(From Walker's _Physiology_.)]

1. The large brain. 2. The small brain. 3. The spinal cord. 4, 5. Nerves.

       *       *       *       *       *

PART XI.

FORMULA FOR THE LESSON ON THE NERVOUS SYSTEM.

1. My brain is a soft gray-and-white mass resembling marrow.

2. It is placed in a bony box called the skull; it is covered and held
together by three coats or membranes.

3. The outer membrane is thick and firm; it strengthens and supports the
brain.

4. The middle membrane is thick, and somewhat like a spider's web in
appearance.

5. The inner membrane is a network of blood-vessels.

6. From the brain, white or reddish gray pulpy cords, called nerves, pass
to all parts of the body. These nerves are of two kinds: nerves of feeling,
and nerves of motion.

7. If I prick my finger, a nerve of feeling carries the message to my
brain; if I wish to move my finger, a nerve of motion causes my finger to
obey my will.

8. Twelve pairs of nerves pass from the base of the brain: the first pair,
called the nerves of smell, to my nose; the fourth pair, called the nerves
of sight, to my eyes; the fifth pair, called the nerves of taste, to my
mouth, tongue, and teeth. One pair pass to my face; another to my ears. The
ninth, tenth, eleventh, and twelfth pairs to my tongue and parts of my
throat and neck.[3]

9. The spinal cord is a bundle of nerves extending from the base of my
brain, down through the whole length of my spine, or backbone. It is the
largest nerve in my body.

10. From the spine, thirty-one pairs of nerves, called _spinal nerves_,
pass to different parts of my body; some to the lungs, some to the heart,
some to the stomach, some to the bones, and some to the muscles and skin.

11. If a nerve be destroyed it cannot carry messages to and from the brain.
Before filling a tooth, the dentist sometimes destroys its nerve.

12. If a nerve be pressed upon too long it cannot perform its duty. If I
press upon the nerve passing to my foot, I stop it from communicating with
the brain; the foot loses its feeling, or, as I say, "is asleep."

13. If I drink alcoholic liquors, or snuff, smoke, or chew tobacco, my
brain and nerves cannot do their work well; because alcohol and nicotine
are very poisonous to the brain and nerves.

14. The brain must be supplied with good blood;

The brain must be used;

The brain must be rested;

I must drink wholesome drink, eat wholesome food, take enough exercise, and
breathe pure air, that my brain may be supplied with pure blood;

I must study and think, that my brain may grow and be strong for work;

I must rest my brain when it is tired, either by changing my employment, or
by going to sleep;

I must not poison my brain with alcohol or tobacco.

[3] NOTE.--_A fuller description of the Nerves of the Brain_: Twelve pairs
of nerves pass from the base of the brain; the first pair, called the
nerves of smell, to my nose; the second pair, called the nerves of sight,
to my eyes; the third, fourth, and sixth pairs to the muscles of my eyes;
the fifth pair to my forehead, eyes, nose, ears, tongue, teeth, and
different parts of my face; the seventh pair to different parts of my face;
the eighth pair, called the nerves of hearing, to the inner part of my ear;
the ninth pair to my mouth, tongue, and throat; the twelfth pair to my
tongue; the eleventh pair to my neck; the tenth pair to my neck, throat,
lungs, stomach, and different parts of my body.

       *       *       *       *       *

QUESTIONS ON THE FORMULA.

1. Describe the brain.

2. Where is the brain placed?

3. Describe the outer membrane of the brain.

4. Describe the middle membrane of the brain.

5. Describe the inner membrane of the brain.

6. Tell about the nerves.

7. Tell about the use of the two kinds of nerves.

8. Tell about the nerves which pass from the brain.

9. Tell about the spinal cord.

10. Tell about the nerves which pass from the spinal cord.

11. What happens if a nerve be destroyed?

12. What happens if a nerve be pressed upon too long?

13. What happens if you drink alcoholic liquors, or snuff, smoke, or chew
tobacco?

14. What is necessary if you would have a healthy brain?

       *       *       *       *       *

THE BRAIN AND ITS WORK.

The brain is egg-shaped, and of two parts, the large brain (_cerebrum_),
and the little brain (_cerebellum_). These are composed of a white and gray
substance, which in the large brain is so folded and wrinkled that it looks
like the meat of an English walnut; in the little brain it is so arranged
that it resembles a tree, and is called _arbor vitae_, tree of life. The
mind does its thinking through the large brain, and controls its muscles
through the little brain.

A drunken man can not walk straight because alcohol has hurt the little
brain; he can not think straight because it has poisoned the large brain.

       *       *       *       *       *

[Illustration: THE BRAIN AND THE SPINAL CORD.]

C, the large brain (_cerebrum_). B, the small brain (_cerebellum_). S, a
portion of the spinal cord.

       *       *       *       *       *

QUESTIONS ON THE NERVOUS SYSTEM.

Where is your brain?--"In my skull."

What color is the brain?--"Gray and white."

What does the brain resemble?--"Marrow."

How is the brain protected?--"By three coats or membranes."

What may you name these membranes?--"The outer membrane, the middle
membrane, and the inner membrane."

Describe the outer membrane. See Formula.

Describe the middle membrane. See Formula.

What are the nerves?--"White ashen-gray pulpy cords, which are found in the
brain."

Where do they go from the brain?--"To every part of the body."

How many kinds of nerves have you?--"Two."

What names are given to the two kinds of nerves?--"Nerves of motion and
nerves of feeling."

Which is the largest nerve in the body?--"The spinal cord."

Where is the spinal cord?--"It extends from the brain throughout the whole
length of the backbone."

How may you describe the spinal cord?--"It is a bundle of nerves, etc." See
Formula.

Where are the spinal nerves?--"They pass from the spinal cord to different
parts of the trunk and limbs."

How many pairs of nerves pass from the base of the brain?--"Twelve."

Where do the first pair go?--"To the nose."

What are they called?--"The nerves of smell."

Where do the second pair go?--"To the eyes."

What are the second pair called?--"The nerves of sight."

Which move the muscles of the eyes?--"The third, fourth, and sixth pairs."

Where do the fifth pair go?--"To the forehead, eyes, nose, ears, tongue,
teeth, and different parts of the face."

The seventh pair?--"To the different parts of the face."

The eighth pair?--"To the inner ear."

What are the eighth pair called?--"The nerves of hearing."

Where do the ninth pair go?--"To the mouth, tongue, and throat."

Where do the twelfth pair go?--"To the tongue."

Where do the eleventh pair go?--"To the neck."

Where do the tenth pair go?--"To the neck, throat, lungs, stomach, and
different parts of the body."

What happens if a nerve be destroyed?--"It cannot carry messages to the
brain."

What happens if a nerve be pressed upon too long?--"It cannot carry
messages to the brain."

What is necessary if you would have a strong, healthy brain?--"My brain
must be used; my brain must be rested; my brain must be supplied with pure
blood."

How must you use your brain?--"In thinking and studying."

How may the brain be rested?--"By sleep."

In what other way may the brain be rested?--"By thinking of something
different from that which made it tired."

What two brain-poisons have you learned about?--"Alcohol and tobacco."[4]

With what may you show the harm done by alcohol to the gray part of the
brain?--"With alcohol and the white of an egg."

How could you show it with these?--"I would pour the alcohol upon the white
of the egg."

What would then happen?--"The white of the egg would harden as if it had
been boiled."

What is in the white of an egg?--"Water and albumen."

Where else may we find albumen?--"In some seeds, and in the gray part of
the brain and the nerves."

What harm does alcohol do to the nerves?--"It takes away their moisture and
hardens them."

What harm does this do to them?--"It paralyzes them, or makes them lose
their power."

What happens when nerves are paralyzed?--"They lose their power over the
muscles; they are unfit to carry messages to and from the brain."

What harm does alcohol do to the gray part of the brain?--"It hardens it,
as it hardens the white of an egg."

What harm does this do to the brain?--"It paralyzes it, or makes it lose
its power."

What then happens?--"It cannot properly do its work of thinking, and cannot
control the nerves."

What disease is sometimes caused by this hardening of the brain by
alcohol?--"Paralysis, which often ends in death."

What harm does alcohol do to the blood-vessels of the brain?--"It fills
them with impure blood."

What disease is caused by the blood-vessels of the brain being filled with
impure blood?--"Congestion of the brain, or apoplexy, which ends in death."

What else frequently happens to those who drink alcoholic liquors?--"They
become crazy, or insane."

If you wish to have a strong, healthy brain, what should you do about these
liquors?--

  "Never put them into my mouth,
  To steal away my brains."

Tell of what dreadful disease people die who are bitten by a mad dog.--"Of
hydrophobia."

Of what dreadful disease do people sometimes die who are bitten by the
serpent in alcoholic liquors?--"Of delirium tremens."

Which is the more dreadful, hydrophobia or delirium tremens?--"One is as
dreadful as the other."

How can you be sure never to have delirium tremens?--"By drinking nothing
which has alcohol in it."

Will a little beer or wine hurt you?--"Yes, it may make me love the taste
of alcohol."

What harm is there in loving the taste of alcohol?--"I may love it so much
as to become a drunkard."

Tell once more how you should treat alcoholic liquors.--"I should never
drink a drop of them."

[4] See Appendices.

       *       *       *       *       *

ALCOHOL.

THE STORY ABOUT ALCOHOL.

Several hundred years ago many people were trying to discover something
that would keep them young and strong, and prevent them from dying. It is
said by some that a man named Paracelsus, in making experiments, discovered
_alcohol_. He called it "the water of life," and boasted that he would
never be weak and never die; so he went on drinking alcoholic liquors until
at last he died in a drunken fit.

What is this alcohol which has done and is doing so much mischief in the
world? I will show you some. What does it look like?--"Water." Yes; and if
you were to smell it you would say it has a somewhat pleasant odor; if you
were to taste it, that it has a hot, biting taste, _i.e._, is pungent. If
you put a lighted match to it you would notice that it burns easily, and
with a flame, and may therefore be said to be combustible and inflammable.

What does it come from? Is it one of the drinks God has given us? Some of
the class think it is; we will try to learn whether this answer is correct
or not. If we study about it very carefully we shall discover that it is
not a natural drink, that it is not found except where it has been made
from decayed or rotten fruits, grains, or vegetables.

If you take some apples, and squeeze the juice out of them, you will find
it sweet and pleasant; let that juice stand for several days and what will
happen to it?--"It will get bad." Yes; or, as grown people say, it will
_work_ or _ferment_; that is, the sugary part of the juice will be
separated into a kind of gas and a liquid. The gas is called _carbonic acid
gas_; the liquid is _alcohol_. Both the gas and the liquid are poisonous.

Alcohol may also be obtained from other fruits, as grapes, and from some
grains and vegetables. But all these must first become rotten before
alcohol will come out of them. This is one reason why we think that God,
who gives us good, wholesome food, did not intend alcohol to be a drink for
man, else He would have put it into the delicious ripe fruit, and not made
it impossible to get until they decay.

Now let us put upon the blackboard something which will help us remember
what we have learned about

                          ALCOHOL.
DISCOVERED BY         DESCRIPTION.          MADE FROM
Paracelsus.           Water-like; with a    Fruits, Grains, or
                      pleasant odor; a      Vegetables.
CALLED                hot, biting taste;
"The water of life."  and will burn with a
                      flame.

       *       *       *       *       *
