see also the minor operations of embroidering, lining--in finished
gloves--sewing the facing, sewing the buttonholes, putting on the
buttons, and trimming with various kinds of thread. Before the gloves
are ready for the boxes one more operation remains. The gloves are
somewhat unsightly as they come from the sewers' hands, and must be
made trim and neat. To secure these desirable results the gloves are
taken to the "laying-off" room.

In this are long tables with a long row of brass hands projecting at
an acute angle. These are filled with steam and are too hot to touch.
These steam tables by ingenious devices are so arranged that it is
impossible to burn the glove or stiffen the leather by too much heat,
a common defect in ordinary methods. The operation of the "laying-off"
room is finished with surprising quickness. Before each table stands
an operator, who slips a glove over each frame, draws it down to
shape, and after a moment's exposure to the warmth removes it, smooth,
shapely, and ready for the box. The frames upon which the gloves are
drawn are long and narrow for fine gloves and short and stubby for
common ones. Then the glove is taken to the stock room, where there
are endless shelves and bins to testify to the chief drawback to glove
making, the necessity for innumerable patterns.--_The Mercer._

       *       *       *       *       *




FABRIC FOR UPHOLSTERY PURPOSES.


The object of this invention is to produce a firm, solid,
dust-resisting, and durable woven cloth, composed, preferably,
entirely of cotton, but it may be of a cotton warp combined with a
linen or other weft, and is particularly applicable for covering the
seats and cushions of railway and other carriages, for upholstering
purposes, for bed ticking, and for various other uses. To effect this
object, a cotton warp and, preferably, a cotton weft also are
employed, or a linen, worsted, or other weft may be used. Both the
yarns for warp and weft may be either dull or polished, according to
the appearance and finish of cloth desired. The fabric is woven in a
plain loom, and the ends are drawn through say eight heald shafts, but
four, sixteen, or thirty-two heald shafts might be employed. When
eight heald shafts are employed, the warp is drawn as follows: The 1st
warp end in the first heald shaft, the 2d warp end in the second heald
shaft, and so on, the remaining six warp ends being drawn in, in
consecutive order, through the remaining six heald shafts; the 9th
warp end is drawn in through the first heald shaft, and so on, the
drawing in of the other ends being repeated as above. The order of the
shedding is as follows: 1st change. The 1st and 3d heald shafts fall,
the rest remaining up. 2d change. The 5th and 7th shafts fall, and the
1st and 3d rise. 3d change. The 2d and 4th shafts fall, and the 5th
and 7th rise. 4th change. The 6th and 8th shafts fall, and the 2d and
4th shafts rise. The result is that each weft thread, a, passes under
six warp threads, b, and over two warp threads, in the manner
illustrated by the accompanying diagram. In drawing in, when four
heald shafts are employed, the 1st warp end is drawn in through the
1st heald shaft, the 2d through the 2d shaft, the 3d through the 1st,
the 4th through the 2d, the 5th through the 3d, the 6th through the
4th, the 7th through the 3d, and 8th through the 4th shaft, and
repeating with the 9th end through the 1st shaft. In shedding, the 1st
heald shaft is lowered, then the 3d, then the 2d, and then 4th. The
result, in this case, is still the same, viz., that each weft thread
passes under six warp ends and over two warp ends. Although a cotton
warp is spoken of in some cases, worsted or other yarn can be added to
the cotton warp to obtain a variation in the pattern or
design.--_Jour. of Fabrics._

[Illustration]

       *       *       *       *       *




REVERSIBLE INGRAIN OR PRO-BRUSSELS CARPET.


The object of this invention is to manufacture, in a cheap fabric, a
closer imitation of Brussels carpets. As is well known, an ordinary
Brussels carpet is made with a pattern on one side only, but according
to this invention, it is intended to produce a pattern on both sides
of the ingrain or pro-Brussels carpet, so that it will be reversible.
In manufacturing a reversible carpet of this class according to the
present invention, the pattern is formed by means of the warp and weft
combined, and any suitable ingrain warp operated by the harness or
jacquard of the loom may be used. In combination with ingrain warp, a
fine catching or binding warp, operated by the gear or jacquard
harness of the loom, is employed, such fine catching warp being used
to bind the weft into the fabric, therefore, if the fabric be woven
two-ply, the ingrain warps are thrown on both the under and upper
surfaces of the fabric, as well as in between the weft, according to
the pattern being woven, by which means four colors are shown on both
sides of the fabric, two being produced by the weft, and two by the
ingrain warps. More than four colors, however, can be produced upon
each side by multiplying the number of colored wefts and warps
employed. If the fabric woven be a three-ply, with the addition of the
ingrain warps thrown on each face of the fabric, then five or more
colors would be imparted to the carpet, as any number of colors can be
used to form a given pattern, by planting or arranging the colors in
the warp, and the remaining colors by the wefts, and so on. The
ingrain warp thread, therefore, together with the weft, used as stated
above, produces an effective pattern on both sides of the carpet;
consequently, it becomes reversible, and this can be accomplished
whether the carpet woven be two, three, or other number of ply. By
reference to the accompanying sheets of drawings, this invention will
be better understood. Fig. 1 is an enlarged cross section of an
improved carpet, a three-ply, that is to say, it is a carpet wherein
three shuttles are employed, each carrying a differently colored weft;
a represents the weft threads which may be composed of any suitable
fiber, b and c are cotton or other fine warp threads, which are
employed for binding the weft together, while d and e represent the
ingrain or woolen warp, where it will be seen that each ingrain warp,
besides lying between the weft, is thrown on both sides of the fabric,
for the purpose of forming figures thereon. It will, therefore, be
seen that a carpet made according to Fig. 1 will show five
colors--three colors produced by the weft and two colors produced by
the ingrain warp. Fig. 2 represents a carpet made with two-ply, in
which case only four colors will be produced, two by the weft and two
by the ingrain warp. It is, consequently, obvious that a carpet made
in the manner above described will have a corresponding pattern or
figure on both its sides, allowing it to be used on both sides. Fig. 3
also shows a two-ply carpet, but, in this case, six colors are
produced, i.e., two colors by the weft and four by the ingrain warp,
marked d, d¹, e, and e¹, the warp being so manipulated by the harness
as to make the carpet reversible, and having a corresponding pattern
or figure on both sides.--_Journal of Fabrics._

[Illustration: Fig. 1]

[Illustration: Fig. 2]

[Illustration: Fig. 3]


       *       *       *       *       *




ARAEO-PICNOMETER.


A modified araeometer has been recently patented by Aug. Eichhorn, in
Dresden, Germany (Deutsches Reichs-Patent, No. 49,683), which will
prove a great boon to chemists, distillers, physicians, etc., as it
affords an easy means of determining the specific gravity of liquids,
especially such of which only small quantities can be conveniently
obtained.

With the ordinary araeometers, as hitherto constructed, a considerable
quantity of the test fluid is required, and an elaborate calculation
necessary for each determination. In the new araeo-picnometer these
drawbacks are ingeniously avoided, so that the specific gravity of any
liquid can be quickly and easily obtained with astonishing accuracy.

The new and important feature of this instrument consists in a glass
bulb, c--see accompanying sketch--which is filled with the liquid
whose gravity is to be determined. Thus, instead of floating the
entire apparatus in the test fluid, only a very small quantity of the
latter is required, an advantage which can hardly be overestimated,
considering how difficult it is in many instances to procure the
necessary supply.

[Illustration]

               ^
               =
               =
               =
               = a
               =
               =
      \        =       /
       |       =      |
       |~~~~~~~~~~~~~~|
       | -  -  =  -  -|
       |-  -   =   -  |
       | -  -  =  -  -|
       |-  -   =   -  |
       | -    / \    -|
       |-  - | b | -  |
       |      \ /    -|
       |-  e//- -\\d  |
       |  - | c   |  -|
       |-    \ _ /    |
       |  -   \ /    -|
       |-      =   -  |
       |  -    =     -|
       |-     | |  -  |
       |  -   \f/    -|
       |-  -   v   -  |
       |             -|
      /                \
      ------------------


The glass bulb, c, when filled with the test fluid, is closed by means
of an accurately fitting glass stopper, d, and the instrument is then
placed in a glass cylinder filled with distilled water of 17.5 deg.
temperature (Centigrade). The gravity is then at once shown on the
divided scale in the tube, a. The lower bulb, f, contains some
mercury; e is a small glass knob, which serves to maintain the
balance, while b is an empty glass bulb (floater).

These instruments are admirably adapted for determining the gravity of
alcohol, petroleum, benzine, and every kind of oil, also for testing
beer, milk, vinegar, grape juice, lye, glycerine, urine, etc.

As the process is an exceedingly simple one and free from the
drawbacks of the araeometer, we are justified in concluding that the
araeo-picnometer will soon be in general use.

H. HENSOLDT, Ph.D.

Petrographical Laboratory, School of Mines, Columbia College.

       *       *       *       *       *

[Continued from SUPPLEMENT, No. 793, page 12669.]




GASEOUS ILLUMINANTS.[1]

[Footnote: Lectures recently delivered before the Society of Arts,
London. From the _Journal_ of the Society.]

BY PROF. VIVIAN B LEWES.


IV.

Mr. Frank Livesey, in the concluding sentence of a paper read before
the Southern District Association of Gas Managers and Engineers during
the past month, on "A Ready Means of Enriching Coal Gas," speaking of
enrichment by gasolene by the Maxim-Clarke process, said "it should,
in many cases, take the place of cannel, to be replaced in its turn,
probably, by a water gas carbureted to 20 or 25 candle power." And
now, having fully reviewed the methods either in use or proposed for
the enrichment of gas, we will pass on to this, the probable cannel of
the future.

Discovered by Fontana, in 1780, and first worked by Ibbetson, in
England, in 1824, water gas has added a voluminous chapter to the
patent records of England, France, and America, no less than sixty
patents being taken out between 1824 and 1858, in which the action of
steam on incandescent carbon was the basis for the production of an
inflammable gas.

Up to the latter date the attempts to make and utilize water gas all
met with failure; but about this time the subject began to be taken up
in America, and the principle of the regenerator, enunciated by
Siemens in 1856, having been pressed into service in the water-gas
generator under the name of fixing chambers or superheaters, we find
water gas gradually approaching the successful development to which it
has attained in the United States during the last ten years. Having
now, by the aid of American skill, been brought into practical form,
it is once more attempting to gain a foothold in Western Europe--the
land of its birth.

When carbon is acted upon at high temperatures by steam, the first
action which takes place is the decomposition of the water vapor, the
hydrogen being liberated, while the oxygen unites with the carbon to
form carbon dioxide:

Carbon. Water.
  C  + 2H2O = CO2 + 4H2

And the carbon dioxide so produced interacts with more red-hot carbon,
forming the lower oxide--carbon monoxide:

  CO2 + C = 2CO

So that the completed reaction may be looked upon as yielding a
mixture of equal volumes of hydrogen and carbon monoxide, both of them
inflammable but non-luminous flames. This decomposition, however, is
rarely completed, and a certain proportion of carbon dioxide is
invariably to be found in the water gas, which, in practice, generally
consists of a mixture of about this composition:

  WATER GAS.

  Hydrogen               48.31
  Carbon monoxide        35.93
  Carbon dioxide          4.25
  Nitrogen                8.75
  Methane                 1.05
  Sulphureted hydrogen    1.20
  Oxygen                  0.51
                        ------
                        100.00

The above is an analysis of water gas made from ordinary gas coke in a
Van Steenbergh generator.

The ratio of carbon monoxide and carbon dioxide present entirely
depends upon the temperature of the generator, and the kind of
carbonaceous matter employed. With a hard, dense anthracite coal, for
instance, it is quite possible to attain a temperature at which there
is practically no carbon dioxide produced, while with an ordinary form
of generator and a loose fuel like coke, a large proportion of carbon
dioxide is generally to be found.

The sulphureted hydrogen in the analysis quoted is, of course, due to
the high amount of sulphur to be found in the gas coke, and is
practically absent from water gas made with anthracite, while the
nitrogen is due to the method of manufacture, the coke being, in the
first instance, raised to incandescence by an air blast, which leaves
the generator and pipes full of a mixture of nitrogen and carbon
monoxide (producer gas), which is carried over by the first portions
of water gas into the holder. The water gas so made has no photometric
value, its constituents being perfectly non-luminous, and attempts to
use it as an illuminant have all taken the form of incandescent
burners, in which thin mantles or combs of highly refractory metallic
oxides have been heated to incandescence. In carbureted water gas this
gas is only used as the carrier of illuminating hydrocarbon gases,
made by decomposing various grades of hydrocarbon oils into permanent
gases by heat.

Many forms of generator have been used in the United States for the
production of water gas, which, after or during manufacture, is mixed
with the vapors and permanent gases obtained by cracking various
grades of paraffin oil, and "fixing" them by subjecting them to a high
temperature; and in considering the subject of enrichment of coal gas
by carbureted water gas, I shall be forced, by the limited time at my
disposal, to confine myself to the most successful of these processes,
or those which are already undergoing trial in this country.

In considering these methods, we find they can be divided into two
classes:

1. Continuous processes, in which the heat necessary to bring about
the interaction of the carbon and steam is obtained by performing the
operation in retorts externally heated in a furnace; and

2. Intermittent processes, in which carbon is first heated to
incandescence by an air blast, and then, the air blast being cut off,
superheated steam is blown in until the temperature is reduced to a
point at which the carbon begins to fail in its action, when the air
is again admitted to bring the fuel up to the required temperature,
the process consisting of alternate formation of producer gas with
rise of temperature, and of water gas with lowering of the
temperature.

Of the first class of generator, none, as far as I know, have as yet
been practically successful, the nearest approach to this system being
the "Meeze," in which fire clay retorts in an ordinary setting are
employed. In the center of each retort is a pipe leading nearly to the
rear end of the retort, and containing baffle plates. Through this a
jet of superheated steam and hydrocarbon vapor is injected, and the
mixture passes the length of the inner tube, and then back through the
retort itself--which is also fitted with baffle plates--to the front
of the retort, whence the fixed gases escape by the stand pipe to the
hydraulic main, and the rich gas thus formed is used either to enrich
coal gas or is mixed with water gas made in a separate generator. In
some forms the water gas is passed with the oil through the retort. In
such a process, the complete breaking down of some of the heavy
hydrocarbons takes place, and the superheated steam, acting on the
carbon so liberated, forms water gas which bears the lower
hydrocarbons formed with it; but inasmuch as oil is not an economical
source of carbon for the production of water gas, this would probably
make the cost of production higher than necessary. This system has
been extensively tried, and indeed used to a certain extent, but the
results have not been altogether satisfactory, one of the troubles
which have had to be contended with being choking of the retorts.

Of the intermittent processes, the one most in use in America is the
"Lowe," in which the coke or anthracite is heated to incandescence in
a generator lined with firebrick, by an air blast, the heated products
of combustion as they leave the generator and enter the superheaters
being supplied with more air, which causes the combustion of the
carbon monoxide present in the producer gas, and heats up the
firebrick "baffles" with which the superheater is filled. When the
necessary temperature of fuel and superheater has been reached, the
air blasts are cut off, and steam is blown through the generator,
forming water gas, which meets the enriching oil at the top of the
first superheater, called the 'carbureter,' and carries the vapors
with it through the main superheater, where the "fixing" of the
hydrocarbons takes place.

The chief advantage of this apparatus is that the enormous
superheating space enables a lower temperature to be used for the
"fixing." This does away, to a certain extent, with the too great
breaking down of the hydrocarbons, and consequent deposition of
carbon. This form of apparatus has just found its way to this country,
and I describe it as being the one most used in the States, and the
type upon which, practically, all water gas plant with superheaters
has been founded.

The Springer apparatus, which is under trial by one of the large gas
companies, differs from the Lowe merely in construction. In this
apparatus the superheater is directly above the generator; and there
is only one superheating chamber instead of two. The air blast is
admitted at the bottom, and the producer gases heat the superheater in
the usual way, and when the required temperature is reached, the steam
is blown in at the top of the generator, and is made to pass through
the incandescent fuel, the water gas being led from the bottom of the
apparatus to the top, where it enters at the summit of the
superheater, meets the oil, and passes down with it through the
chamber, the finished gas escaping at the middle of the apparatus.

This same idea of making the air blast pass up through the fuel, while
in the subsequent operation the steam passes down, is also to be found
in the Loomis plant, and is a distinct advantage, as the fuel is at
its hottest where the blast has entered, and, in order to keep down
the percentage of carbon dioxide, it is important that the fuel
through which the water gas last passes should be as hot as possible,
to insure its reduction to carbon monoxide.

The Flannery apparatus is again but a slight modification of the Lowe
plant, the chief difference being that, as the gas leaves the
generator, the oil is fed into it, and, with the gas, passes through a
D-shaped retort tube, which is arranged round three sides of the top
of the generator; and in this the oil is volatilized, and passes, with
the gas, to the bottom of the superheater, in which the vapors are
converted into permanent gases.

The Van Steenbergh plant, with which I have been experimenting for
some time, stands apart from all other forms of carbureted water gas
plant, in that the upper layer of the fuel itself forms the
superheater, and that no second part of any kind is needed for the
fixation of the hydrocarbons, an arrangement which reduces the
apparatus to the simplest form, and leaves no part which can choke or
get out of order, an advantage which will not be underrated by any one
who has had experience of these plants. While, however, this enormous
advantage is gained, there is also the drawback that the apparatus is
not fitted for use with crude oils of heavy specific gravity, such as
can be dealt with in the big external superheaters of the Lowe class
of water gas plant, but the lighter grades of oil must be used in it
for carbureting purposes.

I am not sure in my own mind that this, which appears at first a
disadvantage, is altogether one, as, in the first place, the lighter
grades of oil, if judged by the amount of carbureting power which they
have, are cheaper per candle power, added to the gas, than the crude
oils, while their use entirely does away with the formation of pitch
and carbon in the pipes and purifying apparatus--a factor of the
greatest importance to the gas manufacturer.

The fact that light oils give a higher carburation per gallon than
heavy crude oil is due to the fact that the latter have to be heated
to a higher temperature to convert them into permanent gas, and this
causes an over-cracking of the most valuable illuminating
constituents; and this trouble cannot be avoided, as, if a lower
temperature is employed, easily condensible vapors are the result,
which, by their condensation in the pipes, give rise to much trouble.

The simplicity of the apparatus is a factor which causes a great
saving of time and expense, as it reduces to a minimum the risk of
stoppages for repairs, while the initial cost of the apparatus is, of
course, low, and the expense of keeping in order practically _nil_.

When I first made the acquaintance of this form of plant, a few years
ago, the promoters were confident that nothing could be used in it
but American anthracite, of the kind they had been in the habit of
using in America, and a light naphtha of about 0.689 specific gravity,
known commercially as 76 deg Baume.

A few weeks' work with the apparatus, however, quickly showed that,
with a slightly increased blow, and a rather higher column of fuel,
gas coke could be used just as well as anthracite, and that by
increasing the column of fuel, a lower grade of oil could be employed;
so that during a considerable portion of the experimental work nothing
but gas coke from the Horseferry Road Works and a petroleum of a
specific gravity of about 0.709 were employed.

Having had control of the apparatus for several months, and, with the
aid of a reliable assistant, having checked everything that went in
and came out of the generator, I am in a position to state
authoritatively that, using ordinary gas coke and a petroleum of
specific gravity ranging from 0.689 to 0.709, 1,000 cubic feet of gas,
having an illuminating power of twenty-two candles, can be made with
an expenditure of 28 to 32 lb. of coke and 21/2 gallons of petroleum.
The most important factors, i.e., the quantity of petroleum and the
illuminating value of the gas, have also been checked and corroborated
