Among the most important of the apparatus exhibited we must reckon Mr.
Cailletet's devices for liquefying gases, and those of Mr. Mascart for
determining the ohm. The results obtained by Mr. Mascart (which have
been submitted to the Committee on Unities of the Congress of
Electricians now in session at Paris), are sensibly concordant with
those obtained independently in England by Lord Rayleigh. Everything
leads to the hope, then, that a rapid and definite solution will be
given of this important question of electric unities, and that nothing
further will prevent the international development of the C.G.S.
system.

Mr. Jules Duboscq made a number of very successful projections, and we
particularly remarked the peculiar experiment made in conjunction with
Mr. Parinaud, that gave in projection two like spectra produced by the
same prism, and which, through superposition, were capable of
increasing the intensity of the colors, or, on the contrary, of
reconstituting white light.

Among the optical applications we may cite Mr. Leon Laurent's
apparatus for controlling plane, parallel, perpendicular, and oblique
surfaces, and magic mirrors obtained with an ordinary light; Mr. S.P.
Thompson's apparatus for demonstrating the propagation of
electro-magnetic waves in ether (according to Maxwell's theory), as
well as some new polarizing prisms; and a mode of lighting the
microscope (presented by Mr. Yvon), that was quite analogous to the
one employed more than a year ago by Dr. Van Heurck, director of the
Botanical Garden of Anvers.

Acoustics were represented by an electro-magnetic brake siren of Mr.
Bourbouze; Konig's apparatus for the synthesis of sounds; and Mr. S.P.
Thompson's cymatograph--a pendulum apparatus for demonstrating the
phenomena of beats.

It was electricity again that occupied the largest space in the
programme of the session.

Apparatus for teaching are assuming greater and greater importance
every day, and the exhibit of Mr. Ducretet included a large number of
the most interesting of these. The house of Breguet exhibited on a
reduced scale the magnificent experiments of Gaston Plante, wherein
320 leaden wire secondary elements charged for quantity with 3 Daniell
elements, and afterward coupled for tension, served to charge a
rheostatic machine formed of 50 condensers coupled for quantity. These
latter, coupled anew for tension, furnished upon being discharged a
spark due to a difference of potential of about 32,000 volts that
presented all the characters of the spark produced by induction coils
on the machines so improperly called "static." Finally, we may cite
the apparatus arranged by Mr. S.P. Thompson for studying the
development of currents in magneto-electric machines. The inventor
studies the influence of the forms of the inductors and armatures of
machines by means of an arrangement that allows him to change the
rings or armatures at will and to take out the induced bobbins in
order to sound every part of the magnetic field. Upon giving the
armature an angular motion limited by two stops, there develops a
certain quantity of electricity that may be measured by causing it to
traverse an appropriate ballistic galvanometer. Messrs. Deprez and
D'Arsonval's galvanometer answers very well for this purpose, and its
aperiodicity, which causes it quickly to return to zero as soon as the
induced current ceases, permits of a large number of readings being
taken within a very short space of time.

Measuring apparatus were represented by a new and very elegant
arrangement of Sir William Thomson's reflecting galvanometers, due to
Mr. J. Carpentier. The mounting adopted by Mr. Carpentier permits of
an easy removal of the bobbins and of an instantaneous substitution
therefor. The galvanometric part, composed of the needles and mirror,
therefore remains entirely free, thus allowing of its being verified,
and making it convenient to attach the silken fiber. Mr. Carpentier
has, moreover, adopted for all the minor apparatus a transparent
celluloid scale which simplifies them, facilitates observations, and
renders the use of reflection almost industrial.

We shall complete our enumeration of the measuring apparatus by citing
Ducretet's non-oscillating galvanometer, Sir William Thomson's
amperemeters, voltameters, ohmmeters, and mhosmeters, constructed and
exhibited by Breguet, and a new aperiodic galvanoscope of Mr. Maiche.
Mr. Baudot exhibited the recent improvements that he has made in his
multiplex printing telegraph, and M. Boudet of Paris showed a new
system of telephone transmission by submarine cables.

[Illustration: FIG. 1.--DIAGRAM EXHIBITING THE ARRANGEMENT FOR
TELEPHONIC TRANSMISSIONS WITHOUT A RECEIVER.]

Finally, we shall conclude our enumeration by referring to the
curiosities. The house of Siemens exhibited a miniature electric
railway actuated by a new model of Reynier accumulators; M. Maiche
operated a system of musical telephonic auditions that differed only
in detail from those instituted by Mr. Ader at the exhibition of 1881;
and Mr. Hospitalier presented a new form of an experiment devised by
Mr. Giltay, consisting of a telephonic transmission of sounds without
the use of receivers. Mr. Giltay's experiment is nothing but Mr.
Dunand's speaking condenser without the condenser. A glance at Fig. 1
will show how things are arranged for the experiment. The transmitting
system comprises two distinct circuits, viz.: (1) one formed of a
pile, P, of 2 or 3 Leclanche elements, or of 1 or 2 small sized
accumulators, an Ader microphane transmitter, M, and the inducting
wire of a small induction coil, B; and (2) the other formed of the
induced wire of the coil, B, of a pile, P', of 10 or 12 Leclanche
elements, and of a line whose extremities terminate at R, in two
ordinary electro-medical handles. With this arrangement the experiment
performed is as follows: When any one speaks or sings in front of the
transmitter, T, while two persons, A and B, each having one hand
gloved, are holding the handles in the ungloved hand, it is only
necessary for A to place his gloved hand upon B's ear, or for the
latter to place his hand upon A's, or for each to place his hand on
the other's ear simultaneously, in order that A or B, or A and B
simultaneously, may hear a voice issuing from the glove. Under these
circumstances, Mr. Giltay's experiment is explained like Dunand's
speaking condenser--the hand of A and the ear of B here constituting
the armature of an elementary condenser in which the glove performs
the role of dielectric.

Upon repeating this experiment at the laboratory of the School of
Physics and Industrial Chemistry of Paris, it has been found that the
glove maybe replaced by a sheet of plain or paraffined paper. In this
case, when two persons are holding the handles, and have their ears
applied, one against the other, if a sheet of paper be interposed,
airs or words will be heard to proceed therefrom. Finally, it has been
found possible to entirely suppress the paper, or dielectric, and to
hear directly, by simply interposing the auditor or auditors in the
circuit. One of the most curious forms of the experiment is the one
shown in Fig. 2. Here a third person, C, hears the hands of A and B
speak when a circuit is formed by means of three persons, A, B, and C,
the two former, A and B, each holding one of the wires of the circuit
and applying his free hand to the ear of C. Although the experiment is
one that requires entire silence, and could not on that account be
performed at the laboratory, a sort of telephonic chain can be formed
in which five or six persons may hear at the same time. A, putting his
hand on the ear of B, the latter putting his to that of C, and so on
up to the last person, who closes the circuit by grasping one of the
handles, the other one being held by A.

[Illustration: EXPERIMENT ON TELEPHONIC TRANSMISSION WITHOUT
RECEIVING APPARATUS.]

It is difficult in the present state of science to explain very
clearly how these telephonic transmissions are effected without a
receiver. All that we can conclude from it so far is that the ear is
an instrument of incomparable delicacy and of exquisite sensitiveness,
since it perceives vibrations in which the energy developer,
particularly in the telephonic chain, is exceedingly feeble.

Without any desire to seek an application for an experiment that is
simply curious, we yet believe that there is here a phenomenon of a
nature to be studied by physicists. Discoveries in telephony and
microphony have certainly opened up to science, as regards both theory
and practice, new horizons that still promise other surprises for the
future. But to return to the observatory: The success obtained by the
exhibition of the French Society of Physics shows that these reunions
respond to a genuine need--that of instructing in and popularizing
science. While warmly congratulating the organizers of these meetings,
we may express a wish that the good example set by the Society of
Physics may be followed by other societies. We are convinced in
advance that an equal success awaits them.--_La Nature._

       *       *       *       *       *




ON THE ARRANGEMENT OF GROUND CONDUCTORS.


In telegraphy, as well as in the question of lightning rods, attention
has been but incidentally paid to the improvement of ground
conductors, and this point has not been the object of that careful
study that has been bestowed upon the establishment of aerial lines.
It is only recently that the interest created by lightning rods has
given rise to new forms of conductors differing from those formerly
used. The publications of the Prussian Academy of Sciences of from
1876 to 1880 contain some information of special importance in regard
to this. It is stated therein that the effect of ground conductors may
be notably increased by the division of the earth plates and the use
of metallic rods, without necessitating a greater output of material.
These facts, however, have not as yet been put to profit in practice
for the reason, perhaps, that the considerations, which have remained
general, have not at once permitted of obtaining forms what could be
employed with perfect knowledge of the results. This is what led Mr.
Ulbricht, of Dresden, to make calculations for a few forms of
conductors, and to test their approximate values. The results of these
researches are printed in the _Elektrotechnischen Zeitschrift_ for
1883 (p. 18).

[Illustration]

The equations found show, in the first place, that there exist three
means of obtaining a considerable effect, as regards the ground
conductor, with a slight expenditure of material: The cylindrical
electrode may be drawn out into the form of a bar or wire; the plate
may be rendered narrow, and elongated in the form of a ribbon; and,
besides, the annular plate may be enlarged in lessening the metallic
surface.

Finally, a short, open cylinder with a vertical axis may be formed by
curving a narrow plate or ribbon. It is not necessary to see the
formula to recognize the fact that this cylinder must behave like a
ribbon and a flat ring. The radius increasing, and the surface
remaining constant, the resistance of the earth here likewise
approaches zero.

As the resistance of the earth is inversely proportional to the
diameter of the plates, the zero resistance can also be reached by
dividing a plate _ad infinitum_. As the parts of the plate may be
brought quite close to each other without perceptibly interfering with
the action, a _network_ has finally been reached by a division carried
very far, yet limited, and by connecting the parts with one another by
conducting cylinders.

If we seek to determine what forms of ground conductors are efficient
and economical under given conditions, we shall have to begin by
informing ourselves as to the choice of material to be used for the
electrode, and shall then have to ascertain whether putting it in the
ground will or will not necessitate much outlay. The most suitable
material is copper, which may be used with advantage, in that it lasts
pretty well underground, and that the facility which it may be worked
permits of easily giving it more appropriate forms than those that can
be obtained with cast iron, which is of itself less costly.

If the burying in the ground requires little or no labor, as when
there exist ponds, rivers, and wells, or subterranean strata of water
near the surface of the earth, elongated forms of conductors will be
employed, such as the solid or hollow cylinder, the wire, the ribbon,
the narrow ring, and the network. Plates approaching a square or
circular shape are not advantageous. But if the ground has to be dug
deeply in order to sink the conductor, the form of the electrode must
be more condensed, and selected in such a way that the necessary
action may be obtained with a minimum output of copper and labor. For
great depths, and when the ground will permit of boring, an elongated
and narrow cylinder will be used. Such a system, however, can only be
employed when the cylinder is surrounded by spring water, since,
without that, an intimate contact with earth that is only moist,
cannot be obtained with certainty. In earth that is only moist and for
moderate depths, preference may be given to an electrode laid down
flat. The digging necessary in this case is onerous, it is true, but
it permits of very accurately determining the state of the earth
beneath and of obtaining a very perfect adherence of the electrode
therewith. Two forms, the annular ribbon or the flat ring and the
network, present themselves, according to calculations, as a
substitute for copper plates, which are so expensive; and these forms
are satisfactory on condition that the labor of digging be not notably
increased. These forms should always have a diameter a little greater
than that of the plate. The flat ring and the network, however, offer
one weak point, which they possess in common with the plate, and that
is, their dimensions cannot be easily adapted to the nature of the
ground met with without a notable increase in the expense. Now, if the
ground should offer a conductivity less than what was anticipated, and
it were desired to increase the plate, say by one-third, it would be
impossible to do so as a consequence of the closed form.

One important advantage is realized in this respect by combining the
ring and the network in the form of a reticulated ring having a
diameter of from 1 to 11/2 meters. On cutting this ring at a given place
and according to a certain radius we obtain the reticulated ribbon
shown in the accompanying figure. The thickness of the wires is 2.5
mm., and their weight is 0.475 kilo. per meter. L, L, and L are the
points at which the conducting cable is soldered. A reticulated ribbon
of copper can be made in advance of any length whatever, and,
according to local exigencies, it may be easily curved and given the
form of a flat or cylindrical ring of varying width. Even though the
ribbon has already been cut for a ring of given diameter, it may be
still further enlarged by drawing it out and leaving a bit of the ring
open, so as to thus obtain a nearly corresponding diminution in the
resistance. Such a resistance may be still further diminished by
rendering the ring higher, that is to say, by employing an annular
cylindrical form.

After assuring himself, by experiments on a small scale, that
calculation and observation gave concordant results for the flat ring,
the author made an experiment on a larger scale with the annular
network. For practical reasons he employed for this purpose a copper
wire 2.5 mm. in diameter, which may be expected to last as long as one
of iron plate 2 mm. in thickness. Calculation showed that in a ribbon
160 mm. wide, meshes 40 mm. in breadth were advantageous and favorable
as regards rigidity. A reticulated ribbon like this, 4 meters in
length, was made and formed into a flat ring having an external
diameter of 1.42 m. and an internal one of 1.10 m. The resistance of
this ring was found to be W = 0.3485 (1/_k_), and that of a plate one
meter square, W0 = 0.368 (1/_k_).

As the conductivity of the earth is very variable, and as we cannot
have an absolute guarantee that the ramming will be uniform, it seemed
proper to make the measurements of the resistance by fixing the plate
and the ring in succession to the lower surface of a small raft, in
such a way that the contact with the water should correspond as well
as possible to the suppositions made for the calculation. As a second
ground conductor, a system of water pipes was used, and, after this, a
lightning rod conductor, etc.

Repeated and varied experiments gave, for the calculation of the
values of the resistances, equations so concordant that the following
results may be considered very approximate.

The square plate had a resistance of 35.5 Siemens units, and the
reticulated ring one of 32.5. From the first figure we deduce k =
1/91.12, that is to say, the specific conductivity of river-water is
1:91120000. Calculation, then, gives as the resistance of the earth in
Siemens units:

                                    Calculated. Observed.
       Square plate.                   33.5       33.5
       Annular ring.                   31.76      32.5

These figures prove the accuracy of the calculations that had been
made in an approximate way.

The experiments were performed upon the Elba, above Dresden. Other
experiments still had reference to the influence of immersion. In
order to diminish polarization, only instantaneous currents from the
measuring pile were employed. It was to be supposed that the current
of water through which the bubbles of gas were removed from the
electrodes would not have permitted of a notable resistance of
polarization. Later measurements, made upon a ribbon buried, like the
plates, in the earth, gave likewise most favorable results.

As a result of these experiments, the State railways of Saxony have,
in such cases as were practicable, introduced the annular network of
copper. There are some manufacturers, too, who seem desirous of
adopting this system, although it has hardly emerged from the period
of experiment. The pecuniary advantages that will result from an
application of it ought, it would seem, to dispel a large proportion
of the criticisms directed against the erection of lightning rods,
from the standpoint of expense, and contribute to extend an
arrangement which may be considered as a very happy one.

If we compare the square plate with the equivalent annular network,
constructed as above indicated, and which should possess, according to
the author an external diameter of 1.26 m. and of 3.45 m., we find
that:

    The square plate, 1 mm. thick weighs 8.9 kilos.
                 "    2  "    "     "   17.8   "
    The annular network             "    1.64  "

The cost of reticulated ribbon per meter amounts to about 4.4 francs,
supposing it to be arranged as shown in the cut.

As term of comparison, we may admit that the following forms are
nearly the equivalent of a horizontal, unburied plate one meter
square.

                                   Length. Diameter.
    Vertical cylinder buried       1.40 m.  0.13  m.
        "       "      "           1.80 m.  0.06  m.
    Vertical bar       "           2.60 m.  0.013 m.
    Horizontal bar     "           5.20 m.  0.013 m.

Horizontal flat ring 1.32 m. in external diameter, and 1.08 m.
internal.

Horizontal network 1.01 m. square, and having meshes of the same size
as those of the reticulated ribbon.

Horizontal reticulated ribbon 3 m. in length and of the structure
described.

Horizontal annular ring 1.26 m. in external diameter, 0.94 m.
internal.

In conclusion, let us meet an objection that might be made to the
accuracy of the hypotheses that serve as a base to the preceding
calculations, in cases where ground plates for lightning rods and not
for telegraphs are concerned. Between the two ground plates of a
telegraph line there is generally a distance such that the curves of
the current undergo no deviation in the vicinity of one of the
electrodes (the only part important for integrations) through the
influence of the other. But it might be admitted that such would prove
the case with a lightning rod in a storm, at the time of the passage
of the fluid into the earth. The ground plate here is one of the
electrodes, and the other is replaced by the surface of the earth
strongly charged to a great distance under the storm clouds. If we
suppose (what may be admitted in a good lightning rod) that there no
longer occurs any spark from the point downward, the curves of the
current, in starting perpendicularly from the ground plate, would be
obliged to leave their rectilinear trajectory and strike the surface
of the earth at right angles. When the electricity flows through a
plane surface into an infinite body, it is only when such surface
presents a very great development that the respective potentials
decrease very slowly in the vicinity of the said surface. No notable
modification occurs, then, in the curves of equal potential, in the
vicinity of the ground plate through the action of this extended
charge, nor consequently any modification in the curves of the
current; but the electricity which spreads has but a short distance to
travel in order to overcome the most important resistances.

The calculations of resistances given above have, then, the same value
for discharges of atmospheric electricity.--_Bull. du Musee de
l'Industrie._

       *       *       *       *       *




ON ELECTROLYSIS.

By H. SCHUCHT.


Concerning the separations which take place at the positive pole, the
composition of the peroxides, and the manner of their determination,
relatively little has been done.

If solutions of the salts of lead, thallium, silver, bismuth, nickel,
and cobalt are decomposed by the current between platinum electrodes,
metal is deposited at the negative, and oxide at the positive
electrode. Manganese is precipitated only as peroxide. The formation
of peroxide is, of course, effected by the ozone found in the
electrolytic oxygen at the positive pole; the oxide existing in
solution is brought to a higher degree of oxidation, and is separated
out. Its formation may be decreased or entirely prevented by the
addition of readily oxidizible bodies, such as organic acids, lactose,
glycerine, and preferably by an excess of oxalic acid; but only until
the organic matter is transformed into carbonic acid. In this manner
Classen separates other metals from manganese in order to prevent the
saline solutions from being retained by the peroxide.

With solutions of silver, bismuth, nickel, and cobalt, it is often
practicable to prevent the separation of oxide by giving the current a
greater resistance--increasing the distance between the electrodes.

The proportion between the quantities of metal and of peroxide
deposited is not constant, and even if we disregard the concentration
of the solution, the strength of the current and secondary influences
(action of nascent hydrogen) is different in acid and in alkaline
solutions. In acid solutions much peroxide is formed; in alkaline
liquids, little or none. The reason of the difference is that ozone is
evolved principally in acid solutions, but appears in small quantities
only in alkaline liquids, or under certain circumstances not at all.
The quantity of peroxide deposited depends also on the temperature of
the saline solution; at ordinary temperatures the author obtained more
peroxide--the solution, the time, and the strength of current being
equal--than from a heated liquid. The cause is that ozone is destroyed
by heat and converted into ordinary oxygen. With the exception of lead
and thallium the quantity of metal deposited from an acid solution is
always greater than that of the peroxide.

_Lead._--Luckow has shown that from acid solutions--no matter what may
be the acid--lead is deposited at the anode as a mixture of anhydrous
and hydrated peroxide of variable composition. Only very strongly acid
solutions let all their lead fall down as peroxide; the precipitation
is rapid immediately on closing the circuit, and complete separation
is effected only in presence of at least 10 per cent. of free nitric
acid. As the current becomes stronger with the increase of free acid,
there is deposited upon the first compact layer a new stratum of
loosely adhering peroxide.

In presence of small quantities of other metals which are thrown down
by the current in the metallic state, such as copper, mercury, etc.,
peroxide alone is deposited from a solution of lead containing small
quantities only of free nitric acid.

The lead peroxide deposited is at first light brown or dark red, and
becomes constantly darker and finally taking a velvet-black. As its
stratification upon the platinum is unequal, it forms beautifully
colored rings.

Experiments show that the quantity of peroxide deposited depends on
the nature of the solution and the strength of the current. In case of
very feeble currents and slight acidity, its quantity is so small that
it does not need to be taken into consideration. If the lead solution
is very dilute scarcely any current is observed, lead solutions _per
se_ being very bad conductors of electricity.

Faintly acid concentrated lead solutions give loose peroxide along
with much spongy metallic lead. Free alkali decreases the separation
of peroxide; feebly alkaline solutions, concentrated and dilute, yield
relatively much peroxide along with metallic lead, while strongly
alkaline solutions deposit no peroxide.

Dried lead peroxide is so sparingly hygroscopic that it may be weighed
as such; its weight remains constant upon the balance for a long time.
In order to apply the peroxide for quantitative determinations, a
large surface must be exposed to action. As positive electrode a
platinum capsule is convenient, and a platinum disk as negative pole.
The capsule shape is necessary because the peroxide when deposited in
large quantities adheres only partially, and falls in part in thin
loose scales. It is necessary to siphon off the nitric solution,
since, like all peroxides, that of lead is not absolutely insoluble in
nitric acid. The methods of Riche and May give results which are
always too high, since portions of saline solution are retained by the
spongy deposit and can be but very imperfectly removed by washing.
This is especially the case in presence of free alkali.

The author has proceeded as follows: The lead peroxide is dried in the
capsule, and there is passed over it pure dry gaseous sulphurous acid
in a strong current from a rather narrow delivery tube. Lead sulphate
is formed with evolution of heat; it is let cool under the exsiccator,
and weighed as such. Or he ignites the peroxide along with finely
pulverized ammonium sulphite; the mass must have a pure white color.
After the conclusion of the reaction it is ignited for about 20
minutes. The results are too high. The proportion of actual lead
peroxide in the deposit ranges from 94 to 94.76 per cent. The peroxide
precipitated from a nitric solution may, under certain circumstances,
be anhydrous. This result is due to the secondary influences at the
positive pole, where the free acid gradually withdraws water from the
peroxide.

The peroxide thrown down from alkaline solutions retains alkali so
obstinately that it cannot be removed by washing; the peroxide plays
here the part of an acid. The lead nitrate mechanically inclosed in
the peroxide is resolved by ignition into oxide, hyponitric acid, and
oxygen; this small proportion of lead oxide does not exert an
important influence on the final result. The quantity of matter
mechanically inclosed is relatively high, as in the precipitation of
