feet in the mixed cars, comprising two first-class and four
second-class compartments, and 32 feet in cars of the third class,
with six compartments. The width of the compartments is 5.6 and 5
feet, according to the class. The passageway is 28 inches in width in
the mixed cars, and 24 in those of the third class. The roof is so
arranged as to afford a circulation of cool air in the interior.

[Illustration: Fig. 2.--PLAN.]

The application of the zigzag passageway has the inconvenience of
slightly elongating the car, but it is advantageous to the passengers,
who can thus enjoy a view of the landscape on both sides of the
train.--_La Nature._

       *       *       *       *       *




FOUNDATIONS OF THE CENTRAL VIADUCT OF CLEVELAND, O.


The Central viaduct, now under construction in the city of Cleveland,
is probably the longest structure of the kind devoted entirely to
street traffic. The superstructure is in two distinct portions,
separated by a point of high ground. The main portion, extending
across the river valley from Hill street to Jennings avenue, is 2,840
feet long on the floor line, including the river bridge, a swing 233
feet in length; the other portion, crossing Walworth run from Davidson
street to Abbey street, is 1,093 feet long. Add to these the earthwork
and masonry approaches, 1,415 feet long, and we have a total length of
5,348 feet. The width of roadway is 40 feet, sidewalks 8 feet each.
The elevation of the roadway above the water level at the river
crossing is 102 feet. The superstructure is of wrought iron, mainly
trapezoidal trusses, varying in length from 45 feet to 150 feet. The
river piers are of first-class masonry, on pile and timber foundations.
The other supports of the viaduct are wrought iron trestles on masonry
piers, resting on broad concrete foundations. The pressure on the
material beneath the concrete, which is plastic blue clay of varying
degrees of stiffness mixed with fine sand, is about one ton per square
foot.

The Cuyahoga valley, which the viaduct crosses from bluff to bluff, is
composed mainly of blue clay to a depth of over 150 feet below the
river level. No attempt is made to carry the foundation to the rock.
White oak piles from 50 to 60 feet in length and 10 inches in diameter
at small end are driven for the bridge piers either side of the river
bed, and these are cut off with a circular saw 18 feet below the
surface of the water. Excavation by dredging was made to a depth of 3
feet below where the piles are cut off to allow for the rising of the
clay during the driving of the piles. The piles are spaced about 2
feet 5 inches each way, center to center. The grillage or platform
covering the piles consists of 14 courses of white oak timber, 12
inches by 12 inches, having a few pine timbers interspersed so as to
allow the mass to float during construction. The lower half of the
platform was built on shore, care being taken to keep the lower
surface of the mass of timber out of wind. The upper and lower
surfaces of each timber were dressed in a Daniels planer, and all
pieces in the same course were brought to a uniform thickness. The
timbers in adjacent courses are at right angles to each other. The
lower course is about 58 feet by 22 feet, the top course about 50 by
24 feet, thus allowing four steps of one foot each all around. The
first course of masonry is 48 feet by 21 feet 8 inches; the first
course of battered work is 41 feet 81/2 inches by 16 feet 3 inches. Thus
the area of the platform on the piles is 1,856 square feet, and of the
first batter course of masonry 777.6 square feet, or in the ratio of
2.4 to 1. The height of the masonry is 78 feet above the timber, or
731/2 feet above the water. The number of piles in each foundation is
312. The average load per pile is about 11 tons, and the estimated
pressure per square inch of the timber on the heads of the piles is
about 200 pounds.

To prevent the submersion of the lower courses of masonry during
construction, temporary sides of timber were drift-bolted to the
margin of the upper course of the timber platform, and carried high
enough to be above the surface of the water when the platform was sunk
to the head of the piles by the increasing weight of masonry.

The center pier is octagonal, and is built in the same general manner
as to foundations as the shore piers, but the piles are cut off 22
feet below water, and there are eighteen courses of timber in the
grillage. The diameter of the platform between parallel sides is 53
feet, while that of the lower course of battered masonry is but 37
feet. The areas are as 2,332 to 1,147, or as 2 to 1 nearly. The
pressure per square inch of timber on the heads of the piles is about
the same as stated above for the shore piers. The number of piles
under the center pier is 483.

The risks and delays by this method of constructing the foundations
were much less, and the cost also, than if an ordinary coffer dam had
been used. Also the total weight of the piers is much less, as that
portion below a point about two feet below the water adds nothing to
their weight.

The piles were driven with a Cram steam hammer weighing two tons, in a
frame weighing also two tons. The iron frame rests directly upon the
head of the pile and goes down with it. The fall of the hammer is
about 40 inches before striking the pile. The total penetration of the
piles into the clay averaged 27 feet. The settlement of the pile
during the final strokes of the hammer varied from one quarter to
three quarters of an inch per blow.

There are 122 masonry pedestals, of which eight are large and heavy,
carrying spans of considerable length. They will all be built upon
concrete beds, except a few near the river on the north side, where
piles are required.

The four abutments with their retaining walls are of first-class
rock-faced masonry. The footing courses are stepped out liberally, so
as to present an unusually large bottom surface. They rest on beds of
concrete 4 feet thick. The foundation pits are about 50 feet below the
top of the bluffs, and are in a material common to the Cleveland
plateau, a mixture of blue sand and clay, with some water. The
estimated load of masonry on the earth at the bottom of the concrete
is one and seven tenths tons to the square foot. Two of the large
abutments were completed last season. They show an average settlement
of three eighths of an inch since the lower footing courses were laid.

The facts and figures here given regarding the viaduct were kindly
furnished by the city civil engineer, C.G. Force, who has the work in
charge.--_Jour. Asso. of Eng. Societies._

       *       *       *       *       *


For sticking paper to zinc, use starch paste with which a little
Venice turpentine has been incorporated, or else use a dilute solution
of white gelatine or isinglass.

       *       *       *       *       *




CENTRIFUGAL PUMPS AT MARE ISLAND NAVY YARD, CALIFORNIA.[1]

  [Footnote 1: Built by the Southwark Foundry and Machine Company,
               of Philadelphia.]

By H.R. CORNELIUS.


In December, 1883, bids were asked for by the United States government
on pumping machinery, to remove the water from a dry dock for vessels
of large size.

The dimensions of the dock, which is situated on San Pablo Bay,
directly opposite the city of Vallejo, are as follows:

Five hundred and twenty-nine feet wide at its widest part, 36 feet
deep, with a capacity at mean tide of 9,000,000 gallons.

After receiving the contract, several different sizes of pumps were
considered, but the following dimensions were finally chosen: Two 42
inch centrifugal pumps, with runner 66 inches in diameter and
discharge pipes 42 inches, each driven direct by a vertical engine
with 28 inch diameter cylinder and 24 inch stroke.

These were completed and shipped in June, 1885, on nine cars,
constituting a special train, which arrived safely at its destination
in the short space of two weeks, and the pumps were there erected on
foundations prepared by the government.

From the "Report of the Chief of Bureau of Yards and Docks" I quote
the following account of the official tests:

     "The board appointed to make the test resolved to fill the
     dock to about the level that would attain in actual service
     with a naval ship of second rate in the dock, and the tide at
     a stage which would give the minimum pumping necessary to
     free the dock. The level of the 20th altar was considered as
     the proper point, and the water was admitted through two of
     the gates of the caisson until this level was reached; they
     were then closed. The contents of the dock at this point is
     5,963,921 gallons.

     "The trial was commenced and continued to completion without
     any interruption in a very satisfactory manner.

     "In the separate trials had of each pump, the average
     discharge per minute was taken of the whole process, and
     there was a singular uniformity throughout with equal piston
     speed of the engine.

     "It was to be expected, and in a measure realized, that
     during the first moments of the operations, when the level of
     the water in the dock was above the center of the runner of
     the pumps, that the discharge would be proportioned to the
     work done, where no effort was necessary to maintain a free
     and full flow through the suction pipes; but as the level
     passed lower and farther away from the center there was no
     apparent diminution of the flow, and no noticeable addition
     to the load imposed on the engine. The variation in piston
     speed, noted during the trial, was probably due to the
     variation of the boiler pressure, as it was difficult to
     preserve an equal pressure, as it rose in spite of great
     care, owing to the powerful draught and easy steaming
     qualities of the boilers.

     "After the trial of the second pump had been completed the
     dock was again filled through the caisson, and as both pumps
     were to be tried, the water was admitted to a level with the
     23d altar, containing 7,317,779 gallons, which was seven feet
     above the center of the pumps; this was in favor of the pumps
     for the reasons before stated. In this case all the boilers
     were used.

     "Everything moved most admirably, and the performance of
     these immense machines was almost startling. By watching the
     water in the dock it could be seen to lower bodily, and so
     rapidly that it could be detected by the eye without
     reference to any fixed point.

     "The well which communicates with the suction tunnel was
     open, and the water would rise and fall, full of rapid swirls
     and eddies, though far above the entrance of these tunnels.
     Through the man hole in the discharge culvert the issuance
     from the pipes could be seen, and its volume was beyond
     conception. It flowed rapidly through the culvert, and its
     outfall was a solid prism of water, the full size of the
     tunnel, projecting far into the river.

     "During a pumping period of 55 minutes, the dock had been
     emptied from the twenty-third to two inches above the sixth
     altar, containing 6,210,698 gallons, an average throughout of
     112,922 gallons per minute. At one time, when the revolutions
     were increased to 160 per minute, the discharge was 137,797
     gallons per minute. This is almost a river, and is hardly
     conceivable. After the pumps were stopped, on this occasion,
     tests were made with each in succession as to the power of
     the ejectors with which each is fitted to recharge the pumps.

     "The valves in the discharge pipe were closed and steam
     admitted to the ejector, the pump being still and no water in
     the gauge glass on the pump casing, which must be full before
     the pumps will work. The suction pipe of the ejector is only
     two and a half inches in diameter, the steam pipe one inch in
     diameter. To fully charge the pumps at this point required
     filling the pump casing and the suction pipe containing about
     2,000 gallons; this was accomplished in four minutes, and
     when the gauge glass was full the pump operated instantly and
     with certainty, discharging its full volume of water.

     "I went on several occasions down in the valve pits on the
     ladder of the casing, and to all accessible parts while in
     motion at its highest speed, and there was no undue
     vibration, only a uniform murmur of well-balanced parts, and
     the peculiar clash of water against the sides of the casing
     as its velocity was checked by the blank spaces in the
     runner.

     "The pumps are noisy while at work, due to the clashing of
     the water just mentioned, but it affords a means of detecting
     any faulty arrangements of the runner or unequal discharge
     from any of its openings. While moving at a uniform speed,
     this clashing has a tone whose pitch corresponds with that
     velocity of discharge, and if this tone is lacking in
     quality, or at all confused, there is want of equality of
     discharge through the various openings of the runner. To this
     part I gave close attention, and there was nothing that the
     ear could detect to indicate aught but the nicest adjustment.
     The bearings of the runners worked with great smoothness, and
     did not become at all heated. Through a simple, novel
     arrangement, these bearings are lubricated and kept cool.
     There is a constant circulation of water from the pumps by
     means of a small pipe, which completes a circuit to an
     annular in the bearings back to the discharge pipe while the
     pump is in motion, requiring no oil and making it seemingly
     impossible to heat these bearings.

     "The large cast steel valves placed in the embouchement of
     the casing, it was thought, might act to check the free
     discharge, and arrangements were provided for raising and
     keeping them open by a long lever key attached to their axes
     of revolution, but, to our great surprise, at the first gush
     from the pumps these valves, weighing nearly 1,500 pounds,
     were lifted into their recessed chambers, giving an
     unobstructed opening to the flow, and they floated on its
     surface unsupported, save by the swiftly flowing water,
     without a movement, while the pump was in operation.

     "The steam-actuated valves in the suction and discharge pipes
     worked very well, and the water cushion gave a slow, uniform
     motion, and without shock, either in opening or closing them.

     "The engines worked noiselessly, without shock or labor. At
     no time during the trial was the throttle valve open more
     than three-eighths of an inch.

     "The indicator cards taken at various intervals gave 796
     horse power, and the revolutions did not exceed 160 at any
     time, though it was estimated that 900 horse power and 210
     revolutions would be necessary to attain the requisite
     delivery. So that there is a large reserve of power available
     at any time.

     "The erection of this massive machinery has been admirably
     done. The parts, as sent from the shops of the contractor,
     have matched in all cases without interference here; and,
     when lowered into place, its final adjustment was then made
     without the use of chisel or file, and has never been touched
     since.

     "The joints of the steam and water connections were perfect,
     and the method of concentrating all valves, waste pipes, and
     important movements at the post of the engineer in charge
     gives him complete control of the whole system of each engine
     and pump without leaving his place, and reduces to a minimum
     the necessary attendance. All the parts are strong and of
     excellent design and workmanship; simple, and without
     ornamentation.

     "Looking down upon them from a level of the pump house
     gallery, they are impressive and massive in their simplicity.

     "The government is well worth of congratulation in possessing
     the largest pumping machinery of this type and of the
     greatest capacity in the world, and the contractors have
     reason to be proud of their work."--_Proc. Eng. Club._

       *       *       *       *       *




THE PART THAT ELECTRICITY PLAYS IN CRYSTALLIZATION.


Since the discovery of the multiplying galvanometer, we know for an
absolute certainty that in every chemical action there is a production
of electricity in a more or less notable quantity, according to the
nature of the bodies in presence. Though, in the play of _affinity_,
there is a manifestation of electricity, is it the same with
_cohesion_, which also is a chemical force?

We know, on another hand, that, on causing electricity to intervene,
we bring about the crystallization of a large number of substances.
But is the converse true? Is spontaneous crystallization accompanied
with an appreciable manifestation of electricity? If we consult the
annals of science and works treating on electricity in regard to this
subject, we find very few examples and experiments proper to elucidate
the question.

Mr. Mascart is content to say: "Some experiments seem to indicate that
the solidification of a body produces electricity." Mr. Becquerel does
more than doubt--he denies: "As regards the disengagement of
electricity in the changing of the state of bodies, we find none."
This assertion is too sweeping, for further along we shall cite facts
that prove, on the contrary, that in the phenomena of crystallization
(to speak of this change of state only) there is an unequivocal
production of electricity. Let us remark, in the first place, that
when a number of phenomena of physical and chemical order
incontestably testify to the very intimate correlation that exists
between the molecular motions of bodies and their electrical state, it
would not be very logical to grant that electricity is absent in
crystallization.

Thus, to select an example from among physical effects, the vibratory
phenomena that occur in telephone transmissions, under the influence
of a very feeble electric current, show us that the molecular
constitution of a solid body is extremely variable, although within
slight limits. The feeblest modification in the electric current may
be shown by molecular motions capable of propagating themselves to
considerable distances in the conducting wire. Conversely, it is
logical to suppose that a modification in the molecular state of a
body must bring electricity into play. If, in the phenomena of
solidification, and particularly of crystallization, we collect but
small quantities of electricity, that may be due to the fact that,
under the experimental conditions involved, the electricity is more or
less completely absorbed by the work of crystal building.

On another hand, the behavior of electricity shows in advance the
multiple role that this agent may play in the various physical,
chemical, and mechanical phenomena.

There is no doubt that electricity exists immovable or in circulation
everywhere, latent or imperceptible, around us, and within ourselves,
and that it enters as a cause into the majority of the chemical,
physical, and mechanical phenomena that are constantly taking place
before our eyes. A body cannot change state, nature, temperature,
form, or place, even, without electricity being brought into play, and
without its accompanying such modifications, if it presides therein.
Like heat, it is _the_ natural agent _par excellence_; it is the
invisible and ever present force which, in the ultimate particles of
matter, causes those motions, vibrations, and rotations that have the
effect of changing the properties of bodies. Upon entering their
intimate structure, it orients or groups their atoms, and separates
their molecules or brings them together. From this, would it not be
surprising if it did not intervene in the wonderful phenomenon of
crystallization? Crystallization, in fact, depends upon _cohesion_,
and, in the thermic theory, this force is not distinct from affinity,
just as solution and dissociation are not distinct from combination.

On this occasion, it is necessary to say that, between affinity, heat,
and electricity there is such a correlation, such a dependency, that
physicists have endeavored to reduce to one single principle all the
causes that are now distinct. The mechanical theory of heat has made a
great stride in this direction.

The equivalence of the thermic, mechanical and chemical forces has
been demonstrated; the only question hereafter will be to select from
among such forces the one that must be adopted as the sole principle,
in order to account for all the phenomena that depend upon these
causes of various orders. But in the present state of science, it is
not yet possible to explain completely by heat or electricity, taken
isolatedly, all the effects dependent upon the causes just mentioned.
We must confine ourselves for the present to a study of the relations
that exist between the principal natural forces--affinity, molecular
forces, heat, electricity, and light. But from the mutual dependence
of such forces, it is admitted that, in every natural phenomenon,
there is a more or less apparent simultaneous concurrence of these
causes.

In order to explain electric or magnetic phenomena, and also those of
crystallization, it is admitted that the atoms of which bodies are
composed are surrounded, each of them, with a sort of atmosphere
formed of electric currents, owing to which these atoms are attracted
or repelled on certain sides, and produce those varied effects that we
observe under different circumstances. According to this theory, then,
atoms would be small electro-magnets behaving like genuine magnets.
Entirely free in gases, but less so in liquids and still less so in
solids, they are nevertheless capable of arranging themselves and of
becoming polarized in a regular order, special to each kind of atom,
in order to produce crystals of geometrical form characteristic of
each species. Thus, as Mr. Saigey remarks in "Physique Moderne" (p.
181): "So long as the atmospheres of the molecules do not touch each
other, no trace of cohesion manifests itself; but as soon as they come
together force is born. We understand why the temperatures of fusion
and solidification are fixed for the same body. Such effects occur at
the precise moment at which these atmospheres, which are variable with
the temperature, have reached the desired diameter."

[Illustration: Figs. 1., 2., and 3.]

Although the phenomenon of crystallization does not essentially depend
upon temperature, but rather upon the relative quantity of liquid that
holds the substance in solution, it will be conceived that a moment
will arrive when, the liquid having evaporated, the atmospheres will
be close enough to each other to attract each other and become
polarized and symmetrically juxtaposed, and, in a word, to
crystallize.

Before giving examples of the production of electricity in the
phenomenon of crystallization, it will be well to examine, beforehand,
the different circumstances under which electricity acts as the
determining cause of crystallization or intervenes among the causes
that bring about the phenomenon. In the first place, two words
concerning crystallization itself: We know that crystallization is the
passage, or rather the result of the passage, of a body from a liquid
or gaseous state to a solid one. It occurs when the substance has lost
its cohesion through any cause whatever, and when, such cause ceasing
to act, the body slowly returns to a solid state.

Under such circumstances, it may take on regular, geometrical forms
called crystalline. Such conditions are brought about by different
processes--fusion, volatilization, solution, the dry way, wet way, and
electric way. Further along, we shall give some examples of the last
named means.

Let us add that crystallization may be regarded as a general property
of bodies, for the majority of substances are capable of
crystallizing. Although certain bodies seem to be amorphous at first
sight, it is only necessary to examine their fracture with a lens or
microscope to see that they are formed of a large number of small
juxtaposed crystals. Many amorphous precipitates become crystalline in
the long run.

In the examination of the various crystallizations that occupy us, we
shall distinguish the following: (1) Those that are produced through
the direct intervention of the electric current; (2) those in which
electricity is manifestly produced by small voltaic couples resulting
from the presence of two different metals in the solution experimented
with; (3) those in which there are no voltaic couples, but in which it
is proved that electricity is one of the causes that concur in the
production of the phenomenon; (4) finally, those in which it is
rational, through analogy with the preceding, to infer that
electricity is not absent from the phenomenon.

I. We know that, by means of voltaic electricity or induction, we can
crystallize a large number of substances.

Despretz tried this means for months at a time upon carbon, either by
using the electricity from a Ruhmkorff coil or the current from a weak
