(or rather twelve) days, sufficiently illustrates this remark. It is
most true that scientific difficulties did not form the chief obstacle.
Having been proposed under the auspices of the Roman pontiff, the
Protestant world, for a century and more, rejected the new style. It was
in various places the subject of controversy, collision, and
bloodshed.[A] It was not adopted in England till nearly two centuries
after its introduction at Rome; and in the country of Struve and the
Pulkova equatorial, they persist at the present day in adding eleven
minutes and twelve seconds to the length of the tropical year.

[Footnote A: Stern's "_Himmelskunde_," p. 72.]


                         GEOGRAPHICAL SCIENCE.

2. The second great practical use of an Astronomical Observatory is
connected with the science of geography. The first page of the history
of our Continent declares this truth. Profound meditation on the
sphericity of the earth was one of the main reasons which led Columbus
to undertake his momentous voyage; and his thorough acquaintance with
the astronomical science of that day was, in his own judgment, what
enabled him to overcome the almost innumerable obstacles which attended
its prosecution.[A] In return, I find that Copernicus in the very
commencement of his immortal work _De Revolutionibus Orbium Coelestium_,
fol. 2, appeals to the discovery of America as completing the
demonstration of the sphericity of the earth. Much of our knowledge of
the figure, size, density, and position of the earth, as a member of the
solar system, is derived from this science; and it furnishes us the
means of performing the most important operations of practical
geography. Latitude and longitude, which lie at the basis of all
descriptive geography, are determined by observation. No map deserves
the name, on which the position of important points has not been
astronomically determined. Some even of our most important political and
administrative arrangements depend upon the cooperation of this science.
Among these I may mention the land system of the United States, and the
determination of the boundaries of the country. I believe that till it
was done by the Federal Government, a uniform system of mathematical
survey had never in any country been applied to an extensive territory.
Large grants and sales of public land took place before the Revolution,
and in the interval between the peace and the adoption of the
Constitution; but the limits of these grants and sales were ascertained
by sensible objects, by trees, streams, rocks, hills, and by reference
to adjacent portions of territory, previously surveyed. The uncertainty
of boundaries thus defined, was a never-failing source of litigation.
Large tracts of land in the Western country, granted by Virginia under
this old system of special and local survey, were covered with
conflicting claims; and the controversies to which they gave rise formed
no small part of the business of the Federal Court after its
organization. But the adoption of the present land-system brought order
out of chaos. The entire public domain is now scientifically surveyed
before it is offered for sale; it is laid off into ranges, townships,
sections, and smaller divisions, with unerring accuracy, resting on the
foundation of base and meridian lines; and I have been informed that
under this system, scarce a case of contested location and boundary has
ever presented itself in court. The General Land Office contains maps
and plans, in which every quarter-section of the public land is laid
down with mathematical precision. The superficies of half a continent is
thus transferred in miniature to the bureaus of Washington; while the
local Land Offices contain transcripts of these plans, copies of which
are furnished to the individual purchaser. When we consider the tide of
population annually flowing into the public domain, and the immense
importance of its efficient and economical administration, the utility
of this application of Astronomy will be duly estimated.

[Footnote A: Humboldt, _Histotre de la Geographie_, &c., Tom. 1,
page 71.]

I will here venture to repeat an anecdote, which I heard lately from a
son of the late Hon. Timothy Pickering. Mr. Octavius Pickering, on
behalf of his father, had applied to Mr. David Putnam of Marietta, to
act as his legal adviser, with respect to certain land claims in the
Virginia Military district, in the State of Ohio. Mr. Putnam declined
the agency. He had had much to do with business of that kind, and found
it beset with endless litigation. "I have never," he added, "succeeded
but in a single case, and that was a location and survey made by General
Washington before the Revolution; and I am not acquainted with any
surveys, except those made by him, but what have been litigated."

At this moment, a most important survey of the coast of the United
States is in progress, an operation of the utmost consequence, in
reference to the commerce, navigation, and hydrography of the country.
The entire work, I need scarce say, is one of practical astronomy. The
scientific establishment which we this day inaugurate is looked to for
important cooperation in this great undertaking, and will no doubt
contribute efficiently to its prosecution.

Astronomical observation furnishes by far the best means of defining the
boundaries of States, especially when the lines are of great length and
run through unsettled countries. Natural indications, like rivers and
mountains, however indistinct in appearance, are in practice subject to
unavoidable error. By the treaty of 1783, a boundary was established
between the United States and Great Britain, depending chiefly on the
course of rivers and highlands dividing the waters which flow into the
Atlantic Ocean from those which flow into the St. Lawrence. It took
twenty years to find out which river was the true St. Croix, that being
the starting point. England then having made the extraordinary discovery
that the Bay of Fundy is not a part of the Atlantic Ocean, forty years
more were passed in the unsuccessful attempt to re-create the highlands
which this strange theory had annihilated; and just as the two countries
were on the verge of a war, the controversy was settled by compromise.
Had the boundary been accurately described by lines of latitude and
longitude, no dispute could have arisen. No dispute arose as to the
boundary between the United States and Spain, and her successor, Mexico,
where it runs through untrodden deserts and over pathless mountains
along the 42d degree of latitude. The identity of rivers may be
disputed, as in the case of the St. Croix; the course of mountain chains
is too broad for a dividing line; the division of streams, as experience
has shown, is uncertain; but a degree of latitude is written on the
heavenly sphere, and nothing but an observation is required to read the
record.


                         QUESTIONS OF BOUNDARY.

But scientific elements, like sharp instruments, must be handled with
scientific accuracy. A part of our boundary between the British
Provinces ran upon the forty-fifth degree of latitude; and about forty
years ago, an expensive fortress was commenced by the government of the
United States, at Rouse's Point, on Lake Champlain, on a spot intended
to be just within our limits. When a line came to be more carefully
surveyed, the fortress turned out to be on the wrong side of the line;
we had been building an expensive fortification for our neighbor. But in
the general compromises of the Treaty of Washington by the Webster and
Ashburton Treaty in 1842, the fortification was left within our
limits.[A]

[Footnote A: Webster's Works. Vol. V., 110, 115.]

Errors still more serious had nearly resulted, a few years since, in a
war with Mexico. By the treaty of Guadalupe Hidalgo, in 1848, the
boundary line between the United States and that country was in part
described by reference to the town of El Paso, as laid down on a
specified map of the United States, of which a copy was appended to the
treaty. This boundary was to be surveyed and run by a joint commission
of men of science. It soon appeared that errors of two or three degrees
existed in the projection of the map. Its lines of latitude and
longitude did not conform to the topography of the region; so that it
became impossible to execute the text of the treaty. The famous Mesilla
Valley was a part of the debatable ground; and the sum of $10,000,000,
paid to the Mexican Government for that and for an additional strip of
territory on the southwest, was the smart-money which expiated the
inaccuracy of the map--the necessary result, perhaps, of the want of
good materials for its construction.

It became my official duty in London, a few years ago, to apply to the
British Government for an authentic statement of their claim to
jurisdiction over New Zealand. The official _Gazette_ for the 2d of
October, 1840, was sent me from the Foreign Office, as affording the
desired information. This number of the _Gazette_ contained the
proclamations issued by the Lieutenant Governor of New Zealand, "in
pursuance of the instructions he received from the Marquis of Normanby,
one of Her Majesty's principal Secretaries of State," asserting the
jurisdiction of his government over the islands of New Zealand, and
declaring them to extend "from 34 degrees 30 minutes North to 47 degrees
10 minutes South latitude." It is scarcely necessary to say that south
latitude was intended in both instances. This error of 69 degrees of
latitude, which would have extended the claim of British jurisdiction
over the whole breadth of the Pacific, had, apparently, escaped the
notice of that government.


                        COMMERCE AND NAVIGATION.

It would be easy to multiply illustrations in proof of the great
practical importance of accurate scientific designations, drawn from
astronomical observations, in various relations connected with
boundaries, surveys, and other geographical purposes; but I must hasten
to

3. A third important department, in which the services rendered by
astronomy are equally conspicuous. I refer to commerce and navigation.
It is mainly owing to the results of astronomical observation, that
modern commerce has attained such a vast expansion, compared with that
of the ancient world. I have already reminded you that accurate ideas in
this respect contributed materially to the conception in the mind of
Columbus of his immortal enterprise, and to the practical success with
which it was conducted. It was mainly his skill in the use of
astronomical instruments--imperfect as they were--which enabled him, in
spite of the bewildering variation of the compass, to find his way
across the ocean.

With the progress of the true system of the universe toward general
adoption, the problem of finding the longitude at sea presented itself.
This was the avowed object of the foundation of the observatory at
Greenwich;[A] and no one subject has received more of the attention of
astronomers, than those investigations of the lunar theory on which the
requisite tables of the navigator are founded. The pathways of the ocean
are marked out in the sky above. The eternal lights of the heavens are
the only Pharos whose beams never fail, which no tempest can shake from
its foundation. Within my recollection, it was deemed a necessary
qualification for the master and the mate of a merchant-ship, and even
for a prime hand, to be able to "work a lunar," as it was called. The
improvements in the chronometer have in practice, to a great extent,
superseded this laborious operation; but observation remains, and
unquestionably will for ever remain, the only dependence for
ascertaining the ship's time and deducting the longitude from the
comparison of that time with the chronometer.

[Footnote A: Grant's _Physical Astronomy_, p. 460.]

It may, perhaps, be thought that astronomical science is brought already
to such a state of perfection that nothing more is to be desired, or at
least that nothing more is attainable, in reference to such practicable
applications as I have described. This, however, is an idea which
generous minds will reject, in this, as in every other department of
human knowledge. In astronomy, as in every thing else, the discoveries
already made, theoretical or practical, instead of exhausting the
science, or putting a limit to its advancement, do but furnish the means
and instruments of further progress. I have no doubt we live on the
verge of discoveries and inventions, in every department, as brilliant
as any that have ever been made; that there are new truths, new facts,
ready to start into recognition on every side; and it seems to me there
never was an age, since the dawn of time, when men ought to be less
disposed to rest satisfied with the progress already made, than the age
in which we live; for there never was an age more distinguished for
ingenious research, for novel result, and bold generalization.

That no further improvement is desirable in the means and methods of
ascertaining the ship's place at sea, no one I think will from
experience be disposed to assert. The last time I crossed the Atlantic,
I walked the quarter-deck with the officer in charge of the noble
vessel, on one occasion, when we were driving along before a leading
breeze and under a head of steam, beneath a starless sky at midnight, at
the rate certainly of ten or eleven miles an hour. There is something
sublime, but approaching the terrible, in such a scene;--the rayless
gloom, the midnight chill,--the awful swell of the deep,--the dismal
moan of the wind through the rigging, the all but volcanic fires within
the hold of the ship. I scarce know an occasion in ordinary life in
which a reflecting mind feels more keenly its hopeless dependence on
irrational forces beyond its own control. I asked my companion how
nearly he could determine his ship's place at sea under favorable
circumstances. Theoretically, he answered, I think, within a
mile;--practically and usually within three or four. My next question
was, how near do you think we may be to Cape Race;--that dangerous
headland which pushes its iron-bound unlighted bastions from the shore
of Newfoundland far into the Atlantic,--first landfall to the
homeward-bound American vessel. We must, said he, by our last
observations and reckoning, be within three or four miles of Cape Race.
A comparison of these two remarks, under the circumstances in which we
were placed at the moment, brought my mind to the conclusion, that it is
greatly to be wished that the means should be discovered of finding the
ship's place more accurately, or that navigators would give Cape Race a
little wider berth. But I do not remember that one of the steam packets
between England and America was ever lost on that formidable point.

It appears to me by no means unlikely that, with the improvement of
instrumental power, and of the means of ascertaining the ship's time
with exactness, as great an advance beyond the present state of art and
science in finding a ship's place at sea may take place, as was effected
by the invention of the reflecting quadrant, the calculation of lunar
tables, and the improved construction of chronometers.

