attenuating, and altering the form of its corpuscles, whose integrity
is so essential to life, causing them to adhere to one another, and to
the walls of the vessels by which they are conveyed; being no longer
able to traverse the capillaries, oedema is produced, followed by the
peculiar livid blush. Shakespeare would appear to have had intuitive
perception of the nature of such subtle poison, when he caused the
ghost to describe to Hamlet

  "The leprous distillment whose effect
   Bears such an enmity to the blood of man
   That swift as quicksilver, it courses through
   The natural gates and alleys of the body
   And with sudden vigor it doth posset
   And curd like eager droppings into milk,
   The thin and wholesome blood: so did it mine
   And a most instant tetter marked about
   Most lazar like, with vile and loathsome crust
   All my smooth body."

It is not to be supposed, however, that all or even a major portion of
the blood disks require to be changed or destroyed to produce a fatal
result, since death may supervene long before such a consummation can
be realized. It is the capillary circulation that suffers chiefly,
since the very size and caliber of the heart cavities and trunk
vessels afford them comparative immunity. But of the greatly dissolved
and disorganized condition of the blood that may occur secondarily, we
have evidences in the passive haemorrhages that attack those that have
recovered from the immediate effects of serpent poisoning, following
or coincident with subsidence of swelling and induration; and, as with
scurvy, bleeding may occur from the mouth, throat, lungs, nose, and
bowels, or from ulcerated surfaces and superficial wounds, or all
together, defying all styptics and haemastatics. In a case occurring
under the care of Dr. David Brainerd in the Illinois General
Hospital,[6] blood flowed from the gums in great profusion, and on
examination was found destitute, even under the microscope, of the
faintest indications of fibrine--the principle upon which coagulation
depends. The breath, moreover, gave most sickening exhalations,
indicative of decomposition, producing serious illness in those
exposed for any length of time to its influence. We may add, among
other sequelae, aside from death produced through primary and secondary
effects, paralysis, loss of nerve power, impotence, haemorrhage, even
mortification or gangrene.

  [Footnote 6: _Medical Independent_, 1855.]

The failure in myotic power of the heart and in the muscles of
respiration through reflex influence of par vagum and great
sympathetic nerves, whereby pulmonary circulation is impeded, are
among the earliest of phenomena. Breathing becoming retarded and
laborious, the necessary supply of oxygen is no longer received, and
blood still venous, in that it is not relieved of its carbon, is
returned through the arteries, whereby the capillaries of the brain
are gorged with a doubly poisoned circulation, poisoned by both venom
and carbon. In this we have ample cause for the attending train of
symptoms that, beginning with drowsiness, rapidly passes into stupor
followed by profound coma and ultimate dissolution--marked evidence of
the fact that a chemical agent or poison may produce a mechanical
disease; and autopsical research reveals absolutely nothing save the
general disorganization of blood corpuscles, as already noted.

Taking circumstantial and pathological evidences into consideration,
the hope of the person thus poisoned rests solely upon lack of
vitality in the serpent and its venom, and in his personal
idiosyncrasies, habits of life, condition of health, etc., and the
varied chapters of accidents. _To look for a specific, in any sense of
the word, is the utmost folly!_ The action of the poison and its train
of results follow inoculation in too swift succession to be overtaken
and counteracted by any antidote, supposing such to be a possible
product, even if administered hypodermically. We have evidence of this
in iodic preparations, iodine being the nearest approach to a perfect
antidote that can be secured by mortal skill, inasmuch, if quickly
injected into the circulation, it retards and restrains the
disorganizing process whereby the continuity of the blood corpuscles
is lost; moreover, it is a marked antiseptic, favors the production of
adhesive inflammation, whereby lymph is effused and coagulated about
the bitten part, and absorption checked, and the poison rendered less
diffusible. But when a remedy is demanded that shall restore the
pristine form, functions, and energy of the disorganized globules, man
arrogates to himself supernal attributes whereby it becomes possible
not only to save and renew, _but to create life_; and we can scarce
expect science or even accident (as some expect) to even rival Nature
and set at defiance her most secret and subtle laws. Such, however, is
the natural outcropping of an ignorant teaching and vulgar prejudice
that feeds and clothes the charlatan and ascribes to savage and
uncultured races an occult familiarity with pathological,
physiological, and remedial effect unattainable by the most advanced
sciences; and whereby the Negro, Malay, Hindoo, South Sea Islander,
and red man are granted an innate knowledge of poisons and their
antidotes more than miraculous. A reward of more than a quarter of a
century's standing, and amounting to several thousand pounds, is
offered by the East India Government for the discovery of a specific
for the bite of the cobra, and for which no claims have ever been
advanced; and the "snake charmers" or jugglers in whom this superior
knowledge is supposed to center are so well aware of the futility of
specifics, and the risk to which they are subjected, that few venture
to ply their calling without a broad-bladed, keen-edged knife
concealed about the person as a means of instant amputation in case of
accident. Medical and scientific associations of various classes, in
Europe, Australia, America, even Africa, and the East and West Indies,
have repeatedly held out the most tempting lures, and indulged in
exhaustive and costly experimentation in search of specifics for the
wounds of vipers, cobras, rattlesnakes, and the general horde of
venomous reptiles; and all in vain. Even the saliva of man, as well as
certain other secretions, is at times so modified by anger as to rival
the venom of the serpent in fatality, and it has no specific; and a
careful analysis of the pathological relations of such poison proves
that further experimentation and expectation is as irrational as the
pursuit of the "philosopher's stone."

It is an indisputable fact, however, that there are individuals whose
natural or acquired idiosyncrasies permit them to be inoculated by the
most venomous of reptiles without deleterious or unpleasant results,
and Colonel Matthews Taylor[7] knew several persons of this character
in India, and who regarded the bite of the cobra or tic paloonga with
nearly as much indifference as the sting of a gnat or mosquito. Again,
in 1868, Mr. Drummond, a prominent magistrate of Melbourne,
Australia,[8] met with untimely death under circumstances that
attracted no little attention. An itinerant vender of nostrums had on
exhibition a number of venomous reptiles, by which he caused himself
to be successively bitten, professing to secure immunity by reason of
a secret compound which he offered for sale at a round figure.
Convinced that the fellow was an imposter, and his wares valuable only
as a means of depleting the pockets of the credulous, Mr. Drummond
loudly asserted the inefficacy of the nostrum, as well as the
innocuousness of the reptiles, which he assumed to be either naturally
harmless, or rendered so by being deprived of their fangs; and in
proof thereof insisted upon being himself bitten. To this experiment
the charlatan was extremely averse, offering strenuous objections, and
finally conveyed a point blank refusal. But Mr. Drummond's demands
becoming more imperative, and observing that his hesitancy impressed
the audience as a tacit acknowledgment of the allegations, he finally
consented, and placed in the hands of the magistrate a tiger snake,
which he deemed least dangerous, and which instantly struck the
gentleman in the wrist. The usual symptoms of serpent poisoning
rapidly manifested themselves, followed by swelling and lividity of
the part, obstructed circulation and respiration, and coma; and in
spite of the use of the vaunted remedy and the attentions of
physicians the result was most fatal. The vender subsequently conceded
the worthless character of his nostrum, declaring that be enjoyed
exemption from the effects of of serpent poison by virtue of recovery
from a severe inoculation in early life; and he further added he knew
"some people who were born so," who put him "up to this dodge" as a
means of gaining a livelihood.

  [Footnote 7: _Vide_ report to Prof. J. Henry Bennett.]

  [Footnote 8: London _Times_.]

It is a general supposition that such immunity, when congenital, is
acquired _in utero_ by the inoculation of the parent, and Oliver
Wendell Holmes' fascinating tale of "Elsie Venner" embodies many
interesting features in this connection. Admitting such inoculation
may secure immunity, recent experiments in the action of this as well
as kindred poisons give no grounds for believing it at all universal
or even common, but as depending upon occult physiological or
accidental phenomena. For instance, the writer and his father are
equally proof against the contagion and inoculation of vaccination and
variola, in spite of repeated attempts to secure both, while their
respective mothers suffered terribly with smallpox at periods
subsequent to the birth of their children; and it is well understood
that there are striking analogies between the poisons of certain
contagious fevers and those of venomous serpents, inasmuch as one
attack conveys exemption from future ones of like character. In other
words, many animal poisons, as well as the pathological ones of
smallpox, measles, scarlatina, whooping cough, etc., have the power of
so modifying the animal economy, when it does not succumb to their
primary influence, as to ever after render it all but proof against
them. Witness, for instance, the ravages of the mosquito, that in
certain districts punishes most terribly all new comers, and who after
a brief residence suffer little, the bite no longer producing pain or
swelling.

Regarding the supposed correlation of serpent poison and the septic
ferments of certain tropical and infectious fevers, they are not
necessarily always contagious. It may be interesting to note that one
Doctor Humboldt in 1852,[9] in an essay read before the Royal Academy
of Medical Sciences at Havana, assumed their proximate identity, and
advocated the inoculation of the poison of one as a prophylactic of
the other. He claimed to have personally inoculated numberless persons
in New Orleans, Vera Cruz, and Cuba with exceedingly dilute venom,
thereby securing them perfect immunity from yellow fever. Aside from
the extraordinary nature of the statement, the fact that the doctor
affirmed, he had never used the virus to an extent sufficient to
produce any of its toxic symptoms, cast discredit over the whole, and
proofs were demanded and promised. This was the last of the subject,
however, which soon passed into oblivion, though whether from failure
on the part of the medico to substantiate his assertions, or from the
inanition of his colleagues, it is difficult to determine, though the
presumption is largely in favor of the former. Nevertheless, it is
worthy of consideration and exhaustive experimentation, since it is no
less plausible than the theory which rendered the name of Jenner
famous.

  [Footnote 9: London _Lancet_.]

Outside of the transfusion of blood, for which there are strong
reasons for believing would be attended with happy results, the sole
remedies available in serpent poisoning are measures looking to the
prompt cutting off of the circulation of the affected part, and the
direct stimulation of the heart's action and the respiratory organs,
until such a time as Nature shall have eliminated all toxical
evidences; and these must necessarily be mechanical. Alcoholic
stimulants are available only as they act mechanically in sustaining
cardiac and pulmonary activity, and where their free use is prolonged
efficacy is quickly exhausted, and they tend rather to hasten a fatal
result. They are devoid of the slightest antidotal properties, and in
no way modify the activity of the venom; and an intoxicated person, so
far from enjoying the immunity with which he is popularly credited, is
far more apt to succumb to the virus than him of unfuddled intellect.
The reasons are obvious. Theoretically, for purely physiological and
therapeutic reasons _amyl nitrite_ should be of incalculable value,
though I have no knowledge of its use in this connection, since its
vapor when inhaled is a most powerful stimulator of cardiac action,
and when administered by the mouth it is unapproached in its control
of spasmodically contracted vessels and muscles. The relief its vapor
affords in the collapse of chloroform anaesthesia, in which dissolution
is imminent from paralyzed heart's action, is instantaneous, and its
effect upon the spasmodic and suffocative sensations of hydrophobia
are equally prompt. Moreover, without further discussing its
physiological functions, it is the nearest approach to an antidote to
certain zymotic poisons, and especially valuable in warding off and
aborting the action of the ferment that gives rise to pertussis, or
whooping cough. _Iodide of ethyl_ is another therapeutical measure
that is worthy of consideration; and _iodoform_ in the treatment of
the sequelae incident to recovery.

The native population of India, in spite of the contrary accepted
opinion, are remarkably free from resort to nostrums that lay claim to
being antidotes. The person inoculated by the cobra is at once seized
by his friends, and constant and violent exercise enforced, if
necessary at the point of stick, and severe and cruel (but
nevertheless truly merciful) beatings are often a result. In this we
see a direct application, without in the least understanding them, of
the rules laid down to secure certain physiological results, as for
the relief of opium and morphia narcosis, which serpent poisoning
almost exactly resembles. The late Doctor Spillsbury (Physician-General
of Calcutta),[10] while stationed at Jubulpore, Central India, was
informed late one evening that his favorite horse keeper had just been
dangerously bitten by a cobra of unusual size, and therefore more than
ordinarily venomous. He at once ordered his gig, and in spite of the
wails and protestations of the sufferer and his friends, with whom a
fatal result was already a foregone conclusion, the doctor caused his
wrists to be bound firmly and inextricably to the back of the vehicle;
then assuring the man if he did not keep up he would most certainly be
dragged to death, he mounted to his seat and drove rapidly away. Three
hours later, or a little more, he returned, having covered nearly
thirty miles without cessation or once drawing rein. The horse keeper
was found bathed in profuse perspiration, and almost powerless from
excessive fatigue. _Eau de luce_, an aromatic preparation of ammonia,
was now administered at frequent and regular intervals as a diffusible
stimulant, and moderate though constant exercise enforced until near
dawn, when the sufferer was found to be completely recovered.

  [Footnote 10: London _Lancet_.]

The value of violent and profuse cutaneous transpiration, thereby
securing a rapidly eliminating channel for discharging poison from the
system, is well known; in no other way can action be had so thorough,
speedy, and prompt. Captain Maxwell[11] tells us it was formerly the
custom among the Irish peasantry of Connaught, when one manifested
unmistakable evidences of hydrophobia, to procure the death of the
unfortunate by smothering between two feather beds. In one instance,
after undergoing this treatment, the supposed corpse was seen, to the
horror and surprise of all who witnessed it, to crawl from between the
bolsters, when he was found to be entirely free from his disorder; the
beds, however, were saturated through and through with the
perspiration that escaped the body in the intensity of his mortal
agony. More recently a French physician,[12] recognizing the incubatory
stage of rabies in his own person, resolved upon suicide rather than
undergo its attendant horrors. The hot bath was selected for the
purpose, with a view of gradually increasing its temperature until
syncope should be induced, which he hoped would be succeeded by death.
To his surprise, however, as the temperature of the water rose, his
sensations of distress improved; and the very means chosen for
terminating life became instead his salvation, restoring to perfect
health. Again, Dr. Peter Hood[13] relates that a blacksmith residing in
the neighborhood of his country house was in high repute for miles
about by reason of his cures of rabies. His remedy consisted simply in
forcing the person bitten to accompany him in a rapid walk or trot for
twenty miles or more, after which he administered copious draughts of
a hot decoction of broom tops, as much for its moral effect as for its
value in sustaining and prolonging established diaphoresis.

  [Footnote 11: Wild Sports or the West.]

  [Footnote 12: _L'Union Medicale_--name withheld by request of the
  gentleman.]

  [Footnote 13: London _Lancet_.]

Though the pathological conditions of hydrophobia and serpent
poisoning are by no means parallel, the _rationale_ of the methods
employed in opening the emunctories of the skin are the same; and were
it not for its powerful protracting effect and depressing action upon
the heart, we might perhaps secure valuable aid from jaborandi
(_pilocarpus_), since it stimulates profusely all the secretions; as
it is, more is to be hoped for in the former disorder than in the
latter. It would be desirable also to know what influence the Turkish
bath might exert, and it would seem worthy at least of trial.

       *       *       *       *       *




TO FIND THE TIME OF TWILIGHT.


_To the Editor of the Scientific American_:

Given latitude N. 40 deg. 51', declination N. 20 deg. 25', sun 18 deg. below the
horizon. To find the time of twilight at that place. In the
accompanying diagram, E Q = equinoctial, D D = parallel of
declination, Z S N a vertical circle, H O = the horizon, P = North
pole, Z = zenith, and S = the sun, 18 deg. below the horizon, H O,
measured on a vertical circle. It is seen that we have here given us
the three sides of a spherical triangle, viz., the co-latitude 49 deg. 9',
the co declination 69 deg. 35', and the zenith distance 108 deg., with which
to compute the angle Z P S. This angle is found to be 139 deg. 16' 5.6".
Dividing this by 15 we have 9 h. 16 m. 24.4 s., from noon to the
beginning or termination of twilight. Now, in the given latitude and
declination, the sun's center coincides with the horizon at sunset
(allowance being made for refraction), at 7 h. 18 m. 29.3 s. from
apparent noon. Then if we subtract 7 h. 18 m. 29.3 s. from 9 h. 16 m.
24.4 s., we shall have 1 h. 57 m. 55.1 s. as the duration of twilight.
But the real time of sunset must be computed when the sun has
descended about 50' below the horizon, at which point the sun's upper
limb coincides with the line, H O, of the horizon. This takes place 7
h. 16 m. 30.8 s. mean time. It is hoped the above will be a sufficient
answer to L.N. (See SCIENTIFIC AMERICAN of Dec. 1, 1883, p. 346.)

B.W. H.

[Illustration]

       *       *       *       *       *




ETHNOLOGICAL NOTES.


The distinguished anthropologist M. De Quatrefages has recently spoken
before the Academy of Sciences in Paris, and we extract from his
discourse on "Fossil Man and Savages" some notes reported in the
_Journal d'Hygiene_: "It is in Oceanica and above all in Melanesia and
in Polynesia where I have looked for examples of savage races. I have
scarcely spoken of the Malays except to bring to the surface the
features which distinguish them among the ethnic groups which they at
times touch, and which in turn frequently mingle with them. I have
especially studied the Papuans and Negritos. The Papuans are an
exclusively Pelasgic race, that many anthropologists consider as
almost confined to New Guinea and the neighboring archipelago. But it
becomes more and more manifest that they have had also periods of
expansion and of dissemination.

"On one side they appear as conquerors in some islands of Micronesia;
on the other we have shown--M. Hamy and myself--that to them alone can
be assigned the skulls found in Easter Island and in New Zealand. They
have hence touched the east and south, the extremities of the maritime
world.

"The Negritos, scarcely known a few years ago, and to-day confounded
with the Papuans by some anthropologists, have spread to the west and
northwest.

"They have left unmistakable traces in Japan; we find them yet in the
Philippines and in many of the islands of the Malay archipelago; they
constitute the indigenous population of the Andaman Islands, in the
Gulf of Bengal. Indeed, they have formerly occupied a great part of
the two peninsulas of India, and I have elsewhere shown that we can
follow their steps to the foot of the Himalayas, and beyond the Indus
to Lake Zerah. I have only sketched here the history of this race,
whose representatives in the past have been the type of the Asiatic
pygmies of whom Pliny and Ctesias speak, and whose _creoles_ were
those Ethiopians, black and with smooth hair, who figured in the army
of Xerxes.

"I have devoted two long examinations to another black race much less
important in numbers and in the extent of their domain, but which
possess for the anthropologist a very peculiar interest and a sad one.
It exists no more; its last representative, a woman, died in 1877. I
refer to the Tasmanians.

"The documents gathered by various English writers, and above all by
Bouwick, give numerous facts upon the intellectual and moral character
of the Tasmanians. The complete destruction of the Tasmanians,
accomplished in at most 72 years over a territory measuring 4,400
square leagues, raises a sorrowful and difficult question. Their
extinction has been explained by the barbarity of the civilized
