
       *       *       *       *       *

[Continued from Supplement, No. 706, page 11283.]




ON ALLOTROPIC FORMS OF SILVER.

By M. CAREY LEA.


In the first part of this paper were described certain forms of
silver; among them a lilac blue substance, very soluble in water, with
a deep red color. After undergoing purification, it was shown to be
nearly pure silver. During the purification by washing it seemed to
change somewhat, and, consequently, some uncertainty existed as to
whether or not the purified substance was essentially the same as the
first product; it seemed possible that the extreme solubility of the
product in its first condition might be due to a combination in some
way with citric acid, the acid separating during the washing. Many
attempts were made to get a decisive indication, and two series of
analyses, one a long one, to determine the ratio between the silver
and the citric acid present, without obtaining a wholly satisfactory
result, inasmuch as even these determinations of mere ratio involved a
certain degree of previous purification which might have caused a
separation.

This question has since been settled in an extremely simple way, and
the fact established that the soluble blue substance contains not a
trace of combined citric acid.

The precipitated lilac blue substance (obtained by reducing silver
citrate by ferrous citrate) was thrown on a filter and cleared of
mother water as far as possible with a filter pump. Pure water was
then poured on in successive portions until more than half the
substance was dissolved. The residue, evidently quite unchanged, was,
of course, tolerably free from mother water. It was found that by
evaporating it to dryness over a water bath, most of the silver
separated out as bright white normal silver; by adding water and
evaporating a second time, the separation was complete, and water
added dissolved no silver. _The solution thus obtained was neutral._
It must have been acid had any citric acid been combined originally
with the silver. This experiment, repeated with every precaution,
seems conclusive. The ferrous solution, used for reducing the silver
citrate, had been brought to exact neutrality with sodium hydroxide.
After the reduction had been effected, the mother water over the lilac
blue precipitate was neutral or faintly acid.

A corroborating indication is the following: The portions of the lilac
blue substance which were dissolved on the filter (see above) were
received into a dilute solution of magnesium sulphate, which throws
down insoluble allotropic silver of the form I have called B (see
previous paper). This form has already been shown to be nearly pure
silver. The magnesia solution, neutral before use, was also neutral
after it had effected the precipitation, indicating that no citric
acid had been set free in the precipitation of the silver.

It seems, therefore, clear that the lilac blue substance contains no
combined citric acid. Had the solubility of the silver been due to
combination with either acid or alkali, the liquid from which it was
separated by digestion at or below 100 deg. C. must have been acid or
alkaline; it could not have been neutral.

We have, therefore, this alternative: In the lilac blue substance we
have either pure silver in a soluble form or else a compound of
silver, with a perfectly neutral substance generated from citric acid
in the reaction which leads to the formation of the lilac blue
substance. If this last should prove the true explanation, then we
have to do with a combination of silver of a quite different nature
from any silver compounds hitherto known. A neutral substance
generated from citric acid must have one or more atoms of hydrogen
replaced by silver. This possibility recalls the recent observations
of Ballo, who, by acting with a ferrous salt on tartaric acid,
obtained a neutral colloid substance having the constitution of
arabin, C6 H10 O6.

To appreciate the difficulty of arriving at a correct conclusion, it
must be remembered that the silver precipitate is obtained saturated
with strong solutions of ferric and ferrous citrate, sodium citrate,
sulphate, etc. These cannot be removed by washing with pure water, in
which the substance itself is very soluble, but must be got rid of by
washing with saline solutions, under the influence of which the
substance itself slowly but continually changes. Next, the saline
solution used for washing must be removed by alcohol. During this
treatment, the substance, at first very soluble, gradually loses its
solubility, and, when ready for analysis, has become wholly insoluble.
It is impossible at present to say whether it may not have undergone
other change; this is a matter as to which I hope to speak more
positively later. It is to be remarked, however, that these allotropic
forms of silver acquire and lose solubility from very slight causes,
as an instance of which may be mentioned the ease with which the
insoluble form B recovers its solubility under the influence of sodium
sulphate and borate, and other salts, as described in the previous
part of this paper.

The two insoluble forms of allotropic silver which I have described as
B and C--B, bluish green; C, rich golden color--show the following
curious reaction. A film of B, spread on glass and heated in a water
stove to 100 deg. C. for a few minutes becomes superficially bright
yellow. A similar film of the gold colored substance, C, treated in
the same way, acquires a blue bloom. In both cases it is the surface
only that changes.

_Sensitiveness to Light._--All these forms of silver are acted upon by
light. A and B acquire a brownish tinge by some hours' exposure to
sunlight. With C the case is quite different, the color changes from
that of red gold to that of pure yellow gold. The experiment is an
interesting one. The exposed portion retains its full metallic
brilliancy, giving an additional proof that the color depends upon
molecular arrangement, and this with the allotropic forms of silver is
subject to change from almost any influence.

_Stability._--These substances vary greatly in stability under
influences difficult to appreciate. I have two specimens of the gold
yellow substance, C, both made in December, 1886, with the same
proportions, under the same conditions. One has passed to dazzling
white, normal silver, without falling to powder, or undergoing
disaggregation of any sort; the fragments have retained their shape,
simply changing to a pure frosted white, remaining apparently as solid
as before; the other is unchanged, and still shows its deep yellow
color and golden luster. Another specimen made within a few months and
supposed to be permanent has changed to brown. Complete exclusion of
air and light is certainly favorable to permanence.

_Physical Condition._--The brittleness of the substances B and C, the
facility with which they can be reduced to the finest powder, makes a
striking point of difference between allotropic and normal silver. It
is probable that normal silver, precipitated in fine powder and set
aside moist to dry gradually, may cohere into brittle lumps, but these
would be mere aggregations of discontinuous material. With allotropic
silver the case is very different, the particles dry in optical
contact with each other, the surfaces are brilliant, and the material
evidently continuous. That this should be brittle indicates a totally
different state of molecular constitution from that of normal silver.

_Specific Gravities._--The allotropic forms of silver show a lower
specific gravity than that of normal silver.

In determining the specific gravities it was found essential to keep
the sp. gr. bottle after placing the material in it for some hours
under the bell of an air pump. Films of air attach themselves
obstinately to the surfaces, and escape but slowly even in vacuo.

Taken with this precaution, the blue substance, B, gave specific
gravity 9.58, and the yellow substance, C, specific gravity 8.51. The
specific gravity of normal silver, after melting, was found by G. Rose
to be 10.5. That of finely divided silver obtained by precipitation is
stated to be 10.62.[1]

   [Footnote 1: Watts' Dict., orig. ed., v. 277.]

I believe these determinations to be exact for the specimens employed.
But the condition of aggregation may not improbably vary somewhat in
different specimens. It seems, however, clear that these forms of
silver have a lower specific gravity than the normal, and this is what
would be expected.

Chestnut Hill, Philadelphia, May, 1889.

--_Amer. Jour. of Science._

       *       *       *       *       *




TURPENTINE AND ITS PRODUCTS.[1]

   [Footnote 1: Read at a meeting of the Liverpool Chemists'
   Association.]

By EDWARD DAVIES, F.C.S., F.I.C.


In treating this subject it is necessary to limit it within
comparatively narrow bounds, for bodies of the turpentine class are
exceedingly numerous and not well understood. In this definite class
turpentine means the exudation from various trees of the natural order
Coniferae, consisting of a hydrocarbon, C10 H16, and a resin. The
constitution of the hydrocarbons in turpentine from different sources,
though identical chemically, varies physically, the boiling point
ranging from 156 deg. C. to 163 deg. C., the density from 0.855 to 0.880, and
the action on polarized light from -40.3 to +21.5. They are very
unstable bodies in their molecular constitution, heat, sulphuric acid,
and other reagents modifying their properties. The resins are also
very variable bodies formed probably by oxidation of the hydrocarbons,
and as this oxidation is more or less complete, mixtures are formed
very difficult to separate and study.

Turpentine as met with in commerce is mainly derived from _Pinus
maritima_, yielding French turpentine, and _Pinus australis_,
furnishing most of the American turpentine. The latter is obtained
from North and South Carolina, Georgia and Alabama. In Hanbury and
Fluckiger's Pharmacographia there is a full description of the manner
in which the trees are wounded to obtain the turpentine. Besides these
there are Venice turpentine from the larch, _Pinus Larix_, Strassburg
turpentine from _Abies pectinata_, and Canada balsam from _Pinus
balsamea_.

The crude American turpentine is a viscid liquid of about the
consistence of honey, but varying to a soft solid, known as gum, thus,
according to the amount of exposure which it has undergone, it
contains about 10 to 25 per cent. of "spirits," to which the name of
turpentine is commonly given, the rest being resin, or as it is
usually called, rosin.

In Liverpool almost all the spirits of turpentine comes from America,
so that it is almost impossible to get a sample of French.

The terpene from American turpentine is called austraterebenthene. It
possesses dextro-rotatory polarization of +21.5. Its density is 0.864.
Boiling point 156 deg. C.

In taking the boiling point of a commercial sample of spirits it is
necessary to wait until the thermometer becomes steady. Not more than
5 per cent. should pass over before this takes place, and then there
is not more than two or three degrees of rise until almost all is
distilled over.

The liquids of lower boiling point do not appear to have been much
studied. In French spirits they seem to be of the same composition as
the main product, but with more action on polarized light.

French spirits of turpentine is mainly composed of terebenthene. The
boiling point and sp. gr. are the same as those of the austraterebenthene,
but the polarization is left handed and amounts to -40.5.

Isomeric modifications. Heated to 300 deg. C. in a sealed tube for two
hours, it becomes an isomeric compound, boiling at 175 deg. C., while the
density is lowered, being only 0.8586 at 0 deg. C. The rotatory power is
only -9 deg.. It oxidizes much more rapidly. It is called isoterebenthene
and has a smell of essential oil of lemons.

By the action of a small quantity of sulphuric acid, among other
products terebene is formed. It has the same boiling point and sp. gr.
as terebenthene, but is without action on polarized light.
Austraterebenthene forms similar if not identical bodies.

Polymers. One part of boron fluoride BF3 instantly converts 160
parts of terebenthene into polymers boiling above 300 deg. C., and
optically inactive. H2 SO4 does the same on heating and forms
diterebene C20 H32.

Terchloride of antimony does the same, and also produces tetraterebene
C40H64, a solid brittle compound formed by the union of four
molecules of C10 H16. It does not boil below 350 deg. C. and
decomposes on heating.

Compound with H2O. Terpin C10 H18 2HO is formed when 1 volume
of spirits of turpentine is mixed with 6 of nitric acid and 1 of
alcohol, and exposed to air for some weeks. Crystals are formed which
are pressed, decolorized by animal charcoal, and recrystallized from
boiling water.

Compounds with HCl. When a slow current of HCl is passed through
cooled spirits of turpentine, two isomeric compounds are formed, one
solid, and one liquid. The lower the temperature is kept, the more of
the solid body is produced. To obtain the solid body pure it is
pressed and recrystallized from ether or alcohol. It is volatile and
has the odor of camphor. It is called artificial camphor, and has the
composition C10 H16 HCl. There is also a compound with 2HCl.

Oxidation products. By passing air into spirits of turpentine oxygen
is absorbed. It was thought at one time that ozone was produced, but
Kingzett's view is that camphoric peroxide is formed C10 H14 O4,
and that in presence of water it decomposes into camphoric acid and
H2 O2. This liquid constitutes the disinfectant known as
"sanitas," which possesses the advantages of a pleasant smell and
non-poisonous properties. C10 H18 O2 may be obtained by
exposing spirits of turpentine in a flask full of oxygen with a little
water.

Camphor C16 H16 O has been made in small quantity by oxidizing spirits
of turpentine. Terebenthene belongs to the benzene or aromatic series,
which can be shown from its connection with cymene. Cymene is
methylpropyl-benzene, and can be made from terpenes by removing two
atoms of H. It has not yet been converted again into terpene, but the
connection is sufficiently proved. The presence of CH3 in terpenes is
shown by their yielding chloroform when distilled with bleaching
powder and water. The resin is imperfectly known. It was supposed to
consist of picric and sylvic acids. It is also stated to contain
abietic anhydride C44 H62 O4, but it is difficult to understand how a
compound containing C44 can be produced from C10 H16. The most
probable view is that it is the anhydride of sylvic acid, which is
probably C20 H30 O2.

The dark colored resin which is obtained when the turpentine is
distilled without water can be converted into a transparent slightly
yellow body by distillation with superheated steam. A small portion is
decomposed, but the greater part distills unchanged. It is used in
making soap which will lather with sea water.

When distilled alone, various hydrocarbons, resin oil and resin pitch,
are obtained.

I find that commercial spirits of turpentine varies in sp. gr. from
0.865 to 0.869 at 15 deg. C. The higher sp. gr. appears to be connected
with the presence of resinous bodies, the result of oxidation. The
boiling point is very uniform, ranging from 155 deg. C. to 157 deg. C. at 760
mm. Taking these two points together, it is hardly possible to
adulterate spirits of turpentine without detection. I give the figures
for a few imitations or adulterations:

                              Sp. gr.   B.P.
  No. 1                        0.821  137 deg. C.
  No. 2                        0.884  165 deg. C.
  No. 3                        0.815  150 deg. C.
  No. 4                        0.895  156 deg. C.

There is a considerable difference in the flashing point, no doubt due
to the longer or shorter exposure of the crude turpentine, by which
more or less of the volatile portion escapes.

       *       *       *       *       *




ON THE OCCURRENCE OF PARAFFINE IN CRUDE PETROLEUM.[1]

   [Footnote 1: An abstract of thesis by E.A. Partridge, class of
   '89, Univ. of Pa. Read before the Chemical Section of the
   Franklin Institute by Prof. S.P. Sadtler.]


It is well known that the paraffine obtained by the distillation of
petroleum residues is crystalline, while that obtained directly (as in
the filtration of residuum) is amorphous. Ozokerite or ceresine
differs but slightly from paraffine, the principal distinction being
want of crystalline structure in it as found. Other characteristics,
such as the melting point, specific gravity, etc., vary in both, and
so are not of importance in a comparison. Hence it has been asked, Is
the paraffine occurring in petroleum and ozokerite identical with that
which is produced by their distillation? As crystalline paraffine
could be obtained from ozokerite by distillation alone, many persons
have supposed that it was engendered in the process. Recently,
however, crystalline paraffine has been obtained from ozokerite by
dissolving the latter in warm amyl alcohol; on cooling the greater
part separates out in crystals having the luster of mother-of-pearl.
By repetition of this process, a substance is obtained that is
scarcely to be distinguished from the paraffine obtained by
distillation. Apparently there exists then in ozokerite, together with
paraffine, other substances not capable of crystallization which keep
the paraffine from crystallizing. These colloids appear to be
separated by amyl alcohol in virtue of their greater solubility in
that menstruum. It is also reasonable to suppose that they undergo
change or decomposition by distillation.

So as petroleum residues are amorphous, and the crystalline paraffine
is first produced by distillation, it has been argued that the
paraffine present in crude petroleum is approximately the same thing
as ozokerite.

This, however, is not sufficient to establish the pyrogenic origin of
all crystallized paraffine, as crystals can be obtained from the
amorphous residues by distillation at normal or reduced pressure or in
a current of steam. To explain these facts two assumptions are
possible. Either the chemical and physical properties of all or some
of the solid constituents are changed by the distillation, and the
paraffine is changed from the amorphous into the crystalline variety,
or the change produced by the distillation takes place in the medium
(i.e., the mother liquid) in which the paraffine exists. The change
effected in ozokerite and in petroleum residues when crystalline
paraffine is obtained by distillation is to be regarded as a
purification, and can be effected partially by treatment with amyl
alcohol. In the same way, by repeated treatment of petroleum residuum
with amyl alcohol, a substance of melting point 59 deg. C. can be
obtained, which cannot be distinguished from ordinary paraffine.

The treatment with amyl alcohol has therefore accomplished the same
results as was obtained by distillation, and the action is probably
the same, i.e., a partial separation of colloid substance. These
facts point to the conclusion that crystallizable paraffine exists
ready formed in both petroleum and in ozokerite, but in both cases
other colloidal substances prevent its crystallization. By
distillation, these colloids appear to be destroyed or changed so as
to allow the paraffine to crystallize.

It is a generally known fact that liquids always appear among the
products of the distillation of paraffine, no matter in what way the
distillation be conducted. This shows that some paraffine is
decomposed in the operation.

The name _proto-paraffine_ has been given to ozokerite and to the
paraffine of petroleum in contradistinction to _pyro-paraffine_, the
name that has been applied to the paraffine obtained by distillation
from any source.

According to Reichenbach, paraffine may crystallize in three forms:
needles, angular grains, and leaflets having the luster of
mother-of-pearl. Hofstadter, in an article on the identity of
paraffine from different sources, confirmed this statement, and added
further that at first needles, then the angular forms, and then the
leaflets are formed. Fritsche found, by means of the microscope, in
the ethereal solution of ozokerite, very fine and thin crystal
leaflets concentrically grouped, and in the alcoholic solution fine
irregular leaflets. Zaloziecki has recently developed these
microscopic investigations to a much greater extent. According to this
observer, the principal part of paraffine, as seen under the
microscope, consists of shining stratified leaflets with a darker
edge. The most characteristic and well developed crystals are formed
by dissolving paraffine in a mixture of ethyl and amyl alcohols and
chilling. The crystals are rhombic or hexagonal tablets or leaves, and
are quite regularly formed. They are unequally developed in different
varieties of paraffine. The best developed are those obtained from
ceresine. Their relative size and appearance give an indication as to
the purity of the paraffine, and, as they are always present, they are
to be counted among the characteristic tests for paraffine.
Reichenbach observed that mere traces of empyreumatic oil prevented
their formation.

The old method of determining the amount of paraffine in petroleum was
to carry out the refining process on a small scale; that is, to
distill the residue from the kerosene oils to coking, chill out the
paraffine, press it thoroughly between filter paper, and weigh the
residue. The sources of error in this procedure are manifold; the
principal one is the solubility of paraffine in oils, which depends
upon the character of both the paraffine and the oil, and also upon
the temperature. The next greatest source of error is variation in the
process of distillation and the difference between working on the
small scale and on the large scale.

In most cases, where a paraffine determination is to be carried out,
one has to deal with a mixture of paraffine with liquid oils. Now,
paraffine is not a substance defined by characteristic physical
properties which distinguish it from the liquid portions of petroleum.
It consists of a mixture of homologous hydrocarbons, which form a
solid under ordinary conditions. The hydrocarbons of this mixture show
a gradation in their properties, and gradually approximate to those
which are liquid at ordinary temperatures. It is a well known fact
that a separation of these homologues is entirely impossible by
distillation. It has also been ascertained that the liquid
constituents of petroleum do not always possess boiling points that
are lower than those of the solid constituents. This shows that we
have to deal not merely with hydrocarbons of one, but of several
series.

When determinations of the amount of paraffine are to be made, then it
becomes necessary to specify with exactness what is to be called
paraffine. The most definite property that can be made use of for this
purpose is the melting point. For several reasons it is convenient to
include under this name hydrocarbons of melting point as low as
35 deg.-40 deg. C.

The method proposed by Zaloziecki for the determination of paraffine
is the following: The most volatile portions of the petroleum are
separated by distillation, until the thermometer shows 200 deg. C. These
portions are separated, as they exert great solvent action upon
paraffine. At the same time he finds that no pyro-paraffine is formed
under this temperature. A weighed portion of the residue is taken and
mixed with ten parts by weight of amyl alcohol and ten parts of
seventy-five per cent. ethyl alcohol: the mixture is then chilled for
twelve hours to 0 deg. C. It is then filtered cold, washed first with a
mixture of amyl and ethyl alcohols, and then with ethyl alcohol alone.
The paraffine is transferred to a small porcelain evaporating dish and
dried at 110 deg. C. It is then heated with concentrated sulphuric acid to
150 deg.-160 deg. C. for fifteen to thirty minutes with constant stirring. The
acid is then neutralized and the paraffine extracted by petroleum
ether. On evaporation of the solvent, the paraffine is dried at 100 deg.
C. and weighed. Zaloziecki found, according to this method, in three
samples of Galician petroleums, 4.6, 5.8 and 6.5 per cent.,
respectively, of proto-paraffine. The method was carried out as above
with four samples of American petroleums, Colorado oil from Florence,
Col.; Warren County oil from Wing Well, Warren, Pa.; Washington oil
from Washington County, Pa.; Middle District oil from Butler County,
Pa., all furnished by Professor Sadtler.

They were very different in physical properties and in appearance, the
Colorado oil being a much heavier oil than the others and the
Washington oil being an amber oil, while the other two were of the
ordinary dark green color and consistence. The losses on distillation
to 200 deg. C. were very different, being about one-tenth in the case of
the Colorado oil and nearly one-half in the case of the others. The
percentages of partially refined proto-paraffine in the four reduced
oils (all below 200 deg. C. off) were as follows: for the Colorado oil,
