Alcoholic fermentation with evolution of carbonic acid gas soon sets
in, and the specific gravity of the liquid is lowered considerably.
This reaction points conclusively to the presence of sugar.

Based upon Braun's potassic picrate test, Dr. G. Johnson has devised a
colorimetric process for the estimation of sugar. On boiling an
alkaline solution of that salt with glucose, the former is reduced to
deep red-brown picramate, the color of the liquid, of course, varying
in intensity according to the proportion of sugar present. This
solution is diluted till it corresponds in tint with a ferric acetate
standard, and the percentage of sugar is then readily calculated. For
those who prefer this process the convenient apparatus manufactured by
Mr. Cetti, of 36 Brooke street, Holborn, is recommended, who will also
furnish full particulars of the test.


ALBUMEN.

Normal urine is free from coagulable proteids, though it is admitted
that albumen may sometimes occur in the absence of disease. It is
always highly important, therefore, to determine accurately the
presence or absence of this body. In the relentless malady named after
Richard Bright, the urine always contains albumen, and if accompanied
by the "casts" of the uriniferous tubules your report may amount to a
sentence of certain death. The tests which we now describe are
accurate and easily applied; but reliance should never be placed on
any single reaction--at any rate until the operator has acquired
considerable experience.

Galippe's _picric acid test_ has within the last few years attracted
much attention, chiefly through the commendation it has received from
Dr. George Johnson. A saturated solution is prepared by dissolving 140
grains of recrystallized picric acid (carbazotic acid, or, more
correctly, trinitrophenol) in 1 pint of water with heat, and decanting
the clear solution. Some of the urine is rendered perfectly bright by
filtration--repeated, if necessary--through good filtering paper, and
to this an equal volume of the picric acid solution is added. In the
presence of albumen a more or less distinct haze is produced, which on
heating to the boiling point is rather intensified than otherwise.
Peptones, if present, yield a similar haze, and quinine or other
alkaloid a more or less crystalline precipitate; but in both these
cases the opalescence is completely dissipated by heat. Mucin, an
important constituent of some urines, is not affected by picric acid,
and the test is decidedly one of great value.

The _nitric acid test_. Heller's contact method, which can also be
used with the last-described reagent, is the best mode of applying the
old-fashioned and favorite test with nitric acid. To 5 volumes of a
filtered saturated solution of magnesic sulphate, prepared by
dissolving 10 parts of the salt in 13 parts of distilled water, add 1
volume of strong nitric acid, and label "Sir W. Roberts' nitric acid
reagent." A couple of drachms of bright filtered urine is allowed to
float on an equal quantity of this solution in a test tube; care being
taken that the contact line is sharply defined. In a period of time
varying from a few seconds to a quarter of an hour, according to the
amount of albumen present, a delicate opalescent zone forms at the
point of junction, and if mucin also is present, a more diffused haze
higher up in the urine. Special attention should be given to the
position of the opacity. In some concentrated urines a belt of urates
will appear at the line of demarkation; but these dissolve on warming.
Moreover, owing to the dilution necessary in the mode of applying
Galippe's picric acid test, they are not so readily shown by the
latter. A 1/2 oz. glass syringe can very conveniently be substituted for
a test tube in making analyses according to Heller's method. Some of
the urine should be drawn up, and then an equal volume of the reagent.
On setting aside, the albumen ring will rapidly develop.

The _boiling test_. This method also is very delicate and valuable. It
depends on the well-known property possessed by many proteids of
coagulating under the influence of heat. The urine should have an acid
reaction to test paper; if alkaline, it must be cautiously neutralized
with dilute acetic acid. In either case a single drop of strong acetic
acid should be added to about three drachms of the bright liquid. If
this precaution is omitted, there is danger of precipitating earthy
phosphates on heating; and should a great excess of acid be employed,
a non-coagulable form of albumen known as syntonin is formed, besides
increasing the likelihood of precipitating mucin. Place the prepared
urine in a narrow test-tube and hold it in a small flame so that the
upper part only of the liquid approaches the boiling point. By this
means very small traces of albumen are easily observed, the
opalescence produced contrasting strongly with the cold and clear
fluid beneath.

The _ferrocyanide test_. Hydroferrocyanic acid yields a precipitate
immediately in the presence of much albumen, and if traces only are
present, in the course of a few minutes. To apply the test, strongly
acidulate with acetic acid, and then add a few drops of recently
prepared potassic ferrocyanide solution. This is one of the most
delicate tests known.

It is often desirable that the percentage of albumen present should be
determined at frequent intervals, in order to note the success or
otherwise of the physician's treatment. These quantitative
determinations, being intended only for comparative purposes, do not
demand any very excessive degree of accuracy, such as would be
difficult to obtain in ordinary practice. The recent method of a
Continental worker. Dr. Esbach, affords indications sufficiently
precise for therapeutical requirements, and is at the same time
extremely easy of application. The filtered acid urine is poured into
the glass tube up to the mark U, and then the special reagent is added
till the level of the liquid stands at R.

[Illustration]

Mix the liquids thoroughly, without shaking, by reversing the tube a
dozen times, close with a cork, and allow it to stand upright for
twenty-four hours. The height at which the coagulum then stands, read
off on the scale, will indicate the number of parts per thousand, or
grammes of albumen in one liter. This divided by ten gives the
percentage. Dr. Esbach's test solution is prepared by dissolving 10
grammes of picric acid and 20 grammes of citric acid in 900 c.c. of
boiling distilled water, and then adding, when cold, sufficient water
to yield 1 liter. The citric acid is only employed for the purpose of
maintaining the acidity of the liquid, and is really not essential.


URIC OR LITHIC ACID.

The determination of the proportion of uric acid in urine was formerly
rather neglected by physicians. There is now, however, a growing
tendency in a certain class of diseases to attach considerable
importance to its accurate estimation, and, as some little trouble is
involved, pharmacists should be prepared to undertake the work. A
rough way is to concentrate somewhat, acidulate with hydrochloric
acid, and collect and weigh the precipitate thrown down on standing.
There are several objections, however, to this method, and many
attempts have been made to elaborate a more reliable process. One of
the most recent, and which has been pronounced the most practical and
successful, has been devised by Professor Haycraft. Although
apparently rather detailed and elaborate, the determination is easy
and extremely simple.

The following solutions must be prepared: 1. Dissolve 5 grammes of
nitrate of silver in 100 c.c. of distilled water, and add ammonia
until the precipitate first formed redissolves. 2. Dilute strong
nitric acid with about two volumes of distilled water; boil, to
destroy the lower oxides of nitrogen, and preserve in the dark. 3.
Dissolve about 8 grammes of ammonic thiocyanate (sulphocyanide)
crystals in a liter of water, and adjust to decinormal argentic
nitrate solution, by diluting till one volume is exactly equal to a
volume of the latter. Dilute the solution thus prepared with nine
volumes of distilled water, and label "Centinormal ammonic-thiocyanate
solution." 4. A saturated solution of ferric alum. 5. Strong solution
of ammonia (sp. gr. 0.880). The uric acid estimation is conducted as
follows: Place 25 per cent. of urine in a beaker with 1 gramme of
sodic bicarbonate. Add 2 or 3 c.c. of strong ammonia, and then 1 or 2
c.c. of the ammoniated silver solution. If, on allowing the
precipitate caused by the latter reagent to subside, a further
precipitate is produced by the addition of more solution, the urine
contains an iodide, and silver solution must be added till there is an
excess. The gelatinous urate must now be collected, the following
special procedure being necessary: Prepare an asbestos filter by
filling a 4 oz. glass funnel to about one-third with broken glass, and
covering this with a bed of asbestos to about a quarter of an inch
deep. This is best managed by shaking the latter in a flask with water
until the fibers are thoroughly separated, and then pouring the
emulsion so made in separate portions on to the broken glass. On
account of the nature of the precipitate and of the filter, it is
necessary to use a Sprengel pump, in order to suck the liquid through.
The small apparatus sold to students by chemical instrument makers
will answer the purpose admirably. Having collected the precipitate of
silver urate on the prepared filter, wash it repeatedly with distilled
water, until the washings cease to become opalescent with a soluble
chloride. Now dissolve the pure urate by washing it through the filter
with a few cubic centimeters of the special nitric acid. The process
is carried out thus: Add to the liquid in the beaker a few drops of
the ferric-alum solution to act as an indicator, and from a burette
carefully drop in centinormal ammonic thiocyanate until a permanent
red coloration of ferric thiocyanate barely appears. The number of
cubic centimeters used of the thiocyanate solution multiplied by
0.00168 gives the amount of uric acid in the 25 c.c. One milligramme
may be added to compensate for loss, and the whole multiplied by four
gives the percentage of uric acid in the urine. The whole process
depends on the fact that argentic urate fails to dissolve in ammonia,
but is soluble in nitric acid, and is thus easily obtained in the pure
state. By determining the amount of combined silver, the percentage of
uric acid can readily be calculated. The addition of sodic bicarbonate
prevents the otherwise inevitable reduction of the silver salt.


BILE.

In diseases affecting the liver, the urine frequently becomes
contaminated with biliary constituents. If the coloring matter of bile
is present (_bilirubin_, etc.), the liquid is darkened considerably in
tint, and may assume various shades of brown or green. Should the
color be decided, the fluid will be found to foam strongly on shaking,
and white blotting-paper will be stained by it yellow or greenish.
These characters point to the presence of bile in fair quantity, and
it is only necessary to apply a single confirmatory test. Allow some
of the urine to flow carefully, according to Heller's method, over a
couple of drachms of yellow nitric acid (i.e., acid containing traces
of the lower oxides of nitrogen). A number of rapidly changing colors
soon appear, passing through green, blue, violet, and red to yellow.
The first of these tints, green, is the only one that undoubtedly
points to the presence of biliary coloring matter, all the others
being yielded by another constituent of urine, indican, when similarly
treated. Should the color of the urine suggest the presence of only
traces of bile, the best plan is not to treat the urine directly, but
extract a quantity of it by shaking with chloroform. On separating the
latter, and covering with yellowish nitric acid, the color changes
will be observed penetrating into the chloroform. A little, also,
evaporated on a slide yields reddish crystals, which exhibit a pretty
play of colors under the microscope when touched with nitric acid.

It is not unfrequently considered important to test urine for the
sodium salts of the conjugate biliary acids, taurocholic and
glycocholic. Dr. Oliver, of Harrogate, has proposed the use of an
acidulated peptone solution for this purpose, and the reaction is
undoubtedly a good one. The reagent is prepared by dissolving 30
grains of flesh peptone, 4 grains of salicylic acid, and 30 minims of
strong acetic acid, in sufficient water to produce 8 fluid oz. of
solution. Thus prepared, the peptone shows no signs of decomposition
on keeping. To use the test, mix 1 fluid drachm of the reagent with 20
minims of urine, previously diluted to a standard specific gravity of
1.003. A haze is produced, which will be found to be more or less
distinct, according to the proportion of bile salts present.


CHLORIDES.

A normal and variable constituent of urine, chlorine, is not usually
required to be determined. Should the estimation be considered
necessary, however, Volhard's silver process, which has been noticed
in treating of uric acid, possesses several advantages over other
methods: 10 c.c. of urine are diluted with 60 c.c. of distilled water.
To this is added 2 c.c. of pure 70 percent. nitric acid and 15 c.c. of
a standard solution of silver nitrate (1 c.c. = 0.01 gramme NaCl).
Shake well and make up to 100 c.c. with water. All the chlorine
present will now be precipitated in the liquid as a silver salt.
Filter an aliquot part (about 70 or 80 c.c.), and determine in the
clear solution the excess of silver with standard ammonic thiocyanate,
using the ferric alum indicator. The difference between this and the
amount of silver originally present in the aliquot part has been
precipitated as silver chloride (AgCl). The whole estimation should be
conducted as rapidly as possible. A simple calculation will then give
the proportion of chlorine in the dilute urine, and this multiplied by
ten shows the percentage. It is usual to report in terms of NaCl.


PHOSPHATES.

In those cases where the pharmacist is asked to determine phosphoric
acid quantitatively, the uranic-acetate method described in Sutton's
"Volumetric Analysis" yields the most satisfactory results. The
process requires some little experience to use it with ease, and is
too lengthy for quotation here.


MICROSCOPICAL EXAMINATION.

A good microscope is one of the first necessaries of the urinary
analyst. By its aid it is possible to distinguish easily many solid
constituents of urine--normal and pathological; indeed, the
examination of urinary deposits is often quite as important as the
more elaborate wet analysis. A well-made instrument is no luxury to
the pharmacist; but even those whose chief aim is _bon marche_ can
procure capital students' microscopes at exceedingly low cost. One of
the cheapest, and at the same time an instrument of good quality, is
the "Star," manufactured by Messrs. R. & J. Beck, of 31 Cornhill, E.C.

Equipped with a good microscope, the analyst should obtain a fair
supply of typical slides for comparison. The following selection will
be found sufficient for his purpose: A set of the chief varieties of
uric acid, calcic oxalate, and triple phosphate; the urates and
oxalurates; urea nitrate, calcic hippurate and carbonate, hippuric
acid, cystin, well mounted "casts" of the _tubili uriniferi_,
spermatozoa, etc. In doubtful cases microchemical reagents can be
employed, using Professor Attfield's "Chemistry" as a guide. Where
mounted objects are not at hand, reference may be made to the
capitally executed plates in that work. After obtaining a little
experience in the use of the microscope, no difficulty will be met
with in these examinations.--_The Chemist and Druggist._

       *       *       *       *       *




LIQUID AND GASEOUS RINGS.


All who have learned a little of chemistry doubtless remember the
experiment with vortex rings produced by phosphorus trihydride mixed
with a little phosphide of hydrogen. As this curious phenomenon
evidently does not depend upon the peculiar properties of this gas, I
have been trying for some time to reproduce it by means of tobacco
smoke, and even with chemical precipitates, which are, in a way,
liquid smoke. After a few tentatives made at different times, my
experiment succeeded perfectly. The following is, in brief, the mode
of operating:

Take up a little hydrochloric acid in a pipette and put a few drops of
it into a very dilute solution of nitrate of mercury, and you will
obtain rings of mercurial chloride that will, in their descent, take
on the same whirling motion that characterizes the aureolas of
phosphureted hydrogen.

The drops of acid should be allowed to fall slowly, and from a feeble
height, to the surface of the liquid contained in the vessel. It is
unnecessary to say that the result may be obtained through the use of
other solutions, provided that a precipitate is produced that is not
very thick, for in the latter case the rings do not form. If need be,
we may have recourse to milk, and carefully pour a few drops of it
into a glass of water.

[Illustration: FIG. 1.--PRODUCTION OF SMOKE RINGS.]

As regards smoke rings, it is easy to produce these by puffing cigar
smoke through a tube (Fig. 1). But, in order to insure success, a few
precautions are necessary. The least current of air must be avoided,
and this requires the closing of the windows and doors. Moreover, in
order to interrupt the ascending currents that are formed in proximity
to the body, the operation should be performed over a table, as shown
in the figure. The rings that pass beyond the table are not
perceptibly influenced by currents of hot air. A tube 3/4 inch in
diameter, made by rolling up a sheet of common letter paper, suffices
for making very beautiful rings of one inch or more in diameter. In
order to observe the rings well, it is well to project them toward the
darkest part of the room, or toward the black table, if the operator
is seated. The first puffs will not produce any rings if the tube has
not previously been filled with smoke. The whirling motion is
perfectly visible on the exit of the ring from the tube, and even far
beyond.

[Illustration: FIGS. 2, 3, AND 4.--VARIOUS ASPECTS OF
SMOKE RINGS.]

As for the aspect of the rings projected with more or less velocity
to different distances from the tube, Figs. 2, 3, and 4 give quite a
clear idea of that. Figs. 3 and 6 show the mode of destruction of the
rings when the air is still. There are always filaments of smoke that
fall after being preceded by a sort of cup. These capricious forms of
smoke, in spreading through a calm atmosphere, are especially very
apparent when the rays of the sun enter the room. Very similar ones
may be obtained in a liquid whose transparency is interfered with by
producing a precipitate or rings in it.--_La Nature._

[Illustration: FIGS. 5 AND 6..--SMOKE RINGS BREAKING UP.]

       *       *       *       *       *




SHALL WE HAVE A NATIONAL HORSE?


_To the Editor of_ SCIENTIFIC AMERICAN SUPPLEMENT:

In your issue for August 13 is "A Proposition for a Government
Breeding Farm for Cavalry Horses," by Lieutenant S.C. Robertson
U.S.A., First Cavalry. The article is national in conception, deep in
careful thought, which only gift, with practical experience with
ability, could so ably put before the people. As a business
proposition, it is creditable to an officer in the United States army.

The husbandman and agriculturist, also the navy and scientific
explorations, each in turn present their wants before the government
for help in some way, and receive assistance. The seaman wants new and
improved or better ships, and the navy gets them; but the poor
cavalryman must put up with any kind of a craft he can get; the horse
is the cavalryman's ship--war vessel on land.

The appeal of Lieut. Robertson to our government for better horses is
reasonable; and he tries to help the government with a carefully
studied business proposition through which to enable our government to
grant the supplication of the army. That Lieut. Robertson loves a
horse, and knows what a good one is, no man can dispute who has read
his article; but as to how it can best be produced, he does not know.
While I for one applaud both his article and his earnestness, with
your permission I will make some suggestions as to the breeding side
of his proposition. The business portion will, of course, come under
the ordnance department in any event.

As for a government breeding establishment for any kind of livestock
in this great agricultural country, I feel that such would be at
variance with the interests of husbandry in America.

The breeding of horses is particularly an important branch of
agriculture, and the farmers should be assisted by the government in
the improvement of their horses, until they are raised to a standard
which in case of emergency could supply the army at a moment's notice
with the best horses in the world at the least possible expense.

Our government Agricultural Bureau is constantly spending thousands of
dollars to help the agriculturist in matter of better and greater
varieties of improved seeds and the better way for cultivation. Now,
the seed of animal life is as important as in vegetable life to the
interest and welfare of the husbandman, which also means the
government. For the government to become a monopolist of any important
branch in agriculture is not in harmony with the principles of our
republican-democratic form of government. While advocating a
protective tariff against outside depreciation of home industries, our
government should not in any way approach monarchical intrusion upon
the industries of its husbandmen. Our government cannot afford to make
its agriculturists competitors in so important a matter to them (the
farmers) as in the raising of horses; but the government can see to it
that the husbandman has a standard for excellence in the breeding of
horses which shall be recognized as a national standard the civilized
world over. Then, by that standard, and through our superior
advantages over any other civilized nation in the vast extent of
cheap and good grass lands, with abundance of pure water, and with all
temperatures of climate, we can grow, as a people, the best horses in
the world, to be known as the National Horse of America. Our
government must have a blood standard for the breeding of horses, by
which our horses can be bred and raised true to a type, able to
reproduce itself in any country to which we may export them; and the
types can be several, as our territory is so great and demands so
varied, but blood and breeding must be the standard for each type. Our
fancy breeders have a standard now, called a "time standard," which is
purely a gambling standard, demoralizing in all its tendencies to both
man and beast. With this the government need have nothing to do, for
it will die out of itself as the masses learn more of it, and
especially would it cease to be, once the government established a
_blood_ standard for the breeding of all horses, and particularly a
National Horse.

When the cereal crops of our country are light, or the prices fall
below profitable production, the farmer has always a colt or two to
sell, thus helping him through the year. In place of constantly
importing horses from France, England, and Scotland, where they are
raised mostly in paddocks, and paying out annually millions of
dollars, it is our duty to be exporting.

As an American I am ashamed when I see paraded at our county or state
fairs stallions and mares wearing the "blue ribbon" of superexcellence,
with boastful exclamation by the owner of "a thoroughbred imported
Percheron, or a thoroughbred imported French coacher, or a
thoroughbred imported Scotch Clyde, or a thoroughbred imported English
coacher, or a thoroughbred imported English Shire, or a thoroughbred
imported English Cleveland Bay!"

The American farmer and his boys look on aghast at the majesty and
beauty of these prize winners over our big-headed, crowbar-necked,
limp-tailed, peeked-quartered horses called "standard bred!" What
standard? "Time standard," as created by a man who is neither a
horseman nor a breeder; but because of the lack of intelligent
information and want of courage upon the part of a few, this man's
_ipse dixit_ has become law for the American breeders until such time
as cultured intelligence shall cause them to rebel. It soon will.

It is indeed time for the government to step in and regulate our horse
breeding. Of all the national industries there is none of more
importance than that of horses. More so in America than in any other
country, because our facilities are greater, and results can be
greater under proper regulation. Lieut. Robertson has proved to be the
right man in the right place, to open the door for glorious results to
our nation. No one man or a small body of men can regulate this
horse-breeding industry, but as in France, Russia, and England, the
government must place its hand and voice.

We are indeed an infant country, but have grown to an age where
parental restraint must be used now, if ever. We have millions of
farmers in America, breeding annually millions of horses; and except
we have another internal war, our horses will soon become a burden and
a pest.

There are numbers of rich men throughout the country breeding fancy
horses, for sport and speculation, but they only add to the increasing
burden of useless animals, except for gambling purposes; for they are
neither work horses, coach horses, nor saddle horses. Our farmers of
the land are the breeders, as our recent war of the rebellion
testified. The war of 1812, the Mexican war of 1847, and the war of
1861 each called for horses at a moment's notice, and our farmers
supplied them, destroying foundation bloods for recuperation. From
