misfortunes of Methyl Green is that if the fabric dyed with it be boiled
with water, at that temperature (212 deg. F.) the colour is decomposed and
injured, for some of the methyl chloride in the compound is driven off.
In fact, by stronger heating we may drive off all the methyl chloride
and get the original Methyl Violet back again.

But we have coal-tar colours which are not basic, but rather of the
nature of acid,--a better term would be _phenolic_, or of the nature of
phenol or carbolic acid. Let us see what phenol or carbolic acid is. We
saw that water may be formulated HOH, and that benzene is C_{6}H_{6}.
Well, carbolic acid or phenol is a derivative of water, or a derivative
of benzene, just as you like, and it is formulated C_{6}H_{5}OH. You can
easily prove this by dropping carbolic acid or phenol down a red-hot
tube filled with iron-borings. The oxygen is taken up by the iron to
give oxide of iron, and benzene is obtained, thus: C_{6}H_{5}OH gives O
and C_{6}H_{6}. But there is another hydrocarbon called naphthalene,
C_{10}H_{8}, and this forms not one, but two phenols. As the name of the
hydrocarbon is naphthalene, however, we call these compounds naphthols,
and one is distinguished as alpha- the other as beta-naphthol, both of
them having the formula C_{10}H_{7}OH. But now with respect to the
colours. If we treat phenol with nitric acid under proper conditions, we
get a yellow dye called picric acid, which is trinitro-phenol
C_{6}H_{2}(NO_{2})_{3}OH; you see this is no aniline dye; it is not a
basic colour, for it would saturate, _i.e._ destroy the basicity of
bases. Again, by oxidising phenol with oxalic acid and vitriol, we get a
colour dyeing silk orange, namely, Aurin, HO.C[C_{6}H_{4}(OH)]_{3}. This
is also an acid or phenolic dye, as a glance at its formula will show
you. Its compound atom bristles, so to say, with phenol-residues, as
some of the aniline dyes do with aniline residue-groups.

We come now to a peculiar but immensely important group of colours known
as the azo-dyes, and these can be basic or acid, or of mixed kind. Just
suppose two ammonia groups, NH_{3} and NH_{3}. If we rob those nitrogen
atoms of their hydrogen atoms, we should leave two unsatisfied nitrogen
atoms, atoms with an exceedingly keen appetite represented in terms of
hydrogen atoms as N*** and N***. We might suppose a group, though of two N
atoms partially satisfied by partial union with each other, thus--N:N--.
Now this group forms the nucleus of the azo-colours, and if we satisfy a
nitrogen at one side with an aniline, and at the other with a phenol, or
at both ends with anilines, and so on, we get azo-dyes produced. The
number of coal-tar colours is thus very great, and the variety also.

_Adjective Colours._--As regards the artificial coal-tar adjective
dyestuffs, the principal are Alizarin and Purpurin. These are now almost
entirely prepared from coal-tar anthracene, and madder and garancine are
almost things of the past. Vegetable adjective colours are Brazil wood,
containing the dye-generating principle Brasilin, logwood, containing
Haematein, and santal-wood, camwood, and barwood, containing Santalin.
Animal adjective colours are cochineal and lac dye. Then of wood colours
we have further: quercitron, Persian berries, fustic and the tannins or
tannic acids, comprising extracts, barks, fruits, and gallnuts, with
also leaves and twigs, as with sumac. All these colours dye only with
mordants, mostly forming with certain metallic oxides or basic salts,
brightly-coloured compounds on the tissues to which they are applied.




LECTURE XI

DYEING OF WOOL AND FUR; AND OPTICAL PROPERTIES OF COLOURS


You have no doubt a tolerably vivid recollection of the illustrations
given in Lecture I., showing the structure of the fibre of wool and fur.
We saw that the wool fibre, of which fur might be considered a coarser
quality, possesses a peculiar, complex, scaly structure, the joints
reminding one of the appearance of plants of the _Equisetum_ family,
whilst the scaled structure resembles that of the skin of the serpent.
Now you may easily understand that a structure like this, if it is to be
completely and uniformly permeated by a dye liquor or any other aqueous
solution, must have those scales not only well opened, but well
cleansed, because if choked with greasy or other foreign matter
impervious to or resisting water, there can be no chance of the
mordanting or dye liquids penetrating uniformly; the resulting dye must
be of a patchy nature. All wool, in its natural state, contains a
certain amount of a peculiar compound almost like a potash soap, a kind
of soft soap, but it also contains besides, a kind of fatty substance
united with lime, and of a more insoluble nature than the first. This
natural greasy matter is termed "yolk" or "suint"; and it ought never to
be thrown away, as it sometimes is by the wool-scourers in this country,
for it contains a substance resembling a fat named _cholesterin_ or
_cholesterol_, which is of great therapeutical value. Water alone will
wash out a considerable amount of this greasy matter, forming a kind of
lather with it, but not all. As is almost invariably the case, after
death, the matters and secretions which in life favour the growth and
development of the parts, then commence to do the opposite. It is as if
the timepiece not merely comes to a standstill, but commences to run
backwards. This natural grease, if it be allowed to stand in contact
with the wool for some time after shearing, instead of nourishing and
preserving the fibres as it does on the living animal, commences to
ferment, and injures them by making them hard and brittle. We see, then,
the importance of "scouring" wool for the removal of "yolk," as it is
called, dirt, oil, etc. If this important operation were omitted, or
incompletely carried out, each fibre would be more or less covered or
varnished with greasy matter, resisting the absorption and fixing of
mordant and dye. As scouring agents, ammonia, carbonate of ammonia,
carbonate of soda completely free from caustic, and potash or soda
soaps, especially palm-oil soaps, which need not be made with bleached
palm oil, but which must be quite free from free alkali, may be used. In
making these palm-oil soaps it is better to err on the side of a little
excess of free oil or fat, but if more than 1 per cent. of free fat be
present, lathering qualities are then interfered with. Oleic acid soaps
are excellent, but are rather expensive for wool; they are generally
used for silks. Either as a skin soap or a soap for scouring wools, I
should prefer one containing about 1/2 per cent. of free fatty matter,
of course perfectly equally distributed, and not due to irregular
saponification. On the average the soap solution for scouring wool may
contain about 6-1/2 oz. of soap to the gallon of water. In order to
increase the cleansing powers of the soap solution, some ammonia may be
added to it. However, if soap is used for wool-scouring, one thing must
be borne in mind, namely, that the water used must not be hard, for if
insoluble lime and magnesia soaps are formed and precipitated on the
fibre, the scouring will have removed one evil, but replaced it by
another. The principal scouring material used is one of the various
forms of commercial carbonate of soda, either alone or in conjunction
with soap. Whatever be the form or name under which the carbonate of
soda is sold, it must be free from hydrate of soda, _i.e._ caustic soda,
or, as it is also termed, "causticity." By using this carbonate of soda
you may dispense with soap, and so be able, even with a hard or
calcareous water, to do your wool-scouring without anything like the ill
effects that follow the use of soap and calcareous water. The carbonate
of soda solutions ought not to exceed the specific gravity of 1 deg. to 2 deg.
Twaddell (1-1/2 to 3 oz. avoird. per gallon of water). The safest plan
is to work with as considerable a degree of dilution and as low a
temperature as are consistent with fetching the dirt and grease off. The
scouring of loose wool, as we may now readily discern, divides itself
into three stages: 1st, the stage in which those "yolk" or "suint"
constituents soluble in water, are removed by steeping and washing in
water. This operation is generally carried out by the wool-grower
himself, for he desires to sell wool, and not wool plus "yolk" or
"suint," and thus he saves himself considerable cost in transport. The
water used in this process should not be at a higher temperature than
113 deg. F., and the apparatus ought to be provided with an agitator; 2nd,
the cleansing or scouring proper, with a weak alkaline solution; 3rd,
the rinsing or final washing in water.

Thus far we have proceeded along the same lines as the woollen
manufacturer, but now we must deviate from that course, for he requires
softness and delicacy for special purposes, for spinning and weaving,
etc.; but the felt manufacturer, and especially the manufacturer of felt
for felt hats, requires to sacrifice some of this softness and delicacy
in favour of greater felting powers, which can only be obtained by
raising the scales of the fibres by means of a suitable process, such
as treatment with acids. This process is one which is by no means
unfavourable to the dyeing capacities of the wool; on the whole it is
decidedly favourable.

So far everything in the treatment of the wool has been perfectly
favourable for the subsequent operations of the felt-hat dyer, but now I
come to a process which I consider I should be perfectly unwarranted in
passing over before proceeding to the dyeing processes. In fact, were it
not for this "proofing process" (see Lecture VII.) the dyeing of felt
hats would be as simple and easy of attainment as the ordinary dyeing of
whole-wool fabrics. Instead of this, however, I consider the hat
manufacturer, as regards his dyeing processes as applied to the stiffer
classes of felt hats, has difficulties to contend with fully comparable
with those which present themselves to the dyer of mixed cotton and
woollen or Bradford goods. You have heard that the purpose of the
wool-scourer is to remove the dirt, grease, and so-called yolk, filling
the pores and varnishing the fibres. Now the effect of the work of the
felt or felt-hat proofer is to undo nearly all this for the sake of
rendering the felt waterproof and stiff. The material used, also, is
even more impervious and resisting to the action of aqueous solutions of
dyes and mordants than the raw wool would be. In short, it is impossible
to mordant and to dye shellac by any process that will dye wool. To give
you an idea of what it is necessary to do in order to colour or dye
shellac, take the case of coloured sealing-wax, which is mainly composed
of shellac, four parts, and Venice turpentine, one part. To make red
sealing-wax this mixture is melted, and three parts of vermilion, an
insoluble metallic pigment, are stirred in. If black sealing-wax is
required, lamp-black or ivory-black is stirred in. The fused material is
then cast in moulds, from which the sticks are removed on cooling. That
is how shellac may be coloured as sealing-wax, but it is a totally
different method from that by which wool is dyed. The difficulty then is
this--in proofing, your hat-forms are rendered impervious to the dye
solutions of your dye-baths, all except a thin superficial layer, which
then has to be rubbed down, polished, and finished. Thus in a short
time, since the bulk of that superficially dyed wool or fur on the top
of every hat is but small, and has been much reduced by polishing and
rubbing, you soon hear of an appearance of bareness--I was going to say
threadbareness--making itself manifest. This is simply because the
colour or dye only penetrates a very little way down into the substance
of the felt, until, in fact, it meets the proofing, which, being as it
ought to be, a waterproofing, cannot be dyed. It cannot be dyed either
by English or German methods; neither logwood black nor coal-tar blacks
can make any really good impression on it. Cases have often been
described to me illustrating the difficulty in preventing hats which
have been dyed black with logwood, and which are at first a handsome
deep black, becoming rather too soon of a rusty or brownish shade. Now
my belief is that two causes may be found for this deterioration. One is
the unscientific method adopted in many works of using the same bath
practically for about a month together without complete renewal. During
this time a large quantity of a muddy precipitate accumulates, rich in
hydrated oxide of iron or basic iron salts of an insoluble kind. This
mud amounts to no less than 25 per cent. of the weight of the copperas
used. From time to time carbonate of ammonia is added to the bath, as it
is said to throw up "dirt." The stuff or "dirt," chiefly an ochre-like
mass stained black with the dye, and rich in iron and carbonate of iron,
is skimmed off, and fresh verdigris and copperas added with another lot
of hat-forms. No doubt on adding fresh copperas further precipitation of
iron will take place, and so this ochre-like precipitate will
accumulate, and will eventually come upon the hats like a kind of thin
black mud. Now the effect of this will be that the dyestuff, partly in
the fibre as a proper dye, and not a little on the fibre as if
"smudged" on or painted on, will, on exposure to the weather, moisture,
air, and so on, gradually oxidise, the great preponderance of iron on
the fibre changing to a kind of iron-rust, corroding the fibres in the
process, and thus at once accounting for the change to the ugly brownish
shade, and to the rubbing off and rapid wearing away of the already too
thin superficial coating of dyed felt fibre. In the final spells of
dyeing in the dye-beck already referred to, tolerably thick with black
precipitate or mud, the application of black to the hat-forms begins, I
fear, to assume at length a too close analogy to another blacking
process closely associated with a pair of brushes and the time-honoured
name of Day & Martin. With that logwood black fibre, anyone could argue
as to a considerable proportion of the dye rubbing, wearing, or washing
off. Thus, then, we have the second cause of the deterioration of the
black, for the colour could not go into the fibre, and so it was chiefly
laid or plastered on. You can also see that a logwood black hat dyer may
well make the boast, and with considerable appearance of truth, that for
the purposes of the English hat manufacturers, logwood black dyeing is
the most appropriate, _i.e._ for the dyeing of highly proofed and stiff
goods, but as to the permanent character of the black colour on those
stiff hats, there you have quite another question. I firmly believe that
in order to get the best results either with logwood black or "aniline
blacks," it is absolutely necessary to have in possession a more
scientific and manageable process of proofing. Such a process is that
invented by F.W. Cheetham (see Lecture VII. p. 66).

In the dyeing of wool and felt with coal-tar colours, it is in many
cases sufficient to add the solution of the colouring matters to the
cold or tepid water of the dye-bath, and, after introducing the woollen
material, to raise the temperature of the bath. The bath is generally
heated to the boiling-point, and kept there for some time. A large
number of these coal-tar colours show a tendency of going so rapidly
and greedily on to the fibre that it is necessary to find means to
restrain them. This is done by adding a certain amount of Glauber's
salts (sulphate of soda), in the solution of which coal-tar colours are
not so soluble as in water alone, and so go more slowly, deliberately,
and thus evenly upon the fibre. It is usually also best to dye in a bath
slightly acid with sulphuric acid, or to add some bisulphate of soda.
There is another point that needs good heed taking to, namely, in using
different coal-tar colours to produce some mixed effect, or give some
special shade, the colours to be so mixed must possess compatibility
under like circumstances. For example, if you want a violet of a very
blue shade, and you take Methyl Violet and dissolve it in water and then
add Aniline Blue also in solution, you find that precipitation of the
colour takes place in flocks. A colouring matter which requires, as some
do, to be applied in an acid bath, ought not to be applied
simultaneously with one that dyes best in a neutral bath. Numerous
descriptions of methods of using coal-tar dyestuffs in hat-dyeing are
available in different volumes of the _Journal of the Society of
Chemical Industry_, and also tables for the detection of such dyestuffs
on the fibre.

Now I will mention a process for dyeing felt a deep dead black with a
coal-tar black dye which alone would not give a deep pure black, but one
with a bluish-purple shade. To neutralise this purple effect, a small
quantity of a yellow dyestuff and a trifle of indigotin are added. A
deep black is thus produced, faster to light than logwood black it is
stated, and one that goes on the fibre with the greatest ease. But I
have referred to the use of small quantities of differently coloured
dyes for the purpose of neutralising or destroying certain shades in the
predominating colour. Now I am conscious that this matter is one that is
wrapped in complete mystery, and far from the true ken of many of our
dyers; but the rational treatment of such questions possesses such vast
advantages, and pre-supposes a certain knowledge of the theory of
colour, of application and advantage so equally important, that I am
persuaded I should not close this course wisely without saying a few
words on that subject, namely, the optical properties of colours.

Colour is merely an impression produced upon the retina, and therefore
on the brain, by various surfaces or media when light falls upon them or
passes through them. Remove the light, and colour ceases to exist. The
colour of a substance does not depend so much on the chemical character
of that substance, but rather and more directly upon the physical
condition of the surface or medium upon which the light falls or through
which it passes. I can illustrate this easily. For example, there is a
bright-red paint known as Crooke's heat-indicating paint. If a piece of
iron coated with this paint be heated to about 150 deg. F., the paint at
once turns chocolate brown, but it is the same chemical substance, for
on cooling we get the colour back again, and this can be repeated any
number of times. Thus we see that it is the peculiar physical structure
of bodies which appear coloured that has a certain effect upon the
light, and hence it must be from the light itself that colour really
emanates. Originally all colour proceeds from the source of light,
though it seems to come to the eye from the apparently coloured objects.
But without some elucidation this statement would appear as an enigma,
since it might be urged that the light of the sun as well as that of
artificial light is white, and not coloured. I hope, however, to show
you that that light is white, because it is so much coloured, so
variously and evenly coloured, though I admit the term "coloured" here
is used in a special sense. White light contains and is made up of all
the differently coloured rainbow rays, which are continually vibrating,
and whose wave-lengths and number of vibrations distinguish them from
each other. We will take some white light from an electric lantern and
throw it on a screen. In a prism of glass we have a simple instrument
for unravelling those rays, and instead of letting them all fall on the
same spot and illumine it with a white light, it causes them to fall
side by side; in fact they all fall apart, and the prism has actually
analysed that light. We get now a coloured band, similar to that of the
rainbow, and this band is called the spectrum (see Fig. 16). If we could
now run all these coloured rays together again, we should simply
reproduce white light. We can do this by catching the coloured band in
another prism, when the light now emerging will be found to be white.
Every part of that spectrum consists of homogeneous light, _i.e._ light
that cannot be further split up. The way in which the white light is so
unravelled by the prism is this: As the light passes through the prism
its different component coloured rays are variously deflected from their
normal course, so that on emerging we have each of these coloured rays
travelling in its own direction, vibrating in its own plane. It is well
to remember that the bending off, or deflection, or refraction, is
towards the thick end of the prism always, and that those of the
coloured rays in that analysed band, the spectrum, most bent away from
the original line of direction of the white light striking the prism,
are said to be the most refrangible rays, and consequently are situated
in the most refrangible end or part of the spectrum, namely, that
farthest from the original direction of the incident white light. These
most refrangible rays are the violet, and we pass on to the least
refrangible end, the red, through bluish-violet, blue, bluish-green,
green, greenish-yellow, yellow, and orange. If you placed a prism say in
the red part of the spectrum, and caught some of those red rays and
allowed them to pass through your prism, and then either looked at the
emerging light or let it fall on a white surface, you would find only
red light would come through, only red rays. That light has been once
analysed, and it cannot be further broken up. There is great diversity
of shades, but only a limited number of primary impressions. Of these
primary impressions there are only four--red, yellow, green, and blue,
together with white and black. White is a collective effect, whilst
black is the antithesis of white and the very negation of colour. The
first four are called primary colours, for no human eye ever detected in
them two different colours, while all of the other colours contain two
or more primary colours. If we mix the following tints of the spectrum,
_i.e._ the following rays of coloured light, we shall produce white
light, red and greenish-yellow, orange and Prussian blue, yellow and
indigo blue, greenish-yellow and violet. All those pairs of colours that
unite to produce white are termed complementary colours. That is, one is
complementary to the other. Thus if in white light you suppress any one
coloured strip of rays, which, mingled uniformly with all the rest of
the spectral rays, produces the white light, then that light no longer
remains white, but is tinged with some particular tint. Whatever colour
is thus suppressed, a particular other tint then pervades the residual
light, and tinges it. That tint which thus makes its appearance is the
one which, with the colour that was suppressed, gave white light, and
the one is complementary to the other. Thus white can always be
compounded of two tints, and these two tints are complementary colours.
But it is important to remark here that I am now speaking of rays of
coloured light proceeding to and striking the eye; for a question like
this might be asked: "You say that blue and yellow are complementary
colours, and together they produce white, but if we mix a yellow and a
blue paint or dye we have as the result a green colour. How is this?"
The cases are entirely different, as I shall proceed to show. In
speaking of the first, the complementary colours, we speak of pure
spectral colours, coloured rays of light; in the latter, of pigment or
dye colours. As we shall see, in the first, we have an addition direct
of coloured lights producing white; in the latter, the green colour,
appearing as the result of the mixture of the blue and yellow pigments,
is obtained by the subtraction of colours; it is due to the absorption,
by the blue and yellow pigments, of all the spectrum, practically,
except the green portion. In the case of coloured objects, we are then
confronted with the fact that these objects appear coloured because of
an absorption by the colouring matter of every part of the rays of light
falling thereupon, except that of the colour of the object, which colour
is thrown off or reflected. This will appear clearer as we proceed. Now
let me point out a further fact and indicate another step which will
show you the value of such knowledge as this if properly applied. I said
that if we selected from the coloured light spectrum, separated from
white light by a prism, say, the orange portion, and boring a hole in
our screen, if we caught that orange light in another prism, it would
emerge as orange light, and suffer no further analysis. It cannot be
resolved into red and yellow, as some might have supposed, it is
monochromatic light, _i.e._ light purely of one colour. But when a
mixture of red and yellow light, which means, of course, a mixture of
rays of greater and less refrangibility respectively than our spectral
orange, the monochromatic orange--is allowed to strike the eye, then we
have again the impression of orange. How are we to distinguish a pure
and monochromatic orange colour from a colour produced by a mixture of
red and yellow? In short, how are we to distinguish whether colours are
homogeneous or mixed? The answer is, that this can only be done by the
prism, apart from chemical analysis or testing of the substances.

[Illustration: FIG. 16.]

The spectroscope is a convenient prism-arrangement, such that the
analytical effect produced by that prism is looked at through a
telescope, and the light that falls on the prism is carefully preserved
from other light by passing it along a tube after only admitting a small
quantity through a regulated slit.

Now all solid and liquid bodies when raised to a white heat give a
continuous spectrum, one like the prismatic band already described, and
one not interrupted by any dark lines or bands. The rays emitted from
the white-hot substance of the sun have to pass, before reaching our
earth, through the sun's atmosphere, and since the light emitted from
any incandescent body is absorbed on passing through the vapour of that
substance, and since the sun is surrounded by such an atmosphere of the
vapours of various metals and substances, hence we have, on examining
the sun's spectrum, instead of coloured bands or lines only, many dark
ones amongst them, which are called Fraunhofer's lines. Ordinary
incandescent vapours from highly heated substances give discontinuous
spectra, _i.e._ spectra in which the rays of coloured light are quite
limited, and they appear in the spectroscope only as lines of the
breadth of the slit. These are called line-spectra, and every chemical
element possesses in the incandescent gaseous state its own
characteristic lines of certain colour and certain refrangibility, by
means of which that element can be recognised. To observe this you place
a Bunsen burner opposite the slit of the spectroscope, and introduce
into its colourless flame on the end of a platinum wire a little of a
volatile salt of the metal or element to be examined. The flame of the
lamp itself is often coloured with a distinctiveness that is sufficient
for a judgment to be made with the aid of the naked eye alone, as to the
metal or element present. Thus soda and its salts give a yellow flame,
which is absolutely yellow or monochromatic, and if you look through
your prism or spectroscope at it, you do not see a coloured rainbow band
or spectrum, as with daylight or gaslight, but only one yellow double
line, just where the yellow would have been if the whole spectrum had
been represented. I think it is now plain that for the sake of
observations and exact discrimination, it is necessary to map out our
spectrum, and accordingly, in one of the tubes, the third, the
spectroscope is provided with a graduated scale, so adjusted that when
we look at the spectrum we also see the graduations of the scale, and so
our spectrum is mapped; the lines marked out and named with the large
and small letters of the alphabet, are certain of the prominent
Fraunhofer's lines (see A, B, C, a, d, etc., Fig. 16). We speak, for
example, of the soda yellow-line as coinciding with D of the spectrum.
These, then, are spectra produced by luminous bodies.

The colouring matters and dyes, their solutions, and the substances dyed
with them, are not, of course, luminous, but they do convert white light
which strikes upon or traverses them into coloured light, and that is
why they, in fact, appear either as coloured substances or solutions.
The explanation of the coloured appearance is that the coloured
substances or solutions have the power to absorb from the white light
that strikes or traverses them, all the rays of the spectrum but those
which are of the colour of the substance or solution in question, these
latter being thrown off or reflected, and so striking the eye of the
observer. Take a solution of Magenta, for example, and place a light
behind it. All the rays of that white light are absorbed except the red
ones, which pass through and are seen. Thus the liquid appears red. If a
dyed piece be taken, the light strikes it, and if a pure red, from that
light all the rays but red are absorbed, and so red light alone is
reflected from its surface. But this is not all with a dyed fabric, for
here the light is not simply reflected light; part of it has traversed
the upper layers of that coloured body, and is then reflected from the
interior, losing a portion of its coloured rays by absorption. This
reflected coloured light is always mixed with a certain amount of white
light reflected from the actual surface of the body before penetrating
its uppermost layer. Thus, if dyed fabrics are examined by the
spectroscope, the same appearances are generally observed as with the
solution of the corresponding colouring matters. An absorption spectrum
is in each case obtained, but the one from the solution is the purer,
for it does not contain the mixed white light reflected from the
surfaces of coloured objects. Let us now take an example. We will take a
cylinder glass full of picric acid in water, and of a yellow colour. Now
when I pass white light through that solution and examine the emerging
light, which looks, to my naked eye, yellow, I find by the spectroscope
that what has taken place is this: the blue part of the spectrum is
totally extinguished as far as G and 2/3 of F. That is all. Then why,
say you, does that liquid look yellow if all the rest of those rays pass
through and enter the eye, namely, the blue-green with a trifle of blue,
the green, yellow, orange, and red? The reason is this: we have already
seen that the colours complementary to, and so producing white light
with red, are green and greenish-blue or bluish-green. Hence these
cancel, so to say, and we only see yellow. We do not see a pure yellow,
then, in picric acid, but yellow with a considerable amount of white.
Here is a piece of scarlet paper. Why does it appear scarlet? Because
from the white light falling upon it, it practically absorbs all the
rays of the spectrum except the red and orange ones, and these it
reflects. If this be so, then, and we take our spectrum band of
perfectly pure colours and pass our strip of scarlet paper along that
variously coloured band of light, we shall be able to test the truth of
several statements I have made as to the nature of colour. I have said
colour is only an impression, and not a reality; and that it does not
exist apart from light. Now, I can show you more, namely, that the
colour of the so-called coloured object is entirely dependent on the
existence in the light of the special coloured rays which it radiates,
and that this scarlet paper depends on the red light of the spectrum for
the existence of its redness. On passing the piece of scarlet paper
along the coloured band of light, it appears red only when in the red
portion of the spectrum, whilst in the other portions, though it is
illumined, yet it has no colour, in fact it looks black. Hence what I
have said is true, and, moreover, that red paper looks red because, as
you see, it absorbs and extinguishes all the rays of the spectrum but
the red ones, and these it radiates. A bright green strip of paper
placed in the red has no colour, and looks black, but transferred to the
pure green portion it radiates that at once, does not absorb it as it
did the red, and so the green shines out finely. I have told you that
sodium salts give to a colourless flame a fine monochromatic or pure
yellow colour. Now, if this be so, and if all the light available in
this world were of such a character, then such a colour as blue would be
unknown. We will now ask ourselves another question, "We have a new blue
colouring matter, and we desire to know if we may expect it to be one of
the greatest possible brilliancy, what spectroscopic conditions ought it
to fulfil?" On examining a solution of it, or rather the light passing
through a solution of it, with the spectroscope, we ought to find that
all the rays of the spectrum lying between and nearly to H and b (Fig.
16), _i.e._ all the bluish-violet, blue, and blue-green rays pass
through it unchanged, unabsorbed, whilst all the rest should be
completely absorbed. In like manner a pure yellow colour would allow all
the rays lying between orange-red and greenish-yellow (Fig. 16) to pass
through unchanged, but would absorb all the other colours of the
spectrum.

Now we come to the, for you, most-important subject of mixtures of
colours and their effects. Let us take the popular case of blue and
yellow producing green. We have seen that the subjective effect of the
mixture of blue and yellow light on the eye is for the latter to lose
sense of colour, since colour disappears, and we get what we term white
light; in strict analogy to this the objective effect of a pure yellow
pigment and a blue is also to destroy colour, and so no colour comes
from the object to the eye; that object appears black. Now the pure blue
colouring matter would not yield a green with the pure yellow colouring
matter, for if you plot off the two absorption spectra as previously
described, on to the spectrum (Fig. 16), you will find that all the rays
would be absorbed by the mixture, and the result would be a black. But,
now, suppose a little less pure yellow were taken, one containing a
little greenish-yellow and a trifle of green, and also a little
orange-red on the other side to red, then whereas to the eye that yellow
might be as good as the first; now, when mixed with a blue, we get a
very respectable green. But, and this is very important, although of the
most brilliant dyes and colours there are probably no two of these that
would so unite to block out all the rays and produce black, yet this
result can easily and practically be arrived at by using three colouring
matters, which must be as different as possible from one another. Thus a
combination of a red, a yellow, and a blue colouring matter, when
concentrated enough, will not let any light pass through it, and can
thus be used for the production of blacks, and this property is made use
of in dyeing. And now we see why a little yellow dye is added to our
coal-tar black. A purplish shade would else be produced; the yellow used
is a colour complementary to that purple, and it absorbs just those blue
and purple rays of the spectrum necessary to illuminate by radiation
that purple, and _vice versa_; both yellow and purple therefore
disappear. In like manner, had the black been of a greenish shade, I
should have added Croceine Orange, which on the fabric would absorb just
those green and bluish rays of light necessary to radiate from and
illumine that greenish part, and the greenish part would do the like by
the orange rays; the effects would be neutralised, and all would fall
together into black.

THE END.




INDEX


Acetone, 64

Acid, boric. _See_ Boric acid.
  "   carbolic. _See_ Phenol.
  "   colours, mordanting, 74
  "   hydrochloric. _See_ Hydrochloric acid.
  "   nitric. _See_ Nitric acid.
  "   sulphuric. _See_ Sulphuric acid.

Acids, distinguishing, from alkalis, 23, 49
  "    neutralisation of, 50
  "    properties of, 49
  "    specific gravities of, 49

Affinity, chemical, 71

Alizarin, 75, 76, 80, 83, 91, 99
  "       blue, 90
  "       paste, 91
  "       pure, 91
  "       purple, 77
  "       red, 77

Alkali, manufacture of, by ammonia-soda process, 55
