heat are produced, nor converted into power, as we are sometimes told.
But whatever the phenomena produced, the aggregate amount of static
and dynamic caloric is always and ever the same.

If we consider the Ritter-Plant-Faure-Battery, which is mentioned as
storing electricity, we find that the phenomena exhibited by the use
of this apparatus are produced by the same factor. The battery is
composed of two sheets of lead, which are covered with a layer of
minium (Pb3O4). The sheets are laid one upon the other with an
intervening layer of felt. The pack is then rolled up in a spiral form
and placed in a vessel containing acidulated water. One of the plates
is connected with the positive, and the other plate with the negative
pole of a battery or generator.

When the current of electricity enters the battery, the Pb3O4 on the
positive plate is reduced to Pb, and the oxygen so set free attacks
the Pb3O4 on the negative plate, and oxidizes it to PbO2. In this
chemical action, caloric is occluded in the Pb and unlocked in the
PbO2, but a much greater amount of caloric is locked up than is
unlocked, although the amount of oxygen used in both cases is
precisely the same, which has been fully explained in the oxidation of
carbon.

Now after the battery has been thus charged and the wires disengaged,
the chemical action ceases for want of the reducing agent (_dynamic
caloric_), and the apparatus may be held at rest, or transported to
any distance required. When it is desired to utilize the force thus
stored, the poles are changed by grounding the positive wire, and
attaching the other to the conduit through which the electricity is to
flow. The chemical action is thus reversed, and the PbO2 is reduced to
Pb3O4, the oxygen thus set free attacks the Pb on the other plate,
oxidizing it to Pb3O4, thus unlocking all the caloric which was
occluded by the first action. In a battery of this kind weighing 75
pounds, we are informed by Sir William Thomson, that one million foot
pounds of force may be stored, and again set free for use.

Thus we find that the principle upon which the Faure battery is formed
is not new, and the prime factor producing the phenomena is the same
as has been shown to have caused all other phenomena referred to, and
indeed the principle is the same as now employed by the author in the
basic dephosphorizing process, i.e., caloric is occluded in
phosphorus by smelting in a blast furnace, and unlocked in the
converter, for the purpose of securing the fluidity of the metal
during treatment. The difference being, that one is done by
non-luminous, while the other is by luminous combustion.

If we consider the phenomenon of light, we find that it is due to the
same force. As before stated, when we oxidize carbon, or hydrogen, as
in the rapid combustion of wood, oil, or coal, the escaping caloric
flies off with such great speed as to cause the molecules in the
circumambient medium to assume a velocity which exhibits luminosity.
Thus the light produced by burning candles, oil, gas, wood, and coal,
is caused by the same prime factor, dynamic caloric.

The force of caloric is imponderable and invisible, and is only known
by its effects. We do know that it is occluded in metals and other
material, because we can unlock it and set it free, or we can transfer
it from one body to another, and by measuring its effects, we can
determine its quantity. We know that it prefers to travel over one
vehicle more than another, and by this knowledge we are able to
insulate it, and thus conduct it in any direction desired. The
materials through which it passes with the greatest freedom are called
conductors, and the materials which most retard its passage,
non-conductors; but these terms must be taken in a comparative sense
only, as in fact there are no absolute non-conductors of dynamic
caloric, or of what we call electricity.

The dynamo-electric generator simply draws the dynamic caloric from
the air or earth, or both, and confines it in an insulated path. Now
if that path be a No. 10 wire, the conduit may be sufficient to permit
the caloric to pass without increasing the molecular velocity of the
metal to an appreciable degree, but if we cut the No. 10 wire and
insert a piece of No. 40 platinum wire in the path, the amount of
caloric flowing through the No. 10 wire cannot pass through the No. 40
wire, and the resistance so caused increases the molecular velocity of
the No. 40 wire to such degree as to exhibit the phenomenon of
incandescence, and this is the incandescent electric light. And if we
consider the carbon light, we find that the current of caloric, in
passing from one pencil to the other, produces a molecular velocity of
luminosity in the adjoining atmosphere, and in addition a portion of
the carbon is consumed, which sets free an additional amount of
caloric, at a very high velocity, hence the intensity of the carbon
electric light is largely due to the dynamic caloric unlocked from the
pencils, and thus we find that the electric light produced by either
method is due to the action of dynamic caloric.

Taking this theory based upon physical science, and the facts which we
know pertaining to electricity, I conceive that caloric exists in two
conditions. _Static caloric_ is what we call _latent heat_, and
_dynamic caloric_ is what we call _electricity_. Therefore what may we
expect of it (electricity) is merely a matter of economy in the
development and utilization of dynamic caloric; in other words, can we
unlock static caloric by non-luminous combustion, and thus develop
_dynamic caloric as a first power_ more economically per foot pound
than we now do or can hereafter do by luminous combustion? Second, can
we utilize water and wind for the production of _dynamic caloric as a
first power_? Third, can we utilize the differential tension of
dynamic caloric in the earth and the atmosphere as _a first power_?
Fourth, will it pay to use luminous combustion as a first power to
generate dynamic caloric as _a second power_?

WHAT MAY WE EXPECT OF IT.

Let us take the steam engine, and see what we are now doing by
luminous combustion. Good Pittsburg coal contains 87 per cent. of
carbon, 5 per cent. of hydrogen, 2 per cent. of oxygen and 6 per cent.
of ash; we therefore have in one pound of such coal:

    8,080 x 9   14,544 x 87
    --------- = ----------- = 12,653 units in carbon.
        5           100

    34,662 x 9   62,391 x 5    3,119 units in hydrogen.
    ---------- = ---------- = ------
        5           100       15,772 units in coal.

15,772 x 772[2] = 12,175,984 foot pounds of energy is occluded in the
static caloric contained in one pound of such coal.

   [Footnote 2: Dr. Joule--foot pounds in one unit.]

A horse-power is estimated as capable of raising 33,000 pounds one
foot high per minute, and for this reason it is termed 33,000 foot
pounds per minute. So we have 33,000 x 60 = 1,980,000 foot pounds per
hour, as a horse-power.

The best class of _compound condensing_ engines,[3] with all the
modern improvements, require 1.828 pounds of coal per 1 h.p. per hour.
Thus we have--

    12,175,984 x 1.828 .................22,257,699
    Foot pounds in one h.p. .............1,980,000
                                        ----------
    Foot pounds lost per h.p. ..........20,277,699

    Per cent utilized per h.p. ..............8.94
    Per cent lost per h.p. .................91.06
                                           ------
                                           100.00

   [Footnote 3: "American Engineer," Vol. II., No. 10, page 182.]

In the ordinary practice of stationary non-condensing engines, from
three to four pounds of coal are required per horse-power per hour.
Now, taking the best of this class at 3 pounds, we have--

    12,175,984 x 3 =      36,527,952
    One h.p.               1,980,000
                          ----------
    Loss per h.p.         34,547,952

    Per cent utilized per h.p.  5.42
    Per cent lost per h.p.     94.58
                              ------
                              100.00

From these facts it may be assumed that after making due allowance for
variable qualities of the coal, the steam engine process, as at
present practiced, will not utilize more than from 5 to 10 per cent.
of the energy contained in the fuel used. It will thus be seen that
the process of converting static to dynamic caloric by luminous
combustion, by means of the steam engine, is an exceedingly wasteful
and costly method, and leaves much room for economy.

Taking an ordinary grade of petroleum as consisting of 13 per cent.
hydrogen, 78 carbon, 6 oxygen, 3 nitrogen and ash, we have as its
energy in foot pounds per pound of oil--

    62,391 x 13              }
    -----------  = 8,110 H.  }
         100                 }
                             } 19,454 units.
    14,544 x 78              }
    -----------  = 11,344 C. }
         100                 }

19,454 x 772 = 15,018,488 foot pounds. Thus, while our best coal
contains twelve million, the petroleum contains fifteen million foot
pounds of occluded energy in each pound, which is equal to 118,000,000
foot pounds, or 60 horse power for one hour, from one gallon of such
oil.

At present electricity is generated by two methods, and both of these
are _second powers_. Metals are smelted by luminous combustion as a
first power, and then oxidized by non-luminous combustion as a _second
power_, and coal is consumed by luminous combustion, by which steam is
generated as a first power, to drive a dynamo-generator whereby
electricity is obtained as a _second power_. Now, of the two methods,
the latter is much the cheaper, and as I have shown that the best
compound condensing engines only utilize 8.94, and a fair average
single cylinder condensing engine only utilizes 5.42 per cent. of the
energy of the fuel consumed, and as at the best not over 70 per cent.
of the foot pounds obtained from the engine can be utilized as
electricity, from which we must deduct loss by friction, etc., it will
be readily seen that not more than 5 per cent. of the energy of the
fuel can be developed by the dynamo-generator as electricity by the
present method.

The great want of the present age is a process by which the static
caloric of carbon or a hydrocarbon maybe set free by non-luminous
combustion; or, in other words, a process by which coal or oil may be
oxidized at a low degree, within an insulated vessel; if this can be
accomplished (and I can see no reason why we should not look for such
invention), we would be able to produce from twelve to fifteen million
foot pounds of energy (electricity) from one pound of petroleum, or
from ten to twelve million foot pounds from one pound of good coal,
which would be a saving of from 90 to 95 per cent. of present cost,
and leave the steam engine for historical remembrance.

Electricity may be generated by water or wind power to great
advantage, and conveyed to a distance for motive power. The
practicability of generating electricity at Niagara by which to propel
trains to New York and return may be considered almost settled; and I
conceive a second invention of importance which is now needed is an
apparatus by which the rising and falling tides may be utilized for
driving dynamo machines, by which electricity may be generated for
lighting the coast cities, and it is not unreasonable to expect that
such an apparatus will soon be provided; and in such an event gas
companies would suffer.

It is a well known fact among electricians that the volume and tension
of electricity vary both in the earth and in the atmosphere at
different sections of the earth's surface, and I conceive that we may
yet find means of utilizing this differential tension of electricity;
indeed, it is reported that during a recent storm the wires of an
ocean cable were grounded at both ends and a sufficient current for
all practical purpose flowed from the European to the American
continent, with all batteries removed, showing that the tension was so
much greater in Europe as to cause the electricity to flow through the
copper cable to this side in preference to passing through the earth
or the sea. It is also said that during an east-going storm it was
found impossible to work the telegraph lines between New York and
Buffalo, but on taking off the batteries at both ends and looping the
ends of the wire in the air, that a constant current of electricity
passed from Buffalo to New York, and the line was kept in constant use
in that direction without any battery connection until the storm
abated. Now, how far or to what advantage we may be able to utilize
this differential tension of electricity in the earth and the air, we
cannot now say; but I think that we may justly look for valuable
developments in this direction.

If, as I verily believe, a process will soon be discovered by which
dynamic caloric can be produced by the oxidation of petroleum with
non-luminous combustion in an insulated chamber, as we now oxidize
zinc, electricity will then be obtained from so small a weight, and at
such a low cost, as to insure aerial navigation beyond a doubt. Not
with balloons and their cumbrous inflations, but with machines capable
of carrying the load, and traveling by displacement of the air at high
velocities. Therefore we may expect that aerial navigation will be
developed in the near future to be one of the greatest enterprises of
the world.

And lastly, will it pay to use luminous combustion as a first power
for generating dynamic caloric for use as a second power, as is now
practiced?

At the University of Pennsylvania, in Philadelphia, gas is consumed in
an Otto gas engine, which drives a Gramme generator; and the lecture
room is lighted with electricity, and I am informed that the light is
both better _and cheaper_ than when they used the gas in the ordinary
gas burners. Hence we may expect to see gas consumed to advantage for
producing electric lights.

Considering the difficulties of transmitting steam power to a
considerable distance, and the comparative great cost of running small
engines, it is more than likely that electricity as at present
generated will be found to be economical for driving small motors.

Having thus endeavored to explain what electricity is, and the laws
which govern the occlusion of static caloric, and the development of
dynamic caloric (electricity), in conclusion I call the attention of
the inventors of the age to the great need of a process for oxidizing
coal or oil at a low degree, within an insulated vessel. With such an
invention electricity would be obtained at such a low cost that it
would be used exclusively to light and heat our houses, to smelt,
refine, and manipulate our metals, to propel our cars, wagons,
carriages, and ships, cook our food, and drive all machinery requiring
motive power.

       *       *       *       *       *




ELECTRIC LIGHT APPARATUS FOR PHOTOGRAPHIC PURPOSES.

By A.J. JARMAN.


For some time past it has been the desire of many photographers to
have at hand a ready means of producing a powerful and highly actinic
artificial light, suitable for the production of negatives, and easily
controllable. Several forms of apparatus have been designed, and I
believe have been, to a certain extent, employed successfully in
portraiture. But it has been well known for many years that the
electric light was just the light that would answer the photographer's
requirements, owing to its possessing great actinic power; but the
cost of its production was too great for general adoption; indeed,
such might be said of it now as far as dynamo-electric machines and
steam or gas motors are concerned, for the majority of photographers.
It is true that several influential photographers have already adopted
the use of the electric light for portraiture, but the primary cost of
the apparatus employed by these firms is far beyond the reach of most
portraitists. The apparatus about to be described is one that has been
carefully worked out to meet the wants of the photographer in almost
every particular; in fact, with this apparatus, portraits can, and
have been, produced in an ordinary sitting room, as good and as
perfect as if taken in a well-lighted studio.

[Illustration: FIG. 1.]

The generator of the electric current consists of a series of voltaic
elements of zinc and carbon--forty-eight in number--these elements
being made up of ninety-six zinc plates and forty-eight carbon plates;
thus the generator consists of forty-eight voltaic elements arranged
in rows of twelve; they are all carefully screwed upon suitable bars
of wood, and these bars are joined by other cross bars, which bind the
whole in a compact form; the battery being suitably connected so as to
produce a current of very high electro-motive force, and so arranged
over their exciting trough that the plates can be raised or lowered at
will, as seen in Fig. 1, which will explain itself almost at first
sight.

The troughs are made of mahogany, put together with brass screws, and
well saturated with an insulating compound which also makes them acid
proof; the cells are charged with a saturated solution of bichromate
of potash, to which has been added twenty fluid ounces of sulphuric
acid to each gallon.

[Illustration: FIG. 2.]

To produce the electric current, all that is needed is to lower these
suspended elements down into the trough, having previously connected
the wires as shown in Fig. 1, to the electric lamp, Fig 2. At once a
light starts up, between the carbon pencils, of a thousand-candle
power or more. With a light of this power, a large head on cabinet or
carte size plate may be produced in three or four seconds.

The generator occupies a floor space of three feet six inches by two
feet, and stands two feet six inches high. The cells will cost 5s. to
charge, and will produce upward of sixty negatives before being
exhausted. All that is necessary, in recharging, is to lift the
elements up out of the way, take out the troughs by their handles and
empty them, charging them again by means of a toilet jug. When
replaced, the whole apparatus is fit for use again; the whole of the
above operation occupies but a quarter of an hour, and as there are no
earthenware cells employed, there is no fear of breakage.

The small amount of labor and cost of working the above apparatus will
compare favorably with the production of the electric light from a
dynamo-electric machine for the photographer, and when we consider
that the cost of the whole of the above apparatus, consisting of a
generator automatic lamp, reflector, and all the necessary
appendages, is less then one-tenth of the dynamo machine, motor,
shafting, etc., to produce the same result, it would seem to have a
greater claim for its adoption with those who wish to employ the
electric light, whether for work at night, use in the sitting room, or
to assist daylight on the dark and foggy days of winter.

Fig. 2 shows the arrangement of the electric lamp. A is the automatic
regulator; B, the reflector; C, top extension of the reflector; D,
small tissue paper screen to prevent the intense arc-rays from coming
in contact with the sitter; E, stand with sliding rod. This appendage
can be wheeled about with ease, as it is arranged to run upon four
casters.

When the generator is in use it may be placed within easy reach of the
operator, so that the exposure may be made by lowering the elements in
their troughs just for the requisite time, and withdrawing immediately
the exposure is made; there is no need to fear any inconvenience from
deleterious fumes as none are given off, so it may be used in any
studio or sitting-room without any inconvenience from this source, and
as far as many trials have gone, it seems to meet every requirement
demanded by the photographer for the production of portraits by means
of the electric light.--_Photo. News._

       *       *       *       *       *




DESRUELLES'S ELECTRIC LIGHTER


[Illustration: ELECTRIC LIGHTER.]

The little apparatus shown in the accompanying cut will certainly find
favor with smokers, as well as with persons generally who often have
need of a fire or light. It forms one of the most direct applications
of dry piles of all the systems on the Desruelles plan. Instead of
filling piles with a liquid, this plan contemplates the introduction
into them of a sort of asbestos sponge saturated with an acid or any
suitable solution. In this way there is obtained the advantage of
having a pile which is in some sort _dry_, that may be moved, shaken,
or upset without any outflow of liquid, and which will prove of
special value when applied to movable apparatus, such as portable
lighters, alarms on ships, railroads, etc. It is hardly necessary to
say that while the introduction of this inert substance diminishes the
volume of the liquid, the electro-motive force of the pile is thereby
in nowise affected, but its internal resistance is increased. This,
however, is of no consequence in the application under consideration.
The lighter consists of a small, round, wooden box containing the
pile, and surmounted by a spirit lamp. A platinum spiral opposite the
wick serves for producing the light. The pile is a bichromate of
potash element, in which there is substituted for the liquid a
solution of bichromate identical with that used in bottle piles. The
zinc is suspended from a small lever, in which it is only necessary to
press slightly to bring the former in contact with the asbestos paste,
when, the zinc being attached, a current is set up which traverses the
spiral, heats it to redness, and lights the spirit. The pile, when
once charged, may be used for several hundred lightings. When the
spiral no longer becomes red hot, it is only necessary to replace the
paste--an operation of extreme simplicity. When the pressure is
removed from the little lever, the zinc, being raised, is no longer
acted upon by the liquid with which the asbestos is saturated. Mr
Desruelles is constructing upon the same principle a gas lighter, the
pile of which is fixed at the extremity of a handle whose length
varies with the height of the gas burners to be reached. These little
domestic apparatus are being exhibited at the Paris Electrical
Exhibition.

       *       *       *       *       *



