The large, short-bodied and long-legged sheep found in the interior of
western and northern Africa are a complete contrast to the
short-legged, long-bodied little Cameroons sheep. There is a very
valuable pair of the former in the Berlin Zoological Garden--the
Haussa sheep--which are very regularly marked, the front parts of
their bodies being red and the hind parts white. They were brought
from the neighborhood of Say, on the middle Niger, by the Togo
Hinterland expedition. The ram has beautiful horns, and the ewe is
distinguished by two strange, tassel-like pendants of skin that hang
from her neck. This zoological garden also possesses a fine ram from
the interior of Tunis, which is similar in shape to the Haussa ram,
but has shorter horns and a heavier mane. Its color is grayish black.

[Illustration: RAM FROM TUNIS.]

[Illustration: HAUSSA RAM.]

[Illustration: HAUSSA EWE.]

Dr. Heck considers the long tail of the domestic sheep the chief
impediment to the adoption of the theory of its descent from the
short-tailed wild sheep. And yet, in sheep, this member is of
secondary importance, for it varies greatly in form. The short-tailed
heath sheep are just the opposite of the fat-tailed Persian sheep,
which are represented in a fabulous account as being obliged to draw
their broad tails, that weighed 40 pounds, behind them on wheels.
These are the sheep that supply the Astrakan and Persian lamb which is
so much worn now. The fur is caused to lie in peculiar waves or tight
rings by sewing the newly born lamb in a tightly fitting covering
which keeps the fur from being mussed. In the Berlin Zoological Garden
there is a very fine four-horned, fat-tailed ram, from the steppes on
the lower Volga. From this region come also the large-boned,
fat-rumped sheep, which have a large mass of fat on each side of the
stunted tail. In the illustration this peculiarity does not show well,
on account of the thick winter wool. Their color is red, with dirty
white. When Wissman and Bumiller returned from their last expedition,
they brought a fine ram of a different breed of fat-rumped sheep,
which are raised by the Kirghise, on the Altai Mountains. They are
smaller than those from the steppes of the Volga, but have finer wool,
and evidently belong to a finer breed. As mutton tallow is very
useful, and has been used even from the most ancient times by sheep
raisers in the preparation of food, they prize sheep with these masses
of fat on the tail and rump, which were purposely developed to the
greatest possible degree.

[Illustration: FAT-TAILED SHEEP (FOUR-HORNED RAM).]

[Illustration: FAT-RUMPED SHEEP.]

The steinbock and the chamois, which live in the highest mountains,
are still found, but other breeds, such as the argalis, which
inhabited the foot hills and the high table lands, have disappeared,
as Europe has become more thickly populated. We know that they
formerly lived there, by the fossil remains of the oldest Pliocene in
England (Ovis Savinii Newton), of the caves of bones near Stramberg in
Moravia (Ovis argaloides Nehring), and of the diluvial strata near
Puy-de-Dome Mountain in the south of France (Ovis antiqua Pommerol).

For the above and the accompanying illustrations we are indebted to
Daheim.

       *       *       *       *       *

[Continued from SUPPLEMENT, No. 1172, page 18756.]




PATENTS.[1]

    [Footnote 1: To be presented at the Niagara Falls meeting (June,
    1898) of the American Society of Mechanical Engineers, and
    forming part of Vol. six of the Transactions.]

By JAMES W. SEE, Hamilton, Ohio, Member of the Society.


EMPLOYERS' RIGHTS.

An invention, to be patented, must be applied for by the actual
inventor, and in the absence of acts constituting a transfer, the
patent, and all legal ownership in it, and all rights under it, go
exclusively to the inventor. In the absence of express or implied
contract, a mere employer of the inventor has no rights under the
patent. Only contracts or assignments give to the employer, or to
anyone else, a license or a partial or entire ownership in the patent.
The equity of this may be appreciated by examples. A journeyman
carpenter invents an improvement in chronometer escapements and
patents it. The man who owns the carpenter shop has no shadow of claim
on or under this patent. Again, the carpenter invents and patents an
improvement in jack planes. The shop owner has no rights in or under
the patent. Again, the carpenter invents an improvement in window
frames, and the shop owner has no rights. He has no right even to make
the patented window frame without license. The shop owner, in merely
employing the carpenter, acquires no rights to the carpenter's
patented inventions. But there are cases in which an implied license
would go to the shop owner. For instance, if the carpenter was
employed on the mutual understanding that he was particularly
ingenious in devising carpenter work, and capable of improving upon
the products of the shop; and if in the course of his work he devised
a new and patentable window frame, and developed it in connection with
his employment and at the expense of his employer; and if the new
frames were made by the employer without protest from the carpenter,
the carpenter could, of course, patent the new frame, but he could not
oust the employer in his right to continue making the invention, for
it would be held that the employer had acquired an implied license.

If he could not use it, then he would not be getting the very
advantage for which he employed this particular carpenter, and if he
did get that right, he would be getting all that he employed the
carpenter for, and that right would not be at all lessened by the fact
that the carpenter had a patent under which he could license other
people. The patent does not constitute the right to make or use or
sell, for such right is enjoyed without a patent. The patent
constitutes the "exclusive" right to make, sell or use, and this the
shop owner does not get unless he specially bargains for it. Implied
licenses stand on delicate ground, and where men employ people of
ingenious talent, with the understanding that the results of such
talent developed during the employment shall inure to the benefit of
the employer, there is only one safeguard, and that is to found the
employment on a contract unmistakably setting forth the understanding.


NEW PURPOSE.

If an invention is old, it is old regardless of any new purpose to
which it is put. It is no invention to put a machine to a new use. If
an inventor contrives a meritorious machine for the production of
coins or medals, his invention is lacking in novelty if it should
appear that such a machine had before been designed as a soap press,
and this fact is not altered by any merely structural or formal
difference, such as difference in power or strength, due to the
difference in duty. The invention resides in the machine and not in
the use of it. If the soap press is covered by an existing patent,
that patent is infringed by a machine embodying that invention,
regardless of whether the infringing machine be used for pressing soap
or silver. And it is no invention to discover some new capacity in an
old invention. An inventor is entitled to all the capacities of his
invention.


COMBINATION CLAIMS.

Many people have an erroneous notion regarding patent claims, and
consider the expression "combination" as an element of weakness. The
fact is, that all mechanical claims that are good for anything are
combination claims. No claim for an individual mechanical element has
come under my notice for many years and I doubt if a new mechanical
element has been lately invented. All claims resolve themselves into
combinations, whether so expressed or not. Combination does not
necessarily imply separateness of elements. The improved carpet tack
is after all but a peculiar combination of body and head and barbs.
The erroneous public contempt for combination claims is based upon the
legal maxim, that if you break the combination you avoid the claim and
escape infringement, and this legal maxim should be well understood in
formulating the claims. If the claim calls for five elements and the
competitor can omit one of the elements, he escapes infringement.
Therefore, the claim is good only when it recites no elements which
are not essential.

Many inventors labor under the delusion that a claim is strong in
proportion to the extent of its array of elements. The exact opposite
is the truth, and that claim is the strongest which recites the
fewest number of elements. It is the duty of the inventor to analyze
his invention and know what is and what is not essential to its
realization. It is the duty of the patent solicitor to sift out the
essential from the non-essential, and to draft claims covering broad
combinations involving only essential elements. Sometimes the inventor
will help him in this matter, but quite as often he will, through
ignorance, hinder him and combat him. The invention having been
carefully analyzed and reduced to its prime factors, and the claim
having been provided to comprise a combination involving no element
which is not essential to a realization of the invention, a new and
more important question arises. The elements have been recited in
terms fitted to the example of the invention thus far developed. The
combination is broadly stated, but the terms of the elements are
limiting. Cannot some ingenious infringer realize the invention by a
similar combination escaping the literalism of the terms of the
elements? It is at this stage that the claim must be carefully
studied. The inventor, or some one for him, must assume the position
of a pirate, and set his wits to work to contrive an organization
realizing the invention but escaping the terms of the proposed claim.
When such an escaping device is schemed out, then the defect in the
claim is developed and the claim must be redrawn. In this way every
possible escape must be studied so as to secure to the inventor
adequate protection for his invention. Solicitors find it difficult to
get inventors to do or consider this matter properly, inventors being
too often inclined to disparage alternative constructions, the matter
being largely one of sentiment founded on the love of offspring.

The wise inventor will recognize the fact that the patent which he
proposes to get is the deed to valuable property; that the object of
the deed is not to permit him to enter upon the property, for he can
do that without the deed, but that it is to keep strangers from
entering upon the property; that he desires to enjoy his invention
without unauthorized competition; that when the property begins to
yield profit it will invite competition; that competitors may make
machines worse than or as good as or better than his; and that he can
get adequate protection only in a claim which would bar poorer as well
as better machines embodying his invention. Briefly, then, all good
claims for mechanism are combination claims; the fewer the elements
recited, the stronger will the claim be; non-essential elements weaken
or destroy the claim; the claim should not be considered satisfactory
so long as a way is seen for the escape of the ingenious pirate.


COMBINATIONS AND AGGREGATIONS.

A given association of mechanical elements may be entirely new, but it
does not follow that it forms a patentable association, for not all
new things are patentable. If the new association is a combination, it
is patentable, but if it is a mere aggregation, it is unpatentable. An
association may be new and still all of its separate elements may be
old, the act of invention lying in the fact that the elements have
been so associated with relation to each other as to bring about an
improved result, or an improved means for an old result. All new
machines are, after all, composed of old elements. The law presupposes
that the elements are old, and that the invention resides in the
peculiar association of them. If we take a given mechanical element,
recognized as having had a certain capacity, and if we then similarly
take some other mechanical element and employ it only for its
previously recognized capacity, and if we then add the third element
for its recognized capacity, we have in the end only an association of
three elements each performing its well recognized individual office,
and the entire association performing only the sum of the recognized
individual elements. Such an association is a mere aggregation, a mere
adding together of elements, without making the sum of the results any
greater in the association than it was in the individual elements. It
is simply adding two to one and getting three as a result. An
aggregation is unpatentable. As an illustration, a heavy marble statue
of Jupiter is found in the parlor and difficult to move. Ordinary
casters are put under its pedestal and it becomes easier to move.
Modern anti-friction two-wheeled casters are substituted for the
commoner casters, and the statue becomes still easier to move. Casters
were never before associated with a statue of Jupiter. Here is a new
association, but it is a mere aggregation. The statue of Jupiter has
been unmodified by the presence of the casters, and the casters
perform precisely the same under the statue of Jupiter that they did
under the bedstead. There is no combined result, and there is no
patentable combination.

But if an inventor takes a given mechanical element for the purpose of
its well recognized capacity, and then associates with it another
mechanical element for its recognized capacity, but so associates the
two elements that one has a modifying effect upon the capacity of the
other element, then the association will be capable of a result
greater than the sum of the results for the individual elements. This
excessive result is not due to the individual elements, but to the
combination of them. One has been added to one and a sum greater than
two has been secured. The modification of result may be due merely to
the bringing of the two elements together, so that they may mutually
act upon each other, or it may be due to the manner or means by which
they are joined. In a patentable combination the separate elements
mutually act upon each other to effect a modification of their
previous individual results, and secure a conjoint result greater than
the sum of the individual results. The elements of a combination need
not act simultaneously; they may act successively, or some may act
without motion. As an illustration, assume an old watch in which there
was a stem for setting the hands, and assume another old watch with a
stem for winding the spring. If an inventor should make a watch, and
provide it with the two stems, he would have only an aggregation. But
if he employed but one stem, and so located it that it could be used
at will for setting the hands or for winding the spring, then he would
have produced a combination. The particular instance just given is not
a case of the same number of elements, producing a result in excess of
the individual results of the separate elements, but is rather a case
of a lesser number of elements, producing a combination result equal
to the sum of the previous results of a greater number of elements. A
better example would perhaps be a new watch with its two old stems so
related that either could be used for setting the hands or for winding
the spring.


GENERA AND SPECIES.

An inventor, being the first to produce a given organization, and
desiring to patent it, may see at once a patentable variation on the
device. In other words, he makes two machines patentably different,
but both embodying his main invention. He drafts his broad patent
claim to cover both machines. In his patent he must illustrate his
invention, and he accordingly shows in the drawings the preferred
machine. The two machines represent two species of his generic
invention, and for illustration he selects the preferable species. He
drafts his generic claim to cover both species, and he follows this
with a specific claim relating to the selected species. The question
might be asked, If the broad generic claim covers the selected and all
other species, why bother with the specific claim, why not rest on the
generic claim? The answer is that it might in the future develop that
the genus was old, and that the generic claim was invalid, while the
specific claim would still be good. The infringer of the specific
claim may thus be held notwithstanding the generic claim becomes void.
But the inventor cannot claim his second species in his patent. He can
claim the genus, and he can claim one species under that genus, but
all other species must be covered in separate patents. It is even
unwise to illustrate alternative species in a patent for, in case, of
litigation, some one of the alternative species might prove to be old.
This would have the effect, of course, to destroy the generic claim,
but it might possibly have the effect of damaging the specific claim
if it should appear that the specific claim was after all merely for a
modification as distinguished from a distinct species. Were it not for
the danger of broad generic claims being rendered void by discovered
anticipations, there would be no need for claiming species, but in
view of such possibility it is important to claim one species in the
generic patent, and to protect alternative species by other patents.


COMBINATION AND SUB-COMBINATION.

A given machine capable of a given ultimate result having been
invented, a claim may be drawn to cover the combination of elements
comprised in the machine. Such claim will cover the machine as a
whole. But, the fact being recognized that many machines are, after
all, composed of a series of sub-machines, and that these
sub-machines, in turn, are composed of certain combinations of
elements, and that within these sub-machines there are still minor
combinations of elements capable of producing useful mechanical
results, and that the sub-machines, or some of the subordinate
combinations of elements within the sub-machines, might be capable of
utilization in other situations than that comprehended by the main
machine, it becomes important that the inventor be protected regarding
the sub-machines and the minor useful combinations. Claims may be
drawn for the combination constituting the main machine, other claims
may be drawn for the combinations constituting the operative
sub-machines, and claims may be drawn covering the minor useful
combinations of elements found within the sub-machines. Each claimed
combination must be operative. But secondary claims cannot be made for
sub-machines or sub-combinations which are for divisional matter or
matter which should be made the subject of separate patents.


MECHANICAL EQUIVALENTS.

Where an inventor produces a new mechanical device for the production
of a certain result, he can often see in advance that various
modifications of it can be made to bring about the same result, and
even if he does not see it he may in the future find competitors
getting at the result by a different construction. He analyzes the
competing structure, and determines that "it is the same thing only
different," and wonders what the legal doctrine of mechanical
equivalents means, and asks if he is not entitled to the benefits of
that doctrine, so that his patent may dominate the competing machine.

An inventor may or may not be entitled to invoke the doctrine of
mechanical equivalents, and the doctrine may or may not cause his
patent to cover a given fancied infringement. If an inventor is a
pioneer in a certain field, and is the first to produce an
organization of mechanism by means of which a given result is
produced, he is entitled to a claim whose breadth of language is
commensurate with the improvement he has wrought in the art. He cannot
claim functions or performance, but must limit his claim to mechanism,
in other words, to the combination of elements which produces the new
result. His claim recites those elements by name. If the new result
cannot be produced by any other combination of elements, then, of
course, no question will arise regarding infringement. But it may be
that a competitor contrives a device having some of the elements of
the combination as called for by the claim, the remaining elements
being omitted and substitutes provided. The competing device will thus
not respond to the language of the claim. But the courts will deal
liberally with the claim of the meritorious pioneer inventor, and will
apply to it the doctrine of mechanical equivalents, and will hold the
claim to be infringed by a combination containing all of the elements
recited in the claim, or containing some of them, and mechanical
equivalents for the rest of them. Were it not for this liberal
doctrine, the pioneer inventor could gather little fruit from his
patent, for the patent could be avoided, perhaps, by the mere
substitution of a wedge for the screw or lever called for by the
claim. The court, having ascertained from the prior art that the
inventor is entitled to invoke the doctrine of equivalents, will
proceed to ascertain if the substituted elements are real equivalents.
A given omitted element will be considered in connection with its
substitute element, and if the substitute element is found to be an
element acting in substantially the same manner for the production of
substantially the same individual result, and if it be found that the
prior art has recognized the equivalency of the two individual
elements, then the court will say that the substituted element is a
mechanical equivalent of the omitted element, and that the two
combinations are substantially the same. This reasoning must be
applied to each of the omitted elements for which substitutes have
been furnished. In this way justice can be done to the pioneer
inventor. But the courts, in exercising liberality, cannot do violence
to the language of the claim. The infringer will not escape by merely
substituting equivalents for recited elements, but he will escape if
he omits a recited element and supplies no substitute, for the courts
will not read out of a claim an element which the patentee has
deliberately put into the claim, and a combination of a less number of
elements than that recited in the claim is not the combination called
for by the claim.

It is seldom that the exemplifying device of the pioneer inventor is a
perfect one. Later developments and improvements by the original
patentee, or by others, must be depended on to bring about perfection
of structure. Those who improve the structure are as much entitled to
patents upon their specific improvements in the device as was the
original inventor entitled to his patent for the fundamental device.
These improvers are secondary inventors, and are not entitled to
invoke the doctrine of mechanical equivalents. The secondary inventor
did not bring about a new result, but his patent was for new means for
producing the old result. His patent is for this improvement in means,
and his claim will be closely scrutinized in court, and he will be
