unchangeableness of her climates, is richer, warmer, more passionate,
more exquisite in its forms and more fascinating in its experiences,
keener of sense, capable of more delicious joys, than is possible to it
amid the manifold inclemencies of the colder earth.

We have seen that there is excellent authority for saying that Venus's
atmosphere is from one and a half to two times as dense and as extensive
as ours. Here is an interesting suggestion of aerial possibilities for
her inhabitants. If man could but fly, how would he take to himself
wings and widen his horizons along with the birds! Give him an
atmosphere the double in density of that which now envelopes him, take
off a little of his weight, thereby increasing the ratio of his strength
and activity, put into his nervous system a more puissant stimulus from
the life-giving sun, and perchance he _would_ fly.

Well, on Venus, apparently, these very conditions actually exist. How,
then, do intellectual creatures in the world of Venus take wing when
they choose? Upon what spectacle of fluttering pinions afloat in
iridescent air, like a Raphael dream of heaven and its angels, might we
not look down if we could get near enough to our brilliant evening star
to behold the intimate splendors of its life?

As Venus herself would be the most brilliant member of the celestial
host to an observer stationed on the night side of Mercury, so the earth
takes precedence in the midnight sky of Venus. For the inhabitants of
Venus Mercury is a splendid evening and morning star only, while the
earth, being an outer planet, is visible at times in that part of the
sky which is directly opposite to the place of the sun. The light
reflected from our planet is probably less dazzling than that which
Venus sends to us, both because, at our greater distance, the sunlight
is less intense, and because our rarer atmosphere reflects a smaller
proportion of the rays incident upon it. But the earth is, after all, a
more brilliant phenomenon seen from Venus than the latter is seen from
the earth, for the reason that the entire illuminated disk of the earth
is presented toward our sister planet when the two are at their nearest
point of approach, whereas, at that time, the larger part of the surface
of Venus that is turned earthward has no illumination, while the
illuminated portion is a mere crescent.

Owing, again, to the comparative rarity of the terrestrial atmosphere,
it is probable that the inhabitants of Venus--assuming their
existence--enjoy a superb view of the continents, oceans, polar snows,
and passing clouds that color and variegate the face of the earth. Our
astronomers can study the full disk of Venus only when she is at her
greatest distance, and on the opposite side of the sun from us, where
she is half concealed in the glare. The astronomers of Venus, on the
other hand, can study the earth under the most favorable conditions of
observation--that is to say, when it is nearest to them and when, being
in opposition to the sun, its whole disk is fully illuminated. In fact,
there is no planet in the entire system which enjoys an outlook toward a
sister world comparable with that which Venus enjoys with regard to the
earth. If there be astronomers upon Venus, armed with telescopes, it is
safe to guess that they possess a knowledge of the surface of the earth
far exceeding in minuteness and accuracy the knowledge that we possess
of the features of any heavenly body except the moon. They must long ago
have been able to form definite conclusions concerning the meteorology
and the probable habitability of our planet.

It certainly tends to increase our interest in Venus when, granting
that she is inhabited, we reflect upon the penetrating scrutiny of which
the earth may be the object whenever Venus--as happens once every 584
days--passes between us and the sun. The spectacle of our great planet,
glowing in its fullest splendor in the midnight sky, pied and streaked
with water, land, cloud, and snow, is one that might well excite among
the astronomers of another world, so fortunately placed to observe it,
an interest even greater than that which the recurrence of total solar
eclipses occasions upon the earth. For the inhabitants of Venus the
study of the earth must be the most absorbing branch of observational
astronomy, and the subject, we may imagine, of numberless volumes of
learned memoirs, far exceeding in the definiteness of their conclusions
the books that we have written about the physical characteristics of
other members of the solar system. And, if we are to look for attempts
on the part of the inhabitants of other worlds to communicate with us by
signals across the ether, it would certainly seem that Venus is the
most likely source of such efforts, for from no other planet can those
features of the earth that give evidence of its habitability be so
clearly discerned. Of one thing it would seem we may be certain: if
Venus has intellectual inhabitants they possess far more convincing
evidence of our existence than we are likely ever to have of theirs.

In referring to the view of the earth from Mercury it was remarked that
the moon is probably visible to the naked eye. From Venus the moon is
not only visible, but conspicuous, to the naked eye, circling about the
earth, and appearing at times to recede from it to a distance of about
half a degree--equal to the diameter of the full moon as we see it. The
disk of the earth is not quite four times greater in diameter than that
of the moon, and nowhere else in the solar system is there an instance
in which two bodies, no more widely different in size than are the moon
and the earth, are closely linked together. The moons of the other
planets that possess satellites are relatively so small that they
appear in the telescope as mere specks beside their primaries, but the
moon is so large as compared with the earth that the two must appear, as
viewed from Venus, like a double planet. To the naked eye they may look
like a very wide and brilliant double star, probably of contrasted
colors, the moon being silvery white and the earth, perhaps, now of a
golden or reddish tinge and now green or blue, according to the part of
its surface turned toward Venus, and according, also, to the season that
chances to be reigning over that part.

Such a spectacle could not fail to be of absorbing interest, and we can
not admit the possibility of intelligent inhabitants on Venus without
supposing them to watch the motions of the moon and the earth with the
utmost intentness. The passage of the moon behind and in front of the
earth, and its eclipses when it goes into the earth's shadow, could be
seen without the aid of telescopes, while, with such instruments, these
phenomena would possess the highest scientific interest and importance.

Because the earth has a satellite so easily observable, the astronomers
of Venus could not remain ignorant of the exact mass of our planet, and
in that respect they would outstrip us in the race for knowledge, since,
on account of the lack of a satellite attending Venus, we have been able
to do no more than make an approximate estimate of her mass.

With telescopes, too, in the case of a solar eclipse occurring at the
time of the earth's opposition, they could see the black spot formed by
the shadow of the moon, where the end of its cone moved across the earth
like the point of an invisible pencil, and could watch it traversing
continents and oceans, or thrown out in bold contrast upon the white
background of a great area of clouds. Indeed, the phenomena which our
globe and its satellite present to Venus must be so varied and wonderful
that one might well wish to visit that planet merely for the sake of
beholding them.

Thus far we have found so much of brilliant promise in the earth's twin
sister that I almost hesitate to approach another phase of the subject
which may tend to weaken the faith of some readers in the habitability
of Venus. It may have been observed that heretofore nothing has been
said as to the planet's rotation period, but, without specifically
mentioning it, I have tacitly assumed the correctness of the generally
accepted period of about twenty-four hours, determined by De Vico and
other observers. This period, closely accordant with the earth's, is, as
far as it goes, another argument for the habitability of Venus.

But now it must be stated that no less eminent an authority than
Schiaparelli holds that Venus, as well as Mercury, makes but a single
turn on its axis in the course of a revolution about the sun, and,
consequently, is a two-faced world, one side staring eternally at the
sun and the other side wearing the black mask of endless night.

Schiaparelli made this announcement concerning Venus but a few weeks
after publishing his discovery of Mercury's peculiar rotation. He
himself appears to be equally confident in both cases of the
correctness of his conclusions and the certainty of his observation. As
with Mercury, several other observers have corroborated him, and
particularly Percival Lowell in this country. Mr. Lowell, indeed, seems
unwilling to admit that any doubt can be entertained. Nevertheless, very
grave doubt is entertained, and that by many, and probably by the
majority, of the leading professional astronomers and observers. In
fact, some observers of great ability, equipped with powerful
instruments, have directly contradicted the results of Schiaparelli and
his supporters.

The reader may ask: "Why so readily accept Schiaparelli's conclusions
with regard to Mercury while rejecting them in the case of Venus?"

The reply is twofold. In the first place the markings on Venus, although
Mr. Lowell sketched them with perfect confidence in 1896, are, by the
almost unanimous testimony of those who have searched for them with
telescopes, both large and small, extremely difficult to see,
indistinct in outline, and perhaps evanescent in character. The sketches
of no two observers agree, and often they are remarkably unlike. The
fact has already been mentioned that Mr. Lowell noticed a kind of veil
partially obscuring the markings, and which he ascribed, no doubt
correctly, to the planet's atmosphere. But he thinks that,
notwithstanding the atmospheric veil, the markings noted by him were
unquestionably permanent features of the planet's real surface.
Inasmuch, however, as his drawings represent things entirely different
from what others have seen, there seems to be weight in the suggestion
that the radiating bands and shadings noticed by him were in some manner
illusory, and perhaps of atmospheric origin.

If the markings were evidently of a permanent nature and attached to the
solid shell of the planet, and if they were of sufficient distinctness
to be seen in substantially the same form by all observers armed with
competent instruments, then whatever conclusion was drawn from their
apparent motion as to the period of the planet's rotation would have to
be accepted. In the case of Mercury the markings, while not easily seen,
appear to be sufficiently distinct to afford confidence in the result of
observations based upon them, but Venus's markings have been represented
in so many different ways that it seems advisable to await more light
before accepting any extraordinary, and in itself improbable, conclusion
based upon them.

It should also be added that in 1900 spectroscopic observations by
Belopolski at Pulkova gave evidence that Venus really rotates rapidly on
her axis, in a period probably approximating to the twenty-four hours of
the earth's rotation, thus corroborating the older conclusions.

Belopolski's observation, it may be remarked, was based upon what is
known as the Doppler principle, which is employed in measuring the
motion of stars in the line of sight, and in other cases of rapidly
moving sources of light. According to this principle, when a source of
light, either original or reflected, is approaching the observer, the
characteristic lines in its spectrum are shifted toward the blue end,
and when it is retreating from the observer the lines are shifted toward
the red end. Now, in the case of a planet rotating rapidly on its axis,
it is clear that if the observer is situated in, or nearly in, the plane
of the planet's equator, one edge of its disk will be approaching his
eye while the opposite edge is retreating, and the lines in the spectrum
of a beam of light from the advancing edge will be shifted toward the
blue, while those in the spectrum of the light coming from the
retreating edge will be shifted toward the red. And, by carefully noting
the amount of the shifting, the velocity of the planet's rotation can be
computed. This is what was done by Belopolski in the case of Venus, with
the result above noted.

Secondly, the theory that Venus rotates but once in the course of a
revolution finds but slight support from the doctrine of tidal friction,
as compared with that which it receives when applied to Mercury. The
effectiveness of the sun's attraction in slowing down the rotation of a
planet through the braking action of the tides raised in the body of the
planet while it is yet molten or plastic, varies inversely as the sixth
power of the planet's distance. For Mercury this effectiveness is nearly
three hundred times as great as it is for the earth, while for Venus it
is only seven times as great. While we may admit, then, that Mercury,
being relatively close to the sun and subject to an enormous braking
action, lost rotation until--as occurred for a similar reason to the
moon under the tidal attraction of the earth--it ended by keeping one
face always toward its master, we are not prepared to make the same
admission in the case of Venus, where the effective force concerned is
comparatively so slight.

It should be added, however, that no certain evidence of polar
compression in the outline of Venus's disk has ever been obtained, and
this fact would favor the theory of a very slow rotation because a
plastic globe in swift rotation has its equatorial diameter increased
and its polar diameter diminished. If Venus were as much flattened at
the poles as the earth is, it would seem that the fact could not escape
detection, yet the necessary observations are very difficult, and Venus
is so brilliant that her light increases the difficulty, while her
transits across the sun, when she can be seen as a round black disk, are
very rare phenomena, the latest having occurred in 1874 and 1882, and
the next not being due until 2004.

Upon the whole, probably the best method of settling the question of
Venus's rotation is the spectroscopic method, and that, as we saw, has
already given evidence for the short period.

Even if it were established that Venus keeps always the same face to the
sun, it might not be necessary to abandon altogether the belief that she
is habitable, although, of course, the obstacles to that belief would be
increased. Venus's orbit being so nearly circular, and her orbital
motion so nearly invariable, she has but a very slight libration with
reference to the sun, and the east and west lunes on her surface, where
day and night would alternate once in her year of 225 days, would be so
narrow as to be practically negligible.

But, owing to her extensive atmosphere, there would be a very broad band
of twilight on Venus, running entirely around the planet at the inner
edge of the light hemisphere. What the meteorological conditions within
this zone would be is purely a matter of conjecture. As in the case of
Mercury, we should expect an interchange of atmospheric currents between
the light and dark sides of the planet, the heated air rising under the
influence of the unsetting sun in one hemisphere, and being replaced by
an indraught of cold air from the other. The twilight band would
probably be the scene of atmospheric conflicts and storms, and of
immense precipitation, if there were oceans on the light hemisphere to
charge the air with moisture.

It has been suggested that ice and snow might be piled in a vast circle
of glaciers, belting the planet along the line between perpetual day
and night, and that where the sunbeams touched these icy deposits near
the edge of the light hemisphere a marvelous spectacle of prismatic
hills of crystal would be presented!

It may be remarked that it would be the inhabitants of the dark
hemisphere who would enjoy the beautiful scene of the earth and the moon
in opposition.




CHAPTER IV

MARS, A WORLD MORE ADVANCED THAN OURS


Mars is the fourth planet in the order of distance from the sun, and the
outermost member of the terrestrial group. Its mean distance is
141,500,000 miles, variable, through the eccentricity of its orbit, to
the extent of about 13,000,000 miles. It will be observed that this is
only a million miles less than the variation in Mercury's distance from
the sun, from which, in a previous chapter, were deduced most momentous
consequences; but, in the case of Mars, the ratio of the variation to
the mean distance is far smaller than with Mercury, so that the effect
upon the temperature of the planet is relatively insignificant.

Mars gets a little less than half as much solar light and heat as the
earth receives, its situation in this respect being just the opposite
to that of Venus. Its period of orbital revolution, or the length of its
year, is 687 of our days. The diameter of Mars is 4,200 miles, and its
density is 73 per cent of the earth's density. Gravity on its surface is
only 38 per cent of terrestrial gravity--i.e., a one hundred-pound
weight removed from the earth to Mars would there weigh but thirty-eight
pounds. Mars evidently has an atmosphere, the details of which we shall
discuss later.

The poles of the planet are inclined from a perpendicular to the plane
of its orbit at very nearly the same angle as that of the earth's poles,
viz., 24 deg. 50 min. Its rotation on its axis is also effected in
almost the same period as the earth's, viz., 24 hours, 37 minutes.

When in opposition to the sun, Mars may be only about 35,000,000 miles
from the earth, but its average distance when in that position is more
than 48,000,000 miles, and may be more than 60,000,000. These
