"There's a lot of this stuff I don't dig," Benson said, tapping the
sheets of onion-skin. "I don't even scratch the surface of this
rigamarole about The Guide. I'm going to get to work on this sample in
the lab, at school, though. Maybe we have something, here."

       *       *       *       *       *

At eight-thirty the next evening, after four and a half hours work, he
stopped to check what he had found out.

The school's X-ray, an excellent one, had given him a complete picture
of the molecular structure of the syrup. There were a couple of
long-chain molecules that he could only believe after two
re-examinations and a careful check of the machine, but with the help of
the notes he could deduce how they had been put together. They would be
the Ingredient Alpha and Ingredient Beta referred to in the notes.

The components of the syrup were all simple and easily procurable with
these two exceptions, as were the basic components from which these were
made.

The mechanical guinea-pig demonstrated that the syrup contained nothing
harmful to human tissue.

Of course, there were the warnings about heightened psycho-physiological
effects....

He stuck a poison-label on the bottle, locked it up, and went home. The
next day, he and Bill Myers got a bottle of carbonated water and mixed
themselves a couple of drinks of it. It was delicious--sweet, dry, tart,
sour, all of these in alternating waves of pleasure.

"We do have something, Bill," he said. "We have something that's going
to give our income-tax experts headaches."

"You have," Myers corrected. "Where do you start fitting me into it?"

"We're a good team, Bill. I'm a chemist, but I don't know a thing about
people. You're a psychologist. A real one; not one of these night-school
boys. A juvenile psychologist, too. And what age-group spends the most
money in this country for soft-drinks?"

Knowing the names of the syrup's ingredients, and what their molecular
structure was like, was only the beginning. Gallon after gallon of the
School Board's chemicals went down the laboratory sink; Fred Benson and
Bill Myers almost lived in the fourth floor lab. Once or twice there
were head-shaking warnings from the principal about the dangers of
over-work. The watchmen, at all hours, would hear the occasional
twanging of Benson's guitar in the laboratory, and know that he had come
to a dead end on something and was trying to think. Football season came
and went; basketball season; the inevitable riot between McKinley and
Eisenhower rooters; the Spring concerts. The term-end exams were only a
month away when Benson and Myers finally did it, and stood solemnly,
each with a beaker in either hand and took alternate sips of the
original and the drink mixed from the syrup they had made.

"Not a bit of difference, Fred," Myers said. "We have it!"

Benson picked up the guitar and began plunking on it.

"Hey!" Myers exclaimed. "Have you been finding time to take lessons on
that thing? I never heard you play as well as that!"

       *       *       *       *       *

They decided to go into business in St. Louis. It was centrally located,
and, being behind more concentric circles of radar and counter-rocket
defenses, it was in better shape than any other city in the country and
most likely to stay that way. Getting started wasn't hard; the first
banker who tasted the new drink-named Evri-Flave, at Myers'
suggestion--couldn't dig up the necessary money fast enough. Evri-Flave
hit the market with a bang and became an instant success; soon the
rainbow-tinted vending machines were everywhere, dispensing the
slender, slightly flattened bottles and devouring quarters voraciously.
In spite of high taxes and the difficulties of doing business in a
consumers' economy upon which a war-time economy had been superimposed,
both Myers and Benson were rapidly becoming wealthy. The gregarious
Myers installed himself in a luxurious apartment in the city; Benson
bought a large tract of land down the river toward Carondelet and
started building a home and landscaping the grounds.

The dreams began bothering him again, now that the urgency of getting
Evri-Flave, Inc., started had eased. They were not dreams of the men he
had killed in battle, or, except for one about a huge, hot-smelling tank
with a red star on the turret, about the war. Generally, they were about
a strange, beautiful, office-room, in which a young man in uniform
killed an older man in a plum-brown coat and a vivid blue neck-scarf.
Sometimes Benson identified himself with the killer; sometimes with the
old man who was killed.

He talked to Myers about these dreams, but beyond generalities about
delayed effects of combat fatigue and vague advice to relax, the
psychologist, now head of Sales & Promotion of Evri-Flave, Inc., could
give him no help.

The war ended three years after the new company was launched. There was
a momentary faltering of the economy, and then the work of
reconstruction was crying hungrily for all the labor and capital that
had been idled by the end of destruction, and more. There was a new
flood-tide of prosperity, and Evri-Flave rode the crest. The estate at
Carondelet was finished--a beautiful place, surrounded with gardens,
fragrant with flowers, full of the songs of birds and soft music from
concealed record-players. It made him forget the ugliness of the war,
and kept the dreams from returning so frequently. All the world ought to
be like that, he thought; beautiful and quiet and peaceful. People
surrounded with such beauty couldn't think about war.

All the world could be like that, if only....

       *       *       *       *       *

The UN chose St. Louis for its new headquarters--many of its offices had
been moved there after the second and most destructive bombing of New
York--and when the city by the Mississippi began growing into a real
World Capital, the flow of money into it almost squared overnight.
Benson began to take an active part in politics in the new World
Sovereignty party. He did not, however, allow his political activities
to distract him from the work of expanding the company to which he owed
his wealth and position. There were always things to worry about.

"I don't know," Myers said to him, one evening, as they sat over a
bottle of rye in the psychologist's apartment. "I could make almost as
much money practicing as a psychiatrist, these days. The whole world
seems to be going pure, unadulterated nuts! That affair in Munich, for
instance."

"Yes." Benson grimaced as he thought of the affair in Munich--a
Wagnerian concert which had terminated in an insane orgy of mass
suicide. "Just a week after we started our free-sample campaign in South
Germany, too...."

He stopped short, downing his drink and coughing over it.

"Bill! You remember those sheets of onion-skin in that envelope?"

"The foundation of our fortunes; I wonder where you really did get
that.... Fred!" His eyes widened in horror. "That caution about
'heightened psycho-physiological effects,' that we were never able
to understand!"

Benson nodded grimly. "And think of all the crazy cases of
mass-hysteria--that baseball-game riot in Baltimore; the time everybody
started tearing off each others' clothes in Milwaukee; the sex-orgy in
New Orleans. And the sharp uptrend in individual psycho-neurotic and
psychotic behavior. All in connection with music, too, and all after
Evri-Flave got on the market."

"We'll have to stop it; pull Evri-Flave off the market," Myers said. "We
can't be responsible for letting this go on."

"We can't stop, either. There's at least a two months' supply out in the
hands of jobbers and distributors over whom we have no control. And we
have all these contractual obligations, to buy the entire output of the
companies that make the syrup for us; if we stop buying, they can sell
it in competition with us, as long as they don't infringe our
trade-name. And we can't prevent pirating. You know how easily we were
able to duplicate that sample I brought back from Turkey. Why, our legal
department's kept busy all the time prosecuting unlicensed manufacturers
as it is."

"We've got to do something, Fred!" There was almost a whiff of hysteria
in Myers' voice.

"We will. We'll start, first thing tomorrow, on a series of tests--just
you and I, like the old times at Eisenhower High. First, we want to
be sure that Evri-Flave really is responsible. It'd be a hell of a
thing if we started a public panic against our own product for nothing.
And then...."

       *       *       *       *       *

It took just two weeks, in a soundproofed and guarded laboratory on
Benson's Carondelet estate, to convict their delicious drink of
responsibility for that Munich State Opera House Horror and everything
else. Reports from confidential investigators in Munich confirmed this.
