sensitizing liquid. I have made an inexpensive drying case which serves
the purpose very well. It consists simply of a light-tight rectangular
case of drawers. There are twenty-five drawers in all. They are
constructed in an inexpensive manner, and are the only parts of the case
that are worth describing. They are very shallow, being but 1-7/8 inches
deep, and as it appeared that the principal expense would be for the
materials of which the bottoms of the drawers should be composed, it was
decided to make the bottoms of cotton cloth. This cloth is stretched
upon a frame, the dimensions of which are greater than that of the paper
to be dried. The stock of which the frame is made is pine, 11/4 inches
wide, and three-eighths of an inch thick. The corners are simply mitered
together and attached to each other by means of the wire staples that
are commonly used for fastening together pages of manuscript, and which
are called "novelty staples." Eight staples are used at each miter, four
above and four below the joint. Two of the staples, at the top and near
the ends of the joint, are set square across it, and two others, at the
top and near the middle of the joint, are placed diagonally across it.
The staples at the bottom are similarly placed. The joint is quite firm
and strong, and is likely to hold for an indefinite period with fair
usage. The cloth, stretched upon the frame, is fastened to it by means
of similar staples. A dark colored cloth not transparent to light is to
be preferred. A strip of pine, 1-13/16 inches wide, and three eighths of
an inch thick, forms the vertical front of the drawer, and prevents the
admission of much light from the front while the sheet is drying. Two
triangular knee pieces, three-quarters of an inch thick, serve to
connect the front board with the frame, and four small screws with a few
brads are used in attaching them. The lower edge of the front board
drops one-quarter of an inch below the bottom of the drawer. My case
stands in a poorly lighted room, and paper dried in this case and
removed to a portfolio as soon as it is dry does not seem to be injured
by the light that reaches it. With the case in a well lighted room, I
should prefer to have outer doors to the case, made of ordinary board
six or eight inches wide, hinged to one end, and arranged to swing
horizontally across the front of the case. These would more completely
prevent the admission of light. The opening of any one of the doors
would allow three or four of the drawers to be filled, while the rest of
the case would be comparatively dark at the same time.[2]

    [Footnote 2: Since this paper was read, I have seen in the
    office of the City Engineer of Boston a drying case which is
    similar in some respects to the one that I have devised. It has
    been longer in use than my own. The drawers are simply the
    ordinary mosquito netting frames covered with cotton netting.
    They have no fronts, but a door covers the front of the case,
    and shuts out the light.]

_The Portfolio for Protecting the Sensitized Paper from Exposure to
Light._--The sensitized paper is very well protected from exposure to
light, if kept in a portfolio or book, the brown paper leaves of which
are considerably larger than the sensitized sheets. The sheets may be
returned to such a book after exposure, and washed at the convenience of
the operator. They can be washed more quickly and perfectly if _two_
water-tanks are provided in which to wash them. A few minutes' soaking
will remove nearly all of the sensitizing preparation which has not been
fixed by the exposure. If the soaking is too long continued in water
that is much discolored by the sensitizing preparation, the sheets
become saturated with the diluted preparation, and they may become
slightly colored by _after_ exposure. If the first soaking is not too
long continued, and if the sheets are transferred at once to a second
bath of clean water, which is kept slowly changing from an open faucet,
they may remain there until the soluble chemicals have been entirely
extracted, and there will be no risk of staining by after exposure.
Washing in two tanks is of more consequence when the ground is white and
the lines blue, than when the ground is blue and the lines white.

_The Grades of Paper that are well Adapted for Blue Process Work._--I
have tested many grades of paper, to ascertain if they were well adapted
for blue process work. Some grades of brown Manila are very good; others
have little specks embedded in their surfaces which refuse to take on a
blue tint; still others, when printed upon, have white lines that are
wider than the corresponding black lines of the negative. The blue
obtained upon bond paper appears to be particularly rich, and the whites
remain pure; but bond paper cockles badly, and the cockles remain in the
finished print. Weston's linen record is an excellent paper. It is
strong, cockles but little, and dries very smooth. A paper that is used
by Allen & Rowell, for carbon printing, is comparatively cheap, and is
an excellent paper. It is not so stiff as the linen record, and the
whites are quite as pure. It does not cockle, neither does it curl while
being sensitized. It comes in one hundred pound rolls, and is about
thirty inches wide. The best papers are those that are prepared for
photographic work. The plain Saxe and the plain Rives both give
excellent results. Blue lines on a pure white ground can be obtained on
these papers, from photographic negatives, without difficulty. None of
the hard papers of good grade require the use of gum in the sensitizing
liquid. The liquid penetrates the more porous papers too far when gum is
not used, and without it good whites are seldom obtained upon porous
paper.

_The Best Chemicals for this Work_ are the _recrystallized_ red
prussiate of potash and the citrate of iron and ammonia, _which is
manufactured by Powers & Wightman_, of Philadelphia. If the red
prussiate has not been recrystallized, the whites will be unsatisfactory
and the samples of citrates of iron and ammonia which have come to us
from other chemists than those named, have all proved unreliable for
this process.

_The Sensitizing Liquid.--Its Proportions._--The blue process was
originally introduced from France, by the late Mr. A. L. Holley. I was
indebted to Mr. P. Barnes, who was with Mr. Holley at the time, for an
early account of it, and I had the first blue process machine that was
in use in New England. Since 1876, instruction in the use of the blue
process has been given to the students of mechanical engineering of the
Massachusetts Institute of Technology, and they have caused its
introduction into many draughting offices. The proportions of the
sensitizing liquid, as originally given me by Mr Barnes, were as
follows:

  Red prussiate of potash............. 8 parts.
  Citrate of iron and ammonia......... 8 parts.
  Gum arabic.......................... 1 part.
  Water.............................. 80 parts.

_Results of Experiments._--In our use, it first appeared that the gum
might be omitted from the preparation when sufficiently hard papers were
used. Next, that a preparation containing

  Red prussiate of potash........ 2 parts,
  Citrate of iron and ammonia.... 3 "
  Water......................... 20 "

printed more rapidly. This preparation I continue to use when much time
may elapse between sensitizing and printing; but, when the paper is to
be printed immediately after sensitizing, I use a larger proportion of
citrate of iron and ammonia. Before arriving at the conclusion that
these proportions were the best to be used, I made a series of purely
empirical experiments, beginning with the proportions:

  Red prussiate of potash.......... 10 parts.
  Citrate of iron and ammonia....... 1 part.
  Water............................ 50 parts.

and ending with the proportions:

  Red prussiate of potash............... 1 part.
  Citrate of iron and ammonia.......... 10 parts.
  Water................................ 50 "

I found the best plan for conducting these experiments to be: To coat a
sheet of the paper with a given mixture; to cut the sheet into strips
before exposure; to expose all the strips of the sheet, at the same
time, to the direct sunlight without an intervening negative; and to
withdraw them, one after another, at stated intervals. I found that with
each mixture there was a time of exposure which would produce the
deepest blue, that with over-exposure the blue gradually turned gray,
and that if a curve should be plotted, the abscissas of which should
represent the time of exposure, and the ordinates of which should
represent the intensity of the blue the curves drawn would have
approximately an elliptical form, so that if one knew the exact time of
exposure which would give the best result with any mixture, one might
deviate two or three minutes either way from that time without producing
a noticeable result. I have found that, with the same paper, the same
blue results with any good proportions of the chemicals named, provided
a sufficient weight of both chemicals is applied to the surface; that an
excess of the red prussiate of potash renders the preparation less
sensitive to light, and very much lengthens the necessary time of
exposure; that the prints are finer with some excess of the red
prussiate; that an excess of the citrate of iron and ammonia hastens the
time of printing materially; that a greater excess of the citrate causes
the whites to become badly stained by the iron, while a still greater
excess of the citrate, in a concentrated solution causes the sensitized
paper to change without exposure to light, and to produce a redder blue
or purple, which does not adhere to the paper, but may be washed off
with a sponge. I have found that the cheapest method of reproducing
inked drawings that have been made on thick paper is not to trace them,
but to print the blues from a photographic glass negative; and also,
that the dry plate process is well adapted to such work in offices, when
one has become sufficiently experienced. Printed matter can also most
easily and inexpensively be reproduced by the same means, when a small
issue is required on each successive year. For the reproduction of
manuscript by the blue process, the best plan that I have found has been
to write the manuscript upon the thinnest blue tinted French note-paper,
with black opaque ink--the stylographic ink is very good--and,
afterward, to dip the paper into melted paraffine, and to dry the paper
at the melting temperature. This operation, if cheaply done, requires
special apparatus. For positive printing from the glass negative, I use
a multiple frame, by the aid of which I can print from 16 negatives at
the same time, upon a single sheet of paper. This frame is
interchangeable with the one that contains the plate glass. The
negatives are so arranged in the frame that the sheets can be cut and
bound, as in the ordinary process of book binding. The time required for
exposure, when printing from glass negatives, varies with the negative;
and, in order to secure satisfactory results with the multiple frame it
is necessary to stop the exposure of some, while the exposure of others
is continued. I insert wooden or cloth stoppers into the frame for the
purpose of stopping the exposure of certain negatives. When paraffined
manuscript is to be printed from, I find it convenient to have it
written on sheets of small size, and to have these mounted upon an
opaque frame of brown Manila paper, printing sixteen or more at a time,
depending upon the size of the printing frame. Many small tracings may
be similarly mounted upon a brown paper multiple frame, and may be
printed together upon a single sheet.

       *       *       *       *       *




SPECTRUM GRATINGS.


At a recent meeting of the London Physical Society, Prof. Rowland, of
Baltimore, exhibited a number of his new concave gratings for giving a
diffraction spectrum. He explained the theory of their action. Gratings
can be ruled on any surface, if the lines are at a proper distance apart
and of the proper form. The best surface, however, is a cylindrical or
spherical one. The gratings are solid slabs of polished speculum metal
ruled with lines equidistant by a special machine of Prof. Rowland's
invention. An account of this machine will be published shortly. The
number of lines per inch varied in the specimens shown from 5,000 to
42,000, but higher numbers can be engraved by the cutting diamond. The
author has designed an ingenious mechanical arrangement for keeping the
photographic plates in focus. In this way photographs of great
distinctness can be obtained. Prof. Rowland exhibited some 10 inches
long, which showed the E line doubled, and the large B group very
clearly. Lines are divided by this method which have never been divided
before, and the work of photographing takes a mere fraction of the time
formerly required. A photographic plate sensitive throughout its length
is got by means of a mixture of eosene, iodized collodion, and bromized
collodion. Prof. Rowland and Captain Abney, R.E., are at present engaged
in preparing a new map of the whole spectrum with a focus of 18 feet.

In reply to Mr. Hilger, F.R.A.S., the author stated that if the metal is
the true speculum metal used by Lord Rosse, it would stand the effects
of climate, he thought; but if too much copper were put in, it might
not.

In reply to Mr. Warren de la Rue, Prof. Rowland said that 42,000 was the
largest number of lines he had yet required to engrave on the metal.

Prof. Guthrie read a letter from Captain Abney, pointing out that Prof.
Rowland's plates gave clearer spectra than any others; they were free
from "ghosts," caused by periodicity in the ruling, and the speculum
metal had no particular absorption.

Prof. Dewar, F.R.S., observed that Prof. Liveing and he had been engaged
for three years past in preparing a map of the ultra-violet spectrum,
which would soon be published. He considered the concave gratings to
make a new departure in the subject, and that they would have greatly
facilitated the preparation of his map.

       *       *       *       *       *




A NEW POCKET OPERA GLASS.


[Illustration: POCKET OPERA GLASS.]

Inasmuch as high power combined with small size is usually required in
an opera glass, manufacturers have always striven to unite these two
features in their instruments, and have succeeded in producing glasses
which, although sufficiently small to be carried in the waistcoat
pocket, are nevertheless powerful enough to allow quite distant objects
to be clearly distinguished. Recently, a Parisian optician has succeeded
in constructing an instrument of this kind that is somewhat of a novelty
in its way, since its mechanism allows it to be closed in such a manner
as to take up no more space than a package of cigarettes (Fig. 1.) It is
constructed as follows:

AB and CD (Fig. 1) are two metallic tubes, in which slide with slight
friction two other tubes. Into the upper part of the latter are inserted
two hollow elliptical eye-pieces, which move therein with slight
friction, and which are united by the two supports tor the wheel, _bb_
(Fig. 4), and endless screw that serve for focusing the instrument. The
eyepieces, TT, are held in the tube by means of two screws, _vv_ (Figs.
2 and 4), in such a way that they can revolve around the latter as axes.
The lenses of the eye-piece are fixed therein by means of a copper ring.
The object glasses are placed in the ends of the tubes, AB and CD, at
_oo_.

When the instrument is closed, it forms a cylinder 35 millimeters in
diameter by 11 centimeters in length. To open it, it is grasped by the
extremities and drawn apart horizontally so as to bring it into the
position shown in Fig. 2. Then it is turned over so that the screw, V,
points upward, while at the same time the two tubes are pressed gently
downward. This causes the eye-pieces to revolve around their axes, _vv_,
and brings the two tubes parallel with each other.--_La Nature._

       *       *       *       *       *




ANCIENT GREEK PAINTING.


A lecture on ancient Greek painting was lately delivered by Professor
C.T. Newton, C.B., at University College, London. The lecturer began by
reminding his audience of the course of lectures on Greek sculpture,
from the earliest times to the Roman period, which he completed this
year. The main epochs in the history of ancient sculpture had an
intimate connection with the general history of the Greeks, with their
intellectual, political, and social development. We could not profitably
study the history of ancient sculpture except as part of the collateral
study of ancient life as a whole, nor could we get a clear idea of the
history of ancient sculpture without tracing out, so far as our
imperfect knowledge permits, the characteristics and successive stages
of ancient painting. Between these twin sister arts there had been in
all times, and especially in Greek antiquity, a close sympathy and a
reciprocal influence. The method in dealing with the history of Greek
painting in this course would be similar to that adopted in the course
on sculpture. The evidence of ancient authors as to the works and
characteristics of Greek painters would be first examined, then the
extant monuments which illustrate the history of this branch of art
would be described. In the case of painting, the extant monuments were
few and far between, but we might learn much by the careful study of the
mural paintings from the buried Campanian cities, Pompeii, Herculaneum,
and those found in the tombs near Rome and Etruria. The paintings on
Greek vases would enable us to trace the history of what is called
ceramographic art from B.C. 600 for nearly five centuries onward.

After noticing the traditions preserved by Pliny and others as to the
earliest painters, the lecturer passed on to the period after the
Persian war. Polygnotos of Thasos was the earliest Greek painter of
celebrity. He flourished B.C. 480-460. At Athens he decorated with
paintings the portico called the Stoa Poikile, the Temple of the
Dioscuri, the Temple of Theseus, and the Pinakotheke on the Akropolis.
At Delphi he painted on the walls of the building called Lesche two
celebrated pictures, the taking of Troy and the descent of Ulysses into
Hades. All these were mural paintings; the subjects were partly
mythical, partly historical. Thus in the Stoa Poikile were represented
the taking of Troy, the battle of Theseus with the Amazons, the battle
of Marathon. In the Temple of Theseus came the battle of the Lapiths and
Centaurs and the battle of the Amazons again. In the other two Athenian
temples he treated mythological subjects. These great public works were
executed during the administration of Kimon, to whom Polygnotos stood in
the same relation us Phidias did to Perikles, the successor of Kimon.
The paintings in the Stoa Poikile were executed by Polygnotos
gratuitously, for which service the Athenians rewarded him with the
freedom of their city. His greatest and probably his earliest works were
the two pictures in the Lesche at Delphi. Of these there was a very full
description in Pausanias. The building called Lesche was thought to have
been of elliptical form, with a colonnade on either side, separated by a
wall in the middle, and to have been about 90 ft in length. The figures
were probably life size.

According to the list given by Pausanias, there were upward of seventy
in each of the two pictures. In that representing the taking of Troy
Polygnotos had brought together many incidents described in the Cyclic
epics: Menelaos Agamemnon, Ulysses, Nestor, Neoptolemos, Antenor, Helen,
Andromache, Kassandra, and many other figures, with which the Homeric
poems have made us familiar, all appeared united in one skillful
composition, arranged in groups. The other picture, the descent of
Ulysses into Hades to interrogate Teiresias, might be called a pictorial
epic of Hades. On one side was the entrance, indicated by Charon's boat
crossing: the Acheron, and the evocation of Teiresias by Ulysses,
besides the punishment of Tityos and other wicked men; on the other side
were Tantalos and Sisyphos. Between these scenes, on the flanks, were
various groups of heroes and heroines from the Trojan and other legends.
From the remarks of ancient critics, it might be inferred that the
genius of Polygnotos, like that of Giotto, was far in advance of his
technical skill. Aristotle called him the most ethical of painters, and
recommended the young artist to study his works in preference to those
of his contemporary Pauson, who was ignobly realistic, or those of
Zeuxis, who had great technical merit, but was deficient in spiritual
conception. The course will comprise four more lectures, as
follows--November 17, "Greek Painters from B.C. 460 to Accession of
Alexander the Great B.C. 336--Apollodoros, Zeuxis, Parrhasios,
Pamphilos, Aristides;" November 24, "Greek Painters from Age of
Alexander to Augustan Age--Apelles, Protogenes, Theon;" December 1,
"Pictures on Greek Fictile Vases;" December 15, "Mural Paintings from
Pompeii, Herculaneum, and other Ancient sites."

       *       *       *       *       *


The new Iowa State Capitol has thus far cost $2,000,000,
and it will require $500,000 to finish it. It is 365 feet long
fron north to south, and measures 274 feet from the sidewalk
to the top of the central dome.

       *       *       *       *       *

[LONGMAN'S MAGAZINE.]




ATOMS, MOLECULES, AND ETHER WAVES.

By JOHN TYNDALL, F.R.S.
