
"Did you get a look at these Sacred Books, or find out what they might
be?"

Loudons shook his head disgustedly. "Every time I brought up the
question, they evaded. The Tenant sent the Reader out to bring in this
old lady, Irene Klein--she was a perfect gold mine of information
about the history and traditions of the Toon, by the way--and then he
sent him out on some other errand, undoubtedly to pass the word not to
talk to us about their religion."

"I don't get that," Altamont said. "They showed me everything they
had--their gunshop, their powder mill, their defenses, everything." He
smoked in silence for a moment. "Say, this slain god couldn't be the
original platoon commander, could he?"

"No. They have the greatest respect for his memory--decorate his grave
regularly, drink toasts to him--but he hasn't been deified. They got
the idea for this deity of theirs out of the Sacred Books." Loudons
gnawed the end of his cigar and frowned. "Monty, this has me worried
like the devil, because I believe that they suspect that you are the
Slain and Risen One."

"Could be, at that. I know the Tenant came up to me, very
respectfully, and said, 'I hope you don't think, sir, that I was
presumptuous in trying to display my humble deductive abilities to
_you_.'"

"What did you say?" Loudons demanded rather sharply.

"Told him certainly not; that he'd used a good quick method of
demonstrating that he and his people weren't like those mindless
subhumans in the woods."

"That was all right. I don't know how we're going to handle this. They
only suspect that you are their deity. As it stands, now, we're on
trial, here. And I get the impression that logic, not faith, seems to
be their supreme religious virtue; that skepticism is a religious
obligation instead of a sin. That's something else that's practically
unheard of. I wish I knew--"

       *       *       *       *       *

Tenant Mycroft Jones, and Reader Stamford Rawson and Toon Sarge Verner
Hughes, and his son Murray Hughes, sat around the bare-topped table in
the room, on the second floor of the Aitch-Cue House. A lighted candle
flickered in the cool breeze that came in through the open window
throwing their shadows back and forth on the walls.

"Pass the tantalus, Murray," the Tenant said, and the youngest of the
four handed the corncob-corked bottle to the eldest. Tenant Jones
filled his cup, and then sat staring at it, while Verner Hughes thrust
his pipe into the toe of the moccasin and filled it. Finally, he drank
about half of the clear wild-plum brandy.

"Gentlemen, I am baffled," he confessed. "We have three alternate
possibilities here, and we dare not disregard any of them. Either
this man who calls himself Altamont is truly He, or he is merely what
we are asked to believe, one of a community like ours, with more of
the old knowledge than we possess."

"You know my views," Verner Hughes said. "I cannot believe that He was
more than a man, as we are. A great, a good, a wise man, but a man and
mortal."

"Let's not go into that, now." The Reader emptied his cup and took the
bottle, filling it again. "You know my views, too. I hold that He is
no longer upon earth in the flesh, but lives in the spirit and is only
with us in the spirit. There are three possibilities, too, none of
which can be eliminated. But what was your third possibility, Tenant?"

"That they are creatures of the Enemy. Perhaps that one or the other
of them _is_ the Enemy."

Reader Rawson, lifting his cup to his lips, almost strangled. The
Hugheses, father and son, stared at Tenant Jones in horror.

"The Enemy--with such weapons and resources!" Murray Hughes gasped.
Then he emptied his cup and refilled it. "No! I can't believe that;
he'd have struck before this and wiped us all out!"

"Not necessarily, Murray," the Tenant replied. "Until he became
convinced that his agents, the Scowrers, could do nothing against us,
he would bide his time. He sits motionless, like a spider, at the
center of the web; he does little himself; his agents are numerous.
Or, perhaps, he wishes to recruit us into his hellish organization."

"It is a possibility," Reader Rawson admitted. "One which we can
neither accept nor reject safely. And we must learn the truth as soon
as possible. If this man is really He, we must not spurn Him on mere
suspicion. If he is a man, come to help us, we must accept his help;
if he is speaking the truth, the people who sent him could do wonders
for us, and the greatest wonder would be to make us, again, a part of
a civilized community. And if he is the Enemy--"

"If it is really He," Murray said, "I think we are on trial."

"What do you mean, son? Oh, I see. Of course, I don't believe he is,
but that's mere doubt, not negative certainty. But if I'm wrong, if
this man is truly He, we are being tested. He has come among us
incognito; if we are worthy of Him, we will penetrate His disguise."

"A very pretty problem, gentlemen," the Tenant said, smacking his lips
over his brandy. "For all that it may be a deadly serious one for us.
There is, of course, nothing that we can do tonight. But tomorrow, we
have promised to help our visitors, whoever they may be, in searching
for this crypt in the city. Murray, you were to be in charge of the
detail that was to accompany them. Carry on as arranged, and say
nothing of our suspicions, but advise your men to keep a sharp watch
on the strangers, that they may learn all they can from them.
Stamford, you and Verner and I will go along. We should, if we have
any wits at all, observe something."

       *       *       *       *       *

"Listen to this infernal thing!" Altamont raged. "'_Wielding a
gold-plated spade handled with oak from an original rafter of the
Congressional Library, at three-fifteen one afternoon last week--_'
One afternoon last week!" He cursed luridly. "Why couldn't that
blasted magazine say _what_ afternoon? I've gone over a lot of
twentieth century copies of that magazine; that expression was a
regular cliche with them."

Loudons looked over his shoulder at the photostated magazine page.

"Well, we know it was between June thirteen and nineteen, inclusive,"
he said. "And there's a picture of the university president, complete
with gold-plated spade, breaking ground. Call it Wednesday, the
sixteenth. Over there's the tip of the shadow of the old Cathedral of
Learning, about a hundred yards away. There are so many inexactitudes
that one'll probably cancel out another."

"That's so, and it's also pretty futile getting angry at somebody
who's been dead two hundred years, but why couldn't they say
Wednesday, or Monday, or Saturday, or whatever?" He checked back in
the astronomical handbook, and the photostated pages of the old
almanac, and looked over his calculations. "All right, here's the
angle of the shadow, and the compass-bearing. I had a look, yesterday,
when I was taking the local citizenry on that junket. The old baseball
diamond at Forbes Field is plainly visible, and I located the ruins of
the Cathedral of Learning from that. Here's the above-sea-level
altitude of the top of the tower. After you've landed us, go up to
this altitude--use the barometric altimeter, not the radar--and hold
position."

Loudons leaned forward from the desk to the contraption Altamont had
rigged in the nose of the helicopter--one of the telescope-sighted
hunting rifles clamped in a vise, with a compass and a spirit-level
under it.

"Rifle's pointing downward at the correct angle now?" he asked. "Good.
Then all I have to do is hold the helicopter steady, keep it at the
right altitude, level, and pointed in the right direction, and watch
through the sight while you move the flag around, and direct you by
radio. Why wasn't I born quintuplets?"

"Mr. Altamont! Dr. Loudons!" a voice outside the helicopter called.
"Are you ready for us, now?"

Altamont went to the open door and looked out. The old Toon Leader,
the Reader, Toon Sarge Hughes, his son, and four young men in
buckskins with slung rifles, were standing outside.

"I have decided," the Tenant said, "that Mr. Rawson and Sarge Hughes
and I would be of more help than an equal number of younger men. We
may not be as active, but we know the old ruins better, especially the
paths and hiding places of the Scowrers. These four young men you
probably met last evening; it will do no harm to introduce them again.
Birdy Edwards; Sholto Jiminez; Jefferson Burns; Murdo Olsen."

