



Proposition 9.

_That there are high Mountaines, deepe vallies, and spacious plains
  in the body of the Moone._


Though there are some who thinke Mountaines to bee a deformity in the
earth, as if they were either beate up by the flood, or else cast up
like so many heaps of rubbish left at the creation, yet if well
considered, they will be found as much to conduce to the beauty and
conveniency of the universe as any of the other parts. Nature (saith
_Pliny_[1]) purposely framed them for many excellent uses: partly to
tame the violence of greater Rivers, to strengthen certaine joynts
within the veines and bowels of the earth, to breake the force of the
Seas inundation, and for the safety of the earths inhabitants, whether
beasts or men. That they make much for the protection of beasts the
Psalmist[2] testifies, _The highest hils are a refuge for the wilde
Goats, and the rockes for Conies_. The Kingly Prophet had learned the
safety of these by his owne experience, when he also was faine to make a
mountaine his refuge from the fury of his Master _Saul_, who persecuted
him in the wildernesse.

  [Sidenote 1: _Nat. hist. l. 36. c. 1._]

  [Sidenote 2: Psal. 104. v. 18.]

True indeed, such places as these keepe their neighbours poore, as
beeing most barren, but yet they preserve them safe, as being most
strong, witnesse our unconquered _Wales_ and _Scotland_, whose greatest
protection hath beene the naturall strength of their Countrey, so
fortified with Mountaines, that these have alwaies been unto them sure
retraites from the violence and oppression of others, wherefore a good
Authour doth rightly call them natures bulwarkes cast up at God
Almighties owne charges, the scornes and curbs of victorious armies,
which made the Barbarians in _Curtius_ so confident of their owne
safety, when they were once retired to an inaccessible mountaine, that
when _Alexanders_ Legate had brought them to a parley and perswading
them to yeeld, told them of his masters victories, what Seas and
Wildernesses hee had passed, they replyed that all that might be, but
could _Alexander_ fly too? Over the Seas he might have ships, and over
the land horses, but hee must have wings before he could get up thither.
Such safety did those barbarous nations conceive in the mountaines
whereunto they were retyred, certainely then such usefull parts were not
the effect of mans sinne, or produced by the Worlds curse the flood, but
rather at the first created by the goodnesse and providence of the
Almighty.

So that if I intend to prove that the Moone is such a habitable world as
this is, 'tis requisite that I shew it to have the same conveniences of
habitation as this hath, and here if some Rabbi or Chymicke were to
handle the point they would first prove it out of Scripture, from that
place in _Moses_ his blessing,[1] where hee speakes of the ancient
mountaines and lasting hils, _Deut._ #Hareray kedem ugva'ot olam#
for having immediately before mentioned those blessings which should
happen unto _Ioseph_ by the influence of the Moone, he does presently
exegetically iterate them in blessing him with the chiefe things of
the ancient Mountaines and lasting hils; you may also see the same
expression used in _Iacobs_ blessing of _Ioseph_.[2]

  [Sidenote 1: Deut. 33. 15]

  [Sidenote 2: Gen. 49. 26]

But however we may deale _pro_ or _con_ in Philosophy, yet we must not
jest with divine truths, or bring Scripture to patronize any fancy of
our owne, though, perhaps, it be truth. For the better proofe of this
proposition, I might here cite the testimony of _Diodorus_, who thought
the Moone to bee full of rugged places, _vel ut terrestribus tumulis
superciliosam_, but he erred much in some circumstances of this opinion,
especially where he saies, there is an Iland amongst the _Hyperboreans_,
wherein those hils may to the eye bee plainely discovered, and for this
reason. [1]*_Caelius_ calls him a fabulous Writer, but you may see more
expresse authority for the proofe of this in the opinions of
_Anaxagoras_ and _Democritus_,[2] who held that this Planet was full of
champion grounds, mountains and vallies, and this seemed likewise
probable unto _Augustinus Nifus_, whose words are these:

  _Forsitan non est remotum dicere, lunae partes esse diversas, veluti
  sunt partes terrae, quarum aliae sunt vallosae, aliae montosae, ex quarum
  differentia effici potest facies illa lunae; nec est rationi dissonum,
  nam luna est corpus imperfecte Sphaericum, cum sit corpus ab ultimo
  coelo elongatum, ut supra dixit Aristoteles._

  "Perhaps, it would not be amisse to say that the parts of the Moone
  were divers, as the parts of this earth, whereof some are vallies,
  and some mountaines, from the difference of which, some spots in the
  Moone may proceed, nor is this against reason, for that Planet cannot
  be perfectly sphericall, since 'tis so remote a body from the first
  orbe, as _Aristotle_ had said before."

You may see this truth assented unto by _Blancanus_ the Jesuit,[3] and
by him confirmed with with divers reasons. _Keplar_ hath observed in the
Moones eclipses,[4] that the division of her enlightened part from the
shaded, was made by a crooked unequall line, of which there cannot be
any probable cause conceived, unlesse it did arise from the ruggednesse
of that planet, for it cannot at all be produc'd from the shade of any
mountains here upon earth, because these would be so lessned before they
could reach so high in a conicall shadow, that they would not be at all
sensible unto us (as might easily be demonstrated) nor can it be
conceived what reason of this difference there should be in the Sunne.
Wherefore there being no other body that hath any thing to doe in
eclipses, we must necessarily conclude, that it is caused by a variety
of parts in the Moone it selfe, and what can there be but its
gibbosities? Now if you should aske a reason why there should be such a
similitude of these in that Planet, the same _Keplar_ shall jest you out
an answere, for supposing (saith he) those inhabitants are bigger than
any of us in the same proportion, as their daies are longer than ours,
viz. by fifteen times it may bee for want of stones to erect such vast
houses as were requisite for their bodies, they are faine to digge great
and round hollowes in the earth, where they may both procure water for
their thirst, and turning about with the shade, may avoid those great
heats which otherwise they would be lyable unto; or if you will give
_Caesar la Galla_ leave to guesse in the same manner, he would rather
think that those thirsty nations cast up so many and so great heaps of
earth in digging of their wine cellars, but this onely by the way.

  [Sidenote 1*: _Lect. aut l. 1. c. 15._
  _Plut. de plac. l. 2. c. 25._]

  [Sidenote 2: _De coelo. l. 2. p. 49._]

  [Sidenote 3: _De Mundi fab. pars 3ª. c. 4._]

  [Sidenote 4: _Astron. Opt. c. 6. num 9._]

I shall next produce the eye-witnesse of _Galilaeus_,[1] on which I most
of all depend for the proofe of this Proposition, when he beheld the new
Moone through his perspective, it appeared to him under a rugged and
spotted figure, seeming to have the darker and enlightned parts divided
by a tortuous line, having some parcels of light at a good distance from
the other, and this difference is so remarkable, that you may easily
perceive it through one of those ordinary perspectives, which are
commonly sold amongst us, but for your better apprehending of what I
deliver, I will set downe the Figure as I find it in _Galilaeus_:

  [Sidenote 1: _Nuncius Sydereus._]

  [Illustration: Crescent Moon]

Suppose ABCD to represent the appearance of the Moones body being in a
sextile, you may see some brighter parts separated at a pretty distance
from the other, which can bee nothing else but a reflexion of the
Sunne-beames upon some parts that are higher then the rest, and those
obscure gibbosities which stand out towards the enlightened parts must
bee such hollow and deepe places whereto the rayes cannot reach, but
when the Moone is got further off from the Sunne, and come to that
fulnesse, as this line BD doth represent her under, then doe these parts
also receive an equall light, excepting onely that difference which doth
appeare betwixt their sea and land. And if you do consider how any
rugged body would appeare, being enlightned, you would easily conceive
that it must necessarily seeme under some such gibbous unequall forme,
as the Moone is here represented. Now for the infallibility of these
appearances, I shall referre the reader to that which hath beene said in
the 6th Proposition.

But _Caesar la Galla_ affirmes, that all these appearances may consist
with a plaine superficies, if wee suppose the parts of the body to be
some of them, _Diaphanous_, and some opacous; and if you object that the
light which is conveyed to any diaphanous part in a plaine superficies
must be by a continued line, whereas here there appeare many brighter
parts among the obscure at some distance from the rest. To this he
answers, it may arise from some secret conveyances and channels within
her body, that doe consist of a more diaphanous matter which being
covered over with an opacious superficies, the light passing through
them may breake out a great way off, whereas the other parts betwixt may
still remaine darke. Just as the River _Arethusa_ in _Sicile_ which
runnes under ground for a great way, and afterwards breakes out againe.
But because this is one of the chiefest fancies whereby hee thinkes hee
hath fully answered the arguments of this opinion, I will therefore set
downe his answere in his owne words, lest the Reader might suspect more
in them then I have expressed.[1]

  _Non est impossibile coecos ductus diaphani & perspicui corporis,
  sed opaca superficie protendi, usque in diaphanam aliquam ex profundo
  in superficiem, emergentem partem, per quos ductus lumen longo
  postmodum interstitio erumpat, &c._

But I reply, if the superficies betwixt these two enlightened parts
remaine darke because of its opacity, then would it alwaies be darke,
and the Sunne could not make it partake of light more then it could of
perspicuity: But this contradicts all experience as you may see in
_Galilaeus_, who affirmes that when the Sunne comes nearer to his
opposition, then that which is betwixt them, both is enlightned as well
as either. Nay this opposes his owne eye-witnesse, for he confesses
himselfe that he saw this by the glasse. He had said before that he came
to see those strange sights discovered by _Galilaeus_ his glasse with an
intent of contradiction, and you may reade that confirmed in the
weakenesse of this answere, which rather bewrayes an obstinate then a
perswaded will, for otherwise sure hee would never have undertooke to
have destroyed such certaine proofes with so groundlesse a fancy.

  [Sidenote 1: _Cap. 11._]

But it may bee objected, that 'tis almost impossible, and altogether
unlikely that in the Moone thete should be any mountaines so high as
those observations make them, for doe but suppose according to the
common principles, that the Moones diameter unto the Earths is very
neere to the proportion of 2. to 7, suppose withall that the Earths
diameter containes about 7000 Italian miles, and the Moones 2000 (as is
commonly granted) now _Galiaeus_ hath observed that some parts have been
enlightened when they were the twentieth part of the diameter distant
from the common terme of illumination, so that hence it must necessarily
follow that there may bee some Mountaines in the Moone so high, that
they are able to cast a shadow a 100 miles off. An opinion that sounds
like a prodigie or a fiction; wherefore 'tis likely that either those
appearances are caused by somewhat else besides mountaines, or else
those are fallible observations, from whence may follow such improbable
inconceiveable consequences.

But to this I answere:

1. You must consider the height of the Mountaines is but very little, if
you compare them to the length of their shadowes. Sr. _Walter
Rawleigh_[1] observes that the Mount _Athos_ now called _Lacas_ casts
its shadow 300 furlongs, which is above 37 miles, and yet that Mount is
none of the highest, nay _Solinus_[2] (whom I should rather believe in
this kinde) affirmes that this Mountaine gives his shadow quite over the
Sea, from _Macedon_ to the Ile of _Lemnos_ which is 700 furlongs or 84
miles, and yet according to the common reckoning it doth scarce reach 4
miles upwards, in its perpendicular height.

  [Sidenote 1: _Hist. l. 1. c. 7. Sec. 11._]

  [Sidenote 2: _Poly. histor. c. 21._]

2. I affirme that there are very high Mountaines in the Moone. _Keplar_
and _Galilaeus_ thinke that they are higher than any which are upon our
earth. But I am not of their opinion in this, because I suppose they goe
upon a false ground whilst they conceive that the highest mountaine upon
the earth is not above a mile perpendicular.

Whereas 'tis the common opinion and found true enough by observation,
that _Olympus_, _Atlas_, _Taurus_ and _Enius_, with many others are much
above this height. _Tenariffa_ in the Canary Ilands is proved by
computation to bee above 8 miles perpendicular, and about this height is
the mount _Perjacaca_ in _America_. Sr. _Walter Rawleigh_ seemes to
thinke, that the highest of these is neere 30 miles upright: nay
_Aristotle_[1] speaking of _Caucasus_ in _Asia_, affirmes it to bee
visible for 560 miles, as some interpreters finde by computation, from
which it will follow, that it was 78 miles perpendicularly high, as you
may see confirmed by _Jacobus Mazonius_,[2] and out of him in
_Blancanus_ the Jesuite.[3] But this deviates from the truth more in
excesse then the other doth in defect. However though these in the moone
are not so high as some amongst us, yet certaine it is they are of a
great height, and some of them at the least foure miles perpendicular.
This I shall prove from the observation of _Galilaeus_, whose glasse can
shew this truth to the senses, a proofe beyond exception and certaine
that man must needs be of a most timerous faith who dares not believe
his owne eye.

  [Sidenote 1: _Meteor. l. 1. c. 11._]

  [Sidenote 2: _Comparatio Arist. cum Platone, Sect. 3. c. 5._]

  [Sidenote 3: _Exposi. in loc. Math. Artis. loc. 148._]

By that perspective you may plainely discerne some enlightned parts
(which are the mountaines) to be distant from the other about the
twentieth part of the diameter. From whence it will follow, that those
mountaines must necessarily be at the least foure Italian miles in
height.

  [Illustration]

For let BDEF be the body of the moone, ABC will be a ray or beame of the
Sunne, which enlightens a mountaine at A and _B_ is the point of
contingency, the distance betwixt A and B must bee supposed to be the
twentieth part of the diameter which is an 100 miles, for so far are
some enlightened parts severed from the common terme of illumination.
Now the aggregate of the quadrate from A _B_ a hundred, and _B_ _G_ a
1000 will bee 1010000, unto which the quadrate arising from A G must be
equall according to the 47th proposition in the first booke of elements.
Therefore the whole line _A_ _G_ is somewhat more than 104, and the
distance betwixt H A must be above 4 miles, which was the thing to be
proved.

But it may be againe objected, if there be such rugged parts, and so
high mountaines, why then cannot wee discerne them at this distance, why
doth the moone appeare unto us so exactly round, and not rather as a
wheele with teeth?

I answere, by reason of too great a distance, for if the whole body
appeare to our eye so little, then those parts which beare so small a
proportion to the whole will not at all be sensible.

But it may be replied, if there were any such remarkeable hils, why does
not the limbe of the moone appeare like a wheele with teeth to those who
looke upon it through the great perspective on whose witnesse you so
much depend? or what reason is there that she appeares as exactly round
through it as shee doth to the bare eye? certainely then either there is
no such thing as you imagine, or else the glasse failes much in this
discovery.

To this I shall answere out of _Galilaeus_.

1. You must know that there is not meerely one ranke of mountaines about
the edge of the moone, but divers orders, one mountaine behind another,
and so there is somewhat to hinder those void spaces which otherwise,
perhaps, might appeare.

Now where there be many hils, the ground seemes even to a man that can
see the tops of all. Thus when the sea rages, and many vast waves are
lifted up, yet all may appeare plaine enough to one that stands at the
shore. So where there are so many hils, the inequality will be lesse
remarkable, if it be discerned at a distance.

2. Though there be mountains in that part which appeares unto us, to be
the limbe of the Moone, as well as in any other place, yet the bright
vapours hide their appearance: for there is an orbe of thicke vaporous
aire that doth immediatly compasse the body of the Moone, which though
it have not so great opacity, as to terminate the sight, yet being once
enlightened by the Sunne, it doth represent the body of the Moone under
a greater forme, and hinders our sight from a distinct view of her true
circumference. But of this in the next Chapter.

I have now sufficiently proved, that there are hills in the Moone, and
hence it may seeme likely that there is also a world, for since
providence hath some speciall end in all its workes, certainly then
these mountaines were not produced in vaine, and what more probable
meaning can wee conceive there should be, than to make that place
convenient for habitation.




Proposition 10.

_That there is an Atmo-sphaera, or an orbe of grosse vaporous aire,
  immediately encompassing the body of the Moone._


As that part of our aire which is neerest to the earth, is of a thicker
substance than the other, by reason tis alwaies mixed with some vapours,
which are continually exhaled into it. So is it equally requisite, that
if there be a world in the Moone, that the aire about that should be
alike qualified with ours. Now, that there is such an orbe of grosse
aire, was first of all (for ought I can reade) observed by _Meslin_,
afterwards assented unto by _Keplar_ and _Galilaeus_,[1] and since by
_Baptistae Cisatus_, _Sheiner_ with others, all of them confirming it by
the same arguments which I shall onely cite, and then leave this
Proposition.

  [Sidenote 1: _Vide_ Euseb. Nierem. _de Nat. Hist. l. 2. c. 11._]

1. 'Tis observed, that so much of the Moone as is enlightened, is
alwaies part of a bigger circle then that which is darker. Their
frequent experience hath proved this, and an easie observation may
quickely confirme it. But now this cannot proceede from any other cause
so probable, as from this orbe of aire, especially when we consider how
that planet shining with a borrowed light, doth not send forth any such
rayes as may make her appearance bigger then her body.

2. 'Tis observed in the Solary eclipses, that there is a great
trepidation about the body of the Moone, from which we may likewise
argue an Atmo-sphaera, since we cannot well conceive what so probable a
cause there should be of such an appearance as this,

  _Quod radii Solares a vaporibus Lunam ambientibus fuerint
  intercisi_,[1]

that the Sun beames were broken and refracted by the vapours that
encompassed the Moone.

  [Sidenote 1: _Scheiner. Ros. Vrs. l. 4. pars 2. c. 27._]

3. I may adde the like argument taken from another observation which
will be easily tried and granted. When the Sunne is eclipsed, wee
discerne the Moone as shee is in her owne naturall bignesse, but then
she appeares somewhat lesse then when shee is in the full, though she be
in the same place of her supposed excentrick and epicycle, and therefore
_Tycho_ hath calculated a Table for the Diameter of the divers new
Moones. But now there is no reason so probable to salve this appearance,
as to place an orbe of thicker aire, neere the body of that Planet,
which may be enlightened by the reflected beames, and through which the
direct raies may easily penetrate.

But some may object that this will not consist with that which was
before delivered, where I said, that the thinnest parts had least light.

If this were true, how comes it to passe then, that this aire should be
as bright as any of the other parts, when as tis the thinnest of all?

I answer, if the light be received by reflection, then the thickest body
hath most because it is best able to beare backe the raies, but if the
light be received by illumination[1] (especially if there be an opacous
body behinde, which may double the beames by reflexion) as it is here,
then I deny not but a thinne body may retaine much light, and perhaps,
some of those appearances which wee take for fiery comets, are nothing
else but a bright cloud enlightened, so that probable it is, there may
be such aire without the Moone, and hence it comes to passe, that the
greater spots are onely visible towards her middle parts, and none neere
the circumference, not but that there are some as well in those parts as
else where, but they are not there perceiveable, by reason of those
brighter vapours which hide them.

  [Sidenote 1: _Hist. l. 1. c. 7. Sec. 11._]




Proposition 11.

_That as their world is our Moone, so our world is their Moone._


I have already handled the first thing that I promised according to the
Method which _Aristotle_ uses in his Booke _de Mundo_, and shew'd you
the necessary parts that belong to this world in the Moone. In the next
place 'tis requisite that I proceed to those things which are
extrinsecall unto it, as the Seasons, the Meteors, and the Inhabitants.

  1. Of the Seasons;

And if there be such a world in the Moone, 'tis requisite then that
their seasons should be some way correspondent unto ours, that they
should have Winter and Summer, night and day, as wee have.

Now that in this Planet there is some similitude of Winter and Summer is
affirmed by _Aristotle_ [1] himselfe, since there is one hemispheare
that hath alwaies heate and light, and the other that hath darknesse and
cold. True indeed, their daies and yeeres are alwaies of one and the
same length, but tis so with us also under the Poles, and therefore that
great difference is not sufficient to make it altogether unlike ours,
nor can we expect that every thing there should be in the same manner as
it is here below, as if nature had no way but one to bring about her
purposes. Wee may easily see what great differences there are amongst
us, betwixt things of the same kinde. Some men (say they) [2] there are,
who can live onely upon smells, without eating any thing, and the same
Plant, saith _Besoldus_, hath sometimes contrary effects. _Mandragora_
which growes in _Syria_ inflames the lust, wheras _Mandragora_ which
grows in other places doth coole the blood & quench lust.

  [Sidenote 1: _De gen. animal. l. 4. 12._]

  [Sidenote 2: _Plat. de fac._
  _De natura populorum. c. 3._]

Now if with us there be such great difference betwixt things of the same
