extended investigation, I fancy he would have agreed with me as to the
cause. I found hundreds of diversified specimens. I am not aware that
it was after a rain, but I took up a number of the plants, and always
found a vigorous scaly root bud, undergoing development at this early
season under ground, to produce a new stem the following spring. I
came to the conclusion that, as the temperature was below freezing and
snow was on the ground, the expanding bud, in close proximity to the
surface, gave out sufficient caloric or warmth to generate vapor from
the moist soil. This vapor rising around the stem of the plant, and
attracted by it, becomes congealed into what we term hoar-frost, in
numerous forms; some like shellwork, others like tulips, with radiated
petals, variously contorted, and often as symmetrical as snowflake
crystals.

[Illustration: Root-bud and frost-flower of the Cunila Mariana
(Maryland Dittany). A, the developing or budding root. B, the old stem
of the previous year. C, the congealed vapor or hoarfrost, forming the
first flower of various shapes.]

That plants in germinating have the power of generating heat was
proved by Mr. Hunter and by Lamarck. Experiments of Hales and Du Hamel
show that vegetation is not wholly suspended, however cold it may be;
and that there is a regular and gradual progress till the returning
warmth of spring gives a greater degree of velocity to the juices,
rendering their development more vigorous and apparent. If the
crystallization takes place when the air is calm, the crystals will be
regularly formed; otherwise, when windy, I have seen them like a shell
within a shell, very thin, of a pearly whiteness. Professor Tyndall
has shown in a very beautiful manner that ice is but an agglomeration
of snow crystals: the transparency of the former being due to the
expulsion of the air, entrapped in and causing the whiteness and
opacity of the latter. There is a formation called the snow plant of
California, which arises to some height, and has been compared to
various things, a fountain convoluted and enlarged above, a
crystallized small bushy shrub, etc.; but on closer inquiry, I have
failed as yet to get any definite ideas to its true character. Some
bulbs in the soil might cause such formations by the congelation of
vapor deposited successively upon itself, or the stems of the previous
year's growth yet remaining, and thus give them a sheathing of
frosting.

The shape of a star is common in snow crystals, which we all know
assume the most beautiful forms, and which are illustrated in various
publications. The eminent botanist Count Swinoskoff should give us
some clue as to the genus or character of the plant, the flower of
which, we are told, melted away on being touched, and as to the
stamens, the diamond seeds like a pin's head, etc. The whole needs
further explanation.

I trust those Bostonians who are in such hope will edify the public as
to the final result of their experiment. What has that veteran in
botany, Dr. Asa Gray, to say about it? Let some one well qualified
tell us more about this frost flower of Russia.

                                     J. Stauffer.
Lancaster, Pa.

       *       *       *       *       *


PATENT MATTERS IN WASHINGTON, D.C.

_To the Editor of the Scientific American:_

From the report of the Commissioner of Patents, just issued, it
appears that its surplus revenue for the past year amounts to over one
hundred and five thousand dollars, and that there is nearly a million
dollars in the United States Treasury to the credit of the Patent
Office; and yet, notwithstanding that this enormous amount is lying
idle, our pseudo-economists at the Capitol refuse to grant the Office
sufficient of its own funds to carry on its business promptly. So much
is the work behindhand in some of the departments that, as the
Commissioner states in his report, some of the attorneys who require
certified copies of papers have been obliged to employ their own
clerks to do office copying, and then had to pay the full legal rate
of ten cents per hundred words, the same as though the Office had done
the work. This style of _economizing_, by making inventors pay two
prices for their work, may be "reform" in the eyes of the average
Democratic Congressman; but speaking for myself, as one of those who
have had to pay twice, I would prefer to dispense with this style of
"retrenchment and reform," and therefore ask you, Messrs. Editors, in
behalf of the inventors of the United States, to so stir up our
legislators that they will allow the Office sufficient of its own
funds to do its work properly, and not delay the work of the
inventor--work that he has to pay for in advance--and so prevent the
discouragement and trouble which these delays always cause.

As the Patent Office has been doing a good business lately, there
appears to be some attempt at rivalry at the Capitol, as the following
list of applications for extension will show:

LIST OF APPLICANTS FOR EXTENSIONS OF PATENTS NOW BEFORE CONGRESS.

  ---- Reynolds, power loom brake.
  Strong & Ross, scales.
  Wm. & W.H. Lewis, photographic plates.
  T.A. Weston, differential pulley.
  S.S. Hartshorn, buckles.
  H.A. Stone, making cheese.
  N. Whitehall, cultivator.
  J.R. Harrington, carpet lining.
  H.L. Emery, cotton gins.
  J. Stainthorp, moulding candles.
  Walter Hunt's heirs, paper collars.
  A.B. Wilson, sewing machines.
  S.A. Knox, plows.
  Rollin White, firearms.
  Aikin A. Felthousen, sewing machines.
  H. Woodman, stripping cotton cards.
  L. Hall, heel trimmer.
  J.A. Conover, wood splitter.
  J. Dyson, carding engine.
  G. Wellmann, card strippers.
  E. Brady, safety valves.
  Jearum Atkins, harvester rakes.
  John Thomas, re-rolling railroad rails.
  Thomas Mitchell, hair brushes.
  Stephen Hull, harvesters.
  T.R. Crosby, wiring blind slats.
  G.W. Laban, mitre cutting machine.
  T.A. Whitenack, harvesters.
  J.J. Vinton, furnaces.
  A. Fuller, faucets.
  D. Baker, pitcher spouts and lids.
  G.F. Chandler, refining sugar.
  G.H. Nott, boiler furnace.
  William Hall, lightning rods.
  B.F. Rice, paper bag machines.
  S.D. Nelson, shovels.
  E.T. Russell, car springs.
  Hubbell & Conant, steam pumps.
  C.A. Chamberlain, shovels.
  C.A. Adams, locks.
  E.A. Leland, paint can.

In addition to the above, I find the following names as applicants for
extensions, but the inventions covered by the patents sought to be
extended is not mentioned: S.S. Turner, Arculous Wyckoff, De Witt C.
Cummings, Moses Marshall, J.W. Fowler, and Holloway & Graham. Many of
the applicants have apparently given up their cases for this session,
but they may be only lying back to its close in hopes that in the
final rush their "little bills" may slip through easily.

Several bills tinkering at the patent laws are before Congress, and
one of these (House Bill, No. 3,370) passed the House on the 30th ult.
It has one section that may be made to work great harm to inventors,
as it prevents infringers being sued for more than one year's damages
previous to notice of infringement being given. By this bill, if it is
allowed to become a law, a person will be able to build and use
patented machines or processes for years in some out of the way place
where the inventor cannot easily find him; and should he be
discovered, he can only be sued for one year's damages. There are
other sections in this bill which will bear ventilating.

Another bill, introduced into the Senate by Mr. Paddock, provides that
all appeals from the Board of Appeals shall be direct to the Supreme
Court of the District of Columbia, instead of to the Commissioner as
heretofore; and that the fees shall be the same as now paid to the
latter official.

Mr. Sampson has introduced into the House a bill changing section 4886
so that it shall read as follows: "SEC. 4886. Any person who has
discovered any new or useful art, machine, manufacture or composition
of matter, or any new or useful improvement thereof, not known or used
by others in this country, and not patented or described in any
printed publication in this or any foreign country, before his
invention or discovery thereof, and not in public use or on sale for
more than two years prior to his application, unless the same is
proved to have been abandoned, may, upon payment of the fees required
by law, and other due proceedings had, obtain a patent therefor:
_Provided, That the manufacture or composition of drugs as a medicine
shall not be patentable_." The change is the addition of the words in
italics.

The Smithsonian Institute has sent to Congress a memorial setting
forth that the present Institute building is already too small for the
vast amount of articles already placed there on exhibition; that at
the late Centennial Exposition the Commissioners of various countries
presented their entire collection of exhibits to the United States,
which had delegated their care to the Smithsonian Institute, and they
had no place for them; that the armory building was being fitted up
for the reception of the United States Centennial collection, and they
therefore asked that a building be erected for the foreign collection,
which could be used as a national museum, or otherwise we should have
to offend the donors by keeping their valuable gifts stowed away in
cellars and other rubbish receptacles.

Mr. Eads, who is now here on the lookout for his pay for his work on
the South Pass of the Mississippi's mouth, has received intelligence
from the resident engineer at the jetties that the channel through the
shoal at the head of the South Pass is now twenty-two feet deep, and
that the least width at which twenty feet depth is found is one
hundred and ten feet. The principal works to improve this shoal were
constructed during the last six months. The low stage and feeble
current of the river has delayed their effect until the recent flood
from the Ohio reached them, and the problem of deepening the shoal has
been fully solved by the rapid scouring away of the obstruction. It is
stated that the channel is quite straight and is deepening rapidly.
The channel through the jetties at the mouth of the Pass is twenty-one
feet deep. The entrance from the sea through the jetties is one
thousand feet wide, and through the works at the head of the Pass
eight hundred feet.

A recent telegram from Nevada states that the Sutro Tunnel (of which I
gave you some particulars in one of my letters) has now progressed a
total distance of 15,565 feet and has fairly entered the mineral belt,
and will soon help to increase the already vast products of the
Comstock lode.

While on the subject of mining, I will state that the amount of
quicksilver produced in California has increased so immensely during
the last two years that it has attracted the attention of all
interested in the article throughout the world. The receipts for the
year have been 63,928 and the exports 48,010 flasks. In addition to
the receipts there, probably about six thousand flasks were shipped
direct from the mines to Nevada, thus bringing up the total production
to over 70,000 flasks, a gain in round numbers of from twelve thousand
to fifteen thousand flasks over 1875. The exports in that year were
34,844 flasks, or 13,666 less than in 1876.

                                       Occasional.

       *       *       *       *       *


TYRIAN PURPLE INK FOR MARKING LINEN.--Von Bele gives the following
method for preparing an ink for marking linen and cotton: Neutralize
75 grains of carbonate of ammonia with pure nitric acid, and triturate
45 to 60 grains of carmine with the solution. Mordant the fabric with
a mixed solution of acetate of alumina and tin salt, and write upon
it, when it is perfectly dry, with the ink.

       *       *       *       *       *




NEW YORK ACADEMY OF SCIENCES.


On Monday evening, January 29, 1877, a meeting of this Academy was
held at the School of Mines, Columbia College, Dr. J.S. Newberry,
President, in the chair. Mr. A.A. Julian, A.M., read a paper on the


PREPARATION OF ROCK AND MINERAL SECTIONS FOR MICROSCOPIC STUDY.

The speaker described in detail the various operations, exhibited the
different kinds of apparatus employed, showed the operations, and
exhibited the finished sections. In some rocks a thin chip can be
broken off, others require to be sawn, and for the latter purpose the
diamond saw is best. Having obtained the chip, it is first polished on
one side, then cemented to a little square of glass, and the other
side polished in the same way. The sections must not be too thick, nor
too thin; they are usually made from a hundredth to a thousandth of an
inch thick. Lathes employed in polishing minerals require to be
provided with conical spindles, so that the wear, due to grit and
emery dust getting on them, may be readily taken up. The grinding
wheel may be either horizontal or vertical; the former has the
advantage that the mineral can be held in either hand; with the latter
only the right hand can be employed, and that in an awkward and
tiresome position. Mr. Julian then referred briefly to the kinds of
emery, its preparation by elutriation, etc., and cautioned operators
against using rouge or tin putty powder in polishing rock sections,
although they may be employed in polishing certain minerals and gems.
The object of making the rock sections being to study their
constituents and determine what minerals enter into their composition,
it is important that no foreign substance, liable to adhere to the
specimen and to be mistaken for one of its ingredients, be placed on
the section while grinding. Lastly, the minerals are mounted on glass,
with or without covers, by means of Canada balsam. Square glasses are
to be preferred to the long and narrow strips, usually employed, as
less liable to break in the center, and more easily revolved on the
stage of a microscope.

Mr. L.H. Landy then exhibited, by means of the gas microscope, several
beautiful rock sections, both American and German. The same gentleman
also showed the effect of passing polarized light through certain
crystal sections, the black cross and rainbow-hued rings revolving
like so many wheels as the polarizer was turned.

At the conclusion of this brilliant exhibition, Dr. P.T. Austen made
some remarks on


LABORATORY MANIPULATIONS.

The points referred to were the apparently unimportant details which
often contribute so much to the ease and pleasure of working. First,
the use of square pieces of felt, such as are used under beer glasses
in saloons, for setting hot beakers and flasks on to prevent chilling
and consequent cracking. Second, in crystallizing substances for
examination under the microscope; one watch glass is placed upon
another with the substance between them, and the upper glass filled
with ether, the cold produced by its evaporation hastening the
crystallization. Third, removing precipitates and solid matter from
flasks, by heating to boiling, and inverting in a vessel of water.
Fourth, crystallization by gradual dilution. Fifth, filter paper
without ash. In German laboratories it is customary to dissolve out
the mineral matter from white filtering paper by washing in dilute
