applause was in order. A few of his zombies clapped their hands;
everybody else was quiet. Belsher held up a hand.

"Please don't applaud," he begged. "What I have to tell you isn't
anything to applaud about."

"You're tootin' well right it isn't!" somebody directly in front of me
said, very distinctly.

"I'm very sorry to have to bring this news to you, but the fact is
that Kapstaad Chemical Products, Ltd., is no longer able to pay
forty-five centisols a pound. This price is being scaled down to
thirty-five centisols. I want you to understand that Kapstaad Chemical
wants to give you every cent they can, but business conditions no
longer permit them to pay the old price. Thirty-five is the absolute
maximum they can pay and still meet competition--"

"Aaah, knock it off, Belsher!" somebody shouted. "We heard all that
rot on the screen."

"How about our contract?" somebody else asked. "We do have a contract
with Kapstaad, don't we?"

"Well, the contract will have to be re-negotiated. They'll pay
thirty-five centisols or they'll pay nothing."

"They can try getting along without wax. Or try buying it somewhere
else!"

"Yes; those wonderful synthetic substitutes!"

"Mr. Chairman," Oscar Fujisawa called out. "I move that this
organization reject the price of thirty-five centisols a pound for
tallow-wax, as offered by, or through, Leo Belsher at this meeting."

Ravick began clamoring that Oscar was out of order, that Leo Belsher
had the floor.

"I second Captain Fujisawa's motion," Mohandas Feinberg said.

"And Leo Belsher doesn't have the floor; he's not a member of the
Co-operative," Tom Kivelson declared. "He's our hired employee, and as
soon as this present motion is dealt with, I intend moving that we
fire him and hire somebody else."

"I move to amend Captain Fujisawa's motion," Joe Kivelson said. "I
move that the motion, as amended, read, '--and stipulate a price of
seventy-five centisols a pound.'"

"You're crazy!" Belsher almost screamed.

Seventy-five was the old price, from which he and Ravick had been
reducing until they'd gotten down to forty-five.

Just at that moment, my radio began making a small fuss. I unhooked
the handphone and brought it to my face.

"Yeah?"

It was Bish Ware's voice: "Walt, get hold of the Kivelsons and get
them out of Hunters' Hall as fast as you can," he said. "I just got a
tip from one of my ... my parishioners. Ravick's going to stage a riot
to give Hallstock's cops an excuse to raid the meeting. They want the
Kivelsons."

"Roger." I hung up, and as I did I could hear Joe Kivelson shouting:

"You think we don't get any news on this planet? Tallow-wax has been
selling for the same price on Terra that it did eight years ago, when
you two crooks started cutting the price. Why, the very ship Belsher
came here on brought the quotations on the commodity market--"

I edged through the crowd till I was beside Oscar Fujisawa. I decided
the truth would need a little editing; I didn't want to use Bish Ware
as my source.

"Oscar, Dad just called me," I told him. "A tip came in to the Times
that Ravick's boys are going to fake a riot and Hallstock's cops are
going to raid the meeting. They want Joe and Tom. You know what
they'll do if they get hold of them."

"Shot while resisting arrest. You sure this is a good tip, though?"

Across the room, somebody jumped to his feet, kicking over a chair.

"That's a double two-em-dashed lie, you etaoin shrdlu so-and-so!"
somebody yelled.

"Who are you calling a so-and-so, you thus-and-so-ing such-and-such?"
somebody else yelled back, and a couple more chairs got smashed and a
swirl of fighting started.

"Yes, it is," Oscar decided. "Let's go."

We started plowing through the crowd toward where the Kivelsons and a
couple more of the _Javelin_ crew were clumped. I got one of the rolls
of quarter sols into my right fist and let Oscar go ahead. He has more
mass than I have.

It was a good thing I did, because before we had gone ten feet, some
character got between us, dragged a two-foot length of inch-and-a-half
high-pressure hose out of his pant leg, and started to swing at the
back of Oscar's head. I promptly clipped him behind the ear with a
fist full of money, and down he went. Oscar, who must have eyes in
the back of his head, turned and grabbed the hose out of his hand
before he dropped it, using it to clout somebody in front of him.
Somebody else came pushing toward us, and I was about to clip him,
too, when he yelled, "Watch it, Walt; I'm with it!" It was Cesario
Vieira, another _Javelin_ man; he's engaged to Linda Kivelson, Joe's
daughter and Tom's sister, the one going to school on Terra.

Then we had reached Tom and Joe Kivelson. Oscar grabbed Joe by the
arm.

"Come on, Joe; let's get moving," he said. "Hallstock's Gestapo are on
the way. They have orders to get you dead or alive."

"Like blazes!" Joe told him. "I never chickened out on a fight yet,
and--"

That's what I'd been afraid of. Joe is like a Zarathustra veldtbeest;
the only tactics he knows is a headlong attack.

"You want to get your crew and your son killed, and yourself along
with them?" Oscar asked him. "That's what'll happen if the cops catch
you. Now are you coming, or will I have to knock you senseless and
drag you out?"

Fortunately, at that moment somebody took a swing at Joe and grazed
his cheek. It was a good thing that was all he did; he was wearing
brass knuckles. Joe went down a couple of feet, bending at the knees,
and caught this fellow around the hips with both hands, straightening
and lifting him over his head. Then he threw him over the heads of the
people in front of him. There were yells where the human missile
landed.

"That's the stuff, Joe!" Oscar shouted. "Come on, we got them on the
run!"

That, of course, converted a strategic retreat into an attack. We got
Joe aimed toward the doors and before he knew it, we were out in the
hall by the elevators. There were a couple of Ravick's men, with
sergeant-at-arms arm bands, and two city cops. One of the latter got
in Joe's way. Joe punched him in the face and knocked him back about
ten feet in a sliding stagger before he dropped. The other cop grabbed
me by the left arm.

I slugged him under the jaw with my ten-sol right and knocked him out,
and I felt the wrapping on the coin roll break and the quarters come
loose in my hand. Before I could drop them into my jacket pocket and
get out the other roll, one of the sergeants at arms drew a gun. I
just hurled the handful of coins at him. He dropped the pistol and put
both hands to his face, howling in pain.

I gave a small mental howl myself when I thought of all the nice
things I could have bought for ten sols. One of Joe Kivelson's
followers stooped and scooped up the fallen pistol, firing a couple of
times with it. Then we all rushed Joe into one of the elevators and
crowded in behind him, and as I turned to start it down I could hear
police sirens from the street and also from the landing stage above.
In the hall outside the meeting room, four or five of Ravick's
free-drink mercenaries were down on all fours scrabbling for coins,
and the rest of the pursuers from the meeting room were stumbling and
tripping over them. I wished I'd brought a camera along, too. The
public would have loved a shot of that. I lifted the radio and spoke
into it:

"This is Walter Boyd, returning you now to the regular entertainment
program."

A second later, the thing whistled at me. As the car started down and
the doors closed I lifted the handphone. It was Bish Ware again.

"We're going down in the elevator to Second Level Down," I said. "I
have Joe and Tom and Oscar Fujisawa and a few of the _Javelin_ crew
with me. The place is crawling with cops now."

"Go to Third Level Down and get up on the catwalk on the right," Bish
said. "I'll be along to pick you up."

"Roger. We'll be looking for you."

The car stopped at Second Level Down. I punched a button and sent it
down another level. Joe Kivelson, who was dabbing at his cheek with a
piece of handkerchief tissue, wanted to know what was up.

"We're getting a pickup," I told him. "Vehicle from the _Times_."

I thought it would save arguments if I didn't mention who was bringing
it.




6

ELEMENTARY, MY DEAR KIVELSON


Before we left the lighted elevator car, we took a quick nose count.
Besides the Kivelsons, there were five _Javelin_ men--Ramon Llewellyn,
Abdullah Monnahan, Abe Clifford, Cesario Vieira, and a whitebeard
named Piet Dumont. Al Devis had been with us when we crashed the door
out of the meeting room, but he'd fallen by the way. We had a couple
of flashlights, so, after sending the car down to Bottom Level, we
picked our way up the zigzag iron stairs to the catwalk, under the
seventy-foot ceiling, and sat down in the dark.

Joe Kivelson was fretting about what would happen to the rest of his
men.

"Fine captain I am, running out and leaving them!"

"If they couldn't keep up, that's their tough luck," Oscar Fujisawa
told him. "You brought out all you could. If you'd waited any longer,
none of us would have gotten out."

"They won't bother with them," I added. "You and Tom and Oscar, here,
are the ones they want."

Joe was still letting himself be argued into thinking he had done the
right thing when we saw the lights of a lorry coming from uptown at
ceiling level. A moment later, it backed to the catwalk, and Bish Ware
stuck his head out from the pilot's seat.

"Where do you gentlemen wish to go?" he asked.

"To the _Javelin_," Joe said instantly.

"Huh-uh," Oscar disagreed. "That's the first place they'll look.
That'll be all right for Ramon and the others, but if they catch you
and Tom, they'll shoot you and call it self-defense, or take you in
and beat both of you to a jelly. This'll blow over in fifteen or
twenty hours, but I'm not going anywhere near my ship, now."

"Drop us off on Second Level Down, about Eighth Street and a couple of
blocks from the docks," the mate, Llewellyn, said. "We'll borrow some
weapons from Patel the Pawnbroker and then circulate around and see
what's going on. But you and Joe and Oscar had better go underground
for a while."

"The _Times_," I said. "We have a whole pillar-building to ourselves;
we could hide half the population."

That was decided upon. We all piled into the lorry, and Bish took it
to an inconspicuous place on the Second Level and let down. Ramon
Llewellyn and the others got out. Then we went up to Main City Level.
We passed within a few blocks of Hunters' Hall. There was a lot of
noise, but no shooting.

Joe Kivelson didn't have anything to say, on the trip, but he kept
looking at the pilot's seat in perplexity and apprehension. I think
he expected Bish to try to ram the lorry through every building we
passed by or over.

We found Dad in the editorial department on the top floor, feeding
voice-tape to Julio while the latter made master sheets for
teleprinting. I gave him a quick rundown on what had happened that he
hadn't gotten from my radio. Dad cluck-clucked in disapproval, either
at my getting into a fight, assaulting an officer, or, literally,
throwing money away.

Bish Ware seemed a little troubled. "I think," he said, "that I shall
make a circuit of my diocese, and see what can be learned from my
devoted flock. Should I turn up anything significant, I will call it
in."

With that, he went tottering over to the elevator, stumbling on the
way and making an unepiscopal remark. I watched him, and then turned
to Dad.

"Did he have anything to drink after I left?" I asked.

"Nothing but about five cups of coffee."

I mentally marked that: _Add oddities, Bish Ware._ He'd been at least
four hours without liquor, and he was walking as unsteadily as when
I'd first seen him at the spaceport. I didn't know any kind of liquor
that would persist like that.

Julio had at least an hour's tape to transcribe, so Dad and Joe and
Tom and Oscar and I went to the living room on the floor below. Joe
was still being bewildered about Bish Ware.

"How'd he manage to come for us?" he wanted to know.

"Why, he was here with me all evening," Dad said. "He came from the
spaceport with Walt and Tom, and had dinner with us. He called a few
people from here, and found out about the fake riot and police raid
Ravick had cooked up. You'd be surprised at how much information he
can pick up around town."

Joe looked at his son, alarmed.

"Hey! You let him see--" he began.

"The wax on Bottom Level, in the Fourth Ward?" I asked. "He won't blab
about that. He doesn't blab things where they oughtn't be blabbed."

"That's right," Dad backed me up. He was beginning to think of Bish as
one of the _Times_ staff, now. "We got a lot of tips from him, but
nothing we give him gets out." He got his pipe lit again. "What about
that wax, Joe?" he asked. "Were you serious when you made that motion
about a price of seventy-five centisols?"

"I sure was!" Joe declared. "That's the real price, and always has
been, and that's what we get or Kapstaad doesn't get any more wax."

"If Murell can top it, maybe Kapstaad won't get any more wax, period,"
I said. "Who's he with--Interstellar Import-Export?"

Anybody would have thought a barbwire worm had crawled onto Joe
Kivelson's chair seat under him.

"Where'd you hear that?" he demanded, which is the Galaxy's silliest
question to ask any newsman. "Tom, if you've been talking--"

"He hasn't," I said. "He didn't need to. It sticks out a parsec in all
directions." I mentioned some of the things I'd noticed while
interviewing Murell, and his behavior after leaving the ship. "Even
before I'd talked to him, I wondered why Tom was so anxious to get
aboard with me. He didn't know we'd arranged to put Murell up here; he
was going to take him to see that wax, and then take him to the
_Javelin_. You were going to produce him at the meeting and have him
bid against Belsher, only that tread-snail fouled your lines for you.
So then you thought you had to stall off a new contract till he got
out of the hospital."

The two Kivelsons and Oscar Fujisawa were looking at one another; Joe
and Tom in consternation, and Oscar in derision of both of them. I was
feeling pretty good. Brother, I thought, Sherlock Holmes never did
better, himself.

That, all of a sudden, reminded me of Dr. John Watson, whom Bish
perceived to have been in Afghanistan. That was one thing Sherlock H.
Boyd hadn't deduced any answers for. Well, give me a little more time.
And more data.

"You got it all figured out, haven't you?" Joe was asking
sarcastically. The sarcasm was as hollow as an empty oil drum.

"The _Times_," Dad was saying, trying not to sound too proud, "has a
very sharp reportorial staff, Joe."

"It isn't Interstellar," Oscar told me, grinning. "It's Argentine
Exotic Organics. You know, everybody thought Joe, here, was getting
pretty high-toned, sending his daughter to school on Terra. School
wasn't the only thing she went for. We got a letter from her, the last
time the Cape Canaveral was in, saying that she'd contacted Argentine
Organics and that a man was coming out on the _Peenemuende_, posing as
a travel-book author. Well, he's here, now."

"You'd better keep an eye on him," I advised. "If Steve Ravick gets
