sonic; a distinct throb of pain answered that stepping up of the
mysterious broadcast.

The laborers broke and ran, or rather crawled on their bellies until
they were well away, before they got to their feet and pelted back down
the strand. However, the guards were of sterner stuff. They were
withdrawing all right, but slowly backing away, their swords held up
before them as men might retreat before insurmountable odds.

When they were well gone the robed one took up the wand. Holding it out
beyond, the cloaked leader of the second party approached the two piles
of salvage the workers had heaped into rough order. There was a detailed
inspection of both until the robed one came upon the body.

At a trilled order two of the warriors came up and laid out the corpse.
When the robed one nodded they stood well back. The rod moved, the tip
rather than the knobbed head being pointed at the body.

Ross's head snapped back. That bolt of light, energy, fire--whatever it
was--issuing from the rod had dazzled him into momentary blindness. And
a vibration of force through the air was like a blow.

When he was able to see once more there was nothing at all on the sand
where the corpse had lain, nothing except a glassy trough from which
some spirals of vapor arose. Ross clung to his rock support badly
shaken.

Men with swords ... and now this--some form of controlled energy which
argued of technical development and science. Just as the cliff castle
had bombarded with rocks ships sailing with a speed which argued engine
power of an unknown type. A mixture of barbaric and advanced knowledge.
To assess this, he needed more experience, more knowledge than he
possessed. Now Ashe could....

Ashe!

Ross was jerked back to his own quest. The rod was quiet, no more sparks
were flung from its knob. And under Ross's touch his sonic was quiet
also. He snapped off the broadcast. If that device had picked up the
flickering of the rod, the reverse could well be true.

The cloaked one chose from the pile of goods, and its escort gathered up
the designated boxes, a small cask or two. So laden, the party returned
south the way they had come. Ross allowed his breath to expel in a sigh
of relief.

He worked his way farther north along the coast, watching other parties
of the furred workers and their guards. Lines of the former climbed the
cliff, hauling their spoil, their destination the castle. But Ross saw
no sign of Ashe, received no answer to the sonic code he had reset once
the strangers were out of distance. And the Terran began to realize that
his present search might well be fruitless, though he fought against
accepting it.

When he turned back to the slit cave Ross's fear was ready to be
expressed in anger, the anger of frustration over his own helplessness.
With no chance of trying to penetrate the castle, he could not learn
whether or not Ashe had been taken prisoner. And until the workers left
the beach he could not prowl there hunting the grimmer evidence his mind
flinched from considering.

Karara waited for him on the inner ledge. There was no sign of the
dolphins and as Ross pulled out of the water, pushing aside his mask,
her face in the thin light of the cave was deeply troubled.

"You did not find him," she made that a statement rather than a
question.

"No."

"And I did not find it--"

Ross used a length of weed from the nest as a towel. But now he stood
very still.

"The gate ... no sign of it?"

"Just this--" She reached behind her and brought up a sealed container.
Ross recognized one of the supply cans they had had in the cache by the
gate. "There are others ... scattered. Taua and Tino-rau seek them now.
It is as if all that was on the other side was sucked through with us."

"You are sure you found the right place?"

"Is--is this not part of it?" Again the girl sought for something on the
ledge. What she held out to him was a length of metal rod, twisted and
broken at one end as if a giant hand had wrenched it loose from the
installation.

Ross nodded dully. "Yes," his voice was harsh as if the words were
pulled out of him against his will and against all hope--"that's part of
a side bar. It--it must have been totally wrecked."

Yet, even though he held that broken length in his hands, Ross could not
really believe the gate was gone. He swam out once more, heading for the
reef where the dolphins joined him as guides. There was a second piece
of broken tube, the scattered containers of supplies, that was all. The
Terrans were wrecked in time as surely as those ships had been wrecked
on the sea reef the night before!

Ross headed once again for the cave. Their immediate needs were of major
importance now. The containers must be all gathered and taken into their
hiding place, because upon their contents three human lives could
depend.

He paused just at the entrance to adjust the net of containers he
transported. And it was that slight chance which brought him knowledge
of the intruder.

On the ledge Karara was heaping up the kelp of the nest. But to one side
and on a level with the girl's head....

Ross dared not flash his torch, thus betraying his presence. Leaving the
net hitched to the rock by its sling, he swam under water along the side
of the cave by a route which should bring him out within striking
distance of that hunched figure perching above to watch Karara's every
move.




6

Loketh the Useless


The wash of waves covered Ross's advance until he came up against the
wall not too far from the spy's perch. Whoever crouched there still
leaned forward to watch Karara. And Ross's eyes, having adjusted to the
gloom of the cavern, made out the outline of head and shoulders. The
next two or three minutes were the critical ones for the Terran. He must
emerge on the ledge in the open before he could attack.

Karara might almost have read his mind and given conscious help. For now
she went out on the point of the ledge to whistle the dolphins' summons.
Tino-rau's sleek head bobbed above water as he answered the girl with a
bubbling squeak. Karara knelt and the dolphin came to butt against her
out-held hand.

Ross heard a gasp from the watcher, a faint sound of movement. Karara
began to sing softly, her voice rippling in one of the liquid chants of
her own people, the dolphin interjecting a note or two. Ross had heard
them at that before, and it made perfect cover for his move. He sprang.

His grasp tightened on flesh, fingers closed about thin wrists. There
was a yell of astonishment and fear from the stranger as the Terran
jerked him from his perch to the ledge. Ross had his opponent flattened
under him before he realized that the other had offered no struggle, but
lay still.

"What is it?" Karara's torch beam caught them both. Ross looked down
into a thin brown face not too different from his own. The wide-set eyes
were closed, and the mouth gaped open. Though he believed the Hawaikan
unconscious, Ross still kept hold on those wrists as he moved from the
sprawled body. With the girl's aid he used a length of kelp to secure
the captive.

The stranger wore a garment of glistening skintight material which
covered body, legs, and feet, but left his lanky arms bare. A belt about
his waist had loops for a number of objects, among them a hook-pointed
knife which Ross prudently removed.

"Why, he is only a boy," Karara said. "Where did he come from, Ross?"

The Terran pointed to the wall crevice. "He was up there, watching you."

Her eyes were wide and round. "Why?"

Ross dragged his prisoner back against the wall of the cave. After
witnessing the fate of those who had swum ashore from the wreck, he did
not like to think what motive might have brought the Hawaikan here.
Again Karara's thoughts must have matched his, for she added:

"But he did not even draw his knife. What are you going to do with him,
Ross?"

That problem already occupied the Terran. The wisest move undoubtedly
was to kill the native out of hand. But such ruthlessness was more than
he could stomach. And if he could learn anything from the stranger--gain
some knowledge of this new world and its ways--he would be twice winner.
Why, this encounter might even lead to Ashe!

"Ross ... his leg. See?" The girl pointed.

The tight fit of the alien's clothing made the defect clear; the right
leg of the stranger was shrunken and twisted. He was a cripple.

"What of it?" Ross demanded sharply. This was no time for an appeal to
the sympathies.

But Karara did not urge any modification of the bonds as he half feared
she would. Instead, she sat back cross-legged, an odd, withdrawn
expression making her seem remote though he could have put out his hand
to touch her.

"His lameness--it could be a bridge," she observed, to Ross's
mystification.

"A bridge--what do you mean?"

The girl shook her head. "This is only a feeling, not a true thought.
But also it is important. Look, I think he is waking."

The lids above those large eyes were fluttering. Then with a shake of
the head, the Hawaikan blinked up at them. Blank bewilderment was all
Ross could read in the stranger's expression until the alien saw Karara.
Then a flood of clicking speech poured from his lips.

He seemed utterly astounded when they made no answer. And the fluency of
his first outburst took on a pleading note, while the expectancy of his
first greeting faded away.

Karara spoke to Ross. "He is becoming afraid, very much afraid. At
first, I think, he was pleased ... happy."

"But why?"

The girl shook her head. "I do not know; I can only feel. Wait!" Her
hand rose in imperious command. She did not rise to her feet, but
crawled on hands and knees to the edge of the ledge. Both dolphins were
there, raising their heads well out of the water, their actions
expressing unusual excitement.

"Ross!" Karara's voice rang loudly. "Ross, they can understand him!
Tino-rau and Taua can understand him!"

"You mean, they understand this language?" Ross found that fantastic,
awesome as the abilities of the dolphins were.

"No, his mind. It's his mind, Ross. Somehow he thinks in patterns they
can pick up and read! They do that, you know, with a few of us, but not
in the same way. This is more direct, clearer! They're so excited!"

Ross glanced at the prisoner. The alien had wriggled about, striving to
raise his head against the wall as a support. His captor pulled the
Hawaikan into a sitting position, but the native accepted that aid
almost as if he were not even aware of Ross's hands on his body. He
stared with a kind of horrified disbelief at the bobbing dolphin heads.

"He is afraid," Karara reported. "He has never known such communication
before."

"Can they ask him questions?" demanded Ross. If this odd mental tie
between Terran dolphin and Hawaikan did exist, then there was a chance
to learn about this world.

"They can try. Now he only knows fear, and they must break through
that."

What followed was the most unusual four-sided conversation Ross could
have ever imagined. He put a question to Karara, who relayed it to the
dolphins. In turn, they asked it mentally of the Hawaikan and conveyed
his answer back via the same route.

It took some time to allay the fears of the stranger. But at last the
Hawaikan entered wholeheartedly into the exchange.

"He is the son of the lord ruling the castle above." Karara produced the
first rational and complete answer. "But for some reason he is not
accepted by his own kind. Perhaps," she added on her own, "it is because
he is crippled. The sea is his home, as he expresses it, and he believes
me to be some mythical being out of it. He saw me swimming, masked, and
with the dolphins, and he is sure I change shape at will."

She hesitated. "Ross, I get something odd here. He does know, or thinks
he knows, creatures who can appear and disappear at will. And he is
afraid of their powers."

"Gods and goddesses--perfectly natural."

Karara shook her head. "No, this is more concrete than a religious
belief."

Ross had a sudden inspiration. Hurriedly he described the cloaked figure
who had driven the castle people from the piles of salvage. "Ask him
about that one."

She relayed the question. Ross saw the prisoner's head jerk around. The
Hawaikan looked from Karara to her companion, a shade of speculation in
his expression.

"He wants to know why you ask about the Foanna? Surely you must well
know what manner of beings they are."

"Listen--" Ross was sure now that he had made a real discovery, though
its importance he could not guess, "tell him we come from where there
are no Foanna. That we have powers and must know of their powers."

If he could only carry on this interrogation straight and not have to
depend upon a double translation! And could he even be sure his
questions reached the alien undistorted?

Wearily Ross sat back on his heels. Then he glanced at Karara with a
twinge of concern. If he was tired by their roundabout communication,
she must be doubly so. There was a droop to her shoulders, and her last
reply had come in a voice hoarse with fatigue. Abruptly he started up.

"That's enough--for now."

Which was true. He had to have time for evaluation, to adjust to what
they had learned during the steady stream of questions passed back and
forth. And in that moment he was conscious of his hunger, just as his
voice was paper dry from lack of drink. The canister of supplies he had
left by the cave entrance ...

"We need food and drink." He fumbled with his mask, but Karara motioned
him back from the water.

"Taua brings ... Wait!"

The dolphin trailed the net of containers to them. Ross unscrewed one,
pulled out a bulb of fresh water. A second box yielded the dry wafers of
emergency rations.

Then, after a moment's hesitation, Ross crossed to the prisoner, cut his
wrist bonds, and pressed both a bulb and a wafer into his hold. The
Hawaikan watched the Terrans eat before he bit into the wafer, chewing
it with vigor, turning the bulb around in his fingers with alert
interest before he sucked at its contents.

As Ross chewed and swallowed, mechanically and certainly with no relish,
he fitted one fact to another to make a picture of this Hawaikan time
period in which they were now marooned. Of course, his picture was based
on facts they had learned from their captive. Perhaps he had purposely
misled them or fogged some essentials. But could he have done that in a
mental contact? Ross would simply have to accept everything with a
certain amount of cautious skepticism.

Anyway, there were the Wreckers of the castle--petty lordlings setting
up their holds along the coasts, preying upon the shipping which was the
lifeblood of this island-water world. The Terrans had seen them in
action last night and today. And if the captive's information was
correct, it was not only the storm's fury which brought the waves'
harvest. The Wreckers had some method of attracting ships to crack up on
their reefs.

Some method of attraction.... And that force which had pulled the
Terrans through the time gate; could there be a connection? However,
there remained the Wreckers on the cliff. And their prey, the seafarers
of the ocean, with an understandably deep enmity between them.

Those two parties Ross could understand and be prepared to deal with, he
thought. But there remained the Foanna. And, from their prisoner's
explanation, the Foanna were a very different matter.

They possessed a power which did not depend upon swords or ships or the
natural tools and weapons of men. No, they had strengths which were
unearthly, to give them superiority in all but one way--numbers. Though
the Foanna had their warriors and servants, as Ross had seen on the
beach, they, themselves, were of another race--a very old and dying race
of which few remained. How many, their enemies could not say, for the
Foanna had no separate identities known to the outer world. They
appeared, gave their orders, levied their demands, opposed or aided as
they wished--always just one or two at a time--always so muffled in
their cloaks that even their physical appearances remained a mystery.
But there was no mystery about their powers. Ross gathered that no
Wrecker lord, no matter how much a leader among his own kind, how
ambitious, had yet dared to oppose actively one of the Foanna, though he
might make a token protest against some demand from them.
