Premier Highway Number One. In the back seat of the jet cab, Loring
turned to his spacemate and slapped him on the back.

"Soon's we get into the Row, you go and pack our gear, see! Then meet me
at the Cafe Cosmos in half an hour."

"Pack our gear?" asked Mason with alarm. "Are we going some place?"

Loring shot a glance at the driver. "Just do as I tell you!" he growled.
"In a few hours we'll be on our way to Tara, and then--" He dropped his
voice to a whisper. Mason listened and smiled.

The jet cab slid along the arrow-straight highway toward the heart of
the city of Venusport. Soon it reached the outskirts. On both sides of
the highway rose low, flat-roofed dwellings, built on a revolving wheel
to follow the precious sun, and constructed of pure Titan crystal.
Farther ahead and looming magnificent in the late afternoon sun was the
first and largest of Venusian cities, Venusport. Like a fantastically
large diamond, the startling towers of the young city shot upward into
the misty atmosphere, catching the light and reflecting it in every
color of the spectrum.

Loring and Mason did not appreciate the beauty of the city as they rode
swiftly through the busy streets. Loring, in particular, thought as he
had never thought before. He was busily putting a plot together in his
mind--a plot as dangerous as it was criminal.

[Illustration: _The jet cab raced along the highway to Venusport_]

The jet cab slammed to a stop at a busy intersection of the city. This
was Spaceman's Row, and it dated back to Venusport's first rough and
tough pioneering days.

For two blocks on either side of the street, in building after building,
cafes, pawnshops, cheap restaurants above and below the street level,
supplied the needs of countless shadowy figures who came and went as
silently as ghosts. Spaceman's Row was where suspended spacemen and
space rats, prospectors of the asteroids for uranium and pitchblende,
gathered and found short-lived and rowdy fun. Here, skippers of rocket
ships, bound for destinations in deep space, could find hands willing to
sign on their dirty freighters despite low pay and poor working
conditions. No questions were asked here. Along Spaceman's Row, hard men
played a grim game of survival.

Loring and Mason paid the driver, got out, and walked down the busy
street. Here and there, nuaniam signs began to flick on, their garish
blues, reds, and whites bathing the street in a glow of synthetic light.
It was early evening, but already Spaceman's Row was getting ready for
the coming night.

Presently, Mason left Loring, climbing up a long narrow flight of stairs
leading to a dingy back hall bedroom to pack their few remaining bits of
gear.

Loring walked on amid the noise and laughter that echoed from cheap
restaurants and saloons. Stopping before Cafe Cosmos, he surveyed the
street quickly before entering the wide doors. Many years before, the
Cosmos had been a sedate dining spot, a place where respectable family
parties came to enjoy good food and the gentle breezes of a near-by
lake. Now, with the lake polluted by industry and with the gradual
influx of shiftless spacemen, the Cosmos had been given over to the most
basic, simple need of its new patrons--rocket juice!

The large room that Loring entered still retained some of the features
of its more genteel beginnings, but the huge blaring teleceiver screen
was filled with the pouting face of a popular singer. He advanced to the
bar that occupied one entire wall.

"Rocket juice!" he said, slamming down his fist on the wooden bar.
"Double!" He was served a glass of the harsh bluish liquid, paid his
credits, and downed the drink. Then he turned slowly and glanced around
the half-filled room. Almost immediately he spotted a small wizened man
limping toward him.

"Been waiting for you," said the man.

"Well," demanded Loring, "did'ja get anything set up, Shinny?"

"_Mr._ Shinny!" growled the little man, with surprising vigor. "I'm old
enough to be your father!"

"Awright--awright--_Mr._ Shinny!" sneered Loring. "Did'ja get it?"

The little man shook his head. "Nothing on the market, Billy boy." He
paused and aimed a stream of tobacco juice at a near-by cuspidor.

Loring looked relieved. "Just as well. I've got something else lined up,
anyway."

Shinny's eyes sharpened. "You must have a pretty big strike, Billy boy,
if you're so hot to buy a spaceship!"

"Only want to take a little ride upstairs, _Mr._ Shinny," said Loring.

"Don't hand me that space gas!" snapped Shinny. "A man who's lost his
space papers ain't going to take a chance at getting caught by the Solar
Guard, busting the void with a rocket ship and no papers." He stopped,
and his small gray eyes twinkled. "_Unless_," he added, "you've got
quite a strike lined up!"

"Hey, Loring!" yelled Mason, entering the cafe. He carried two
spaceman's traveling bags, small black plastic containers with glass
zippers.

"So you've got Al Mason in with you," mused Shinny. "Pretty good man,
Al. Let's see now, I saw you two just before you blasted off for Tara!"
He paused. "Couldn't be that you've got anything lined up in deep space,
now could it?"

"You're an old fool!" snarled Loring.

"Heh--heh--heh," chuckled Shinny. A toothless smile spread across his
wrinkled face. "Coming close, am I?"

Al Mason looked at Shinny and back at Loring. "Say! What is this?" he
demanded.

"O.K., O.K.," said Loring between clenched teeth. "So we've got a strike
out in the deep, but one word outta line from you and I'll blast you
with my heater!"

"Not a word," said Shinny, "not a word. I'll only charge you a little to
keep your secret."

Mason looked at Loring. "How much?" he demanded.

"A twentieth of the take," said Shinny. "And that's dirt cheap."

"It's robbery," said Loring, "but O.K. We've got no choice!"

"Loring, wait a minute!" objected Mason. "One twentieth! Why, that could
add up to a million credits!"

Shinny's eyes opened wide. "Twenty million! Hey, there hasn't been a
uranium strike that big since the old seventeenth moon of Jupiter back
in 2294!"

Loring motioned to them to sit down at a table. He ordered a bottle of
rocket juice and filled three glasses.

"This ain't uranium, _Mr._ Shinny!" he said.

Shinny's eyes opened wider still. "What then?"

"What's the most precious metal in the system today?" Loring asked.

"Why--gold, I guess."

"Next to gold?"

Shinny thought for a moment. "Couldn't be silver any more, since
they're making the artificial stuff cheaper'n it costs to mine it." The
little man's jaw dropped and he stared at Loring. "You mean--?"

"That's right," said Loring, "copper!"

Shinny's mind raced. In this year of 2353, all major copper deposits had
long since been exhausted and only small new deposits were being found,
not nearly enough for the needs of the expanding system. In an age of
electronics, lack of copper had become a serious bottleneck in the
production of electrical and scientific equipment. Search parties were
out constantly, all over the solar system, trying to find more of the
precious stuff. So a deposit of the kind Loring and Mason were talking
about was a prize indeed.

Shinny's greedy fingers twitched with anticipation.

"So that's why you want to buy a spaceship, eh?"

"Wanted," replied Loring. "I don't want to buy one now. The way things
look, we'll get what we want for nothing!"

Mason, who had been sitting quietly, suddenly jumped up. "So that's your
angle! Well, I don't want any part of it," he shouted.

Loring and Shinny looked up in surprise.

"What're you talking about?" demanded Loring.

"All of a sudden it's come to me. Now I know why you've been hanging
around the spaceport for the last two weeks. And what you meant when you
saw the spaceman get out of that freighter today!"

"Sit down!" barked Loring. "If you weren't so dumb, you'd have caught on
long ago." He eyed the shorter man from between half-closed lids. "It's
the only way we can get out of here!"

"Not me. I ain't pulling anything like that!" whined Mason.

"What's going on here?" demanded Shinny. "What're you two space bums
talking about?"

"I'll tell you what! He's going to try--"

Loring suddenly stood up and slapped the shorter spaceman across the
mouth. Mason sat down, a dazed look on his face.

"You space-crawling rat!" hissed Loring. "You'll do what I tell you to
do, see?"

"Yeah--yeah, sure," bleated Mason. "O.K. Anything you say. Anything."

"What is this?" demanded Shinny.

"You shut up!" growled Loring.

"I won't!" said Shinny, as he also rose from the table. "You may be
tough, Billy Loring, but not as tough as me!"

The two men stared at each other for a moment. Finally Loring smiled and
patted Mason's shoulder. "Sorry, Al. I guess I got a little hot for a
moment."

"Quit talking riddles," pleaded Shinny. "What's this all about?"

"Sit down," said Loring.

They sank back into their chairs.

"It's simple," said Mason fearfully. "Loring wants to steal a
spaceship."

"A pirate job!" said Shinny. He drew in his breath sharply. "You must be
outta your mind!"

"You've called yourself in on this," Loring reminded him. "And you're
staying in."

"Oh, no!" Shinny's voice dropped to a husky, frightened whisper. "Deal's
off. I ain't gonna spend the rest of my life on a prison asteroid!"

"Shinny, you know too much!" Loring's hand darted toward the blaster he
wore at his belt.

"Your secret's safe with me. I give you my spaceman's word on it," said
Shinny, pushing back his chair. Abruptly getting to his feet, he
scrambled rapidly out the door of the Cafe Cosmos.

"Loring," said Mason, "get him. You can't let him ..."

"Forget it," shot back the other. "He won't break his spaceman's oath.
Not Shinny." He got up. "Come on, Mason. We haven't got much time before
the _Annie Jones_ blasts off."

"What are we gonna do?" the shorter man wanted to know.

"Stow away on the cargo deck. Then, when we get out into space, we dump
the pilots and head for Tara, for our first load of copper."

"But a job like this'll take money!"

"We'll make enough to go ahead on the first load."

Mason began to get up, hesitated, and then sat down again.

"Come on," snapped Loring. His hand dropped toward his belt. "I'm going
to make you rich, Mason," he said quietly. "I'm going to make you one of
the richest men in the universe--even if I have to kill you first."

[Illustration]




CHAPTER 7


"Space freighter _Antares_ from Venus space station. Your approach
course is one-nine-seven--corrected. Reduce speed to minimum thrust and
approach spaceport nine--landing-deck three. End transmission!"

Tom stood on the dais of the traffic-control room and switched the
_Antares_ beam to one of his assistants at the monitors in the control
room. In less than two weeks he had mastered the difficult
traffic-control procedure to the point where Captain Stefens had allowed
him to handle the midnight shift. He checked the monitors and turned to
see Roger walk through the door.

"Working hard, Junior?" asked Roger in his casual drawl.

"Roger!" exclaimed Tom. "What are you fooling around down here for?"

"Ah, there's nothing to do on the radar deck. Besides, I've got the
emergency alarm on." He wiped his forehead. "Brother! Of all the crummy
places to be stuck!"

"Could be worse," said Tom, his eyes sweeping the monitors.

"Nothing could be worse," groaned Roger. "But nothing. Think of that
lovely space doll Helen Ashton alone on earth--and me stuck here on a
space station."

"Well, we're doing an important job, Roger," replied Tom. "And doing it
well, or Major Connel wouldn't leave us alone so much. How're you making
out with the new equipment?"

"That toy?" sneered Roger. "I gave it a look, checked the circuits once,
and knew it inside out. It's so simple a child could have built one!"

"Oh, sure," scoffed Tom. "That's why the top scientists worked for years
on something small, compact, powerful enough to reach through deep
space--and still be easy to repair."

"Quit heckling me, Junior," retorted Roger, "I'm thinking. Trying to
figure out some way of getting to the teleceiver set on board the
_Polaris_."

"Why can't you get on the _Polaris_?" asked Tom.

"They're jazzing up the power deck with a new hyperdrive unit for the
big hop to Tara. So many guys buzzing around you can't get near it."

"What do you need a teleceiver for?" asked Tom.

"To give me company," replied Roger sourly. "Say!" He snapped his
fingers suddenly. "Maybe if I just changed the frequency--"

"What frequency? What are you talking about?"

"Spaceboy, I'm getting a real hot-rocket idea! See ya later!" And the
blond cadet ran for the door.

Tom watched his unit-mate disappear and shook his head in amused
despair. Roger, he told himself, might be difficult, but he was
certainly never dull.

Then his attention was brought back to the monitors by the warning of
another approaching spaceship.

"... jet liner _San Francisco_ to Venus space-station traffic control
..." the metallic voice crackled over the speaker.

"Jet liner _San Francisco_, this is Venus space-station traffic
control," replied Tom. "You are cleared for landing at port
eleven--repeat--eleven. Make standard check for approach orbit to
station landing. End transmission!"

From one side of the circular dais, Tom saw Major Connel enter the room.
He snapped to attention and saluted smartly.

"Morning, Corbett," said Connel, returning Tom's salute. "Getting into
the swing of the operation?"

"Yes, sir," said Tom. "I've handled about twenty approaches since
Captain Stefens left me alone, and about fifty departures." Tom brought
his fist up, with the thumb extended and wiped it across his chest in
the traditional spaceman's signal that all was clear. "I didn't scratch
one of 'em, sir," he said, smiling.

"Good enough," said Connel. "Keep it that way." He watched the monitor
screen as the liner _San Francisco_ settled into landing-port eleven.

When she was cradled and secure, he grunted his satisfaction and turned
to leave. At the door he suddenly paused. "By the way, isn't Manning on
radar watch?"

"Yes, sir," replied Tom.

"Well, it's one forty-eight. How about his standard check-in with
traffic control?"

Tom stammered, "He--uh--he may be plotting some space junk, sir."

"He _still_ must report, regardless of what he's doing!"

"I--uh--ah--yes, sir!" gulped Tom. Blast Roger anyway, he thought,
