
  The antheridia (Fig. 26, _F_, _G_) are small oblong cells, at first
  colorless, but when ripe containing numerous glistening, reddish
  brown dots, each of which is part of a spermatozoid. When ripe, the
  contents of the antheridium are forced out into the water (_G_),
  leaving the empty outer wall behind, but still surrounded by a thin
  membrane. After a few minutes this membrane is dissolved, and the
  spermatozoids are set free. These (Fig. 27, _K_) are oval in form,
  with two long cilia attached to the side where the brown speck, seen
  while still within the antheridium, is conspicuous.

  The act of fertilization may be easily observed by laying fresh
  antheridia into a drop of water containing recently discharged egg
  cells. To obtain these, all that is necessary is to allow freshly
  gathered plants to remain in the air until they are somewhat dry,
  when the ripe sexual cells will be discharged from the openings of
  the conceptacles, exuding as little drops, those with antheridia
  being orange-yellow; the masses of ooegonia, olive. Within a few
  minutes after putting the ooegonia into water, the egg cells may be
  seen to escape into the water, when some of the antheridia may be
  added. The spermatozoids will be quickly discharged, and collect
  immediately in great numbers about the egg cells, to which they
  apply themselves closely, often setting them in rotation by the
  movements of their cilia, and presenting a most extraordinary
  spectacle (_J_). Owing to the small size of the spermatozoids, and
  the opacity of the eggs, it is impossible to see whether more than
  one spermatozoid penetrates it; but from what is known in other
  cases it is not likely. The egg now secretes a wall about itself,
  and within a short time begins to grow. It becomes pear-shaped, the
  narrow portion becoming attached to the parent plant or to some
  other object by means of rootlets, and the upper part grows into the
  body of the young plant (Fig. 27, _M_).

[Illustration: FIG. 27.--_H_, the eight egg cells still surrounded by
the inner membrane of the ooegonium. _I_, the egg cells escaping into
the water. _J_, a single egg cell surrounded by spermatozoids. _K_,
mass of spermatozoids surrounded by the inner membrane of the
antheridium. _L_, spermatozoids. _M_, young plant. _r_, the roots.
_K_, x 300; _L_, x 600; the others, x 150.]

The simpler brown seaweeds, so far as known, multiply only by means of
zooespores, which may grow directly into new plants, or, as has been
observed in some species, two zooespores will first unite. A few, like
_Ectocarpus_ (Fig. 28, _A_), are simple, branched filaments, but most
are large plants with complex tissues. Of the latter, a familiar
example is the common kelp, "devil's apron" (_Laminaria_), often three
to four metres in length, with a stout stalk, provided with root-like
organs, by which it is firmly fastened. Above, it expands into a
broad, leaf-like frond, which in some species is divided into strips.
Related to the kelps is the giant kelp of the Pacific (_Macrocystis_),
which is said sometimes to reach a length of three hundred metres.

[Illustration: FIG. 28.--Forms of brown seaweeds. _A_, _Ectocarpus_,
x 50. Sporangia (_sp._). _B_, a single sporangium, x 150. _C_, kelp
(_Laminaria_), x 1/8. _D_, _E_, gulf weed (_Sargassum_). _D_, one-half
natural size. _E_, natural size. _v_, air bladders. _x_, conceptacle
bearing branches.]

The highest of the class are the gulf weeds (_Sargassum_), plants of
the warmer seas, but one species of which is found from Cape Cod
southward (Fig. 28, _D_, _E_). These plants possess distinct stems and
leaves, and there are stalked air bladders, looking like berries,
giving the plant a striking resemblance to the higher land plants.




CHAPTER VII.

CLASS III.--THE RED ALGAE (_Rhodophyceae_).


These are among the most beautiful and interesting members of the
plant kingdom, both on account of their beautiful colors and the
exquisitely graceful forms exhibited by many of them. Unfortunately
for inland students they are, with few exceptions, confined to salt
water, and consequently fresh material is not available. Nevertheless,
enough can be done with dried material to get a good idea of their
general appearance, and the fruiting plants can be readily preserved
in strong alcohol. Specimens, simply dried, may be kept for an
indefinite period, and on being placed in water will assume perfectly
the appearance of the living plants. Prolonged exposure, however, to
the action of fresh water extracts the red pigment that gives them
their characteristic color. This pigment is found in the chlorophyll
bodies, and usually quite conceals the chlorophyll, which, however,
becomes evident so soon as the red pigment is removed.

The red seaweeds differ much in the complexity of the plant body, but
all agree in the presence of the red pigment, and, at least in the
main, in their reproduction. The simpler ones consist of rows of
cells, usually branching like _Cladophora_; others form cell plates
comparable to _Ulva_ (Fig. 30, _C_, _D_); while others, among which is
the well-known Irish moss (_Chondrus_), form plants of considerable
size, with pretty well differentiated tissues. In such forms the outer
cells are smaller and firmer, constituting a sort of rind; while the
inner portions are made up of larger and looser cells, and may be
called the pith. Between these extremes are all intermediate forms.

They usually grow attached to rocks, shells, wood, or other plants,
such as the kelps and even the larger red seaweeds. They are most
abundant in the warmer seas, but still a considerable number may be
found in all parts of the ocean, even extending into the Arctic
regions.

[Illustration: FIG. 29.--_A_, a red seaweed (_Callithamnion_), of the
natural size. _B_, a piece of the same, x 50. _t_, tetraspores. _C_
i-v, successive stages in the development of the tetraspores, x 150.
_D_ I, II young procarps. _tr._ trichogyne. iii, young; iv, ripe spore
fruit. I, III, x 150. iv, x 50. _E_, an antheridium, x 150. _F_, spore
fruit of _Polysiphonia_. The spores are here surrounded by a case,
x 50.]

The methods of reproduction may be best illustrated by a specific
example, and preferably one of the simpler ones, as these are most
readily studied microscopically.

The form here illustrated (_Callithamnion_) grows attached to wharves,
etc., below low-water mark, and is extremely delicate, collapsing
completely when removed from the water. The color is a bright rosy
red, and with its graceful form and extreme delicacy it makes one of
the most beautiful of the group.

If alcoholic material is used, it may be mounted for examination
either in water or very dilute glycerine.

  The plant is composed of much-branched, slender filaments, closely
  resembling _Cladophora_ in structure, but with smaller cells
  (Fig. 29, _B_). The non-sexual reproduction is by means of special
  spores, which from being formed in groups of four, are known as
  tetraspores. In the species under consideration the mother cell of
  the tetraspores arises as a small bud near the upper end of one of
  the ordinary cells (Fig. 29, _C_ i). This bud rapidly increases in
  size, assuming an oval form, and becoming cut off from the cell of
  the stem (Fig. 29, _C_ ii). The contents now divide into four equal
  parts, arranged like the quadrants of a sphere. When ripe, the wall
  of the mother cell gives way, and the four spores escape into the
  water and give rise to new plants. These spores, it will be noticed,
  differ in one important particular from corresponding spores in most
  algae, in being unprovided with cilia, and incapable of spontaneous
  movement.

  Occasionally in the same plant that bears tetraspores, but more
  commonly in special ones, there are produced the sexual organs, and
  subsequently the sporocarps, or fruits, developed from them. The
  plants that bear them are usually stouter that the non-sexual ones,
  and the masses of ripe carpospores are large enough to be readily
  seen with the naked eye.

  If a plant bearing ripe spores is selected, the young stages of the
  female organ (procarp) may generally be found by examining the
  younger parts of the plant. The procarp arises from a single cell of
  the filament. This cell undergoes division by a series of
  longitudinal walls into a central cell and about four peripheral
  ones (Fig. 29, _D_ i). One of the latter divides next into an upper
  and a lower cell, the former growing out into a long, colorless
  appendage known as a trichogyne (Fig. 29, _D_, _tr._).

  The antheridia (Fig. 29, _E_) are hemispherical masses of closely
  set colorless cells, each of which develops a single spermatozoid
  which, like the tetraspores, is destitute of cilia, and is dependent
  upon the movement of the water to convey it to the neighborhood of
  the procarp. Occasionally one of these spermatozoids may be found
  attached to the trichogyne, and in this way fertilization is
  effected. Curiously enough, neither the cell which is immediately
  fertilized, nor the one beneath it, undergo any further change; but
  two of the other peripheral cells on opposite sides of the filament
  grow rapidly and develop into large, irregular masses of spores
  (Fig. 29, _D_ III, IV).

While the plant here described may be taken as a type of the group,
it must be borne in mind that many of them differ widely, not only in
the structure of the plant body, but in the complexity of the sexual
organs and spores as well. The tetraspores are often imbedded in the
tissues of the plant, or may be in special receptacles, nor are they
always arranged in the same way as here described, and the same is
true of the carpospores. These latter are in some of the higher forms,
_e.g._ _Polysiphonia_ (Fig. 29, _F_), contained in urn-shaped
receptacles, or they may be buried within the tissues of the plant.

[Illustration: FIG. 30.--Marine red seaweeds. _A_, _Dasya_. _B_,
_Rhodymenia_ (with smaller algae attached). _C_, _Grinnellia_. _D_,
_Delesseria_. _A_, _B_, natural size; the others reduced one-half.]

The fresh-water forms are not common, but may occasionally be met with
in mill streams and other running water, attached to stones and
woodwork, but are much inferior in size and beauty to the marine
species. The red color is not so pronounced, and they are, as a rule,
somewhat dull colored.

[Illustration: FIG. 31.--Fresh-water red algae. _A_, _Batrachospermum_,
x about 12. _B_, a branch of the same, x 150. _C_, _Lemanea_, natural
size.]

The commonest genera are _Batrachospermum_ and _Lemanea_ (Fig. 31).




CHAPTER VIII.

SUB-KINGDOM III.

FUNGI.


The name "Fungi" has been given to a vast assemblage of plants,
varying much among themselves, but on the whole of about the same
structural rank as the algae. Unlike the algae, however, they are
entirely destitute of chlorophyll, and in consequence are dependent
upon organic matter for food, some being parasites (growing upon
living organisms), others saprophytes (feeding on dead matter). Some
of them show close resemblances in structure to certain algae, and
there is reason to believe that they are descended from forms that
originally had chlorophyll; others are very different from any green
plants, though more or less evidently related among themselves.
Recognizing then these distinctions, we may make two divisions of the
sub-kingdom: I. The Alga-Fungi (_Phycomycetes_), and II. The True
Fungi (_Mycomycetes_).


CLASS I.--_Phycomycetes_.

These are fungi consisting of long, undivided, often branching tubular
filaments, resembling quite closely those of _Vaucheria_ or other
_Siphoneae_, but always destitute of any trace of chlorophyll. The
simplest of these include the common moulds (_Mucorini_), one of which
will serve to illustrate the characteristics of the order.

If a bit of fresh bread, slightly moistened, is kept under a bell jar
or tumbler in a warm room, in the course of twenty-four hours or so it
will be covered with a film of fine white threads, and a little later
will produce a crop of little globular bodies mounted on upright
stalks. These are at first white, but soon become black, and the
filaments bearing them also grow dark-colored.

These are moulds, and have grown from spores that are in the
atmosphere falling on the bread, which offers the proper conditions
for their growth and multiplication.

One of the commonest moulds is the one here figured (Fig. 32), and
named _Mucor stolonifer_, from the runners, or "stolons," by which it
spreads from one point to another. As it grows it sends out these
runners along the surface of the bread, or even along the inner
surface of the glass covering it. They fasten themselves at intervals
to the substratum, and send up from these points clusters of short
filaments, each one tipped with a spore case, or "sporangium."

  For microscopical study they are best mounted in dilute glycerine
  (about one-quarter glycerine to three-quarters pure water). After
  carefully spreading out the specimens in this mixture, allow a drop
  of alcohol to fall upon the preparation, and then put on the cover
  glass. The alcohol drives out the air, which otherwise interferes
  badly with the examination.

  The whole plant consists of a very long, much-branched, but
  undivided tubular filament. Where it is in contact with the
  substratum, root-like outgrowths are formed, not unlike those
  observed in _Vaucheria_. At first the walls are colorless, but later
  become dark smoky brown in color. A layer of colorless granular
  protoplasm lines the wall, becoming more abundant toward the growing
  tips of the branches. The spore cases, "sporangia," arise at the
  ends of upright branches (Fig. 32, _C_), which at first are
  cylindrical (_a_), but later enlarge at the end (_b_), and become
  cut off by a convex wall (_c_). This wall pushes up into the young
  sporangium, forming a structure called the "columella." When fully
  grown, the sporangium is globular, and appears quite opaque, owing
  to the numerous granules in the protoplasm filling the space between
  the columella and its outer wall. This protoplasm now divides into a
  great number of small oval cells (spores), which rapidly darken,
  owing to a thick, black wall formed about each one, and at the same
  time the columella and the stalk of the sporangium become
  dark-colored.

  When ripe, the wall of the sporangium dissolves, and the spores
  (Fig. 32, _E_) are set free. The columella remains unchanged, and
  some of the spores often remain sticking to it (Fig. 32, _D_).

[Illustration: FIG. 32.--_A_, common black mould (_Mucor_), x 5. _B_,
three nearly ripe spore cases, x 25. _C_, development of the spore
cases, i-iv, x 150; v, x 50. _D_, spore case which has discharged its
spores. _E_, spores, x 300. _F_, a form of _Mucor mucedo_, with small
accessory spore cases, x 5. _G_, the spore cases, x 50. _H_, a single
spore case, x 300. _I_, development of the zygospore of a black mould,
x 45 (after De Bary).]

  Spores formed in a manner strongly recalling those of the pond scums
  are also known, but only occur after the plants have grown for a
  long time, and hence are rarely met with (Fig. 32, _I_).

Another common mould (_M. mucedo_), often growing in company with the
one described, differs from it mainly in the longer stalk of the
sporangium, which is also smaller, and in not forming runners. This
species sometimes bears clusters of very small sporangia attached to
the middle of the ordinary sporangial filament (Fig. 32, _F_, _H_).
These small sporangia have no columella.

Other moulds are sometimes met with, parasitic upon the larger species
of _Mucor_.

Related to the black moulds are the insect moulds (_Entomopthoreae_),
which attack and destroy insects. The commonest of these attacks the
house flies in autumn, when the flies, thus infested, may often be
found sticking to window panes, and surrounded by a whitish halo of
the spores that have been thrown off by the fungus.


ORDER II.--WHITE RUSTS AND MILDEWS (_Peronosporeae_)

These are exclusively parasitic fungi, and grow within the tissues of
various flowering plants, sometimes entirely destroying them.

As a type of this group we will select a very common one (_Cystopus
bliti_), that is always to be found in late summer and autumn growing
on pig weed (_Amarantus_). It forms whitish, blister-like blotches
about the size of a pin head on the leaves and stems, being commonest
on the under side of the leaves (Fig. 33, _A_). In the earlier stages
the leaf does not appear much affected, but later becomes brown and
withered about the blotches caused by the fungus.

  If a thin vertical section of the leaf is made through one of these
  blotches, and mounted as described for _Mucor_, the latter is found
  to be composed of a mass of spores that have been produced below the
  epidermis of the leaf, and have pushed it up by their growth. If the
  section is a very thin one, we may be able to make out the structure
  of the fungus, and then find it to be composed of irregular,
  tubular, much-branched filaments, which, however, are not divided by
  cross-walls. These filaments run through the intercellular spaces of
  the leaf, and send into the cells little globular suckers, by means
  of which the fungus feeds.

  The spores already mentioned are formed at the ends of crowded
  filaments, that push up, and finally rupture the epidermis (Fig. 33,
  _B_). They are formed by the ends of the filaments swelling up and
  becoming constricted, so as to form an oval spore, which is then cut
  off by a wall. The portion of the filament immediately below acts in
  the same way, and the process is repeated until a chain of half a
  dozen or more may be produced, the lowest one being always the last
  formed. When ripe, the spores are separated by a thin neck, and
  become very easily broken off.

  In order to follow their germination it is only necessary to place a
  few leaves with fresh patches of the fungus under a bell jar or
  tumbler, inverted over a dish full of water, so as to keep the air
  within saturated with moisture, but taking care to keep the leaves
  out of the water. After about twenty-four hours, if some of the
  spores are scraped off and mounted in water, they will germinate in
  the course of an hour or so. The contents divide into about eight
  parts, which escape from the top of the spore, which at this time
  projects as a little papilla. On escaping, each mass of protoplasm
  swims away as a zooespore, with two extremely delicate cilia. After a
  short time it comes to rest, and, after developing a thin cell wall,
  germinates by sending out one or two filaments (Fig. 33, _C_, _E_).

[Illustration: FIG. 33.--_A_, leaf of pig-weed (_Amarantus_), with
spots of white rust (_c_), one-half natural size. _B_, non-sexual
spores (conidia). _C_, the same germinating. _D_, zooespores. _E_,
germinating zooespores. _sp._ the spore. _F_, young. _G_, mature sexual
organs. In _G_, the tube may be seen connecting the antheridium
(_an._), with the egg cell (_o_). _H_, a ripe resting spore still
surrounded by the wall of the ooegonium. _I_, a part of a filament of
the fungus, showing its irregular form. All x 300.]

  Under normal conditions the spores probably germinate when the
  leaves are wet, and the filaments enter the plant through the
  breathing pores on the lower surface of the leaves, and spread
  rapidly through the intercellular spaces.

  Later on, spores of a very different kind are produced. Unlike those
  already studied, they are formed some distance below the epidermis,
  and in order to study them satisfactorily, the fungus must be freed
  from the host plant. In order to do this, small pieces of the leaf
  should be boiled for about a minute in strong caustic potash, and
  then treated with acetic or hydrochloric acid. By this means the
  tissues of the leaf become so soft as to be readily removed, while
