       *       *       *       *       *

More aircars were arriving, big and luxurious, emblazoned with the arms
of some of the most distinguished families in Asgard. One of the first
to let down bore the device of Duklass, and from it the Minister of
Economics, the Minister of Education, and a couple of other Ministers,
alighted. Count Duklass went at once to Prince Travann, drawing him away
from King Ranulf and Lord Koreff and talking to him rapidly and
earnestly. Count Tammsan approached at a swift half-run.

"Save Your Majesty!" he greeted, breathlessly. "What's going on, sir? We
heard something about some petty brawl at the University, that Prince
Ganzay had become alarmed about, but now there seems to be fighting all
over the city. I never saw anything like it; on the way here we had to
go up to ten thousand feet to get over a battle, and there's a vast
crowd on the Avenue of the Arts, and----" He took in the Security
Guards. "Your Majesty, just what _is_ going on?"

"Great and frightening changes." Count Tammsan started; he must have
been to a psi-medium, too. "But I think the Empire is going to survive
them. There may even be a few improvements, before things are done."

A blue-uniformed Gendarme officer approached Prince Travann, drawing him
away from Count Duklass and speaking briefly to him. The Minister of
Security nodded, then turned back to the Minister of Economics. They
talked for a few moments longer, then clasped hands, and Travann left
Duklass with his face wreathed in smiles. The Gendarme officer
accompanied him as he approached.

"Your Majesty, this is Colonel Handrosan, the officer who handled the
affair at the University."

"And a very good piece of work, colonel." He shook hands with him.
"Don't be surprised if it's remembered next Honors Day. Did you bring
Khane and the two professors?"

"They're down on the lower landing-stage, Your Majesty. We're delaying
the students, to give Your Majesty time to talk to them."

"We'll see them now. My study will do." The officer saluted and went
away. He turned to Count Tammsan. "That's why I asked Prince Ganzay to
invite you here. This thing's become too public to be ignored; some sort
of action will have to be taken. I'm going to talk to the students; I
want to find out just what happened before I commit myself to anything.
Well, gentlemen, let's go to my study."

Count Tammsan looked around, bewildered. "But I don't understand----" He
fell into step with Paul and the Minister of Security; a squad of
Security Guards fell in behind them. "I don't understand what's
happening," he complained.

An emperor about to have his throne yanked out from under him, and a
minister about to stage a _coup d'etat_, taking time out to settle a
trifling academic squabble. One thing he did understand, though, was
that the Ministry of Education was getting some very bad publicity at a
time when it could be least afforded. Prince Travann was telling him
about the hooligans' attack on the marching students, and that worried
him even more. Nonworking hooligans acted as voting-bloc bosses ordered;
voting-bloc bosses acted on orders from the political manipulators of
Cartels and pressure-groups, and action downward through the nonworkers
was usually accompanied by action upward through influences to which
ministers were sensitive.

       *       *       *       *       *

There were a dozen Security Guards in black tunics, and as many
Household Thorans in red kilts, in the hall outside the study,
fraternizing amicably. They hurried apart and formed two ranks, and the
Thoran officer with them saluted.

Going into the study, he went to his desk; Count Tammsan lit a cigarette
and puffed nervously, and sat down as though he were afraid the chair
would collapse under him. Prince Travann sank into another chair and
relaxed, closing his eyes. There was a bit of wafer on the floor by
Paul's chair, dropped by the little dog that morning. He stooped and
picked it up, laying it on his desk, and sat looking at it until the
door screen flashed and buzzed. Then he pressed the release button.

Colonel Handrosan ushered the three University men in ahead of
him--Khane, with a florid, arrogant face that showed worry under the
arrogance; Dandrik, gray-haired and stoop-shouldered, looking irritated;
Faress, young, with a scrubby red mustache, looking bellicose. He
greeted them collectively and invited them to sit, and there was a brief
uncomfortable silence which everybody expected him to break.

"Well, gentlemen," he said, "we want to get the facts about this affair
in some kind of order. I wish you'd tell me, as briefly and as
completely as possible, what you know about it."

"There's the man who started it!" Khane declared, pointing at Faress.

"Professor Faress had nothing to do with it," Colonel Handrosan stated
flatly. "He and his wife were in their apartment, packing to move out,
when it started. Somebody called him and told him about the fighting at
the stadium, and he went there at once to talk his students into
dispersing. By that time, the situation was completely out of hand; he
could do nothing with the students.

"Well, I think we ought to find out, first of all, why Professor Faress
was dismissed," Prince Travann said. "It will take a good deal to
convince me that any teacher able to inspire such loyalty in his
students is a bad teacher, or deserves dismissal."

"As I understand," Paul said, "the dismissal was the result of a
disagreement between Professor Faress and Professor Dandrik about an
experiment on which they were working. I believe, an experiment to fix
more exactly the velocity of accelerated subnucleonic particles. Beta
micropositos, wasn't it, Chancellor Khane?"

Khane looked at him in surprise. "Your Majesty, I know nothing about
that. Professor Dandrik is head of the physics department; he came to
me, about six months ago, and told me that in his opinion this
experiment was desirable. I simply deferred to his judgment and
authorized it."

"Your Majesty has just stated the purpose of the experiment," Dandrik
said. "For centuries, there have been inaccuracies in mathematical
descriptions of subnucleonic events, and this experiment was undertaken
in the hope of eliminating these inaccuracies." He went into a lengthy
mathematical explanation.

"Yes, I understand that, professor. But just what was the actual
experiment, in terms of physical operations?"

       *       *       *       *       *

Dandrik looked helpless for a moment. Faress, who had been choking back
a laugh, interrupted:

"Your Majesty, we were using the big turbo-linear accelerator to project
fast micropositos down an evacuated tube one kilometer in length, and
clocking them with light, the velocity of which has been established
almost absolutely. I will say that with respect to the light, there were
no observable inaccuracies at any time, and until the micropositos were
accelerated to 16.067543333-1/3 times light-speed, they registered much
as expected. Beyond that velocity, however, the target for the
micropositos began registering impacts before the source registered
emission, although the light target was still registering normally. I
notified Professor Dandrik about this, and----"

"You notified him. Wasn't he present at the time?"

"No, Your Majesty."

"Your Majesty, I am head of the physics department of the University. I
have too much administrative work to waste time on the technical aspects
of experiments like this," Dandrik interjected.

"I understand. Professor Faress was actually performing the experiment.
You told Professor Dandrik what had happened. What then?"

"Why, Your Majesty, he simply declared that the limit of accuracy had
been reached, and ordered the experiment dropped. He then reported the
highest reading before this anticipation effect was observed as the
newly established limit of accuracy in measuring the velocity of
accelerated micropositos, and said nothing whatever in his report about
the anticipation effect."

"I read a summary of the report. Why, Professor Dandrik, did you omit
mentioning this slightly unusual effect?"

"Why, because the whole thing was utterly preposterous, that's why!"
Dandrik barked; and then hastily added, "Your Imperial Majesty." He
turned and glared at Faress; professors do not glare at galactic
emperors. "Your Majesty, the limit of accuracy had been reached. After
that, it was only to be expected that the apparatus would give erratic
reports."

"It might have been expected that the apparatus would stop registering
increased velocity relative to the light-speed standard, or that it
would begin registering disproportionately," Faress said. "But, Your
Majesty, I'll submit that it was not to be expected that it would
register impacts before emissions. And I'll add this. After registering
this slight apparent jump into the future, there was no proportionate
increase in anticipation with further increase of acceleration. I wanted
to find out why. But when Professor Dandrik saw what was happening, he
became almost hysterical, and ordered the accelerator shut down as
though he were afraid it would blow up in his face."

       *       *       *       *       *

"I think it has blown up in his face," Prince Travann said quietly.
"Professor, have you any theory, or supposition, or even any wild guess,
as to how this anticipation effect occurs?"

"Yes, Your Highness. I suspect that the apparent anticipation is simply
an observational illusion, similar to the illusion of time-reversal
experienced when it was first observed, though not realized, that
positrons sometimes exceeded light-speed."

"Why, that's what I've been saying all along!" Dandrik broke in. "The
whole thing is an illusion, due----"

"To having reached the limit of observational accuracy; I understand,
Professor Dandrik. Go on, Professor Faress."

"I think that beyond 16.067543333-1/3 times light-speed, the
micropositos ceased to have any velocity at all, velocity being defined
as rate of motion in four-dimensional space-time. I believe they moved
through the three spatial dimensions without moving at all in the
fourth, temporal, dimension. They made that kilometer from source to
target, literally, in nothing flat. Instantaneity."

That must have been the first time he had actually come out and said it.
Dandrik jumped to his feet with a cry that was just short of being a
shriek.

"He's crazy! Your Majesty, you mustn't ... that is, well, I
mean--Please, Your Majesty, don't listen to him. He doesn't know what
he's saying. He's raving!"

"He knows perfectly well what he's saying, and it probably scares him
more than it does you. The difference is that he's willing to face it
and you aren't."

The difference was that Faress was a scientist and Dandrik was a science
teacher. To Faress, a new door had opened, the first new door in eight
hundred years. To Dandrik, it threatened invalidation of everything he
had taught since the morning he had opened his first class. He could no
longer say to his pupils, "You are here to learn from me." He would have
to say, more humbly, "_We_ are here to learn from the Universe."

It had happened so many times before, too. The comfortable and
established Universe had fitted all the known facts--and then new facts
had been learned that wouldn't fit it. The third planet of the Sol
system had once been the center of the Universe, and then Terra, and
Sol, and even the galaxy, had been forced to abdicate centricity. The
atom had been indivisible--until somebody divided it. There had been
intangible substance that had permeated the Universe, because it had
been necessary for the transmission of light--until it was demonstrated
to be unnecessary and nonexistent. And the speed of light had been the
ultimate velocity, once, and could be exceeded no more than the atom
could be divided. And light-speed had been constant, regardless of
distance from source, and the Universe, to explain certain observed
phenomena, had been believed to be expanding simultaneously in all
directions. And the things that had happened in psychology, when
psi-phenomena had become too obvious to be shrugged away.

