
The sun, starting from the first degree of Aries, the first day of
spring, passes through one constellation a month. The planets follow
the same pathway.

Confusion, therefore, respecting their identity can only arise in
connection with a study of one of the twelve constellations named
above, so that whenever a star of any size is seen in one of these
constellations, not accounted for in the diagram, the student may
conclude that this is a planet; especially if the unknown star does
not twinkle. It now remains to identify the planet.

This can best be done by referring to an almanac, which states what
planets are above the horizon, and which are morning and evening
stars. By morning star is meant that the planet is east of the sun; by
evening star, that it is west of the sun.

If the planet is in the west, and very brilliant, it is safe to assume
that it is the planet Venus.

If it is brighter than any of the fixed stars, and is some distance
from the sun, it is doubtless the colossal Jupiter.

If it is very red, it will probably be Mars.

Saturn is distinguished because of its pale, steady, yellow light.

As for Mercury, Uranus, and Neptune, the former is very near the sun,
and seldom seen; while Uranus and Neptune are so inconspicuous as to
lead to no confusion on the part of the novice.

A few notes of interest relative to the planets follow, taking them up
in regular order passing outward from the sun: Mercury, Venus, Mars,
Jupiter, Saturn, Uranus, Neptune.


MERCURY.

Mercury is the nearest to the sun of any of the planets. On this
account, and because of its rapid changes, it is seldom seen.

The most favorable time for observing it is just after sunset, or just
before sunrise, during the months of March, April, August, and
September, when it may be seen for a few successive days.

The greatest distance it ever departs from the sun on either side
varies approximately from sixteen to twenty-eight degrees. Its motion
resembles a pendulum, swinging from one side of the sun to the other.


VENUS.

Venus approaches nearer to the earth and is more brilliant than any
other planet. It is bright enough to cast a shadow at night, and is
sometimes visible even at noonday. It is almost as large as the earth,
and appears to oscillate, as Mercury does, on either side of the sun.

It never appears more than three hours after sunset, and as long
before the sunrise, and is never more than forty-eight degrees from
the sun.


MARS.

Mars is most like the earth of any of the planets, and, although not
as interesting an object to view as the more brilliant planets, Venus
and Jupiter, it claims our attention chiefly because of the surmises
respecting its habitability.

Mars appears to the naked eye as a bright red star, and when at a
favorable opposition to the earth (which occurs only once in every
fifteen years) it rivals Jupiter in splendor.

The planet may be mistaken for the first magnitude stars, Antares in
Scorpius, and Aldebaran in Taurus, near which it frequently passes.

The fixed stars, however, twinkle, while Mars glows steadily. If there
is any doubt in the student's mind as to the identity of the planet, a
few nights of observation, noting the changes in the planet's
position, will decide the point. It takes Mars about fifty-seven days
to pass through one constellation in the Zodiac.


JUPITER.

Jupiter is the largest of all the planets in the solar system, and it
is easily distinguished from the fixed stars because of its brilliancy
and splendor, exceeding in brightness all the planets excepting Venus,
and casting a perceptible shadow.

It moves slowly and majestically across the sky, advancing through the
Zodiac at the rate of one constellation yearly. It is therefore a
simple matter to forecast its position, for, in whatever constellation
it is seen to-day, one year hence it will be seen equally advanced in
the next constellation.

Although Jupiter appears to move slowly, it really travels at the
incomprehensible rate of five hundred miles a minute.

The most interesting feature about Jupiter for the amateur astronomer
consists in observing four of its moons, which are visible with a
small telescope. They appear like mere dots of light, and their
transit of or occultation with the planet (that is, their
disappearance before or behind its disk) can be watched, and is a
never failing source of pleasure. A large telescope alone reveals
Jupiter's four other moons.


SATURN.

Saturn is farther removed from the earth than any of the planets in
the solar system, visible to the naked eye. It is distinguished from
the fixed stars by the steadiness of its light, which is dull and of a
yellow hue, though to some it appears to be of a greenish tinge. It
seems barely to move, so slow is its motion among the stars, for it
takes two and one half years to pass through a single constellation of
the Zodiac.

Saturn has eight moons. Titan, its largest one, can be seen with a 3"
glass. Its celebrated rings are telescopic objects but a small glass
reveals them.


URANUS.

The student will hardly mistake Uranus for a fixed star, as it is only
under the most favorable circumstances that it can be seen with the
naked eye.

At its nearest approach to the earth, it is as bright as a
sixth-magnitude star. Uranus is accompanied by four moons, and takes
seven years to pass through a constellation of the Zodiac.


NEPTUNE.

Neptune is the most distant of the planets in the solar system, and is
never visible to the naked eye.

The earth comes properly under a discussion of the planets, but a
description of it is hardly within the scope of this work.

Confusion in identifying the planets is really confined to Mars and
Saturn, for Venus and Jupiter are much brighter than any of the fixed
stars, and their position in the heavens identifies them, as we have
seen before.

The following table of first-magnitude stars in the Zodiacal
constellations confines the question of identifying the planets to a
comparison of the unknown star with the following-named stars:

  Castor and Pollux in Gemini.
  Spica             "  Virgo.
  Regulus           "  Leo.
  Aldebaran         "  Taurus.
  Antares           "  Scorpius.

The first four stars named above are white in color, so that either
Mars or Saturn is readily distinguished from them.

As for Aldebaran and Antares, which are both red stars, not unlike
Mars and Saturn in color and magnitude, the fact that the latter do
not twinkle, and that they do not appear in the diagrams, should
satisfy the observer of their identity. Reference to an almanac, or a
few nights of observation, will in any case set at rest any doubt in
the matter.

[Illustration: THE PLANETARY ORBITS]

[Illustration: COMPARATIVE SIZE OF THE PLANETS.]




THE MILKY WAY.


The Milky Way, or Galaxy as it is sometimes called, is a great band of
light that stretches across the heavens. Certain portions of it are
worthy of being viewed with an opera-glass, which separates this
seemingly confused and hazy stream into numberless points of light,
emanating from myriads of suns.

This wonderful feature of the heavens is seen to best advantage during
the months of July, August, September, and October. Beginning near the
head of Cepheus, about thirty degrees from the North Pole, it passes
through Cassiopeia, Perseus, Auriga, part of Orion, and the feet of
Gemini, where it crosses the Ecliptic, and thence continues into the
southern hemisphere, beyond our ken in these latitudes.

It reappears in two branches in the region of Ophiuchus, one running
through the tail of Scorpius, the bow of Sagittarius, Aquila,
Delphinus, and Cygnus; the other above and almost parallel to it,
uniting with the first branch in Cygnus, and passing to Cepheus, the
place of beginning.

The student should note especially the strange gap between [a], [g],
and [e] Cygni. This dark space has been called the "Coal Sack."

The Milky Way in the vicinity of Cassiopeia is particularly rich, and
well repays a search with an opera-glass.

"The Galaxy covers more than one tenth of the visible heavens,
contains nine-tenths of the visible stars, and seems a vast
zone-shaped nebula, nearly a great circle of the sphere, the poles
being at Coma and Cetus."




THE MOTIONS OF THE STARS.


It may be that the student desires to proceed in this conquest of the
sky at a more rapid pace than the scheme of study permits. To assist
such, it should be borne in mind that the circumpolar constellations,
as Ursa Major, Ursa Minor, Draco, Cepheus, and Cassiopeia, are
designated,--are visible in our latitude in the northern sky every
night.

A reference to their diagrams, and a glance at any of the large plates
showing the entire group in their respective positions, will suffice
for the student to identify them.

The hours of darkness alone limit the speed with which a knowledge of
the constellations can be acquired.

Let us suppose that the student begins his search for the constellations
on the night of April 1st, at nine P.M. He has for his guide the large
plate, and the spring group of eleven constellations set forth in the
diagrams. The remaining three constellations of the circumpolar group
are, as we have seen before, visible in the north.

If he faces the western sky, he will see Andromeda just setting, and
Perseus, Taurus, Orion, Lepus, and Canis Major but a short distance
above the horizon. If he is so fortunate as to be able to identify
these, and the spring group, he may turn his attention wholly to the
eastern sky, where new constellations await him.

In the southeast he may see Virgo. In the east well up blazes
Arcturus, the gem of Bo[:o]tes, below which is the beautiful Northern
Crown, with the diamond in the head of Serpens beneath it. Hercules is
rising, and Vega in the Lyre should be seen just flashing on the view
in the northeast.

This completes the list of wonders visible at this precise time, but
the stars apparently are never still, and doubtless, while the student
has been passing from one constellation to another in the western and
southern skies, others have been rising in the east and northeast.

At ten P.M. the Lyre is well up, and Ophiuchus and Libra can be
discerned. At midnight Scorpius and Cygnus are ready to claim the
attention. By two o'clock A.M., Aquila, Delphinus, and Sagittarius
have risen, and at break of day Andromeda, Pegasus, and Capricornus
can be seen if the student has had the courage to remain awake this
length of time.

In no way can the seeming movement of the stars be better understood
than by actual observation. The observer must bear in mind that the
movement is an apparent one: that it is the earth that is moving and
not the stars. He has only to think of the analogy of the moving train
beside the one that is standing still, and the true state of affairs
will at once be evident.

To further appreciate this apparent change in the situation of the
constellations, the student should refer to the large plates
successively. In each successive one he will note the advancement
westward of the constellations mentioned above, rising in the east
late at night.

The student can best get an idea of this westward apparent movement of
the stars by noting the position of some bright first-magnitude star
from night to night. He will soon be able to calculate the position of
this star a month or more ahead, and this calculation applies to all
the constellations and stars.

It is not within the scope of this work to go into this matter in
detail. The author merely desires to mention this fact of apparent
change of position in the stars, a fact that will be noticeable to the
observer in a short time, and a fact that it is hoped he will be able
to explain to his own satisfaction with the aid of the foregoing
remarks.

It will be noticed that the stars on the diagrams are all numbered and
lettered. The numbers refer to the magnitude of the star,--that is,
the brightness of it, the first-magnitude stars being the brightest,
the second-magnitude stars two-and-a-half times less bright, etc.

The letters are those of the Greek alphabet, and the student if not
familiar with it is advised to consult a Greek grammar.

In the text, in referring to certain stars in the constellations, the
genitive case of the Latin name of the constellation is given; for
example, Vega is known as [a] Lyrae, meaning alpha of Lyra, Aldebaran
as [a] Tauri, alpha of Taurus, etc.

The twilight hour affords an excellent opportunity of fixing the
relative positions of the first-magnitude stars in the mind, for at
that time they alone, save the planets, are visible.




METEORS, OR SHOOTING-STARS.


As this work is designed primarily to cover what is observable in the
starlit heavens with the naked eye, the subject of meteors, or
shooting-stars, comes properly within its scope.

There are few persons, if any, who have not witnessed the sight of a
splendid meteor speeding across the sky, and such a sight always calls
forth exclamations of wonder and delight.

Apparently these evanescent wanderers in space are without distinctive
features, and baffle classification; but, like all that nature reveals
to us, they have been found, for the most part, to conform to certain
laws, and to bear certain marks of resemblance that permit of their
identification and classification.

By careful observation for over fifty years the meteors, generally
speaking, have been so arranged that they come under the head of one
of the nearly three hundred distinct showers which are now recognized
by astronomers.

Many of these showers are too feeble and faint to be worthy of the
attention of one not especially interested in the subject, but certain
ones are well worth observing. There is always a pleasure in being
able to recognize at a glance a certain definite manifestation of
nature, be it a rare flower or a flashing meteor.

The generally accepted theory respecting the meteors is that they were
all originally parts of comets now disintegrated, and the four
well-known showers of April 20th, August 10th and 14th, and November
27th, bear testimony to this theory.

The apparent velocity of the meteors is between ten and forty-five
miles a second, and their average height is about seventy-six miles at
first appearance, and fifty-one miles at disappearance. Occasionally a
meteor is so large and compact as to escape total destruction, and
falls to the earth. Specimens of these meteorites are to be found in
our best museums.

I have seen fit to divide the principal meteor showers into four
groups, according to the seasons in which they appear, and have placed
them respectively at the conclusion of each season's work on the
constellations.

By radiant point is meant the point from which the meteors start on
their flight. This point is an apparent one, however, due to an
illusion of perspective, for the meteors really approach the earth in
parallel paths.

The dates given for these showers are those of the maxima, and the
meteors should be looked for several nights before and after the dates
specified.

The showers that are to be seen after midnight are, unless of special
note, omitted.

There are, besides the meteors that have been classified, certain
shooting-stars that apparently have no determined radiant point. These
are called sporadic meteors.

In these lists of meteors, the radiant point is only approximately
given; for scientific purposes a far more exact position is required
in terms of right ascension and declination. There are several good
lists of meteoric showers to be obtained, which afford this
information for those who care to pursue the matter more in detail.
See the Rev. T.W. Webb's book, entitled _Celestial Objects for Common
Telescopes_. For purposes of identification, the radiant points here
given will be found for the most part sufficient.


NOTE.

    Many readers of this book may be the fortunate possessors of
    small telescopes. It may be that they have observed the
    heavens from time to time in a desultory way and have no
    notion that valuable and practical scientific research work
    can be accomplished with a small glass. If those who are
    willing to aid in the great work of astrophysical research
    will communicate with the author he will be pleased to
    outline for them a most practical and fascinating line of
    observational work that will enable them to share in the
    advance of our knowledge respecting the stars. It is work
    that involves no mathematics, and its details are easily
    mastered.




THE NAMES OF THE STARS AND THEIR MEANINGS.


  ACUBENS, [a] _Cancri_, "the claws."

    Situated in one of the Crab's claws. It is white in color
    and culminates[1] March 18th.

  A-DAR'-A, [e] _Canis Majoris_, "the virgins," a name for
    four stars, of which Adara is brightest.

    Situated in the Dog's right thigh. It is pale orange in
    color, and culminates Feb. 11th.

  ADHIL, [e] _Andromedae_, "the train of a garment."

    Situated in the left shoulder of the chained lady.

  ALADFAR (al-ad-f[:a]r), [m] _Lyrae_, "the talons" (of the
    falling eagle)

  AL BALI, [e] _Aquarii_, "the good fortune of the swallower."

  AL-BI'-REO, or AL-BIR'[:E]-O [b] _Cygni_, origin doubtful.
    Means the beak of the hen.

    Situated in the beak of the Swan and the base of the Cross.
    Its color is topaz yellow, and it culminates Aug. 28th.

  ALCAID, [[^e]] _Ursae Majoris_. _See_ Benetnasch.

  ALCHIBA (al-k[=e]-b[:a]'), [a] _Corvi_, "the tent," the desert
    title for the constellation.

    Situated in the eye of the Crow. Orange in color.

  ALCOR (al'-k[^o]r), g _Ursae Majoris_, "the cavalier" or "the
    rider."

    Situated close to Mizar in the handle of the "Dipper."
    Silver white in color. The Arabs called this star "Saidak,"
    meaning "the proof," because they used it to test a good
    eye.

  AL-CY'-O-NE, [[^e]] _Tauri_.

    Greenish yellow in color. The brightest of the Pleiades.
    Situated in the neck of the Bull.

  AL-DEB'-A-RAN, [a] _Tauri_, "the hindmost" or the
    "follower," _i.e._ of the Pleiades.

    Situated in the eye of the Bull. Pale rose in color. It is
    receding from the earth at the rate of thirty miles per
    second, and culminates Jan. 10.

    [a] Tauri is sometimes called Palilicium.

  ALDERAMIN (Al-der-am'-in), [a] _Cephei_ "the right arm." It
    now marks the shoulder of Cepheus.

    White in color. It culminates Sept. 27th.

  ALDHAFERA, [z] _Leonis_.

    Situated in the "Sickle," and the neck of the Lion. It
    culminates April 8th.

  ALFIRK (al-ferk'), or ALPHIRK, "stars of the flock," [b]
    _Cephei_.

    The Arab name for the constellation. Situated in the girdle
