idea, but the idea is worthless without the X. You say that the stuff is
extremely rare--where did they get it?"

"That's right, Mart. I never thought of that. The stuff _is_ extremely
rare. I am supposed to know something about rare metals, and I never
heard of it before--there isn't even a gap in the Periodic System in
which it belongs. I would bet a hat that we have every milligram known
to the world at present."

"Well, then," said the practical Crane. "We had better see whether or
not we have all we started with."

Asking Shiro to bring the large bottle from the vault, he opened the
living-room safe and brought forth the small vial. The large bottle was
still nearly full, the seal upon it unbroken. The vial was apparently
exactly as Seaton had left it after he had made his bars.

"Our stuff seems to be all there," said Crane. "It looks as though
someone else has discovered it also."

"I don't believe it," said Seaton, their positions now reversed. "It's
altogether too rare."

He scanned both bottles narrowly.

"I can tell by taking the densities," he added, and ran up to the
laboratory, returning with a Westphal balance in his hand. After testing
both solutions he said slowly:

"Well, the mystery is solved. The large bottle has a specific gravity of
1.80, as it had when I prepared it; that in the vial reads only 1.41.
Somebody has burglarized this safe and taken almost half of the
solution, filling the vial up with colored water. The stuff is so strong
that I probably never would have noticed the difference."

"But who could it have been?"

"Search me! But it's nothing to worry about now, anyway, because whoever
it was is gone where he'll never do it again. He's taken the solution
with him, too, so that nobody else can get it."

"I wish I were sure of that, Dick. The man who tried to do the research
work is undoubtedly gone--but who is back of him?"

"Nobody, probably. Who would want to be?"

"To borrow your own phrase, Dick, Scott 'chirped it' when he called you
'Nobody Holme.' For a man with your brains you have the least sense of
anybody I know. You know that this thing is worth, as a power project
alone, thousands of millions of dollars, and that there are dozens of
big concerns who would cheerfully put us both out of the way for a
thousandth of that amount. The question is not to find one concern who
might be backing a thing like that, but to pick out the one who is
backing it."

       *       *       *       *       *

After thinking deeply for a few moments he went on:

"The idea was taken from your demonstration in the Bureau, either by an
eye-witness or by someone who heard about it afterward, probably the
former. Even though it failed, one man saw the possibilities. Who was
that man? Who was there?"

"Oh, a lot of the fellows were there. Scott, Smith, Penfield, DuQuesne,
Roberts--quite a bunch of them. Let's see--Scott hasn't brains enough to
do anything. Smith doesn't know anything about anything except amines.
Penfield is a pure scientist, who wouldn't even quote an authority
without asking permission. DuQuesne is ... hm-m ... DuQuesne ... he ...
I...."

"Yes. DuQuesne. I have heard of him. He's the big black fellow, about
your own size? He has the brains, the ability, and the inclination, has
he not?"

"Well, I wouldn't want to say that. I don't know him very well, and
personal dislike is no ground at all for suspicion, you know."

"Enough to warrant investigation. Is there anyone else who might have
reasoned it out as you did, and as DuQuesne possibly could?"

"Not that I remember. But we can count DuQuesne out, anyway, because he
called me up this afternoon about some notes on gallium; so he is still
in the Bureau. Besides, he wouldn't let anybody else investigate it if
he got it. He would do it himself, and I don't think he would have blown
himself up. I never did like him very well personally--he's such a cold,
inhuman son of a fish--but you've got to hand it to him for ability.
He's probably the best man in the world today on that kind of thing."

"No, I do not think that we will count him out yet. He may have had
nothing to do with it, but we will have him investigated nevertheless,
and will guard against future visitors here."

Turning to the telephone, he called the private number of a well-known
detective.

"Prescott? Crane speaking. Sorry to get you out of bed, but I should
like to have a complete report upon Dr. Marc C. DuQuesne, of the Rare
Metals Laboratory, as soon as possible. Every detail for the last two
weeks, every move and every thought if possible. Please keep a good man
on him until further notice.... I wish you would send two or three
guards out here right away, to-night; men you can trust and who will
stay awake.... Thanks. Good night."




CHAPTER V

Direct Action


Seaton and Crane spent some time developing the object-compass. Crane
made a number of these instruments, mounted in gymbals, so that the
delicate needles were free to turn in any direction whatever. They were
mounted upon jeweled bearings, but bearings made of such great strength,
that Seaton protested.

"What's the use, Mart? You don't expect a watch to be treated like a
stone-crusher. That needle weighs less than half a gram. Why mount it as
though it weighed twenty pounds?"

"To be safe. Remember the acceleration the Lark will be capable of, and
also that on some other worlds, which we hope to visit, this needle will
weigh more than it does here."

"That's right, Mart, I never thought of that. Anyway, we can't be too
safe to suit me."

When the compasses were done and the power through them had been
adjusted to one-thousandth of a watt, the lowest they could maintain
with accuracy, they focused each instrument upon one of a set of most
carefully weighed glass beads, ranging in size from a pin-head up to a
large marble, and had the beads taken across the country by Shiro, in
order to test the sensitiveness and accuracy of the new instruments. The
first test was made at a distance of one hundred miles, the last at
nearly three thousand. They found, as they had expected, that from the
weight of the object and the time it took the needle to come to rest
after being displaced from its line by a gentle tap of the finger, they
could easily calculate the distance from the compass to the object. This
fact pleased Crane immensely, as it gave him a sure means of navigation
in space. The only objection to its use in measuring earthly distances
was its extreme delicacy, the needle focused upon the smallest bead in
the lot at a distance of three thousand miles coming to rest in little
more than one second.

The question of navigation solved, the two next devoted themselves to
perfecting the "X-plosive bullet," as Seaton called it. From his notes
and equations Seaton calculated the weight of copper necessary to exert
the explosive force of one pound of nitro-glycerin, and weighed out, on
the most delicate assay-balance made, various fractions and multiples of
this amount of the treated copper, while Crane fitted up the bullets of
automatic-pistol cartridges to receive the charges and to explode them
on impact.

They placed their blueprints and working notes in the safe, as usual,
taking with them only those notes dealing with the object-compass and
the X-plosive bullet, upon which they were still working. No one except
Shiro knew that the original tracings, from which the blue-prints had
been made, and their final, classified notes were always kept in the
vault. They cautioned him and the three guards to keep a close watch
until they returned. Then they set out in the biplane, to try out the
new weapon in a lonely place where the exploding shells could do no
damage.

       *       *       *       *       *

They found that the X-plosive came fully up to expectations. The
smallest charge they had prepared, fired by Crane at a great stump a
full hundred yards away from the bare, flat-topped knoll that had
afforded them a landing-place, tore it bodily from the ground and
reduced it to splinters, while the force of the explosion made the two
men stagger.

"She sure is big medicine!" laughed Seaton. "Wonder what a real one will
do?" and drawing his pistol, he inserted a cartridge carrying a much
heavier charge.

"Better be careful with the big ones," cautioned Crane. "What are you
going to shoot at?"

"That rock over there," pointing to a huge boulder half a mile away
across the small valley. "Want to bet me a dinner I can't hit it?"

"No. You forget that I saw you win the pistol trophy of the District."

The pistol cracked, and when the bullet reached its destination the
great stone was obliterated in a vast ball of flame. After a moment
there was a deafening report--a crash as though the world were falling
to pieces. Both men were hurled violently backward, stumbling and
falling flat. Picking themselves up, they looked across the valley at
the place where the boulder had stood, to see only an immense cloud of
dust, which slowly blew away, revealing a huge hole in the ground. They
were silent a moment, awed by the frightful power they had loosed.

"Well, Mart," Seaton broke the silence, "I'll say those one-milligram
loads are plenty big enough. If that'd been something coming after
us--whether any possible other-world animal, a foreign battleship, or
the mythical great sea-serpent himself, it'd be a good Indian now. Yes?
No?"

"Yes. When we use the heavier charges we must use long-range rifles.
Have you had enough demonstration or do you want to shoot some more?"

"I've had enough, thanks. That last rock I bounced off of was no pillow,
I'll tell the world. Besides, it looks as though I'd busted a leg or two
off of our noble steed with my shot, and we may have to walk back home."

An examination of the plane, which had been moved many feet and almost
overturned by the force of the explosion, revealed no damage that they
could not repair on the spot, and dusk saw them speeding through the air
toward the distant city.

In response to a summons from his chief, Perkins silently appeared in
Brookings' office, without his usual complacent smile.

"Haven't you done anything yet, after all this time?" demanded the
magnate. "We're getting tired of this delay."

"I can't help it, Mr. Brookings," replied the subordinate. "They've got
detectives from Prescott's all over the place. Our best men have been
trying ever since the day of the explosion, but can't do a thing without
resorting to violence. I went out there myself and looked them over,
without being seen. There isn't a man there with a record, and I haven't
been able so far to get anything on any one of them that we can use as a
handle."

"No, Prescott's men are hard to do anything with. But can't you...?"
Brookings paused significantly.

"I was coming to that. I thought one of them might be seen, and I talked
to him a little, over the phone, but I couldn't talk loud enough without
consulting you. I mentioned ten, but he held out for twenty-five. Said
he wouldn't consider it at all, but he wants to quit Prescott and go
into business for himself."

"Go ahead on twenty-five. We want to get action," said Brookings, as he
wrote an order on the cashier for twenty-five thousand dollars in
small-to-medium bills. "That is cheap enough, considering what
DuQuesne's rough stuff would probably cost. Report tomorrow about four,
over our private phone--no, I'll come down to the cafe, it's safer."

       *       *       *       *       *

The place referred to was the Perkins Cafe, a high-class restaurant on
Pennsylvania Avenue, heavily patronized by the diplomatic, political,
financial, and sporting circles of upper-class Washington. It was famous
for its discreet waiters, and for the absolutely private rooms. Many of
its patrons knew of its unique telephone service, in which each call
went through such a devious system of relays that any attempt to trace
it was hopeless; they knew that while "The Perkins" would not knowingly
lend itself to any violation of law, it was an entirely safe and
thoroughly satisfactory place in which to conduct business of the most
secret and confidential character; a place from which one could enjoy
personal conversation with persons to whom he wished to remain invisible
and untraceable: a place which had never been known to "leak." For these
reasons it was really the diplomatic and political center of the
country, and over its secret wires had gone, in guarded language,
messages that would have rocked the world had they gone astray. It was
recognized that the place was occasionally, by its very nature, used for
illegal purposes, but it was such a political, financial, and diplomatic
necessity that it carried a "Hands Off" sign. It was never investigated
by Congress and never raided by the police. Hundreds of telephone calls
were handled daily. A man would come in, order something served in a
private room, leave a name at the desk, and say that he was expecting a
call. There the affair ended. The telephone operators were hand-picked,
men of very short memories, carefully trained never to look at a face
and never to remember a name or a number. Although the precaution was
unnecessary, this shortness of memory was often encouraged by bills of
various denominations.

No one except Perkins and the heads of the great World Steel Corporation
knew that the urbane and polished proprietor of the cafe was a criminal
of the blackest kind, whose liberty and life itself were dependent upon
the will of the Corporation; or that the restaurant was especially
planned and maintained as a blind for its underground activities; or
that Perkins was holding a position which suited him exactly and which
he would not have given up for wealth or glory--that of being the
guiding genius who planned nefarious things for the men higher up, and
saw to it that they were carried out by the men lower down. He was in
constant personal touch with his superiors, but in order to avoid any
chance of betrayal he never saw his subordinates personally. Not only
were they entirely ignorant of his identity, but all possible means of
their tracing him had been foreseen and guarded against. He called them
on the telephone, but they never called him. The only possible way in
which any of his subordinates could get in touch with him was by means
of the wonderful wireless telephone already referred to, developed by a
drug-crazed genius who had died shortly after it was perfected. It was a
tiny instrument, no larger than a watch, but of practically unlimited
range. The controlling central station of the few instruments in
existence, from which any instrument could be cut out, changed in tune,
or totally destroyed at will, was in Perkins' office safe. A man
intrusted with an unusually important job would receive from an unknown
source an instrument, with directions sufficient for its use. As soon as
the job was done he would find, upon again attempting to use the
telephone, that its interior was so hopelessly wrecked that not even the
most skilled artisan could reproduce what it had once been.

       *       *       *       *       *

At four o'clock Brookings was ushered into the private office of the
master criminal, who was plainly ill at ease.

"I've got to report another failure, Mr. Brookings. It's nobody's fault,
just one of those things that couldn't be helped. I handled this myself.
Our man left the door unlocked and kept the others busy in another room.
I had just started to work when Crane's Japanese servant, who was
supposed to be asleep, appeared upon the scene. If I hadn't known
something about jiu-jutsu myself, he'd have broken my neck. As it was, I
barely got away, with the Jap and all three guards close behind me...."

"I'm not interested in excuses," broke in the magnate, angrily. "We'll
have to turn it over to DuQuesne after all unless you get something
done, and get it done quick. Can't you get to that Jap some way?"

"Certainly I can. I never yet saw the man who couldn't be reached, one
way or another. I've had 'Silk' Humphreys, the best fixer in the
business, working on him all day, and he'll be neutral before night. If
the long green won't quiet him--and I never saw a Jap refuse it yet--a
lead pipe will. Silk hasn't reported yet, but I expect to hear from him
any minute now, through our man out there."

As he spoke, the almost inaudible buzzer in his pocket gave a signal.

"There he is now," said Perkins, as he took out his wireless
instrument. "You might listen in and hear what he has to say."

Brookings took out his own telephone and held it to his ear.

"Hello," Perkins spoke gruffly into the tiny transmitter. "What've you
got on your chest?"

"Your foot slipped on the Jap," the stranger replied. "He crabbed the
game right. Slats and the big fellow put all the stuff into the box,
told us to watch it until they get back tonight--they may be late--then
went off in Slats' ship to test something--couldn't find out what. Silk
tackled the yellow boy, and went up to fifty grand, but the Jap couldn't
see him at all. Silk started to argue, and the Jap didn't do a thing but
lay him out, cold. This afternoon, while the Jap was out in the grounds,
three stick-up men jumped him. He bumped one of them off with his hands
and the others with his gat--one of those big automatics that throw a
slug like a cannon. None of us knew he had it. That's all, except that I
am quitting Prescott right now. Anything else I can do for you, whoever
you are?"

