     obtained by these methods is never quite pure. About 1% of the
     product is composed of other gases, from which it is very
     difficult to separate the nitrogen. The impure nitrogen so
     obtained may, however, be used for a study of most of the
     properties of nitrogen, since these are not materially affected
     by the presence of the other gases.

~Preparation from compounds of nitrogen.~ Pure nitrogen may be obtained
from certain compounds of the element. Thus, if heat is applied to the
compound ammonium nitrite (NH_{4}NO_{2}), the change represented in the
following equation takes place:

    NH_{4}NO_{2} = 2H_{2}O + 2N.

~Physical properties.~ Nitrogen is similar to oxygen and hydrogen in that
it is a colorless, odorless, and tasteless gas. One liter of nitrogen
weighs 1.2501 g. It is almost insoluble in water. It can be obtained in
the form of a colorless liquid having a boiling point of -195 deg. at
ordinary pressure. At -214 deg. it solidifies.

~Chemical properties.~ Nitrogen is characterized by its inertness. It is
neither combustible nor a supporter of combustion. At ordinary
temperatures it will not combine directly with any of the elements
except under rare conditions. At higher temperatures it combines with
magnesium, lithium, titanium, and a number of other elements. The
compounds formed are called _nitrides_, just as compounds of an element
with oxygen are called _oxides_. When it is mixed with oxygen and
subjected to the action of electric sparks, the two gases slowly combine
forming oxides of nitrogen. A mixture of nitrogen and hydrogen when
treated similarly forms ammonia, a gaseous compound of nitrogen and
hydrogen. Since we are constantly inhaling nitrogen, it is evident that
it is not poisonous. Nevertheless life would be impossible in an
atmosphere of pure nitrogen on account of the exclusion of the necessary
oxygen.

     ~Argon, helium, neon, krypton, xenon.~ These are all rare
     elements occurring in the air in very small quantities. Argon,
     discovered in 1894, was the first one obtained. Lord Rayleigh,
     an English scientist, while engaged in determining the exact
     weights of various gases, observed that the nitrogen obtained
     from the air is slightly heavier than pure nitrogen obtained
     from its compounds. After repeating his experiments many times,
     always with the same results, Rayleigh finally concluded that
     the nitrogen which he had obtained from the air was not pure,
     but was mixed with a small amount of some unknown gas, the
     density of which is greater than that of nitrogen. Acting on
     this assumption, Rayleigh, together with the English chemist
     Ramsay, attempted to separate the nitrogen from the unknown
     gas. Knowing that nitrogen would combine with magnesium, they
     passed the nitrogen obtained from the air and freed from all
     known substances through tubes containing magnesium heated to
     the necessary temperature. After repeating this operation, they
     finally succeeded in obtaining from the atmospheric nitrogen a
     small volume of gas which would not combine with magnesium and
     hence could not be nitrogen. This proved to be a new element,
     to which they gave the name _argon_. As predicted, this new
     element was found to be heavier than nitrogen, its density as
     compared with hydrogen as a standard being approximately 20,
     that of nitrogen being only 14. About 1% of the atmospheric
     nitrogen proved to be argon. The new element is characterized
     by having no affinity for other elements. Even under the most
     favorable conditions it has not been made to combine with any
     other element. On this account it was given the name argon,
     signifying lazy or idle. Like nitrogen, it is colorless,
     odorless, and tasteless. It has been liquefied and solidified.
     Its boiling point is -187 deg..

     Helium was first found in the gases expelled from certain
     minerals by heating. Through the agency of the spectroscope it
     had been known to exist in the sun long before its presence on
     the earth had been demonstrated,--a fact suggested by the name
     helium, signifying the sun. Its existence in traces in the
     atmosphere has also been proven. It was first liquefied by
     Onnes in July, 1908. Its boiling point, namely -269 deg., is the
     lowest temperature yet reached.

     The remaining elements of this group--neon, krypton, and
     xenon--have been obtained from liquid air. When liquid air is
     allowed to boil, the constituents which are the most difficult
     to liquefy, and which therefore have the lowest boiling points,
     vaporize first, followed by the others in the order of their
     boiling points. It is possible in this way to make at least a
     partial separation of the air into its constituents, and Ramsay
     thus succeeded in obtaining from liquid air not only the known
     constituents, including argon and helium, but also the new
     elements, neon, krypton, and xenon. These elements, as well as
     helium, all proved to be similar to argon in that they are
     without chemical activity, apparently forming no compounds
     whatever. The percentages present in the air are very small.
     The names, neon, krypton, xenon, signify respectively, new,
     hidden, stranger.


EXERCISES

1. How could you distinguish between oxygen, hydrogen, and nitrogen?

2. Calculate the relative weights of nitrogen and oxygen; of nitrogen
and hydrogen.

3. In the preparation of nitrogen from the air, how would hydrogen do as
a substance for the removal of the oxygen?

4. What weight of nitrogen can be obtained from 10 l. of air measured
under the conditions of temperature and pressure which prevail in your
laboratory?

5. How many grams of ammonium nitrite are necessary in the preparation
of 20 l. of nitrogen measured over water under the conditions of
temperature and pressure which prevail in your laboratory?

6. If 10 l. of air, measured under standard conditions, is passed over
100 g. of hot copper, how much will the copper gain in weight?

[Illustration: WILLIAM RAMSAY (Scotch) (1855-)

Has made many studies in the physical properties of substances;
discovered helium; together with Lord Rayleigh and others he discovered
argon, krypton, xenon, and neon; has contributed largely to the
knowledge of radio-active substances, showing that radium gradually
gives rise to helium; professor at University College, London]




CHAPTER VIII

THE ATMOSPHERE


~Atmosphere and air.~ The term _atmosphere_ is applied to the gaseous
envelope surrounding the earth. The term _air_ is generally applied to a
limited portion of this envelope, although the two words are often used
interchangeably. Many references have already been made to the
composition and properties of the atmosphere. These statements must now
be collected and discussed somewhat more in detail.

~Air formerly regarded as an element.~ Like water, air was at first
regarded as elementary in character. Near the close of the eighteenth
century Scheele, Priestley, and Lavoisier showed by their experiments
that it is a mixture of at least two gases,--those which we now call
oxygen and nitrogen. By burning substances in an inclosed volume of air
and noting the contraction in volume due to the removal of the oxygen,
they were able to determine with some accuracy the relative volumes of
oxygen and nitrogen present in the air.

~The constituents of the atmosphere.~ The constituents of the atmosphere
may be divided into two general groups: those which are essential to
life and those which are not essential.

1. _Constituents essential to life._ In addition to oxygen and nitrogen
at least two other substances, namely, carbon dioxide and water vapor,
must be present in the atmosphere in order that life may exist. The
former of these is a gaseous compound of carbon and oxygen having the
formula CO_{2}. Its properties will be discussed in detail in the
chapter on the compounds of carbon. Its presence in the air may be shown
by causing the air to bubble through a solution of calcium hydroxide
(Ca(OH)_{2}), commonly called lime water. The carbon dioxide combines
with the calcium hydroxide in accordance with the following equation:

    Ca(OH)_{2} + CO_{2} = CaCO_{3} + H_{2}O.

The resulting calcium carbonate (CaCO_{3}) is insoluble in water and
separates in the form of a white powder, which causes the solution to
appear milky.

The presence of water vapor is readily shown by its condensation on cold
objects as well as by the fact that a bit of calcium chloride when
exposed to the air becomes moist, and may even dissolve in the water
absorbed from the air.

2. _Constituents not essential to life._ In addition to the essential
constituents, the air contains small percentages of various other gases,
the presence of which so far as is known is not essential to life. This
list includes the rare elements, argon, helium, neon, krypton, and
xenon; also hydrogen, ammonia, hydrogen dioxide, and probably ozone.
Certain minute forms of life (germs) are also present, the decay of
organic matter being due to their presence.

     ~Function of each of the essential constituents.~ (1) The oxygen
     directly supports life through respiration. (2) The nitrogen,
     on account of its inactivity, serves to dilute the oxygen, and
     while contrary to the older views, it is possible that life
     might continue to exist in the absence of the atmospheric
     nitrogen, yet the conditions of life would be entirely changed.
     Moreover, nitrogen is an essential constituent of all animal
     and plant life. It was formerly supposed that neither animals
     nor plants could assimilate the free nitrogen, but it has been
     shown recently that the plants of at least one natural order,
     the Leguminosae, to which belong the beans, peas, and clover,
     have the power of directly assimilating the free nitrogen from
     the atmosphere. This is accomplished through the agency of
     groups of bacteria, which form colonies in little tubercles on
     the roots of the plants. These bacteria probably assist in the
     absorption of nitrogen by changing the free nitrogen into
     compounds which can be assimilated by the plant. Fig. 27 shows
     the tubercles on the roots of a variety of bean. (3) The
     presence of water vapor in the air is necessary to prevent
     excessive evaporation from both plants and animals. (4) Carbon
     dioxide is an essential plant food.

[Illustration: Fig. 27]

~The quantitative analysis of air.~ A number of different methods have
been devised for the determination of the percentages of the
constituents present in the atmosphere. Among these are the following.

1. _Determination of oxygen._ (1) The oxygen is withdrawn from a
measured volume of air inclosed in a tube, by means of phosphorus.

     To make the determination, a graduated tube is filled with
     water and inverted in a vessel of water. Air is introduced into
     the tube until it is partially filled with the gas. The volume
     of the inclosed air is carefully noted and reduced to standard
     conditions. A small piece of phosphorus is attached to a wire
     and brought within the tube as shown in Fig. 28. After a few
     hours the oxygen in the inclosed air will have combined with
     the phosphorus, the water rising to take its place. The
     phosphorus is removed and the volume is again noted and reduced
     to standard conditions. The contraction in the volume of the
     air is equal to the volume of oxygen absorbed.

[Illustration: Fig. 28]

(2) The oxygen may also be estimated by passing a measured volume of air
through a tube containing copper heated to a high temperature. The
oxygen in the air combines with the copper to form copper oxide (CuO).
Hence the increase in the weight of the copper equals the weight of the
oxygen in the volume of air taken.

(3) A more accurate method is the following. A eudiometer tube is filled
with mercury and inverted in a vessel of the same liquid. A convenient
amount of air is then introduced into the tube and its volume accurately
noted. There is then introduced more than sufficient hydrogen to combine
with the oxygen present in the inclosed air, and the volume is again
accurately noted. The mixture is then exploded by an electric spark, and
the volume is once more taken. By subtracting this volume from the total
volume of the air and hydrogen there is obtained the contraction in
volume due to the union of the oxygen and hydrogen. The volume occupied
by the water formed by the union of the two gases is so small that it
may be disregarded in the calculation. Since oxygen and hydrogen combine
in the ratio 1: 2 by volume, it is evident that the contraction in
volume due to the combination is equal to the volume occupied by the
oxygen in the air contained in the tube, plus twice this volume of
hydrogen. In other words, one third of the total contraction is equal to
the volume occupied by the oxygen in the inclosed air. The following
example will make this clear:

Volume of air in tube                                        50.0 cc.
Volume after introducing hydrogen                            80.0
Volume after combination of oxygen and hydrogen              48.5
Contraction in volume due to combination (80 cc.-48.5 cc.)   31.5
Volume of oxygen in 50 cc. of air (1/3 of 31.5)              10.5

All these methods agree in showing that 100 volumes of dry air contain
approximately 21 volumes of oxygen.

2. _Determination of nitrogen._ If the gas left after the removal of
oxygen from a portion of air is passed over heated magnesium, the
nitrogen is withdrawn, argon and the other rare elements being left. It
may thus be shown that of the 79 volumes of gas left after the removal
of the oxygen from 100 volumes of air, approximately 78 are nitrogen and
0.93 argon. The other elements are present in such small quantities that
they may be neglected.

3. _Determination of carbon dioxide._ The percentage of carbon dioxide
in any given volume of air may be determined by passing the air over
calcium hydroxide or some other compound which will combine with the
carbon dioxide. The increase in the weight of the hydroxide equals the
weight of the carbon dioxide absorbed. The amount present in the open
normal air is from 3 to 4 parts by volume in 10,000 volumes of air, or
about 0.04%.

4. _Determination of water vapor._ The water vapor present in a given
volume of air may be determined by passing the air over calcium chloride
(or some other compound which has a strong affinity for water), and
noting the increase in the weight of the chloride. The amount present
varies not only with the locality, but there is a wide variation from
day to day in the same locality because of the winds and changes in
temperature.

~Processes affecting the composition of the air.~ The most important of
these processes are the following.

1. _Respiration._ In the process of respiration some of the oxygen in
the inhaled air is absorbed by the blood and carried to all parts of the
body, where it combines with the carbon of the worn-out tissues. The
products of oxidation are carried back to the lungs and exhaled in the
form of carbon dioxide. The amount exhaled by an adult averages about 20
l. per hour. Hence in a poorly ventilated room occupied by a number of
people the amount of carbon dioxide rapidly increases. While this gas is
not poisonous unless present in large amounts, nevertheless air
containing more than 15 parts in 10,000 is not fit for respiration.

2. _Combustion._ All of the ordinary forms of fuel contain large
percentages of carbon. On burning, this carbon combines with oxygen in
the air, forming carbon dioxide. Combustion and respiration, therefore,
tend to diminish the amount of oxygen in the air and to increase the
amount of carbon dioxide.

3. _Action of plants._ Plants have the power, when in the sunlight, of
absorbing carbon dioxide from the air, retaining the carbon and
returning at least a portion of the oxygen to the air. It will be
observed that these changes are just the opposite of those brought about
by the processes of respiration and combustion.

     ~Poisonous effect of exhaled air.~ The differences in the
     percentages of oxygen, carbon dioxide, and moisture present in
     inhaled air and exhaled air are shown in the following
     analyses.

                       INHALED AIR     EXHALED AIR
       Oxygen            21.00%          16.00%
       Carbon dioxide     0.04            4.38
       Moisture         variable        saturated

     The foul odor of respired air is due to the presence of a
     certain amount of organic matter. It is possible that this
     organic matter rather than the carbon dioxide is responsible
     for the injurious effects which follow the respiration of
     impure air. The extent of such organic impurities present may
     be judged, however, by the amount of carbon dioxide present,
     since the two are exhaled together.

     ~The cycle of carbon in nature.~ Under the influence of sunlight,
     the carbon dioxide absorbed from the air by plants reacts with
     water and small amounts of other substances absorbed from the
     soil to form complex compounds of carbon which constitute the
     essential part of the plant tissue. This reaction is attended
     by the evolution of oxygen, which is restored to the air. The
     compounds resulting from these changes are much richer in their
     energy content than are the substances from which they are
     formed; hence a certain amount of energy must have been
     absorbed in their formation. The source of this energy is the
     sun's rays.

     If the plant is burned, the changes which took place in the
     formation of the compounds present are largely reversed. The
     carbon and hydrogen present combine with oxygen taken from the
     air to form carbon dioxide and water, while the energy absorbed
     from the sun's rays is liberated in the form of energy of heat.
     If, on the other hand, the plant is used as food, the compounds
     present are used in building up the tissues of the body. When
     this tissue breaks down, the changes which it undergoes are
     very similar to those which take place when the plant is
     burned. The carbon and hydrogen combine with the inhaled oxygen
     to form carbon dioxide and water, which are exhaled. The energy
     possessed by the complex substances is liberated partly in the
     form of energy of heat, which maintains the heat of the body,
     and partly in the various forms of muscular energy. The carbon
     originally absorbed from the air by the plant in the form of
     carbon dioxide is thus restored to the air and is ready to
     repeat the cycle of changes.

~The composition of the air is constant.~ Notwithstanding the changes
constantly taking place which tend to alter the composition of the air,
the results of a great many analyses of air collected in the open fields
show that the percentages of oxygen and nitrogen as well as of carbon
dioxide are very nearly constant. Indeed, so constant are the
percentages of oxygen and nitrogen that the question has arisen, whether
these two elements are not combined in the air, forming a definite
chemical compound. That the two are not combined but are simply mixed
together can be shown in a number of ways, among which are the
following.

1. When air dissolves in water it has been found that the ratio of
oxygen to nitrogen in the dissolved air is no longer 21: 78, but more
nearly 35: 65. If it were a chemical compound, the ratio of oxygen to
nitrogen would not be changed by solution in water.

2. A chemical compound in the form of a liquid has a definite boiling
point. Water, for example, boils at 100 deg.. Moreover the steam which is
thus formed has the same composition as the water. The boiling point of
liquid air, on the other hand, gradually rises as the liquid boils, the
nitrogen escaping first followed by the oxygen. If the two were
combined, they would pass off together in the ratio in which they are
found in the air.

~Why the air has a constant composition.~ If air is a mixture and changes
are constantly taking place which tend to modify its composition, how,
then, do we account for the constancy of composition which the analyses
reveal? This is explained by several facts. (1) The changes which are
caused by the processes of combustion and respiration, on the one hand,
and the action of plants, on the other, tend to equalize each other. (2)
The winds keep the air in constant motion and so prevent local changes.
(3) The volume of the air is so vast and the changes which occur are so
small compared with the total amount of air that they cannot be readily
detected. (4) Finally it must be noted that only air collected in the
open fields shows this constancy in composition. The air in a poorly
ventilated room occupied by a number of people rapidly changes in
composition.

~The properties of the air.~ Inasmuch as air is composed principally of a
mixture of oxygen and nitrogen, which elements have already been
discussed, its properties may be inferred largely from those of the two
gases. One liter weighs 1.2923 g. It is thus 14.38 times as heavy as
hydrogen. At the sea level it exerts an average pressure sufficient to
sustain a column of mercury 760 mm. in height. This is taken as the
standard pressure in determining the volumes of gases as well as the
boiling points of liquids. Water may be made to boil at any temperature
between 0 deg. and considerably above 100 deg. by simply varying the pressure.
It is only when the pressure upon it is equal to the normal pressure of
the atmosphere at the sea level, as indicated by a barometric reading of
760 mm., that it boils at 100 deg..

~Preparation of liquid air.~ Attention has been called to the fact that
both oxygen and nitrogen can be obtained in the liquid state by strongly
cooling the gases and applying great pressure to them. Since air is
largely a mixture of these two gases, it can be liquefied by the same
methods.

     The methods for liquefying air have been simplified greatly in
     that the low temperature required is obtained by allowing a
     portion of the compressed air to expand. The expansion of a gas
     is always attended by the absorption of heat. In liquefying air
     the apparatus is so constructed that the heat absorbed is
     withdrawn from air already under great pressure. This process
     is continued until the temperature is lowered to the point of
     liquefaction.

[Illustration: Fig. 29]

~The Dewar bulb.~ It is not possible to preserve air in the liquid state
in a closed vessel, on account of the enormous pressure exerted by it in
its tendency to pass into the gaseous state. It may however be preserved
for some hours or even days before it will completely evaporate, by
simply placing it in an open vessel surrounded by a nonconducting
material. The most efficient vessel for this purpose is the _Dewar bulb_
shown in Fig. 29. The air is withdrawn from the space between the two
walls, thus making it nonconducting.

~Properties and uses of liquid air.~ When first prepared, liquid air is
cloudy because of the presence of particles of solid carbon dioxide.
These may be filtered off, leaving a liquid of slightly bluish color. It
begins to boil at about -190 deg., the nitrogen passing off first, gradually
followed by the oxygen, the last portions being nearly pure oxygen. To a
certain extent oxygen is now prepared in this way for commercial
purposes.

The extremely low temperature of liquid air may be inferred from the
fact that mercury when cooled by it is frozen to a mass so hard that it
may be used for driving nails.

Liquid air is used in the preparation of oxygen and as a cooling agent
in the study of the properties of matter at low temperatures. It has
thus been found that elements at extremely low temperatures largely lose
their chemical activity.


EXERCISES

1. When oxygen and nitrogen are mixed in the proportion in which they
exist in the atmosphere, heat is neither evolved nor absorbed by the
process. What important point does this suggest?

2. What essential constituent of the air is found in larger amount in
manufacturing districts than in the open country?

3. Can you suggest any reason why the growth of clover in a field
improves the soil?

4. Why are the inner walls of a Dewar bulb sometimes coated with a film
of silver?

5. To what is the blue color of liquid air due? Does this color increase
in intensity on standing?

6. When ice is placed in a vessel containing liquid air, the latter
boils violently. Explain.

7. Taking the volumes of the oxygen and nitrogen in 100 volumes of air
as 21 and 78 respectively, calculate the percentages of these elements
present by weight.

8. Would combustion be more intense in liquid air than in the gaseous
substance?

9. A tube containing calcium chloride was found to weigh 30.1293 g. A
volume of air which weighed 15.2134 g. was passed through, after which
the weight of the tube was found to be 30.3405 g. What was the
percentage amount of moisture present in the air?

10. 10 l. of air measured at 20 deg. and 740 mm. passed through lime water
caused the precipitation of 0.0102 g. of CaCO_{3}. Find the number of
volumes of carbon dioxide in 10,000 volumes of the air.




CHAPTER IX

SOLUTIONS


~Definitions.~ When a substance disappears in a liquid in such a way as to
thoroughly mix with it and to be lost to sight as an individual body,
the resulting liquid is called a _solution_. The liquid in which the
substance dissolves is called the _solvent_, while the dissolved
substance is called the _solute_.

~Classes of solutions.~ Matter in any one of its physical states may
dissolve in a liquid, so that we may have solutions of gases, of
liquids, and of solids. Solutions of liquids in liquids are not often
mentioned in the following pages, but the other two classes will become
very familiar in the course of our study, and deserve special attention.


SOLUTION OF GASES IN LIQUIDS

[Illustration: Fig. 30]

It has already been stated that oxygen, hydrogen, and nitrogen are
slightly soluble in water. Accurate study has led to the conclusion that
all gases are soluble to some extent not only in water but in many other
liquids. The amount of a gas which will dissolve in a liquid depends
upon a number of conditions, and these can best be understood by
supposing a vessel B (Fig. 30), to be filled with the gas and inverted
over the liquid. Under these circumstances the gas cannot escape or
become mixed with another gas.

~Circumstances affecting the solubility of gases.~ A number of
circumstances affect the solubility of a gas in a liquid.

1. _Nature of the gas._ Other conditions being equal, each gas has its
own peculiar solubility, just as it has its own special taste or odor.
The solubility of gases varies between wide limits, as will be seen from
the following table, but as a rule a given volume of a liquid will not
dissolve more than two or three times its own volume of a gas.


_Solubility of Gases in Water_

1 l. of water at 760 mm. pressure and at 0 deg. will dissolve:

    Ammonia                 1148.00 l.
    Hydrochloric acid        503.00
    Sulphur dioxide           79.79
    Carbon dioxide             1.80
    Oxygen                    41.14 cc.
    Hydrogen                  21.15
    Nitrogen                  20.03

In the case of very soluble gases, such as the first three in the table,
it is probable that chemical combination between the liquid and the gas
takes place.

2. _Nature of the liquid._ The character of the liquid has much
influence upon the solubility of a gas. Water, alcohol, and ether have
each its own peculiar solvent power. From the solubility of a gas in
water, no prediction can be made as to its solubility in other liquids.

3. _Influence of pressure._ It has been found that the weight of gas
which dissolves in a given case is proportional to the pressure exerted
upon the gas. If the pressure is doubled, the weight of gas going into
solution is doubled; if the pressure is diminished to one half of its
original value, half of the dissolved gas will escape. Under high
pressure, large quantities of gas can be dissolved in a liquid, and when
the pressure is removed the gas escapes, causing the liquid to foam or
_effervesce_.

4. _Influence of temperature._ In general, the lower the temperature of
the liquid, the larger the quantity of gas which it can dissolve. 1000
volumes of water at 0 deg. will dissolve 41.14 volumes of oxygen; at 50 deg.,
18.37 volumes; at 100 deg. none at all. While most gases can be expelled
from a liquid by boiling the solution, some cannot. For example, it is
not possible to expel hydrochloric acid gas completely from its solution
by boiling.


SOLUTION OF SOLIDS IN LIQUIDS

This is the most familiar class of solutions, since in the laboratory
substances are much more frequently used in the form of solutions than
in the solid state.

~Circumstances affecting the solubility of a solid.~ The solubility of a
