
As we rapidly approached the dazzling splendor of the mountain became
almost unbearable to our eyes, and we were compelled to resort to the
devise, practised by all climbers of lofty mountains, where the glare of
sunlight on snow surfaces is liable to cause temporary blindness, of
protecting our eyes with neutral-tinted glasses.

Professor Moissan, the great French chemist and maker of artificial
diamonds, fairly danced with delight.

"Voila! Voila! Voila!" was all that he could say.

When we were comparatively near, the mountain no longer seemed to glow
with a uniform radiance, evenly distributed over its entire surface, but
now innumerable points of light, all as bright as so many little suns,
blazed away at us. It was evident that we had before us a mountain
composed of, or at least covered with, crystals.

Without stopping to alight on the outer slopes of the great ring-shaped
range of peaks which composed Aristarchus, we sailed over their rim and
looked down into the interior. Here the splendor of the crystals was
greater than on the outer slopes, and the broad floor of the crater,
thousands of feet beneath us, shone and sparkled with overwhelming
radiance, as if it were an immense bin of diamonds, while a peak in the
center flamed like a stupendous tiara incrusted with selected gems.

Eager to see what these crystals were, the car was now allowed rapidly
to drop into the interior of the crater. With great caution we brought
it to rest upon the blazing ground, for the sharp edges of the crystals
would certainly have torn the metallic sides of the car if it had come
into violent contact with them.

Donning our air-tight suits and stepping carefully out upon this
wonderful footing we attempted to detach some of the crystals. Many of
them were firmly fastened, but a few--some of astonishing size--were
readily loosened.

A moment's inspection showed that we had stumbled upon the most
marvelous work of the forces of crystalization that human eyes had ever
rested upon. Some time in the past history of the moon there had been an
enormous outflow of molten material from the crater. This had overspread
the walls and partially filled up the interior, and later its surface
had flowered into gems, as thick as blossoms in a bed of pansies.

The whole mass flashed prismatic rays of indescribable beauty and
intensity. We gazed at first speechless with amazement.

"It cannot be, surely it cannot be," said Professor Moissan at length.

"But it is," said another member of the party.

"Are these diamonds?" asked a third.

"I cannot yet tell," replied the Professor. "They have the brilliancy of
diamonds, but they may be something else."

"Moon jewels," suggested a third.

"And worth untold millions, whatever they are," remarked another. These
magnificent crystals, some of which appeared to be almost flawless,
varied in size from the dimensions of a hazelnut to geometrical solids
several inches in diameter. We carefully selected as many as it was
convenient to carry and placed them in the car for future examination.
We had solved another long standing lunar problem and had, perhaps,
opened up an inexhaustible future mine of wealth which might eventually
go far toward reimbursing the earth for the damage which it had suffered
from the invasion of the Martians.

On returning to Cape Heraclides we found that the other expeditions had
arrived at the rendezvous ahead of us. Their members had wonderful
stories to tell of what they had seen, but nothing caused quite so much
astonishment as that which we had to tell and to show.

The party which had gone to visit Plato and the lunar Alps brought back,
however, information which, in a scientific sense, was no less
interesting than what we had been able to gather.

They had found within this curious ring of Plato, which is a circle of
mountains sixty miles in diameter, enclosing a level plain remarkably
smooth over most of its surface, unmistakable evidences of former
habitation. A gigantic city had evidently at one time existed near the
center of this great plain. The outlines of its walls and the foundation
marks of some of its immense buildings were plainly made out, and
elaborate plans of this vanished capitol of the moon were prepared by
several members of the party.

One of them was fortunate enough to discover an even more precious relic
of the ancient lunarians. It was a piece of petrified skullbone,
representing but a small portion of the head to which it had belonged,
but yet sufficient to enable the anthropologists, who immediately fell
to examining it, to draw ideal representations of the head as it must
have been in life--the head of a giant of enormous size, which, if it
had possessed a highly organized brain, of proportionate magnitude, must
have given to its possessor intellectual powers immensely greater than
any of the descendants of Adam have ever been endowed with.

Indeed, one of the professors was certain that some little concretions
found on the interior of the piece of skull were petrified portions of
the brain matter itself, and he set to work with the microscope to
examine its organic quality.

In the meantime, the repairs to the electrical ships had been completed,
and, although these discoveries on the moon had created a most profound
sensation among the members of the expedition, and aroused an almost
irresistable desire to continue the explorations thus happily begun, yet
everybody knew that these things were aside from the main purpose in
view, and that we should be false to our duty in wasting a moment more
upon the moon than was absolutely necessary to put the ships in proper
condition to proceed on their warlike voyage.

Everything being prepared then, we left the moon with great regret, just
forty-eight hours after we had landed upon its surface, carrying with us
a determination to revisit it and to learn more of its wonderful secrets
in case we should survive the dangers which we were now going to face.




CHAPTER SIX

_THE MONSTERS ON THE ASTEROID_


A day or two after leaving the moon, we had another adventure with a
wandering inhabitant of space which brought us into far greater peril
than had our encounter with the meteor.

The airships had been partitioned off so that a portion of the interior
could be darkened in order to serve as a sleeping chamber, wherein,
according to the regulations prescribed by the commander of the squadron
each member of the expedition in his turn passed eight out of every
twenty-four hours--sleeping if he could, if not, meditating in a more or
less dazed way, upon the wonderful things that he was seeing and
doing--things far more incredible than the creations of a dream.

One morning, if I may call by the name morning the time of my periodical
emergence from the darkened chamber, glancing from one of the windows, I
was startled to see in the black sky a brilliant comet.

No periodical comet, as I knew, was at this time approaching the
neighborhood of the sun, and no stranger of that kind had been detected
from the observatories making its way sunward before we left the earth.
Here, however, was unmistakably a comet rushing toward the sun, flinging
out a great gleaming tail behind it and so close to us that I wondered
to see it remaining almost motionless in the sky. This phenomenon was
soon explained to me, and the explanation was of a most disquieting
character.

The stranger had already been perceived, not only from the flagship, but
from the other members of the squadron, and, as I now learned, efforts
had been made to get out of the neighborhood, but for some reason the
electrical apparatus did not work perfectly--some mysterious disturbing
force acting upon it--and so it had been found impossible to avoid an
encounter with the comet, not an actual coming into contact with it, but
a falling into the sphere of its influence.

In fact, I was informed that for several hours the squadron had been
dragging along in the wake of a comet, very much as boats are sometimes
towed off by a wounded whale. Every effort had been made to so adjust
the electric charge upon the ships that they would be repelled from the
cometic mass, but, owing apparently to electric changes affecting the
clashing mass of meteoric bodies which constituted the head of the
comet, we found it impossible to escape from its influence.

At one instant the ships would be repelled; immediately afterward they
would be attracted again, and thus they were dragged hither and thither,
but never able to break from the invisible leash which the comet had
cast upon them. The latter was moving with enormous velocity toward the
sun, and, consequently, we were being carried back again, away from the
object of our expedition, with a fair prospect of being dissipated in
blazing vapors when the comet had dragged us, unwilling prisoners, into
the immediate neighborhood of the solar furnace.

Even the most cool-headed lost his self control in this terrible
emergency. Every kind of devise that experience or the imagination could
suggest was tried, but nothing would do. Still on we rushed with the
electrified atoms composing the tail of the comet swinging to and fro
over the members of the squadron, as they shifted their position, like
the plume of smoke from a gigantic steamer, drifting over the sea birds
that follow in its course.

Was this to end it all, then? Was this the fate that Providence had in
store for us? Were the hopes of the earth thus to perish? Was the
expedition to be wrecked and its fate to remain for ever unknown to the
planet from which it had set forth? And was our beloved globe, which had
seemed so fair to us when we last looked upon it nearby, and in whose
defense we had resolved to spend our last breath, to be left helpless
and at the mercy of its implacable foe in the sky?

At length we gave ourselves up for lost. There seemed to be no possible
way to free ourselves from the baleful grip of this terrible and
unlooked for enemy.

As the comet approached the sun its electrical energy rapidly increased,
and watching it with telescopes, for we could not withdraw our
fascinated eyes from it, we could clearly behold the fearful things that
went on in its nucleus.

This consisted of an immense number of separate meteors of no very great
size individually, but which were in constant motion among one another,
darting to and fro, clashing and smashing together, while fountains of
blazing metallic particles and hot mineral vapours poured out in every
direction.

As I watched it, unable to withdraw my eyes, I saw imaginary forms
revealing themselves amid the flaming meteors. They seemed like
creatures in agony, tossing their arms, bewailing in their attitudes the
awful fate that had overtaken them, and fairly chilling my blood with
the pantomime of torture which they exhibited. I thought of an old
superstition which I had often heard about the earth, and exclaimed:

"Yes, surely, this is a flying hell!"

As the electric activity of the comet increased, its continued changes
of potential and polarity became more frequent, and the electrical ships
darted about with even greater confusion than before. Occasionally one
of them, seized with a sudden impulse, would spring forward toward the
nucleus of the comet with a sudden access of velocity that would fling
every one of its crew from his feet, and all would lie sprawling on the
floor of the car while it rushed, as it seemed, to inevitable and
instant destruction.

Then, either through the frantic efforts of the electrician struggling
with the controller or through another change in the polarity of the
comet, the ship would be saved on the very brink of ruin and stagger
away out of immediate danger.

Thus the captured squadron was swept, swaying and darting hither and
thither, but never able to get sufficiently far from the comet to break
the bond of its fatal attraction.

So great was our excitement and so complete our absorption in the
fearful peril that we had not noticed the precise direction in which the
comet was carrying us. It was enough to know that the goal of the
journey was the furnace of the sun. But presently someone in the
flagship recalled us to a more accurate sense of our situation in space
by exclaiming:

"Why, there is the earth!"

And there, indeed, it was, its great globe rolling under our eyes, with
the contrasted colors of the continents and clouds and the watery gleam
of the oceans spread beneath us.

"We're going to strike it!" exclaimed somebody. "The comet is going to
dash us into the earth."

Such a collision at first seemed inevitable, but presently it was
noticed that the direction of the comet's motion was such that while it
might graze the earth it would not actually strike it.

And so, like a swarm of giant insects circling about an electric light
from whose magic influence they could not escape, our ships went on, to
be whipped against the earth in passing and then to continue their swift
journey to destruction.

"Thank God, this saves us," suddenly cried Mr. Edison.

"What-what?"

"Why, the earth, of course. Do you not see that as the comet sweeps
close to the great planet the superior attraction of the latter will
snatch us from its grasp, and that thus we shall be able to escape."

And it was indeed as Mr. Edison had predicted. In a blaze of falling
meteors the comet swept the outer limits of the earth's atmosphere and
passed on, while the swaying ships, having been instructed by signals
what to do, desperately applied their electrical machinery to reverse
the attraction and threw themselves into the arms of their mother earth.

In another instant we were all free, settling down through the quiet
atmosphere with the Atlantic Ocean sparkling in the morning sun far
below.

We looked at one another in amazement. So this was the end of our
voyage! This was the completion of our warlike enterprise. We had
started out to conquer a world, and we had come back ignominiously
dragged in the train of a comet.

The earth which we were going to defend and protect had herself turned
protector, and reaching out her strong arm had snatched her foolish
children from the destruction which they had invited.

It would be impossible to describe the chagrin of every member of the
expedition.

The electric ships rapidly assembled and hovered high in the air, while
their commanders consulted about what should be done. A universal
feeling of shame almost drove them to a decision not to land upon the
surface of the planet, and if possible not to let its inhabitants know
what had occurred.

But it was too late for that. Looking carefully beneath us, we saw that
fate had brought us back to our very starting point, and signals
displayed in the neighborhood of New York indicated that we had already
been recognized. There was nothing for us then but to drop down and
explain the situation.

I shall not delay my narrative by undertaking to describe the
astonishment and the disappointment of the inhabitants of the earth
when, within a fortnight from our departure, they saw us back again,
with no laurels of victory crowning our brows.

At first they had hoped that we were returning in triumph, and we were
overwhelmed with questions the moment we had dropped within speaking
distance.

"Have you whipped them?"

"How many are lost?"

"Is there any more danger?"

"Faix, have ye got one of thim men from Mars?"

But their rejoicing and their facetiousness were turned into wailing
when the truth was imparted.

We made a short story of it, for we had not the heart to go into
details. We told of our unfortunate comrades whom we had buried upon the
moon, and there was one gleam of satisfaction when we exhibited the
wonderful crystals we had collected in the crater of Aristarchus.

Mr. Edison determined to stop only long enough to test the electrical
machinery of the cars, which had been more or less seriously deranged
during our wild chase after the comet, and then to start straight back
for Mars--this time on a through trip.

The astronomers, who had been watching Mars, since our departure, with
their telescopes, reported that mysterious lights continued to be
visible, but that nothing indicating the starting of another expedition
for the earth had been seen.

Within twenty-four hours we were ready for our second start.

The moon was now no longer in a position to help us on our way. It had
moved out of line between Mars and the earth.

High above us, in the center of the heavens, glowed the red planet which
was the goal of our journey.

The needed computations of velocity and direction of flight having been
repeated, and the ships being all in readiness, we started direct for
Mars.

An enormous charge of electricity was imparted to each member of the
squadron, in order that as soon as we had reached the upper limits of
the atmosphere, where the ships could move swiftly, without danger of
being consumed by the heat developed by the friction of their passage
through the air, a very great initial velocity could be imparted.

Once started off by this tremendous electrical kick, and with no
atmosphere to resist our motion, we should be able to retain the same
velocity, baring incidental encounters, until we arrived near the
surface of Mars.

When we were free of the atmosphere, and the ships were moving away from
the earth, with the highest velocity which we were able to impart to
them, observations on the stars were made in order to determine the rate
of our speed.

This was found to be ten miles in a second, or 864,000 miles in a day, a
very much greater speed than that with which we had travelled on
starting to touch at the moon. Supposing this velocity to remain
uniform, and, with no known resistance, it might reasonably be expected
to do so, we should arrive at Mars in a little less than forty-two days,
the distance of the planet from the earth being at this time, about
thirty-six million miles.

Nothing occurred for many days to interrupt our journey. We became
accustomed to our strange surroundings, and many entertainments were
provided to while away the time. The astronomers in the expedition found
plenty of occupation in studying the aspects of the stars and the other
heavenly bodies from their new point of view.

At the expiration of about thirty-five days we had drawn so near to Mars
that with our telescopes, which, though small, were of immense power, we
could discern upon its surface features and details which no one had
been able to glimpse from the earth.

As the surface of this world, that we were approaching as a tiger hunter
draws near the jungle, gradually unfolded itself to our inspection,
there was hardly one of us willing to devote to sleep or idleness the
prescribed eight hours that had been fixed as the time during which each
member of the expedition must remain in the darkened chamber. We were
too eager to watch for every new revelation upon Mars.

But something was in store that we had not expected. We were to meet the
Martians before arriving at the world in which they dwelt.

Among the stars which shone in that quarter of the heavens where Mars
appeared as the master orb, there was one, lying directly in our path,
which, to our astonishment, as we continued on, altered from the aspect
of a star, underwent a gradual magnification, and soon presented itself
in the form of a little planet.

"It is an asteroid," said somebody.

"Yes, evidently; but how does it come inside the orbit of Mars?"

"Oh, there are several asteroids," said one of the astronomers, "which
travel inside the orbit of Mars, along a part of their course, and, for
aught we can tell, there may be many which have not yet been caught
sight of from the earth, that are nearer to the sun than Mars is."

"This must be one of them."

"Manifestly so."

As we drew nearer the mysterious little planet revealed itself to us as
a perfectly formed globe not more than five miles in diameter.

"What is that upon it?" asked Lord Kelvin, squinting intently at the
little world through his glass. "As I live, it moves."

"Yes, yes!" exclaimed several others, "there are inhabitants upon it,
but what giants!"

"What monsters!"

"Don't you see?" exclaimed an excited savant. "They are the Martians!"
