The Captain gave him a wan smile. "Who has, at the best of times?"

Paresi returned the smile. "Drug addicts ... Catatonics ...
illusionaries ... and saints. I guess it's up to us to add to the
category."

"How about dead people?"

"Ives! How long have you been awake?"


The big man shoved himself up and leaned on one arm. He shook his head
and grunted as if he had been punched in the solar plexus. "Who hit me
with what?" he said painfully, from between clenched teeth.

"You apparently decided the bulkhead was a paper hoop and tried to dive
through it," said Paresi. He spoke lightly but his face was watchful.

"Oooh...." Ives held his head for a moment and then peered between his
fingers at the darkness. "I remember," he said in a strained whisper. He
looked around him, saw the engineer huddled against his chessboard.
"What's he doing?"

They all looked at the engineer as he moved a piece and then sat
quietly.

"Hey, Hoskins!"

Hoskins ignored Ives' bull voice. Paresi said, "He's not talking just
now. He's ... all right, Ives. Leave him alone. At the moment, I'm more
interested in you. How do you feel?"

"Me, I feel great. Hungry, though. What's for chow?"

Anderson said quickly, "Nick doesn't want us to eat just now."

"Thanks," muttered Paresi in vicious irony.

"He's the doctor," said Ives good-naturedly. "But don't put it off too
long, huh? This furnace needs stoking." He fisted his huge chest.

"Well, this is encouraging," said Paresi.

"It certainly is," said the Captain. "Maybe the breaking point is just
the point of impact. After that the rebound, hm?"

Paresi shook his head. "Breaking means breaking. Sometimes things just
don't break."


"Got to pass," said a voice. Johnny, the pilot, was stirring.

"Ha!" Anderson's voice was exultant. "Here comes another one!"

"How sure are you of that?" asked the doctor. To Johnny, he called,
"Hiya, John?"

"I got to pass," said Johnny worriedly. He swung his feet to the deck.
"You see," he said earnestly, "being the head of your class doesn't make
it any easier. You've got to keep that and pass the examinations too.
You've got two jobs. Now, the guy who stands fourth, say--he has only
one job to do."

Anderson turned a blank face to Paresi, who made a silencing gesture.
Johnny put his head in his hands and said, "When one variable varies
directly as another, two pairs of their corresponding values are in
proportion." He looked up. "That's supposed to be the keystone of all
vector analysis, the man says, and you don't get to be a pilot without
vector analysis. And it makes no sense to me. What am I going to do?"

"Get some shuteye," said Paresi immediately. "You've been studying too
hard. It'll make more sense to you in the morning."

Johnny grinned and yawned at the same time, the worried wrinkles
smoothing out. "Now that was a real educational remark, Martin, old
chap," he said. He lay down and stretched luxuriously. "_That_ I can
understand. You may wear my famous maroon zipsuit." He turned his face
away and was instantly asleep.

"Who the hell is Martin?" Ives demanded. "Martin who?"

"Shh. Probably his roommate in pre-pilot school."

Anderson gaped. "You mean he's back in school?"

"Doesn't it figure?" said Paresi sadly. "I told you that this situation
is intolerable to him. If he can't escape in space, he'll escape in
time. He hasn't the imagination to go forward, so he goes backward."

Something scuttled across the floor. Ives whipped his feet off the floor
and sat like some cartoon of a Buddha, clutching his ankles. "What in
God's name was that?"

"I didn't see anything," said Paresi.

The Captain demanded, "What was it?"

From the shadows, Hoskins said, "A mouse."

"Nonsense."

"I can't stand things that scuttle and slither and crawl," said Ives.
His voice was suddenly womanish. "Don't let anything like that in here!"

From the quarters aft came a faint scratching, a squeak. Ives turned
pale. His wattles quivered.

"Snap out of it, Ives," said Paresi coldly. "There isn't so much as a
microbe on this ship that I haven't inventoried. Don't sit there like
little Miss Muffet."

"I know what I saw," said Ives. He rose suddenly, turned to the black
wall, and bellowed, "Damn you, send something I can fight!"


Two mice emerged from under the couch. One of them ran over Ives' foot.
They disappeared aft, squeaking. Ives leapt straight up and came down
standing on the couch. Anderson stepped back against the inboard
bulkhead and stood rigid. Paresi walked with great purpose to the
medical chest, took out a small black case and opened it.

Ives cowered down to his knees and began to blubber openly, without
attempting to hide it, without any articulate speech. Paresi approached
him, half-concealing a small metal tube in his hand.

A slight movement on the deck caught Anderson's eye. He was unable to
control a shrill intake of breath as an enormous spider, hairy and
swift, darted across to the couch and sprang. It landed next to Ives'
knee, sprang again. Paresi swung at it and missed, his hand catching
Ives heavily just under the armpit. The spider hit the deck, skidded,
righted itself and, abruptly, was gone. Ives caved in around the impact
point of Paresi's hand and curled up silently on the couch. Anderson ran
to him.

"He'll be all right now," said Paresi. "Forget it."

"Don't tell me he fainted! Not Ives!"

"Of course not." Paresi held up the little cylinder.

"Anesthox! Why did you use that on him?"

Paresi said irritably, "For the reason one usually uses anesthox. To
knock a patient out for a couple of hours without hurting him."

"Suppose you hadn't?"

"How much more of that scuttle-and-slither treatment do you think he
could have taken?"

Anderson looked at the unconscious communications man. "Surely more than
that." He looked up suddenly. "Where the hell _did_ that vermin come
from?"

"Ah. Now you have it. He dislikes mice and spiders. But there was
something special about these. They couldn't be here, and they were. He
felt that it was a deliberate and personal attack. He couldn't have
handled much more of it."

"Where did they come from?" demanded the Captain again.

"_I_ don't know!" snapped Paresi. "Sorry, skipper ... I'm a little
unnerved. I'm not used to seeing a patient's hallucinations. Not that
clearly, at any rate."

"They were Ives' hallucinations?"

"Can you recall what was said just before they appeared?"

"Uh ... something scuttled. A mouse."

"It wasn't a mouse until someone said it was." The doctor turned and
looked searchingly at Hoskins, who still sat quietly over his chess.

"By God, it was Hoskins. Hoskins--what made you say that?"

The engineer did not move nor answer. Paresi shook his head hopelessly.
"Another retreat. It's no use, Captain."


Anderson took a single step toward Hoskins, then obviously changed his
mind. He shrugged and said, "All right. Something scuttled and Hoskins
defined it. Let's accept that without reasoning it out. So who called up
the spider?"

"You did."

"_I_ did?"

In a startling imitation of the Captain's voice, Paresi quoted, "Don't
sit there like Miss Muffet!"

"I'll be damned," said Anderson. "Maybe we'd all be better off saying
nothing."

Paresi said bitterly, "You think it makes any difference if we _say_
what we think?"

"Perhaps...."

"Nup," said Paresi positively. "Look at the way this thing works. First
it traps us, and then it shows us a growing darkness. Very basic. Then
it starts picking on us, one by one. Johnny gets machines that don't
work, when with his whole soul he worships machines that do. Ives gets a
large charge of claustrophobia from the black stuff over there and goes
into a flat spin."

"He came out of it."

"Johnny woke up too. In another subjective time-track. Quite harmless
to--to Them. So they left him alone. But they lowered the boom on Ives
when he showed any resilience. It's breaking point they're after,
Captain. Nothing less."

"Hoskins?"

"I guess so," said Paresi tiredly. "Like Johnny he escaped from a
problem he couldn't handle to one he could. Only instead of regressing
he's turned to chess. I hope Johnny doesn't bounce back for awhile, yet.
He's too--Captain! He's gone!"

They turned and stared at Johnny's bunk. Or--where the bunk had been
before the black wall had swelled inwards and covered it.




                     V

    "_... and there I was, Doctor, in the lobby of the hotel at
    noon, stark naked!_"

    "_Do you have these dreams often?_"

    "_I'm afraid so, Doctor. Am I--all right? I mean_ ..."

    "_Let me ask you this question: Do you believe that these
    experiences are real?_"

    "_Of course not!_"

    "_Then, Madam, you are, by definition, sane; for insanity, in
    the final analysis, is the inability to distinguish the real
    from the unreal._"


Paresi and the Captain ran aft together, and together they stopped four
paces away from the bulging blackness.

"_Johnny!_" The Captain's voice cracked with the agonized effort of his
cry. He stepped to the black wall, pounded it with the heel of his hand.

"He won't hear you," said Paresi bleakly. "Come back, Captain. Come
back."

"Why him? Why Johnny? They've done everything they could to Johnny; you
said so yourself!"

"Come back," Paresi said again, soothing. Then he spoke briskly: "Can't
you see they're not doing anything to him? They're doing it to us!"

The Captain stood rigidly, staring at the featureless intrusion. He
turned presently. "To us," he parroted. Then he stumbled blindly to the
doctor, who put a firm hand on his biceps and walked with him to the
forward acceleration couch.

The Captain sat down heavily with his back to this new invasion. Paresi
stood by him reflectively, then walked silently to Hoskins.

