training. Ponderously, the ship settled into the iron sand; slowly, the
internal fires died.

       *       *       *       *       *

Kimball stood in the control room, his heart pounding. Slowly, the ports
opened. Through the thick quartz he could see the endless plain. Reddish
brown, empty. The basin of some long ago sea. The sky was a deep,
burning blue with stars shining at midday at the zenith. It looked
unreal, a painting of unworldly quiet and desolation.

_What is reality, Kimmy?_

Steinhart was right, he thought vaguely. A tear streaked his cheek. He
had never been so alone.

And then he imagined he saw something moving on the great plain. He
scrambled down through the ship, past the empty fuel tanks and the
lashed supplies. His hands were clawing desperately at the dogs of the
outer valve. Suddenly the pressure jerked the hatch from his hands and
he gasped at the icy air, his lungs laboring to breathe.

He dropped to one knee and sucked at the thin, frigid air. His vision
was cloudy and his head felt light. But there _was_ something moving on
the plain.

A shadowy cavalcade.

       *       *       *       *       *

Strange monstrous men on fantastic war-mounts, long spears and
fluttering pennons. Huge golden chariots with scythes flashing on the
circling hubs and armored giants, the figments of a long remembered
dream----

He dropped to the sand and dug his hands into the dry powdery soil. He
could scarcely see now, for blackness was flickering at the edges of his
vision and his failing heart and lungs were near collapse.

_Kimmm-eee!_

A huge green warrior on a gray monster of a thoat was beckoning to him.
Pointing toward the low hills on the oddly near horizon.

_Kimmmm-eeeee!_

The voice was thin and distant on the icy wind. Kimball knew that voice.
He knew it from long ago in the Valley Dor, from the shores of the Lost
Sea of Korus where the tideless waters lay black and deep----

He began stumbling across the empty, lifeless plain. He knew the voice,
he knew the man, and he knew the hills that he must reach, quickly now,
or die.

They were the hills of home.

  +--------------------------------------------------------------+
  | Transcriber's Note and Errata                                |
  |                                                              |
  | This etext was produced from "Future Science Fiction" No. 30 |
  | 1956. Extensive research did not uncover any evidence that   |
  | the U.S. copyright on this publication was renewed.          |
  |                                                              |
  | The following errors have been corrected:                    |
  |                                                              |
  |   Error     Correction                                       |
  |   cooly     coolly                                           |
  |   fantasic  fantastic                                        |
  +--------------------------------------------------------------+





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of The Hills of Home, by Alfred Coppel

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE HILLS OF HOME ***

***** This file should be named 22102.txt or 22102.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/2/2/1/0/22102/

Produced by Greg Weeks, LN Yaddanapudi and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net


