"We did it!" Friedrichs slapped Lancaster's back till it felt that the
ribs must crack. "We have it!"

"Whooppee!" yelled Karen.

Suddenly they had joined hands and were dancing idiotically around the
induction furnace. Lancaster clasped Rakkan's talons without caring that
it was a Martian. They sang then, sang till heads appeared at the door
and the glassware shivered.

    _Here we go 'round the mulberry bush,
     The mulberry bush, the mulberry bush--_

It called for a celebration. The end of a Project meant no more than
filing a last report and waiting for the next assignment, but they ran
things differently out here. Somebody broke out a case of Venusian
aguacaliente. Somebody else led the way to a storeroom, tossed its
contents into the hall, and festooned it with used computer tape.
Rakkan forgot his Martian dignity and fiddled for a square dance, with
Isaacson doing the calling. The folk from the other end of the station
swarmed in till the place overflowed. It was quite a party.

Hours later, Lancaster was hazily aware of lying stretched on the floor.
His head was in Karen's lap and she was stroking his hair. The hardy
survivors were following the Dufreres in French drinking songs, which
are the best in the known universe. Rakkan's fiddle wove in and out, a
lovely accompaniment to voices that were untrained but made rich and
alive by triumph.

    _"Sur ma tomb' je veux qu'on inscrive:
     'Ici-git le roi des buveurs.'
     Sur ma tomb' je veux qu'on inscrive:
     'Ici-git le roi des buveurs.
       Ici-git, oui, oui, oui,
       Ici-git, non, non, non--'"_

Lancaster knew that he had never been really happy before.

       *       *       *       *       *

Berg showed up a couple of days later, looking worried. Lancaster's
vacation time was almost up. When he heard the news, his eyes snapped
gleefully and he pumped the physicist's hand. "Good work, boy!"

"There are things to clean up yet," said Lancaster, "but it's all
detail. Anybody can do it."

"And the material--what do you call it, anyway?"

Karen grinned. "So far, we've only named it _ffuts_," she said. "That's
'stuff' spelled backward."

"Okay, okay. It's easy to manufacture?"

"Sure. Now that we know how, anybody can make it in his own home--if
he's handy at tinkering apparatus together."

"Fine, fine! Just what was needed. This is the ticket." Berg turned back
to Lancaster. "Okay, boy, you can pack now. We blast again in a few
hours."

The physicist shuffled his feet. "What are my chances of getting
re-assigned back here?" he asked. "I've liked it immensely. And now that
I know about it anyway--"

"I'll see. I'll see. But remember, this is top secret. You go back to
your regular job and don't say a word on this to anyone less than the
President--no matter what happens, understand?"

"Of course," snapped Lancaster, irritated. "I know my duty."

"Yeah, so you do." Berg sighed. "So you do."

Leavetaking was tough for all concerned. They had grown fond of the
quiet, bashful man--and as for him, he wondered how he'd get along
among normal people. These were his sort. Karen wept openly and kissed
him good-bye with a fervor that haunted his dreams afterward. Then she
stumbled desolately back to her quarters. Even Berg looked glum.

He regained his cockiness on the trip home, though, and insisted on
talking all the way. Lancaster, who wanted to be alone with his
thoughts, was annoyed, but you don't insult a Security man.

"You understand the importance of this whole business, and why it has to
be secret?" nagged Berg. "I'm not thinking of the scientific and
industrial applications, but the military ones."

"Oh, sure. You can make lightning throwers if you want to. And you've
overcome the fuel problem. With a few _ffuts_ accumulators, charged from
any handy power source, you can build fuelless military vehicles, which
would simplify your logistics immensely. And some really deadly hand
guns could be built--pistols the equivalent of a cannon, almost."
Lancaster's voice was dead. "So what?"

"So plenty! Those are only a few of the applications. If you use your
imagination, you can think of dozens more. And the key point is--the
_ffuts_ and the essential gadgetry using it are cheap to make in
quantity, easy to handle--the perfect weapon for the citizen soldier. Or
for the rebel! It isn't enough to decide the outcome of a war all by
itself, but it may very well be precisely the extra element which will
tip the military balance against the government. And I've already
discussed what that means."

"Yes, I remember. That's your department, not mine. Just let me forget
about it."

"You'd better," said Berg.

       *       *       *       *       *

In the month after his return, Lancaster lived much as usual. He was
scolded a few times for an increasing absent-mindedness and a lack of
enthusiasm on the Project, but that wasn't too serious. He became more
of an introvert than ever. Having some difficulty with getting to sleep,
he resorted to soporifics and then, in a savage reaction, to stimulants.
But outwardly there was little to show the turmoil within him.

He didn't know what to think. He had always been a loyal citizen--not a
fanatic, but loyal--and it wasn't easy for him to question his own basic
assumptions. But he had experienced something utterly alien to what he
considered normal, and he had found the strangeness more congenial--more
human in every way--than the norm. He had breathed a different
atmosphere, and it couldn't but seem to him that the air of Earth was
tainted. He re-read Kipling's _Chant-Pagan_ with a new understanding,
and began to search into neglected philosophies. He studied the news in
detail, and his critical eye soon grew jaundiced--did this editorial or
that feature story have any semantic content at all, or was it only a
tom-tom beat of loaded connotations? The very statements of fact were
subject to doubt--they should be checked against other accounts, or
better yet against direct observation; but other accounts were forbidden
and there was no chance to see for himself.

He took to reading seditious pamphlets with some care, and listened to a
number of underground broadcasts, and tried clumsily to sound out those
of his acquaintances whom he suspected of rebellious thoughts. It all
had to be done very cautiously, with occasional nightmare moments when
he thought he was being spied on; and was it right that a man should be
afraid to hear a dissenting opinion?

He wondered what his son was doing. It occurred to him that modern
education existed largely to stultify independent thought.

At the same time, he was unable to discard the beliefs of his whole
life. Sedition was sedition and treason was treason--you couldn't evade
that fact. There were no more wars--plenty of minor clashes, but no real
wars. There was a stable economy, and nobody lacked for the essentials.
The universal state might be a poor solution to the problems of a time
of troubles, but it was nevertheless a solution. Change would be
unthinkably dangerous.

Dangerous to whom? To the entrenched powers and their jackals. But the
oppressed peoples of Earth had nothing to lose, really, except their
lives, and many of them seemed quite willing to sacrifice those. Did the
rights of man stop at a full belly, or was there more?

He tried to take refuge in cynicism. After all, he was well off. He was
a successful jackal. But that wouldn't work either. He required a more
basic philosophy.

One thing that held him back was the thought that if he became a rebel,
he would be pitted against his friends--not only those of Earth, but
that strange joyous crew out in space. He couldn't see fighting against
them.

Then there was the very practical consideration that he hadn't the
faintest idea of how to contact the underground even if he wanted to.
And he'd make a hell of a poor conspirator.

He was still in an unhappy and undecided whirlpool when the monitors
came for him.

       *       *       *       *       *

They knocked on the door at midnight, as was their custom, and he felt
such an utter panic that he could barely make it across the apartment to
let them in. The four burly men wavered before his eyes, and there was a
roaring and a darkness in his head. They arrested him without ceremony
on suspicion of treason, which meant that habeas corpus and even the
right of trial didn't apply. Two of them escorted him to a car, the
other two stayed to search his dwelling.

At headquarters, he was put in a cell and left to stew for some hours.
Then a pair of men in the uniform of the federal police led him to a
questioning chamber. He was given a chair and a smiling, soft-voiced
man--almost fatherly, with his plump cheeks and white hair--offered him
a cigarette and began talking to him.

"Just relax, Dr. Lancaster. This is pretty routine. If you've nothing to
hide then you've nothing to fear. Just tell the truth."

"Of course." It was a dry whisper.
