fantastic with cubed domes, spires, and aerial bridges and flying
buttresses. Tunnel-like streets, flanked on either side by
shining metallic ramps and runways, stretched endlessly to the
vanishing point. Great shafts of multicolored light probed huge
streamers and ellipses above the higher levels.

And beyond, like a final backdrop, rose a titanic wall. It was
from that wall ... from its crenelated parapets and battlements
that Mr. Chambers felt the eyes peering at him.

Thousands of eyes glaring down with but a single purpose.

And as he continued to look, something else seemed to take form
above that wall. A design this time, that swirled and writhed in
the ribbons of radiance and rapidly coalesced into strange
geometric features, without definite line or detail. A colossal
face, a face of indescribable power and evil, it was, staring
down with malevolent composure.

       *       *       *       *       *

Then the city and the face slid out of focus; the vision faded
like a darkened magic-lantern, and the grayness moved in again.

Mr. Chambers pushed open the door of his house. But he did not
lock it. There was no need of locks ... not any more.

A few coals of fire still smouldered in the grate and going
there, he stirred them up, raked away the ash, piled on more
wood. The flames leaped merrily, dancing in the chimney's throat.

Without removing his hat and coat, he sank exhausted in his
favorite chair, closed his eyes then opened them again.

He sighed with relief as he saw the room was unchanged.
Everything in its accustomed place: the clock, the lamp, the
elephant ash tray, the marine print on the wall.

Everything was as it should be. The clock measured the silence
with its measured ticking; it chimed abruptly and the vase sent
up its usual sympathetic vibration.

This was his room, he thought. Rooms acquire the personality of
the person who lives in them, become a part of him. This was his
world, his own private world, and as such it would be the last to
go.

But how long could he ... his brain ... maintain its existence?

Mr. Chambers stared at the marine print and for a moment a little
breath of reassurance returned to him. _They_ couldn't take this
away. The rest of the world might dissolve because there was
insufficient power of thought to retain its outward form.

But this room was his. He alone had furnished it. He alone, since
he had first planned the house's building, had lived here.

This room would stay. It must stay on ... it must....

He rose from his chair and walked across the room to the book
case, stood staring at the second shelf with its single volume.
His eyes shifted to the top shelf and swift terror gripped him.

For all the books weren't there. A lot of books weren't there!
Only the most beloved, the most familiar ones.

So the change already had started here! The unfamiliar books were
gone and that fitted in the pattern ... for it would be the least
familiar things that would go first.

Wheeling, he stared across the room. Was it his imagination, or
did the lamp on the table blur and begin to fade away?

But as he stared at it, it became clear again, a solid,
substantial thing.

For a moment real fear reached out and touched him with chilly
fingers. For he knew that this room no longer was proof against
the thing that had happened out there on the street.

Or had it really happened? Might not all this exist within his
own mind? Might not the street be as it always was, with laughing
children and barking dogs? Might not the Red Star confectionery
still exist, splashing the street with the red of its neon sign?

Could it be that he was going mad? He had heard whispers when he
had passed, whispers the gossiping housewives had not intended
him to hear. And he had heard the shouting of boys when he walked
by. They thought him mad. Could he be really mad?

But he knew he wasn't mad. He knew that he perhaps was the sanest
of all men who walked the earth. For he, and he alone, had
foreseen this very thing. And the others had scoffed at him for
it.

Somewhere else the children might be playing on a street. But it
would be a different street. And the children undoubtedly would
be different too.

For the matter of which the street and everything upon it had
been formed would now be cast in a different mold, stolen by
different minds in a different dimension.

_Perhaps we shall come upon a day, far distant, when our plane,
our world will dissolve beneath our feet and before our eyes as
some stronger intelligence reaches out from the dimensional
shadows of the very space we live in and wrests from us the
matter which we know to be our own._

But there had been no need to wait for that distant day. Scant
years after he had written those prophetic words the thing was
happening. Man had played unwittingly into the hands of those
other minds in the other dimension. Man had waged a war and war
had bred a pestilence. And the whole vast cycle of events was but
a detail of a cyclopean plan.

He could see it all now. By an insidious mass hypnosis minions from
that other dimension ... or was it one supreme intelligence ... had
deliberately sown the seeds of dissension. The reduction of the
world's mental power had been carefully planned with diabolic
