
"Certainly," Blake said, and led him down the corridor to a small
office. Malone went to the phone at one end and began dialing even
before Blake shut the door and left him alone.

The screen lit up instantly with Burris' face. "Malone, where the hell
have you been?" the head of the FBI roared. "I've been trying to get
in touch with you--"

"Sorry," Malone said. "I was tied up."

"What do you mean, tied up?" Burris said. "Do you know I was just
about to send out a general search order? I thought they'd got you."

"They?" Malone said, interested. "Who?"

"How the hell would I know who?" Burris roared.

"Well, nobody got me," Malone said. "I've been investigating Rice
Pavilion, just like I'm supposed to do."

"Then why didn't you check in?" Burris asked.

Malone sighed. "Because I got myself locked up," he said, and
explained. Burris listened with patience.

When Malone was finished, Burris said: "You're coming right on back."

"But--"

"No arguments," Burris told him. "If you're going to let things like
that happen to you you're better off here. Besides, there are plenty
of men doing the actual searching. There's no need--"

Secretly, Malone felt relief. "Well, all right," he said. "But let me
check out this place first, will you?"

"Go ahead," Burris said. "But get right on back here."

Malone agreed and snapped the phone off. Then he turned back to find
Dr. Blake.

                              * * * * *

Examining hospital records was not an easy job. The inalienable right
of a physician to refuse to disclose confidences respecting a patient
applied even to idiots, imbecile and morons. But Malone had a slight
edge, due to Dr. Blake's embarrassment, and he put it mercilessly to
work.

For all the good it did him he might as well have stayed in his cell.
There wasn't even the slightest suspicion in any record that any of
the Rice Pavilion patients were telepathic.

"Are you sure that's what you're looking for?" Blake asked him, some
hours later.

"I'm sure," Malone said. "When you eliminate the impossible, whatever
remains, however improbable, must be the truth."

"Oh," Blake said. After a second he added: "What does that mean?"

Malone shrugged. "It's an old saying," he told the doctor. "It doesn't
have to mean anything. It just sounds good."

"Oh," Blake said again.

After a while, Malone said farewell to good old Rice Pavilion, and
headed back to Washington. There, he told himself, everything would be
peaceful.

And so it was. Peaceful and dispiriting.

Every agent had problems getting reports from hospitals--and not even
the FBI could open the private files of a licensed and registered
psychiatrist.

But the field agents did the best they could and, considering the
circumstances, their best was pretty good.

Malone, meanwhile, put in two weeks sitting glumly at his Washington
desk and checking reports as they arrived. They were uniformly
depressing. The United States of America contained more sub-normal
minds than Malone cared to think about. There seemed to be enough of
them to explain the results of any election you were unhappy over.
Unfortunately, subnormal was all you could call them. Like the
patients at Rice Pavilion, not one of them appeared to possess any
abnormal psionic abilities whatever.

There were a couple who were reputed to be poltergeists--but in
neither case was there a single shred of evidence to substantiate the
claim.

At the end of the second week, Malone was just about convinced that
his idea had been a total washout. He himself had been locked up in a
padded cell, and other agents had spent a full fortnight digging up
imbeciles, while the spy at Yucca Flats had been going right on his
merry way, scooping information out of the men at Project Isle as
though he were scooping beans out of a pot. And, very likely, laughing
himself silly at the feeble efforts of the FBI.

Who could he be?

Anyone, Malone told himself unhappily. Anyone at all. He could be the
janitor who swept out the buildings, one of the guards at the gate,
one of the minor technicians on another project, or even some old
prospector wandering around the desert with a scintillation counter.

Is there any limit to telepathic range?

The spy could even be sitting quietly in an armchair in the Kremlin,
probing through several thousand miles of solid earth to peep into the
brains of the men on Project Isle.

That was, to say the very least, a depressing idea.

Malone found he had to assume that the spy was in the United States--
that, in other words, there was some effective range to telepathic
communication. Otherwise, there was no point in bothering to continue
the search.

Therefore, he found one other thing to do. He alerted every agent to
the job of discovering how the spy was getting his information out of
the country.

He doubted that it would turn up anything, but it was a chance. And
Malone hoped desperately for it, because he was beginning to be sure
that the field agents were never going to turn up any telepathic
imbeciles.

He was right. They never did.


                                  3

The telephone rang.

Malone rolled over on the couch and muttered four words under his
breath. Was it absolutely necessary for someone to call him at seven
in the morning?

He grabbed at the receiver with one hand, and picked up his cigar from
the ashtray with the other. It was bad enough to be awakened from a
sound sleep--but when a man hadn't been sleeping at all, it was even
worse.

He'd been sitting up since before five that morning, worrying about
the telepathic spy, and at the moment he wanted sleep more than he
wanted phone calls.

"Gur?" he said, sleepily and angrily, thankful that he'd never had a
visiphone installed in his apartment. A taste for blondes was
apparently hereditary. At any rate, Malone felt he had inherited it
from his father, and he didn't want any visible strangers calling him
at odd hours to interfere with his process of collection and research.

He blinked at the audio circuit, and a feminine voice said: "Mr.
Kenneth J. Malone?"

"Who's this?" Malone said peevishly, beginning to discover himself
capable of semirational English speech.

"Long distance from San Francisco," the voice said.

"It certainly is," Malone said. "Who's calling?"

"San Francisco is calling," the voice said primly.

Malone repressed a desire to tell the voice that he didn't want to
talk to St. Francis, not even in Spanish, and said instead: _"Who_ in
San Francisco?"

There was a momentary hiatus, and then the voice said: "Mr. Thomas
Boyd is calling, sir. He says this is a scramble call."

Malone took a drag from his cigar and closed his eyes. Obviously the
call was a scramble. If it had been clear, the man would have dialed
direct, instead of going through what Malone now recognized as an
operator.

"Mr. Boyd says he is the Agent-in-Charge of the San Francisco office
of the FBI," the voice offered.

"And quite right, too," Malone told her. "All right. Put him on."

"One moment," There was a pause, a click, another pause and then
another click. At last the operator said: "Your party is ready, sir."

Then there was still another pause.

Malone stared at the audio receiver. He began to whistle _When Irish
Eyes Are Smiling_.

_... And the sound of Irish laughter...._ "Hello? Malone?"

"I'm here, Tom," Malone said guiltily. "This is me. What's the
trouble?"

"Trouble?" Boyd said. "There isn't any trouble. Well, not really. Or
maybe it is. I don't know."

Malone scowled at the audio receiver, and for the first time wished he
had gone ahead and had a video circuit put in, so that Boyd could see
the horrendous expression on his face.

"Look," he said. "It's seven here and that's too early. Out there,
it's four, and that's practically ridiculous. What's so important?"

He knew perfectly well that Boyd wasn't calling him just for the fun
of it. The man was a damned good agent. But why a call at this hour?

Malone muttered under his breath. Then, self-consciously, he squashed
out his cigar and lit a cigarette while Boyd was saying: "Ken, I think
we may have found what you've been looking for."

It wasn't safe to say too much, even over a scrambled circuit. But
Malone got the message without difficulty.

"Yeah?" he said, sitting up on the edge of the couch. "You sure?"

"Well," Boyd said, "no. Not absolutely sure. Not absolutely. But it is
worth your taking a personal look, I think."

"Ah," Malone said cautiously. "An imbecile?"

"No," Boyd said flatly. "Not an imbecile. Definitely not an imbecile.
As a matter of fact, a hell of a fat long way from an imbecile."

Malone glanced at his watch and skimmed over the airline timetables in
his mind. "I'll be there nine o'clock, your time," he said. "Have a
car waiting for me at the field."

                              * * * * *

As usual, Malone managed to sleep better on the plane than he'd been
able to do at home. He slept so well, in fact, that he was still
groggy when he stepped into the waiting car.

"Good to see you, Ken," Boyd said briskly, as he shook Malone's hand.

"You, too, Tom," Malone said sleepily. "Now what's all this about?" He
looked around apprehensively. "No bugs in this car, I hope?" he said.

Boyd gunned the motor and headed toward the San Francisco Freeway.
"Better not be," he said, "or I'll fire me a technician or two."

"Well, then," Malone said, relaxing against the upholstery, "where is
this guy, and who is he? And how did you find him?"

Boyd looked uncomfortable. It was, somehow, both an awe-inspiring and
a slightly risible sight. Six feet one and one-half inches tall in his
flat feet, Boyd posted around over two hundred and twenty pounds of
bone, flesh and muscle. He swung a pot-belly of startling proportions
under the silk shirting he wore, and his face, with its wide nose,
small eyes and high forehead, was half highly mature, half startlingly
childlike. In an apparent effort to erase those childlike qualities,
Boyd sported a fringe of beard and a moustache which reminded Malone
of somebody he couldn't quite place.

But whoever the somebody was, his hair hadn't been black, as Boyd's
was...

He decided it didn't make any difference. Anyhow, Boyd was speaking.

"In the first place," he said, "it isn't a guy. In the second, I'm not
exactly sure who it is. And in the third, Ken, I didn't find it."

There was a little silence.

"Don't tell me," Malone said. "It's a telepathic horse, isn't it? Tom,
I just don't think I could stand a telepathic horse...."

"No," Boyd said hastily. "No. Not at all. No horse. It's a dame. I
mean a lady." He looked away from the road and flashed a glance at
Malone. His eyes seemed to be pleading for something--understanding,
possibly, Malone thought. "Frankly," Boyd said, "I'd rather not tell
you anything about her just yet. I'd rather you met her first. Then
you could make up your own mind. All right?"

"All right," Malone said wearily. "Do it your own way. How far do we
have to go?"

"Just about an hour's drive," Boyd said. "That's all."

Malone slumped back in the seat and pushed his hat over his eyes.
"Fine," he said. "Suppose you wake me up when we get there."

But, groggy as he was, he couldn't sleep. He wished he'd had some
coffee on the plane. Maybe it would have made him feel better.

Then again, coffee was only coffee. True, he had never acquired his
father's taste for gin (and imagined, therefore, that it wasn't
hereditary, like a taste for blondes), but there was always bourbon.

He thought about bourbon for a few minutes. It was a nice thought. It
warmed him and made him feel a lot better. After a while, he even felt
awake enough to do some talking.

He pushed his hat back and struggled to a reasonable sitting position.
"I don't suppose you have a drink hidden away in the car somewhere?"
he said tentatively. "Or would the technicians have found that, too?"

"Better not have," Boyd said in the same tone as before, "or I'll fire
a couple of technicians." He grinned without turning. "It's in the
door compartment, next to the forty-five cartridges and the Tommy-
gun."

Malone opened the compartment in the thick door of the car and
extracted a bottle. It was Christian Brothers Brandy instead of the
bourbon he had been thinking about, but he discovered that he didn't
