
Then how _could_ I find it--and having found it, catch it? When the
infernal thing was more than a match for any ship it might meet. That
was my problem. It had kept me awake nights and talking to myself days,
since there was no easy answer.

I had to construct a solution, slowly and carefully. Since I couldn't be
sure where Pepe was going to be next, I had to make him go where I
wanted him to.

There were some things in my favor. The most important was the fact I
had forced him to make his play before he was absolutely ready. It
wasn't chance that he had left the same day I arrived on Cittanuvo. Any
plan as elaborate as his certainly included warning of approaching
danger. The drive on the battleship, as well as controls and primary
armament had been installed weeks before I showed up. Much of the
subsidiary work remained to be done when the ship had left. One witness
of the theft had graphically described the power lines and cables
dangling from the ship's locks when she lifted.

[Illustration]

My arrival had forced Pepe off balance. Now I had to keep pushing until
he fell. This meant I had to think as he did, fall into his plan, think
ahead--then trap him. Set a thief to catch a thief. A great theory, only
I felt uncomfortably on the spot when I tried to put it into practice.

A drink helped, as did a cigar. Puffing on it, staring at the smooth
bulkhead, relaxed me a bit. After all--there aren't that many things
you can do with a battleship. You can't run a big con, blow safes or
make burmedex with it. It is hell-on-jets for space piracy, but that's
about all.

"Great, great--but why a battleship?"

I was talking to myself, normally a bad sign, but right now I didn't
care. The mood of space piracy had seized me and I had been going along
fine. Until this glaring inconsistency jumped out and hit me square in
the eye.

Why a battleship? Why all the trouble and years of work to get a ship
that two people could just barely manage? With a tenth of the effort
Pepe could have had a cruiser that would have suited his purposes just
as well.

Just as good for space piracy, that is--but not for _his_ purposes. He
had wanted a battleship, and he had gotten himself a battleship. Which
meant he had more in mind than simple piracy. What? It was obvious that
Pepe was a monomaniac, an egomaniac, and as psychotic as a shorted
computer. Some day the mystery of how he had slipped through the screen
of official testing would have to be investigated. That wasn't my
concern now. He still had to be caught.

       *       *       *       *       *

A plan was beginning to take shape in my head, but I didn't rush it.
First I had to be sure that I knew him well. Any man that can con an
entire world into building a battleship for him--then steal it from
them--is not going to stop there. The ship would need a crew, a base for
refueling and a mission.

Fuel had been taken care of first, the gutted hull of _Ogget's Dream_
was silent witness to that. There were countless planets that could be
used as a base. Getting a crew would be more difficult in these peaceful
times, although I could think of a few answers to that one, too. Raid
the mental hospitals and jails. Do that often enough and you would have
a crew that would make any pirate chief proud. Though piracy was, of
course, too mean an ambition to ascribe to this boy. Did he want to rule
a whole planet--or maybe an entire system? Or more? I shuddered a bit as
the thought hit me. Was there really anything that could stop a plan
like this once it got rolling? During the Kingly Wars any number of
types with a couple of ships and less brains than Pepe had set up just
this kind of empire. They were all pulled down in the end, since their
success depended on one-man rule. But the price that had to be paid
first!

This was the plan and I felt in my bones that I was right. I might be
wrong on some of the minor details, they weren't important. I knew the
general outline of the idea, just as when I bumped into a mark I knew
how much he could be taken for, and just how to do it. There are natural
laws in crime as in every other field of human endeavor. I _knew_ this
was it.

"Get the Communications Officer in here at once," I shouted at the
intercom. "Also a couple of clerks with transcribers. And fast--this is
a matter of life or death!" This last had a hollow ring, and I realized
my enthusiasm had carried me out of character. I buttoned my collar,
straightened my ribbons and squared my shoulders. By the time they
knocked on the door I was all admiral again.

Acting on my orders the ship dropped out of warpdrive so our psiman
could get through to the other operators. Captain Steng grumbled as we
floated there with the engines silent, wasting precious days, while half
his crew was involved in getting out what appeared to be insane
instructions. My plan was beyond his understanding. Which is, of course,
why he is a captain and I'm an admiral, even a temporary one.

Following my orders, the navigator again constructed a sphere of
speculation in his tank. The surface of the sphere contacted all the
star systems a days flight ahead of the maximum flight of the stolen
battleship. There weren't too many of these at first and the psiman
could handle them all, calling each in turn and sending by news releases
to the Naval Public Relations officers there. As the sphere kept growing
he started to drop behind, steadily losing ground. By this time I had a
general release prepared, along with directions for use and follow up,
which he sent to Central 14. The battery of psimen there contacted the
individual planets and all we had to do was keep adding to the list of
planets.

The release and follow-ups all harped on one theme. I expanded on it,
waxed enthusiastic, condemned it, and worked it into an interview. I
wrote as many variations as I could, so it could be slipped into as many
different formats as possible. In one form or another I wanted the basic
information in every magazine, newspaper and journal inside that
expanding sphere.

"What in the devil does this nonsense _mean_?" Captain Steng asked
peevishly. He had long since given up the entire operation as a futile
one, and spent most of the time in his cabin worrying about the affect
of it on his service record. Boredom or curiosity had driven him out,
and he was reading one of my releases with horror.

"Billionaire to found own world ... space yacht filled with luxuries to
last a hundred years," the captain's face grew red as he flipped through
the stack of notes. "What connection does this tripe have with catching
those murderers?"

       *       *       *       *       *

When we were alone he was anything but courteous to me, having assured
himself by not-too-subtle questioning that I was a spurious admiral.
There was no doubt I was still in charge, but our relationship was
anything but formal.

"This tripe and nonsense," I told him, "is the bait that will snag our
fish. A trap for Pepe and his partner in crime."

"Who is this mysterious billionaire?"

"Me," I said. "I've always wanted to be rich."

"But this ship, the space yacht, where is it?"

"Being built now in the naval shipyard at Udrydde. We're almost ready to
go there now, soon as this batch of instructions goes out."

Captain Steng dropped the releases onto the table, then carefully wiped
his hands off to remove any possible infection. He was trying to be fair
and considerate of my views, and not succeeding in the slightest.

"It doesn't make sense," he growled. "How can you be sure this killer
will ever read one of these things. And if he does--why should he be
interested? It looks to me as if you are wasting time while he slips
through your fingers. The alarm should be out and every ship notified.
The Navy alerted and patrols set on all spacelanes--"

"Which he could easily avoid by going around, or better yet not even
bother about, since he can lick any ship we have. That's not the
answer," I told him. "This Pepe is smart and as tricky as a fixed
gambling machine. That's his strength--and his weakness as well.
Characters like that never think it possible for someone else to
outthink them. Which is what _I'm_ going to do."

"Modest, aren't you," Steng said.

"I try not to be," I told him. "False modesty is the refuge of the
incompetent. I'm going to catch this thug and I'll tell you how I'll do
it. He's going to hit again soon, and wherever he hits there will be
some kind of a periodical with my plant in it. Whatever else he is
