
"He won't hurt her, Alonzo," Hunter said, wishing he could be sure.
"He'll only use words on her."

"He never ask her _why_ she run away--he onry curse her and threaten her
because she embarrass him."

"Embarrass him?"

"He and Sonig, they see you coming out of the forest with your arm
around her. They watch with high-power grasses."

"But there was nothing wrong in that--"

"That are what Princess Ryra say. She say you onry put your arm around
her because she are stirr scared of the tigers. And then he say, what
about the other? And he cawr her awrful bad names."

"What other?"

"Oh, when you are bending down to kiss Princess Ryra and are wawrking
into tree."

He gulped. "_They saw that?_"

"Oh, sure. Rord Narf are so mad he want to kirr you right then but Sonig
say, 'Wait, I have a pran.' Then Sonig say, 'It are too bad we don't
have a camera--we could have made that rootenant the raffing stock of
forty worlds.'"

The thought made Hunter gulp again.

"What was Sonig's plan that Narf told Lyla about?" He asked.

"Oh, he not terr _her_. I hear Sonig terr Rord Narf when I spy. Sonig
say, 'Tomorrow we be friendry and we ret those two go for another wawrk
in the woods. And we have cameras with terescope rens and when they kiss
and hug we take moving pictures.'"

"Why, the gutter-bred rat--"

"And Rord Narf say, 'That is what we wirr do. And then I wirr kirr him
as soon as we have the pictures and she wirr have to toe the mark from
then on because if I pubricry show the pictures of what she did, she
wirr be ashamed to show her face anywhere on Vesta.'"

"Why, the--" He could not think of a suitable expression.

"And then Sonig say, 'To make sure she go out tomorrow, you bawr her out
good so she wirr want to cry on the rootenant's shourder again.' And
Rord Narf say, 'I wirr be very grad to terr the two-timing hussy what I
think of her, don't worry.'"

"Why, she was only a scared girl and that rat thinks she--"

       *       *       *       *       *

"_... Your promise to your dying father_," Narf's voice came in
accusation. "_He's gone, now, and you can betray him, too! Why don't you
go all the way in your deceptions ... your father will never know...._"

Alonzo said, "I think I go back and stay croser to her cabin,
Rootenant."

It was an hour later, and Narf's voice had settled to a low, steady
growling, when Hunter heard a helicopter settle down near the camp. A
minute later, Val Boran was outlined momentarily in the doorway of the
cabin he shared with Sonig. There followed the exchange of a few
words--interrogation in Val's tone--and then the sound of Sonig's voice
alone, which continued for minute after minute.

_Sonig is telling him all about it_, Hunter thought, _including my
walking into that tree. But there won't be one word in sympathy with
Lyla._

Sonig's story ended and Hunter saw Val leave the cabin. He came straight
up the path toward Hunter, looming tall in the darkness as he stopped
before him. There was the pale gleam of metal in Val's belt--a blaster.
His voice came cold and flat:

"I want to talk to you, Lieutenant."

Hunter sighed, thinking, _I suppose he wants to kill me, too_.

He got up and said, "We'll go inside. Shut the door behind you--I don't
want your friend straining his ears to hear us."

Val sat tall even in the chair, his face like a carving in a dark
granite and his eyes as bright and hard.

"I understand that you took Princess Lyla into the tiger forest today."
Val's hand was very near the blaster. "I understand you then played the
role of affectionate rescuer."

"Do you believe that story?" Hunter asked.

"Do you have a different one?"

"You might ask Lyla. Or Alonzo. Alonzo is the one who came to me for
help when he saw she was going out to die."

"To die?" A startled expression came into the black eyes. "She _wanted_
to die?"

"I'll tell you what happened," Hunter said, and told him the story,
omitting only the embarrassing kissing incident and knowing that Sonig
had not.

Val was silent for a while after Hunter finished speaking, then he said,
"It isn't for me to comment upon Lord Narf's character or actions. She
is his wife by her own choice. But the thought of someone else taking
her out and--"

"I know. It wasn't so." Then Hunter added, "You think a great deal of
her, don't you?"

Val's face hardened and Hunter thought he would not answer. Then he
smiled a little, even though without humor, and said:

"Since I came here to kill you if I thought you deserved it, I suppose I
am obligated to answer your question. My regard for Princess Lyla is the
respectful one that any civilized man would have for another man's
wife."

There was an unintended implication in the statement and Hunter made a
conjecture:

"You and Princess Lyla were engaged--how long ago?"

There was surprise on Val's face, and something like pain quickly
masked. "So she's already making it public information?"

"No. I learned of it from ... other sources. I don't know, of course,
why you persuaded her to break the engagement--that's none of my
business, anyway."

"No," Val said. "It's none of your business. I'll tell you this: _I_
didn't ask her to break the engagement. But so long as that was what she
wanted, I certainly wasn't going to beg her to change her mind."

Val stood up to go. "If you don't mind, I would rather you said nothing
to Princess Lyla about this visit tonight. I'm afraid my misplaced surge
of chivalry would make me look like a fool to her."

Then, as an afterthought, Val added, "Mr. Rockford had further business
in the city."

       *       *       *       *       *
           *       *       *       *

It was late when Narf finally left Lyla's part of the cabin. He went to
the cabin occupied by Val and Sonig, aroused Sonig, and the two of them
went to the helicopter field. Hunter heard the helicopter leaving for
the city a few minutes later. Val's cabin remained dark and after a
while, the light in Lyla's cabin went out.

He went to bed, but not to sleep. Over and over, a lonely little
Princess Lyla clung to him for comfort, crying, while he held her close.
He twisted and turned restlessly as he thought of the hours she had sat
alone and unloved while Narf poured out his hatred and fury on her.

There was a yearning for her, a desire to hold her and always protect
her, that would not let him sleep. And he realized the reason why.

He thought miserably, _I'm in love with her_!

       *       *       *       *       *

Rockford was in bed, snoring loudly, with six empty beer cans on the
floor beside him, when Hunter got up. He went outside and found Alonzo
waiting for him.

"They got it awr pranned to kirr you for sure today, Rootenant."

"How?" he asked.

"Rast night, Rord Narf and Sonig go to the city and Rord Narf, he hire
four bad-rooking men with brasters, and Sonig hire four more that are
his countrymen, and they bring these men back and now they are hiding in
the woods. And they awrso bring back movie cameras with terescope
renses. And Rord Narf raff and say he wirr marry Princess Ryra today
before your dead body is even coor."

"Oh?" Hunter said. He thought of the snoring Rockford and his words of
two days before: _If you manage to live that long._ How, he wondered,
could the lazy old drunkard have made such an accurate guess?

"And then," Alonzo said, "Rord Narf wake up Princess Ryra--onry I know
she wasn't asreep--and he terr her he ruv her and have awready made awr
the arrangement for them to get married today, right after runch. And he
terr her she is right about the Space Guard and she wirr have until
runch to tawrk to you about it."

There was the sound of Narf's door opening and closing and Alonzo said,
"I go now--Rord Narf might guess that I are terring you things."

A few minutes later Narf and Sonig came down the path toward Hunter.
Both carried packsacks--the cameras, of course--and both carried
long-range rifle blasters.

"Good morning, lieutenant!" Narf was smiling and pseudogenial again.
"About last night--sometimes a man has to be stern with his wife to
impress her. Very foolish thing she did--might have been killed. I'm
afraid I was so badly shaken with worry over her that I didn't even
thank you for bringing her back."

"A beautiful morning, lieutenant!" Sonig was smiling, coming as close to
beaming as the nature of his face would permit. "Lord Narf is going to
take me stag hunting this morning--I'll get some lessons from a master.
Did you ever see his lordship's collection of heads? Amazing!"

"But it seems a sportsman's collection is never quite complete," Narf
said. He was still smiling but the hatred was burning like a fire in his
eyes as he looked at Hunter. "There's one more head I must have--I
intend to get it this morning."

Narf and Sonig were gone when Lyla came out of her cabin, her face pale
and drawn. Val came out of his cabin and the two spoke to each other in
greeting. There was a silence, in which neither seemed to know what to
say.

Finally, awkwardly, Val said, "I heard about yesterday, Lyla. Why did
you go into the tiger forest?"

"Oh ... I was just walking, I guess, and didn't notice where."

