
They had built him a palace--no, a _temple_--and a city; and they were
building him a world. A planet that would be his to the last atom when
it was done; a corner of the universe that was Algernon James Weaver.

He recalled that in the beginning he had felt almost like these
creatures' servant--"public servant," he had thought, with
self-righteous lukewarm, pleasure. He had seen himself as one who built
for others--the more virtuous because those others were not even men.

But it was not he who built. _They_ built, and for him.

It was strange, he thought again, that he should not have seen it from
the first. For it was perfectly clear and all of a pattern.

The marriage laws. _Thou shalt not live in adultery._

The dietary laws. _Thou shalt not eat that which is unclean._

And the logical concomitant, the law of worship. _Thou shalt have no
gods before Me._

       *       *       *       *       *

The apostles ... Mark, Luke and John. Later, Matthew, Philip, Peter,
Simon, Andrew, James, Bartholomew and Thomas.

He had a feeling that something was wrong with the list besides the
omission of Judas--unluckily, he had no Bible--but it was really an
academic question. They were _his_ apostles, not that Other's.

The pattern repeated itself, he thought, but with variations.

He understood now why he had shelved the project of Christianizing the
natives, although one of his first acts had been to abolish their pagan
sects. He had told himself at first that it was best to wait until he
had put down from memory the salient parts of the Holy Bible--Genesis,
say, the better-known Psalms, and a condensed version of the Gospels;
leaving out all the begats, and the Jewish tribal history, and awkward
things like the Songs of Solomon. (_Thy mandibles are like pomegranates_
... no, it wouldn't do).

And, of course, he had never found time to wrack his brains for the
passages that eluded him. But all that had been merely a subterfuge to
soothe his conscience, while he slowly felt his way into his new role.

Now, it was almost absurdly simple. He was writing his own holy book--or
rather, Luke, Thomas, and a corps of assistants were putting it together
from his previous utterances, to be edited by him later.

The uneasy rustling of chitinous arms against white robes recalled him
from his meditation. The swarm of priests, altar boys, and the rest of
his retinue was still gathered around him, waiting until he should deign
to notice them again. Really, God thought with annoyance, this
woolgathering--at such a moment!

       *       *       *       *       *

The worshippers were massed in the Temple. A low, excited twittering
rose from them as He appeared and walked into the beam of the spotlight.

The dark lenses of television cameras were focused on Him from every
part of the balcony at the rear of the hall. The microphones were ready.
Weaver walked forward as the congregation knelt, and waited an
impressive moment before He spread His hands in the gesture that meant,
"Rise, my children." Simon, previously coached, translated. The
congregation rose again, rustling, and then was still.

At a signal from Simon, the choir began a skirling and screeching which
the disciples warranted to be music--religious music, composed to fit
the requirements He had laid down. Weaver endured it, thinking that
some changes must come slowly.

The hymn wailed to an end, and Weaver gripped the lectern, leaning
carefully forward toward the microphones. "My children," He began, and
waited for Solomon's twittering translation. "You have sinned greatly--"
Twitter. "--and in many ways." Twitter. "But I have come among you--"
Twitter. "--to redeem your sins--" Twitter. "--and make them as though
they had never been." Twitter.

He went on to the end, speaking carefully and sonorously. It was not a
long sermon, but He flattered Himself that it was meaty. At the end of
it He stepped back a pace, and folded His arms, in their long white-silk
sleeves, across His chest.

Simon took over now, and so far as Weaver could judge, he did well. He
recited a litany which Weaver had taught him, indicating by gestures
that the congregation was to repeat after him every second speech. The
low chirping welled from the hall; a comforting, warming sound, almost
like the responses of a human congregation. Weaver felt tears welling to
His eyes, and He restrained Himself from weeping openly only by a
gigantic effort. After all, He was a god of wrath; but the love which
swept toward Him at this moment was a powerful thing to gainsay.

       *       *       *       *       *

When it was all over, He went back to His sanctum, dismissed all His
retinue except His regular assistants, and removed the ceremonial robes.

"The people responded well," He said. "I am pleased."

Simon said, "They will work hard to please You, Master. You bring great
happiness to them."

"That is well," said Weaver. He sat down behind His great desk, while
the others stood attentively below Him, in the sunken fore-section of
the sanctum. "What business have you for Me today?"

"There is the matter of the novel, Master," said Mark. He stepped
forward, mounted the single step to Weaver's dais, and laid a sheaf of
papers on the desk. "This is a preliminary attempt which one called
Peter Smith has made with my unworthy help."

"I will read it later," Weaver told him. It was poor stuff, no
doubt--what else could one expect?--but it was a start. He would tell
them what was wrong with it, and they would try again.

Literary criticism, armaments, tariffs, manners--there was no end to it.
"What else?"

Luke stepped forward. "The plans for the large weapons You commanded
Your servants to design, Master." He put three large sheets of parchment
on the desk.

Weaver looked at the neat tracery on the first, and frowned. "You may
come near Me," He said. "Show Me how these are meant to operate."

Luke pointed to the first drawing. "This is the barrel of the weapon,
Master," he said. "As You commanded, it is rifled so that the missile
will spin. Here the missile is inserted at the breech, according to Your
direction. Here is the mechanism which turns and aims the weapon, as You
commanded. It is shown in greater detail on this second sheet.... And
here, on the third, is the missile itself. It is hollow and filled with
explosive powder, as You ordered, and there is in the tip a device which
will attract it to the target."

Weaver gravely nodded. "Has it been tested?"

"In models only, Master. If You direct, the construction will begin at
once."

"Good. Proceed. How many of these can you make for Me within a month?"

Luke hesitated. "Few, Master. At first all must be done by hand methods.
Later it will be possible to make many at a time--fifty, or even a
hundred in one month--but for the first two or three months, Master, two
weapons in a month is all that Your unworthy servants can do."

"Very well," said Weaver. "See to it."

       *       *       *       *       *
