"--but to send me to jail," said Walter Towne. "Go ahead. Send me to
jail. In fact, I _insist_ upon going to jail."

The union lawyer's jaw sagged. There was a hurried conference. A recess
was pleaded. Telephones buzzed. Then: "Your Honor, the plaintiff desires
to withdraw all charges at this time."

"Objection," Bates exclaimed. "We've already pleaded."

"--feel sure that a settlement can be effected out of court--"

The case was thrown out on its ear.

And still the machines sputtered.

       *       *       *       *       *

Back at the plant rumor had it that the machines were permanently
gutted, and that the plant could never go back into production.
Conflicting scuttlebutt suggested that persons high in uniondom had
perpetrated the crisis deliberately, bullying Management into the strike
for the sole purpose of cutting current dividends and selling stock to
themselves cheaply. The rumors grew easier and easier to believe. The
workers came to the plants in business suits, it was true, and lounged
in the finest of lounges, and read the _Wall Street Journal_, and felt
like stockholders. But to face facts, their salaries were not the
highest. Deduct union dues, pension fees, medical insurance fees, and
sundry other little items which had formerly been paid by well-to-do
managements, and very little was left but the semi-annual dividend
checks. And now the dividends were tottering.

Production lines slowed. There were daily brawls on the plant floor, in
the lounge and locker rooms. Workers began joking about the trash cans;
then the humor grew more and more remote. Finally, late in the afternoon
of the eighth day, Bailey was once again in Torkleson's office.

"Well? Speak up! What's the beef this time?"

"Sir--the men--I mean, there's been some nasty talk. They're tired of
making trash cans. No challenge in it. Anyway, the stock room is full,
and the freight yard is full, and the last run of orders we sent out
came back because nobody wants any more trash cans." Bailey shook his
head. "The men won't swallow it any more. There's--well, there's been
talk about having a board meeting."

Torkleson's ruddy cheeks paled. "Board meeting, huh?" He licked his
heavy lips. "Now look, Bailey, we've always worked well together. I
consider you a good friend of mine. You've got to get things under
control. Tell the men we're making progress. Tell them Management is
beginning to weaken from its original stand. Tell them we expect to have
the strike broken in another few hours. Tell them anything."

He waited until Bailey was gone. Then, with a trembling hand he lifted
the visiphone receiver. "Get me Walter Towne," he said.

       *       *       *       *       *

"I'm not an unreasonable man," Torkleson was saying miserably, waving
his fat paws in the air as he paced back and forth in front of the
spokesmen for the striking managers. "Perhaps we were a little
demanding, I concede it! Overenthusiastic with our ownership, and all
that. But I'm sure we can come to some agreement. A hike in wage scale
is certainly within reason. Perhaps we can even arrange for better
company houses."

Walter Towne stifled a yawn. "Perhaps you didn't understand us. The men
are agitating for a meeting of the board of directors. We want to be at
that meeting. That's the only thing we're interested in right now."

"But there wasn't anything about a board meeting in the contract your
lawyer presented."

"I know, but you rejected that contract. So we tore it up. Anyway, we've
changed our minds."

Torkleson sat down, his heavy cheeks quivering. "Gentlemen, be
reasonable! I can guarantee you your jobs, even give you a free hand
with the management. So the dividends won't be so large--the men will
have to get used to that. That's it, we'll put it through at the next
executive conference, give you--"

"The board meeting," Walter said gently. "That'll be enough for us."

The union boss swore and slammed his fist on the desk. "Walk out in
front of those men after what you've done? You're fools! Well, I've
given you your chance. You'll get your board meeting. But you'd better
come armed. Because I know how to handle this kind of board meeting, and
if I have anything to say about it, this one will end with a massacre."

       *       *       *       *       *

The meeting was held in a huge auditorium in the Robling administration
building. Since every member of the union owned stock in the company,
every member had the right to vote for members of the board of
directors. But in the early days of the switchover, the idea of a board
of directors smacked too strongly of the old system of corporate
organization to suit the men. The solution had been simple, if a trifle
ungainly. Everyone who owned stock in Robling Titanium was automatically
a member of the board of directors, with Torkleson as chairman of the
board. The stockholders numbered over ten thousand.

They were all present. They were packed in from the wall to the stage,
and hanging from the rafters. They overflowed into the corridors. They
jammed the lobby. Ten thousand men rose with a howl of anger when Walter
Towne walked out on the stage. But they quieted down again as Dan
Torkleson started to speak.

It was a masterful display of rabble-rousing. Torkleson paced the stage,
his fat body shaking with agitation, pointing a chubby finger again and
again at Walter Towne. He pranced and he ranted. He paused at just the
right times for thunderous peals of applause.
