snarled. "He can't do that to me again. Not while I'm ready for him."

"No? I think he could. Any time, any place, and under almost any
conditions. And I have much more experience in these matters than you,
my friend. This is a very dangerous young man, and he requires special
handling. Sit down and let us consider this young man."

Masterson growled impatiently, but returned to his desk. He sat down,
glowering at his companion.

"Suppose you tell me what you're talking about," he demanded.

Rayson looked down at his hands, which rested on the desk.

"We have been talking about mental influence, I believe. In fact, we
mentioned this very matter to our young friend. This is correct?"

"Sure we did. So?"

"And our young man was quite positive that he could never be so
controlled and that any effort to do so would be immediately apparent
to him. This is also correct, I believe?"

"That's about the way of it, yes. What are you driving at?"

Rayson sighed. "Let me remind you of something, then. You are, of
course; of the Ministerial Investigative Force, just as I am. But our
specialties are different. Your dealings are with the teaching and
preparation of youth for useful citizenship, and with the prevention of
certain gross misbehavior. Thus, you deal with those more obvious and
material deviations from the socially acceptable and have little
experience with the more dangerous and even less acceptable deviations
with which I must concern myself." He smiled faintly.

"Your handling of this young man just now would indicate a quite
complete lack of understanding of the specialty I have prepared myself
for. And even if there were no other reasons, it would serve to point
up the reason for our difference in relative rank. You must admit you
got something less than desirable results." He cleared his throat and
looked disapprovingly at Masterson.

"Of course, you are familiar with stories of mental influence. And I
have no doubt that you have had some experience with this type of
thing, even though it is not in your direct line of work."

Masterson shook his head. "Sorry," he admitted. "This is the first time
anyone's ever pulled anything like that on me."

Rayson inclined his head slowly. "So," he said softly. "Your lack of
caution and discretion is more understandable, then. You have been
quite fortunate, I should say. Of course, extreme individualism is far
from common now, and persons who combine extreme individualism with
high empathic power are rare, but they do appear. And they are
dangerous in the highest degree." He spread his hands.

"A fully developed person of this type could do almost as he pleased
and there would be no one who would be able to deny him or even check
his course. You can see what I mean, surely?"

                    *      *      *      *      *

Masterson stared contemplatively into space. "Yes," he said. "Yes, I
think I get the idea. A person like that could demand almost anything
from almost anyone--and get it. But how would you go about it to
restrain one of those people?"

"It can lead to difficulties." Rayson smiled reminiscently. "I can
remember cases where----" He frowned.

"But no matter. We seldom allow them to reach high development. Very
often, they betray themselves in little ways and we discover them quite
early. We are then able to take care of them before they can do serious
harm. Some, even, we are able to ... ah ... reorient, so that they
become normal, useful subjects of the realm. But sometimes ... well, we
have to call upon the Guard and get heavy weapons. Complete elimination
becomes necessary." He frowned.

"And sometimes, like our young friend, they gain considerable power
which they manage to conceal, and only betray themselves when under
stress. Then, they become dangerous in the extreme. And there is no
really legal way in which they can be handled, since they haven't yet
committed any overt act of violence." He shook his head.

"No, this young man will require quite special handling. He will have
to be carefully watched, and will probably get to the stage where
complete elimination is demanded. I shall set the process in motion
immediately." He reached for the telephone on his desk.

Masterson looked at him thoughtfully.

"You say these people are pretty rare, and really dangerous?"

"Yes. To both questions, definitely yes."

"Well, then, I should think that anyone who managed to organize and
direct the elimination of one of them would be likely to get quite a
bit of credit. Might even lead to a good promotion."

Rayson took his hand from the telephone.

"This is true," he admitted. "You are thinking of----?"

Masterson nodded. "Why don't we pick up a few people and run this
operation ourselves?" he asked.

Rayson shook his head. "The idea is excellent," he agreed. "But I
really see no reason for a joint effort." He got to his feet.

"After all, you must admit the total implication of this matter was my
discovery. I had to explain it to you. And thus, I can see no reason
for making a full partnership of the matter." He raised a hand.

"Of course, you will receive credit in the matter," he added quickly,
"and you might even find yourself advanced. But I shall have to insist
on taking the final steps and directing the operation personally." He
smiled coldly.

"I can consult with certain of my colleagues and get the necessary
support. And when I have left, you may get in touch with your superiors
and report the matter, telling them that action is being initiated.
This way, we will both receive our due credit." He paused.

"Oh, yes," he added, "and you might interview this young Kelton again,
with his companions. Thus, you will gather evidence for use in
justifying my operations."

Masterson looked at him unhappily. "Well ... all right," he agreed
reluctantly. "Rank has its privileges, I suppose. And I guess in this
case, that includes the collection of more rank. Suppose I'd better
take what I can get."

"To be sure." Rayson smiled at him benignly. "This way, you are sure of
profiting. Otherwise, you might run into disaster." He rose and strode
toward the door.

"You may get those boys in for interview as soon as I leave," he said.
"From them, you can get sufficient evidence of these powers of your
young friend. Ah ... and I would suggest that you use a little more
discretion with them than you showed with this young Michaels of ours.
You were a trifle--shall we say, crude?" He coughed.

"Then you may call in and advise Headquarters that evidence has been
gathered and action is being taken in this case of Donald Michaels."

He turned and went out the door.

Masterson watched as the door closed, then reached into the back of a
desk drawer. He took out a small box with a number of switches mounted
on its top. For a moment, he examined the object, then he got to his
feet and went to the window.

He stood, looking out of the window for a few moments, nodded, and let
his fingers play among the switches. Finally, he nodded in satisfaction
and went back to his desk.

He looked contemplatively at the telephone for a moment, then picked it
up and started flipping at the dial.

                    *      *      *      *      *

The sports flier dropped free for the last few feet, bounced, tilted,
and finally righted itself. It was not a very good landing.

Don snapped the switch off and sat for a moment, looking out at the
long, low house. Then he let himself out of the flier and walked across
the courtyard and through the door.

The front room was empty. He looked over at the wide glass panels that
formed one side of the room. A small, dark man came from between the
bushes of the inner garden. He slid a panel aside and looked
expressionlessly at Don for a moment. Then he slowly allowed his head
to drop.

"Master Donald," he said. He raised his head, looking at Don with
brilliant yellow eyes. "Your father did not expect you until two days."

"I know, Dowro. But I came home early. I want to talk to him."

"It is well." The man motioned toward a curtained arch. "He is below."

"Thanks, Dowro. I'll find him." Don swept the curtains aside and
turned, to open a heavy door.

As he started down the steep flight of stairs, a sharp crack came from
the basement. He grinned. With this kind of weather, the range would be
busy.

Kent Michaels stood on the plastic flooring, a rifle at his shoulder.
The front sight weaved almost imperceptibly, then steadied. He seemed
completely unaware of his son's presence.

Suddenly, a spurt of smoke came from the muzzle of the rifle. There was
another sharp crack and the muzzle swept upward then dropped, to become
steady again.

At last, the shooter took the weapon from his shoulder and opened the
action. He looked around.

"Oh, Don," he said. "Didn't expect you for a couple of days. There's no
holiday down there right now, is there?"

Don shook his head. "I made a new one," he said. "Permanent type."

His father bent over the rifle action, examining it. Then he stepped
over to place the weapon in a rack. Finally, he turned, to look
searchingly at his son.

"Permanent?"

"Afraid so, Dad. I guess I sort of blew up."

"Want to tell me about it?"

The older man motioned Don to a camp stool and pulled one over for
himself. As Don talked, he listened intently. At last, he nodded.

"So that's all of that, eh?"

"Guess it is, Dad. Looks as though I'll have to start working for my
keep. Won't be any police official in the family after all."

"Could be." Kent Michaels got up and reached out to the weapons rack.

"Got one more shot on this target. Then we'll talk it over, hm-m-mm?"

He stepped up to a line inlaid in the floor. Deliberately, he placed a
cartridge in the rifle and closed the action. Then, he raised the
weapon, seated it on his shoulder, and brought it into position with a
twisting motion.

Don watched, smiling in spite of himself, as the front sight rose and
fell with his father's breathing. That routine never changed. From the
time the Old Man picked up his weapon till he laid it down, you could
predict every move he'd make.

The motion stopped and for endless seconds, the man stood motionless,
the muzzle of his rifle probing steadily toward the lighted space
downrange. Then the front sight jumped upward, settled back, and
steadied again.

"Looked good." Kent Michaels let the weapon down, opened the action and
checked it, then racked the weapon. He touched a button near the firing
line and waited for the target to come in to him.

Deliberately, he unclipped the sheet of paper, laid it down, and
clipped another in its place. He touched another button, then picked up
the fired target and bent over it, checking his score. Finally, he
looked up.

"Ninety-seven," he said. "Four X's. Think you can beat it?" He walked
back to the rack and picked out a rifle. After glancing into the
action, he held it out toward Don.

"Zero hasn't been changed since you fired it last. Want to take a
couple of free ones anyway, just to be sure?"

Don looked at him indignantly.

"Good grief, Dad," he objected. "This is no time for a rifle match."

"Good as any, I'd say," his father told him. "Go ahead. There's a block
of ammo at the point. Take your time, but you'll have to make 'em
good." He sat down on his camp stool and waited.

Don looked at him for a few seconds, then shook his head resignedly and
stepped up to the line.

"Oh, well," he said. "I'll try. Never mind the zero rounds."

He loaded the rifle and brought it to his shoulder. The sight weaved
and bobbed. He brought it down again and looked back at his father. The
older man pulled a cigarette from his breast pocket.

"Go ahead," he said calmly. "Take a few deep breaths. And relax."

Don bowed his shoulders and let the rifle hang loosely from his
outstretched arms. He looked downrange, trying to drive everything out
of his mind but the target hanging down there. Finally, he raised the
weapon again. The sight bobbed about, then steadied. He put pressure on
the trigger, then growled softly as the weapon fired.

"Oh, no! Drifted off at three o'clock."

His father exhaled a small cloud of smoke and said nothing. Don looked
at him unhappily for a moment, then reloaded and brought the rifle up
again.

Finally, the tenth shot smacked against the backstop and he racked his
weapon and punched at the target return button.

His father got up and unclipped the sheet.

"Well, let's see," he said. "Eight, nine, nine ... here's a nipper ten
... nine ... oh, me! You didn't do so well, did you?"

"What would you expect?" grumbled Don. "Give me a couple of hours to
simmer down and I'll take you on. Beat you, too."

"Suppose you got into a fight, Don?" his father asked. "Think the guy'd
give you a couple hours to simmer down? So you could maybe shoot his
eye out?"

                    *      *      *      *      *

He turned and led the way to a couple of lounge chairs.

"Sit down," he advised. "And turn on that light, will you?" He leaned
back.

"So you gave Andy Masterson a fast outline on manners, eh?" He laughed
softly. "Boy, I'd like to have seen his face about then!"

Don jerked his head around. "You know him, Dad?"

"You could say I did once," his father answered. "We went through Guard
