eyes watchful. "We know your people were here," he said suddenly. "Now
they've gone, and yet you remain behind. There must be a reason for such
rashness. Are you sick? Crippled?"

Ravdin shook his head. "We are not sick."

"Then criminals, perhaps? Being punished for rebellious plots?"

"We are not criminals."

The Hunter's fist crashed on the desk. "Then why are you here? _Why?_
Are you going to tell me now, or do you propose to waste a few hours of
my time first?"

"There is no mystery," Ravdin said softly. "We stayed behind to plead
for peace."

"For peace?" Frankle stared in disbelief. Then he shrugged, his face
tired. "I might have known. Peace! Where have your people gone?"

Ravdin met him eye for eye. "I can't say."

The Hunter laughed. "Let's be precise, you don't _choose_ to say, just
now. But perhaps very soon you will wish with all your heart to tell
me."

Dana's voice was sharp. "We're telling you the truth. We want peace,
nothing more. This constant hunting and running is senseless, exhausting
to both of us. We want to make peace with you, to bring our people
together again."

Frankle snorted. "You came to us in war, once, long ago. Now you want
peace. What would you do, clasp us to your bosom, smother us in your
idiotic music? Or have you gone on to greater things?"

Ravdin's face flushed hotly. "Much greater things," he snapped.

Frankle sat down slowly. "No doubt," he said. "Now understand me
clearly. Very soon you will be killed. How quickly or slowly you die
will depend largely upon the civility of your tongues. A civil tongue
answers questions with the right answers. That is my definition of a
civil tongue." He sat back coldly. "Now, shall we commence asking
questions?"

Dana stepped forward suddenly, her cheeks flushed. "We don't have the
words to express ourselves," she said softly. "We can't tell you in
words what we have to say, but music is a language even you can
understand. We can tell you what we want in music."

Frankle scowled. He knew about the magic of this music, he had heard of
the witchcraft these weak chicken-people could weave, of their strange,
magic power to steal strong men's minds from them and make them like
children before wolves. But he had never heard this music with his own
ears. He looked at them, his eyes strangely bright. "You know I cannot
listen to your music. It is forbidden, even you should know that. How
dare you propose--"

"But this is different music." Dana's eyes widened, and she threw an
excited glance at her husband. "Our music is beautiful, wonderful to
hear. If you could only hear it--"

"Never." The man hesitated. "Your music is forbidden, poisonous."

Her smile was like sweet wine, a smile that worked into the Hunter's
mind like a gentle, lazy drug. "But who is to permit or forbid? After
all, you are the leader here, and forbidden pleasures are all the
sweeter."

Frankle's eyes were on hers, fascinated. Slowly, with a graceful
movement, she drew the gleaming thought-sensitive stone from her
clothing. It glowed in the room with a pearly luminescence, and she saw
the man's eyes turning to it, drawn as if by magic. Then he looked away,
and a cruel smile curled his lips. He motioned toward the stone. "All
right," he said mockingly. "Do your worst. Show me your precious music."

Like a tinkle of glass breaking in a well, the stone flashed its fiery
light in the room. Little swirls of music seemed to swell from it,
blossoming in the silence. Frankle tensed, a chill running up his spine,
his eyes drawn back to the gleaming jewel. Suddenly, the music filled
the room, rising sweetly like an overpowering wave, filling his mind
with strange and wonderful images. The stone shimmered and changed,
taking the form of dancing clouds of light, swirling with the music as
it rose. Frankle felt his mind groping toward the music, trying
desperately to reach into the heart of it, to become part of it.

Ravdin and Dana stood there, trancelike, staring transfixed at the
gleaming center of light, forcing their joined minds to create the
crashing, majestic chords as the song lifted from the depths of oblivion
to the heights of glory in the old, old song of their people.

A song of majesty, and strength, and dignity. A song of love, of
aspiration, a song of achievement. A song of peoples driven by ancient
fears across the eons of space, seeking only peace, even peace with
those who drove them.

Frankle heard the music, and could not comprehend, for his mind could
not grasp the meaning, the true overtones of those glorious chords, but
he felt the strangeness in the pangs of fear which groped through his
mind, cringing from the wonderful strains, dazzled by the dancing light.
He stared wide-eyed and trembling at the couple across the room, and for
an instant it seemed that he was stripped naked. For a fleeting moment
the authority was gone from his face; gone too was the cruelty, the
avarice, the sardonic mockery. For the briefest moment his cold gray
eyes grew incredibly tender with a sudden ancient, long-forgotten
longing, crying at last to be heard.

And then, with a scream of rage he was stumbling into the midst of the
light, lashing out wildly at the heart of its shimmering brilliance. His
