more steps on his faceplate.

Dor hesitated, her head just above water. She looked at the limp,
diving-suited body beside her, then back at the launch and Farmer.
Again, she came to a decision quickly.

Bending, leaving a trail of bubbles as her head went under, she set the
Judge's invention down on a lower step and picked up the Judge instead.
Cradling him in her arms, she started back up again, calling to Farmer
to be ready to take her burden aboard.

They got him on the boat with little difficulty, and John Andrew laid
him on the deck as Dor sprang lithely over the rail again, showing
interest in the little fellow's condition. The diving helmet came off
easily, not having been properly fastened down at all. Farmer bent
anxiously over the Judge, looking for signs of life.

The diving suit had shipped some water, and the Judge had gotten a nasty
crack on the head--but he was a tough bozo. There was no blood, his
breathing seemed almost normal, and he already showed signs of returning
consciousness.

John Andrew turned to Dor. "Well, I should thank you for bringing him
back, I guess," he muttered. "But now that you're with us again"--he
shot out a big paw and grabbed her by the wrist--"how about explaining
some of this?"

He was very gentle with the wrist. He didn't want to hurt her; he was
wondering already, in fact, what had made him get so rough at all. But
she didn't seem to mind.

"I've got to go quickly," she told him. "I think Garf will be all right
now, but he may take a notion to come back. And I have to see that the
gate is closed before ..."

"What gate? Get back where?" Farmer managed to put more curiosity than
impatience into his tone.

"Back to my own planet--Tamdivar, sun Nogore, member of the Galactic
Federation," she said patiently. "The gate is a matter-transmitter
between my world and yours. It was once in constant use, but my
government closed it when you people got to the point where you were
running around in submarines, using depth bombs, and just noticing our
aircraft too much."

       *       *       *       *       *

Somehow, what popped into Farmer's head was the chorus of an old song he
had sung in boy's camp when very young. "_There's a hole in the bottom
of the sea! There's a log in the hole...._"

"Your machine reactivated the gate from this side, even if that isn't
what you designed it to do," Dor went on. "It's a good thing I noticed
the gate was open. Of course, the area affected isn't large--it includes
those steps and a lot of water around them.

"The gate'll stay open now until it's closed from our side--but I'll
have to take your outfit back and destroy it, anyway. Our cops would be
tough with you if they found you operating the thing, and Federation
Securitymen would be even tougher. Take it as a warning: don't do it
again."

She turned to go, but Farmer held on. "What's this about a Galactic
Federation? And if they've banned all communication with Earth, why
haven't they just blasted the planet out of existence and gotten rid of
it? Of course, I know we're thoroughly uncivilized and too warlike for
any other race to trust, and all that. I can see how Earth might be
considered the plague spot of the universe...."

Dor gawked, and saw that he was very serious. Then she threw back her
head and laughed a merry laugh. "Listen, friend," she said at last. "The
only real trouble with you Earth people is that you have a tremendous
inferiority complex, collectively and individually--as you've just
illustrated. Get over that and you'll eliminate most of your trouble. As
for the Federation, they let _us_ in, and most member-races have wars
occasionally; they'll undoubtedly accept you, once you develop space
travel.

"Just at the moment, of course, you're at a crossroads. You could jump
in either direction, blowing yourself up or taking the big step into
space. I think you'll turn out okay, but not everybody agrees--and the
Federation can't take even small chances. So you can't be allowed to set
off your atom bombs, or worse, where they might get through to another
planet. We can't actually interfere with you, so we've closed the gates;
that's all."

John Andrew, thinking it over, said "Oh," and let go of her wrist. She
turned and went back to the rail again, after flashing him the most de
luxe smile so far. Farmer came out of a philosophic haze to notice she
was leaving. He said, "Hey!"

She looked over her shoulder. Farmer didn't know what to say, but he
wanted to delay her. Finally, he pointed to the nonapus, and said, "What
about that monster? You're not going to leave it here?"

She laughed again. "Oh, the robot? It'll follow me. It's designed to....
Oh damn!"

The damn was for something she saw in the water as she looked back over
the rail again. John Andrew rushed to her side and looked as she got set
for a dive. Garf, he saw immediately, had returned, and was picking up
the Judge's invention.

"Put that down!" Dor's yell was high-pitched. Garf faced them, and
Farmer could just make out his lazy, contemptuous smile through the
murky water. The fishman raised his arm in one of the now-familiar
gestures.

The boat heaved, wallowed, and sank.

Farmer thought desperately again that he couldn't swim, and then he
thought wildly of the Judge, who hadn't regained full consciousness. He
