She stroked it gently, commenting on its beauty, and before I could
prevent it or divert her attention, she had lifted the heavy lid
exposing the disarranged shroud, the remains of one or two hapless small
creatures, the horrible blood-stained satin lining. She screamed and
dropped the lid, somehow pinching her finger. She hopped on one foot, as
one usually does to fight down sudden pain. Then she was clinging to me,
thoroughly frightened._

_"What does it mean, Tod?"_

_I quieted her with the usual platitudes. Then I was kissing that poor,
red little finger. Without warning to myself or her, I nipped it
affectionately. A warm glow spread through me; there was a taste more
delightful than fine old brandy, or vintage wine, and I knew irrevocably
that I was not cured; no, nor ever should be! And I knew, too, that I
wanted Maria--not just as a man longs for the woman he loves--but to
drink of the fountain of her life, that warm, intoxicating fountain,
greedily, joyously. She never knew what went through my mind at that
moment. If I could have killed myself then, I would have, and with no
compunction. But there is more to killing a revenant than that. The
Church knows the procedure. I hurried Maria home as fast as I could and
told her I had to go away for a week on business. She believed me and
said she would miss me. But I didn't go away. That night I fought a
losing battle with myself, and then and every night thereafter, I
returned to her, partook of her and slunk away, loathing myself. I knew
that I must soon kill the one being I loved above all others, kill, too,
her immortal soul, and there was nothing I could do to prevent it._

_She began to fade visibly. When I "returned" in a week, she was so ill
that a few steps tired her. Her appetite all but vanished. She seemed
genuinely glad to see me. She was beset by nightmares, she said. Could I
help her get some rest? I took her to a physician who sagely prescribed
a change in climate, rest and a diet rich in blood and iron, gave her a
prescription for sedatives, and called it a day._

_You know how she looked when you saw her. The day was approaching when
she would have no more blood, when life as you know it would stop and
she would become like me. Somehow I couldn't take her with me without
some warning, but I didn't know how to do it. You see, since I was an
innocent victim myself. I could speak, could warn my intended victim,
because although my soul had all but died, there was still a spark that
evil hadn't touched. I knew she would think it a joke if I told her
about myself without warning._

_Then, happily for me, you came along. I knew you would sense something
amiss and I didn't care. I was almost certain of her love, and I decided
to seize the few minutes left me and devil take the hindmost! When you
told her to confront me, you gave me the happiest days of my life. For
this I thank you sincerely. For what I have done and will ask you to do,
forgive me!_

_Maria asked me directly, as you had known she would. I replied frankly,
sparing her nothing. I told her that the fact that this life had been
wished on me, as it were, gave me some rights, and that I could tell her
how to rid herself of me, if she wished. Then she turned to me, her
large, lovely eyes thoughtful._

_"Tod, dearest," she said softly, "I must die some day, really die, so
what difference does it make when? I only know that I love you. Why wait
until I'm decrepit and alone, with only a few memories to look back on?
Why not now, with you, where life doesn't really stop? With all I've
read about this, don't you think I could free myself if I wished?"_

_I still wonder if she really believed me. We were married three days
later. I never told her what her life with me would be like--that one
day I would desert her, fearing and hating her rivalry for the very
source of my life, and the ghastly chain would continue. I couldn't. I
loved her so, Morris, can you understand that? I couldn't betray her
then and I can't now._

_On the second night of our marriage, she died as you know it, in my
arms. I don't think she knows it yet. But it won't be long until she
does discover it. We were quite alive when you found us; she was in an
hypnotic state induced by her condition. She heard and saw nothing. But
I knew. And I must keep my faith. I must, and you are the only one who
can help me._

_If you will show this to a priest, he will gladly accompany you to the
place in_ Konigstein, _where we rest during the morning in a new "bed" I
had specially constructed for us. I couldn't bring Maria to that other
bed of corruption. A map of how to get there is enclosed. There you will
perform the ancient, effective rites, and you will lay us to rest
together, as we wish. That is all I ask...._

       *       *       *       *       *

When I had finished reading I stared at nothing, trying to force myself
to think. This was "all" he asked. In substance, he wished me to murder
the girl I loved. I could refuse; I could ignore his request. I could
even doubt the verity of his statements. He might be a madman. But I
didn't doubt. I believed every word, and I knew I would do as he asked.

That she had gone willingly I didn't doubt. I no longer hated him so
much; rather I pitied him, the hapless victim of a horrible chain of
circumstance.

       *       *       *       *       *

I found the priest, a venerable, gentle soul, after much searching. The
younger men had looked at me searchingly, laughed and told me to read
the Good Book for consolation, and to lay off the bottle. Father Kalman
was understanding, with the wisdom of the very old.

"Yes, my son," he said, "I will go. Many might doubt, but I believe.
Lucifer roams the earth in many guises and must be recognized and
exorcised."

It was five o'clock in the morning when we approached the mausoleum. The
Good Father explained that the "creatures of darkness" had to be back in
