
"Please, Master," he begged. "Do not place me under enchantment." He
held up his hands in a peculiar gesture.

"What made you do that?" Kweiros raised a hand slowly, palm out. "I have
no intention of harming you."

"But I could feel you, trying to cast me under a spell."

"You ... felt me?"

"To be sure, Master, just as I have felt the same power from my master,
Jaeger. But this was far stronger. It hurt. And it seemed as though you
wanted me to do something."

Kweiros nodded. "I think I'm getting an idea," he remarked. "And it
scares me a little. They're not really nontelepathic, any more than the
Kierawelans, for example, are nonvocal. I think we've got something here
that's almost unique in the galaxy." He rubbed his neck. "Excuse me a
few minutes. I want to check something in one of these tapes."

Jaeger nodded and leaned back in his chair, looking curiously at the boy
beside him, then back at his superior, who had selected a tape reel. He
threaded it into the playing heads, put on a headband, and snapped a
switch. Jaeger and the boy watched as Kweiros leaned back.

The officer's face became vacant, then twisted, seeming to reflect
painful mental effort. Slowly, he leaned forward again, touching another
switch. Then, he sank back, to concentrate on his thoughts.

Jaeger looked again at the boy, who was sitting tensely, his hands
gripping the arms of his chair, his eyes fastened fearfully on the
officer before him. As Jaeger watched, Elwar half rose from his chair,
then sank back, his face appearing to mirror Kweiros' efforts.

[Illustration]

At last, Kweiros sat up. Shakily, he removed his headband and snapped
the playback off.

"Long time since I checked that tape," he said. "Pretty rugged stuff,
and highly speculative. Always gives me a headache." He shook his head
as he looked at Elwar.

"And this makes it even worse. It was bad enough as pure speculation,
but we've got something real here. Something rough. For one thing, we
have got a planet where no one but native operatives stand a chance of
working. For another we--" He cupped his chin in his hands and examined
Elwar closely.

"Do you really want to learn the secrets you looked for in the books,
youngster? Do you still want the secrets you first thought you might
learn?"

The boy seemed to withdraw a little. "I have a great fear," he admitted
tremulously.

"You haven't been injured or mistreated, have you?"

"No, Master, but--" Elwar looked toward the door.

"And you won't be," he was told reassuringly. "Now you just go ahead on
back to your quarters."

       *       *       *

As the door closed, Kweiros turned to Jaeger.

"Think we'll put you on special assignment. For the next few cycles,
you'll act as a private tutor. Then you can go back to Main Base with
Elwar while they give him his training."

Jaeger raised his eyebrows. "Yes, sir," he said doubtfully. "You think
the boy will develop?"

Kweiros nodded. "I'm quite sure of it," he said. "And he's got a big job
ahead of him. He may be instrumental in preventing a major disaster." He
waved at the tape reels.

"I got that little tape out just on an off chance," he added. "Didn't
really expect to find anything, but--" He flipped his hands out.
"Anyway, I pulled it." He leaned forward, looking at Jaeger.

"We may have run into a second, or even third growth culture," he said
slowly. "Once, before some ancient war of destruction, the people of
this planet might have been normally telepathic." He closed his eyes for
an instant. "Possibly they were unable to use their telepathic power.
And equally possibly, they could have had a highly developed mechanical
civilization. Something went wrong." He waved at the tape reel.

"In this reconstruction, there's an hypothesis on just such a situation.
Here, a race reaches high development and wrecks itself--leaving no
trace of its accomplishments. Growth starts over from the most meager of
beginnings. Survival becomes a matter of the most bitter conflict, with
everyone becoming a hunter and being hunted in his turn. In this
situation, detection of an enemy becomes vital." He grinned wryly. "Can
you imagine what would happen to someone who radiated his thoughts?"

Jaeger ran a finger over his lips. "He'd be easy to locate," he mused.
"And he'd have a hard time evading an enemy."

"Precisely." Kweiros nodded. "And he'd never be able to approach his
prey. In short, he'd fail to survive. Complete telepathic blankness
would have a high survival value. But an ability to detect mental
radiation would still be a big help." He waved a hand.

"So, a race like this one could evolve. And the author of this tape
extrapolated from there. A normal telepathic reception will be
accompanied, by a slight feedback. A completely black body, however,
will neither radiate nor feed back. It merely absorbs energy and, unless
it's super-imposed on a reflective background, it leaves no trace. Since
nothing in nature other than a telepathic mind can reflect telepathy, no
background would survive for long." He frowned a little.

"Of course, no mind we are familiar with could act as a telepathically
black body, but this author hypothesized a race that could do just
that--plus. There's a further hypothesis of an ability to detect and
localize radiations as such, without bothering to resolve them."

"Sounds like just what we have here," Jaeger admitted.

"It does, doesn't it?" Kweiros nodded. "And there's a further
extrapolation. Some of the members or the elder races have speculated on
a sort of second-order telepathy, undetectable to the normal telepath,
but capable of noting normal radiation. And some of the speculations
seem to make sense--though they're a little confusing. If you don't have
a specific sense, it's difficult to visualize it, or even to speculate
on its presence." He drew a deep breath.

"That leads us into a real problem. Our people roamed around this planet
for several cycles this time. And there may have been others before us,
who didn't record their visits, other than in the minds and legends of
the natives. And there may be other legends from that other, older
culture." He shrugged.
