blocked by people lining the way on a cross street. The cars beeped,
and nobody heard them. With stiff, jerky motions Sean O'Donohue got out
of the enforcedly stopped car. It had seemed that he could be no more
incensed, but he was. Within ten feet of him a matronly black snake
moved along the sidewalk with a manner of such assurance and such
impeccable respectability that it would have seemed natural for her to
be carrying a purse.

Sean O'Donohue gasped once. His face was then a dark purple. He marched
blindly into the mob of people before him. Somehow, the people of Tara
gave way. But the sides of this cross street were crowded. Not only was
all the population out and waiting to cheer, but the trees were
occupied. By black snakes. They hung in tasteful draperies among the
branches, sometimes two or three together. They gazed with intense
interest at the scene below them. The solicitor general, following Sean
O'Donohue, saw a black snake wriggling deftly between the legs of the
packed populace--packed as if to observe a parade--to get a view from
the very edge of the curb. The Chancellor of the Exchequer came
apprehensively behind the solicitor general.

Sean O'Donohue burst through the ranks of onlookers. He stalked out
onto the empty center of the street. He looked neither to right nor
left. He was headed for the presidential mansion, there to strangle
President O'Hanrahan in the most lingering possible manner.

But there came a roar of rejoicing which penetrated even his
single-tracked, murder-obsessed brain. He turned, purple-face and
explosive, to see what the obscene sound could mean.

He saw. The lean and lanky figure of the chief justice of the supreme
court of the Planet Eire came running down the street toward him. He
bore a large slab of sheet-iron.

As he ran, he played upon it the blue flame of a welding torch. The
smell of hot metal diffused behind him. The chief justice ran like a
deer. But he wasn't leaving anything behind but the smell. Everything
else was close on his heels.

A multicolored, multitudinous, swarming tide of dinies filled the
highway from gutter to gutter. From the two-inch dwarfs to the
purple-striped variety which grew to eight inches and sometimes fought
cats, the dinies were in motion. They ran in the wake of the chief
justice, enthralled and entranced by the smell of hot sheet iron. They
were fascinated. They were bemused. They were aware of nothing but that
ineffable fragrance. They hopped, ran, leaped, trotted and galloped in
full cry after the head of the planet's supreme court.

He almost bumped into the stunned Sean O'Donohue. As he passed, he
cried: "Duck, man! The dinies are comin' tra-la, tra-la!"

But Sean O'Donohue did not duck. He was fixed, stuck, paralyzed in his
tracks. And the dinies arrived. They ran into him. He was an obstacle.
They played leapfrog over each other to surmount him. He went down and
was merely a bump in the flowing river of prismatic colorings which
swarmed after the racing chief justice.

But there was a limit to things. This was not the first such event in
Tara, this day. The dinies, this time, filled no more than a block of
the street. They swarmed past him, they raced on into the distance, and
Sean O'Donohue struggled to a sitting position.

His shoes were shreds. Dinies had torn them swiftly apart for the nails
in them. His garters were gone. Dinies had operated on his pants to get
at the metal parts. His pockets were ripped. The bright metal buttons
of his coat were gone. His zippers had vanished. His suspenders dangled
without any metal parts to hold them together, nor were there any pants
buttons for them to hold onto. He opened his mouth, and closed it, and
opened it again and closed it. His expression was that of a man in
delirium.

And, even before the Chancellor of the Exchequer and the solicitor
general could lift him gently and bear him away, there came a final
catastrophe, for the O'Donohue. The snakes who had watched events from
the curbs, as well as those which had gazed interestedly from aloft,
now began to realize that this was an affair which affected them. They
came out and began to follow the vanishing procession, very much as
small dogs and little boys pursue a circus parade. But they seemed to
talk uneasily to each other as they flowed past Sean O'Donohue, sitting
in the dust of the street, all his illusions vanished and all his hopes
destroyed.

But the people of Tara did not notice. They cheered themselves hoarse.

                     *      *      *      *      *

President O'Hanrahan held himself with some dignity in the tumble-down
reception hall of the presidential mansion. Moira gazed proudly at him.
The two still-active members of the Dail Committee looked uncomfortably
around them. The cabinet of Eire was assembled.

"It's sorry I am," said the President of Eire, "to have to issue a
defiance to the Eire on Earth we owe so much to. But it can't be
helped. We had to have the black creatures to keep the dinies from
eating us out of house and home altogether. We've been fightin' a
rear-guard battle, and we needed them. In time we'd have won with their
help, but time we did not have. So this mornin' Moira told me what
she'd done yesterday. The darlin' had used the brains God gave her, and
maybe holy St. Patrick put a flea in her ear. She figured out that
dinies must find metal by its smell, and if its smell was made stronger
by simple heatin' they'd be unable to resist it. And it was so. Ye saw
the chief justice runnin' down the street with all the dinies after
him."

The two members of the committee nodded.

"He was headin," said the president, "for the cold-storage plant that
Sean O'Donohue had twitted me was empty of the provisions we'd had to
eat up because of the dinies. It's no matter that it's empty now
though. We can grow victuals in the fields from now on, because now the
cold rooms are packed solid with dinies that ran heedless into a
climate they are not used to an' fell--what was the word, Moira
darlin'?"

"Torpid," said Moira, gazing at him.

"Torpid," agreed the president. "From now on when there's too many
dinies we can send somebody runnin' through the streets with a hot
plate to call them into cold storage. We've pied pipers at will, to
help out the black creatures that've done so much for us. If we've
offended Eire on Earth, by havin' the black creatures to help us, we're
sorry. But we had to--till Moira and doubtless St. Patrick gave us the
answer ye saw today. If we're disowned, bedamned if we don't hang on!
We can feed ourselves now. We can feed some extra mouths. There'll be a
ship droppin' by out of curiosity now and then, and we'll trade with
'em. If were disowned--we'll be poor. But when were the Irish ever
rich?"

