becoming a mass of bruises from the lash of their tentacles. He burned
his way through the swarm on to ship after ship.

As he stepped from the last vessel there was a rumbling beneath his
feet. Did the monster understand his intent? Was it stirring in its
shell? Most of the globes had disappeared; now a nauseatingly sweet
odor penetrated the screen in his headpiece, which permitted him to
smell without allowing the oxygen to escape. He hurried around to the
rear of the ship, an apprehensive, sickening feeling at the pit of his
stomach. A thick jelly-like wave of liquid was rolling over the
floor--the reeking, deadly juices from the beast's stomach. If the
liquid touched him, it would eat through the heavy fabric, exploding
the air pressure from around his body. How was he to escape from the
cave?

The answer came to him suddenly. Quickly he darted back toward the
nearest vessel. Two of the screaming spheres blocked his way; he sent
bolt after searing bolt into them, more of a charge than he had given
any of the others. The lights in the globes went out; their voices
ceased. And they burst into slowly mounting incandescence. Yet, they
were not consumed by their fire, only glowed an intense white light
like that of a lighthouse.

"Lighthouse!" The word flashed through his mind clearly, strongly. They
glowed like the "zirconia lights" of a lighthouse. Why hadn't he
recognized the greasy, quartz-like material before? It was zirconia, a
compound of zirconium, of course. A silicate base creature could easily
have formed a shell of it about itself.

Zirconia--one of the compounds he'd intended prospecting for on the
moons of Saturn. Worth over a hundred dollars per pound. Because of its
resistance to heat, it was used to line the tubes of rockets; Terra's
supply had long been used up. Here was a fortune all around him; but
that fortune was about to be destroyed, he along with it, if he did not
hurry.

If he could only reach the timing mechanism to yank from it the wires
connecting it to the other ships. It was at the other end of the line.
He started in that direction, but a surge of fatal, thick acid rolled
before him, reaching for him with hungry, questing tongues.

When it was almost touching his toes, he leaped. As he floated toward
the floor, he placed a chair beneath him so that his feet landed on the
seat. The legs of the chair sank slowly into the liquid.

Again he leaped, his moment retarded by the fluid which now reached
halfway up the chair legs, sucked and clung there. The sweetly-evil
smelling stuff was rising rapidly. But the next leap carried him into
the main cave. Abandoning the chair, he leaped once more, out through
the cave's mouth, pursued by the waving tentacles of the sensory
spheres.

                *       *       *       *       *

He had lost precious minutes eluding that deadly acid. It would take
at least five minutes to get his ship away from the asteroid; he must
hurry before all those rocket motors were thrown into action, or it
would be too late.

Leap and leap again. It seemed ages, but he reached the ship, bolted
the door shut. Thumps against the door as the pursuing globes ran up
against it. A thought came to him; swiftly he opened the door,
permitted a few of them to enter, then slammed it shut. With the heat
gun he sheared off their tentacles; he could sell the zirconia in the
entities. Then he turned to the controls and the ship zoomed up and
out.

Nat had barely raised his ship from the Asteroid Moira when he saw the
small planetoid lurch suddenly, bounding off its orbit at almost a
right angle. The sudden combined driving force of all the rockets
within the cave had sent it hurtling away like a rocket itself.

The asteroid housing the monster was heading into the Flora group of
Asteroids. There the fifty-seven odd solid bodies of that group would
grind, crack, and rend that dangerous beast into harmless, dead
fragments.

"A good job," said a weak, but softly friendly voice behind him. He
whirled. The girl stood in the doorway of the pilot room, supporting
herself against the door frame. Digger rubbed thoughtfully against her
legs.

"We'll just follow that asteroid, Miss," he said, "and see if we can't
pick up some odd fragment of zirconia when it's smashed in the
grindstone there. Then we'll light out for Terra."

She smiled. Earth, to him, seemed like a very good place to go as soon
as possible.



   Transcriber's Note:
