tickled her immensely. But he had never said anything about the ghost
which haunted the little old house at Salem. He knew she would be
frightened out of her wits if the house ghost revealed itself to her,
and he saw at once that it would be impossible to go to Salem on their
wedding trip. So he told her all about it, and how whenever he went to
Salem the two ghosts interfered, and gave dark seances and manifested
and materialized and made the place absolutely impossible. Kitty
listened in silence, and Eliphalet thought she had changed her mind.
But she hadn't done anything of the kind."

"Just like a man--to think she was going to," remarked Baby Van
Rensselaer.

"She just told him she could not bear ghosts herself, but she would not
marry a man who was afraid of them."

"Just like a girl--to be so inconsistent," remarked Dear Jones.

Uncle Larry's tiny cigar had long been extinct. He lighted a new one,
and continued: "Eliphalet protested in vain. Kitty said her mind was
made up. She was determined to pass her honeymoon in the little old
house at Salem, and she was equally determined not to go there as long
as there were any ghosts there. Until he could assure her that the
spectral tenant had received notice to quit, and that there was no
danger of manifestations and materializing, she refused to be married
at all. She did not intend to have her honeymoon interrupted by two
wrangling ghosts, and the wedding could be postponed until he had made
ready the house for her."

"She was an unreasonable young woman," said the Duchess.

"Well, that's what Eliphalet thought, much as he was in love with her.
And he believed he could talk her out of her determination. But he
couldn't. She was set. And when a girl is set, there's nothing to do
but to yield to the inevitable. And that's just what Eliphalet did. He
saw he would either have to give her up or to get the ghosts out; and
as he loved her and did not care for the ghosts, he resolved to tackle
the ghosts. He had clear grit, Eliphalet had--he was half Scotch and
half Yankee, and neither breed turns tail in a hurry. So he made his
plans and he went down to Salem. As he said good-bye to Kitty he had an
impression that she was sorry she had made him go; but she kept up
bravely, and put a bold face on it, and saw him off, and went home and
cried for an hour, and was perfectly miserable until he came back the
next day."

"Did he succeed in driving the ghosts away?" asked Baby Van Rensselaer,
with great interest.

"That's just what I'm coming to," said Uncle Larry, pausing at the
critical moment, in the manner of the trained story-teller. "You see,
Eliphalet had got a rather tough job, and he would gladly have had an
extension of time on the contract, but he had to choose between the
girl and the ghosts, and he wanted the girl. He tried to invent or
remember some short and easy way with ghosts, but he couldn't. He
wished that somebody had invented a specific for spooks--something that
would make the ghosts come out of the house and die in the yard. He
wondered if he could not tempt the ghosts to run in debt, so that he
might get the sheriff to help him. He wondered also whether the ghosts
could not be overcome with strong drink--a dissipated spook, a spook
with delirium tremens, might be committed to the inebriate asylum. But
none of these things seemed feasible."

"What did he do?" interrupted Dear Jones. "The learned counsel will
please speak to the point."

"You will regret this unseemly haste," said Uncle Larry, gravely, "when
you know what really happened."

"What was it, Uncle Larry?" asked Baby Van Rensselaer. "I'm all
impatience."

And Uncle Larry proceeded:

"Eliphalet went down to the little old house at Salem, and as soon as
the clock struck twelve the rival ghosts began wrangling as before.
Raps here, there, and everywhere, ringing bells, banging tambourines,
strumming banjos sailing about the room, and all the other
manifestations and materializations followed one another just as they
had the summer before. The only difference Eliphalet could detect was a
stronger flavor in the spectral profanity; and this, of course, was
only a vague impression, for he did not actually hear a single word. He
waited awhile in patience, listening and watching. Of course he never
saw either of the ghosts, because neither of them could appear to him.
At last he got his dander up, and he thought it was about time to
interfere, so he rapped on the table, and asked for silence. As soon as
he felt that the spooks were listening to him he explained the
situation to them. He told them he was in love, and that he could not
marry unless they vacated the house. He appealed to them as old
friends, and he laid claim to their gratitude. The titular ghost had
been sheltered by the Duncan family for hundreds of years, and the
domiciliary ghost had had free lodging in the little old house at Salem
for nearly two centuries. He implored them to settle their differences,
and to get him out of his difficulty at once. He suggested that they
had better fight it out then and there, and see who was master. He had
brought down with him all needful weapons. And he pulled out his
valise, and spread on the table a pair of navy revolvers, a pair of
shot-guns, a pair of duelling-swords, and a couple of bowie-knives. He
offered to serve as second for both parties, and to give the word when
to begin. He also took out of his valise a pack of cards and a bottle
of poison, telling them that if they wished to avoid carnage they might
cut the cards to see which one should take the poison. Then he waited
anxiously for their reply. For a little space there was silence. Then
he became conscious of a tremulous shivering in one corner of the room,
and he remembered that he had heard from that direction what sounded
like a frightened sigh when he made the first suggestion of the duel.
Something told him that this was the domiciliary ghost, and that it was
badly scared. Then he was impressed by a certain movement in the
opposite corner of the room, as though the titular ghost were drawing
himself up with offended dignity. Eliphalet couldn't exactly see those
things, because he never saw the ghosts, but he felt them. After a
silence of nearly a minute a voice came from the corner where the
family ghost stood--a voice strong and full, but trembling slightly
with suppressed passion. And this voice told Eliphalet it was plain
enough that he had not long been the head of the Duncans, and that he
had never properly considered the characteristics of his race if now he
supposed that one of his blood could draw his sword against a woman.
Eliphalet said he had never suggested that the Duncan ghost should
raise his hand against a woman, and all he wanted was that the Duncan
ghost should fight the other ghost. And then the voice told Eliphalet
that the other ghost was a woman."

"What?" said Dear Jones, sitting up suddenly. "You don't mean to tell
me that the ghost which haunted the house was a woman?"

"Those were the very words Eliphalet Duncan used," said Uncle Larry;
"but he did not need to wait for the answer. All at once he recalled
the traditions about the domiciliary ghost, and he knew that what the
titular ghost said was the fact. He had never thought of the sex of a
spook, but there was no doubt whatever that the house ghost was a
woman. No sooner was this firmly fixed in Eliphalet's mind than he saw
his way out of the difficulty. The ghosts must be married!--for then
there would be no more interference, no more quarrelling, no more
manifestations and materializations, no more dark seances, with their
raps and bells and tambourines and banjos. At first the ghosts would
not hear of it. The voice in the corner declared that the Duncan wraith
had never thought of matrimony. But Eliphalet argued with them, and
pleaded and persuaded and coaxed, and dwelt on the advantages of
matrimony. He had to confess, of course, that he did not know how to
get a clergyman to marry them; but the voice from the corner gravely
told him that there need be no difficulty in regard to that, as there
was no lack of spiritual chaplains. Then, for the first time, the house
ghost spoke, a low, clear, gentle voice, and with a quaint,
old-fashioned New England accent, which contrasted sharply with the
broad Scotch speech of the family ghost. She said that Eliphalet Duncan
seemed to have forgotten that she was married. But this did not upset
Eliphalet at all; he remembered the whole case clearly, and he told her
she was not a married ghost, but a widow, since her husband had been
hanged for murdering her. Then the Duncan ghost drew attention to the
great disparity in their ages, saying that he was nearly four hundred
and fifty years old, while she was barely two hundred. But Eliphalet
had not talked to juries for nothing; he just buckled to, and coaxed
those ghosts into matrimony. Afterwards he came to the conclusion that
they were willing to be coaxed, but at the time he thought he had
pretty hard work to convince them of the advantages of the plan."

"Did he succeed? asked Baby Van Rensselaer, with a woman's interest in
matrimony.

"He did," said Uncle Larry. "He talked the wraith of the Duncans and
the spectre of the little old house at Salem into a matrimonial
engagement. And from the time they were engaged he had no more trouble
with them. They were rival ghosts no longer. They were married by their
spiritual chaplain the very same day that Eliphalet Duncan met Kitty
Sutton in front of the railing of Grace Church. The ghostly bride and
bridegroom went away at once on their bridal tour, and Lord and Lady
Duncan went down to the little old house at Salem to pass their
honeymoon."

Uncle Larry stopped. His tiny cigar was out again. The tale of the
rival ghosts was told. A solemn silence fell on the little party on the
deck of the ocean steamer, broken harshly by the hoarse roar of the
fog-horn.

(1883.)




SIXTEEN YEARS WITHOUT A BIRTHDAY


While the journalist deftly dealt with the lobster _a la_ Newburg,
as it bubbled in the chafing-dish before him, the deep-toned bell of
the church at the corner began to strike twelve.

"Give me your plates, quick," he said, "and we'll drink Jack's health
before it's to-morrow."

The artist and the soldier and the professor of mathematics did as they
were told; and then they filled their glasses.

The journalist, still standing, looked the soldier in the eye, and
said: "Jack, this is the first time The Quartet has met since the old
school-days, ten years ago and more. That this reunion should take
place on your birthday doubles the pleasure of the occasion. We wish
you many happy returns of the day!"

Then the artist and the mathematician rose also, and they looked at the
soldier, and repeated together, "Many happy returns of the day!"

Whereupon they emptied their glasses and sat down, and the soldier rose
to his feet.

"Thank you, boys," he began, "but I think you have already made me
enjoy this one birthday three times over. It was yesterday that I was
twenty-six, and----"

"But I didn't meet you till last night," interrupted the journalist;
"and yesterday was Sunday; and I couldn't get a box for the theatre and
find the other half of The Quartet all on Sunday, could I?"

"I'm not complaining because yesterday was my real birthday," the
soldier returned, "even if you have now protracted the celebration on
to the third day--it's just struck midnight, you know. All I have to
say is, that since you have given me a triplicate birthday this time,
any future anniversary will have to spread itself over four days if it
wants to beat the record, that's all." And he took his seat again.

"Well," said the artist, who had recently returned from Paris, "that
won't happen till we see 'the week of the four Thursdays,' as the
French say."

"And we sha'n't see that for a month of Sundays, I guess," the
journalist rejoined.

There was a moment of silence, and then the mathematician spoke for the
first time.

"A quadruplex birthday will be odd enough, I grant you," he began, "but
I don't think it quite as remarkable as the case of the lady who had no
birthday for sixteen years after she was born."

The soldier and the artist and the journalist all looked at the
professor of mathematics, and they all smiled; but his face remained
perfectly grave.

"What's that you say?" asked the journalist. "Sixteen years without a
birthday? Isn't that a very large order?"

"Did you know the lady herself?" inquired the soldier.

"She was my grandmother," the mathematician answered. "She had no
birthday for the first sixteen years of her life."

"You mean that she did not celebrate her birthdays, I suppose," the
artist remarked. "That's nothing. I know lots of families where they
don't keep any anniversaries at all."

"No," persisted the mathematician. "I meant what I said, and precisely
what I said. My grandmother did not keep her first fifteen birthdays
because she couldn't. She didn't have them to keep. They didn't happen.
The first time she had a chance to celebrate her birthday was when she
completed her sixteenth year--and I need not tell you that the family
made the most of the event."

"This a real grandmother you are talking about," asked the journalist,
"and not a fairy godmother?"

"I could understand her going without a birthday till she was four
years old," the soldier suggested, "if she was born on the 29th of
February."

"That accounts for four years," the mathematician admitted, "since my
grandmother _was_ born on the 29th of February."

"In what year?" the soldier pursued. "In 1796?"

The professor of mathematics nodded.

"Then that accounts for eight years," said the soldier.

"I don't see that at all," exclaimed the artist.

"It's easy enough," the soldier explained. "The year 1800 isn't a
leap-year, you know. We have a leap-year every four years, except the
final year of a century--1700, 1800, 1900."

"I didn't know that," said the artist.

"I'd forgotten it," remarked the journalist. "But that gets us over
only half of the difficulty. He says his grandmother didn't have a
birthday till she was sixteen. We can all see now how it was she went
without this annual luxury for the first eight years. But who robbed
her of the birthdays she was entitled to when she was eight and twelve.
That's what I want to know."

"Born February 29, 1796, the Gregorian calendar deprives her of a
birthday in 1800," the soldier said. "But she ought to have had her
first chance February 29, 1804. I don't see how----" and he paused in
doubt. "Oh!" he cried, suddenly; "where was she living in 1804?"

"Most of the time in Russia," the mathematician answered. "Although the
family went to England for a few days early in the year."

"What was the date when they left Russia?" asked the soldier, eagerly.

"They sailed from St. Petersburg in a Russian bark on the 10th of
February," answered the professor of mathematics, "and owing to
head-winds they did not reach England for a fortnight."

"Exactly," cried the soldier. "That's what I thought. That accounts for
it."

"I don't see how," the artist declared; "that is, unless you mean to
suggest that the Czar confiscated the little American girl's birthday
and sent it to Siberia."

"It's plain enough," the soldier returned. "We have the reformed
calendar, the Gregorian calendar, you know, and the Russians haven't.
They keep the old Julian calendar, and it's now ten days behind ours.
They celebrate Christmas three days after we have begun the new year.
So if the little girl left St. Petersburg in a Russian ship on February
10, 1804, by the old reckoning, and was on the water two weeks, she
would land in England after March 1st by the new calendar."

"That is to say," the artist inquired, "the little girl came into an
English port thinking she was going to have her birthday the next week,
and when she set foot on shore she found out that her birthday was
passed the week before. Is that what you mean?"

"Yes," answered the soldier; and the mathematician nodded also.

"Then all I have to say," the artist continued, "is that it was a mean
trick to play on a child that had been looking forward to her first
birthday for eight years--to knock her into the middle of next week in
that fashion!"

"And she had to go four years more for her next chance," said the
journalist. "Then she would be twelve. But you said she hadn't a
birthday till she was sixteen. How did she lose the one she was
entitled to in 1808? She wasn't on a Russian ship again, was she?"

"No," the mathematician replied; "she was on an American ship that
time."

"On the North Sea?" asked the artist.

"No," was the calm answer; "on the Pacific."

"Sailing east or west?" cried the soldier.

"Sailing east," answered the professor of mathematics, smiling again.

"Then I see how it might happen," the soldier declared.

"Well, I don't," confessed the artist.

The journalist said nothing, as it seemed unprofessional to admit
ignorance of anything.

"It is simple enough," the soldier explained. "You see, the world is
revolving about the sun steadily, and it is always high noon somewhere
on the globe. The day rolls round unceasing, and it is not cut off into
twenty-four hours. We happen to have taken the day of Greenwich or
Paris as the day of civilization, and we say that it begins earlier in
China and later in California; but it is all the same day, we say.
Therefore there has to be some place out in the middle of the Pacific
Ocean where we lose or gain a day--if we are going east, we gain it; if
we are going west, we lose it. Now I suppose this little girl of twelve
was on her way from some Asiatic port to some American port, and they
stopped on their voyage at Honolulu. Perhaps they dropped anchor there
just before midnight on their February 28, 1808, thinking that the
morrow would be the 29th; but when they were hailed from the shore,
just after midnight, they found out that it was already March 1st."

As the soldier finished, he looked at the mathematician for
confirmation of his explanation.

Thus appealed to, the professor of mathematics smiled and nodded, and
said: "You have hit it. That's just how it was that my grandmother lost
the birthday she ought to have had when she was twelve, and had to go
four years more without one."

"And so she really didn't have a birthday till she was sixteen!" the
artist observed. "Well, all I can say is, your great-grandfather took
too many chances. I don't think he gave the child a fair show. I hope
he made it up to her when she was sixteen--that's all!"

An hour later The Quartet separated. The soldier and the artist walked
away together, but the journalist delayed the mathematician.

"I say," he began, "that yarn about your grandmother was very
interesting. It is an extraordinary combination of coincidences. I
can see it in the Sunday paper with a scare-head--

    'SIXTEEN YEARS WITHOUT A BIRTHDAY!'

Do you mind my using it?"

"But it isn't true," said the professor.

"Not true?" echoed the journalist.

"No," replied the mathematician. "I made it up. I hadn't done my share
of the talking, and I didn't want you to think I had nothing to say for
myself."

"Not a single word of truth in it?" the journalist returned.

"Not a single word," was the mathematician's answer.

"Well, what of that?" the journalist declared. "I don't want to file it
in an affidavit--I want to print it in a newspaper."

(1894.)




THE TWINKLING OF AN EYE


I

The telegraph messenger looked again at the address on the envelope in
his hand, and then scanned the house before which he was standing. It
was an old-fashioned building of brick, two stories high, with an attic
above; and it stood in an old-fashioned part of lower New York, not
far from the East River. Over the wide archway there was a small
weather-worn sign, "Ramapo Steel and Iron Works;" and over the smaller
door alongside was a still smaller sign, "Whittier, Wheatcroft & Co."

When the messenger-boy had made out the name, he opened this smaller
door and entered the long, narrow store. Its sides and walls were
covered with bins and racks containing sample steel rails and iron
beams, and coils of wire of various sizes. Down at the end of the store
were desks where several clerks and book-keepers were at work.

As the messenger drew near, a red-headed office-boy blocked the
passage, saying, somewhat aggressively, "Well?"

"Got a telegram for Whittier, Wheatcroft & Co.," the messenger
explained, pugnaciously thrusting himself forward.

"In there!" the office-boy returned, jerking his thumb over his
shoulder towards the extreme end of the building, an extension, roofed
with glass and separated by a glass screen from the space where the
clerks were at work.

The messenger pushed open the glazed door of this private office, a
bell jingled over his head, and the three occupants of the room looked
up.

"Whittier, Wheatcroft & Co.?" said the messenger, interrogatively,
holding out the yellow envelope.

"Yes," responded Mr. Whittier, a tall, handsome old gentleman, taking
the telegram. "You sign, Paul."

The youngest of the three, looking like his father, took the
messenger's book, and, glancing at an old-fashioned clock which stood
in the corner, he wrote the name of the firm and the hour of delivery.
He was watching the messenger go out. His attention was suddenly called
to subjects of more importance by a sharp exclamation from his father.

"Well, well, well," said the elder Whittier with his eyes fixed on the
telegram he had just read. "This is very strange--very strange indeed!"

"What's strange?" asked the third occupant of the office, Mr.
Wheatcroft, a short, stout, irascible-looking man with a shock of
grizzly hair.
