
"Calcium metal's the toughest going--and even that would break under the
beating those ships give it. The only way to withstand it is to have
such a mass of metal that the oscillations are damped out. But--"

The set tuned in on the IP station on Europa was speaking again. "The
ships are returning. There are one hundred and twenty-nine by accurate
count. Jorgsen reports that telescopic observation of the dead on the
fallen cruiser show them to be a _completely un-human race_! They are
of mottled coloring, predominately grayish brown. The ships are
returning. They have divided into ten groups, nine groups of two each,
and a main body of the rest of the fleet. The group of eighteen is
descending within range, and we are focusing our beams on them--"

Out by Europa, ten great UV beams were stabbing angrily toward ten great
interstellar ships. The metal of the hulls glowed brilliant, and
distorted slowly as the thick walls softened under the heat, and the air
behind pressed against it. Grimly the ten ships came on. Torpedoes were
being launched, and exploded, and now they had no effect, for the Mirans
within were protected.

The eighteen grouped ships separated, and arranged themselves in a
circle around the fort. Suddenly one staggered as a great puff of gas
shot out through the thin atmosphere of Europa to flare brilliantly in
the lash of the stabbing UV beam. Instantly the ship righted itself, and
labored upward. Another dropped to take its place--

And the great walls of the IP fort suddenly groaned and started in their
welded joints. The faint, whispering rustle of the crumbling beam was
murmuring through the station. Engineers shouted suddenly as meters
leapt the length of their scales, and the needles clicked softly on the
stop pins. A thin rustle came from the atostors grouped in the great
power room. "Spirits of Space--a revolving magnetic field!" roared the
Chief Technician. "They're making this whole blasted station a squirrel
cage!"

The mighty walls of eight-foot metal shuddered and trembled. The UV
beams lashed out from the fort in quivering arcs now, they did not hold
their aim steady, and the magnetic shield that protected them from
atomic bombs was working and straining wildly. Eighteen great ships
quivered and tugged outside there now, straining with all their power to
remain in the same spot, as they passed on from one to another the
magnetic impulses that were now creating a titanic magnetic vortex about
the fort.

"The atostors will be exhausted in another fifteen minutes," the Chief
Technician roared into his transmitter. "Can the signals get through
those fields, Commander?"

"No, Mac. They've been stopped, Sparks tells me. We're here--and let's
hope we stay. What's happening?"

"They've got a revolving magnetic field out there that would spin a
minor planet. The whole blasted fort is acting like the squirrel cage in
an induction motor! They've made us the armature in a five hundred
million horsepower electric motor."

"They can't tear this place loose, can they?"

"I don't know--it was never--" The Chief stopped. Outside a terrific
roar and crash had built up. White darts of flame leapt a thousand feet
into the air, hurling terrific masses of shattered rock and soil.

"I was going to say," the Chief went on, "this place wasn't designed for
that sort of a strain. Our own magnetic field is supporting us now,
preventing their magnetic field from getting its teeth on metal. When
the strain comes--well, they're cutting loose our foundation with atomic
bombs!"

Five UV beams were combined on one interstellar ship. Instantly the
great machine retreated, and another dropped in to take its place while
the magnetic field spun on, uninterruptedly.

"Can they keep that up long?"

"God knows--but they have a hundred and more ships to send in when the
power of one gives out, remember."

"What's our reserve now?"

The Chief paused a moment to look at the meters. "Half what it was ten
minutes ago!"

Commander Wallace sent some other orders. Every torpedo tube of the
station suddenly belched forth deadly, fifteen-foot torpedoes, most of
them mud-torpedoes, torpedoes loaded with high explosive in the nose, a
delayed fuse, and a load of soft clinging mud in the rear. The mud would
flow down over the nose and offer a resistance foot-hold for the
explosive which empty space would not. Four hundred and three torpedoes,
equipped with anti-magnetic apparatus darted out. One hundred and four
passed the struggling fields. One found lodgement on a Miran ship, and
crushed in a metal wall, to be stopped by a bulkhead.

The Chief engineer watched his power declining. All ten UV beams were
united in one now, driving a terrible sword of energy that made the
attacked ship skip for safety instantly, yet the beams were all but
useless. For the Miran reserves filled the gap, and the magnetic tornado
continued.

For seventeen long minutes the station resisted the attack. Then the
last of the strained mercury flowed into the receivers, and the vast
power of the atostors was exhausted. Slowly the magnetic fields
declined. The great walls of the station felt the clutching lines of
force--they began to heat and to strain. A low, harsh grinding became
audible over the roar of the atomic bombs. The whole structure trembled,
and jumped slightly. The roar of bombs ceased suddenly, as the station
jerked again, more violently. Then it turned a bit, rolled clumsily.
Abruptly it began to spin violently, more and more rapidly. It started
rolling clumsily across the plateau--

A rain of atomic bombs struck the unprotected metal, and the eighth
breached the walls. The twentieth was the last. There was no longer an
IP station on Europa.

"The difference," said Buck Kendall slowly, when the reports came in
from scout-ships in space that had witnessed the last struggle, "between
an atomic generator and an atomic power-store, or accumulator, is
clearly shown. We haven't an adequate _source_ of power."

McLaurin sighed slowly, and rose to his feet. "What can we do?"

"Thank our lucky stars that Faragaut here, and I, bought up all the
mercury in the system, and had it brought to Earth. We at least have a
supply of materials for the atostors."

"They don't seem to do much good."

"They're the best we've got. All the photocells on Earth and Venus and
Mercury are at present busy storing the sun's power in atostors. I have
two thousand tons of charged mercury in our tanks here in the 'Lunar
Bank.'"

"Much good that will do--they can just pull and pull and pull till it's
all gone. A starfish isn't strong, but he can open the strongest oyster
just because he can pull from now on. You may have a lot of power--but."

"But--we also have those new fifteen-foot UV beams. And one fifteen-foot
UV beam is worth, theoretically, nine five-foot beams, and practically,
a dozen. We have a dozen of them. Remember, this place was designed not
only to protect itself, but Earth, too."

"They can still pull, can't they?"

"They'll stop pulling when they get their fingers burned. In the
meantime, why not use some of those IP ships to bring in a few more
cargoes of charged mercury?"

"They aren't good for much else, are they? I wonder if those fellows
have anything more we don't know?"

"Oh, probably. I'm going to work on that crumbler thing. That's the
first consideration now."

"Why?"

"So we can move a ship. As it is, even those two we built aren't any
good."

"Would they be anyway?"

"Well--I think I might disturb those gentlemen slightly. Remember, they
each have a nose-beam eighteen feet across. Exceedingly unpleasant
customers."

"Score: Strangers; magnetic field, atomic bombs, atomic power, crumbler
ray. Home team; UV beams."

Kendall grinned. "I'd heard you were a pessimistic cuss when battle
started--"

"Pessimistic, hell, I'm merely counting things up."

"McClellan had all the odds on Lee back in the Civil War of the
States--but Lee sent him home faster than he came."

"But Lee lost in the end."

"Why bring that up? I've got work to do." Still smiling, Kendall went to
the laboratory he had built up in the "Lunar Bank." Devin was already
there, calculating. He looked unhappy.

"We can't do anything, as far as I can see. They're using an electric
field all right, and projecting it. I can't see how we can do that."

"Neither can I," agreed Kendall, "so we can't use that weapon. I really
didn't want to anyway. Like the neutron gun which I told Commander
McLaurin would be useless as a weapon, they'd be prepared for it, you
can be sure. All I want to do is fight it, and make their projection
useless."

"Well, we have to know how they project it before we can break up the
projection, don't we?"

"Not at all. They're using an electric field of very high frequency, but
variable frequency. As far as I can see, all we need is a similar
variable electric field of a slightly different frequency to heterodyne
theirs into something quite harmless."

"Oh," said Devin. "We could, couldn't we? But how are you going to do
that?"

"We'll have to learn, that's all."

       *       *       *       *       *

Buck Kendall started trying to learn. In the meantime, the Mirans were
taking over Jupiter. There were three IP stations on the planet itself,
but they were vastly hindered by the thick, almost ultra-violet-proof
atmosphere of Jupiter. Their rays were weak. And the magnetic fields of
the Mirans were unaffected. Only their atomic bombs were hindered by the
heavier gravity that pulled the rocks back in place faster than the
bombs could throw them out. Still--a few hours of work, and the IP
stations on Jupiter had rolled wildly across the flat plains of the
planet like dented cans, to end in utter destruction.

The Mirans had paid no attention to the fleeing passenger and freighter
ships that left the planet, loaded to the utmost with human cargo, and
absolutely no freight. The IP fleet had to go to their rescue with
oxygen tanks to take care of the extra humans, but nearly three-quarters
of the population of Jupiter, a newly established population, and hence
a readily mobile one, was saved. The others, the Mirans did not bother
with particularly except when they happened to be near where the Mirans
wanted to work. Then they were instantly destroyed by atomic bombing, or
gamma rays.

The Mirans settled almost at once, and began their work of finding on
Jupiter the badly needed atomic fuels. Machines were set up, and work
begun, Mirans laboring under the gravity of the heavy planet. Then,
fifty ships swam up again, reloaded with fuel, and with crews consisting
solely of uninjured warriors, and started for Mars.

Mars was half way between her near conjunction and her maximum
elongation with respect to Jupiter at that time. The Mirans knew their
business though, for they started in on the IP station on Phobos. They
were practiced by this time, and this IP station had only seven
five-foot beams. In half an hour that station fell, and its sister
station on Deimos followed. Three wounded ships returned to Jupiter, and
ten new ships came out. The attack on Mars itself was started.

Mars was a different proposition. There were thirty-two IP stations
here, one of them nearly as powerful as the Lunar Bank station. It was
equipped with four of the huge fifteen-foot beams. And it had fifteen
tons of mercury, more than seven-eighths charged. The Mars Center
Station was located a short ten miles from the Mars Center City, and
under the immediate orders of the IP heads, Mars Center City had been
vacated.

For two days the Mirans hung off Mars, solidifying their positions on
Phobos and Deimos. Then, with sixty-two ships, they attacked. They had
made some very astute observations, and they started on the smaller
stations just beyond the range of the Mars Center Station. Naturally,
near so powerful a center, these stations had never been strong. They
fell rapidly. But they had been counted on by Mars Center as auxiliary
supports. McLaurin had sent very definite orders to Mars Center
forbidding any action on their part, save gathering of power-supplies.

At last the direct attack on Mars Center was launched. For the first
time, the Mirans saw one of the fifteen-foot beams. Mars' atmosphere is
thin, and there is little ozone. The ultra-violet beams were nearly as
effective as in empty space. When the Mirans dropped their ships, a full
thirty of them, into the circle formation, Mars Center answered at once.
All four beams started.

Those fifteen-foot beams, connected directly to huge atostor release
apparatus, delivered a maximum power of two and three-quarter billion
horsepower, each. The first Miran ship struck, sparkled magnificently,
and a terrific cascade of white-hot metal rolled down from its nose. The
great ship nosed down and to the left abruptly, accelerated swiftly--and
crashed with tremendous energy on the plain outside of Mars Center City.
White, unwavering flames licked up suddenly, and made a column five
hundred feet high against the dark sky. Then the wreck exploded with a
violence that left a crater half a mile across.

Three other ships had been struck, and were rapidly retreating. Another
try was made for the ring formation, and four more ships were wounded,
and replaced. The ring did not retreat, but the great magnetic field
started. Atomic and gamma ray bombs started now, flashing sometimes
dangerously close to the station as its magnetic field battled the
rotating field of the ships. The four greater beams, and many smaller
ones were in swift and angry action. Not more than a ten-second exposure
could be endured by any one ship, before it must retreat.

       *       *       *       *       *

For five minutes the Mirans hung doggedly at their task. Then, wisely,
they retreated. Of the fleet, not more than seven ships remained
untouched. Mars Center Station had held--at what cost only they knew.
Five hundred tons of their mercury had been exhausted in that brief five
minutes. One hundred tons a minute had flowed into and out of the
atostor apparatus. Mars Center radioed for help, when the fleet lifted.

There was one other station on Mars that stood a good chance of
survival, Deenmor Station, with three of the big beams installed, and
apparatus for their fourth was in the station, and being rapidly worked
over. McLaurin did a wise and courageous thing, at which every man on
Mars cursed. He ordered that all IP stations save these two be deserted,
and all mercury fuel reserves be moved to Deenmor and Mars Center.

The Mirans could not land on the North Western section of Mars, nor in
the South Central region. Therefore Mars was not exactly habitable to
Miran ships, because the great beams had been so perfectly figured that
they were effective at a range of nearly twelve hundred miles.

Deenmor station was attacked--but it was a half-hearted attack, for
Mirans were becoming distinctly skittish about fifteen-foot UV beams.
Two badly blistered ships--and the Mirans retreated to Jupiter. But Mira
held Phobos and Deimos. In two weeks, they had set up cannon there, and
proved themselves accurate long-range gunners. Against the feeble
attraction of Deimos, and with Mars' gravity to help them, they began
bombarding the two stations, and anything that attempted to approach
them, with gamma and atomic explosive bombs. Meanwhile they amused
themselves occasionally by planting a gamma-ray bomb in each of Mars'
major cities. They made Mars uninhabitable for Solarians as well as for
Mirans, at least until the deadly slow-action atomic explosives wore
off, or were removed.

Then the Mirans, after a lapse of three weeks while they dug in their
toes on Jupiter, prepared to leap. Earth was the next goal. Miran
scout-ships had been sent out before this--and severely handled by the
concentrated fleets of the IP that hung grimly off Earth and Luna now.
But the scouts had learned one thing. Mirans could never hope to attain
a firm grasp on Earth while terribly armed Luna hung like a Sword of
Damocles over their heads. Further, attack on Earth directly would be
next to impossible, for, thanks to Faragaut's Interplanetary Company,
nearly all the mercury metal in the system was safely lodged on Earth,
and saturated with power. Every major city had been equipped with great
UV apparatus. And neutron guns in plenty waited on small ships just
outside the atmosphere to explode harmlessly any atomic or gamma bombs
Miran ships might attempt to deposit.

An attack on Luna was the first step. But that terrible, gigantic fort
on Luna worried them. Yet while that fort existed, Earth ships were free
to come and go, for Mirans could not afford to stand near. At a distance
of twenty thousand miles, small Miran ships had felt the touch of those
great UV beams.

Finally, a brief test-attack was made, with an entire fleet of one
hundred ships. They drew almost into position, faster than light, faster
than the signaling warnings could send their messages. In position, all
those great ships strained and heaved at the mighty magnetic vortex that
twisted at the field of the fort. Instantly, twelve of the fifteen-foot
UV beams replied. And--two great UV beams of a size the Mirans had never
seen before, beams from the two ships, "S Doradus" and "Cepheid."

The test-attack dissolved as suddenly as it had come. The Mirans
returned to Jupiter, and to the outer planets where they had further
established themselves. Most of the Solar system was theirs. But the
Solarians still held the choicest planets--and kept the Mirans from
using the mild-temperatured Mars.




IX


"They can't take this, at least," sighed McLaurin as they retreated from
Luna.

"I didn't think they could--right away. I'm wondering though if they
haven't something we haven't seen yet. Besides which--give them time,
give them time."

"Well, give us time, too," snapped McLaurin. "How are you coming?"

Buck smiled. "I'm sure I don't know. I have a machine but I haven't the
slightest idea of whether or not it's any good."

"Why not?"

"I can destroy--I hope--but I can't build up their ray. I can't test the
machine because I haven't their ray to test it against."

"What can we do to test it?"

"The only thing I can see is to call for volunteers--and send out a
six-man cruiser. If the ship's too small, they may not destroy it with
the big crumbler rays. If it's too large--and the machine didn't
work--we'd lose too much."

Twelve hours later, the IP men at the Lunar Bank fort were lined up.
McLaurin stepped up on the platform, and addressed the men briefly, told
them what was needed. Six volunteers were selected by a process of
elimination, those who were married, had dependents, officers, and
others were refused. Finally, six men of the IP were chosen, neither
rookies nor veterans, six average men. And one average six-man cruiser,
one hundred and eleven feet long, twenty-two in diameter. It was the
T-208, a sister ship of the T-247, the first ship to be destroyed.

The T-208 started out from Luna, and with full acceleration, sped out
toward Phobos. Slowly she circled the satellite, while distant scouts
kept her under view. Lazily, the Miran patrol on Phobos watched the
T-208, indifferent to her. The T-208 dove suddenly, after five fruitless
circles of the tiny world, and with her four-foot UV beam flaming,
stabbed angrily at a flight of Miran scouts berthed in the very shadow
of a great battle cruiser, one of the interstellar ships stationed here
on Phobos.

Four of the little ships slumped in incandescence. Angrily the terrific
sword of energy slashed at the frail little scouts.

Angrily the Miran interstellar ship shot herself abruptly into action
against this insolent cruiser. The cruiser launched a flight of the
mercury-torpedoes. Flashing, burning, ultra-violet energy flooded the
great ship, harmlessly, for the men were, as usual, protected. The Miran
answered with the neutron beam, atomic and gamma bombs--and the crumbler
ray.

Gently, softly a halo of shimmering-violet luminescence built up about
