whether he coughed or whether he thought that he coughed.

The sense of time deserted him when the metronome of heartbeat died.
Determined Brain compromised by assuming that crude time could be kept
by the function of hunger, elimination, weariness. Logical Brain pointed
out that he could starve to death and feel nothing; elimination was a
sensory thing no more; weariness was of the body that brought no
information anyway--and what, indeed was sleep?

Brain considered this question. Brain said, I am Jerry Markham. But is
it true that no brain can think of nothing? Is it possible that "Sleep"
is the condition that obtains when the body stops conveying reliable
information to the brain, and then says to Hell with Everything and
decides to stop thinking?

The Brain called Jerry Markham did not stop thinking. It lost its time
sense, but not completely. A period of time passed, a whirlwind of
thoughts and dreamlike actions went on, and then calmness came for a
while.

Dreams? Now ponder the big question. Does the brain dream the dream as a
sensory experience--or is a dream no more than a sequence of assorted
memories? Would a dying brain expire in pleasure during a pleasant
dream--or is the enjoyment of a pleasant dream only available to the
after-awakened brain?

What is Man but his Memories?

       *       *       *       *       *

In one very odd manner, the brain of Jerry Markham retained its
intellectual orientation, and realized that its physical orientation was
uncontrollable and undetectable and therefore of no importance. Like the
lighthouse keeper who could not sleep when the diaphone did not
wrneeee-hrnawwww for five seconds of each and every minute, Jerry
Markham's brain was filled with a mild concern about the total lack of
unimportant but habitual data. There was no speckle of light to classify
and ignore, no susurrus of air molecules raining against the eardrum.
Blankness replaced the smell and taste and their absence was as
disturbing as a pungence or a poison. And, of course, one should feel
something if it is no more than the tonus of muscle against the mobile
bones.

Communication is the prime drive of life. Cut off from external
communication entirely, section A, bay 6, tier 9, row 13 hollered
over to box Q, line 23, aisle F and wanted to know what was going
on. The gang on the upper deck hailed the boiler room, and the
crew in the bleacher seats reported that the folks in charge of
C.I.C.--Communication Information Center--were sitting on their hands
because they didn't have anything to do. One collection of bored brain
cells stirred. They hadn't been called upon since Jerry Markham sang
"_Adeste Fidelis_" in memorized Latin some fifteen years earlier and so
they started the claque. Like an auditorium full of people impatient
because the curtain had not gone up on time, bedlam broke loose.

Bedlam is subject to the laws of periodicity, stochastic analysis, and
with some rather brilliant manipulation it can be reduced to a Fourier
Series. Fourier says that Maxwell is right and goes on to define exactly
when, in a series of combined periodicities of apparently random motion,
all the little particles will be moving in the same direction.
Stochastic analysis says that if the letter "U" follows the letter "Q"
in most cases, words beginning with "Q" will have "U" for a second
letter.

Jerry Markham began to think. Isolated and alone, prisoner in the cell
of bone, with absolutely nothing to distract him, the Brain by common
consent pounded a gavel, held a conference, appointed a chairman and
settled down to do the one job that the Brain was assembled to do. In
unison, ten to the sixteenth storage cells turned butter side up at the
single wave of a mental flag.

He thought of his father and his mother; of his Sally. He thought of his
commanding officer and of the fellows he liked and disliked. The
primitive urge to communicate was upon him, because he must first
establish communication before he could rise from the stony mineral
stage to the exalted level of a vegetable. Bereft of his normal senses,
undistracted by trivia such as noise and pain and the inestimable
vastness of information bits that must be considered and evaluated, his
brain called upon his memory and provided the background details.

The measured tread of a company of marching soldiers can wreck a bridge.

The cadence of ten to the sixteenth brain cells, undivided by the
distraction of incoming information, broke down a mental barrier.

As vividly as the living truth, Jerry Markham envisioned himself
sauntering down the sidewalk. The breeze was on his face and the
pavement was beneath his feet, the air was laden with its myriad of
smells and the flavor of a cigarette was on his tongue. His eyes saw
Sally running toward him, her cry of greeting was a welcome sound and
the pressure of her hug was strong and physical as the taste of her
lips.

Real.

She hugged his arm and said, "Your folks are waiting."

Jerry laughed. "Let the general wait a bit longer," he said. "I've got a
lot to tell him."
