plenty of time to hunt them out and destroy them.

And then he forced his mind away from that train of thought. There had
to be a way to get there on time. Something in the back of his mind told
him that there _was_ a way.

He had to think. Really think.

       *       *       *       *       *

On 7 June 2287, a signal officer on the Earth destroyer _Muldoon_ picked
up a faint signal coming from the general direction of the constellation
of Sagittarius. It was the standard emergency signal for distress. The
broadcaster only had a very short range, so the source couldn't be too
far away.

He made his report to the ship's captain. "We're within easy range of
her, sir," he finished. "Shall we pick her up?"

"Might be a Rat trick," said the captain. "But we'll have to take the
chance. Beam a call to Earth, and let's go out there dead slow. If the
detectors show anything funny, we turn tail and run. We're in no position
to fight a Rat ship."

"You think this might be a Rat trap, sir?"

The captain grinned. "If you are referring to the _Muldoon_ as a rat
trap, Mr. Blake, you're both disrespectful and correct. That's why we're
going to run if we see anything funny. This ship is already obsolete by
our standards; you can imagine what it is by theirs." He paused. "Get
that call in to Earth. Tell 'em this ship is using a distress signal
that was obsolete six months ago. And tell 'em we're going out."

"Yes, sir," said the signal officer.

It wasn't a trap. As the _Muldoon_ approached the source of the signal,
their detectors picked up the ship itself. It was a standard lifeboat
from a battleship of the _Shannon_ class.

"You don't suppose that's from the _Shane_, do you?" the captain said
softly as he looked at the plate. "She's the only ship of that class
that's missing. But if that's a _Shane_ lifeboat, what took her so long
to get here?"

"She's cut her engines, sir!" said the observer. "She evidently knows
we're coming."

"All right. Pull her in as soon as we're close enough. Put her in
Number Two lifeboat rack; it's empty."

       *       *       *       *       *

When the door of the lifeboat opened, the captain of the _Muldoon_ was
waiting outside the lifeboat rack. He didn't know exactly what he had
expected to see, but it somehow seemed fitting that a lean, bearded man
in a badly worn uniform and a haggard look about him should step out.

The specter saluted. "Lieutenant Alfred Pendray, of the _Shane_," he
said, in a voice that had almost no strength. He held up a pouch.
"Microfilm," he said. "Must get to Earth immediately. No delay. Hurry."

"Catch him!" the captain shouted. "He's falling!" But one of the men
nearby had already caught him.

In the sick bay, Pendray came to again. The captain's questioning
gradually got the story out of Pendray.

"... So I didn't know what to do then," he said, his voice a breathy
whisper. "I knew I had to get that stuff home. Somehow."

"Go on," said the captain, frowning.

"Simple matter," said Pendray. "Nothing to it. Two equations. Little
ship goes thirty times as fast as big ship--big _hulk_. Had to get here
before 22 June. _Had_ to. Only way out, y'unnerstand.

"Anyway. Two equations. Simple. Work 'em in your head. Big ship takes
ten months, little one takes ten days. But can't stay in a little ship
ten days. No shielding. Be dead before you got here. See?"

"I see," said the captain patiently.

"_But_--and here's a 'mportant point: If you stay on the big ship for
eight an' a half months, then y' only got to be in the little ship for a
day an' a half to get here. Man can live that long, even under that
radiation. See?" And with that, he closed his eyes.

"Do you mean you exposed yourself to the full leakage radiation from a
lifeboat engine for thirty-six hours?"

But there was no answer.

"Let him sleep," said the ship's doctor. "If he wakes up again, I'll let
