mentioned; but gleaming between the lines like the sweep of a revolving
beacon was a strong intimation that Mayne had better not hope to charge
the item to "good will." The budget just was not made that way, the hint
concluded.

"It's due to get dark soon, isn't it?" he asked Haruhiku, crumpling the
final message into a side pocket. "I don't believe I'll resume the talks
till morning. Maybe my head will function again by then."

       *       *       *       *       *

In the morning, one of the scout's crew again took the pilot and Mayne
to the meeting by helicopter. Mayne spent part of the trip mulling over
a message Haruhiku had received. The spaceship _Diamond Belt_ could be
expected to arrive in orbit about the planet later the same day, bearing
special envoy J. P. McDonald. The captain, having been informed of
Haruhiku's presence, requested landing advice.

"I told him what I know," said the pilot. "We can give him a beam down,
of course, unless you think we should send him somewhere else."

"Well ... let's see how this goes," said Mayne. "They seem to be waiting
for us down there."

They landed to find Voorhis, Melin, and the native officialdom gathered
at the hut facing the new "temple." After exchanging greetings, they sat
down at the table as they had the day before.

"All right, gentlemen," said Mayne to the two Terrans. "You win. The
government is going to have to put something in the pot. I want to make
it as little as possible, so let us have no more nonsense about the true
value of ship or cargo as they stand."

They looked startled at his tone. Mayne went on before they could
recover.

"The object I have in mind, if it seems at all possible, is to put
Captain Voorhis back in business without costing Mr. Melin his job. Now,
let's put our heads together on that problem and worry about justifying
ourselves later."

The most difficult part was to convince Voorhis to surrender his dream
of fantastic profits; but sometime before Mayne got hoarse, the captain
was made to see that he could not have his cake and eat it, too.

Melin agreed that he might pay the paper value of the _Gemsbok_ if he
could pay likewise for the cargo, in which case he would admit a loss.
After all, a spaceship anchored by a temple might reasonably be termed
unspaceworthy. He would take over the cargo and cut his losses by
allowing the government to buy it at two million.

"You wanna come with me next trip?" invited Voorhis when he heard this.
"If that's how you cut loose, we'll make a fortune!"

"Well, there it is," said Mayne, straightening up to ease his aching
back. He must have been leaning tensely over the table longer than he
had thought. "The captain gets two and a half million, Mr. Melin gets
off with paying only half a million, and you've stuck me for the rest."

"Congratulations, Judge!" said Melin. "You now own a ship and cargo
which I presume you will present to the Kappans."

"How can he?" demanded Voorhis. "They figure they own it already."

"We'll worry about that later," said Mayne.

"_You_ will!" Voorhis guffawed. "I hope you get _some_ credit out of
it."

Haruhiku interrupted to inform Mayne that the Kappans, who had been
interested if bewildered listeners, had invited the Terrans to a small
feast.

"I translated enough to let them understand there would be no attempt to
disturb their temple building," he explained. "They now feel they owe us
hospitality."

"Good, that's something," said Mayne.

"I'll tell you what else will be something," grunted Voorhis. "The
food!"

The assemblage repaired to the Kappan village. The Terrans--though it
took some doing--survived the feast.

Mayne thought it best not to inquire into the nature of the dishes
served. Eemakh was evidently determined to display his village's finest
hospitality, so the Terrans even tried the Kappan beer. Mayne absorbed
enough to get used to it.

_Or did it absorb me?_ he wondered. _Igrillik's beginning to look almost
human!_

Eventually, carts were brought, and they rode bumpily out to admire
progress made on the temple. A fresh breeze helped Mayne to remember
that it was now late afternoon and he had yet to settle one matter with
Eemakh.

When they arrived at the site, crewmen from the _Gemsbok_ saw fit to
take Voorhis in charge and carry him into their hut. Mayne sank down at
the table outside, watching Melin grope to a place beside him. He
noticed that Haruhiku's helicopter pilot handed him a message as soon as
the lieutenant alighted.

"That will be from the _Diamond Belt_," Mayne guessed.

He eyed Melin with some amusement. The insurance man stared very quietly
at the board beneath his elbows. His complexion held a tint of green.
Even Eemakh, plodding ponderously up, lowered himself to a bench with a
sigh. The high priest seemed less affected by the celebration, and Mayne
was proud when Haruhiku walked over with his normal bland alertness.

"They're getting near?" he asked.

"Doing braking circles," reported the pilot. "I sent an order for the
scout to give them a beam. There may still be time to send them
somewhere else--"

"One more try here first," Mayne decided. "Tell Eemakh we want to
straighten out some confusion about Meeg and the cargo."

       *       *       *       *       *

Haruhiku permitted himself a small shrug and translated. Eemakh aroused
himself to a show of interest, while Igrillik turned a suspicious orange
stare upon Mayne. The latter strove to frame in his mind an argument
