were the earth and the moon absolutely rigid particles, perturbations
would work all sorts of small changes in the pliant curve. The
phenomena of tidal evolution impart an additional element of
complexity into the actual shape of the moon's path. We now see that
the ellipse is not merely subject to incessant deflections of a
periodic nature, it also undergoes a gradual contraction as we look
back through time past; but we may, with all needful accuracy for our
present purpose, think of the path of the moon as a circle, only we
must attribute to that circle a continuous contraction of its radius
the further and the further we look back. The alteration in the
radius will be even so slow, that the moon will accomplish thousands
of revolutions around the earth without any appreciable alteration in
the average distance of the two bodies. We can therefore think of the
moon as revolving at every epoch in a circle of special radius, and as
accomplishing that revolution in a special time. With this
understanding we can now apply Kepler's law to the several stages of
the moon's past history. The periodic time of each revolution, and the
mean distance at which that revolution was performed, will be always
connected together by the formula of Kepler. Thus to take an instance
in the very remote past. Let us suppose that the moon was at one
hundred and twenty thousand miles instead of two hundred and forty
thousand, that is, at half its present distance. Applying the law of
Kepler, we see that the time of revolution must then have been only
about ten days instead of the twenty-seven it is now. Still further,
let us suppose that the moon revolves in an orbit with one-tenth of
the diameter it has at present, then the cube of 10 being 1000, and
the square root of 1000 being 31.6, it follows that the month must
have been less than the thirty-first part of what it is at present,
that is, it must have been considerably less than one of our present
days. Thus you see the month is growing shorter and shorter the
further we look back, the day is also growing shorter and shorter; but
still I think we can show that there must have been a time when the
month will have been at least as short as the day. For let us take the
most extreme case in which the moon shall have made the closest
possible approximation to the earth. Two globes in contact will have a
distance between their centres which is equal to the sum of their
radii. Take the earth as having a radius of four thousand miles, and
the moon a radius of one thousand miles, the two centres must at their
shortest distance be five thousand miles apart, that is, the moon must
then be at the forty-eighth part of its present distance from the
earth. Now the cube of 48 is 110,592, and the square root of 110,592
is nearly 333, therefore the length of the month will be one-three
hundred and thirty-third part of the duration of the month at present;
in other words, the moon must revolve around the earth in a period of
somewhat about two hours. It seems impossible that the day can ever
have been as brief as this. We have therefore proved that, in the
course of its contracting duration, the moon must have overtaken the
contracting day, and that therefore there must have been a time when
the moon was in the vicinity of the earth, and having a day and month
of equal period. Thus we have shown that the critical condition of
dynamical instability must have occurred in the early period of the
earth-moon history, if the agents then in operation were those which
we now know. The further development of the subject must be postponed
until the next lecture.




LECTURE II.


Starting from that fitting commencement of earth-moon history which
the critical epoch affords, we shall now describe the dynamical
phenomena as the tidal evolution progressed. The moon and the earth
initially moved as a solid body, each bending the same face towards
the other; but as the moon retreated, and as tides began to be raised
on the earth, the length of the day began to increase, as did also the
length of the month. We know, however, that the month increased more
rapidly than the day, so that a time was reached when the month was
twice as long as the day; and still both periods kept on increasing,
but not at equal rates, for in progress of time the month grew so much
more rapidly than the day, that many days had to elapse while the moon
accomplished a single revolution. It is, however, only necessary for
us to note those stages of the mighty progress which correspond to
special events. The first of such stages was attained when the month
assumed its maximum ratio to the day. At this time, the month was
about twenty-nine days, and the epoch appears to have occurred at a
comparatively recent date if we use such standards of time as tidal
evolution requires; though measured by historical standards, the epoch
is of incalculable antiquity. I cannot impress upon you too often the
enormous magnitude of the period of time which these phenomena have
required for their evolution. Professor Darwin's theory affords but
little information on this point, and the utmost we can do is to
assign a minor limit to the period through which tidal evolution has
been in progress. It is certain that the birth of the moon must have
occurred at least fifty million years ago, but probably the true
period is enormously greater than this. If indeed we choose to add a
cipher or two to the figure just printed, I do not think there is
anything which could tell us that we have over-estimated the mark.
Therefore, when I speak of the epoch in which the month possessed the
greatest number of days as a recent one, it must be understood that I
am merely speaking of events in relation to the order of tidal
evolution. Viewed from this standpoint, we can show that the epoch is
a recent one in the following manner. At present the month consists of
a little more than twenty-seven days, but at this maximum period to
which I have referred the month was about twenty-nine days; from that
it began to decline, and the decline cannot have proceeded very far,
for even still there are only two days less in the month than at the
time when the month had the greatest number of days. It thus follows
that the present epoch--the human epoch, as we may call it--in the
history of the earth has fallen at a time when the progress of tidal
evolution is about half-way between the initial and the final stage. I
do not mean half-way in the sense of actual measurement of years;
indeed, from this point it would seem that we cannot yet be nearly
half-way, for, vast as are the periods of time that have elapsed since
the moon first took its departure from the earth, they fall far short
of that awful period of time which will intervene between the present
moment and the hour when the next critical state of earth-moon
history shall have been attained. In that state the day is destined
once again to be equal to the month, just as was the case in the
initial stage. The half-way stage will therefore in one sense be that
in which the proportion of the month to the day culminates. This is
the stage which we have but lately passed; and thus it is that at
present we may be said to be almost half-way through the progress of
tidal evolution.

My narrative of the earth-moon evolution must from this point forward
cease to be retrospective. Having begun at that critical moment when
the month and day were first equal, we have traced the progress of
events to the present hour. What we have now to say is therefore a
forecast of events yet to come. So far as we can tell, no agent is
likely to interfere with the gradual evolution caused by the tides,
which dynamical principles have disclosed to us. As the years roll on,
or perhaps, I should rather say, as thousands of years and millions of
years roll on, the day will continue to elongate, or the earth to
rotate more slowly on its axis. But countless ages must elapse before
another critical stage of the history shall be reached. It is needless
for me to ponder over the tedious process by which this interesting
epoch is reached. I shall rather sketch what the actual condition of
our system will be when that moment shall have arrived. The day will
then have expanded from the present familiar twenty-four hours up to a
day more than twice, more than five, even more than fifty times its
present duration. In round numbers, we may say that this great day
will occupy one thousand four hundred of our ordinary hours. To
realize the critical nature of the situation then arrived at, we must
follow the corresponding evolution through which the moon passes. From
its present distance of two hundred and forty thousand miles, the moon
will describe an ever-enlarging orbit; and as it does so the duration
of the month will also increase, until at last a point will be reached
when the month has become more than double its present length, and has
attained the particular value of one thousand four hundred hours. We
are specially to observe that this one-thousand four-hundred-hour
month will be exactly reached when the day has also expanded to one
thousand four hundred hours; and the essence of this critical
condition, which may be regarded as a significant point of tidal
evolution, is that the day and the month have again become equal. The
day and the month were equal at the beginning, the day and the month
will be equal at the end. Yet how wide is the difference between the
beginning and the end. The day or the month at the end is some
hundreds of times as long as the month or the day at the beginning.

I have already fully explained how, in any stage of the evolutionary
progress in which the day and the month became equal, the energy of
the system attained a maximum or a minimum value. At the beginning the
energy was a maximum; at the end the energy will be a minimum. The
most important consequences follow from this consideration. I have
already shown that a condition of maximum energy corresponded to
dynamic instability. Thus we saw that the earth-moon history could not
have commenced without the intervention of some influence other than
tides at the beginning. Now let us learn what the similar doctrine
has to tell us with regard to the end. The condition then arrived at
is one of dynamical stability; for suppose that the system were to
receive a slight alteration, by which the moon went out a little
further, and thus described a larger orbit, and so performed more than
its share of the moment of spin. Then the earth would have to do a
little less spinning, because, under all circumstances, the total
quantity of spin must be preserved unaltered. But the energy being at
a minimum, such a small displacement must of course produce a state of
things in which the energy would be increased. Or if we conceived the
moon to come in towards the earth, the moon would then contribute less
to the total moment of momentum. It would therefore be incumbent on
the earth to do more; and accordingly the velocity of the earth's
rotation would be augmented. But this arrangement also could only be
produced by the addition of some fresh energy to the system, because
the position from which the system is supposed to have been disturbed
is one of minimum energy.

No disturbance of the system from this final position is therefore
conceivable, unless some energy can be communicated to it. But this
will demonstrate the utter incompetency of the tides to shift the
system by a hair's breadth from this position; for it is of the
essence of the tides to waste energy by friction. And the
transformations of the system which the tides have caused are
invariably characterized by a decline of energy, the movements being
otherwise arranged so that the total moment of momentum shall be
preserved intact. Note, how far we were justified in speaking of this
condition as a final one. It is final so far as the lunar tides are
concerned; and were the system to be screened from all outer
interference, this accommodation between the earth and the moon would
be eternal.

There is indeed another way of demonstrating that a condition of the
system in which the day has assumed equality with the month must
necessarily be one of dynamical equilibrium. We have shown that the
energy which the tides demand is derived not from the mere fact that
there are high tides and low tides, but from the circumstance that
these tides do rise and fall; that in falling and rising they do
produce currents; and it is these currents which generate the friction
by which the earth's velocity is slowly abated, its energy wasted, and
no doubt ultimately dissipated as heat. If therefore we can make the
ebbing and the flowing of the tides to cease, then our argument will
disappear. Thus suppose, for the sake of illustration, that at a
moment when the tides happened to be at high water in the Thames, such
a change took place in the behaviour of the moon that the water always
remained full in the Thames, and at every other spot on the earth
remained fixed at the exact height which it possessed at this
particular moment. There would be no more tidal friction, and
therefore the system would cease to course through that series of
changes which the existence of tidal friction necessitates.

But if the tide is always to be full in the Thames, then the moon must
be always in the same position with respect to the meridian, that is,
the moon must always be fixed in the heavens over London. In fact, the
moon must then revolve around the earth just as fast as London
does--the month must have the same length as the day. The earth must
then show the same face constantly to the moon, just as the moon
always does show the same face towards the earth; the two globes will
in fact revolve as if they were connected with invisible bonds, which
united them into a single rigid body.

We need therefore feel no surprise at the cessation of the progress of
tidal evolution when the month and the day are equal, for then the
movement of moon-raised tides has ceased. No doubt the same may be
said of the state at the beginning of the history, when the day and
the month had the brief and equal duration of a few hours. While the
equality of the two periods lasted there could be no tides, and
therefore no progress in the direction of tidal evolution. There is,
however, the profound difference of stability and instability between
the two cases; the most insignificant disturbance of the system at the
initial stage was sufficient to precipitate the revolving moon from
its condition of dynamical equilibrium, and to start the course of
tidal evolution in full vigour. If, however, any trifling derangement
should take place in the last condition of the system, so that the
month and the day departed slightly from equality, there would
instantly be an ebbing and a flowing of the tides; and the friction
generated by these tides would operate to restore the equality because
this condition is one of dynamical stability.

It will thus be seen with what justice we can look forward to the day
and month each of fourteen hundred hours as a finale to the progress
of the luni-tidal evolution. Throughout the whole of this marvellous
series of changes it is always necessary to remember the one constant
and invariable element--the moment of momentum of the system which
tides cannot alter. Whatever else the friction can have done, however
fearful may have been the loss of energy by the system, the moment of
momentum which the system had at the beginning it preserves unto the
end. This it is which chiefly gives us the numerical data on which we
have to rely for the quantitative features of tidal evolution.

We have made so many demands in the course of these lectures on the
capacity of tidal friction to accomplish startling phenomena in the
evolution of the earth-moon system, that it is well for us to seek for
any evidence that may otherwise be obtainable as to the capacity of
tides for the accomplishment of gigantic operations. I do not say
that there is any doubt which requires to be dispelled by such
evidence, for as to the general outlines of the doctrine of tidal
evolution which has been here sketched out there can be no reasonable
ground for mistrust; but nevertheless it is always desirable to widen
our comprehension of any natural phenomena by observing collateral
facts. Now there is one branch of tidal action to which I have as yet
only in the most incidental way referred. We have been speaking of the
tides in the earth which are made to ebb and flow by the action of the
moon; we have now to consider the tides in the moon, which are there
excited by the action of the earth. For between these two bodies there
is a reciprocity of tidal-making energy--each of them is competent to
raise tides in the other. As the moon is so small in comparison with
the earth, and as the tides on the moon are of but little significance
in the progress of tidal evolution, it has been permissible for us to
omit them from our former discussion. But it is these tides on the
moon which will afford us a striking illustration of the competency of
tides for stupendous tasks. The moon presents a monument to show what
tides are able to accomplish.

[Illustration: Fig. 3.--The Moon.]

I must first, however, explain a difficulty which is almost sure to
suggest itself when we speak of tides on the moon. I shall be told
that the moon contains no water on its surface, and how then, it will
be said, can tides ebb and flow where there is no sea to be disturbed?
There are two answers to this difficulty; it is no doubt true that the
moon seems at present entirely devoid of water in so far as its
surface is exposed to us, but it is by no means certain that the moon
was always in this destitute condition. There are very large features
marked on its map as "seas"; these regions are of a darker hue than
the rest of the moon's surface, they are large objects often many
hundreds of miles in diameter, and they form, in fact, those dark
patches on the brilliant surface which are conspicuous to the unaided
eye, and are represented in Fig. 3. Viewed in a telescope these
so-called seas, while clearly possessing no water at the present time,
are yet widely different from the general aspect of the moon's
surface. It has often been supposed that great oceans once filled
these basins, and a plausible explanation has even been offered as to
how the waters they once contained could have vanished. It has been
thought that as the mineral substances deep in the interior of our
satellite assumed the crystalline form during the progress of cooling,
the demand for water of crystallization required for incorporation
with the minerals was so great that the oceans of the moon became
entirely absorbed. It is, however, unnecessary for our present
argument that this theory should be correct. Even if there never was a
drop of water found on our satellite, the tides in its molten
materials would be quite sufficient for our purpose; anything that
tides could accomplish would be done more speedily by vast tides of
flowing lava than by merely oceanic tides.

There can be no doubt that tides raised on the moon by the earth would
be greater than the tides raised on the earth by the moon. The
question is, however, not a very simple one, for it depends on the
masses of both bodies as well as on their relative dimensions. In so
far as the masses are concerned, the earth being more than eighty
times as heavy as the moon, the tides would on this account be vastly
larger on the moon than on the earth. On the other hand, the moon's
diameter being much less than that of the earth, the efficiency of a
tide-producing body in its action on the moon would be less than that
of the same body at the same distance in its action on the earth; but
the diminution of the tides from this cause would be not so great as
their increase from the former cause, and therefore the net result
would be to exhibit much greater tides on the moon than on the earth.

Suppose that the moon had been originally endowed with a rapid
movement of rotation around its axis, the effect of the tides on that
rotation would tend to check its velocity just in the same way as the
tides on the earth have effected a continual elongation of the day.
Only as the tides on the moon were so enormously great, their capacity
to check the moon's speed would have corresponding efficacy. In
addition to this, the mass of the moon being so small, it could only
offer feeble resistance to the unceasing action of the tide, and
therefore our satellite must succumb to whatever the tides desired
ages before our earth would have been affected to a like extent. It
must be noticed that the influence of the tidal friction is not
directed to the total annihilation of the rotation of the two bodies
affected by it; the velocity is only checked down until it attains
such a point that the speed in which each body rotates upon its axis
has become equal to that in which it revolves around the
tide-producer. The practical effect of such an adjustment is to make
the tide-agitated body turn a constant face towards its tormentor.

I may here note a point about which people sometimes find a little
difficulty. The moon constantly turns the same face towards the earth,
and therefore people are sometimes apt to think that the moon performs
no rotation whatever around its own axis. But this is indeed not the
case. The true inference to be drawn from the constant face of the
moon is, that the velocity of rotation about its own axis is equal to
that of its rotation around the earth; in fact, the moon revolves
around the earth in twenty-seven days, and its rotation about its axis
is performed in twenty-seven days also. You may illustrate the
movement of the moon around the earth by walking around a table in a
room, keeping all the time your face turned towards the table; in such
a case as this you not only perform a motion of revolution, but you
also perform a rotation in an equal period. The proof that you do
rotate is to be found in the fact that during the movement your face
is being directed successively to all the points of the compass. There
is no more singular fact in the solar system than the constancy of the
moon's face to the earth. The periods of rotation and revolution are
both alike; if one of these periods exceeded the other by an amount so
small as the hundredth part of a second, the moon would in the lapse
of ages permit us to see that other side which is now so jealously
concealed. The marvellous coincidence between these two periods would
be absolutely inexplicable, unless we were able to assign it to some
physical cause. It must be remembered that in this matter the moon
occupies a unique position among the heavenly host. The sun revolves
around on its axis in a period of twenty-five or twenty-six days--thus
we see one side of the sun as frequently as we see the other. The side
of the sun which is turned towards us to-day is almost entirely
different from that we saw a fortnight ago. Nor is the period of the
sun's rotation to be identified with any other remarkable period in
our system. If it were equal to the length of the year, for instance,
or if it were equal to the period of any of the other planets, then it
could hardly be contended that the phenomenon as presented by the moon
was unique; but the sun's period is not simply related, or indeed
related at all, to any of the other periodic times in the system. Nor
do we find anything like the moon's constancy of face in the behaviour
of the other planets. Jupiter turns now one face to us and then
another. Nor is his rotation related to the sun or related to any
other body, as our moon's motion is related to us. It has indeed been
thought that in the movements of the satellites of Jupiter a somewhat
similar phenomenon may be observed to that in the motion of our own
satellite. If this be so, the causes whereby this phenomenon is
produced are doubtless identical in the two cases.

So remarkable a coincidence as that which the moon's motion shows
could not reasonably be explained as a mere fortuitous circumstance;
nor need we hesitate to admit that a physical explanation is required
when we find a most satisfactory one ready for our acceptance, as was
originally pointed out by Helmholtz.

There can be no doubt whatever that the constancy of the moon's face
is the work of ancient tides, which have long since ceased to act. We
have shown that if the moon's rotation had once been too rapid to
permit of the same face being always directed towards us, the tides
would operate as a check by which the velocity of that rotation would
be abated. On the other hand, if the moon rotated so slowly that its
other face would be exposed to us in the course of the revolution, the
tides would then be dragged violently over its surface in the
direction of its rotation; their tendency would thus be to accelerate
the speed until the angular velocity of rotation was equal to that of
revolution. Thus the tides would act as a controlling agent of the
utmost stringency to hurry the moon round when it was not turning fast
enough, and to arrest the motion when going too fast. Peace there
would be none for the moon until it yielded absolute compliance to the
tyranny of the tides, and adjusted its period of rotation with exact
identity to its period of revolution. Doubtless this adjustment was
made countless ages ago, and since that period the tides have acted so
as to preserve the adjustment, as long as any part of the moon was in
a state sufficiently soft or fluid to respond to tidal impression. The
present state of the moon is a monument to which we may confidently
appeal in support of our contention as to the great power of the tides
