
[Illustration]

Gefty let Kerim and himself into the cubicle from one of the passages,
steered the girl through the pitch blackness of the little room to the
chair before the control panel and told her to sit down. He groped for a
moment at the side of the panel, found a knob and twisted it. There was
a faint click. A scattering of pale lights appeared suddenly on the
panel, a dark viewscreen, set at a tilt above them, reflecting their
gleam.

Gefty explained in a low voice, "Left side of that screen covers the
lock. Right one covers the big hall outside. No lights in either at the
moment, so you don't see anything. Only way the cargo door to the hall
can be opened or closed is with these switches right here. What I want
to do is get the janandra into the lock, slam the door on it and lock
down the control switches. Then we've got it trapped."

"But how are you going to get it to go in there?"

"No real problem--I'll be three jumps ahead of it. Then I duck back up
into this cubicle, and lock both doors. And it'll be inside the lock.
You have the picture now?"

Kerim said unsteadily, "I do. But it sounds awfully risky, Gefty."

"Well, I don't like it either," Gefty admitted. "So I'll start right now
before I lose my nerve. As soon as I move out into the vault hall, the
lighting will go on. That's automatic. You watch the right side of the
screen. If you see the janandra coming before I do, yell as loud as you
can."

He shifted the two inner door switches to the right. A red spark
appeared in the dark viewscreen, high up near the center. A second red
light showed on the cubicle bulkhead beside Gefty. Beneath it an oblong
section of the bulkhead turned silently away on heavy hinges, became a
door two feet in thickness, which stood jutting out at a right angle
into the darkness of the cargo lock. A wave of cold air moved through it
into the control cubicle.

On the screen, another red spark appeared beside the first one.

"Both doors are open now," Gefty murmured to the girl. "The janandra
isn't in the vault hall or the lighting would have turned on, but it may
have heard the door open and be on its way. So keep watching the
screen."

"I certainly will!" she whispered shakily.

Gefty took an oversized wrench from the wall, climbed quickly and
quietly down the three ladder steps to the floor of the lock, and walked
across it to the sill of the giant freight door, which now had swung out
and down into the vault hall, fitting itself into a depression of the
flooring. He hesitated an instant on the sill, then stepped out into the
big dark hall. Light filled it immediately in both directions.

He stood quiet, intent on the storage vault entrance far up the hall to
his left. He could see the vault was open. The janandra might still be
inside it. But the seconds passed, and the dark entrance remained silent
and there was no suggestion of motion beyond it. Gefty glanced to the
right, moved a dozen steps farther out into the hall, hefted the wrench
and spun it through the air towards the ventilator frame on the opposite
bulkhead.

The heavy tool clanged loudly against the frame, bounced off and thudded
to the floor. Gefty started slowly over to it, heart pounding, with the
vault entrance still at the edge of his vision.

Kerim's voice screamed, "_Gefty, it's_--"

He spun around, sprinted back to the cargo lock. The janandra had come
silently out of the nearest side passage behind him, was approaching
with the remembered oiling swiftness of motion, its great head lifted a
yard from the floor. Gefty plunged through the lock, jumped for the top
of the cubicle door steps, came stumbling into the cubicle. Kerim was on
her feet, staring. He swung the cubicle door switch to the left,
slapping it flat to the panel. The door snapped back into the wall
behind him with a force that shook the floor.

On the screen, the janandra's thick, dark worm-shape was swinging around
in the dim lock to regain the open hall. It had seen the trap. But the
freight door switch went flat beside the other, and the freight door
rose with massive swiftness. The heavy body smashed against it, went
sliding back to the floor as the door slammed shut and the screen
section showing the cargo lock turned dark.

"Got it--got it--got it!" Gefty heard himself whispering exultantly. He
switched on the lock's interior lights.

Then he swore softly, and, beside him, Kerim sucked in her breath.

       *       *       *       *       *

The screen showed the janandra in violent but apparently purposeful
motion inside the lock ... and it was also apparent now that it was a
more complexly constructed creature than the long worm-body and heavy
head had indicated. The skin, to a distance of some eight feet back of
the head, had spread out into a wide, flexible frill. From beneath the
frill extended half a dozen jointed, bone-white arms, along with waving,
ribbonlike appendages less easy to define. The thing was reared half up
along the hall door, inspecting its surface with these members; then
suddenly it flung itself around and flashed over to the outer lock door.
Three arms shot out; wiry fingers caught the three spin-locks
simultaneously, began to whirl them.

Gefty said, staring, "Kerim, it's going to ..."

The janandra didn't. The motion checked suddenly, was reversed. The
locks drew tight again. The janandra swung back from the door, lifting
half its length upwards, big head weaving about as it inspected the tool
racks overhead. An arm reached suddenly, snatched something from one of
the racks. Then the thing turned again; and in the next instant its head
filled the viewscreen. Kerim made a choked sound of fright, jerking back
against Gefty. The bulging, metal-green eyes seemed to stare directly at
him. And the screen went black.

Kerim whispered, "Wha ... what happened, Gefty?"

Gefty swallowed, said, "It smashed the view pickup. Must have guessed we
were watching and didn't like it...." He added, "I was beginning to
think Maulbow must be some kind of superman. But it wasn't any
remote-control magic of his that let the janandra out of the vault, and
opened the intership locks when it came up to the main deck and followed
us down again. It was doing all that for itself. It's Maulbow's partner,
not his pet. And it's probably got at least as good a brain as anyone
else on board behind that ugly face."

Kerim moistened her lips. "Can it ... could it get out again?"

"Into the ship?" Gefty shook his head decidedly. "Uh-uh. It could dump
itself out on the other side--and it almost did before it realized where
it was and what it was about to do. But the inner lock doors won't open
until someone opens them right on this panel. No, the thing's safely
trapped. On the other hand ..."

On the other hand, Gefty realized that he wouldn't now be able to bring
himself to eject the janandra out of the cargo lock and into the Great
Current. Its intentions obviously hadn't been friendly, but its level of
intelligence was as good as his own, and perhaps somewhat better; and at
present it was helpless. To dispose of it as he'd had in mind would
therefore be the cold-blooded murder of an equal. But so long as that
ugly and formidable shipmate of Maulbow's stayed in the cargo lock, the
lock couldn't be used to get rid of the control unit in the vault.

A new solution presented itself while Gefty was making a rapid and
rather desperate mental review of various heavy-duty tools which might
be employed as weapons to force the janandra into submission and haul it
off for confinement elsewhere in the ship. Not impossible, but a highly
precarious and time-consuming operation at best. Then another thought
occurred: the storage vault lay directly against the hull of the
_Queen_--

How long to cut through the hull? The ship's mining equipment was on
board, and the tools were self-powered. Climb into a spacesuit, empty
the air from the entire storage deck, leaving the janandra imprisoned in
the cargo lock ... with Maulbow incapacitated in sick bay, and Kerim
back in the control compartment and also in a suit, for additional
protection. Then cut ship's power to this deck to avoid complications
with the _Queen's_ involved circuitry and work under space
conditions--half an hour if he hurried.

       *       *       *

"Shouldn't take more than another ten minutes," he informed Kerim
presently over the suit's intercom.

"I'm very glad to hear it, Gefty." She sounded shaky.

"Anything going on in the screens?" he asked.

She hesitated a little, said, "No. Not at the moment."

Gefty grunted, blinked sweat from his eyes, and took hold of the
handgrips of the heavy mining cutter again, turning it nose down towards
the vault floor. The guide light found the point he was working on, and
the slice beam stabbed out, began nibbling delicately away to extend the
curving line it had eaten through the _Queen's_ thick skin. He had drawn
a twenty-five foot circle around Maulbow's battered control unit and the
instruments attached to it, well outside the fragile-looking safety
field. The circle was broken at four points where he would plant
explosives. The explosives, going off together, should shatter the
connecting links with the hull and throw the machine clear. If that
didn't release them immediately from its influence, he would see what
putting the _Queen's_ drives into action would do.
