nature, of being converted into quick-lime, or of being dissolved in
water; it seems rather to have consisted of a small part of the chalk in
its mild state, or saturated with air, which had either remained, for
want of a sufficient fire to drive it out entirely, or had been
furnished by the distilled water.

I indeed expected to see a much larger quantity of sediment produced
from the lime, on account of the air which water constantly contains,
and with a view to know whether water retains its air when fully
saturated with lime, a lime-water was made as strong as possible; four
ounces of which were placed under the receiver of an air-pump, together
with four ounces of common water in a vial of the same size; and, upon
exhausting the receiver, without heating the vials, the air arose from
each in nearly the same quantity: from whence it is evident, that the
air, which quick-lime attracts, is of a different kind from that which
is mixed with water. And that it is also different from common elastic
air, is sufficiently proved by daily experience; for lime-water, which
soon attracts air, and forms a crust when exposed in open and shallow
vessels, may be preserved, for any time, in bottles which are but
slightly corked, or closed in such a manner as would allow free access
to elastic air, were a vacuum formed in the bottle. Quick-lime therefore
does not attract air when in its most ordinary form, but is capable of
being joined to one particular species only, which is dispersed thro'
the atmosphere, either in the shape of an exceedingly subtile powder, or
more probably in that of an elastic fluid. To this I have given the name
of fixed air, and perhaps very improperly; but I thought it better to
use a word already familiar in philosophy, than to invent a new name,
before we be more fully acquainted with the nature and properties of
this substance, which will probably be the subject of my further
inquiry.

It is, perhaps, needless to mention here, that the calcarious substances
used in making the above experiments should be of the purest kind, and
burnt with the utmost violence of heat, if we would be sure of
converting them into perfect quick-lime. I therefore made use of chalk
burnt in a small covered crucible with the fiercest fire of a
Black-smith's forge, for half an hour, and found it necessary to employ,
for this purpose, a crucible of the _Austrian_ kind, which resemble
black lead; for if any calcarious substance be heated to such a degree
in an ordinary or _Hessian_ crucible, the whole of it is melted down,
together with part of the vessel, into glass.

I now prepared to inquire into the properties of the caustic alkali; in
order to which, I made a caustic or soap ley in the following manner.

Twenty six ounces of very strong quick-lime made of chalk, were slaked
or reduced to a sort of fluid paste, with eleven pounds of boiling
water, and then mixed in a glass vessel with eighteen ounces of a pure
fixed alkaline salt, which had been first dissolved in two pounds and a
half of water. This mixture was shaken frequently for two hours, when
the action of the lime upon the alkali was supposed to be over, and
nothing remained but to separate them again from one another. I
therefore added 12 pounds of water, stirred up the lime, and, after
allowing it to settle again, poured off as much of the clear ley as
possible.

The lime and alkali were mixed together under the form of a very thick
milky liquor or fluid paste; because they are thus kept in perpetual
contact and equal mixture until they have acted sufficiently upon one
another: whereas in the common way of using a larger quantity of water,
the lime lies for the most part at bottom, and, tho' stirred up ever so
often, cannot exert its influence so fully upon the alkali, which is
uniformly diffused thro' every part of the liquor.

The above ley was found upon trial to be saturated by acids without the
least effervescence or diminution of weight.

It was now proper to examine whether the alkali suffered any loss in
becoming caustic, which I proposed to attempt by ascertaining the
strength of the ley, or the quantity of salt which a given portion of it
contained; from which by computation some imperfect knowledge might be
obtained of the quantity of caustic produced from the eighteen ounces of
mild salt.

I therefore evaporated some of my ley, but soon perceived that no
certain judgment could be formed of its strength in this way, because it
always absorbed a considerable quantity of air during the evaporation,
and the dried salt made a pretty brisk effervescence with acids, so that
the ley appeared stronger than it really was; and yet, upon proceeding
in the estimate from this rude and unfair trial, it appeared that the
salt had lost above a sixth in becoming caustic, and the quantity of
acid saturated by two drams of it was to the quantity of acid saturated
by two drams of salt of tartar, nearly as six to five.

These experiments are therefore agreeable to that part of the second
proposition which relates to the caustic alkali.

Upon farther examining what changes the alkali had undergone, I found
that the ley gave only an exceeding faint milky hue to lime-water;
because the caustic alkali wants that air by which salt of tartar
precipitates the lime. When a few ounces of it were exposed in an open
shallow vessel for four and twenty hours, it imbibed a small quantity of
air, and made a slight effervescence with acids. After a fortnight's
exposure in the same manner, it became entirely mild, effervesced as
violently with acids, and had the same effect upon lime-water as a
solution of an ordinary alkali. It likeways agrees with lime-water in
this respect, that it may be kept in close vessels, or even in bottles
which are but slightly covered, for a considerable time, without
absorbing a sensible quantity of air.

In order to know how much lime it contained, I evaporated ten ounces in
a small silver dish over a lamp, and melted the salt, after having
dissipated the water.[8]

The caustic thus produced was dissolved again in a small quantity of
water, and deposited a trifling portion of sediment, which I imagined at
first to be lime; but finding that it could easily be dissolved in a
little more water, concluded it to be a vitriolated tartar, which always
accompanies the fixed alkali of vegetables.

I then saturated the solution of the caustic salt with spirit of
vitriol, expecting thus to detect the lime; because that acid
precipitates a calcarious earth from its ordinary solutions. During the
saturation, a large quantity of white powder was formed; but this
likeways turned out to be a vitriolated tartar, which had appeared in
the form of a powder, because there was not enough of water in the
mixture to dissolve it.

Lastly, I exposed a few ounces of the ley in an open shallow vessel so
long, that the alkali lost the whole of its causticity, and seemed
entirely restored to the state of an ordinary fixed alkali; but it did
not however deposite a single atom of lime. And to assure myself that my
caustic ley was not of a singular kind, I repeated the same experiments
with an ordinary soap-ley, and with one made by mixing one part of a
pure fixed alkaline salt with three parts of common stone lime fresh
slaked and sifted; nor could I discover any lime in either. The first of
these contained a small quantity of brimstone, and was far from being
perfectly caustic, for it made a pretty brisk effervescence with acids;
but the last was so entirely deprived of its air, that it did not
diminish in the least the transparency of lime-water.

These experiments seem therefore to support the fourth proposition, and
to shew that the caustic alkali does not contain any lime.

As it seems probable, from the quickness and ease wherewith the alkali
was rendered caustic, that more lime had been employed than what was
just sufficient to extract the whole of its air, we are surprised to
find that little or none of the superfluous quick-lime was dissolved by
the water. But this _phaenomenon_ will become less surprizing, by
comparing it with some similar instances in chemistry. Water may be made
to deposite a salt, by the admixture of a substance which it attracts
more strongly than it does that salt; such as spirit of wine; and
quick-lime itself may be separated from water upon the same principle;
for if that spirit is added to an equal quantity of lime-water, the
mixture becomes turbid and deposites a sediment, which, when separated
and dissolved again in distilled water, composes lime-water. We may
therefore refer the above _phaenomenon_, with respect to the ley, to the
same cause with these, and say, that the water did not dissolve the
lime, because it already contained a caustic alkali, for which it has a
superior attraction.

I also rendered the volatile alkali caustic, in order to examine what
change it suffered in the operation, and obtained an exceedingly
volatile and acrid spirit, which neither effervesced with acids, nor
altered in the least the transparency of lime-water; and, altho' very
strong, was lighter than water, and floated upon it like spirit of wine.

I next inquired into the truth of the fifth proposition, in the
following manner.

Two drams of epsom-salt were dissolved in a small quantity of water, and
thrown into two ounces of the caustic-ley; the mixture instantly became
thick, like a decoction of starch or barley, by the magnesia, which was
precipitated. I then added spirit of vitriol by degrees, until the
mixture became perfectly clear, or the whole of the magnesia was again
dissolved; which happened without any effervescence or emission of air.

Half an ounce of chalk was dissolved in spirit of salt, the quantity of
which was so adjusted, that the mixture was not acid in the least
degree; and the solution was thrown into twelve ounces of the caustic
ley; which quantity I found, by experiment, to be sufficient for
precipitating almost the whole of the chalk. I now filtrated this turbid
liquor, and laid the powder remaining in the paper upon a chalk-stone,
in order to draw as much of the water from it as possible, and thereby
reduce it to the form of a more dense and heavy powder, that it might
subside the more perfectly in the following part of the experiment. I
then mixed it with about twenty ounces of pure water in a flask, and,
after allowing the powder to subside, poured off the water, which had
all the qualities of lime-water. And I successively converted eight
waters more into lime-water, seven of these in the same quantity, and
with the same management, as the first. The eighth was likeways in the
same quantity; but I allowed it to remain with the chalk, and shook it
frequently, for two days. This, after being filtrated, formed a cream or
crust upon its surface when exposed to the air; changed the colour of
the juice of violets into green; separated an orange-coloured powder
from a solution of corrosive sublimate; became turbid upon the addition
of an alkali; was entirely sweetened by magnesia; and appeared so
