time we can organize a truly effective underground."

"Toppinhout is a girls' college."

"So?"

"I've never taught anthropology before."

"You've never been married before, either," she pointed out, "but I
predict you'll be a success at both."

"Married?" Long popped his head up.

       *       *       *       *       *

She smiled at him in the rear-view mirror. "Get your head down before
you get it blown off. Yes, I said married. I'm not trusting that
pug-ugly, beautiful mug of yours out of my sight from now on. And I'm
afraid Tom will shoot you himself if you don't make it conventional.
Tom's old-fashioned."

"But--I couldn't support you on--"

"A full professor's salary? Don't be foolish. Besides, I'm retiring from
my agency. Selling out. That'll set us up housekeeping."

That such a prosaic term as "set us up housekeeping" should send molten
lava racing through his veins, did not seem strange to Dr. Hubert Long.
How could a man successfully keep his mind on dying when at last a work
of art like Julie seemed within his reach? He knew that his plans were
irrevocably changed.

       *       *       *       *       *

Emily Bogarth turned to the phone speaker as her assistant made the
circuit and signalled to her.

"On the Hubert Long mission--" the speaker said. "Mission accomplished
from this end. I trust you have a likely story for the press?"

"Never mind that. Did it come off as planned?"

"Precisely. Your marksmen were quite effective."

Emily Bogarth sighed. "Sorry to sacrifice you, honey, but the other way
is just too messy."

"Don't mention it. This chap has a very interesting mind. He's a
challenge--in more ways than one. By the way, get word to Senator Stone,
will you? Have him fly down to his winter home at once. He'll be needed.
Some Party members, too."

"Of course. That's all set up. Good luck!"

"Thanks, but you can put your mind at rest. Dr. Hubert Long is
positively liquidated."

       *       *       *       *       *

Julie stepped from the phone booth and paid the service attendant for
the gasoline. He looked at her as he dropped the change into her hand
and wondered who the lucky chap in the back seat might be. A man would
sell his soul for the right kind of a look from those green eyes.


THE END




Transcriber's Note:

    This etext was produced from _Amazing Science Fiction Stories_
    October 1958. Extensive research did not uncover any evidence that
    the U.S. copyright on this publication was renewed. Minor spelling
    and typographical errors have been corrected without note.





End of Project Gutenberg's The Deadly Daughters, by Winston K. Marks

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE DEADLY DAUGHTERS ***

***** This file should be named 24965.txt or 24965.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/2/4/9/6/24965/
