Delegate was an exploded ruin.

The news flashed with lightning speed over the world, and Jerry Bridges'
eyewitness accounts of the incredible event was syndicated throughout
the nation. But his sudden celebrity left him vaguely unsatisfied.

He tried to explain his feeling to Greta on his first night back in
Washington. They were in his apartment, and it was the first time Greta
had consented to pay him the visit.

"Well, what's _bothering_ you?" Greta pouted. "You've had the biggest
story of the year under your byline. I should think you'd be tickled
pink."

"It's not that," Jerry said moodily. "But ever since I heard the
Delegate speak, something's been nagging me."

"But don't you think he's done good? Don't you think they'll be
impressed by what he said?"

"I'm not worried about that. I think that damn robot did more for
peace than anything that's ever come along in this cockeyed world. But
still ..."

Greta snuggled up to him on the sofa. "You worry too much. Don't you
ever think of anything else? You should learn to relax. It can be fun."

She started to prove it to him, and Jerry responded the way a normal,
healthy male usually does. But in the middle of an embrace, he cried
out:

"Wait a minute!"

"What's the matter?"

"I just thought of something! Now where the hell did I put my old
notebooks?"

He got up from the sofa and went scurrying to a closet. From a debris of
cardboard boxes, he found a worn old leather brief case, and cackled
with delight when he found the yellowed notebooks inside.

"What _are_ they?" Greta said.

"My old school notebooks. Greta, you'll have to excuse me. But there's
something I've got to do, right away!"

"That's all right with me," Greta said haughtily. "I know when I'm not
wanted."

She took her hat and coat from the hall closet, gave him one last chance
to change his mind, and then left.

Five minutes later, Jerry Bridges was calling the airlines.

       *       *       *       *       *

It had been eleven years since Jerry had walked across the campus of
Clifton University, heading for the ivy-choked main building. It was
remarkable how little had changed, but the students seemed incredibly
young. He was winded by the time he asked the pretty girl at the desk
where Professor Martin Coltz could be located.

"Professor Coltz?" She stuck a pencil to her mouth. "Well, I guess he'd
be in the Holland Laboratory about now."

"Holland Laboratory? What's that?"

"Oh, I guess that was after your time, wasn't it?"

Jerry felt decrepit, but managed to say: "It must be something new since
I was here. Where is this place?"

He followed her directions, and located a fresh-painted building three
hundred yards from the men's dorm. He met a student at the door, who
told him that Professor Coltz would be found in the physics department.

The room was empty when Jerry entered, except for the single stooped
figure vigorously erasing a blackboard. He turned when the door opened.
If the students looked younger, Professor Coltz was far older than Jerry
remembered. He was a tall man, with an unruly confusion of straight gray
hair. He blinked when Jerry said:

"Hello, Professor. Do you remember me? Jerry Bridges?"

"Of course! I thought of you only yesterday, when I saw your name in the
papers--"

They sat at facing student desks, and chatted about old times. But Jerry
was impatient to get to the point of his visit, and he blurted out:

"Professor Coltz, something's been bothering me. It bothered me from the
moment I heard the Delegate speak. I didn't know what it was until last
night, when I dug out my old college notebooks. Thank God I kept them."

Coltz's eyes were suddenly hooded.

"What do you mean, Jerry?"

"There was something about the Robot's speech that sounded familiar--I
could have sworn I'd heard some of the words before. I couldn't prove
anything until I checked my old notes, and here's what I found."

He dug into his coat pocket and produced a sheet of paper. He unfolded
it and read aloud.

"'It's my belief that peace is the responsibility of individuals, of
nations, and someday, even of worlds ...' Sound familiar, Professor?"
