inadequate ships set out for unannounced goals to homestead new worlds
for man. Some of these survived, and many were being discovered even
at this late date. But so far none had any difficulty in proving their
human origin.

The Lani, conceivably, could have been descendants of one of these
groups, which probably explained the extreme care the Brotherhood
courts had taken with their case. But they had failed the test, and
were declared animals. Yet it was possible that they had mutated beyond
genetic compatibility. If they had, and if it were proved, here was a
test case that could rock the galaxy--that could shake the Brotherhood
to its very foundations--that could force a re-evaluation of the
criteria of humanity.

Kennon grinned. He was a fine employee. Here he was, less than a full
day on the job, dreaming how he could ruin his employer, shake the
foundation of human civilization, and force ten thousand billion humans
to change their comfortable habit patterns and their belief in the
unchangeable sameness of men. He was, he reflected wryly, an incurable
romantic.



CHAPTER VIII

"Wake up, Doctor, it's six A.M." A pleasant voice cut through Kennon's
slumber. He opened one eye and looked at the room. For a moment the
strange surroundings bothered him, then memory took over. He stirred
uncomfortably, looking for the owner of the voice.

"You have your morning calls at seven, and there's a full day ahead,"
the voice went on. "I'm sorry, sir, but you should get up." The voice
didn't sound particularly sorry.

It was behind him, Kennon decided. He rolled over with a groan of
protest and looked at his tormentor. A gasp of dismay left his lips,
for standing beside the bed, a half smile on her pointed face, was
Copper--looking fresh and alert and as disturbing as ever.

It wasn't right, Kennon thought bitterly, to be awakened from a sound
sleep by a naked humanoid who looked too human for comfort. "What are
you doing here?" he demanded.

"I'm supposed to be here," Copper said. "I'm your secretary." She
grinned and flexed a few curves of her torso.

Kennon was silent.

"Is there anything wrong?" she asked.

For a moment Kennon was tempted to tell her what was wrong--but he held
his tongue. She probably wouldn't understand. But there was one thing
he'd better settle right now. "Now look here, young lady--" he began.

"I'm not a lady," Copper interrupted before he could continue. "Ladies
are human. I'm a Lani."

"All right," Kennon growled. "Lani or human, who cares? But do you have
to break into a man's bedroom and wake him in the middle of the night?"

"I didn't break in," she said, "and it isn't the middle of the night.
It's morning."

"All right--so it's morning and you didn't break in. Then how in
Halstead's sacred name did you get here?"


"I sleep next door," she said jerking a thumb in the direction of an
open door in the side wall. "I've been there ever since you dismissed me
last night," she explained.

The explanation left Kennon cold. The old cliche about doing as the
Santosians do flicked through his mind. Well, perhaps he would in
time--but not yet. The habits of a lifetime couldn't be overturned
overnight. "Now you have awakened me," he said, "perhaps you'll get out
of here."

"Why?"

"I want to get dressed."

"I'll help you."

"You will not! I'm perfectly capable of taking care of myself. I've been
dressing myself for years. I'm not used to people helping me."

"My--what a strange world you must come from. Haven't you ever had a
Lani before?"

"No."

"You poor man." Her voice was curiously pitying. "No one to make you
feel like the gods. No one to serve you. No one to even scrub your
back."

"That's enough," Kennon said. "I can scrub my own back."

"How?--you can't reach it."

Kennon groaned.

"Weren't there any Lani on your world?"

"No."

"No wonder you left it. It must be quite primitive."

"Primitive!" Kennon's voice was outraged. "Beta has one of the highest
civilizations in the Brotherhood!"

"But you don't have Lani," she said patiently. "So you must be
primitive."

"Halstead, Fleming, and Ochsner!" Kennon swore. "Do you believe that?"

"Naturally, isn't it obvious? You can't possibly be civilized unless you
take responsibility for intelligent life other than your own race.
Until you face up to your responsibilities you are merely a member of a
dominant race, not a civilized one."

Kennon's reply caught in his throat. His eyes widened as he looked at
her, and what he was about to say remained unspoken. "Out of the mouths
of humanoids--" he muttered oddly.

"What does that mean?" Copper asked.

"Forget it," Kennon said wildly. "Leave me alone. Go put on some
clothes. You embarrass me."

"I'll go," Copper said, "but you'll have to be embarrassed. Only
household Lani wear cloth." She frowned, two vertical furrows dividing
her dark brows. "I've never understood why inhouse Lani have to be
disfigured that way, but I suppose there's some reason for it. Men
seldom do anything without a reason."

Kennon shook his head. Either she was grossly ignorant, which he
doubted, or she was conditioned to the eyeballs.

The latter was more probable. But even that was doubtful. Her trenchant
remark about civilization wasn't the product of a conditioned mind. But
why was he worrying about her attitudes? They weren't important--she
wasn't even human. He shook his head. That was a sophistry. The fact
that she wasn't human had nothing to do with the importance of her
attitude. "I suppose there is a reason," he agreed. "But I don't know
it. I haven't been here long enough to know anything about such things."

She nodded. "That does make a difference," she admitted. "Many new
men are bothered at first by the fact that we Lani are naked, but they
adjust quickly. So will you." She smiled as she turned away. "You see,"
she added over her shoulder as she left the room, "we're not human.
We're just another of your domestic animals."

Was there laughter in her voice? Kennon wasn't sure. His sigh was
composed of equal parts of relief and exasperation as he slipped out of
bed and began to dress. He'd forgo the shower this morning. He had no
desire for Copper to appear and offer to scrub his back. In his present
state of mind he couldn't take it. Possibly he'd get used to it in time.
Perhaps he might even like it. But right now he wasn't acclimatized.

* * *

"Man Blalok called," Copper said as she removed the breakfast dishes.
"He said that he'd be right over to pick you up. He wants to show you
the operation." "When did he call?"

"About ten minutes ago. I told him that you were at breakfast. He said
he'd wait." She disappeared in the direction of the kitchen.

"There's a nightmare quality to this," Kennon muttered as he slipped his
arms into the sleeves of his tunic and closed the seam tabs. "I have
the feeling that I'm going to wake up any minute." He looked at his
reflection in the dresser mirror, and his reflection looked worriedly
back. "This whole thing has an air of plausible unreality: the
advertisement, the contract, this impossible island that raises
humanoids as part of the livestock." He shrugged and his mirrored image
shrugged back. "But it's real, all right. No dream could possibly be
this detailed. I wonder how I'm going to take it for the next five
years? Probably not too well," he mused silently. "Already I'm talking
to myself. Without even trying, that Lani Copper can make me feel like a
Sarkian." He nodded at his image.

The Sarkian analogy was almost perfect, he decided. For on that grimly
backward world females were as close to slaves as the Brotherhood would
permit; raised from birth under an iron regimen designed to produce
complaisant mates for the dominant males. Probably that was the reason
Sark was so backward. The men, having achieved domestic tranquillity,
had no desire to do anything that would disturb the status quo. And
since no Sarkian woman under any conceivable circumstances would annoy
her lordly master with demands to produce better mousetraps, household
gadgetry, and more money, the technological development of Sark had come
to a virtual standstill. It took two sexes to develop a civilization.

Kennon shrugged. Worlds developed as they did because people were as
they were, and while passing judgment was still a major human pursuit,
no native of one world had a right to force his customs down the
unwilling throat of another. It would be better to accept his present
situation and live with it rather than trying to impose his Betan
conception of morality upon Lani that neither understood nor appreciated
it. His business was to treat and prevent animal disease. What happened
to the animals before infection or after recovery was none of his
affair. That was a matter between Alexander and his conscience.

Blalok was waiting for him, sitting behind the wheel of a square boxy
vehicle that squatted with an air of unpolished efficiency on the
graveled drive behind his house. He smiled a quick greeting as Kennon
approached. "It's about time you showed up," he said. "You'll have to
get into the habit of rising early on this place. We do most of our work
early in the morning and late in the afternoon. During the day it's too
hot to breathe, let alone work. Well, let's get going. There's still
time to visit the outer stations."

Kennon climbed in and Blalok started the vehicle. "I thought we'd take a
jeep today," he said. "They aren't very pretty, but they get around." He
turned onto the surfaced road that ran down the hill toward the hospital
and the complex of red-roofed buildings clustered about it. "About those
flukes," he said. "You have any plans to get rid of them?"

"Not yet. I'll have to look the place over. There's more detective work
than medicine involved in this."

"Detective work?"

"Sure--we know the criminal, but to squelch him we have to learn his
hangouts, study his modus operandi, and learn how to make his victims
secure from his activities. Unless we do that, we can treat individuals
from now to infinity and all we'll have is more cases. We have to apply
modern criminology tactics--eliminate the source of crime--stop up the
soft spots. In other words, kill the flukes before they enter the Lani."

"Old Doc never said anything about this," Blalok said.

"Probably he never knew about it. I was looking over the herd books last
night, and I saw nothing about trematodes, or anything that looked like
a parasite pattern until the last few months."

"Why not?"

"My guess is that he was one of the first deaths."

"You mean this thing attacks human beings?"

"Preferentially," Kennon said. "It's strange, too, because it originated
on Santos so far as we know. In fact, some people think that the Varl
bred it for a weapon to use against us before we conquered them. They
could have done it. Their biological science was of a high enough
order."

"But how did it get here?"

"I wouldn't know--unless you've hired a Santosian or someone else who
was affected."

"We did have a man from Santos. Fellow called Joe Kryla. We had to let
him go because he was a nudist. It made a bad impression on the Lani.
But that was over a year ago."

"That's about the right time to build up a good reservoir of infection.
The fatal cases usually don't show up before an area is pretty well
seeded."

"That's not so good."

"Well, there's one thing in our favor. The Lani are pretty well
concentrated into groups. And so far there doesn't seem to be any
infestation outside of Hillside Station--except for two deaths in Lani
recently sent from there. If we quarantine those stations and work fast,
may be we can stop this before it spreads all over the island."

"That's fine, but what are you going to do now?"

"Treat those that show symptoms. There should be some Trematox capsules
at the hospital. If there aren't we'll get them. We'll take the
sick ones back to the hospital area and push therapy and supportive
treatment. Now that we know the cause, we shouldn't have any more death
losses."

"Old Doc didn't treat at the hospital," Blalok said.

"I'm not Old Doc."

"But it's going to mess up our operations. We're using the ward
buildings to finish training the Lani scheduled for market."

"Why?"

"It's convenient. Most of the ward space is filled right now." Blalok
said. There was a touch of disgust in his voice.

"They're well, aren't they?" Kennon demanded.

"Of course."

"Then get them out of there."

"But I told you-"

"You told me nothing. The hospital area is needed for something more
than a training center. Perhaps Old Doc was trained in outcall work, but
I'm not. I work from a hospital. The only things I do on outcalls are
diagnoses, vaccinations, and emergencies. The rest of the patients come
to the hospital."

"This isn't going to set well with Jordan and the division chiefs."

"That's not my concern," Kennon said. "I run my business in the best way
possible. The patients are of more concern than the personal comfort of
any straw boss or administrator. You're the administrator--you calm them
down."

"You have the authority," Blalok admitted. "But my advice to you is to
go slow."

"I can't," Kennon said. "Not if we want to prevent any more losses.
There simply won't be time to run all over the island dosing with
Trematox and taking temperatures, and while that sort of thing is
routine, it should be supervised. Besides, you'll see the advantages of
this method. Soon enough."

"I hope so," Blalok said as he braked the jeep to a stop in front of the
hospital. "I suppose you'll want to take some things along."

"So I will," Kennon said. "I'll be back in a minute." Kennon slid from
the seat, leaving Blalok looking peculiarly at his departing back.

The minute stretched to nearly ten before Kennon returned followed by
two Lani carrying bags which they loaded into the back of the jeep.
"I had to reorganize a little," Kennon apologized, "some things were
unfamiliar."

"Plan on taking them?" Blalok said, jerking a thumb at the two Lani.

"Not this time. I'm having them fit up an ambulance. They should be busy
most of the day."

Blalok grunted and started the turbine. He moved a lever and the jeep
floated off the ground.

"An airboat too," Kennon remarked. "I wondered why this rig was so
boxy."

"It's a multipurpose vehicle," Blalok said. "We need them around here
for fast transport. Most of the roads aren't so good." He engaged the
drive and the jeep began to move. "We'll go cross country," he said.
"Hillside's pretty far out--the farthest station since we abandoned
Olympus."

The air began whistling past the boxlike body of the jeep as Blalok
increased the power to the drive and set the machine on automatic.
"We'll get a pretty good cross-section of our operations on this trip,"
he said over the whine of the turbine. "Look down there."

They were passing across a series of fenced pastures and Kennon was
impressed. The size of this operation was beginning to sink in. It
hadn't looked so big from the substratosphere in Alexander's ship, but
down here close to the ground it was enormous. Fields of grain, wide
orchards, extensive gardens. Once they were forced to detour a huge
supply boat that rose heavily in front of them. Working in the fields
were dozens of brown-skinned Lani who paused to look up and wave as
the jeep sped by. Occasional clusters of farm buildings and the low
barrackslike stations appeared and disappeared behind them.

"There's about twenty Lani at each of these stations," Blalok said,
"They work the farm area under the direction of the stationmaster."

"He's a farmer?"

"Of course. Usually he's a graduate of an agricultural school, but we
have a few who are descendants of the crew of the first Alexander, and
there's one old codger who was actually with him during the conquest.
Most of our stationmasters are family men. We feel that a wife and
children add to a man's stability--and incidentally keep him from
fooling around with the Lani."

A series of fenced pastures containing hundreds of huge grayish-white
quadrupeds slipped past.

"Cattle?" Kennon asked.

"Yes--Earth strain. That's why they're so big. We also have sheep and
swine, but you won't see them on this run."

"Any native animals?"

"A few--and some which are native to other worlds. But they're
luxury-trade items. The big sale items are beef, pork, and mutton."
Blalok chuckled. "Did you think that the Lani were our principal
export?"


Kennon nodded.

"They're only a drop in the bucket. Agriculture--Earth-style
agriculture--is our main source of income. The Lani are valuable
principally to keep down the cost of overhead. Virtually all of them
work right here on the island. We don't sell more than a hundred a year
less than five per cent of our total. And those are surplus--too light
or too delicate for farm work."

"Where do you find a market for all this produce?" Kennon asked.

"There's two hundred million people here, and quite a few billion more
in space-train range. We can produce more cheaply than any competitor,
and we can undersell any competition, even full automation." Blalok
chuckled. "There are some things that a computer can't do as well as
a human being, and one of them is farm the foods on which humanity is
accustomed to feed. A man'll pay two credits for a steak. He could get a
Chlorella substitute for half a credit, but he'll still buy the steak
if he can afford it. Same thing goes for fruit, vegetables, grain, and
garden truck. Man's eating habits have only changed from necessity.
