Who was up there in that suite? Houston wasn't quite sure. He had
narrowed his list of suspects down to three men: John Sager, Loris
Pederson, and Norcross Lasser, three top officials in the company. Sager
and Pederson were both vice-presidents of the firm; Sager was in charge
of the Foreign Exports department, while Pederson handled the actual
shipping. Lasser, by virtue of being the grandson of the man who had
founded the firm, was president of Lasser & Sons, Inc.

Lasser seemed like a poor choice as chief villain of the outfit; he was
a mild, bland man, quiet and friendly. Besides, his position made him
an obvious suspect; naturally, the majority stockholder of the firm
would profit most by the increased power of the company. And, equally
obviously, a Controller wouldn't want to put himself in such an exposed
position.

Which made Lasser, in Houston's mind, a hell of a good suspect. If
anything happened, Lasser could cover by claiming that he, too, had been
controlled, and the chances were that he could get away with it. A
Controller never did anything directly; their dirty work was done by
someone else--a puppet under their mental control. At least, so ran the
popular misconception. If Lasser were the man, he stood a good chance of
getting away with it, even if he were caught, provided he played his
cards right.

       *       *       *       *       *

That reasoning still didn't eliminate Sager or Pederson. Either of them
could be the Controller. And there still remained the possibility that
some unknown, unsuspected fourth person had the company of Lasser & Sons
under his thumb.

That was what Houston intended to find out tonight.

He took a sip of his coffee, found it still reasonably hot.

Damn the megalomaniacs, anyway! Houston subconsciously tightened his
fists. He, personally, had more to fear from the Normals than from
another Controller. Normals could kill or imprison him, while a
Controller would have a hard time doing either, directly.

But Houston could understand the Normal man; he could see how fear of a
Controller could drive a man without the ability into a frenzied panic.
He could understand, even forgive their actions, born and bred in
ignorance and fear.

No, the ones he hated were the ones who had conceived and fostered that
fear--the psychologically unstable megalomaniac Controllers. There were
only a handful of them--probably not more than a few hundred or a
thousand. But because of them, every telepath on Earth found his life in
danger, and every Normal found his life a hell of terror.

Let Dorrine and her do-nothing friends run around the globe recruiting
members for their precious Group; that was all right for them.
Meanwhile, David Houston would be doing something on a more basic action
level.

He glanced at his watch. Almost time.

"How's the deployment?" he whispered in his throat.

"We've got the building surrounded now," said the voice in his ear. "You
can go in anytime."

"How about the roof?"

"That's taken care of, sir; we've got 'copter that can be on the top of
the Lasser Building at any time you call. They can land within thirty
seconds of your signal."

"Okay," Houston said; "I'm going in now. Remember--no matter what I say
or do, no one is to leave that building if they're conscious. And keep
your eyes on me; if I act in the least peculiar, handcuff me--but don't
knock me out.

"And if I'm not back on time, come in anyway."

"Right."

       *       *       *       *       *

Houston finished his coffee, dropped a coin on the counter, and headed
for the other side of the street.

The big problem was getting into the building itself. It was ringed with
alarms; Lasser & Sons didn't want just anybody wandering in and out of
their building.

So Houston had arranged a roundabout way. The building next to the
Lasser Building was a good deal smaller, only forty-five stories high. A
week before, Houston had rented an office on the eighteenth floor of
the building; on the door, he had already had a sign engraved: Ajax
Enterprises.

It was a shame the office would never be used.

Houston walked straight to the next-door building and opened the front
door with his key. Inside, a night watchman lounged behind a desk,
smoking a blackened briar. He looked up, smiled, and nodded.

"Evening, Mr. Griswold; working late tonight?"

Houston forced a smile he did not feel. "Just doing a little paper
work," he said.

He took the automatic elevator to the eighteenth floor. He didn't relish
the idea of walking up to the roof, but taking the elevator would make
the nightwatchman suspicious.

He didn't bother going to the office; he headed directly for the
stairway and began his long climb--twenty-seven floors to the roof.

All through it, he kept up a running comment through his throat mike. "I
wish I weighed about fifty pounds less; carrying two hundred and twenty
pounds of blubber up these stairs isn't easy."

"Blubber, hooey!" the earphone interrupted. "Any man who's
six-feet-three has a right to carry that much weight. Actually, you're
a skinny-looking sort of goop."

Both men were exaggerating; Houston wasn't fat, but his broad, powerful
frame couldn't be called skinny, either.

When he finally reached the roof, he paused and surveyed the wall of the
Lasser Building, which towered high above him, spearing an additional
thirty stories in the air. Up there, the lights on the sixtieth floor
gleamed in the night.

The air was growing cooler, and the beginnings of a mist were forming.
Houston hoped it wouldn't start to rain before he got inside.

       *       *       *       *       *

The forty-sixth floor of the Lasser Building had no windows on this
side, but there were plenty on the forty-seventh.

Leading up to them was an inviting looking fire escape, but Houston knew
he didn't dare take that. By law, every fire escape was rigged with a
fire alarm, in addition to the regular burglar alarm. He'd have to use
another way.

The Lasser Building was a steel structure, shelled over with a bright
blue anodized aluminum sheath. Only the day before, Houston, wearing the
gray coverall of a power-line workman, had checked the wall to find the
big steel beams beneath the aluminum. He had also installed certain
other equipment; now he was going to make use of it.

Concealed in the louvres of the air-conditioner intake of the lower
building was a specially constructed suit and several hundred feet of
power line which was connected to the main line of the building.

In the darkness, Houston slipped on the suit. It was constructed
somewhat like a light diving suit or a spacesuit, but without the
helmet. In the toes, knees, and hands, were powerful electromagnets
controlled by switches in the fingers of the gloves and powered by the
current in the long line.

Houston stepped over to the blue aluminum wall, reached out a hand, and
lowered one finger. Instantly, the powerful magnet anchored his hand to
the wall, held by the dense magnetic field to the steel beam beneath the
aluminum sheath. That one magnet alone could support his full body
weight, and he had six magnets to work with.

Slowly, carefully, David Houston began to crawl up the wall.

Turn on a magnet in the right hand; lift up the left hand and anchor it
higher; turn on the right hand and lift it even with the left, then
anchor it again; do the same with both legs; then begin the process all
over again, turning the magnets off and on in rotation.

Up and up he went. Past the forty-sixth floor, past the forty-seventh,
the forty-eighth, and the forty-ninth. Not until he reached the fiftieth
floor did he attempt to open one of the windows.

There was a magnetic lock inside the window, but Houston had taken that,
too, into account. The powerful magnet in his right glove slid it aside
easily. Houston lifted the window and stepped inside.

He had ten more floors to go.

He took off the suit and rolled it up into a tight package, then dropped
it out the window. It landed with a barely audible thump. Houston took a
deep breath, drew his stun gun, and headed for the stairway.

       *       *       *       *       *

On the landing of the sixtieth floor of the Lasser Building, David
Houston paused for a moment.

"Sounds like you're out of breath," said the voice in his ear.

"You try climbing all that way sometime," Houston whispered. "I'm no
superman, you know."

"Shucks," said the voice, "you've disillusioned me. What now?"

"I'm going to try to get a little information," Houston told him. "Hold
on."

On the other side of the door, he could hear faint sound, as if someone
were moving around, but he could hear no voices.

Carefully, he sent out a probing thought, trying to see if he could
attune his mind with that of someone inside without betraying himself.

He couldn't detect anything. The sixtieth floor covered a lot of space;
if whoever was inside was too far away, their thoughts would be too
faint to pick up unless Houston stepped up his own power, and he didn't
want to do that.

Cautiously, he reached out a hand and eased open the door.

The hallway was brightly lit, but there was no one in sight. The
unaccustomed light made Houston blink for a moment before his eyes
adjusted to it; the hallways and landings below had been pitch dark,
forcing him to use a penlight to find his way up.

He stepped into the hallway, closing the door behind him.

Now he could hear voices. He stopped to listen. The conversation was
coming from an office down the hall--if it could be called a
conversation.

There would be long periods of silence, then a word or two: "But not
that way." "Until tomorrow." "Vacillates."

There were three different voices.

Houston moved on down the hall, his stun gun ready. A few yards from the
door, he stopped again, and, very gently, he sent out another
thought-probe, searching for the minds of those within, carefully
forging his way.

       *       *       *       *       *

And, at that crucial instant, a voice spoke in his ear.

"Houston! What's going on? You haven't said a thing for two full
minutes!"

"I'm all right!" Houston snapped. Only the force of long training and
habit kept him from shouting the words aloud instead of keeping them to
a subvocal whisper.

"All right or not," said the other, "we're coming in in seven minutes,
as ordered. Meanwhile, there's a news bulletin for you; the British
division has picked up another Controller--a woman named Dorrine Kent.
Two in one night ought to be a pretty good bag."

For a moment, Houston's mind was a meaningless blur.

_Dorrine!_

And then another voice broke through his shock.

"Dear me, sir! Calm yourself! You're positively fizzing!"

Houston jerked. Standing in the doorway of the office was Norcross
Lasser, with a benign smile on his face and a deadly-looking .38
automatic in his hand. Behind him stood John Sager and Loris Pederson,
their faces wary.

"Please drop that stun gun, Mr. Cop."

       *       *       *       *       *

In those few moments, Houston had regained control of himself. He
realized what had happened. The interruption of his thought-probe had
startled him just a little, but that little had been enough to warn the
Controller.

He wondered which of the three men was the actual Controller.

He began to lower his weapon, then, suddenly, with all the force and
hatred he could muster, he sent a blistering, shocking thought toward
the man with the gun.

Lasser staggered as though he'd been struck. His gun wavered, and
Houston fired quickly with his stun gun. At the same time, Lasser's
automatic went off.

The bullet went wild, and the stun beam didn't do much better. It struck
Lasser's hand, paralyzing it, but it didn't knock out Lasser.

The mental battle that ensued only took a half second, but at the speed
