for food and clothing. This apartment was assigned to her on graduation
from the State School, in which she had been placed as an infant, and it
remained hers so long as she lived, regardless of whether she occupied
it or not. At the conclusion of her various "marriages" she would return
there, pending her endeavors to make a new match. Naturally, as her
years increased, her returns became more frequent and her stay of longer
duration, until finally, abandoning hope of making another match, she
finished out her days there, usually in drunkenness and whatever other
forms of cheap dissipation she could afford on her dole, starving
herself.

Men also received the same State pension, sufficient for the necessities
but not for the luxuries of life. They got it only as an old-age
pension, and on application.

       *       *       *       *       *

When boys graduated from the State School they generally were "adopted"
by their fathers and taken into the latter's households, where they
enjoyed luxuries far in excess of their own earning power. It was not
that their fathers wasted any affection on them, for as I have explained
before, the Hans were so morally atrophied and scientifically developed
that love and affection, as we Americans knew them, were unexperienced
or suppressed emotions with them. They were replaced by lust and pride
of possession. So long as it pleased a father's vanity, and he did not
miss the cost, he would keep a son with him, but no longer.

Young men, of course, started to work at the minimum wage, which was
somewhat higher than the pension. There was work for everybody in
positions of minor responsibility, but very little hard work.

Upon receiving his appointment from one or another of the big
corporations which handled the production and distribution of the vast
community (the shares of which were pooled and held by the
government--that is, by San-Lan himself--in trust for all the workers,
according to their positions) he would be assigned to an
apartment-office, or an apartment adjoining the group of offices in
which he was to have his desk. Most of the work was done in single
apartment-offices.

The young man, for instance, might recline at his ease in his apartment
near the top of the city, and for three or four hours a day inspect,
through his viewplate and certain specially installed apparatus, the
output of a certain process in one of the vast automatically controlled
food factories buried far underground beneath the base of the mountain,
where the moan of its whirring and throbbing machinery would not disturb
the peace and quiet of the citizens on the mountain top. Or he might be
required simply to watch the operation of an account machine in an
automatic store.

There is no denying that the economic system of the Hans was marvelous.
A suit of clothes, for instance, might be delivered in a man's apartment
without a human hand having ever touched it.

Having decided that he wished a suit of a given general style, he would
simply tune in a visual broadcast of the display of various selections,
and when he had made his choice, dial the number of the item and press
the order button. Simultaneously the charge would be automatically made
against his account number, and credited as a sale on the automatic
records of that particular factory in the account house. And his account
plate, hidden behind a little wall door, would register his new credit
balance. An automatically packaged suit that had been made to style and
size-standard by automatic machinery from synthetically produced
material, would slip into the delivery chute, magnetically addressed,
and in anywhere from a few seconds to thirty minutes or so, according to
the volume of business in the chutes, and drop into the delivery basket
in his room.

       *       *       *       *       *

Daily his wages were credited to his account, and monthly his share of
the dividends likewise (according to his position) from the Imperial
Investment Trust, after deduction of taxes (through the automatic
bookkeeping machines) for the support of the city's pensioners and
whatever sum San-Lan himself had chosen to deduct for personal expenses
and gratuities.

A man could not bequeath his ownership interest in industry to his son,
for that interest ceased with his death, but his credit accumulation, on
which interest was paid, was credited to his eldest recorded son as a
matter of law.

Since many of these credit fortunes (The Hans had abandoned gold as a
financial basis centuries before) were so big that they drew interest in
excess of the utmost luxury costs of a single individual, there was a
class of idle rich consisting of eldest sons, passing on these credit
fortunes from generation to generation. But younger sons and women had
no share in these fortunes, except by the whims and favor of the
"Man-Dins" (Mandarins), as these inheritors were known.

These Man-Dins formed a distinct class of the population, and numbered
about five percent of it. It was distinct from the Ku-Li (coolie) or
common people, and from the "Ki-Ling" or aristocracy composed of those
more energetic men (at least mentally more energetic) who were the
active or retired executive heads of the various industrial,
educational, military or political administrations.

A man might, if he so chose, transfer part of his credit to a woman
favorite, which then remained hers for life or until she used it up, and
of course, the prime object of most women, whether as wives, or
favorites, was to beguile a settlement of this sort out of some wealthy
man.

When successful in this, and upon reassuming her freedom, a woman ranked
socially and economically with the Man-Dins. But on her death, whatever
remained of her credit was transferred to the Imperial fund.

When one considers that the Hans, from the days of their exodus from
Mongolia and their conquest of America, had never held any ideal of
monogamy, and the fact that marriage was but a temporary formality which
could be terminated on official notice by either party, and that after
all it gave a woman no real rights or prerogatives that could not be
terminated at the whim of her husband, and established her as nothing
but the favorite of his harem, if he had an income large enough to keep
one, or the most definitely acknowledged of his favorites if he hadn't,
it is easy to see that no such thing as a real family life existed among
them.

Free women roamed the corridors of the city, pathetically importuning
marriage, and wives spent most of the time they were not under their
husbands' watchful eyes in flirtatious attempts to provide themselves
with better prospects for their next marriages.

       *       *       *       *       *

Naturally the biggest problem of the community was that of stimulating
the birth rate. The system of special credits to mothers had begun
centuries before, but had not been very efficacious until women had been
deprived of all other earning power, and even at the time of which I
write it was only partially successful, in spite of the heavy bounties
for children. It was difficult to make the bounties sufficiently
attractive to lure the women from their more remunerative light
flirtations. Eugenic standards also were a handicap.

As a matter of fact, San-Lan had under consideration a revolutionary
change in economic and moral standards, when the revolt of the forest
men upset his delicately laid plans, for, as he had explained to me, it
was no easy thing to upset the customs of centuries in what he was
pleased to call the "morals" of his race.

He had another reason too. The physically active men of the community
were beginning to acquire a rather dangerous domination. These included
men in the army, in the airships, and in those relatively few civilian
activities in which machines could not do the routine work and
thinking. Already common soldiers and air crews demanded and received
higher remuneration than all except the highest of the Ki-Ling, the
industrial and scientific leaders, while mechanics and repairmen who
could, and would, work hard physically, commanded higher incomes than
Princes of the Blood, and though constituting only a fraction of one per
cent of the population they actually dominated the city. San-Lan dared
take no important step in the development of the industrial and military
system without consulting their council or Yun-Yun (Union), as it was
known.

Socially the Han cities were in a chaotic condition at this time,
between morals that were not morals, families that were not families,
marriages that were not marriages, children who knew no homes, work that
was not work, eugenics that didn't work; Ku-Lis who envied the richer
classes but were too lazy to reach out for the rewards freely offered
for individual initiative; the intellectually active and physically lazy
Ki-Lings who despised their lethargy; the Man-Din drones who regarded
both classes with supercilious toleration; the Princes of the Blood,
arrogant in their assumption of a heritage from a Heaven in which they
did not believe; and finally the three castes of the army, air and
industrial repair services, equally arrogant and with more reason in
their consciousness of physical power.

       *       *       *       *       *

The army exercised a cruelly careless and impartial police power over
all classes, including the airmen, when the latter were in port. But it
did not dare to touch the repair men, who, so far as I could ever make
out, roamed the corridors of the city at will during their hours off
duty, wreaking their wills on whomever they met, without let or
hindrance.

Even a Prince of the Blood would withdraw into a side corridor with his
escort of a score of men, to let one of these labor "kings" pass, rather
than risk an altercation which might result in trouble for the
government with the Yun-Yun, regardless of the rights and wrongs of the
case, unless a heavy credit transference was made from the balance of
the Prince to that of the worker. For the machinery of the city could
not continue in operation a fortnight, before some accident requiring
delicate repair work would put it partially out of commission. And the
Yun-Yun was quick to resent anything it could construe as a slight on
one of its members.

In the last analysis it was these Yun-Yun men, numerically the smallest
of the classes, who ruled the Han civilization, because for all
practical purposes they controlled the machinery on which that
civilization depended for its existence.

Politically, San-Lan could balance the organizations of the army and the
air fleets against each other, but he could not break the grip of the
repairmen on the machinery of the cities and the power broadcast plants.




CHAPTER XI

The Forest Men Attack


Many times during the months I remained prisoner among the Hans I had
tried to develop a plan of escape, but could conceive of nothing which
seemed to have any reasonable chance of success.

While I was allowed almost complete freedom within the confines of the
city, and sometimes was permitted to visit even the military outposts
and disintegrator ray batteries in the surrounding mountains, I was
never without a guard of at least five men under the command of an
officer. These men were picked soldiers, and they were armed with
powerful though short-range disintegrator-ray pistols, capable of
annihilating anything within a hundred feet. Their vigilance never
relaxed. The officer on duty kept constantly at my side, or a couple of
paces behind me, while certain of the others were under strict orders
never to approach within my reach, nor to get more than forty feet away
from me. The thought occurred to me once to seize the officer at my side
and use him as a shield, until I found that the guard were under orders
to destroy both of us in such a case.

So in this fashion I roamed the city corridors, wherever I wished. I
visited the great factories at the bottom of the shafts that led to the
base of the mountain, where, unattended by any mechanics, great turbines
whirred and moaned, giant pistons plunged back and forth, and immense
systems of chemical vats, piping and converters, automatically performed
their functions with the assistance of no human hand, but under the
minute television inspection of many perfumed dandies reclining at their
ease before viewplates in their apartment offices in the city, that
clung to the mountain peak far above.

There were just two restrictions on my freedom of movement. I was
allowed nowhere near the power-broadcasting station on the peak, nor the
complement of it which was buried three miles below the base of the
mountain. And I was never allowed to approach within a hundred feet of
any disintegrator ray machine when I visited the military outposts in
the surrounding mountains.

I first noticed the "escape tunnels" one day when I had descended to the
lowest level of all, the location of the Electronic Plant, where
machines, known as "reverse disintegrators," fed with earth and crushed
rock by automatic conveyors, subjected this material to the
disintegrator ray, held the released electrons captive within their
magnetic fields and slowly refashioned them into supplies of metals and
other desired elements.

My attention was attracted to the tunnels by the unusual fact that men
were busily entering and leaving them. Almost the entire repair force
seemed to be concentrated here. Stocky, muscular men they were, with the
same modified Oriental countenances as the rest of the Hans, but with a
certain ruggedness about them that was lacking in the rest of the
indolent population. They sweated as they labored over the construction
of magnetic cars evidently designed to travel down these tunnels,
automatically laying pipe lines for ventilation and temperature control.
The tunnels themselves appeared to have been driven with disintegrator
rays, which could bore rapidly through the solid rock, forming glassy
iridescent walls as they bored, and involving no problem of debris
removal.

       *       *       *       *       *

I asked San-Lan about it the next time I saw him, for the officer of my
guard would give me no information.

The supreme ruler of the Hans smiled mockingly.

"There is no reason why you should not know their purpose," he said,
"for you will never be able to stop our use of them. These tunnels
constitute the road to a new Han era. Your forest men have turned our
cities into traps, but they have not trapped our minds and our powers
over Nature. We are masters still; masters of the world, and of the
forest men.

"You have revolutionized the tactics of warfare with your explosive
rockets and your strategy of fighting from concealed positions, miles
away, where we cannot find you with our beams. You have driven our ships
from the air, and you may destroy our cities. But we shall be gone.

"Down these tunnels we shall depart to our new cities, deep under
ground, and scattered far and wide through the mountains. They are
nearly completed now.

"You will never blast us out of these, even with your most powerful
explosives, because they will be more difficult for you to find than it
is for us to locate a forest gunner somewhere beneath his leafy screen
of miles of trees, and because they will be too far underground."

"But," I objected, "man cannot live and flourish like a mole continually
removed from the light of day, without the health-giving rays of the
sun, which man needs."

"No?" San-Lan jeered. "Wild tribesmen might not be able to, but we are a
civilization. We shall make our own sunlight to order in the bowels of
the earth. If necessary, we can manufacture our air synthetically; not
the germ-laden air of Nature, but absolutely pure air. Our underground
cities will be heated or refrigerated artificially as conditions may
require. Why should we not live underground if we desire? We produce all
our needs synthetically.

"Nor will you be able to locate our cities with electronic indicators.

"You see, Rogers, I know what is in your mind. Our scientists have
planned carefully. All our machinery and processes will be shielded so
that no electronic disturbances will exist at the surface.

"And then, from our underground cities we will emerge at leisure to wage
merciless war on your wild men of the forest, until we have at last done
what our forefathers should have done, exterminated them to the last
beast."

       *       *       *       *       *

He thrust his jeering face close to mine. "Have you any answer to that?"
he demanded.

My impulse was to plant my fist in his face, for I could think of no
other answer. But I controlled myself, and even forced a hearty laugh,
to irritate him.

"It is a fine plan," I admitted, "but you will not have time to carry it
through. Long before you can complete your new cities you will have been
destroyed."

"They will be completed within the week," he replied triumphantly. "We
have not been asleep, and our mechanical and scientific resources make
us masters of time as well as the earth. You shall see."

Naturally I was worried. I would have given much if I could have passed
this information on to our chiefs.

But two days later a mighty exultation arose within me, when from far to
the east and also to the south there came the rolling and continuous
thunder of rocket fire. I was in my own apartment at the time. The Han
captain of my guard was with me, as usual, and two guards stood just
within the door. The others were in the corridor outside. And as soon as
I heard it, I questioned my jailer with a look. He nodded assent, and I
did what probably every disengaged person in Lo-Tan did at the same
moment, tuned in on the local broadcast of the Military Headquarters
View and Control Room.

It was as though the side wall of my apartment had dissolved, and we
looked into a large room or office which had no walls or ceiling, these
being replaced by the interior surface of a hemisphere, which was in
fact a vast viewplate on which those in the room could see in every
direction. Some 200 staff officers had their desks in this room. Each
desk was equipped with a system of small viewplates of its own, and each
officer was responsible for a given directional section of the "map,"
and busied himself with teleprojectoscope examination of it, quite
independently of the general view thrown on the dome plate.

At a raised circular desk in the center, which was composed entirely of
viewplates, sat the Executive Marshal, scanning the hemisphere, calling
occasionally for telescopic views of one section or another on his desk
plates, and noting the little pale green signal lights that flashed up
as Sector Observers called for his attention.

       *       *       *       *       *

Members of Strategy Board, Base Commanders of military units, and
San-Lan himself, I understood, sat at similar desks in their private
offices, on which all these views were duplicated, and in constant
verbal and visual communication with one another and with the Executive
Marshal.

The particular view which appeared on my own wall fortunately showed the
east side of the dome viewplate and in one corner of my picture appeared
the Executive Marshal himself.

Although I was getting a viewplate picture of a viewplate picture, I
could see the broad, rugged valley to the east plainly, and the
relatively low ridge beyond, which must have been some thirty miles
away.

It was beyond this, evidently far beyond it, that the scene of the
action was located, for nothing showed on the plate but a misty haze
permeated by indefinite and continuous pulsations of light, and against
which the low mountain ridge stood out in bold relief.

Somewhere on the floor of the Observation room, of course, was a Sector
Observer who was looking beyond that ridge, probably through a
projectoscope station in the second or third "circle," located perhaps
on that ridge or beyond it.

At the very moment I was wishing for his facilities the Executive
Marshal leaned over to a microphone and gave an order in a low tone.
The hemispherical view dissolved, and another took its place, from the
