
"Where is he now?"

"At my place, sleeping it off, I guess."

"Without his oxy-mask?"

"Oh, I gave him my oxidation pills for the mask."

The First shook his head. "That sounds like the kind of trick Parkinson
would pull, all right. I'll have to write it up and turn you both in to
the authorities when we hit Earth." He eyed Clayton. "What's your name?"

"Cartwright. Sam Cartwright," Clayton said without batting an eye.

"Volunteer or convicted colonist?"

"Volunteer."

The First looked at him for a long moment, disbelief in his eyes.

It didn't matter. Volunteer or convict, there was no place Clayton could
go. From the officer's viewpoint, he was as safely imprisoned in the
spaceship as he would be on Mars or a prison on Earth.

       *       *       *       *       *

The First wrote in the log book, and then said: "Well, we're one man
short in the kitchen. You wanted to take Parkinson's place; brother,
you've got it--without pay." He paused for a moment.

"You know, of course," he said judiciously, "that you'll be shipped back
to Mars immediately. And you'll have to work out your passage both
ways--it will be deducted from your pay."

Clayton nodded. "I know."

"I don't know what else will happen. If there's a conviction, you may
lose your volunteer status on Mars. And there may be fines taken out of
your pay, too.

"Well, that's all, Cartwright. You can report to Kissman in the
kitchen."

The First pressed a button on his desk and spoke into the intercom. "Who
was on duty at the airlock when the crew came aboard last night? Send
him up. I want to talk to him."

Then the quartermaster officer led Clayton out the door and took him to
the kitchen.

The ship's driver tubes were pushing it along at a steady five hundred
centimeters per second squared acceleration, pushing her steadily closer
to Earth with a little more than half a gravity of drive.

       *       *       *       *       *

There wasn't much for Clayton to do, really. He helped to select the
foods that went into the automatics, and he cleaned them out after each
meal was cooked. Once every day, he had to partially dismantle them for
a really thorough going-over.

And all the time, he was thinking.

Parkinson must be dead; he knew that. That meant the Chamber. And even
if he wasn't, they'd send Clayton back to Mars. Luckily, there was no
way for either planet to communicate with the ship; it was hard enough
to keep a beam trained on a planet without trying to hit such a
comparatively small thing as a ship.

But they would know about it on Earth by now. They would pick him up the
instant the ship landed. And the best he could hope for was a return to
Mars.

No, by God! He wouldn't go back to that frozen mud-ball! He'd stay on
Earth, where it was warm and comfortable and a man could live where he
was meant to live. Where there was plenty of air to breathe and plenty
of water to drink. Where the beer tasted like beer and not like slop.
Earth. Good green hills, the like of which exists nowhere else.

Slowly, over the days, he evolved a plan. He watched and waited and
checked each little detail to make sure nothing would go wrong. It
_couldn't_ go wrong. He didn't want to die, and he didn't want to go
back to Mars.

Nobody on the ship liked him; they couldn't appreciate his position. He
hadn't done anything to them, but they just didn't like him. He didn't
know why; he'd _tried_ to get along with them. Well, if they didn't like
him, the hell with them.

If things worked out the way he figured, they'd be damned sorry.

He was very clever about the whole plan. When turn-over came, he
pretended to get violently spacesick. That gave him an opportunity to
steal a bottle of chloral hydrate from the medic's locker.

And, while he worked in the kitchen, he spent a great deal of time
sharpening a big carving knife.

Once, during his off time, he managed to disable one of the ship's two
lifeboats. He was saving the other for himself.

The ship was eight hours out from Earth and still decelerating when
Clayton pulled his getaway.

       *       *       *       *       *

It was surprisingly easy. He was supposed to be asleep when he sneaked
down to the drive compartment with the knife. He pushed open the door,
looked in, and grinned like an ape.

The Engineer and the two jetmen were out cold from the chloral hydrate
in the coffee from the kitchen.

Moving rapidly, he went to the spares locker and began methodically to
smash every replacement part for the drivers. Then he took three of the
signal bombs from the emergency kit, set them for five minutes, and
placed them around the driver circuits.

He looked at the three sleeping men. What if they woke up before the
