
          16. Why must all the food we eat be changed?

          17. Why do you need food?

          18. Why do people who are not growing need food?

          19. What does alcohol do to the gastric juice? to
          the stomach?

          20. What is the use of the saliva?

          21. How does the habit of spitting injure a
          person?

          22. How does tobacco affect the teeth? the mouth?

          23. How does the tobacco-user annoy other people?

FOOTNOTE:

[Footnote C: The food is partly prepared by the liver and some other
organs.]




CHAPTER XI.

WHAT DOES THE BODY NEED FOR FOOD?


[Illustration: N]OW that you know how the body is fed, you must next
learn what to feed it with; and what each part needs to make it grow and
to keep it strong and well.


WATER.

A large part of your body is made of water. So you need, of course, to
drink water, and to have it used in preparing your food.

Water comes from the clouds, and is stored up in cisterns or in springs
in the ground. From these pipes are laid to lead the water to our
houses.

Sometimes, men dig down until they reach a spring, and so make a well
from which they can pump the water, or dip it out with a bucket.

Water that has been standing in lead pipes, may have some of the lead
mixed with it. Such water would be very likely to poison you, if you
drank it.

Impurities are almost sure to soak into a well if it is near a drain or
a stable.

If you drink the water from such a well, you may be made very sick by
it. It is better to go thirsty, until you can get good water.

A sufficient quantity of pure water to drink is just as important for
us, as good food to eat.

We could not drink all the water that our bodies need. We take a large
part of it in our food, in fruits and vegetables, and even in beefsteak
and bread.


LIME.

Bones need lime. You remember the bone that was nothing but crumbling
lime after it had been in the fire.

Where shall we get lime for our bones?

We can not eat lime; but the grass and the grains take it out of the
earth. Then the cows eat the grass and turn it into milk, and in the
milk we drink, we get some of the lime to feed our bones.

[Illustration: _Lime being prepared for our use._]

In the same way, the grain growing in the field takes up lime and other
things that we need, but could not eat for ourselves. The lime that thus
becomes a part of the grain, we get in our bread, oat-meal porridge, and
other foods.


SALT.

Animals need salt, as children who live in the country know very well.
They have seen how eagerly the cows and the sheep lick up the salt that
the farmer gives them.

Even wild cattle and buffaloes seek out places where there are salt
springs, and go in great herds to get the salt.

We, too, need some salt mixed with our food. If we did not put it in,
either when cooking, or afterward, we should still get a little in the
food itself.


FLESH-MAKING FOODS.

Muscles are lean meat, that is flesh; so muscles need flesh-making
foods. These are milk, and grains like wheat, corn and oats; also, meat
and eggs. Most of these foods really come to us out of the ground. Meat
and eggs are made from the grain, grass, and other vegetables that the
cattle and hens eat.


FAT-MAKING FOODS.

We need cushions and wrappings of fat, here and there in our bodies, to
keep us warm and make us comfortable. So we must have certain kinds of
food that will make fat.

[Illustration: _Esquimaux catching walrus._]

There are right places and wrong places for fat, as well as for other
things in this world. When alcohol puts fat into the muscles, that is
fat badly made, and in the wrong place.

The good fat made for the parts of the body which need it, comes from
fat-making foods.

In cold weather, we need more fatty food than we do in summer, just as
in cold countries people need such food all the time.

The Esquimaux, who live in the lands of snow and ice, catch a great many
walrus and seal, and eat a great deal of fat meat. You would not be well
unless you ate some fat or butter or oil.


WHAT WILL MAKE FAT?

Sugar will make fat, and so will starch, cream, rice, butter, and fat
meat. As milk will make muscle and fat and bones, it is the best kind of
food. Here, again, it is the earth that sends us our food. Fat meat
comes from animals well fed on grain and grass; sugar, from sugar-cane,
maple-trees, or beets; oil, from olive-trees; butter, from cream; and
starch, from potatoes, and from corn, rice, and other grains.

Green apples and other unripe fruits are not yet ready to be eaten. The
starch which we take for food has to be changed into sugar, before it
can mix with the blood and help feed the body. As the sun ripens fruit,
it changes its starch to sugar. You can tell this by the difference in
the taste of ripe and unripe apples.


CANDY.

Most children like candy so well, that they are in danger of eating more
sugar than is good for them. You would starve if fed only on sugar.

We would not need to be quite so much afraid of a little candy if it
were not for the poison with which it is often colored.

Even what is called pure, white candy is sometimes not really such.
There is a simple way by which you can find this out for yourselves.

If you put a spoonful of sugar into a tumbler of water, it will all
dissolve and disappear. Put a piece of white candy into a tumbler of
water; and, if it is made of pure sugar only, it will dissolve and
disappear.

If it is not, you will find at the bottom of the tumbler some white
earth. This is not good food for anybody. Candy-makers often put it
into candy in place of sugar, because it is cheaper than sugar.


REVIEW QUESTIONS.

          1. Why do we need food?

          2. How do people get water to drink?

          3. Why is it not safe to drink water that has been
          standing in lead pipes?

          4. Why is the water of a well that is near a drain
          or a stable, not fit to drink?

          5. What food do the bones need?

          6. How do we get lime for our bones?

          7. What is said about salt?

          8. What food do the muscles need?

          9. Name some flesh-making foods.

          10. Why do we need fat in our bodies?

          11. What is said of the fat made by alcohol?

          12. What kinds of food will make good fat?

          13. What do the Esquimaux eat?

          14. How does the sun change unripe fruits?

          15. Why is colored candy often poisonous?

          16. What is sometimes put into white candy? Why?

          17. How could you show this?




CHAPTER XII.

HOW FOOD BECOMES PART OF THE BODY.


[Illustration: H]ERE, at last, is the bill of fare for our dinner:

          Roast beef,
          Potatoes,
          Tomatoes,
          Squash,
          Bread,
          Butter,
          Salt,
          Water,
          Peaches,
          Bananas,
          Oranges,
          Grapes.

What must be done first, with the different kinds of food that are to
make up this dinner?

The meat, vegetables, and bread must be cooked. Cooking prepares them to
be easily worked upon by the mouth and stomach. If they were not cooked,
this work would be very hard. Instead of going on quietly and without
letting us know any thing about it, there would be pains and aches in
the overworked stomach.

The fruit is not cooked by a fire; but we might almost say the sun had
cooked it, for the sun has ripened and sweetened it.

When you are older, some of you may have charge of the cooking in your
homes. You must then remember that food well cooked is worth twice as
much as food poorly cooked.

"A good cook has more to do with the health of the family, than a good
doctor."


THE SALIVA.

Next to the cooking comes the eating.

As soon as we begin to chew our food, a juice in the mouth, called
saliva (sa l[=i]'va), moistens and mixes with it.

Saliva has the wonderful power of turning starch into sugar; and the
starch in our food needs to be turned into sugar, before it can be taken
into the blood.

You can prove for yourselves that saliva can turn starch into sugar.
Chew slowly a piece of dry cracker. The cracker is made mostly of
starch, because wheat is full of starch. At first, the cracker is dry
and tasteless. Soon, however, you find it tastes sweet; the saliva is
changing the starch into sugar.

All your food should be eaten slowly and chewed well, so that the saliva
may be able to mix with it. Otherwise, the starch may not be changed;
and if one part of your body neglects its work, another part will have
more than its share to do. That is hardly fair.

If you swallow your food in a hurry and do not let the saliva do its
work, the stomach will have extra work. But it will find it hard to do
more than its own part, and, perhaps, will complain.

It can not speak in words; but will by aching, and that is almost as
plain as words.


SWALLOWING.

Next to the chewing, comes the swallowing. Is there any thing wonderful
about that?

We have two passages leading down our throats. One is to the lungs, for
breathing; the other, to the stomach, for swallowing.

Do you wonder why the food does not sometimes go down the wrong way?

The windpipe leading to the lungs is in front of the other tube. It has
at its top a little trap-door. This opens when we breathe and shuts when
we swallow, so that the food slips over it safely into the passage
behind, which leads to the stomach.

If you try to speak while you have food in your mouth, this little door
has to open, and some bit of food may slip in. The windpipe will not
pass it to the lungs, but tries to force it back. Then we say the food
chokes us. If the windpipe can not succeed in forcing back the food, the
person will die.


HOW THE FOOD IS CARRIED THROUGH THE BODY.

But we will suppose that the food of our dinner has gone safely down
into the stomach. There the stomach works it over, and mixes in gastric
juice, until it is all a gray fluid.

Now it is ready to go into the intestines,--a long, coiled tube which
leads out of the stomach,--from which the prepared food is taken into
the blood.

The blood carries it to the heart. The heart pumps it out with the blood
into the lungs, and then all through the body, to make bone, and muscle,
and skin, and hair, and eyes, and brain.

Besides feeding all these parts, this dinner can help to mend any parts
that may be broken.

Suppose a boy should break one of the bones of his arm, how could it be
mended?

If you should bind together the two parts of a broken stick and leave
them a while, do you think they would grow together?

No, indeed!

But the doctor could carefully bind together the ends of the broken bone
in the boy's arm and leave it for awhile, and the blood would bring it
bone food every day, until it had grown together again.

So a dinner can both make and mend the different parts of the body.


REVIEW QUESTIONS.

          1. What shall we have for dinner?

          2. What is the first thing to do to our food?

          3. Why do we cook meat and vegetables?

          4. Why do not ripe fruits need cooking?

          5. What is said about a good cook?
