"Tell him about your women," Beth added.

I noticed the affectionate regard she also seemed to have for Miela; and I
noticed, too, that there was in her face that vague look of sorrow that
was in her father's.

The habitable world of Mercury, Miela then went on to tell me, was divided
into three zones--light, twilight and darkness. There was no direct
sunlight in the Light Country--only a diffused daylight like the light on
our earth when the sky is clouded over. The people of the Light Country,
Miela's people, were the most civilized and the ruling race.

In the twilight zone around them, grading back to the Dark Country,
various other peoples dwelt, and occasionally warred with their neighbors
for possession of land in the light.

In the center of the Light Country, directly underneath the sun--that is,
where the sun, would always appear near the zenith--was the Fire Country.
Here, owing to violent storms, the atmospheric envelope of the planet was
frequently disturbed sufficiently to allow passage for the sun's direct
rays. Then would ensue in that locality, for a limited time, a heat so
intense as to destroy life. This Fire Country was practically uninhabited.

"You see, Bob," Alan interrupted, "the dark part of Mercury--that is the
side that continually faces away from the sun--is also practically
uninhabited. Only strange animals and savages live there. And the twilight
zones, and the ring of Light Country, with the exception of its center,
are too densely populated. This has caused an immense amount of trouble.
The Twilight People are an inferior race. They have tried to mix with
those of the Light Country. It doesn't work. There's been trouble for
generations; trouble over the women, for one thing. Anyhow, the Twilight
People have been kept out as much as possible. Now this fellow Tao--"

"Let Miela explain about the women first," Beth interjected.

Then Miela went on to tell me that only the females of Mercury had
wings--given them by the Creator as a protection against the pursuit of
the male. At marriage, to insure submission to the will of her husband, a
woman's wings were clipped. For more than a generation now there had been
a growing rebellion on the part of the women against this practice. In
this movement Miela's mother, Lua, was a leader. To overcome this
masculine desire for physical superiority and dominance which he had had
for centuries seemed practically impossible. Yet, Miela said, the leaders
of the women now felt that some progress was being made in changing public
sentiment, although so far not a single man had been found who would take
for mate a woman with wings unclipped.

This was partly from personal pride and partly because the laws of the
country made such a union illegal, its parties moral outlaws, its children
illegitimate, and thus not entitled to the government benefits bestowed
upon all offspring of legitimate parentage. It was this man-made law the
women were fighting, and of recent years fighting more and more
militantly.

This was the situation when Tao suddenly projected himself into public
affairs as the leader of a new movement. Tao had paid court to Miela
without success. He was active in the fight against the woman movement--a
brilliant orator, crafty, unscrupulous, a good leader. Leadership was to
him purely a matter of personal gain. He felt no deep, sincere interest in
any public movement for any other reason.

Interplanetary communication had become of latter years a possibility;
science had invented and perfected the means. So far these vehicles had
only been used for short trips to the outer edge of the atmosphere of
Mercury--trips that were giving scientific men much valuable knowledge of
atmospheric conditions, and which it was thought would ultimately enable
them to counteract the storms and make the Fire Country habitable. No
trips into space had been made.

Tao now came forward with the proposition to undertake a new world
conquest--a conquest of Venus or the earth. These planets recently had
been observed from the vehicles. This, he said, would solve the land
question, which, after all, was more serious than the clipping of women's
wings.

He found many followers--adventurers, principally, to whom the
possibilities for untold personal gain in such a conquest appealed. Then
abruptly the women took part. Dropping for the time their own fight, they
opposed Tao vigorously. If Venus or the earth were inhabited, as it was
thought they were, such an expedition would be a war against humanity. It
would result in the needless destruction of human life.

In this controversy the government of the Light Country remained neutral.
But the women finally won, and Tao and his followers, a number of them men
of science, were all banished by the government, under pressure of popular
sentiment, into the Twilight Country.

Here Tao's project fell upon fertile soil. The Twilight People had every
reason to undertake such a conquest; and Tao became their leader in
preparing for it. These preparations were known in the Light Country. The
government made no effort to prevent them. It was, indeed, rather glad of
the possibility of being rid of its disturbing neighbors.

Only the women were concerned, but they alone could do nothing, since by
principle they were as much opposed to offensive warfare against the
Twilight People as against the possible inhabitants of the earth. Miela
paused at this point in her narrative. The thing was getting clearer to me
now, but I could not reconcile this feeble attempt to conquer the earth
which we were then fighting in Wyoming with the picture she drew. I said
so.

"She hasn't come to that," Alan broke in. "You see, Bob, Tao, with about a
hundred followers, was banished to the Twilight Country a couple of years
ago. There was plenty of brains in the party, scientific men and such.
They had only one vehicle, but they have been at work ever since building
a lot of others.

"This expedition of Tao to Wyoming--with only about a hundred of the
Twilight People with him--is not intended to be an offensive operation at
all. He's only looking the situation over, finding out what they're up
against. They decided before they started that the light-ray would protect
them from anything on earth, and they have only come to look around.

"Right now up there"--Alan leaned forward earnestly, and in the moonlight
I could see the flush on his handsome face--"right now up there in the
Twilight Country of Mercury they're working their damnedest over all kinds
of preparations. This Wyoming business this summer does not mean a thing
Tao will quit it any minute. You'll see. Some morning we'll wake up and
find them gone. Probably they'll destroy their apparatus, and not bother
to take it back.

"And then, in a year or two, they'll be here again. Not one vehicle next
time, but a hundred. They'll land all over the earth at once, not on a
desert--Tao probably only picked that this time to avoid
complications--but in our big cities, New York, Paris, London, all of them
at once. That's what we've got to face.

"If Tao comes back as he plans, we have not got a chance. That's why Miela
stole this little vehicle and, without it being publicly known in Mercury,
came here to warn us. That's what she was after, to help us, risked her
life to warn us people of another world."

Alan stopped abruptly, and, dropping to the floor of the porch beside
Miela, laid his arm across her lap, looking up into her face as though she
were a goddess. She stroked his hair tenderly, and I could see her eyes
were wet with tears.

There was a moment's silence. I could not have known what Professor
Newland and Beth were thinking, but a moment later I understood.

Then I realized the sorrow that was oppressing them both.

"What can be done?" I asked finally.

Alan jumped to his feet. He began pacing up and down the porch before us;
evidently he was laboring under a great nervous excitement.

"There's nothing to be done," he said--"nothing at all--here on earth. We
have not got a chance. It's up there the thing has got to be fought
out--up there on Mercury--to keep them from returning."

Alan paused again. When he resumed his voice was pitched lower, but was
very tense.

"I'm going there, Bob--with Miela."

I heard Professor Newland's sharply indrawn breath, and saw Beth's dear
face suddenly whiten.

"I'm going there to fight it out with them. I may come back; I may not.
But if I am successful, _they_ never will--which is all that matters.

"Miela's mother gave her up to come down here and help us. It is a little
thing to go back there to help us, also. If I can help her people with
their own problems, so much the better."

He pulled Miela to her feet beside him and put his arm protectingly about
her shoulders.

"And Miela is going back to her world as my wife--her body
unmutilated--the first married woman in Mercury with wings as God gave
them to her!"



CHAPTER XI.


TO SAVE THE WORLD.


Two days later Alan and Miela were quietly married in Bay Head. She still
wore the long cloak, and no one could have suspected she was other than a
beautiful stranger in the little community. When we got back home Alan
immediately made her take off the cloak. He wanted us to admire her
wings--to note their long, soft red feathers as she extended them, the
symbol and the tangible evidence of her freedom from male dominance.

She was as sweet about it all as she could be, blushing, as though to
expose the wings, now that she was married, were immodest. And by the way
she regarded Alan, by the gentleness and love in her eyes, I could see she
would never be above the guidance, the dominance, of one man, at least.

The day before their marriage Alan had taken me up the bayou to see the
little silver car in which Miela had come. I was intensely curious to
learn the workings of this strange vehicle. As soon as we were inside I
demanded that Alan explain it all to me in detail.

He smiled.

"That's the remarkable part of it, Bob," he answered. "Miela herself
didn't thoroughly understand either the basic principle or the mechanism
itself when she started down here."

"Good Lord! And she ventured--"

"Tao was already on the point of leaving when she conceived the idea. He
had already made one trip almost to the edge of the earth's atmosphere,
you know, and now was ready to start again."

"That first trip was last November," I said. "Tell me about that. What
were those first light-meteors for?"

"As far as I can gather from what Miela says," Alan answered, "Tao wanted
to make perfectly sure the light-ray would act in our atmosphere. He
came--there were several vehicles they had ready even then--without other
apparatus than those meteors, as we called them. Those he dropped to earth
with the light-ray stored in them. They did discharge it properly--they
seemed effective. The thing was merely a test. Tao was satisfied, and went
back to arrange for this second preliminary venture in which he is engaged
now."

"I understand," I said. "Go on about Miela."

"Well, she and her mother went before the Scientific Society, she calls
it--the men who own and control these vehicles in the Light Country. They
called it suicide. No one could be found to come with her. Lua, her
mother, wanted to, but Miela would not let her take the risk, saying she
was needed more there in her own world.

"As a matter of fact, the thing, while difficult perhaps to understand in
principle, in operation works very simply. Miela knew that, and merely
asked them to show her how to operate it practically. This they did. She
spent two days with them--she learns things rather easily, you know--and
then she was ready."

I waited in amazement.

"For practical purposes all she had to understand was the operation of
these keys. The pressure of the light-ray in these coils"--he was standing
beside a row of wire coils which in the semidarkness I had not noticed
before--"is controlled by the key-switches." He indicated the latter as he
spoke. "They send a current to the outer metal plates of the car which
makes them repel or attract other masses of matter, as desired.

"All that Miela had to understand then was how to operate these keys so as
to keep the base of the vehicle headed toward the earth. They took her to
the outer edge of the atmosphere of Mercury over the Dark Country and
showed her the earth. They have used terrestrial telescopes for
generations, and since the invention of this vehicle telescopes for
celestial observation have been greatly improved.

"All Miela had to do was keep the air in here purified. That is a simple
chemical operation. By using this attractive and repellent force she
allowed the earth's gravity and the repelling power of the sun and Mercury
to drive her here."

He paused.

"But, doesn't she--don't you understand the thing in detail?" I asked
finally.

"I think father and I understand it now better than she does," he
answered. "We have studied it out here and questioned her as closely as
possible. We understand its workings pretty thoroughly. But the exact
nature of the light-ray we do not understand, any more than we understand
electricity. Nor do we understand this metallic substance which when
charged with the current becomes attractive or repellent in varying
degrees."

"Yes," I said. "That I can appreciate."

"Father has a theory about the light-ray," he went on, "which seems rather
reasonable from what we can gather from Miela. The thing seems more like
electricity than anything else, and father thinks now that it is generated
by dynamos on Mercury, similar to those we use here for electricity."

"Along that line," I said, "can you explain why this light-ray, which will
immediately set anything on fire that is combustible, and which acts
through metal, like those artillery shells, for instance, does not seem to
raise the temperature of the ground it strikes to any extent?"

"Because, like electricity, it is dissipated the instant it strikes the
ground. The earth is an inexhaustible storehouse and receptacle for such a
force. That is why the broken country around the Shoshone River protected
Garland and Mantua from its direct rays."

"Tell me about the details of this mechanism," I said, reverting to our
original subject. "You say you understand its workings pretty thoroughly
now."

"Yes, I do," he admitted, "and so does father. But I cannot go into it now
with you. You see," he added hastily, as though he feared to hurt my
feelings, "the scientific men of Mercury--some of them--objected to
Miela's coming, on the ground that the inhabitants of the earth, obtaining
from her a knowledge that would enable them to voyage through space, might
take advantage of that knowledge to undertake an invasion of Mercury.

"As a matter of fact, that was a remote possibility. I could explain to
you all I know about this mechanism without much danger of your ever being
able to build such a car. But Miela promised them that she would use all
possible precautions, in the event of her having any choice in the matter,
to prevent the earth people learning anything about it.

"Father and I have examined everything here closely. But no one else
has--and I am sure Miela would prefer no one else did. You understand,
Bob?"

I did understand; and of course I had to be satisfied with that.

"It seems to me," I said when, later in the day, we were discussing
affairs in Wyoming, "that with things in Mercury as we now know they are,
it would help the situation tremendously if Tao and these Twilight People
with him were prevented from ever returning."

"That's my idea exactly," Professor Newland agreed.

I could see by the look on his face he was holding on to this thought as a
possibility that might make Alan's plan unnecessary.

"I've thought about it constantly," the professor said, "ever since these
facts first came to us through Miela. It would be important. With his
expedition here a total failure, I think we might assume that nothing more
would be done up there in attempting to conquer the earth. I've tried to
make Alan see that we should give the authorities all the information we
have. It might help--something might be accomplished--"

"Nothing would, father," Alan interrupted. "There wouldn't be time. And
even if this expedition of Tao's were destroyed, I don't see why that's
any guarantee another attempt would not be made. Miela doesn't, either,
and she ought to know.

"Besides, don't you see, Bob"--he turned to me earnestly--"I can't have
the eyes of the world turned on Miela and her affairs? Why, think of
it--this little woman sent to Washington, questioned, photographed,
written about, made sport of, perhaps, in the newspapers! And all for
nothing. It is unthinkable."

"You may be right, my boy," said the professor sadly. "I am giving in to
you, but I still--"

"The thing has come to me," said Alan. "A duty--a responsibility put
squarely up to me. I've accepted it. I'll do my best all the way."

A week after Alan and Miela were married the report came that the
Mercutians had suddenly departed, abandoning, after partly destroying,
their apparatus. The world for a few days was in trepidation, fearing a
report that they had landed somewhere else, but no such report came.

Three days later Alan and Miela followed them into space.

Professor Newland, Beth and I went up the bayou with them that morning
they left. We were a solemn little party, none of us seemingly wishing to
voice the thoughts that possessed us all.

Professor Newland never spoke once during the trip. When the moment of
final parting came he kissed Miela quietly, and, pressing Alan's hand,
said simply: "Good luck, my boy. We appreciate what you are doing for us.
Come back, some day, if you can."

Then he faced about abruptly and trudged back to the launch alone, as
pathetic a figure as I have ever seen. We all exchanged our last good-bys,
little Beth in tears clinging to Alan, and then kissing Miela and making
her promise some day to come back with Alan when he had accomplished his
mission.

Then they entered the vehicle. Its heavy door closed. A moment later it
rose silently--slowly at first, then with increasing velocity until we
could see it only as a little speck in the air above us. And then it was
gone.



CHAPTER XII.


THE LANDING ON MERCURY.


_(Narrative continued by Alan Newland.)_


With hardly more than a perceptible tremor our strange vehicle came to
rest upon the surface of Mercury. For a moment Miela and I stood regarding
each other silently. Then she left her station at the levers of the
mechanism and placed her hands gently on my shoulders. "You are welcome,
my husband, here to my world."

I kissed her glowing, earnest face. We had reached our journey's end. My
work was about to begin--upon my own efforts now depended the salvation of
that great world I had left behind. What difficulties, what dangers, would
I have to face, here among the people of this strange planet? I thrilled
with awe at the thought of it; and I prayed God then to hold me firm and
steadfast to my purpose.

Miela must have divined my thoughts, for she said simply: "You will have
great power here, Alan; and it is in my heart that you will succeed."

We slid back one of the heavy metallic curtains and looked out through the
thick glass of the window. It was daylight--a diffused daylight like that
of a cloudy midday on my own earth. An utterly barren waste met my gaze.
We seemed to have landed in a narrow valley. Huge cliffs rose on both
sides to a height of a thousand feet or more.

These cliffs, as well as the floor of the valley itself, shone with a
brilliant glare, even in the half light of the sunless day. They were not
covered with soil, but seemed rather to be almost entirely metallic,
copper in color. The whole visible landscape was devoid of any sign of
vegetation, nor was there a single living thing in sight.

I shuddered at the inhospitable bleakness of it.

"Where are we, Miela?"

