forthright, inspiring champions of the _status quo_.

_The scientists?_

But the scientists were a part of the government, and the government
was a one-party system, and the system supported the nation and the
nation supported the scientists. Of course, there were still private
laboratories subsidized for industrial purposes, but the men who
worked in them seemed singularly disinterested in social problems. In
a way, Harry could understand their position. It isn't likely that a
dedicated scientist, a man whose specialized research has won him a
Nobel Prize for creating a new detergent, will be worldly enough to
face unpleasant realities beyond the walls of his antiseptic sanctum.
After all, there was precedent for such isolationism--did the sainted
Betty Crocker ever enlist in any crusades? As for physicians,
psychiatrists and mass-psychologists, they were the very ones who
formed the hard core of Leffingwell's support.

_The educators, then?_

Vocational Apt was a part of the government. And the poor pedagogues,
who had spent generations hacking their way out of the blackboard
jungles, were only too happy to welcome the notion of a coming
millennium when their small charges would be still smaller. Even
though formal schooling, for most youngsters, terminated at fourteen,
there was still the problem of overcrowding. Telescreening and
teletesting techniques were a help, but the problem was essentially a
physical one. And Leffingwell was providing a physical solution.
Besides, the educators had been themselves educated, through
Vocational Apt. And while they, and the government, fervently upheld
the principle of freedom of speech, they had to draw the line
somewhere. As everyone knows, freedom of speech does not mean freedom
to _criticize_.

_Business men?_

Perhaps there were some disgruntled souls in the commercial community,
whose secret heroes were the oil tycoons of a bygone era or the
old-time Stock Exchange clan united under the totems of the bull or
the bear. But the day of the rugged individualist was long departed;
only the flabby individualist remained. And he had the forms to fill
out and the inspectors to contend with, and the rationing to worry
about and the taxes to meet and the quotas to fulfill. But in the long
run, he managed. The business man worked for the government, but the
government also worked for him. His position was protected. And if the
government said the Leff Shots would solve the overpopulation
problem--_without_ cutting down the number of consumers--well, was
that really so bad? Why, in a generation or so there'd be even _more_
customers! That meant increased property values, too.

It took Harry several years to realize he'd never find Naturalists
organized for group action. The capacity for group action had vanished
as the size of the group increased. All interests were interdependent;
the old civic, fraternal, social and anti-social societies had no
present purpose any more. And the once-familiar rallying-points--whether
they represented idealistic humanitarianism or crass self-interest--had
vanished in the crowd. Patriotism, racialism, unionism, had all been
lost in a moiling megalopolitanism.

There were protests, of course. The mothers objected, some of them. Ag
Culture, in particular, ran into difficulties with women who revived
the quaint custom of "going on strike" against the Leff Law and
refused to take their shots. But it was all on the individual level,
and quickly coped with. Government medical authorities met the women
at checkup time and demonstrated that the Leff Law had teeth in it.
Teeth, and scalpels. The rebellious women were not subdued, slain, or
segregated--they were merely sterilized. Perhaps more would have come
of this if their men had backed them up; but the men, by and large,
were realists. Having a kid was a headache these days. This new
business of injections wasn't so bad, when you came right down to it.
There'd still be youngsters around, and you'd get the same allotment
for extra living space--only the way it worked out, there'd be more
room and the kids would eat less. Pretty good deal. And it wasn't as
if the young ones were harmed. Some of them seemed to be a lot smarter
than ordinary--like on some of the big quizshows, youngsters of eight
and nine were winning all those big prizes. Bright little ones. Of
course, these must be the ones raised in the first special school the
government had set up. They said old Leffingwell, the guy who invented
the shots, was running it himself. Sort of experimenting to see how
this new crop of kids would make out....

It was when Harry learned about the school that he knew what he must
do.

And if nobody else would help him, he'd act on his own. There might
not be any help from organized society, but he still had disorganized
society to turn to.

       *       *       *       *       *

He spent the next two years and the last of his money finding a way.
The pattern of criminality had changed, too, and it was no easy matter
to find the assistance he needed. About the only group crime still
flourishing was hijacking; it took him a long while to locate a small
under-cover outfit which operated around St. Louie and arrange to
obtain a helicopter and pilot. Getting hold of the rifle was still
more difficult, but he managed. And by the time everything was
assembled, he'd found out what he needed to know about Dr. Leffingwell
and his school.

As he'd suspected, the school was located in the old canyon, right in
the same buildings which had once served as experimental units. How
many youngsters were there, Harry didn't know. Maybe Manschoff was
still on the staff, and maybe they'd brought in a whole new staff.
These things didn't matter. What mattered was that Leffingwell was on
the premises. And a man who knew his way about, a man who worked alone
and to a single purpose, could reach him.

Thus it was that Harry Collins crouched behind the boulder that bright
May morning and waited for Dr. Leffingwell to appear. The helicopter
had dropped him at the upper end of the canyon the day before, giving
him a chance to reconnoitre and familiarize himself with the terrain
once again. He'd located Leffingwell's quarters, even seen the man
through one of the lower windows. Harry had no trouble recognizing
him; the face was only too familiar from a thousand 'casts viewed on a
thousand screens. Inevitably, some time today, he'd emerge from the
building. And when he did, Harry would be waiting.

He shifted behind the rocks and stretched his legs. Twelve years had
passed, and now he'd come full circle. The whole business had started
here, and here it must end. That was simple justice.

_And it is justice_, Harry told himself. _It's not revenge._ Because
there'd be no point to revenge; that was only melodramatic nonsense.
He was no Monte Cristo, come to wreak vengeance on his cruel
oppressors. And he was no madman, no victim of a monomaniacal
obsession. What he was doing was the result of lengthy and logical
consideration.

If Harry Collins, longtime fugitive from a government treatment
center, tried to take his story to the people, he'd be silenced
without a hearing. But his story must be heard. There was only one way
to arrest the attention of a nation--with the report of a rifle.

A bullet in Leffingwell's brain; that was the solution of the problem.
Overnight the assassin would become a national figure. They'd
undoubtedly try him and undoubtedly condemn him, but first he'd have
his day in court. He'd get a chance to speak out. He'd give all the
voiceless, unorganized victims of the Leff Law a reason for
rebellion--and offer them an example. If Leffingwell had to die, it
would be in a good cause. Moreover, he deserved to die. Hadn't he
killed men, women, infants, without mercy?

_But it's not revenge_, Harry repeated. _And I know what I'm doing.
Maybe I was disturbed before, but I'm sane now. Perfectly logical.
Perfectly calm. Perfectly controlled._

Yes, and now his sane, logical, calm, controlled eyes noted that the
distant door was opening, and he sighted through the 'scope and
brought his sane, logical, calm, controlled hand up along the barrel
to the trigger. He could see the two men emerging, and the shorter,
plumper of the two was Leffingwell. He squinted at the high forehead
with its receding hairline; it was a perfect target. A little squeeze
now and he knew what would happen. In his sane, logical, calm,
controlled mind he could visualize the way the black hole would appear
in the center of that forehead, while behind it would be the torn and
dripping redness flecked with gray--

"What are you doing?"

Harry whirled, staring; staring down at the infant who stood smiling
beside him. It _was_ an infant, that was obvious enough, and implicit
in the diminutive stature, the delicate limbs and the oversized head.
But infants do not wear the clothing of pre-adolescent boys, they do
not enunciate with clarity, they do not stare coolly and knowingly at
their elders. They do not say, "Why do you want to harm Dr.
Leffingwell?"

Harry gazed into the wide eyes. He couldn't speak.

"You're sick, aren't you?" the child persisted. "Let me call the
doctor. He can help you."

Harry swung the rifle around. "I'll give you just ten seconds to clear
out of here before I shoot."

The child shook his head. Then he took a step forward. "You wouldn't
hurt me," he said, gravely. "You're just sick. That's why you talk
this way."

Harry leveled the rifle. "I'm not sick," he muttered. "I know what I'm
doing. And I know all about you, too. You're one of them, aren't you?
One of the first of Leffingwell's brood of illegitimates."

The child took another step forward. "I'm not illegitimate," he said.
"I know who I am. I've seen the records. My name is Harry Collins."

Somewhere the rifle exploded, the bullet hurtling harmlessly overhead.
But Harry didn't hear it. All he could hear, exploding in his own
brain as he went down into darkness, was the sane, logical, calm,
controlled voice of his son.




7. Michael Cavendish--2027


Mike was just coming through the clump of trees when the boy began to
wave at him. He shifted the clumsy old Jeffrey .475, cursing the
weight as he quickened his pace. But there was no help for it, he had
to carry the gun himself. None of the boys were big enough.

He wondered what it had been like in the old days, when you could get
fullsized bearers. There used to be game all over the place, too, and
a white hunter was king.

And what was there left now? Nothing but pygmies, all of them,
scurrying around and beating the brush for dibatags and gerenuks. When
he was still a boy, Mike had seen the last of the big antelopes go;
the last of the wildebeestes and zebra, too. Then the carnivores
followed--the lions and the leopards. _Simba_ was dead, and just as
well. These natives would never dare to come out of the villages if
they knew any lions were left. Most of them had gone to Cape and the
other cities anyway; handling cattle was too much of a chore, except
on a government farm. Those cows looked like moving mountains
alongside the average boy.

Of course there were still some of the older generation left; Kikiyu
and even a few Watusi. But the free inoculations had begun many years
ago, and the life-cycle moved at an accelerated pace here. Natives
grew old and died at thirty; they matured at fifteen. Now, with the
shortage of game, the elders perished still more swiftly and only the
young remained outside the cities and the farm projects.

Mike smiled as he waited for the boy to come up to him. He wasn't
smiling at the boy--he was smiling at himself, for being here. He
ought to be in Cape, too, or Kenyarobi. Damned silly, this business of
being a white hunter, when there was nothing left to hunt.

But somehow he'd stayed on, since Dad died. There were a few
compensations. At least here in the forests a man could still move
about a bit, taste privacy and solitude and the strange, exotic
tropical fruit called loneliness. Even _that_ was vanishing today.

It was compensation enough, perhaps, for lugging this damned Jeffrey.
Mike tried to remember the last time he'd fired it at a living target.
A year, two years? Yes, almost two. That gorilla up in Ruwenzori
country. At least the boys swore it was _ingagi_. He hadn't hit it,
anyway. Got away in the darkness. Probably he'd been shooting at a
shadow. There were no more gorillas--maybe _they_ had been taking the
shots, too. Perhaps they'd all turned into rhesus monkeys.

Mike watched the boy run towards him. It was a good five hundred yards
from the river bank, and the short brown legs couldn't move very
swiftly. He wondered what it felt like to be small. One's sense of
proportion must be different. And that, in turn, would affect one's
sense of values. What values applied to the world about you when you
were only three feet high?

Mike wouldn't know. He was a big man--almost five feet seven.

Sometimes Mike reflected on what things might be like if he'd been
born, say, twenty years later. By that time almost everyone would be a
product of Leff shots, and he'd be no exception. He might stay with
people his own age in Kenyarobi without feeling self-conscious,
clumsy, conspicuous. Pressed, he had to admit that was part of the
reason he preferred to remain out here at Dad's old place now. He
could tolerate the stares of the natives, but whenever he ventured
into a city he felt awkward under the scrutiny of the young people.
The way those teen-agers looked up at him made him feel a monster,
rather.

Better to endure the monotony, the emptiness out here. Yes, and wait
for a chance to hunt. Even though, nine times out of ten, it turned
out to be a wild goose-chase. During the past year or so Mike had
hunted nothing but legends and rumors, spent his time stalking
shadows.

Then the villagers had come to him, three days ago, with their wild
story. Even when he heard it, he realized it must be pure fable. And
the more they insisted, the more they protested, the more he realized
it simply couldn't be.

Still, he'd come. Anything to experience some action, anything to
create the illusion of purpose, of--

"_Tembo!_" shrieked the boy, excited beyond all pretense of caution.
"Up ahead, in river. You come quick, you see!"

No. It couldn't be. The government surveys were thorough. The last
record of a specimen dated back over a half-dozen years ago. It was
impossible that any survivors remained. And all during the safari
these past days, not a sign or a print or a spoor.

"_Tembo!_" shrilled the boy. "Come quick!"

Mike cradled the gun and started forward. The other bearers shuffled
behind him, unable to keep pace because of their short legs and--he
suspected--unwilling to do so for fear of what might lie ahead.

Halfway towards the river bank, Mike halted. Now he could hear the
rumbling, the unmistakable rumbling. And now he could smell the rank
mustiness borne on the hot breeze. Well, at least he was down-wind.

The boy behind him trembled, eyes wide. He _had_ seen something, all
right. Maybe just a crocodile, though. Still some crocs around. And he
doubted if a young native would know the difference.

Nevertheless, Mike felt a sudden surge of unfamiliar excitement, half
expectancy and half fear. _Something_ wallowed in the river; something
that rumbled and exuded the stench of life.

Now they were approaching the trees bordering the bank. Mike checked
his gun carefully. Then he advanced until his body was aligned with
the trees. From here he could see and not be seen. He could peer down
at the river--or the place where the river had been, during the rainy
season long past. Now it was nothing but a mudwallow under the glaring
sun; a huge mudwallow, pitted with deep, circular indentations and
dotted with dung.

But in the middle of it stood _tembo_.

_Tembo_ was a mountain, _tembo_ was a black block of breathing basalt.
_Tembo_ roared and snorted and rolled red eyes.

Mike gasped.

He was a white hunter, but he'd never seen a bull elephant before. And
this one stood eleven feet at the shoulders if it stood an inch; the
biggest creature walking the face of the earth.

It had risen from the mud, abandoned its wallowing as its trunk curled
about, sensitive to the unfamiliar scent of man. Its ears rose like
the outspread wings of some gigantic jungle bat. Mike could see the
flies buzzing around the ragged edges. He stared at the great tusks
that were veined and yellowed and broken--once men had hunted
elephants for ivory, he remembered.

But how could they? Even with guns, how had they dared to confront a
moving mountain? Mike tried to swallow, but his throat was dry. The
stock slipped through his clammy hands.

"Shoot!" implored the boy beside him. "You shoot, now!"

Mike gazed down. The elephant was aware of him. It turned
deliberately, staring up the bank as it swayed on the four black
pillars of its legs. Mike could see its eyes, set in a mass of grayish
wrinkles. The eyes had recognized him.

They knew, he realized. The eyes knew all about him; who he was and
what he was and what he had come here to do. The eyes had seen man
before--perhaps long before Mike was born. They understood everything;
the gun and the presence and the purpose.

"Shoot!" the boy cried, not bothering to hold his voice down any
longer. For the elephant was moving slowly towards the side of the
wallow, moving deliberately to firmer footing, and the boy was afraid.
Mike was afraid, too, but he couldn't shoot.

"No," he murmured. "Let him go. I can't kill him."

"You must," the boy said. "You promise. Look--all the meat. Meat for
two, three villages."

Mike shook his head. "I can't do it," he said. "That isn't meat.
That's life. Bigger life than we are. Don't you understand? Oh, the
bloody hell with it! Come on."

The boy wasn't listening to him. He was watching the elephant. And now
he started to tremble.

For the elephant was moving up onto solid ground. It moved slowly,
daintily, almost mincing as its legs sampled the surface of the shore.
Then it looked up and this time there was no doubt as to the direction
of its gaze--it stared intently at Mike and the boy on the bank. Its
ears fanned, then flared. Suddenly the elephant raised its trunk and
trumpeted fiercely.

And then, lowering the black battering-ram of its head, the beast came
forward. A deceptively slow lope, a scarcely accelerated trot, and
then all at once it was moving swiftly, swiftly and surely and
inexorably towards them. The angle of the bank was not steep and the
elephant's speed never slackened on the slope. Its right shoulder
struck a sapling and the sapling splintered. It was crashing forward
in full charge. Again it trumpeted, trunk extended like a flail of
doom.

"Shoot!" screamed the boy.

Mike didn't want to shoot. He wanted to run. He wanted to flee the
mountain, flee the incredible breathing bulk of this grotesque giant.
But he was a white hunter, he was a man, and a man is not a beast; a
man does not run away from life in any shape or size.

The trunk came up. Mike raised the gun. He heard the monster roar, far
away, and then he heard another sound that must be the gun's
discharge, and something hit him in the shoulder and knocked him down.
Recoil? Yes, because the elephant wasn't there any more; he could hear
the crashing and thrashing down below, over the rim of the river bank.

Mike stood up. He saw the boy running now, running back to the bearers
huddled along the edge of the trail.

He rubbed his shoulder, picked up his gun, reloaded. The sounds from
below had ceased. Slowly, Mike advanced to the lip of the bank and
stared down.

The bull elephant had fallen and rolled into the wallow once more. It
had taken a direct hit, just beneath the right ear, and even as Mike
watched, its trunk writhed feebly like a dying serpent, then fell
forward into the mud. The gigantic ears twitched, then flickered and
flopped, and the huge body rolled and settled.

Suddenly Mike began to cry.

Damn it, he hadn't _wanted_ to shoot. If the elephant hadn't charged
like that--

But the elephant _had_ to charge. Just as he _had_ to shoot. That was
the whole secret. The secret of life. And the secret of death, too.

Mike turned away, facing the east. Kenyarobi was east, and he'd be
going there now. Nothing to hold him here in the forests any longer.
He wouldn't even wait for the big feast. To hell with elephant-meat,
anyway. His hunting days were over.

Mike walked slowly up the trail to the waiting boys.

And behind him, in the wallow, the flies settled down on the lifeless
carcass of the last elephant in the world.




8. Harry Collins--2029


The guards at Stark Falls were under strict orders not to talk. Each
prisoner here was exercised alone in a courtyard runway, and meals
were served in the cells. The cells were comfortable enough, and while
there were no telescreens, books were available--genuine, old-style
books which must have been preserved from libraries dismantled fifty
years ago or more. Harry Collins found no titles dated later than
1975. Every day or so an attendant wheeled around a cart piled high
with the dusty volumes. Harry read to pass the time.

At first he kept anticipating his trial, but after a while he almost
forgot about that possibility. And it was well over a year before he
got a chance to tell his story to anyone.

When his opportunity came, his audience did not consist of judge or
jury, doctor, lawyer or penologist. He spoke only to Richard Wade, a
fellow-prisoner who had been thrust into the adjoining cell on the
evening of October 11th, 2013.

Harry spoke haltingly at first, but as he progressed the words came
more easily, and emotion lent its own eloquence. His unseen auditor on
the other side of the wall did not interrupt or question him; it was
enough, for Harry, that there _was_ someone to listen at last.

"So it wasn't a bit like I'd expected," he concluded. "No trial, no
publicity. I've never seen Leffingwell again, nor Manschoff. Nobody
questioned me. By the time I recovered consciousness, I was here in
prison. Buried alive."

Richard Wade spoke slowly, for the first time. "You're lucky. They
might have shot you down on the spot."

"That's just what bothers me," Harry told him. "Why didn't they kill
me? Why lock me up _incommunicado_ this way? There aren't many prisons
left these days, with food and space at such a premium."

"There are _no_ prisons left at all--officially," Wade said. "Just as
there are no longer any cemeteries. But important people are still
given private burials and their remains secretly preserved. All a
matter of influence."

"I've no influence. I'm not important. Wouldn't you think they'd
consider it risky to keep me alive, under the circumstances? If
there'd ever be an investigation--"

"Who would investigate? Not the government, surely."

"But suppose there's a political turnover. Suppose Congress want to
make capital of the situation?"

"There is no Congress."

Harry gasped. "No Congress?"

"As of last month. It was dissolved. Henceforth we are governed by the
Cabinet, with authority delegated to department heads."

"But that's preposterous! Nobody'd stand still for something like
that!"

"They did stand still, most of them. After a year of careful
preparation--of wholesale _exposes_ of Congressional graft and
corruption and inefficiency. Turned out that Congress was the villain
all along; the Senators and Representatives had finagled
tariff-barriers and restrictive trade-agreements which kept our food
supply down. They were opposing international federation. In plain
language, people were sold a bill of goods--get rid of Congress and
you'll have more food. That did it."

"But you'd think the politicians themselves would realize they were
cutting their own throats! The state legislatures and the governors--"

"Legislatures were dissolved by the same agreement," Wade went on.
"There are no states any more; just governmental districts. Based upon
sensible considerations of area and population. This isn't the
old-time expanding economy based on obsolescence and conspicuous
consumption. The primary problem at the moment is sheer survival. In
a way, the move makes sense. Old-fashioned political machinery
couldn't cope with the situation; there's no time for debate when
instantaneous decisions are necessary to national welfare. You've
heard how civil liberties were suspended during the old wars. Well,
there's a war on right now; a war against hunger, a war against the
forces of fecundity. In another dozen years or so, when the Leff shot
generation is fullgrown and a lot of the elderly have died off, the
tensions will ease. Meanwhile, quick action is necessary. Arbitrary
action."

"But you're defending dictatorship!"

Richard Wade made a sound which is usually accompanied by a derisive
shrug. "Am I? Well, I didn't when I was outside. And that's why I'm
here now."

Harry Collins cleared his throat. "What did you do?"

"If you refer to my profession, I was a scripter. If you refer to my
alleged criminal activity, I made the error of thinking the way you
do, and the worse error of attempting to inject such attitudes in my
scripts. Seems that when Congress was formally dissolved, there was
some notion of preparing a timely show--a sort of historical review of
the body, using old film clips. What my superiors had in mind was a
