Just supposing you asked me to whip up something to analyze what Betsy
receives, so it can be checked on that it is a new wave-type."

"Can you do that?" demanded Graves. "We were supposed to work on
that--but so far we've absolutely nothing to go on!"

The sergeant waved his hand negligently.

"You got something now. Betsy's a Mahon-modified device. Every receiver
that picked up one of those crazy broadcasts broke down before it was
through. She takes 'em in her stride--especial with Al and Gus to help
her. Wouldn't it be reasonable to guess that Mahon machines
are--uh--especial adapted to handle intertemporal communication?"

"Very reasonable!" said Howell dourly. "Very! The broadcast said that
the wave-type produced unpredictable surges of current. Ordinary
machines do find it difficult to work with whatever type of radiation
that can be."

"Betsy chokes off those surges," observed the sergeant. "With Gus and Al
to help, she don't have no trouble. We hadn't ought to need to make any
six transmitters if we put Mahon-unit machines together for the job!"

"Quite right," agreed Lecky, mildly. "And it is odd--"

"Yeah," said the sergeant. "It's plenty odd my
great-great-great-grandkids haven't got sense enough to do it
themselves!"

       *       *       *       *       *

He went to a shelf and brought down a boxed machine,--straight from the
top-secret manufactory of Mahon units. It had never been activated. Its
standby light did not glow. Sergeant Bellews ripped off the carton and
said reflectively:

"You hate to turn off a machine that's got its own ways of working. But
a machine that ain't been activated has not got any personality. So you
don't mind starting it up to turn it off later."

He opened the adjustment-cover and turned something on. The standby
light glowed. Closely observed, it was not a completely steady glow.
There were the faintest possible variations of brightness. But there was
no impression of life.

Graves said:

"Why doesn't it flicker like the others?"

"No habits," said the sergeant. "No experience. It's like a newborn
baby. It'll get to have personality after it's worked a while. But not
now."

He went across the shop again. He moved out a heavy case, and twisted
the release, and eased out a communicator of the same type--Mark IV--as
Betsy back in the Communications room. Howell went to help him. Graves
tried to assist. Lecky moved other things out of the way. They were
highly eminent scientists, and Metech Sergeant Bellews was merely a
non-commissioned officer in the armed forces. But he happened to have
specialized information they had not. Quite without condescension they
accepted his authority in his own field, and therefore his equality. As
civilians they had no rank to maintain, and they disagreed with each
other--and would disagree with the sergeant--only when they knew why.
Which was one of the reasons why they were eminent scientists.

Sergeant Bellews brought out yet another box. He unrolled cables. He
selected machines whose flickering lights seemed to bespeak eagerness to
be of use. He coupled them to the newly unboxed machines, whose lights
were vaguely steady.

"Training cables," he said over his shoulder. "You get one machine
working right, and you hook it with another, and the new machine kinda
learns from the old one. Kinda! But it ain't as good as real experience.
Not at first."

       *       *       *       *       *

Presently the lights of the newly energized machines began to waver in
somewhat the manner of the ready-for-operation ones. But they did not
give so clear an impression of personality.

"Look!" said Sergeant Bellews abruptly. "I got to check with you. The
more I think, the more worried I get."

"You begin to believe the broadcasts come from the future?" demanded
Graves. "And it worries you? But they do not speak of Mahon units--"

"I don't care where they come from," said the sergeant. "I'm worryin'
about what they are! The guy in the broadcast--not knowing Mahon
units--said we'd have to make half a dozen transmitters so they'd take
over one after another as they blew out. You see what that means?"

Lecky said crisply:

"You pointed it out before. There is something in the wave-type
which--you would say this, Sergeant!--which machines do not like. Is
that the reasoning?"

"Uh-uh!" The sergeant scowled. "Machines work by the golden rule. They
try to do unto you what they want you to do unto them. Likes an'
dislikes don't matter. I mean that there's something about that
wave-type that machines _can't_ take! It busts them. If it sort of
explodes surges of current in 'em--Look! Any running machine is a
dynamic system in a object. A jet-plane operating is that. So's a
water-spout. So's a communicator. But if you explode surges of heavy
current in a dynamic system in a operating machine--things get messed
up. The operating habit is busted to hell. I'm saying that if this
wave-type makes crazy surges of current start up--why--if the surges
are strong enough they'll bust not only a communicator but a jet-plane.
Or a water-spout. Anything! See?"

       *       *       *       *       *

Lecky blinked and suddenly went pale.

"But," said Howell reasonably, "you said that Betsy handled it.
Especially well when linked with other Mahon machines."

"Yeah," said the sergeant.

"I think," observed Graves jerkily, "that you are preparing new
machines, without developed--personalities, because you think that if
they make this special-type wave they'll be broken."

"Yeah," said the sergeant, again. "The signal Betsy was amplifyin'
coulda been as little as a micro-micro-watt. At its frequency an' type,
she'd choke it down if it was more. But even a micro-micro-watt bothered
Betsy until she got Al and Gus to help. She was fair screamin' for
somebody to come help her hold it. But the three of them done all
right."

Howell conceded the point.

"That seems sound reasoning."

"But you don't broadcast with a micro-micro-watt. You use a hell of a
lot more power than that! The transmitter the guy in the screen said to
make was a twenty-kilowatt job. Not too much for a broadcast of sine
waves, but a hell of a lot to be turned loose, in waves that have Betsy
hollerin' at the power she was handlin'!"

"It might break even the Mahon machines in this installation?" demanded
Howell.

"You're gettin' warm," said the sergeant.

Graves said:

"You mean it might break all operating communicators in a very large
area?"

"You're gettin' hot," said the sergeant grimly.

Lecky wetted his lips.

"I think," he said very carefully, "that you suspect it is a wave-type
which will break any dynamic system, in any sort of object a dynamic
system can exist in."

"Yeah," said the sergeant. He waited, looking at Lecky.

"And," said Lecky, "not only operating machines are dynamic systems.
Living plants and animals are, too. So are men."

"That's what I'm drivin' at," said Sergeant Bellews.

"So you believe," said Lecky, very pale indeed, "that we have been given
the circuit-diagram of a transmitter which will broadcast a wave-type
which destroys dynamic systems--life as well as the operation of
machines. Persons--in the future or an alien creature in a space-ship,
or perhaps even the Compubs--are furnishing us with designs for
transmitters of death, to be linked together so that if one fails the
others will carry on. And they lure us to destroy ourselves by lying
about who they are and what they propose."

"They're lyin'," said the sergeant. "They say they're in the future and
they don't know a thing about Mahon units. Else they'd use 'em."

Lecky wetted his lips again.

"And--if they are not in the future, they are trying to get us to
destroy ourselves because that would be safer and surer than trying to
destroy us by--say--transmitters of death dropped upon us by parachute.
Yet if we do not destroy ourselves, they will surely do that."

"If we don't bump ourselves off, it'll be because we got wise,"
acknowledged the sergeant. "If we get wise, we could bump them off by
parachute-transmitter. So they'll beat us to it. They'll have to!"

"Yes," said Lecky. "They'll have to. It has always been said that a
death-ray was impossible. This would be a death-broadcast. If we do not
broadcast, they will--whoever they are. It is--" He smiled mirthlessly
at the magnitude of his understatement. "It is urgent that we do
something. What shall we do, Sergeant?"

       *       *       *       *       *

A squadron of light tanks arrived at Research Installation 83 that
afternoon, with a shipment of courier motorcycles. They had been
equipped with Mahon units and went to the post to be trained.

The Pentagon was debating the development of a Mahon-modified guided
missile, and a drone plane was under construction. But non-military
items also arrived for activation and test. Automatic telephone
switching systems, it appeared, could be made much simpler if they could
be trained to do their work instead of built so they couldn't help it.

Passenger-cars other than jeeps showed promise. It had long been known
that most accidents occurred with new cars, and that ancient jalopies
were relatively safe even in the hands of juvenile delinquents. It was
credible that part of the difference was in the operating habits of the
cars.

It appeared that humanity was upon the threshold of a new era, in which
the value of personality would reappear among the things taken for
granted. Strictly speaking, of course, Mahon machines were not persons.
But they reflected the personalities of their owners. It might again
seem desirable to be a decent human being if only because machines
worked better for them.

But it would be tragic if Mahon machines were used to destroy humankind
with themselves! Sergeant Bellews would have raged at the thought of
