but weakening gradually as they widened the distance between themselves
and the Antares. Finally, almost three miles away, the fear impulses
faded out completely....

But thereafter the wreck was unapproachable. The fear generator did not
run out of power, might not run out of power for years.

Dasinger said, "Doctor, let's hurry this up! Ask him why they weren't
affected by their murder machines when they robbed Dosey Asteroids. Do
the generators have a beam-operated shut-off, or what?"

Graylock listened to the question, said, "We had taken kwil. The effects
were still very unpleasant, but they could be tolerated."

There was a pause of a few seconds. Dr. Egavine cleared his throat. "It
appears, Dasinger," he remarked, "that we have failed to consider a
very important clue!"

Dasinger nodded. "And an obvious one," he said drily. "Keep it moving
along, doctor. How much kwil did they take? How long had they been
taking it before the raid?"

Dr. Egavine glanced over at him, repeated the questions.

Graylock said Hovig had begun conditioning the crew to kwil a week or
two before the Antares slipped out of Aruaque for the strike on the
station. In each case the dosage had been built up gradually to the
quantity the man in question required to remain immune to the
generators. Individual variations had been wide and unpredictable.

Dasinger passed his tongue over his lips, nodded. "Ask him ..."

       *       *       *       *       *

He checked himself at a soft, purring noise, a shadowy fluttering in the
air. Graylock's animal flew past him, settled on its master's shoulder,
turned to stare at Dasinger and Egavine. Dasinger looked at the yellow
owl-eyes, the odd little tube of a mouth, continued to Egavine, "Ask him
where the haul was stored in the ship."

Graylock confirmed Leed Farous's statement of what he had seen in the
Antares's records. All but a few of the star hyacinths had been placed
in a vault-like compartment in the storage, and the compartment was
sealed. Explosives would be required to open it. Hovig kept out half a
dozen of the larger stones, perhaps as an antidote to boredom during the
long voyage ahead. Graylock had found one of them just before Hovig's
infernal instrument went into action.

"And where is that one now?" Dr. Egavine asked.

"I still have it."

"On your person?"

"Yes."

Dr. Egavine held out his hand, palm upward. "You no longer want it,
Graylock. Give it to me."

Graylock looked bewildered; for a moment he appeared about to weep. Then
he brought a knotted piece of leather from his pocket, unwrapped it,
took out the gem and placed it in Egavine's hand. Egavine picked it up
between thumb and forefinger of his other hand, held it out before him.

There was silence for some seconds while the star hyacinth burned in the
evening air and the three men and the small winged animal stared at it.
Then Dr. Egavine exhaled slowly.

"Ah, now!" he said, his voice a trifle unsteady. "Men might kill and
kill for that one beauty alone, that is true!... Will you keep it for
now, Dasinger? Or shall I?"

Dasinger looked at him thoughtfully.

"You keep it, doctor," he said.

       *       *       *       *       *

"Dasinger," Dr. Egavine observed a few minutes later, "I have been
thinking...."

"Yes?"

"Graylock's attempted description of his experience indicates that the
machine on the Antares does not actually broadcast the emotion of
terror, as he believes. The picture presented is that of a mind in which
both the natural and the acquired barriers of compartmentalization are
temporarily nullified, resulting in an explosion of compounded insanity
to an extent which would be inconceivable without such an outside agent.
As we saw in Graylock, the condition is in fact impossible to describe
or imagine! A diabolical device...."

He frowned. "Why the drug kwil counteracts such an effect remains
unclear. But since we now know that it does, I may have a solution to
the problem confronting us."

Dasinger nodded. "Let's hear it."

"Have Miss Mines bring the ship down immediately," Egavine instructed
him. "There is a definite probability that among my medical supplies
will be an effective substitute for kwil, for this particular purpose. A
few hours of experimentation, and ..."

"Doctor," Dasinger interrupted, "hold it right there! So far there's
been no real harm in sparring around. But we're in a different situation
now ... we may be running out of time very quickly. Let's quit playing
games."

Dr. Egavine glanced sharply across at him. "What do you mean?"

"I mean that we both have kwil, of course. There's no reason to
experiment. But the fact that we have it is no guarantee that we'll be
able to get near that generator. Leed Farous's tissues were soaked with
the drug. Graylock's outfit had weeks to determine how much each of them
needed to be able to operate within range of the machines and stay sane.
We're likely to have trouble enough without trying to jockey each
other."

Dr. Egavine cleared his throat. "But I ..."

Dasinger interrupted again. "Your reluctance to tell me everything you
knew or had guessed is understandable. You had no more reason to trust
me completely than I had to trust you. So before you say anything else
I'd like you to look at these credentials. You're familiar with the
Federation seal, I think."

Dr. Egavine took the proffered identification case, glanced at Dasinger
again, then opened the case.

"So," he said presently. "You're a detective working for the Dosey
Asteroids Company...." His voice was even. "That alters the situation,
of course. Why didn't you tell me this?"

"That should be obvious," Dasinger said. "If you're an honest man, the
fact can make no difference. The company remains legally bound to pay
out the salvage fee for the star hyacinths. They have no objection to
that. What they didn't like was the possibility of having the gems
stolen for the second time. If that's what you had in mind, you
wouldn't, of course, have led an agent of the company here. In other
words, doctor, in cooperating with me you're running no risk of being
cheated out of your half of the salvage rights."

Dasinger patted the gun in his coat pocket. "And of course," he added,
"if I happened to be a bandit in spite of the credentials, I'd be
eliminating you from the partnership right now instead of talking to
you! The fact that I'm not doing it should be a sufficient guarantee
that I don't intend to do it."

Dr. Egavine nodded. "I'm aware of the point."

"Then let's get on with the salvage," Dasinger said. "For your further
information, there's an armed Fleet ship hunting for us with piratical
intentions, and the probability is that it will find us in a matter of
hours...."

       *       *       *       *       *

He described the situation briefly, concluded, "You've carried out your
part of the contract by directing us here. You can, if you wish,
minimize further personal risks by using the Fleet scout's lifeboat to
get yourself and Quist off the planet, providing kwil will get you to
the scout. Set a normspace course for Orado then, and we'll pick you up
after we've finished the job."

Dr. Egavine shook his head. "Thank you, but I'm staying. It's in my
interest to give you what assistance I can ... and, as you've surmised,
I do have a supply of kwil. What is your plan?"

"Getting Hovig's generator shut off is the first step," Dasinger said.
"And since we don't know what dosage of the drug is required for each of
us, we'd be asking for trouble by approaching the Antares in the ship.
Miss Mines happens to be a kwil-sensitive, in any case. So it's going to
take hiking, and I'll start down immediately now. Would Graylock and the
Fleetmen obey hypnotic orders to the extent of helping out dependably in
the salvage work?"

Egavine nodded. "There is no question of that."

"Then you might start conditioning them to the idea now. From the outer
appearance of the Antares, it may be a real job to cut through inside
her to get to the star hyacinths. We have the three salvage suits. If I
can make it to the generator, shut it off, and it turns out then that I
need some hypnotized brawn down there, Miss Mines will fly over the
shelter as a signal to start marching the men down."

"Why march? At that point, Miss Mines could take us to the wreck within
seconds."

Dasinger shook his head. "Sorry, doctor. Nobody but Miss Mines or myself
goes aboard the Mooncat until we either wind up the job or are forced to
clear out and run. I'm afraid that's one precaution I'll have to take.
When you get to the Antares we'll give each of the boys a full shot of
kwil. The ones that don't go limp on it can start helping."

Dr. Egavine said reflectively, "You feel the drug would still be a
requirement?"

"Well," Dasinger said, "Hovig appears to have been a man who took
precautions, too. We know he had three generators and that he set off
one of them. The question is where the other two are. It wouldn't be so
very surprising, would it, if one or both of them turned out to be
waiting for intruders in the vault where he sealed away the loot?"

       *       *       *       *       *

The night was cool. Wind rustled in the ground vegetation and the
occasional patches of trees. Otherwise the slopes were quiet. The sky
was covered with cloud layers through which the Mooncat drifted
invisibly. In the infrared glasses Dasinger had slipped on when he
started, the rocky hillside showed clear for two hundred yards, tinted
green as though bathed by a strange moonlight; beyond was murky
darkness.

"Still all right?" Duomart's voice inquired from the wrist communicator.

"Uh-huh!" Dasinger said. "A little nervous, but I'd be feeling that way
in any case, under the circumstances."

"I'm not so sure," she said. "You've gone past the two and a half mile
line from the generator. From what that Graylock monster said, you
should have started to pick up its effects. Why not take your shot, and
play safe?"

"No," Dasinger said. "If I wait until I feel something that can be
definitely attributed to the machine, I can keep the kwil dose down to
what I need. I don't want to load myself up with the drug any more than
I have to."

A stand of tall trees with furry trunks moved presently into range of
the glasses, thick undergrowth beneath. Dasinger picked his way through
the thickets with some caution. The indications so far had been that
local animals had as much good reason to avoid the vicinity of Hovig's
machine as human beings, but if there was any poisonous vermin in the
area this would be a good place for it to be lurking. Which seemed a
fairly reasonable apprehension. Other, equally definite, apprehensions
looked less reasonable when considered objectively. If he stumbled on a
stone, it produced a surge of sharp alarm which lingered for seconds;
and his breathing had quickened much more than could be accounted for by
the exertions of the downhill climb.

       *       *       *       *       *
