combat skipper! I didn't wonder about him any more. He had the guts all
right. But it was a different sort of courage from the icy contempt for
danger that marked Andy Royce. Even so, I couldn't help thinking that I
was glad to be riding with Chase. We drove to the rear, heading for the
supply train, our ammunition expended, while behind us the battlewagons
and cruisers were hammering each other to metal pulp.

In the quiet of the rear area it was hardly believable that a major
battle was going on ahead of us. We raised the "Amphitrite," identified
ourselves, and put in a request for supply.

"Lay aboard," "Amphitrite" signalled back. "How's the war going?"

"Don't know. We've been too busy," our signalman replied.

"I'll bet--you're 'Lachesis,' aren't you?"

"Affirmative."

"How'd you lose your ammo? Jettison it?"

"Stow that, you unprintable obscenity," Haskins replied. "We're a
fighting ship."

"Amphitrite" chuckled nastily. "That I'll believe when I see it!"

"Communications," Chase snapped. "This isn't a social call. Get our
heading and approach instructions." He sounded as schoolmasterish as
ever, but there was a sickly smile on his face, and the gray-green look
was gone.

"Morale seems a little better, doesn't it, Marsden?" he said to me as
the "Amphitrite" flicked out into threespace and we followed.

I nodded. "Yes, sir," I agreed. "Quite a little."

Our cargo hatches snapped open and we cuddled up against "Amphitrite's"
bulging belly while our crew and the supply echelon worked like demons
to transfer ammunition. We had fifty torpedoes aboard when the I.F.F.
detector shrilled alarm.

Three hundred feet above us the "Amphitrite's" main battery let loose a
salvo at three Rebel scouts that had flickered into being less than
fifty miles away. Their launchers flared with a glow that lighted the
blackness of space.

"Stand by!" Chase yelled as he threw the converter on.

"Hatches!" I screamed as we shimmered and vanished.

Somehow we got most of them closed, losing only the crew on number two
port turret which was still buttoning up as we slipped over into the
infra band. I ordered the turret sealed. Cth had already ruined the
unshielded sighting mechanisms and I had already seen what happened to
men caught in Cth unprotected. I had no desire to see it again--or let
our crew see it if it could be avoided. A human body turned inside out
isn't the most wholesome of sights.

"How did _they_ get through?" Chase muttered as we put out our probe.

"I don't know--maybe someone wasn't looking."

"What's it like down there?" Chase asked. "See anything?"

"'Amphitrite's' still there," I said.

"She's _what_?"

"Still there," I repeated. "And she's in trouble."

"She's big. She can take it--but--"

"Here, you look," I said, flipping the probe switch.

"My God!" Chase muttered--as he took one look at the supply ship lying
dead in space, her protective batteries flaming. She had gotten one of
the Rebel scouts but the other two had her bracketed and were pouring
fire against her dim screens.

"She can't keep this up," I said. "She's been hulled--and it looks like
her power's taken it."

"Action imminent," Chase ordered, and the rangefinder took up his
chant.

We came storming out of Cth right on top of one of the Rebel scouts. A
violent shock raced through the ship, slamming me against my web. The
rebound sent us a good two miles away before our starboard battery
flamed. The enemy scout, disabled by the shock, stunned and unable to
maneuver took the entire salvo amidships and disappeared in a puff of
flame.

The second Rebel disappeared and we did too. She was back in Cth looking
for a better chance at the "Amphitrite." The big ship was wallowing like
a wounded whale, half of one section torn away, her armor dented, and
her tubes firing erratically.

We took one long look and jumped back into Cth. But not before Haskins
beamed a message to the supply ship. "Now you've seen it, you damned
storekeeper," he gloated. "What do you think?" "Amphitrite" didn't
answer.

"Probe out," Chase ordered, neglecting, I noticed, to comment on the
signalman's act.

       *       *       *       *       *

I pushed the proper buttons but nothing happened. I pushed again and
then turned on the scanners. The one aft of the probe was half covered
with a twisted mass of metal tubing that had once been our probe. We
must have smashed it when we rammed. Quickly I shifted to the auxiliary
probe, but the crumpled mass had jammed the hatch. It wouldn't open.

"No probes, sir," I announced.

"Damn," Chase said. "Well, we'll have to do without them. Hold tight,
we're going down."

We flicked into threespace just in time to see a volcano of fire erupt
from "Amphitrite's" side and the metallic flick of the Rebel scout
slipping back into Cth.

"What's your situation, 'Amphitrite'?" our signal asked.

"Not good," the faint answer came back. "They've got us in the power
room and our accumulators aren't going to stand this load very long.
That last salvo went through our screens, but our armor stopped it. But
if the screens go down--"

Our batteries flared at the Rebel as he again came into sight. He didn't
wait, but flicked right back into Cth without firing a shot. Pollard was
on the ball.

"Brave lad, that Reb," Chase said. There was a sneer in his voice.

For the moment it was stalemate. The Reb wasn't going to come into close
range with a warship of equal power to his own adding her metal to the
"Amphitrite's," but he could play cat and mouse with us, drawing our
fire until we had used up our torpedoes, and then come in to finish
