quickly fatal to me.

       *       *       *       *       *

"Accordingly, my only chance of surviving in one of your worlds is to
first transfer my Intelligence to the body of one of the dwellers upon
that planet. Of the seven planets within reach of my net I found only
two that promised to be at all suitable. One was your Earth, the other
a minor planet circling the star you call Vega. I brought both you and a
net-load of Vegans here to this oxygen-filled enclosure I had already
prepared.

"The Vegans were the headless things with the jelly nuclei. I watched
your battle with them, and waited to choose as my vehicle the planetary
type that proved the stronger. You vanquished the Vegans, so it is in
the body of an Earthling that I shall leave Xollar, and it is to the
planet Earth that I shall be hurtled through the inter-dimensional gate.

"Aside from the slight difficulty caused by having to keep my body and
yours each in its proper element during the operation, the matter of
transfer into one of your bodies is a simple one. It involves none of
the clumsy brain surgery of your Earthly science. We of Xollar have
found that the real Intelligence of a being is an invisible force not at
all dependent for existence upon the protoplasm through which it
manifests. My Intelligence can function quite as well in your brain
cells as in my own.

"I require no assistant in the transfer." Zehru indicated an intricate
piece of apparatus on the platform behind him. It was a massive cylinder
of fluorescent metal, with two long metallic cables running from its
center, each cable ending in a saucer-shaped disk.

       *       *       *       *       *

"I have only to thrust one cable through the force-wall into your
enclosure and place its disk upon one of your heads, then place the
other disk upon my own head. The apparatus is entirely automatic. Three
seconds after both disks are in place my Intelligence will course into
the Earthling brain, driving out his Intelligence and destroying it as
mine enters.

"I will, of course, remove the selected body from under the paralyzing
plate before I attach the disks. Then when I am safely transferred to
the Earthling body I will have only to walk on through the enclosure to
the silver arch at the far end and leave Xollar forever.

"That silver arch is the inter-dimensional gate to your Earth. Its
operation is slightly different from that of the net. Where the net was
capable of reaching under the surface of your planet, a proceeding I
tried when two attempts upon the surface proved fruitless, the gate is
so adjusted that it will place its passenger exactly upon the surface of
your world. It requires no cooperation from this end. When I step under
the arch I merely close a black lever there. Inter-dimensional force
immediately catapults me to your Earth. Then the automatic mechanism of
the gate will within half a minute of my departure release an explosion
that will shatter everything within a radius of a mile here, and so
prevent the Council of Three from even guessing the method of my
escape."

"But what of the two of us whose bodies you do not need?" Blake
protested. "Can you not at least take them through the arch-gate with
you back to their home world?"

"Why should I do anything so foolish as that?" Zehru answered callously.
"They might easily be a menace to my first attempts to establish myself
upon your planet. Far better to leave them here in their present state
of paralysis to be safely destroyed in the explosion of the gate."

       *       *       *       *       *

Zehru now thrust three of his tentacles into a vat of milky fluid, and
withdrew them coated with a silver sheen on the black flesh. The silver
glaze seemed to be an insulation against both the oxygen of the
enclosure and the paralyzing force of the overhead disk, for the
Xollarian promptly thrust the three silver-coated arms through the wall
and began handling the bodies of Mapes and Blake in a painstaking
process of examination.

Again Blake noted that the shimmering gold-flecked wall closed quickly
in and kept its surface unbroken no matter how often objects were thrust
through it.

Completely ignoring Helen, Zehru lifted first Mapes, then Blake, his
tentacles probing, fingering, exploring. There was enormous power in the
Xollarian's grotesque body. He lifted the men as though they were wooden
dolls, bringing them close to the shimmering wall to peer at them, then
setting them carefully down again on their feet under the disk. Blake
wondered idly why their stiff bodies did not topple over when they were
left unsupported, then decided that the paralyzing force of the disk
probably left the automatic muscular balancing movements unimpaired,
affecting only the powers of voluntary movement.

       *       *       *       *       *

Then, as Zehru set him down after one of the periods of examination,
Blake noticed a new and startling change the moment his feet touched the
ground. His right leg and right arm were no longer dead!

He hurriedly glanced down at the ground at his feet, and promptly found
what seemed to be the reason for his partial freedom from the paralysis.
In setting his body down the last time Zehru had moved Blake slightly.
His right foot now rested upon a corner of the discarded topcoat lying
half-buried there in the blue-gray dust.

The heavily rubberized cloth apparently acted as an insulating sheet
that prevented the effective grounding of the paralyzing force that
streamed down through Blake's body from the overhead disk. Consequently
all portions of his body between the coat and the disk were free from
the paralysis. For a moment Blake wondered at Zehru's carelessness. Then
he realized that the insulating qualities of rubber would naturally be
unknown to a Xollarian.

Noting that Zehru was busy at the moment with his work upon Mapes, Blake
quickly grasped at the faint chance the presence of the rubberized cloth
offered him. Working with infinite slowness and caution, he edged his
right foot over an inch at a time, dragging the rest of his body with
it.

Luck was with him. Zehru continued, absorbed in his work upon Mapes. The
Xollarian's telepathic powers apparently functioned only with the aid of
the red ray, for he remained oblivious of Blake's actions. One final
cautious dragging movement, and Blake's entire body was upon the cloth,
with every muscle again vibrantly alive.

       *       *       *       *       *

Blake stood there motionless, faking paralysis, while his brain raced in
an effort to figure the best use to make of his present advantage. He
was still trapped, not daring to reach even a hand beyond the protection
of the cloth underfoot. The first essential of any effort at escape
would have to be a lunge of sufficient power to take him safely beyond
the area of the disk's influence.

Blake's first thought was to hurl himself through the barrier wall upon
Zehru, trusting to sheer surprise to overwhelm the Xollarian, but he
quickly dismissed that plan. It left too many elements in Zehru's favor.
There was a tube-like weapon thrust in a belt around Zehru's middle and
there were probably a dozen other different weapons lying handy to his
