ceaselessly, and my mind had been clear and quick as the day I first had
left the hospital. But all that time I had been able only to remain what
I was--an extraordinarily intelligent man of the twentieth century. And
the rest of the race had been progressing! It had been swiftly gathering
knowledge and power and ability all that time, faster and faster, while
I had been only remaining still. And now here was Zarentzov and the
teachers of the Universities, and, probably, a hundred intelligent men,
who had all outstripped me! I was being left behind.

And that is what happened. I need not dilate further upon it. By the end
of that century I had been left behind by all the students of the world,
and I never did understand Zarentzov. Other men came with other
theories, and these theories were accepted by the world. But I could not
understand them. My intellectual life was at an end. I had nothing more
to understand. I knew everything I was capable of knowing, and,
thenceforth, I could only play wearily with the old ideas.

       *       *       *       *       *

Many things happened in the world. A time came when the East and West,
two mighty unified hemispheres, rose up in arms: the civil war of a
planet. I recall only chaotic visions of fire and thunder and hell. It
was all incomprehensible to me: like a bizarre dream, things happened,
people rushed about, but I never knew what they were doing. I lurked
during all that time in a tiny shuddering hole under the city of
Yokohama, and by a miracle I survived. And the East won. But it seems to
have mattered little who did win, for all the world had become, in all
except its few remaining prejudices, a single race, and nothing was
changed when it was all rebuilt again, under a single government.

I saw the first of the strange creatures who appeared among us in the
year 6371, men who were later known to be from the planet Venus. But
they were repulsed, for they were savages compared with the Earthmen,
although they were about equal to the people of my own century, 1900.
Those of them who did not perish of the cold after the intense warmth of
their world, and those who were not killed by our hands, those few
returned silently home again. And I have always regretted that I had not
the courage to go with them.

I watched a time when the world reached perfection in mechanics, when
men could accomplish anything with a touch of the finger. Strange men,
these creatures of the hundredth century, men with huge brains and tiny
shriveled bodies, atrophied limbs, and slow, ponderous movements on
their little conveyances. It was I, with my ancient compunctions, who
shuddered when at last they put to death all the perverts, the
criminals, and the insane, ridding the world of the scum for which they
had no more need. It was then that I was forced to produce my tattered
old papers, proving my identity and my story. They knew it was true, in
some strange fashion of theirs, and, thereafter, I was kept on
exhibition as an archaic survival.

I saw the world made immortal through the new invention of a man called
Kathol, who used somewhat the same method "legend" decreed had been used
upon me. I observed the end of speech, of all perceptions except one,
when men learned to communicate directly by thought, and to receive
directly into the brain all the myriad vibrations of the universe.

All these things I saw, and more, until that time when there was no more
discovery, but a Perfect World in which there was no need for anything
but memory. Men ceased to count time at last. Several hundred years
after the 154th Dynasty from the Last War, or, as we would have counted
in my time, about 200,000 A.D., official records of time were no longer
kept carefully. They fell into disuse. Men began to forget years, to
forget time at all. Of what significance was time when one was immortal?

       *       *       *       *       *

After long, long uncounted centuries, a time came when the days grew
noticeably colder. Slowly the winters became longer, and the summers
diminished to but a month or two. Fierce storms raged endlessly in
winter, and in summer sometimes there was severe frost, sometimes there
was only frost. In the high places and in the north and the
sub-equatorial south, the snow came and would not go.

Men died by the thousands in the higher latitudes. New York became,
after awhile, the furthest habitable city north, an arctic city, where
warmth seldom penetrated. And great fields of ice began to make their
way southward, grinding before them the brittle remains of
civilizations, covering over relentlessly all of man's proud work.

Snow appeared in Florida and Italy one summer. In the end, snow was
there always. Men left New York, Chicago, Paris, Yokohama, and
everywhere they traveled by the millions southward, perishing as they
went, pursued by the snow and the cold, and that inevitable field of
ice. They were feeble creatures when the Cold first came upon them, but
I speak in terms of thousands of years; and they turned every weapon of
science to the recovery of their physical power, for they foresaw that
the only chance for survival lay in a hard, strong body. As for me, at
last I had found a use for my few powers, for my physique was the finest
in that world. It was but little comfort, however, for we were all
united in our awful fear of that Cold and that grinding field of Ice.
All the great cities were deserted. We would catch silent, fearful
glimpses of them as we sped on in our machines over the snow--great
hungry, haggard skeletons of cities, shrouded in banks of snow, snow
that the wind rustled through desolate streets where the cream of human
life once had passed in calm security. Yet still the Ice pursued. For
men had forgotten about that Last Ice Age when they ceased to reckon
time, when they lost sight of the future and steeped themselves in
memories. They had not remembered that a time must come when Ice would
lie white and smooth over all the earth, when the sun would shine
bleakly between unending intervals of dim, twilight snow and sleet.

Slowly the Ice pursued us down the earth, until all the feeble remains
of civilization were gathered in Egypt and India and South America. The
deserts flowered again, but the frost would come always to bite the tiny
crops. For still the Ice came. All the world now, but for a narrow strip
about the equator, was one great silent desolate vista of stark
