
Tensely, he straightened and contemplated the lean, gray spaceship. Then
he whirled around and slapped every button on the intercom.

       *       *       *       *       *

Thursday. The sun pecked fitfully at the low overcast while a sullen
crowd watched a squat alien ship descend vertically, to finally settle
with a flaming belch not far from the first. Similar crowds watched
similar landings at nineteen other airports around the world, but the
loading was to start first in New York.

An elevator-like box swung out from the fat belly of the ship and was
lowered rapidly to the ground. Two golden-hued aliens, in uniforms
resembling Aku's, stepped out and walked about a thousand feet towards
the crowd. Only children actually being loaded were to go beyond this
point; parents had to stay at the airport gates.

"When do I go, Dad?"

"Shortly, son." Rothwell laid his hand on the lean shoulder. "You're in
the second hundred." There was a brief, awkward silence. "Martha, you'd
better take him over to the line." He held out his hand. "So long, son."

Jim, Jr., shook his hand gravely, then, without a word, suddenly threw
his hands tight around his younger sister. He took his mother's hand,
and they walked slowly over to the sad line that was forming beyond the
gate.

Rothwell turned to his daughter. "You going over there too, kitten?" The
words were gruff in his tight throat.

She wiped a hand quickly across her cheek. "No, Dad, I guess I'll stay
here with you." She stood close beside him.

Aku, forgotten until now, cleared his throat. "I think the loading
should start, General."

Raising his hand in a half-salute, Rothwell signaled to a captain
standing near the gate who turned and motioned to a small cordon of
military police. Shortly, a group of fifty of the first youngsters in
the line separated from the others and moved slowly out onto the
concrete ribbon towards the waiting ship. The rest of the line
hesitated, then edged reluctantly up to the gate, to take the place of
the fifty who had left. They waited there, the children of a thousand
families, suddenly dead quiet, staring after the fifty that slowly moved
away.

They walked quietly, in a tight group, without any antics or horseplay
which, in itself, gave the event an air of unreality. Approaching the
ship, they seemed to huddle even closer together, forming a pathetically
tiny cluster in the shadow of the towering space cruiser. The title of a
book that he had read once, many years before, flashed unexpectedly in
Rothwell's memory, _The Story of Mankind_. He looked sadly after the
fifty, then back at the silent line. Were these frightened kids now
writing the final period in the last chapter? He shook himself, work to
be done, no time now for daydreams.

As the fifty reached the ship and started to enter the elevator,
Rothwell turned and beckoned to some technicians standing out of sight
just inside the entrance to the control tower. Three of them ran out and
set up what looked like a television set, only with three screens. One
ran back, unreeling a power cable, while a fourth flicked on a bank of
switches, making feverish, minute adjustments. Rothwell felt the sweat
in his hands. "Is it okay, Sergeant?"

The back of the sergeant's shirt was wet though the air was cool. "It's
got to be, sir!" His fingers played across the knobs. "All that metal,
the whole thing is critical as ... Ah!" He jumped back. The screens
flashed into life.

       *       *       *       *       *

Aku stiffened. His lieutenant gasped audibly, made a jerky movement
towards the screens, then suddenly became aware of three MPs standing
beside him, hands nonchalantly cradling blunt-nosed weapons.

All three receivers showed similar scenes, the milling youngsters and
the ship, but from up close, the pictures jerking and swaying
erratically as if the cameras were somehow fastened to moving human
beings. Then the scenes condensed into a cramped, jostling blackness as
the fifty crowded into the elevator and were lifted up the side of the
ship.

Next, were three views of a large room, bare except for what appeared to
be overhead cranes and other mechanical paraphernalia of a military shop
or warehouse. For a while the fifty moved about restlessly, then the
cameras swung about simultaneously to face a wall that slowly slid
apart.

Rothwell froze. "Good Lord!"

Six murky _things_ moved from the open wall towards the cameras, which
fell back to the opposite side of the room. Each was large, many times
the size of a man, but somehow indistinct, for the cameras didn't convey
any sense of shape or form. For an instant, one of the screens flashed a
picture of a terrified human face, and arms raised protectively as the
shadowy things moved in upon the group.

A projection snapped out from one, grabbed two of the humans, and
hurled them into a corner. Then it motioned a dozen or so others over to
the same spot. With similar harsh, sweeping movements, the group of
humans was quickly broken up into three roughly equal segments. One of
the groups seemed to be protecting someone who appeared seriously hurt.
A black tentacle lashed out and one of the screens went blank. Then
another.
