Ackerman Boone shrugged. "Don't look at me," he said mockingly. "I'm
only an enlisted man and they don't give enlisted men enough math to
answer questions like that. But reckoning by the seat of my pants I
would say, yes. Yes, we could get away like that--if we act fast.
Because every minute we waste is a minute that brings us closer to the
sun and makes it harder to get away in the lifeboats. If we act, men, we
got to act fast."

"You're talking mutiny, Boone," a grizzled old space veteran said. "You
can count me out."

"What's the matter, McCormick? Yellow?"

"I'm not yellow. I say it takes guts to maintain discipline in a real
emergency. I say _you're_ yellow, Boone."

"You better be ready to back that up with your fists, McCormick," Boone
said savagely.

"I'm ready any time you're ready, you yellow mutinous bastard!"

       *       *       *       *       *

Ackerman Boone launched himself at the smaller, older man, who stood his
ground unflinchingly although he probably knew he would take a sound
beating. But four or five crewmen came between them and held them apart,
one saying:

"Look who's talking, Boone. You say time's precious but you're all set
to start fighting. Every minute--"

"Every _second_," Boone said grimly, "brings us more than a hundred
miles closer to the sun."

"What can we do, Acky?"

Instead of answer, Ackerman Boone dramatically mopped the sweat from his
face. All the men were uncomfortably warm now. It was obvious that the
temperature within the _Glory of the Galaxy_ had now climbed fifteen or
twenty degrees despite the fact that the refrigs were working at full
capacity. Even the bulkheads and the metal floor of crew quarters were
unpleasantly warm to the touch. The air was hot and suddenly very dry.

"I'll tell you what we ought to do," Ackerman Boone said finally.
"Admiral Stapleton or no Admiral Stapleton, President of the Galactic
Federation or no President of the Galactic Federation, we ought to take
over this ship and man the life boats for everyone's good. If they don't
want to save their lives and ours--let's us save our lives and theirs!"

Roars of approval greeted Boone's words, but Spacer McCormick and some
of the other veterans stood apart from the loud speech-making which
followed. Actually, Boone's wild words--which he gambled with after the
first flush of enthusiasm for his plan--began to lose converts. One by
one the men drifted toward McCormick's silent group until, finally,
Boone had lost almost his entire audience.

Just then a T/2 rushed into crew quarters and shouted: "Hey, is Boone
around? Has anyone seen Boone?"

This brought general laughter. Under the circumstances, the question was
not without its humorous aspect.

"What'll you have?" Boone demanded.

"The refrigs, Boone! They are on the blink. Overstrained themselves and
burned themselves out. Inside of half an hour this ship's going to be an
oven hot enough to kill us all!"

"Half an hour, men!" Ackerman Boone cried. "Now, do we take over the
ship and man those lifeboats or don't we!"

The roar which followed his words was a decidedly affirmative one.

       *       *       *       *       *

"These are the figures," Admiral Stapleton said. "You can see, Mr.
President, that we have absolutely no chance whatever if we man the
lifeboats. We would perish as assuredly as we would if we remained with
the _Glory of the Galaxy_ in normal space."

"Admiral, I have to hand it to you. I don't know how you can think--in
all this heat."

"Have to, sir. Otherwise we all die."

"The air temperature--"

"Is a hundred and thirty degrees and rising. We've passed salt tablets
out to everyone, sir, but even then it's only a matter of time before
we're all prostrated. If you're sure you give your permission, sir--"

"Admiral Stapleton, you are running this ship, not I."

"Very well, sir. I've sent our subspace officer, Lieutenant Ormundy, to
throw in the subspace drive. We should know in a few moments--"

"No crash hammocks or anything?"

"I'm sorry, sir."

"It isn't your fault, Admiral. I was merely pointing out a fact."

The squawk box blared: "Now hear this! Now hear this! T/3 Ackerman Boone
to Admiral Stapleton. Are you listening, Admiral?"

Admiral Stapleton's haggard, heat-worn face bore a look of astonishment
as he listened. Ackerman said, "We have Lieutenant Ormundy, Admiral.
He's not killing us all by putting us into subspace in minutes when it
ought to take hours, you understand. We have Ormundy and we have the
subspace room. A contingent of our men is getting the lifeboats ready.
We're going to abandon ship, Admiral, all of us, including you and the
politicians even if we have to drag you aboard the lifeboats at
N--gunpoint."

Admiral Stapleton's face went ashen. "Let me at a radio!" he roared. "I
want to answer that man and see if he understands exactly what mutiny
is!"

While Ackerman Boone was talking over the squawk box, the temperature
within the _Glory of the Galaxy_ rose to 145 deg. Fahrenheit.

       *       *       *       *       *

"Fifteen minutes," Larry Grange said. "In fifteen minutes the heat will
have us all unconscious." Only it wasn't Larry alone who was talking. It
was Larry and Johnny Mayhem. In a surprisingly short time the young
Secret Serviceman had come to accept the dual occupation of his own
mind. It was there: it was either dual occupation or insanity and if the
voice which spoke inside his head said it was Johnny Mayhem, then it was
Johnny Mayhem. Besides, Larry felt clear-headed in a way he had never
felt before, despite the terrible, sapping heat. It was as if he had
matured suddenly--the word matured came to him instinctively--in the
space of minutes. Or, as if a maturing influence were at work on his
mind.

"What can we do?" Sheila said. "The crew has complete control of the
ship."

"Secret Service chief says we're on our own. There's no time for
co-ordinated planning, but somehow, within a very few minutes, we've got
to get inside the subspace room and throw the ship out of normal space
or we'll all be roasted."

"Some of your men are there now, aren't they?"

"In the companionway outside the subspace room, yeah. But they'll never
force their way in time. Not with blasters and not with N-guns, either.
Not in ten minutes, they won't."

"Larry, all of a sudden I--I'm scared. We're all going to die, Larry. I
