you back to your own period of history. For I see that you will never be
yourself, here. It will be hard to accomplish, but we'll try. Now I
shall put you under an anesthetic...."

Ned felt better immediately, for there was real hope now, where there
had been none before. Maybe he'd be back in his home-town of Harwich
again. Maybe he'd see the old machine-shop, there. And the trees
greening out in Spring. Maybe he'd be seeing Betty Moore in Hurley,
soon.... Ned relaxed, as a tiny hypo-needle bit into his arm....

As soon as Ned Vince passed into unconsciousness, Loy Chuk went to work
once more, using that pair of brain-helmets again, exploring carefully
the man's mind. After hours of research, he proceeded to prepare his
plans. The government of Kar-Rah was a scientific oligarchy, of which
Loy was a prime member. It would be easy to get the help he needed.

A horde of small, grey-furred beings and their machines, toiled for many
days.

       *       *       *       *       *

Ned Vince's mind swam gradually out of the blur that had enveloped it.
He was wandering aimlessly about in a familiar room. The girders of the
roof above were of red-painted steel. His tool-benches were there,
greasy and littered with metal filings, just as they had always been. He
had a tractor to repair, and a seed-drill. Outside of the machine-shop,
the old, familiar yellow sun was shining. Across the street was the
small brown house, where he lived.

With a sudden startlement, he saw Betty Moore in the doorway. She wore a
blue dress, and a mischievous smile curved her lips. As though she had
succeeded in creeping up on him, for a surprise.

"Why, Ned," she chuckled. "You look as though you've been dreaming, and
just woke up!"

He grimaced ruefully as she approached. With a kind of fierce gratitude,
he took her in his arms. Yes, she was just like always.

"I guess I _was_ dreaming, Betty," he whispered, feeling that mighty
sense of relief. "I must have fallen asleep at the bench, here, and had
a nightmare. I thought I had an accident at Pit Bend--and that a lot of
worse things happened.... But it wasn't true ..."

Ned Vince's mind, over which there was still an elusive fog that he did
not try to shake off, accepted apparent facts simply.

He did not know anything about the invisible radiations beating down
upon him, soothing and dimming his brain, so that it would never
question or doubt, or observe too closely the incongruous circumstances
that must often appear. The lack of traffic in the street without, for
instance--and the lack of people besides himself and Betty.

He didn't know that this machine-shop was built from his own memories of
the original. He didn't know that this Betty was of the same origin--a
miraculous fabrication of metal and energy-units and soft plastic. The
trees outside were only lantern-slide illusions.

It was all built inside a great, opaque dome. But there were hidden
television systems, too. Thus Loy Chuk's kind could study this ancient
man--this Kaalleee. Thus, their motives were mostly selfish.

Loy, though, was not observing, now. He had wandered far out into cold,
sad sea-bottom, to ponder. He squeaked and chatted to himself,
contemplating the magnificent, inexorable march of the ages. He
remembered the ancient ruins, left by the final supermen.

"The Kaalleee believes himself home," Loy was thinking. "He will survive
and be happy. But there was no other way. Time is an Eternal Wall. Our
archeological researches among the cities of the supermen show the
truth. Even they, who once ruled Earth, never escaped from the present
by so much as an instant...."


THE END


PRINTED IN U. S. A.




Transcriber's Note:

    This etext was produced from _Amazing Stories_ April 1956 and was
    first published in _Amazing Stories_ November 1942. Extensive
    research did not uncover any evidence that the U.S. copyright on
    this publication was renewed. Minor spelling and typographical
    errors have been corrected without note.


