resistance. More--more--

The violet beam spread across the canopy of blackness, supporting it
against the pressing, driving rays of pale green.

Then the gathering fleet was driven off, just as it seemed that that
hopeless, futile curtain must break, and admit a flood of destroying
rays. Great ray projectors on the ground drove their terrible energies
through the enemy curtains of blankness, as light illumines and
disperses darkness.

And then, when the fleet retired, on all Earth, the only life was under
that dark shroud!

       *       *       *

"We are alone, Trest," said Roal, "alone, now, in all the system, save
for these, the children of men, the machines. Pity that men would not
spread to other planets," he said softly.

"Why should they? Earth was the planet for which they were best fitted."

"We are alive--but is it worth it? Man is gone now, never to return.
Life, too, for that matter," answered Trest.

"Perhaps it was ordained; perhaps that was the right way. Man has always
been a parasite; always he had to live on the works of others. First, he
ate of the energy, which plants had stored, then of the artificial foods
his machines made for him. Man was always a makeshift; his life was
always subject to disease and to permanent death. He was forever useless
if he was but slightly injured; if but one part were destroyed.

"Perhaps, this is--a last evolution. Machines--man was the product of
life, the best product of life, but he was afflicted with life's
infirmities. Man built the machine--and evolution had probably reached
the final stage. But truly, it has not, for the machine can evolve,
change far more swiftly than life. The machine of the last evolution is
far ahead, far from us still. It is the machine that is not of iron and
beryllium and crystal, but of pure, living force.

"Life, chemical life, could be self-maintaining. It is a complete unit
in itself and could commence of itself. Chemicals might mix
accidentally, but the complex mechanism of a machine, capable of
continuing and making a duplicate of itself, as is F-2 here--that could
not happen by chance.

"So life began, and became intelligent, and built the machine which
nature could not fashion by her Controls of Chance, and this day Life
has done its duty, and now Nature, economically, has removed the
parasite that would hold back the machines and divert their energies.

"Man is gone, and it is better, Trest," said Roal, dreaming again. "And
I think we had best go soon."

"We, your heirs, have fought hard, and with all our powers to aid you,
Last of Men, and we fought to save your race. We have failed, and as you
truly say, Man and Life have this day and forever gone from this system.

"The Outsiders have no force, no weapon deadly to us, and we shall, from
this time on, strive only to drive them out, and because we things of
force and crystal and metal can think and change far more swiftly, they
shall go, Last of Men.

"In your name, with the spirit of your race that has died out, we shall
continue on through the unending ages, fulfilling the promise you saw,
and completing the dreams you dreamt.

"Your swift brains have leapt ahead of us, and now I go to fashion that
which you hinted," came from F-2's thought-apparatus.

Out into the clear sunlight F-2 went, passing through that black
cloudiness, and on the twisted, massed rocks he laid a plane of force
that smoothed them, and on this plane of rock he built a machine which
grew. It was a mighty power plant, a thing of colossal magnitude. Hour
after hour his swift-flying forces acted, and the thing grew, moulding
under his thoughts, the deadly logic of the machine, inspired by the
leaping intuition of man.

The sun was far below the horizon when it was finished, and the glowing,
arcing forces that had made and formed it were stopped. It loomed
ponderous, dully gleaming in the faint light of a crescent moon and
pinpoint stars. Nearly five hundred feet in height, a mighty, bluntly
rounded dome at its top, the cylinder stood, covered over with smoothly
gleaming metal, slightly luminescent in itself.

Suddenly, a livid beam reached from F-2, shot through the wall, and to
some hidden inner mechanism--a beam of solid, livid flame that glowed in
an almost material cylinder.

       *       *       *       *

There was a dull, drumming beat, a beat that rose, and became a
low-pitched hum. Then it quieted to a whisper.

"Power ready," came the signal of the small brain built into it.

F-2 took control of its energies and again forces played, but now they
were the forces of the giant machine. The sky darkened with heavy
clouds, and a howling wind sprang up that screamed and tore at the tiny
rounded hull that was F-2. With difficulty he held his position as the
winds tore at him, shrieking in mad laughter, their tearing fingers
dragging at him.

The swirl and patter of driven rain came--great drops that tore at the
rocks, and at the metal. Great jagged tongues of nature's forces, the
lightnings, came and jabbed at the awful volcano of erupting energy that
was the center of all that storm. A tiny ball of white-gleaming force
that pulsated, and moved, jerking about, jerking at the touch of
lightnings, glowing, held immobile in the grasp of titanic force-pools.

For half an hour the display of energies continued. Then, swiftly as it
had come, it was gone, and only a small globe of white luminescence
floated above the great hulking machine.

F-2 probed it, seeking within it with the reaching fingers of
intelligence. His probing thoughts seemed baffled and turned aside,
brushed away, as inconsequential. His mind sent an order to the great
machine that had made this tiny globe, scarcely a foot in diameter. Then
again he sought to reach the thing he had made.

"You, of matter, are inefficient," came at last. "I can exist quite
alone." A stabbing beam of blue-white light flashed out, but F-2 was not
