home, and then to take a short vacation before resuming her duties as
his confidential secretary. The next morning when she came down from her
room, a change had been made.

Two armed men were with Dom Blessing at breakfast and accompanied him
wherever he went. She discovered that two more men with guns were
stationed in the bare anteroom and a guard was stationed at every
entrance to the house.

"Why all the protection?" she asked Blessing.

"A wealthy man must be careful," said Blessing cheerfully. "When we
don't understand all the implications of new circumstances, we must be
prepared for anything, eh?"

There was only one new circumstance Trella could think of. Without
actually intending to, she exclaimed:

"You aren't afraid of Quest? Why, an android can't hurt a human!"

Blessing peered at her over his spectacles.

"And what if he isn't an android, eh? And if he is--what if old Mansard
didn't build in the prohibition against harming humans that's required
by law? What about that, eh?"

Trella was silent, shocked. There was something here she hadn't known
about, hadn't even suspected. For some reason, Dom Blessing feared Dr.
Eriklund Mansard ... or his heir ... or his mechanical servant.

                   *       *       *       *       *

She was sure that Blessing was wrong, that Quest, whether man or android,
intended no harm to him. Surely, Quest would have said something of
such bitterness during their long time together on Ganymede and aspace,
since he did not know of Trella's connection with Blessing. But, since
this was to be the atmosphere of Blessing's house, she was glad that he
decided to assign her to take the Mansard papers to the New York
laboratory.

Quest came the day before she was scheduled to leave.

Trella was in the living room with Blessing, discussing the instructions
she was to give to the laboratory officials in New York. The two
bodyguards were with them. The other guards were at their posts.

Trella heard the doorbell ring. The heavy oaken front door was kept
locked now, and the guards in the anteroom examined callers through a
tiny window.

Suddenly alarm bells rang all over the house. There was a terrific crash
outside the room as the front door splintered. There were shouts and the
sound of a shot.

"The steel doors!" cried Blessing, turning white. "Let's get out of
here."

He and his bodyguards ran through the back of the house out of the
garage.

Blessing, ahead of the rest, leaped into one of the cars and started the
engine.

The door from the house shattered and Quest burst through. The two
guards turned and fired together.

He could be hurt by bullets. He was staggered momentarily.

Then, in a blur of motion, he sprang forward and swept the guards aside
with one hand with such force that they skidded across the floor and lay
in an unconscious heap against the rear of the garage. Trella had opened
the door of the car, but it was wrenched from her hand as Blessing
stepped on the accelerator and it leaped into the driveway with spinning
wheels.

Quest was after it, like a chunky deer, running faster than Trella had
ever seen a man run before.

Blessing slowed for the turn at the end of the driveway and glanced back
over his shoulder. Seeing Quest almost upon him, he slammed down the
accelerator and twisted the wheel hard.

The car whipped into the street, careened, and rolled over and over,
bringing up against a tree on the other side in a twisted tangle of
wreckage.

With a horrified gasp, Trella ran down the driveway toward the smoking
heap of metal. Quest was already beside it, probing it. As she reached
his side, he lifted the torn body of Dom Blessing. Blessing was dead.

"I'm lucky," said Quest soberly. "I would have murdered him."

"But why, Quest? I knew he was afraid of you, but he didn't tell me
why."

"It was conditioned into me," answered Quest "I didn't know it until
just now, when it ended, but my father conditioned me psychologically
from my birth to the task of hunting down Dom Blessing and killing him.
It was an unconscious drive in me that wouldn't release me until the
task was finished.

"You see, Blessing was my father's assistant on Ganymede. Right after my
father completed development of the surgiscope, he and my mother blasted
off for Io. Blessing wanted the valuable rights to the surgiscope, and
he sabotaged the ship's drive so it would fall into Jupiter.

"But my father was able to control it in the heavy atmosphere of Jupiter,
and landed it successfully. I was born there, and he conditioned me to
