Through it all, Kurho made a token show of interest; he twice lost his
temper in boast against boast, but he was more often a blunt enigma. He
saw much and said little. Those times when he did speak, so extravagant
were his grunt and gesture that much was lost.

When Kurho departed at last for Far End, he had implanted a feeling of
frustration and one thing more--the disturbing thought that not all of
his own boasts were idle!

       *       *       *

And now came the time for Otah to cross. It was done so quietly that not
many knew he was gone, but soon the reports came: Otah had been received
with great clamor and curiosity by the Kurho people, and accorded much
honor! Aside from that, the result was much the same, as Otah saw much
and said little and did not once lose his temper. Kurho persisted in his
boast and claim, and it was rumored that the two leaders had gone so far
as to discuss the weapons!

Rumor was true. Otah returned from Far End and immediately called
Council, even as Kurho was calling Council. Little had been gained,
little proven; the perilous thing was still there, that monstrous means
of death that might come in a moment of temper or reprisal to either
tribe. Alas, such weapons were not easily relinquished--and who would be
first?

Plainly, the way would now be slow and heavy with suspicion, but a
method to abate such a threat must soon be formulated.

On _that_ Otah and Kurho were agreed!

       *       *       *       *       *

So the two great leaders agreed, and were patient, and twice more there
were meetings. So engrossed they became and even enamored, that they
were only dimly aware--

Others in the valley, those so scattered and isolate as to be considered
only clans, had long watched and waited--and yearned. Neither the
long-shaft weapon nor the way of making were longer secret--so why
should they not also have?

Inevitably the reports trickled in. A lone clansman had been observed
near the river, employing one of the weapons crudely devised but
efficient. Some days later, one from the high-plateau was seen skulking
the valley with such a weapon. Those lone ones, who barely subsisted in
the barren places beyond river and cave, nor foraged afield--discreet
and fleeting at first but with increased daring as the days went on.

And so fixed were Otah and Kurho that such reports were tolerated. There
could be no threat here! True, the way of the making was no longer
secret. True, such clan-people had long been despised and neglected and
left to their own grubbing hunger--but was it not recognized, especially
now, that the tribes of Otah and Kurho would determine the fate of all?

_They erred--both Otah and Kurho. Neither would determine, nor would
preponderance of weapons determine. It was not yet perceived that such
clan-people were not Tribe-People, and thus could not know the meaning
of Council, nor weigh consequence, nor realize in their new-found
cleverness that a single arrogant act would trigger the first and final
avalanche...._

It came. It came on a day when a lone and hungry clansman found himself
a full day's journey beyond the river; he was not of Otah's Tribe nor
any tribe, nor did he know that the two he faced were of Kurho's Tribe.
In the dispute over the bring, so emboldened was he by his weapon
newly-fashioned that he used it quick and surely.

He did not again look at the two bodies! Taking up his bring, the lone
one departed quite leisurely, without even the good sense to flee in
horror of the consequence.

Consequence came. It came soon, before the sun was scarcely down. It
came swiftly without question or council, as word reached Far End that
two had been slain. Throughout the night it came in divergent attack, as
Kurho deployed a token force near the river and sent his real strength
high to the north, across the valley-rim and down upon Otah's people. It
was at once attack and reprisal and reason!

And for Otah it was reason! For many weeks past, in test and maneuver of
the long-shafts he had looked to the north. Now couriers brought the
alarm swiftly, and within minutes his forces were launched--fearless
ones who knew each foot of terrain by day or night. Otah led one
contingent and Mai-ak the other, strategy being to stem Kurho's strength
high upon the valley-rim, deplete the enemy and then join force to hunt
down any who sifted through.

It was good strategy, the only strategy--and for a time it went well.
Within the hour Kurho's forces were scattered, as attack and
counter-attack surged and slashed in wild eruption of the long-shafts.
Just as eruptive were the neuro-emotives, as each in his primal way must
have known that _this_ was the long awaitment, _this_ was the grim
finality in Kurho's boast and Otah's boast of weapons.

A few sifted through, but were quickly brought down as Otah's drifting
rear-guard deployed to their assignments. It became evident early that
Otah's tribe was more proficient in the long-shafts!

Alas, mere proficiency would not prevail against force of numbers. Well
within the hour Otah knew it, knew with a raging despair that time was
not with him, he had deployed too late with too little. Now he knew with
consuming clarity, that despite the lulling pretense Kurho's boasts of
strength had not been idle boasts!

This was Otah's last bitter thought, and then he was too occupied for
cerebral indulgence. For the next minutes he wielded truer than any! Men
came and fell, and others leaped and fell, skulls shattered, the
life-stuff spurting, before Otah's shaft went spinning away in shattered
ruin; he leaped to seize another, employed it in great sweeping swaths
against those who still came. Two went down, but two came to fill the
gap. In perfect unison, one parried as the other wielded truly to the
mark....

It cannot be said, with surety, that Otah in that ultimate moment felt
pain. It is fairly certain that both finitely and cosmically the initial
numbing shock did register; and it may be assumed that he jolted rather
