
This entire dialogue occupied somewhat less than _five minutes_!

       *       *       *       *       *


Setts of thirty-six numbers of the last volume of this paper, may be
had for one dollar--very cheap. Any one desiring them may enclose the
amount to the publishers.

       *       *       *       *       *




ADVERTISING IN LONDON.


A new and "improved" mode of advertising has been introduced in
London; which is to furnish laborers, carmen, &e. with while frocks or
jackets, on the backs of which are printed in large characters, the
advertisements of hotels, tradesmen, &c. The wearers of the bills are
generally allowed a small compensation.

       *       *       *       *       *




DEERFIELD BRIDGE.


The railroad bridge at Deerfield, Mass., is said to be a splendid
affair. It is fifty feet above the traveled stage road bridge, and
nearly eighty feet above the waters of the river. The piers are
already erected, and nearly ready for the superstructure.

       *       *       *       *       *


The Artesian well at South Boston has been sunk to the depth of nearly
400 feet. The boring machine is worked by steam power, and progresses
about 12 feet per day.

       *       *       *       *       *


Some impudent doctor says that tight lacing is a public benefit; for
it kills off the foolish girls, and leaves the wise ones for good
wives and mothers.

       *       *       *       *       *


An exchange remarks--"When we see a man kick a horse, we say at
once, that he never need come to court our daughter, for he should not
have her if he was worth a million."

       *       *       *       *       *




INFORMATION WANTED.


Mr. Editor,--I have a saw-mill which draws thirty-six square inches of
water, under thirty feet head. I wish to build another below with only
twenty feet head of water. How many square inches aperture will be
required to discharge the same quantity in the same time? If some of
your correspondents will give me an answer, they will much oblige me.
R. C. Navarino, Sept. 7, 1846.

We shall have no occasion to depend on correspondents for the
intelligence above required. Thirty-six inches of aperture under
thirty feet head, will admit the discharge of 660 cubic feet of water
per minute; the velocity of the water being forty-four feet per
second. Under twenty feet head the velocity is only thirty-six feet
per second, and consequently forty-four inches aperture is required to
discharge an equal quantity.

_Rule in Hydraulics_: (never before published.) To ascertain the
velocity of water issuing through an aperture under a given head:
Multiply the head in feet by 62, and the square root of the product
will show the velocity in feet per second.

       *       *       *       *       *




RAILROAD INTELLIGENCE.


Old Colony Railroad, from Boston to Plymouth, Mass., has for some time
past been in full operation, and is doing a fair business.

The whole amount of the stock of the Michigan Central
Railroad--$2,000,000--has been taken up, and of course the enterprise
will go forward.

On the first day of the opening of the subscription books for the
stock of the New York and Boston Railroad, the people of Middletown
took shares to the amount of $350,000; and they expect to go up to
half a million.

The Cheshire N. H. Railroad is going ahead rapidly, the grading and
bridging on every part of the line being in progress. This road is to
be carried over the Connecticut River at or near Bellows' Falls.

The stock of the Wilton N. H. Branch Railroad is said to be all taken
up.

A General Meeting of the proprietors of the St. Lawrence and Atlantic
Railway was recently held at Montreal. It appears by the report of the
board of directors, that 5,364 shares had been taken up, amounting to
about L1,200,000. All parties appear to be confident that this road
will be constructed and in operation at an early day.

The Little Miami Railroad having been opened to Springfield, is doing
a fair business, and adds important facilities to trade in that
section.

The directors of the New York and Erie Railroad are said to be "going
on with it in the right way to accomplish the great object of the
undertaking." Contracts are already made for the construction of the
road as far as the valley of the Delaware. Proposals for grading 133
miles more are advertised for, which will carry the road to
Binghampton, 270 miles from New York.

       *       *       *       *       *


It is asserted that of all single marriageable ladies who reached
Oregon last season, two-thirds were married before the first of March.

       *       *       *       *       *


Alexandria has decided on re-annexation to Virginia, by a vote of 633
to 197. Probably some of her citizens want to be Governors and
Representatives.

       *       *       *       *       *


The arrival of the new steamship Southerner in Charleston, 57 hours
from New York, excited much admiration. She brought 125 passengers;
and was pronounced decidedly the handsomest vessel seen in those
waters.

       *       *       *       *       *


The price of flour at Buffalo, on the 18th inst., was $3.70 per
barrel. Corn, 49 cents per bushel.

       *       *       *       *       *


Mr. J. B. Gough, who has been for some time seriously indisposed, has
nearly recovered his health, and returned north.

       *       *       *       *       *


Gold is imported from St. Petersburgh to London, at the rate of
$500,000 per month.--The mining business in Russia is increasing.

       *       *       *       *       *


The Boston Common Council charge $600 per annum for the licenses of
the Howard and National Theatres, with the condition that spirituous
liquors shall not be sold, and no female admitted unless in company
with a male.

       *       *       *       *       *




LATEST NEWS:

[Illustration: Latest News]

ARRIVAL OF THE CAMBRIA.


The steamship Cambria arrived at Boston on Friday, the 18th inst.,
thirteen days from Liverpool. From the news by this arrival, we select
the following brief items:--not very interesting, but better than
none.

       *       *       *       *       *


The man Henry, who lately attempted to shoot the King of France, has
been tried and condemned to work in the galleys for life.--During his
trial, he expressed a wish to be condemned to death, but the request
was not granted.

       *       *       *       *       *


The Bank of England has reduced its rate of interest to 3 per cent.,
whereby greater facilities are given to trade to counteract the
depression likely to proceed from other causes.

       *       *       *       *       *


The British ship America recently arrived from the coast of Mexico and
Peru, liberally laden with specie, the amount whereof is stated at
_six millions of dollars_, which, in silver, would make nearly two
hundred and fifty tons.

       *       *       *       *       *


The Queen of Spain, Isabella, has decided to marry her cousin, the
Duke de Cadiz; thus putting to rest a subject which has long agitated
the circles of royalty in Europe.

       *       *       *       *       *


Late news from the east furnishes the report that robberies and
piracies are of hourly occurrence in the immediate vicinity of Hong
Kong. An ordinance had been promulgated in China for the relief of
debtors.

       *       *       *       *       *


The Cambria brought 133 passengers, among whom were Hon. Washington
Irving, our late minister to Spain, and the celebrated "Cruikshanks,"
the caricaturist.

       *       *       *       *       *




THE MEXICAN WAR.


The latest news from Mexico, and from our army, represent affairs in a
most quaint and ludicrous light, with regard to the policy and
movements of all parties. The average progress of the army of invasion
appears to be about three miles a day, with no opposition, nor
prospect of any; while the Mexicans are tame as bullfrogs, showing no
disposition to either fight or run. Gen. Parades having got sick of
his job, has suffered himself to be imprisoned at the approach of
Santa Anna, who has returned and resumed the government without
opposition. Mr. Polk having sent an embassy, virtually asking
permission to "give it up," has been refused a hearing, unless he will
first withdraw our troops from the Mexican territory; while the
Mexican army appointed to combat and conquer Gen. Taylor, remains at
ease and content at Mexico, calculating, probably, that the longer
they wait, the less distance they will have to travel to encounter the
Yankees. Whether our President will call off Gen. Taylor with the
American troops, before they reach anywhere in particular, remains to
be decided.

       *       *       *       *       *




TRADE TO SANTA FE.


The trade to Santa Fe is said to be much greater this year than ever
before. Thirty-nine companies of traders have gone out this season,
taking with them four hundred and thirteen wagons, which are in the
charge of about eighteen hundred men. The value of the goods carried
out by these traders, is estimated at nearly a million of dollars.

       *       *       *       *       *


A large mastiff dog picked up a favorite lap dog in the upper part of
the city last week, and ran off with it. He was pursued by a mob, and
after a severe chase, the terrified pet was recovered and brought back
rejoicing.

       *       *       *       *       *




THE SCIENTIFIC AMERICAN.


Persons wishing to subscribe for this paper, have only to enclose the
amount in a letter directed (post paid) to

            MUNN & COMPANY,
Publishers of the Scientific American, New York City.

TERMS.--$2 a year; ONE DOLLAR IN ADVANCE--the remainder in 6 months.

_Postmasters_ are respectfully requested to receive subscriptions for
this paper, to whom a discount of 25 per cent will be allowed.

Any person sending us 4 subscribers for 6 months, shall receive a copy
of the paper for the same length of time, gratis.

       *       *       *       *       *




THE HARBOR OF HAVANA


[Illustration: Havana Harbor]


Our engraving represents a view of the harbor of Havana, which is one
of the most commodious in the world, communicating with the sea by a
channel little more than half a mile in length, and from 300 to 350
yards wide; its depth varying from eight to ten fathoms. The harbor
itself is an oblong basin, surrounded by heights which usually shelter
it from the wind.

Havana is a place of considerable strength, and, besides the walls and
ditches which surround it, the city is defended by six strongholds,
called the Moro, the Cobanas, No. 4, the Atares, the Principie and the
Putna. The first and last serve to protect the entrance of the harbor,
the second is a sort of citadel and the others are so placed as to
cover the approaches by land. The line of fortification, embraces a
sort of irregular polygon of an eliptical form, the greatest diameter
of which is 2,100 yards, and the smallest 1,200 yards in extent. The
entrance between the Moro and Putna, castles is about 1,500 yards
long, and in its narrowest part 350 yards wide. In the arsenal of the
Havana, there have been built 49 ships of the line, 22 frigates, 7
packet ships, 9 brigs of war, and 15 schooners of war.

The town is built on the western side of the basin, near the channel,
on a kind of promontory. The suburbs, or _barrios esta muros_, cover
more ground and contain a larger population than the city itself, and
yet they are so intimately connected with it, that the first of the
houses in the suburban street, stands on the very edge of the
_glacis_.

The streets are narrow, crooked, and generally unpaved, but they
contain some well-built houses. There are, too, several good buildings
among the churches, one of which contains the remains of Christopher
