
Tulan, missing Jezef's smooth help, was caught up in the daze and strain
of battle now. He punched buttons and shouted orders as he played the
fleet to match the enemy's subtle swerving. Another heavy salvo came
in, but the computers had its sources pinpointed now, and it was
contained. These first few seconds favored the enemy, who was only
fighting the light shield in front of Tulan's formation.

Now the swelling mass of blips streaked apart in the viewers and space
lit up with the fire and interception. Two ships met head on; at such
velocities it was like a nuclear blast.

Then Coar's ships crashed through the shield and into the center of the
doughnut. Ringed, outgunned, outpredicted, they hit such a concentration
of missiles that it might as well have been a solid wall. Ships
disintegrated as if on a common fuse; the ones that didn't take direct
hits needed none, in that debris-filled stretch of hell.

Tulan's flagship rocked in the wave of expanding hot gasses. There was a
jolt as some piece of junk hit her; if she hadn't already been under
crushing acceleration away from the inferno she'd have been holed.

From a safer distance the path of destruction was a bright slash across
space, growing into the distance with its momentum. It was annihilation,
too awful for triumph; there was only horror in it. Tulan knew that with
this overwhelming tactic he'd written a new text-book for action against
an inferior fleet. He hoped it would never be printed. Sweating and
weak, he slumped in his straps and was ill.

       *       *       *       *       *

While brief repairs and re-arming were under way, he sent scouts
spiraling out to pick up any radio beams from Sennech or Teyr. There
were none. The telescopes showed Sennech's albedo down to a fraction of
normal; that, he supposed, would indicate smoke in the atmosphere. He
wavered, wondering whether he should detach more ships to send out
there. Reason and training told him to stick to the key objective, which
was Coar's surrender. He waited only for Group Three to achieve a
converging course, then started around the sun again.

They didn't encounter even a roboscout. He crossed the sun, curved into
Coar's orbit, matched speeds, and coasted along a million miles ahead of
the planet, sending light sorties in to feel out any ambushes. Still
there was no sign of fight, so he went in closer where the enemy could
get a good look at his strength. Finally he took a small group in boldly
over the fourth planet's Capitol and sent a challenge.

The answer was odd. "This is Acting President Kliu. What are your
intentions?"

Tulan realized he was holding his breath. He let it out and looked
around the silent command room, meeting the intent eyes of his staff. He
had an unreal feeling; this couldn't be the climax, the
consummation--this simple exchange over the radio. He lifted the
microphone slowly. "This is Admiral Tulan, commanding the Fleets of
Sennech. I demand your immediate and unconditional surrender."

There was something in the reply that might have been dry amusement:
"Oh; by all means; but I hope you're not going to insist upon an
elaborate ceremony. Right now we don't give a damn about the war; we're
worried about the race."

There was more silence, and Tulan turned, uncertainly, looking at the
bare spot where Jezef ought to be standing. He buzzed for
Communications. "Connect me with Captain Rhu. Rhu; I'm advancing you in
rank and leaving you in charge here. I'm going down to accept the
surrender and find out what this man's talking about."

       *       *       *       *       *

Kliu was gaunt and middle-aged, wearing, to Tulan's surprise, the gray
of Coar's First Level of Science. He was neither abject nor hostile,
agreeing impatiently to turn over the secret of Coar's weapon and to
assist with a token occupation of the planet. Again Tulan had the
unreal, let-down feeling, and judging by Kliu's amused expression, it
showed.

Tulan sent couriers to get things started, then turned back to the
scientist. "So you have had a change of government. What did you mean,
about the race?"

Kliu watched him for a moment. "How much do you know about the weapon?"

"Very little. That it projects matter through hyperspace and
materializes it where you want it."

"Not exactly; the materialization is spontaneous. Mass somehow distorts
hyperspace, and when the projected matter has penetrated a certain
distance into such distortion, it pops back into normal space. The
penetration depends mainly upon a sort of internal energy in the
missile; you might think of it more as a voltage than as velocity.
You've made it very hard for us to get reports, but I understand we
successfully placed stuff in Sennech's crust."

"Yes; causing volcanoes. Our scientists speculated that any kind of
matter would do it."

"That's right. Actually, we were projecting weighed chunks of rock. When
one bit of matter, even a single atom, finds itself materializing where
another already is, unnatural elements may be formed, most of them
unstable. That's what blew holes in your crust and let the magma out."

Tulan considered the military implications of the weapon for a few
moments, then pulled his mind back. "I see; but what about the
radiation? It wasn't more than a trace when I left."

Kliu looked away for a while before answering. "When we learned you'd
defied your government, our own military got out of hand. They had a
couple of days before the sun cut us off completely, and they began
throwing stuff as soon as it could be dug and hauled to the projectors.
They used high energies to get it past the sun. As we realize now, a lot
of it hit the planet deeper than at first, below the crust. Under such
pressure a different set of fissionables was formed. Some of them burst
out and poisoned the atmosphere, but most of them are still there." He
leaned forward and eyed Tulan hard. "We've got to get an expedition out
there to study things. Will you help?"

There was another of the palpable silences, and when he spoke Tulan's
voice sounded unnatural. "I--yes; we'll help. Whatever you want. Is ...
Sennech finished?"

Kliu smiled tightly. "Sennech, for sure; and she may take the rest of us
with her. Nobody conceived what this might come to. A lot of those deep
materializations produced pockets of dense fissionables, and they're
converging toward the center under their own weight. When they get to a
certain point, we'll have a fine monument to Man's ingenuity. A
planet-size nova." He stood up. "I'll start organizing."

