water. Others that lifted loads that hundreds of men and oxen could not
have stirred.

"They showed men of knowledge like Rastin and Thicourt beside me. Some
were healers, working miraculous cures in a way that I could not
understand. Others were gazing through giant tubes at the stars, and the
pictures showed what they saw, showed that all of the stars were great
suns like our sun, and that our sun was greater than earth, that earth
moved around it instead of the reverse! How could such things be, I
wondered. Yet they said that it was so, that earth was round like an
apple, and that with other earths like it, the planets, moved round the
sun. I heard, but could scarce understand.

"At last Rastin and Thicourt led me out of that place of living pictures
and to their ground-vehicle. We went again through the streets to their
building, where first I had found myself. As we went I saw that none
challenged my right to go, nor asked who was my lord. And Rastin said
that none now had lords, but that all were lord, king and priest and
noble, having no more power than any in the land. Each man was his own
master! It was what I had hardly dared to hope for, in my own time, and
this, I thought, was greatest of all the marvels they had shown me!

"We entered again their building but Rastin and Thicourt took me first
to another room than the one in which I had found myself. They said that
their men of knowledge were gathered there to hear of their feat, and to
have it proved to them.

"'You would not be afraid to return to your own time, Henri?' asked
Rastin, and I shook my head.

"'I want to return to it,' I told them. 'I want to tell my people there
what I have seen--what the future is that they must strive for.'

"'But if they should not believe you?' Thicourt asked.

"'Still I must go--must tell them,' I said.

"Rastin grasped my hand. 'You are a man, Henri,' he said. Then, throwing
aside the cloak and hat I had worn outside, they went with me down to
the big white-walled room where first I had found myself.

"It was lit brightly now by many of the shining glass things on ceiling
and walls, and in it were many men. They all stared strangely at me and
at my clothes, and talked excitedly so fast that I could not understand.
Rastin began to address them.

"He seemed explaining how he had brought me from my own time to his. He
used many terms and words that I could not understand, incomprehensible
references and phrases, and I could understand but little. I heard again
the names of Einstein and De Sitter that I had heard before, repeated
frequently by these men as they disputed with Rastin and Thicourt. They
seemed disputing about me.

"One big man was saying, 'Impossible! I tell you, Rastin, you have faked
this fellow!'

"Rastin smiled. 'You don't believe that Thicourt and I brought him here
from his own time across five centuries?'

"A chorus of excited negatives answered him. He had me stand up and
speak to them. They asked me many questions, part of which I could not
understand. I told them of my life, and of the city of my own time, and
of king and priest and noble, and of many simple things that they seemed
quite ignorant of. Some appeared to believe me but others did not, and
again their dispute broke out.

"'There is a way to settle the argument, gentlemen,' said Rastin
finally.

"'How?' all cried.

"'Thicourt and I brought Henri across five centuries by rotating the
time-dimensions at this spot,' he said. 'Suppose we reverse that
rotation and send him back before your eyes--would that be proof?'

"They all said that it would. Rastin turned to me. 'Stand on the metal
circle, Henri,' he said. I did so.

"All were watching very closely. Thicourt did something quickly with the
levers and buttons of the mechanisms in the room. They began to hum, and
blue light came from the glass tubes on some. All were quiet, watching
me as I stood there on the circle of metal. I met Rastin's eyes and
something in me made me call goodbye to him. He waved his hand and
smiled. Thicourt pressed more buttons and the hum of the mechanisms grew
louder. Then he reached toward another lever. All in the room were
tense and I was tense.

"Then I saw Thicourt's arm move as he turned one of the many levers.

"A terrific clap of thunder seemed to break around me, and as I closed
my eyes before its shock, I felt myself whirling around and falling at
the same time as though into a maelstrom, just as I had done before. The
awful falling sensation ceased in a moment and the sound subsided. I
opened my eyes. I was on the ground at the center of the familiar field
from which I had vanished hours before, upon the morning of that day. It
was night now, though, for that day I had spent five hundred years in
the future.

"There were many people gathered around the field, fearful, and they
screamed and some fled when I appeared in the thunderclap. I went toward
those who remained. My mind was full of things I had seen and I wanted
