
VIII.


Days turned into weeks in the school, cut off from the world outside.
Jason almost became proud of his ability to deal death. He recognized
all the animals and plants in the nursery room and had been promoted to
a trainer where the beasts made sluggish charges at him. His gun picked
off the attackers with dull regularity. The constant, daily classes were
beginning to bore him as well.

Though the gravity still dragged at him, his muscles were making great
efforts to adjust. After the daily classes he no longer collapsed
immediately into bed. Only the nightmares got worse. He had finally
mentioned them to Brucco, who mixed up a sleeping potion that took away
most of their effect. The dreams were still there, but Jason was only
vaguely aware of them upon awakening.

By the time Jason had mastered all the gadgetry that kept the Pyrrans
alive, he had graduated to a most realistic trainer that was only a
hair-breadth away from the real thing. The difference was just in
quality. The insect poisons caused swelling and pain instead of instant
death. Animals could cause bruises and tear flesh, but stopped short of
ripping off limbs. You couldn't get killed in this trainer, but could
certainly come very close to it.

Jason wandered through this large and rambling jungle with the rest of
the five-year-olds. There was something a bit humorous, yet sad, about
their unchildlike grimness. Though they still might laugh in their
quarters, they realized there was no laughing outside. To them survival
was linked up with social acceptance and desirability. In this way
Pyrrus was a simple black-and-white society. To prove your value to
yourself and your world, you only had to stay alive. This had great
importance in racial survival, but had very stultifying effects on
individual personality. Children were turned into like-faced killers,
always on the alert to deal out death.

Some of the children graduated into the outside world and others took
their places. Jason watched this process for a while before he realized
that all of those from the original group he had entered with were gone.
That same day he looked up the chief of the adaptation center.

"Brucco," Jason asked, "how long do you plan to keep me in this
kindergarten shooting gallery?"

"You're not being 'kept' here," Brucco told him in his usual irritated
tone. "You will be here until you qualify for the outside."

[Illustration]

"Which I have a funny feeling will be never. I can now field strip and
reassemble every one of your blasted gadgets in the dark. I am a dead
shot with this cannon. At this present moment, if I had to, I could
write a book on the Complete Flora and Fauna of Pyrrus, and How to Kill
It. Perhaps I don't do as well as my six-year-old companions, but I have
a hunch I do about as good a job now as I ever will. Is that true?"

Brucco squirmed with the effort to be evasive, yet didn't succeed. "I
think, that is, you know you weren't born here, and--"

"Come, come," Jason said with glee, "a straight-faced old Pyrran like
you shouldn't try to lie to one of the weaker races that specialize in
that sort of thing. It goes without saying that I'll always be sluggish
with this gravity, as well as having other inborn handicaps. I admit
that. We're not talking about that now. The question is--will I improve
with more training, or have I reached a peak of my own _development_
now?"

Brucco sweated. "With the passage of time there will be improvement of
course--"

"Sly devil!" Jason waggled a finger at him. "Yes or no, now. Will I
improve _now_ by more training _now_?"

"No," Brucco said, and still looked troubled. Jason sized him up like a
poker hand.

"Now let's think about that. I won't improve--yet I'm still stuck here.
That's no accident. So you must have been ordered to keep me here. And
from what I have seen of this planet, admittedly very little, I would
say that Kerk ordered you to keep me here. Is that right?"

"He was only doing it for your own sake," Brucco explained, "trying to
keep you alive."

"The truth is out," Jason said, "so let us now forget about it. I didn't
come here to shoot robots with your offspring. So please show me the
street door. Or is there a graduating ceremony first? Speeches, handing
out school pins, sabers overhead--"

"Nothing like that," Brucco snapped. "I don't see how a grown man like
you can talk such nonsense all the time. There is none of that, of
course. Only some final work in the partial survival chamber. That is a
compound that connects with the outside--really is a part of the
outside--except the most violent life forms are excluded. And even some
of those manage to find their way in once in a while."

"When do I go?" Jason shot the question.

"Tomorrow morning. Get a good night's sleep first. You'll need it."

       *       *       *       *       *

There was one bit of ceremony attendant with the graduation. When Jason
came into his office in the morning, Brucco slid a heavy gun clip across
the table.

"These are live bullets," he said. "I'm sure you'll be needing them.
After this your gun will always be loaded."

They came up to a heavy air lock, the only locked door Jason had seen in
the center. While Brucco unlocked it and threw the bolts, a sober-faced
eight-year-old with a bandaged leg limped up.

"This is Grif," Brucco said. "He will stay with you, wherever you go,
from now on."

"My personal bodyguard?" Jason asked, looking down at the stocky child
who barely reached his waist.

"You might call him that." Brucco swung the door open. "Grif tangled
with a sawbird, so he won't be able to do any real work for a while. You
yourself admitted that you will never be able to equal a Pyrran, so you
should be glad of a little protection."

"Always a kind word, that's you, Brucco," Jason said. He bent over and
shook hands with the boy. Even the eight-year-olds had a bone-crushing
grip.

The two of them entered the lock and Brucco swung the inner door shut
behind them. As soon as it was sealed the outer door opened
automatically. It was only partly open when Grif's gun blasted twice.
Then they stepped out onto the surface of Pyrrus, over the smoking body
of one of its animals.

Very symbolic, Jason thought. He was also bothered by the realization
that he hadn't remembered to look for something coming in. Then, too, he
couldn't even identify the beast from its charred remains. He glanced
around, hoping he would be able to fire first himself, next time.

This was an unfulfilled hope. The few beasts that came their way were
always seen first by the boy. After an hour of this, Jason was so
irritated that he blasted an evil-looking thorn plant out of existence.
He hoped that Grif wouldn't look too closely at it. Of course the boy
did.

"That plant wasn't close. It is stupid to waste good ammunition on a
plant," Grif said.

There was no real trouble during the day. Jason ended by being bored,
though soaked by the frequent rainstorms. If Grif was capable of
carrying on a conversation, he didn't show it. All Jason's gambits
failed. The following day went the same way. On the third day, Brucco
appeared and looked Jason carefully up and down.

"I don't like to say it, but I suppose you are as ready to leave now as
you ever will be. Change the virus filter noseplugs every day. Always
check boots for tears and metalcloth suiting for rips. Medikit supplies
renewed once a week."

"And wipe my nose and wear my galoshes. Anything else?" Jason asked.

Brucco started to say something, then changed his mind. "Nothing that
you shouldn't know well by now. Keep alert. And ... good luck." He
followed up the words with a crushing handshake that was totally
unexpected. As soon as the numbness left Jason's hand, he and Grif went
out through the large entrance lock.




IX.


Real as they had been, the training chambers had not prepared him for
the surface of Pyrrus. There was the basic similarity of course. The
feel of the poison grass underfoot and the erratic flight of a stingwing
in the last instant before Grif blasted it. But these were scarcely
noticeable in the crash of the elements around him.

A heavy rain was falling, more like a sheet of water than individual
drops. Gusts of wind tore at it, hurling the deluge into his face. He
wiped his eyes clear and could barely make out the conical forms of two
volcanoes on the horizon, vomiting out clouds of smoke and flame. The
reflection of this inferno was a sullen redness on the clouds that raced
by in banks above them.

There was a rattle on his hard hat and something bounced off to splash
to the ground. He bent over and picked up a hailstone as thick as his
thumb. A sudden flurry of hail hammered painfully at his back and neck,
he straightened hurriedly.

As quickly as it started the storm was over. The sun burned down,
melting the hailstones and sending curls of steam up from the wet
street. Jason sweated inside his armored clothing. Yet before they had
gone a block it was raining again and he shook with chill.

Grif trudged steadily along, indifferent to the weather or the volcanoes
that rumbled on the horizon and shook the ground beneath their feet.
Jason tried to ignore his discomfort and match the boy's pace.

The walk was a depressing one. The heavy, squat buildings loomed grayly
through the rain, more than half of them in ruins. They walked on a
pedestrian way in the middle of the street. The occasional armored
trucks went by on both sides of them. The midstreet sidewalk puzzled
Jason until Grif blasted something that hurtled out of a ruined building
towards them. The central location gave them some chance to see what was
coming. Suddenly Jason was very tired.

"Grif, this city of yours is sure down at the heels. I hope the other
ones are in better shape."

"I don't know what you mean talking about heels. But there are no other
cities. Some mining camps that can't be located inside the perimeter.
But no other cities."

This surprised Jason. He had always visualized the planet with more than
one city. There were a _lot_ of things he didn't know about Pyrrus, he
realized suddenly. All of his efforts since landing had been taken up
with the survival studies. There were a number of questions he wanted to
ask. But ask them of somebody other than his grouchy eight-year-old
bodyguard. There was one person who would be best equipped to tell him
what he wanted to know.

"Do you know Kerk?" he asked the boy. "Apparently he's your ambassador
to a lot of places, but his last name--"

"Sure, everybody knows Kerk. But he's busy, you shouldn't see him."

Jason shook a finger at him. "Minder of my body you may be. But minder
of my soul you are not. What do you say I call the shots and you go
along to shoot the monsters? O.K.?"

       *       *       *       *       *

They took shelter from a sudden storm of fist-sized hailstones. Then,
with ill grace, Grif led the way to one of the larger, central
buildings. There were more people here and some of them even glanced at
Jason for a minute, before turning back to their business. Jason dragged
himself up two flights of stairs before they reached a door marked
CO-ORDINATION AND SUPPLY.

"Kerk in here?" Jason asked.

"Sure," the boy told him. "He's in charge."

"Fine. Now you get a nice cold drink, or your lunch, or something, and
meet me back here in a couple of hours. I imagine Kerk can do as good a
job of looking after me as you can."

The boy stood doubtfully for a few seconds, then turned away. Jason
wiped off some more sweat and pushed through the door.

There were a handful of people in the office beyond. None of them looked
up at Jason or asked his business. Everything has a purpose on Pyrrus.
If he came there--he must have had a good reason. No one would ever
think to ask him what he wanted. Jason, used to the petty officialdom of
a thousand worlds, waited for a few moments before he understood. There
was only one other door. He shuffled over and opened it.

Kerk looked up from a desk strewed about with papers and ledgers. "I was
wondering when you would show up," he said.

"A lot sooner if you hadn't prevented it," Jason told him as he dropped
wearily into a chair. "It finally dawned on me that I could spend the
rest of my life in your blood-thirsty nursery school if I didn't do
something about it. So here I am."

"Ready to return to the 'civilized' worlds, now that you've seen enough
of Pyrrus?"

"I am not," Jason said. "And I'm getting very tired of everyone telling
me to leave. I'm beginning to think that you and the rest of the Pyrrans
are trying to hide something."

Kerk smiled at the thought. "What could we have to hide? I doubt if any
planet has as simple and one-directional an existence as ours."

"If that's true, then you certainly wouldn't mind answering a few direct
questions about Pyrrus?"

Kerk started to protest, then laughed. "Well done. I should know better
by now than to argue with you. What do you want to know?"

Jason tried to find a comfortable position on the hard chair, then gave
up. "What's the population of your planet?" he asked.

For a second Kerk hesitated, then said, "Roughly thirty thousand. That
is not very much for a planet that has been settled this long, but the
reason for that is obvious."

"All right, population thirty thousand," Jason said. "Now how about
surface control of your planet. I was surprised to find out that this
city within its protective wall--the perimeter--is the only one on the
planet. Let's not consider the mining camps, since they are obviously
just extensions of the city. Would you say then, that you people control
more or less of the planet's surface than you did in the past?"

       *       *       *       *       *

Kerk picked up a length of steel pipe from the desk, that he used as a
paperweight, and toyed with it as he thought. The thick steel bent like
rubber at his touch, as he concentrated on his answer.

"That's hard to say offhand. There must be records of that sort of
thing, though I wouldn't know where to find them. It depends on so many
factors--"

"Let's forget that for now then," Jason said. "I have another question
that's really more relevant. Wouldn't you say that the population of
Pyrrus is declining steadily, year after year?"

There was a sharp _twang_ as the steel snapped in Kerk's fingers, the
pieces dropping to the floor. He stood, over Jason, his hands extended
towards the smaller man, his face flushed and angry.

"Don't ever say that," he roared. "Don't let me ever hear you say that
again!"

Jason sat as quietly as he could, talking slowly and picking out each
word with care. His life hung in the balance.

"Don't get angry, Kerk. I meant no harm. I'm on your side, remember? I
can talk to you because you've seen much more of the universe than the
Pyrrans who have never left the planet. You are used to discussing
things. You know that words are just symbols. We can talk and know you
don't have to lose your temper over mere words--"

Kerk slowly lowered his arms and stepped away. Then he turned and poured
himself a glass of water from a bottle on the desk. He kept his back
turned to Jason while he drank.

Very little of the sweat that Jason wiped from his sopping face was
caused by the heat in the room.

"I'm ... sorry I lost my temper," Kerk said, dropping heavily into his
chair. "Doesn't usually happen. Been working hard lately, must have got
my temper on edge." He made no mention of what Jason had said.

"Happens to all of us," Jason told him. "I won't begin to describe the
condition my nerves were in when I hit this planet. I'm finally forced
to admit that everything you said about Pyrrus is true. It is the most
deadly spot in the system. And only native-born Pyrrans could possibly
survive here. I can manage to fumble along a bit after my training, but
I know I would never stand a chance on my own. You probably know I have
an eight-year-old as a bodyguard. Gives a good idea of my real status
here."

Anger suppressed, Kerk was back in control of himself now. His eyes
narrowed in thought. "Surprises me to hear you say that. Never thought I
would hear you admit that anyone could be better than you at anything.
Isn't that why you came here? To prove that you were as good as any
native-born Pyrran?"

"Score one for your side," Jason admitted. "I didn't think it showed
that much. And I'm glad to see your mind isn't as muscle-bound as your
body. Yes, I'll admit that was probably my main reason for coming, that
