
At the University he devoted himself to the study of classics,
especially Latin, which in those days was the language adopted by men of
learning, when engaged in writing works of a philosophical and
scientific character.

After having remained at Cambridge for three years, Horrox returned to
his native county, and was appointed curate of Hoole, a place about
eight miles distant from Preston. Hoole is described as a narrow
low-lying strip of land consisting largely of moss, and almost converted
into an island by the waters of Martin Mere on the south, and the Ribble
on the north; and, though doubtless an open and favourable situation for
astronomical observation, it could not have been attractive as a place
of residence. Yet it was here on November 24, 1639, that Horrox made his
famous observation of the first recorded transit of Venus, an occurrence
with which his name will be for ever associated.

It was while at Cambridge that Horrox first turned his attention to the
study of astronomy. His love of the sublime, and the captivating
influence exerted on his mind by the contemplation of the heavenly
bodies, induced him to adopt astronomy as a pursuit congenial to his
tastes, and capable of exercising his highest mental powers. Having this
object in view, he applied himself with much earnestness to the study of
mathematics; he had, however, to rely mainly upon his own exertions, for
at that time no branch of physical or mathematical science was taught at
Cambridge, and consequently he obtained no professional instruction.

It was so also with astronomy, which, as a science, was scarcely known
in this country; no regular record of astronomical observations was kept
by any individual observer, and no public observatory existed in England
or in France.

The disadvantages and obstacles which Horrox had to encounter may be
best described by quoting his own words. He writes: 'There were many
hindrances. The abstruse nature of the study, my inexperience and want
of means dispirited me. I was much pained not to have any one to whom I
could look for guidance, or indeed for the sympathy of companionship in
my endeavours, and I was assailed by the languor and weariness which are
inseparable from every great undertaking. What then was to be done? I
could not make the pursuit an easy one, much less increase my fortune,
and least of all imbue others with a love for astronomy; and yet to
complain of philosophy on account of its difficulties would be foolish
and unworthy. I determined, therefore, that the tediousness of study
should be overcome by industry; my poverty--failing a better method--by
patience; and that instead of a master I would use astronomical books.
Armed with these weapons I would contend successfully; and, having heard
of others acquiring knowledge without greater help, I would blush that
any one should be able to do more than I, always remembering that word
of Virgil's--

    Totidem nobis animaeque manusque.

Having heard much praise bestowed upon the works of Lansberg, a Flemish
astronomer, Horrox thought it would be to his advantage to procure a
copy of his writings. This he succeeded in obtaining after some
difficulty, and devoted a considerable time to calculating Ephemerides,
based upon the Lansberg Tables, but after making a number of
computations he discovered that they were unreliable and inaccurate.

In the year 1636 Horrox made the acquaintance of William Crabtree, a
devoted astronomer, who lived at Broughton, a suburb of Manchester. A
close friendship soon existed between the two men, and they carried on
an active correspondence about matters relating to the science which
they both loved so well.

Crabtree, who was an unbeliever in Lansberg, urged Horrox to discard the
Flemish astronomer's works, and devote his talents to the study of Tycho
Brahe and Kepler. This advice led Horrox to make a more rigorous
examination of the Lansberg Tables, and after comparing them with the
observations made by Crabtree, which coincided with his own, he resolved
to renounce them. Acting on the advice of his friend, Horrox directed
his attention to the writings of Kepler. The youthful astronomer soon
realised their value, and was charmed with the accuracy of observation
and inductive reasoning displayed in the elucidation of those general
laws which constituted a new era in the history of astronomy.

The Rudolphine Tables, which were the astronomical calculations
commenced by Tycho Brahe, and completed by Kepler, were regarded by
Horrox as much superior to those of Lansberg; but it occurred to him
that they might be improved by changing some of the numbers, and yet
retaining the hypotheses. To this task he applied himself with much
earnestness and assiduity, and after close application and laborious
study he accomplished the arduous undertaking of bringing those tables
to a high state of perfection.

In his investigation of the Lunar theory, Horrox outstripped all his
predecessors, and Sir Isaac Newton distinctly affirms he was the first
to discover that the Moon's motion round the Earth is in the form of an
ellipse with the centre in the lower focus. Besides having made this
discovery, Horrox was able to explain the causes of the inequalities of
the Moon's motion, which render the exact computation of her elements so
difficult.

The Annual Equation, an irregularity discovered by Tycho Brahe, which is
produced by the increase and decrease of the Sun's disturbing force as
the Earth approaches or recedes from him in her orbit, had its value
first assigned by Horrox. This he calculated to be eleven minutes
sixteen seconds, which is within four seconds of what it has since been
proved to be by the most recent observations.

The Evection, an irregular motion of the Moon discovered by Ptolemy,
whereby her mean longitude is increased or diminished, was explained by
Horrox as depending upon the libratory motion of the apsides, and the
change which takes place in the eccentricity of the lunar orbit.

These discoveries were made by Horrox before he attained the age of
twenty years, and if his reputation had alone rested upon them his name
would have been honourably associated with those who have attained to
the highest eminence in astronomy.

Another achievement which adds lustre to Horrox's name consists in his
detection of the inequality in the mean motions of Jupiter and Saturn.

He also directed his attention to the study of cometary bodies, and
arrived at certain conclusions with regard to the nature of their
movements. At first, he believed like Kepler that comets were projected
in straight lines from the Sun; this supposition having been upheld on
account of the great elongation of their orbits. He next perceived that
their velocity increased as they approached the Sun, and decreased as
they receded from him. Afterwards he says, 'They move in an elliptic
figure or near it,' and finally he arrived at the conclusion that
'comets move in elliptical orbits, being carried round the Sun with a
velocity which is probably variable.' This theory has been verified by
numerous observations, and is now generally accepted by astronomers.

Horrox also made a series of observations on the tides. He notified the
extent of their rise and fall at different periods, and investigated
other phenomena associated with their ebb and flow. After having
continued his observations for some time, he wrote to his friend
Crabtree, and informed him that he had perceived many interesting
details which had not been previously described, and he hoped to be
able to arrive at some important conclusions with regard to their nature
and cause. Unfortunately, Horrox's writings on this subject, along with
many other important papers, have been lost or destroyed. We are
therefore ignorant of the result of his researches, which were the first
undertaken by any person for the purpose of scientific inquiry.

From his study of the Lansberg and Rudolphine Tables, Horrox arrived at
the conclusion that a transit of Venus would occur on November 24, 1639.
This transit was for some unaccountable reason overlooked by Kepler, who
predicted one in 1631, and the next not until 1761. The transit of 1631
was not visible in Europe.

We are indebted to Horrox for a description of the transit of 1639--the
first that was ever observed of which there is any record; and were it
not for the accuracy of his calculations, the occurrence of the
phenomenon would have been unperceived, and no history of the
conjunction would have been handed down to posterity. As soon as Horrox
had assured himself of the time when the transit would take place, he
wrote to Crabtree to inform him of the date, and asked him to make
observations with his telescope, and especially to examine the diameter
of the planet, which he thought had been over-estimated. He also
requested him to write to Dr. Foster of Cambridge, and inform him of the
expected event, as it was desirable that the transit should be observed
from several places in consequence of the possibility of failure, owing
to an overcast sky. His letter is dated October 26, 1639. He says: 'My
reason for now writing is to advise you of a remarkable conjunction of
the Sun and Venus on the 24th of November, when there will be a transit.
As such a thing has not happened for many years past, and will not occur
again in this century, I earnestly entreat you to watch attentively with
your telescope in order to observe it as well as you can.

'Notice particularly the diameter of Venus, which is stated by Kepler to
be seven minutes, and by Lansberg to be eleven, but which I believe to
be scarcely greater than one minute.'

In describing the method which he adopted for observing the transit,
Horrox writes as follows: 'Having attentively examined Venus with my
instrument, I described on a sheet of paper a circle, whose diameter was
nearly equal to six inches--the narrowness of the apartment not
permitting me conveniently to use a larger size. I divided the
circumference of this circle into 360 degrees in the usual manner, and
its diameter into thirty equal parts, which gives about as many minutes
as are equivalent to the Sun's apparent diameter. Each of these thirty
parts was again divided into four equal portions, making in all one
hundred and twenty; and these, if necessary, may be more minutely
subdivided. The rest I left to ocular computation, which, in such small
sections, is quite as certain as any mechanical division. Suppose,
then, each of these thirty parts to be divided into sixty seconds,
according to the practice of astronomers. When the time of the
observation approached, I retired to my apartment, and, having closed
the windows against the light, I directed my telescope--previously
adjusted to a focus--through the aperture towards the Sun, and received
his rays at right angles upon the paper already mentioned. The Sun's
image exactly filled the circle, and I watched carefully and unceasingly
for any dark body that might enter upon the disc of light.

'Although the corrected computation of Venus' motions which I had before
prepared, and on the accuracy of which I implicitly relied, forbade me
to expect anything before three o'clock in the afternoon of the 24th,
yet since, according to the calculations of most astronomers, the
conjunction should take place sooner--by some even on the 23rd--I was
unwilling to depend entirely on my own opinion, which was not
sufficiently confirmed, lest by too much self-confidence I might
endanger the observation. Anxiously intent, therefore, on the
undertaking through the greater part of the 23rd, and on the whole of
the 24th, I omitted no available opportunity of observing her ingress. I
watched carefully on the 24th from sunrise to nine o'clock, and from a
little before ten until noon, and at one in the afternoon, being called
away in the intervals by business of the highest importance, which for
these ornamental pursuits I could not with propriety neglect.[3] But
during all this time I saw nothing in the Sun except a small and common
spot, consisting as it were of three points at a distance from the
centre towards the left, which I noticed on the preceding and following
days. This evidently had nothing to do with Venus. About fifteen minutes
past three in the afternoon, when I was again at liberty to continue my
labours, the clouds, as if by divine interposition, were entirely
dispersed, and I was once more invited to the grateful task of repeating
my observations. I then beheld a most agreeable spectacle--the object of
my sanguine wishes; a spot of unusual magnitude and of a perfectly
circular shape, which had already fully entered upon the Sun's disc on
the left, so that the limbs of the Sun and Venus precisely coincided,
forming an angle of contact. Not doubting that this was really the
shadow of the planet, I immediately applied myself sedulously to observe
it.

'In the first place, with respect to the inclination, the line of the
diameter of the circle being perpendicular to the horizon, although its
plane was somewhat inclined on account of the Sun's altitude, I found
that the shadow of Venus at the aforesaid hour--namely, fifteen minutes
past three--had entered the Sun's disc about 62 deg. 30', certainly between
60 deg. and 65 deg., from the top towards the right. This was the appearance in
the dark apartment; therefore, out of doors, beneath the open sky,
according to the laws of optics, the contrary would be the case, and
Venus would be below the centre of the Sun, distant 62 deg. 30' from the
lower limbs or the nadir, as the Arabians term it. The inclination
remained to all appearances the same until sunset, when the observation
was concluded.

'In the second place, the distance between the centres of Venus and the
Sun I found by three observations to be as follows:--

          The Hour.          | Distance of the Centres.
                             |
At 3.15 by the clock         |        14' 24''
 " 3.35      "               |        13' 30''
 " 3.45      "               |        13'  0''
 " 3.50 the apparent sunset. |

The true setting being 3.45, and the apparent about 5 minutes later, the
difference being caused by refraction. The clock therefore was
sufficiently correct.

'In the third place I found after careful and repeated observation that
the diameter of Venus, as her shadow was depicted on the paper, was
larger indeed than the thirtieth part of the solar diameter, though not
more so than the sixth, or at the utmost the fifth of such a part.
Therefore let the diameter of the Sun be to the diameter of Venus as 30'
to 1' 12''. Certainly her diameter never equalled 1' 30'', scarcely
perhaps 1' 20'', and this was evident as well when the planet was near
the Sun's limb as when far distant from it.

[Illustration: VENUS ON THE SUN'S DISC.]

'This observation was made in an obscure village where I have long been
in the habit of observing, about fifteen miles to the north of
Liverpool, the latitude of which I believe to be 53 deg. 20', although by
common maps it is stated at 54 deg. 12', therefore the latitude of the
village will be 53 deg. 35', and longitude of both 22 deg. 30' from the
Fortunate Islands, now called the Canaries. This is 14 deg. 15' to the west
of Uraniburg in Denmark, the longitude of which is stated by Brahe, a
native of the place, to be 36 deg. 45' from these islands.

'This is all I could observe respecting this celebrated conjunction
during the short time the Sun remained in the horizon: for although
Venus continued on his disc for several hours, she was not visible to me
longer than half an hour on account of his so quickly setting.
Nevertheless, all the observations which could possibly be made in so
short a time I was enabled by Divine Providence to complete so
effectually that I could scarcely have wished for a more extended
period. The inclination was the only point upon which I failed to attain
the utmost precision; for, owing to the rapid motion of the Sun it was
difficult to observe with certainty to a single degree, and I frankly
confess that I neither did nor could ascertain it. But all the rest is
sufficiently accurate, and as exact as I could desire.'

Besides having ascertained that the diameter of Venus subtends an angle
not much greater than one minute of arc, Horrox reduced the horizontal
solar parallax from fifty-seven seconds as stated by Kepler to fourteen
seconds, a calculation within one and a half second of the value
assigned to it by Halley sixty years after. He also reduced the Sun's
semi-diameter.

Crabtree, to whom Horrox refers as 'his most esteemed friend and a
person who has few superiors in mathematical learning,' made
preparations to observe the transit similar to those already described.
But the day was unfavourable, dark clouds obscured the sky and rendered
the Sun invisible. Crabtree was in despair, and relinquished all hope of
being able to witness the conjunction. However, just before sunset there
was a break in the clouds, and the Sun shone brilliantly for a short
interval. Crabtree at once seized his opportunity, and to his intense
delight observed the planet fully entered upon the Sun's disc. Instead
of proceeding to take observations, he was so overcome with emotion at
the sight of the phenomenon, that he continued to gaze upon it with rapt
attention, nor did he recover his self-possession until the clouds again
hid from his view the setting Sun.[4]

Crabtree's observation of the transit was, however, not a fruitless one.
He drew from memory a diagram showing the exact position of Venus on the
Sun's disc, which corresponded in every respect with Horrox's
observation; he also estimated the diameter of the planet to be 7/200
that of the Sun, which when calculated gives one minute three seconds;
Horrox having found it to be one minute twelve seconds. This transit of
Venus is remarkable as having been the first ever observed of which
there is any record, and for this we are indebted to the genius of
