
"Well?" Erick said. "Did you both succeed?"

Around them peasants and merchants were pouring from the entrance,
leaving the City to return to their farms and villages, starting the
long trip back across the plain toward the hills beyond. None of them
noticed the shivering girl and the young man and the old priest standing
by the wall.

"Mine's in place," Jan said. "On the other side of the City, on the
extreme edge. Buried by a well."

"Mine's in the industrial section," Mara whispered, her teeth
chattering. "Jan, give me something to put over me! I'm freezing."

"Good," Erick said. "Then the three coils should trisect dead center, if
the models were correct." He looked up at the darkening sky. Already,
stars were beginning to show. Two dots, the evening patrol, moved slowly
toward the horizon. "Let's hurry. It won't be long."

They joined the line of Martians moving along the road, away from the
City. Behind them the City was losing itself in the sombre tones of
night, its black spires disappearing into darkness.

They walked silently with the country people until the flat ridge of
dead trees became visible on the horizon. Then they left the road and
turned off, walking toward the trees.

"Almost time!" Erick said. He increased his pace, looking back at Jan
and Mara impatiently.

"Come on!"

They hurried, making their way through the twilight, stumbling over
rocks and dead branches, up the side of the ridge. At the top Erick
halted, standing with his hands on his hips, looking back.

"See," he murmured. "The City. The last time we'll ever see it this
way."

"Can I sit down?" Mara said. "My feet hurt me."

Jan pulled at Erick's sleeve. "Hurry, Erick! Not much time left." He
laughed nervously. "If everything goes right we'll be able to look at
it--forever."

"But not like this," Erick murmured. He squatted down, snapping his case
open. He took some tubes and wiring out and assembled them together on
the ground, at the peak of the ridge. A small pyramid of wire and
plastic grew, shaped by his expert hands.

At last he grunted, standing up. "All right."

"Is it pointed directly at the City?" Mara asked anxiously, looking down
at the pyramid.

Erick nodded. "Yes, it's placed according--" He stopped, suddenly
stiffening. "Get back! It's time! _Hurry!_"

Jan ran, down the far side of the slope, away from the City, pulling
Mara with him. Erick came quickly after, still looking back at the
distant spires, almost lost in the night sky.

"Down."

Jan sprawled out, Mara beside him, her trembling body pressed against
his. Erick settled down into the sand and dead branches, still trying to
see. "I want to see it," he murmured. "A miracle. I want to see--"

A flash, a blinding burst of violet light, lit up the sky. Erick clapped
his hands over his eyes. The flash whitened, growing larger, expanding.
Suddenly there was a roar, and a furious hot wind rushed past him,
throwing him on his face in the sand. The hot dry wind licked and seared
at them, crackling the bits of branches into flame. Mara and Jan shut
their eyes, pressed tightly together.

"God--" Erick muttered.

The storm passed. They opened their eyes slowly. The sky was still alive
with fire, a drifting cloud of sparks that was beginning to dissipate
with the night wind. Erick stood up unsteadily, helping Jan and Mara to
their feet. The three of them stood, staring silently across the dark
waste, the black plain, none of them speaking.

The City was gone.

At last Erick turned away. "That part's done," he said. "Now the rest!
Give me a hand, Jan. There'll be a thousand patrol ships around here in
a minute."

"I see one already," Mara said, pointing up. A spot winked in the sky, a
rapidly moving spot. "They're coming, Erick." There was a throb of chill
fear in her voice.

"I know." Erick and Jan squatted on the ground around the pyramid of
tubes and plastic, pulling the pyramid apart. The pyramid was fused,
fused together like molten glass. Erick tore the pieces away with
trembling fingers. From the remains of the pyramid he pulled something
forth, something he held up high, trying to make it out in the darkness.
Jan and Mara came close to see, both staring up intently, almost without
breathing.

"There it is," Erick said. "There!"

       *       *       *       *       *

In his hand was a globe, a small transparent globe of glass. Within the
glass something moved, something minute and fragile, spires almost too
small to be seen, microscopic, a complex web swimming within the hollow
glass globe. A web of spires. A City.

Erick put the globe into the case and snapped it shut. "Let's go," he
said. They began to lope back through the trees, back the way they had
come before. "We'll change in the car," he said as they ran. "I think we
should keep these clothes on until we're actually inside the car. We
still might encounter someone."

"I'll be glad to get my own clothing on again," Jan said. "I feel funny
in these little pants."

"How do you think I feel?" Mara gasped. "I'm freezing in this, what
there is of it."

"All young Martian brides dress that way," Erick said. He clutched the
case tightly as they ran. "I think it looks fine."

"Thank you," Mara said, "but it is cold."

"What do you suppose they'll think?" Jan asked. "They'll assume the City
was destroyed, won't they? That's certain."

"Yes," Erick said. "They'll be sure it was blown up. We can count on
that. And it will be damn important to us that they think so!"

"The car should be around here, someplace," Mara said, slowing down.

"No. Farther on," Erick said. "Past that little hill over there. In the
ravine, by the trees. It's so hard to see where we are."

"Shall I light something?" Jan said.

"No. There may be patrols around who--"
