pitifully few men. And every car shot back loaded with wounded.

"I thought you said your people weren't fighters, Artur?" I said.
"They're fighting now, like trained soldiers."

"Surely. They are well trained, but they have no fighting spirit, like
the enemy. Their training, it is no more than a form of amusement, a
recreation, the following of custom. He taught it, and my people drill,
knowing not for what they train. See! Their beautiful ranks crumple and
go down before the formless rush of the Neens!"

"The disintegrator beams, sir?" asked Correy insidiously.

"No. That would be needless slaughter. Those brown hordes are witless
savages. An atomic bomb, Mr. Correy. Perhaps two of them, one on either
flank of the enemy. Will you give the order?"

                     *      *      *      *      *

Correy rapped out the order, and the ship darted to the desired
position for the first bomb--darted so violently that Artur was almost
thrown off his feet.

"Watch!" I said, motioning to Artur to share a port with me.

The bomb fled downward, a swift black speck. It struck perhaps a half
mile to the west (to adopt Earth measures and directions) of the
enemy's flank.

As it struck, a circle of white shot out from the point of impact, a
circle that barely touched that seething west flank. The circle paled
to gray, and settled to earth. Where there had been green, rank growth,
there was now no more than a dirty red crater, and the whole west flank
of the enemy was fleeing wildly.

I said the whole west flank; that was not true. There were some that
did not flee: that would never move again. But there was not one
hundredth part of the number that would not have dissolved into dust
with one sweep of the disintegrator ray through that pack of striving
humanity.

"The other flank, Mr. Correy," I said quietly. "And just a shade
further away from the enemy. A little object lesson, as it were!"

                     *      *      *      *      *

The battle was at a momentary standstill. The Neens and the Libars
seemed, for the moment, to forget the issue; every face was turned
upward. Even the faces of the runners who fled from a disaster they did
not understand.

"I think one more will be enough, sir," chuckled Correy. "The beggars
are ready to run for it right now." He gave a command, and as though
the microphone itself released the bomb, it dropped from the bottom of
the _Ertak_ and diminished swiftly as it hurtled earthward.

Again the swift spread of white that turned to gray; again the vast red
crater. Again, too, a flank crumpled.

As though I could see the faces of the brown men, I saw terror strike
to the heart of the Neens. The flanks were melting away, and the panic
of fear spread as flame spreads on a surface of oil. Correy has a good
eye for such things, and he said there were fifty thousand of the enemy
massed there. If there were, in the space that it takes the heart to
tick ten times, fifty thousand Neens turned their back to the enemy and
fled to the safety of their own jungles.

                     *      *      *      *      *

The Libars made no effort to pursue. They stood there, in their
military formations, watching with wonderment. Then, with crisp
military dispatch, they maneuvered into great long ranks, awaiting the
arrival of transportation.

"And so it is finished, John Hanson," said Artur slowly, his eyes
shining with a light that might almost be called holy. "My people are
saved! He spoke well, as always, when He said that those who would come
after Him would be our friends if we were their friends."

"We are your friends," I replied, "but tell me, who is this one of whom
you speak always, but do not name? From what I have seen, I guess a
great deal, but there has been no time to learn all the story. Will you
tell me, now?"

"I will, if that is your wish," said Artur, "but I should prefer to
tell you in the Place. It is a long story, the story of toma annerson,
the story of He Who Speaks, and there are things you should see, so
that you may understand that story."

"As you wish, Artur." I glanced at Correy and nodded. "Back to the
city, Mr. Correy. I think we're through here."

"I believe we are, sir." He gave the orders to the operating room, and
the _Ertak_ swung in a great circle toward the gleaming city of the
Libars. "It looked like a real row when we got here; I wouldn't have
minded being down there for a few minutes myself."

"With the _Ertak_ poised over your head, dropping atomic bombs?"

Correy shook his head and grinned.

"No, sir!" he admitted. "Just hand to hand, with clubs."

                     *      *      *      *      *

Artur and I were together in the great domed building he called "the
Place." There were no others in that vast auditorium, although outside
a multitude waited. Artur had expressed a wish that no one accompany
me, and I could see no valid reason for refusing the request.

"First," he said, pausing beside the great shining body of the space
ship upon the central dais, "let me take you back many generations, to
the time when only this northern continent was inhabited, and the
Libars and the Neens were one people.

"In those days, we were of less understanding than the Neens of today.
There were no cities; each family lived to itself, in crude huts,
tilling the ground and hunting its own food. Then, out of the sky came
this." He touched, reverently, the smooth side of the space ship. "It
came to earth at this very spot, and from it, presently, emerged He Who
Speaks. Would you inspect the ship that brought Him here?"

"Gladly," I said, and as I spoke, Artur swung open the small circular
door. A great ethon flashlight, of a type still to be seen in our
larger museums, stood just inside the threshold, and aided by its
beams, we entered.

I stared around in amazement. The port through which he had entered led
to a narrow compartment running lengthwise of the ship: a compartment
twice the length of a man, perhaps, and half the length of a man in
breadth. The rest of the ship was cut off by bulkheads, each studded
with control devices the uses of which I could but vaguely understand.

                     *      *      *      *      *

Forward was a veritable maze of instruments, mounted on three large
panels, the central panel of the group containing a circular lens which
apparently was the eyepiece of some type of television disk the like of
which I have never seen or heard. From my hasty examination I gathered
that the ship operated by both a rocket effect (an early type of
propulsion which was abandoned as ineffective) and some form of
attraction-repulsion apparatus, evidently functioning through the
reddish, pitted disks I had observed around the nose of the ship. The
