had to get below.

"I was just tryin' to figure out a way o' cuttin' myself in half when
I thought o' Ran-los. For a Weenie he's got a heck of a lot of sense.
I zoomed down, hauled him out o' his bunk, scooted back up, showed him
how to work the peri-telescope an' the big beam-thrower, an' left him
there on guard."

"Best thing you could have done." Darl's voice was muffled by the
bandages in which his head, as well as the rest of his body, was
swathed. "He's got a head on his shoulders, that bird."

"Somethin' told me to take a ray-gun down in the mine with me. I was
just steppin' out o' the elevator when I caught your last signal; -L-P
D-A-R-L was all I got, but it was enough. How you ever got the other
side of the barrier had me wingin', but you were there right enough,
and yellin' for help. Ran-los had been doin' some repairs on a head
support an' his weldin' machine was still there. Takin' an awful
chance on there bein' air on the other side, I butted it up against
the wall, shot the flame against the steel, and when she was soft
enough had some of the Weenies smash her in with sledge-hammers. First
thing I see is you, stretched out in a pool o' blood, with a couple of
those yellow imps just gettin' to work on you. I clipped them
first--that gave the Martian a chance to get away. An' then--well, you
know the rest."

       *       *       *       *       *

"I owe you one for that, Jim. Too bad, though, the big fellow escaped;
we'll hear from him again, or I don't know the breed. Wonder how he
got on the planet."

"The sucker must 'a' stowed away on the last recruit ship from Venus,
slipped in a case o' tools or somethin'. Mars has labor agents there,
too, you know, for their farms on Ganymede."

"Possibly. He knew my name, and that I was chief here. He's rigged up
an air-lock out there, though I can't figure out how he gets the air."

"That's easy. While I was repairin' the barrier I found a pipe runnin'
through. He's been stealin' ours. Which, by the same token, is why he
was punchin' holes in the Dome rather than down below, where he would
have been safer from discovery."

"So that's it. Get anything more on the space-radio?"

"Nope. Angus has kept the ear-flaps on, but the ether is still jammed.
Hey, what're you up to?"

Darl was swinging his bandaged body up from the cot that had been set
up in the headquarters tent at his insistence. "Can't lie on my back,"
he panted, "with that devil loose on the planet. Lord knows what he's
up to now. We're short-handed enough as it is."

He rose to his feet, staggering with weakness and loss of blood. But
his indomitable will drove him on. "I'll take over the control board.
Send Angus up to relieve Ran-los, and you get below and speed up
production. Earth will need double quantities of surta for food, now
that there's a war on."

       *       *       *       *       *

Jim turned to convey the order to the Scot, but he whirled to the
tent-flap instead as a riot of sound exploded outside. He tore aside
the canvas, and now there was a burst of shrill, frightened Venusian
cries, and a deeper, rattling chorus. Out on the Dome floor, pouring
from the shaft-head in a panic torrent, came the Venusians. And among
them, leaping, slashing, dragging them down, were countless little
yellow men, their fangs and tusks and curving claws crimson with the
blood of their victims.

"Darl, Mac, they've broken through! The Mercs have broken through!"
The brown plain was a blood-spattered battlefield. Here and there
little groups of the green men, braver than the rest, fought with
spanner and hammer and whatever improvised weapon they may have found.
"Come on, give 'em hell!" The three Earthmen dashed out, weapons in
hand. But friend and foe were so intermingled that they could not use
the devastating ray of their hand-guns. The fighting Venusians were
vanishing under a tossing sea of yellow imps. And still the dwarfs
poured forth from the mine entrance.

A blue form towered, far back, where all green had vanished, and only
Mercurians were left. The Martian's beak opened in a rattling call. A
group of hundreds of pigmies suddenly left the main fight, and came
forward with short, swift steps. They dashed straight for the Earth
trio and cut them off from the Venusians they were running to aid.

       *       *       *       *       *

Side by side the three fought. Their weapons grew hot in their hands
as the beams cut great swaths in the seething ranks. The attackers
halted, gave back, then surged forward again as the roar of their
alien commander lashed them on.

The Earthmen faced the frenzied throng. A cleared circle was still
around them. Beyond, the Venusians were all down. The Mercurian mob
was closing in, the Terrestrians' rays had lost half their range. In
moments now the ray-guns would be exhausted.

"The plane!" Darl shouted. "Back to the plane, it's our only chance."

The gyrocopter that could carry them aloft, out of the rout, was fifty
feet away. They fought through to it and reached it just as the last
faint charge flashed from Mac's tube. Jim was at the controls, Darl
smashed his useless projector into the chattering face of a dwarf that
had leaped on the Scot's shoulders and dragged Angus into the cockpit.

The overloaded flier zoomed to the landing at the lofty air-lock's
manhole and hovered as Darl and Angus slipped home the hooks that held
it to the platform. "The spy has the Dome," Jim grunted, "but by God,
he hasn't got us. We'll be safe in the lock up here, till help comes.
And then--"

"Safe is it?" Angus broke in. "Mon, luik ye what those bairns fra hell
are up to the noo."

A yellow tide was rising about the base of each of the latticed steel
arches that vaulted to the Earthmen's refuge. On every side the dwarfs
were climbing, were swarming up the walls in numbers so great that
they concealed the metal beneath. Up, up they came, slowly but surely.
And right in the center of the plain, ankle-deep in the torn fragments
of the murdered Venusians, was the Martian, directing the attack.

       *       *       *       *       *

Jim groaned. "I might've known he'd never let us get away. It's slow
bells for us, I guess. Hey, where's Darl?"

"Gone weethin. No, guid losh, he's here!"

Darl appeared, his features pale and drawn, carrying an armful of
ray-guns. "Grab these," he snapped. "We're not licked yet."

"Licked, hell!" Jim's roar reverberated. "We've just begun to fight!"
The Scot was silent, but the battle light shone in his eyes. In
another moment the Terrestrians were kneeling, were raking the roof
girders as the mounting Mercurians came within range. Each had two
ray-guns in his hands, and a little pile of extra tubes beside him.
They fought silently, wasting not a single blast.

Six white rays flamed through the misty, humid air, and striking the
teeming girders, swept them clean. A greasy, horrible smoke cloud
gathered along the shell and drifted slowly down, till the concrete
