
When they returned to the _Enterprise_, she let Ramsey kiss her and
tried to slip the telepathic tentacles of her mind behind his guard--

Lewd libidinous fantasies, X stands for nothing for nothing for nothing,
XXX--she got nowhere.

What was X? What was Ramsey's secret? Margot did not know, and wondered
if she would ever find out.

She smiled, reading Vardin's mind. For Vardin was thinking: it must be
so wonderful to have beauty such as she has, to melt the wills of strong
handsome men such as Ramsey. It must be truly wonderful.

For the first twenty-eight years of her life, Margot Dennison would have
agreed, would have delighted in her own beauty. She still did, to a
point. But beyond that point, she could dream only of proto-man and his
secret.

Beauty or power?

She had beauty.

She wanted power.

       *       *       *       *       *

In the early hours of the following morning, behind the cover of what
appeared to be a dense early morning fog but what actually was an
artificially produced fog, a team of Irwadi technicians swarmed all over
a battered Procyonian cruiser of three thousand tons. By mid-morning,
working swiftly and with all the tools and spare parts they would need,
they made the ship, called _Dog Star_, space-worthy.

Later that day, but still two hours before nightfall, Ramar Chind
arrived with a small crew of three Security Police. He had selected his
men carefully: they knew how to handle a spaceship, they knew how to
fight, they were quite ruthless. He thought Garr Symm would be pleased.

Symm did not arrive until just before nightfall. He was very agitated
when he came. Ramar Chind, too, was eager. What would happen within the
next several hours, he realized, might be beyond his ken, but he still
recognized its importance. And, being an opportunist, he would pounce on
whatever he found of value to himself....

Several hours after the setting of the Irwadi primary had ushered in the
cold night, Margot Dennison, Ramsey and Vardin arrived at the Graveyard
and made their way at once to the _Enterprise_. They went inside swiftly
and in a very few minutes prepared the thousand-tonner for blastoff.
Ramsey's mouth was dry. He could barely keep the thoughts of proto-man
from his mind. If Margot read them....

"Centauri here we come," he said, just to talk.

"Centauri," said Margot.

But of course, she had another destination in mind.

Several hundred yards across the Graveyard, watching, waiting, the
occupants of _Dog Star_ were armed to the teeth.

Ramsey sat at the controls. Vardin stood behind him nervously. The space
trip from Vega to Irwadi was probably the only one she had ever taken.
Margot sat, quite relaxed, in the co-pilot's chair.

"I still can't believe we're not going to feel anything," Vardin said in
her soft, shy voice.

"Haven't you ever been through hyper-space before?" Margot asked the
Vegan girl.

"Just once."

"In normal space," Ramsey explained, "we feel acceleration and
deceleration because the increase or decrease in velocity is experienced
at different micro-instants by all the cells of our body. In hyper-space
the velocity is felt simultaneously in all parts of the ship, including
all parts of us. We become weightless, of course, but the change is
instant and we feel no pressure, no pain."

Ramsey was waiting until 0134:57 on the ship chronometer. At that
precise instant in time, and at that instant only, blastoff would place
them on the proper hyper-space orbit. And, before they could feel the
mounting pressure of blastoff, the timelessness of hyper-space would
intervene.

"0130:15," Margot read the chronometer for Ramsey. "It won't be long
now. 30:20--"

"All right," Ramsey said suddenly. "All right. I can read the
chronometer."

"Why, Ramsey! I do believe you're nervous."

"Anxious, Margot. A hyper-pilot is always anxious just before crossover.
You've got to be, because the slightest miscalculation can send you
fifty thousand light years off course."

"So? All you'd have to do is re-enter hyper-space and go back."

Ramsey shook his head. "Hyper-space can only be entered from certain
points in space. We've never been able to figure out why."

"What certain points?"

       *       *       *       *       *

Ramsey looked at her steadily. "Points which vary with the orbits of the
three thousand humanoid worlds, Margot," he said slowly. He watched her
for a reaction, knowing that strange fact about hyper-space--perfectly
true and never understood--dovetailed with her father's letter about
proto-man, an unknown pre-human ancestor of all the humanoid races in
the galaxy, who had discovered hyper-space, bred variations to colonize
all the inhabitable worlds, found or created the three thousand
crossover points in space, and used them.

Margot showed no response, but then, Ramsey told himself, she was a
tri-di actress. She could feign an emotion--or hide one. She merely
asked: "Is it true that there's no such thing as time in hyper-space?"

"That's right. That's why you can travel scores or hundreds or thousands
of light years through hyper-space in hours. Hyper-space is a continuum
of only three dimensions. There is no fourth dimension, no dimension of
duration."

"Then why aren't trips through hyper-space instantaneous? They take
several hours, don't they?"

"Sure, but the way scientists have it figured, that's subjective time.
No objective time passes at all. It can't. There isn't any--in
hyper-space."

"Then you mean--"

Ramsey shook his head. "0134:02," he said. "It's almost time."

The seconds ticked away. Even Margot did not seem relaxed now. She
stared nervously at the chronometer, or watched Ramsey's lips as he
silently read away the seconds. A place where time did not exist, an
under-stratum of extension sans duration. An idea suddenly entered her
mind, and she was afraid.

If proto-man had colonized the galactic worlds between one and four or
five million years ago, but if time did not exist for proto-man, then
wasn't the super-race which had engendered all mankind still waiting in
its timeless home, waiting perhaps grimly amused to see which of their
progeny first discovered their secret? Or must proto-man, like humans
everywhere, fall victim to subjective time if objective time did not
matter for him?

Ramsey was saying softly: "Fifty-three, fifty-four, fifty-five,
fifty-six ... blastoff!"

His hand slammed down on the activating key.

An instant later, having felt no sensation of acceleration, they were
floating weightlessly in the cabin of the little _Enterprise_.

       *       *       *       *       *

"The qualities of radar," Garr Symm said, "exist in their totality in a
universe of extension. Time, actually is a drawback to radar,
necessitating a duration-lag between sending and receiving. Therefore,
Ramar Chind, radar behaves perfectly in hyper-space, as you see."

"Yes," Ramar Chind said, floating near the radar screen aboard the _Dog
Star_. At its precise center was a bright little pip of light.

_The Enterprise_....

"But don't we do anything except follow them?" Ramar Chind said after a
long silence.

Garr Symm smiled. "Does it really matter? You see, Chind, time actually
stands still for us here. Duration is purely subjective, so what's your
hurry?"

Ramar Chind licked his lips nervously and stared fascinated at the
little pip of bright light.

Which suddenly dipped and swung erratically.

       *       *       *       *       *

"What is it?" Margot asked. "What's the matter?"

"Take it easy," Ramsey told her.

"But the ship's swooping. I can feel it. I thought you weren't supposed
to feel movement in hyper-space!"

"Relax, will you? There are eddies in hyper-space, that's all. If you
want an analogy in terms of our own universe, think of shoals in an
ocean--unmarked by buoys or lights."

"You mean they have to be avoided?"

"Yes."

"But this particular shoal--it's midway between Irwadi and Earth?"

"There isn't any 'midway,' Margot. That's the paradox of hyper-space."

"I--I don't understand."

"Look. In the normal universe, extension is measured by time. That is,
it takes a certain amount of time to get from point A to point B.
Conversely, time is measured by extension in space. On Earth, a day of
time passes when Earth moves through space on an arc one
three-hundred-sixty-fifth of its orbit around the sun in length. Since
there isn't any time to measure extension with in hyper-space, since
time doesn't exist here, you can't speak of mid-points."

"But this--shoal. It's always encountered in hyper-space between Earth
and Irwadi?"

Ramsey nodded. "Yes, that is right."

Margot smiled.

The smile suddenly froze on her face.

The _Enterprise_ lurched as if an unseen giant hand had slapped it.

At that moment Ramsey leaned forward over the controls, battling to
bring the _Enterprise_ back on course.

And let down his mental guard.

_... precise place in hyper-space her father must have meant ... home of
proto-man ... thinks I'm going to stop there, she's crazy ... heck, I'm
no mystic, but there are things not meant to be meddled with ..._

The ship swooped again. Ramsey went forward against the control panel
head-first and fell dazed from the pilot chair. His head whirled, his
arms and legs were suddenly weak and rubbery. He tried to stand up and
make his way back to the controls again, but collapsed and went down to
his knees. He crouched there, trying to shake the fog from his brain.

With a cry of triumph, Margot Dennison leaped at him and bore him down
to the floor with her weight. He was still too dazed from the blow on
his head to offer any resistance when her strong hands tugged at his
belt and withdrew the m.g. gun. She got up with it, backing away from
