tall Subterrors. Hitler the Third leads us into the spelunker's
nightmare and we finally come to a big metal door about eighty feet long
and twenty feet high.

Agrodyte pushes a button and the steel door lifts. Then we walk up a
flight of steps to the top of a dam and take a gander at a fleet of
submarines that makes Earthian pig-boats look like they belonged in
antique shops.

"We will take you for a ride in one," the dictator of Subterro says.
"After that I will turn you over to the executioner."

"We need lawyers," Wurpz says.

We cross a thin gangplank and enter the sub. The lights in it are
indirect and are purplish green. Hitler Number Three shows us the
telepathic machine, the radar, and the viso-screen that pictures
everything going on upstairs on Earth, and on Mars, Jupiter and all
other planets. There are four other beetleheads on the sub and they
carry disintegrators.

"These Subterro U-boats," our genial host brags, "can go as fast in
reverse as full speed ahead, as the situation warrants. They are alive
with guided missiles no larger than this flashlight I have here, but one
would blow up your Metropolita and leave hardly an ash."

He looks at me, and then goes on: "We will proceed to the lock that will
raise us to the underground river and cruise along its course for a few
hundred miles. It is the treat I should accord such distinguished
visitors from the outside of Earth, nein?"

The skipper of the Subterro sub pulls a switch and there is a noise like
three contented cats purring. The metal fish slides along the surface of
the underground lake and comes to a hole in a big rock ledge.

We see all this through a monitor which registers the scenery outside
the sub within a radius of three miles. The sub slides into the side of
the rock, and then is lifted up to the underground river that winds and
winds upward like a corkscrew to the outlet under Brazil. Every once in
a while a blast of air that smells like a dentist's office goes through
the sub from bow to stern and I ask why.

"There is such terrific potency to the power we use from our puranium,"
Hitler Number Three says, "that we purify the air every few seconds with
formula XYB and Three-fifth. The basis of the gas is galena."

I nudge Wurpz and Zahooli as the Neofeuhrer goes over to converse with
his crew. "It is our big chance," I whisper. "You watch how they run
this tub for the next few minutes. Then when I cough three times you be
ready. I do not know how much powder it will take to knock off the big
bug as he is half human. Once I blow this insect powder at the same time
as the purifying blast is to take place, you two be ready to jump
Agrodyte. I noticed that a small purple light flashes on over the
monitor just before that stuff turns loose. It is a warning so the
beetleheads can take deep breaths."

"Sep," D'Ambrosia Zahooli says. "I take back all the insults of the past
five hours. Shake."

"I am doin' that already," I says. "We have to work fast while we are in
the underground river."

We wait. The Neofeuhrer comes walking back to where we are sitting. The
purple light flashes on, and I count to three. Just as the blast of air
loaded with XYB plus cuts loose I throw all the bug powder left in the
box into the current. Hitler Number Three breathes in a big gob of it
and buckles a little at the knees.

"Grab him!" I screech. "Don't let him yank that disintegrator loose. Hit
him with anything you see, pals!"

I see the other beetleheads collapse like they had been hit with
bulldozers and I know now that insecticide is more dangerous in Subterro
than all the radioactivity harnessed up on six planets.

Agrodyte Hitler, however, has some moxey left in him as he has two of
his hands around Wurpz's throat, the third around Zahooli's leg and is
reaching for a ray Betsy with his fourth. He grabs the disintegrator
just as I belt him over his ugly noggin with a wrench about two feet
long and which was certainly not made of aluminum or balsa wood.

"Himmel!" the Neofeuhrer gulps. "Ach du lebensraum!" He has to be hit
once more which is enough and we tie him up with rope that looks like it
was made out of plutonium filaments.

"Well," I says. "We have a sub from Subterro. Wurpz, you just sit there
at the controls and make sure that needle on the big dial don't move as
I am sure this creep has it on robot so that this tub will automatically
follow the course of the river."

"We are sure takin' a powder," D'Ambrosia yelps. "Look at the monitor!"

We see fish gaping at us from the screen that even Earth citizens with
delirium tremens never saw, and I look quite anxiously at the instrument
panel.

"A thousand miles per and we are climbin'," I says. "I am glad this
Hitler used old Germanic on his subs, and that I majored in it once.
I--er--I am gettin' arthritis all at once! The bends! Uh--er--look, peel
them suits off the other creeps and fast, Zahooli, as I bet they can be
inflated and made into compression chambers. They have got connections
that plug into something."

We pull on the suits which were too big for the beetleheads and for a
good reason. More bends than there are in the Ohio River are with us
before we plug into the right socket. The suits bulge out until our feet
