glowing out there like a miniature atomic pile, and under the
circumstances as we know them, should be deader than a door nail, but
there she stands, shining like the morning sun, chewing her cud and just
mooing away as if nothing happened."

"What is your theory, Professor?" one of the assistants asked.

"I have one, but it's utterly fantastic," Sims answered.

"So is that cow out there. Let's hear it!"

"Do you remember how much more frequent saucer sightings were reported
in this area alone?" Sims asked. All the assistants nodded their heads.

"Well," Sims went on, "I am of the opinion that a saucer actually landed
out there and they came across the cow by accident. They either shot her
with some sort of radium ray gun, or some luminous substance unknown to
us."

"Why didn't Junius die?" one of the assistants asked.

Sims shook his head. "They wished to examine her. You see, gentlemen,
whatever it was, it served a threefold purpose. It made her luminous,
immobile and--" Sims placed both hands on the table and leaned forward
for emphasis, "transparent."

There was a gasp and exclamations.

"Transparent? How?--"

"I was within a foot of the cow, felt her hide, and through the glasses
I could see the skeletal frame, the chest cavity, the heart beating
within, the entire intestinal tract, much, much more clearly than could
be seen by the best X-ray."

As if on command, the assistants all rose simultaneously.

"Sit down, gentlemen, the cow isn't going anywhere. We shall have to
face this situation with sound scientific reasoning. There will be a
closed van here soon to pick up Junius and haul her to the laboratory
where we can examine her more thoroughly. Now my belief is that the
saucer took off in haste, such great haste that they forgot to
extinguish poor Junius. I believe they will be back looking for her,
therefore we shall have to return her tonight and conceal ourselves
around the area and watch."

"Splendid idea, Professor Sims!" one of the assistants exclaimed.

Yelling voices in the farmyard caught their attention. They saw Sgt.
Johnson through the dining-room window, coming across the yard, yelling
and pointing to the sky. Sims rushed from the house, met Johnson,
grasped him by the shoulders, shaking him.

"What happened, man, what happened?" Sims asked.

"Black light, black light!" Johnson shouted, pointing skyward. Sims
looked up. Nothing but the serene blue of the summer sky and an
occasional bird caught his eye.

Sims shook him again, more roughly.

"Speak, man, what happened?"

"Black light flashed down on the cow! Blackest light you ever saw!"

The group gathered around him in the yard, trying to make sense out of
what he said. So engrossed were they with his babblings, that none but
Mrs. Stewart was aware of the fact that Junius had entered the farmyard
and was eyeing them curiously.

"Junius!" she exclaimed.

"Moooo!"

The crowd looked up to see the ordinary, unlit Junius standing calmly by
the gate.

"Hurry and get the milk pail, Zack, Junius is all right now!" Mrs.
Stewart yelled happily to her husband, as Professor Sims and his
assistants led the hysterical trooper into the house.

High over the horizon, a faint, silvery disc was disappearing at
fantastic speed into outer space.




Transcriber's Note:

    This etext was produced from _Fantastic Universe_ September 1957.
    Extensive research did not uncover any evidence that the U.S.
