on row. The children were led out into the play quadrangle to play. One
of the robots taught them a new game, and after that took them to supper
served in the school's cafeteria. No other robot was left in the
building, but it did not matter, because the doors were locked so that
the children could not go home.

The other robots had begun to walk out into the town, and as they walked
the robots walked from other schools, in other towns. All over the
country, all over the towns, the robots walked to tell the people that
the children would not be home from school, and do what had to be done.

In the schools, the roboteachers told stories until the children fell
asleep.

       *       *       *       *       *

Morning came. The robots were up with the sun. The children were up with
the robots. There was breakfast and more stories, and now the children
clustered about the robots, holding onto their arms, where they could
cling, tagging and frisking along behind the robots as they went down
into the town. The sun was warm, and it was early, early, and very
bright from the morning sun in the streets.

They went into the Mayor's house. Johnny called, "Mom! Dad! I'm home."

The house was silent. The robot that tended the house came gliding in
answer. "Would you like breakfast, Master Malone?"

"I've had breakfast. I want my folks. Hey! Mom, Dad!"

He went into the bedroom. It was clean and empty and scrubbed.

"Where's my mother and father?"

The metal voice of the robot beside Johnny said, "I am going to live
with you. You will learn as much at home as you do at school."

"Where's my mother?"

"I'm your mother."

"Where's my father?"

"I'm your father."

Johnny Malone swung. "You mean my mother and father are gone?" Tears
gathered in his eyes.

Gently, gently, the metal hand pulled him against the metal body. "Your
folks have gone away, Johnny. Everyone's folks have gone away. We will
stay with you."

Johnny Malone ran his glance around the room.

"I might have known they were gone. The place is so clean."

       *       *       *       *       *

All the houses were clean. The servant robots had cleaned all night. The
roboteachers had checked each house before the children were brought
home. The children must not be alarmed. There must be no bits of blood
to frighten them.

The robot's voice said gently, "Today will be a holiday to become
accustomed to the changes. There will be school tomorrow."




Transcriber's Note:

    This etext was produced from _Fantastic Universe_ November 1956.
    Extensive research did not uncover any evidence that the U.S.
    copyright on this publication was renewed. Minor spelling and
    typographical errors have been corrected without note.





End of Project Gutenberg's There Will Be School Tomorrow, by V. E. Thiessen

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THERE WILL BE SCHOOL TOMORROW ***

***** This file should be named 29317.txt or 29317.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/2/9/3/1/29317/
