push and pull as a man or a horse may? All have energy, which is
available in certain ways and not in others, and whatever possesses
energy available in any way is not an ideally inert body. Lastly, how
many inert bodies together will it take to make an active body? If the
question be absurd, then all the phenomena witnessed in bodies, large or
small, are due to the fact that the atoms are not inert, but are
immensely energetic, and their inertia is the measure of their rates of
exchanging energy.


THE ETHER IS CONDITIONALLY POSSESSED OF INERTIA.

A moving mass of matter is brought to rest by friction, because it
imparts its motion at some rate to the body it is in contact with.
Generally the energy is transformed into heat, but sometimes it appears
as electrification. Friction is only possible because one or both of the
bodies possess inertia. That a body may move in the ether for an
indefinite time without losing its velocity has been stated as a reason
for believing the ether to be frictionless. If it be frictionless, then
it is without inertia, else the energy of the earth and of a ray of
light would be frittered away. A ray of light can only be transformed
when it falls upon molecules which may be heated by it. As the ether
cannot be heated and cannot transform translational energy, it is
without inertia for _such_ a form of motion and its embodied energy.

It is not thus with other forms of energy than the translational. Atomic
and molecular vibrations are so related to the ether that they are
transformed into waves, which are conducted away at a definite rate.
This shows that such property of inertia as is possessed by the ether is
selective and not like that of matter, which is equally "inertiative"
under all conditions. Similarly with electric and magnetic phenomena, it
is capable of transforming the energy which may reside as stress in the
ether, and other bodies moving in the space so affected meet with
frictional resistance, for they become heated if the motion be
maintained. On the other hand, there is no evidence that the body which
produced the electric or magnetic stress suffers any degree of friction
on moving in precisely the same space. A bar magnet rotating on its
longitudinal axis does not disturb its own field, but a piece of iron
revolving near the magnet will not only become heated, but will heat the
stationary magnet. Much experimental work has been done to discover, if
possible, the relation of a magnet to its ether field. As the latter is
not disturbed by the rotation of the magnet, it has been concluded that
the field does not rotate; but as every molecule in the magnet has its
own field independent of all the rest, it is mechanically probable that
each such field does vary in the rotation, but among the thousands of
millions of such fields the average strength of the field does not vary
within measurable limits. Another consideration is that the magnetic
field itself, when moved in space, suffers no frictional resistance.
There is no magnetic energy wasted through ether inertia. These
phenomena show that whether the ether exhibits the quality called
inertia depends upon the kind of motion it has.


18. MATTER IS MAGNETIC.

The ordinary phenomenon of magnetism is shown by bringing a piece of
iron into the neighbourhood of a so-called magnet, where it is attracted
by the latter, and if free to move will go to and cling to the magnet. A
delicately suspended magnetic needle will be affected appreciably by a
strong magnet at the distance of several hundred feet. As the strength
of such action varies inversely as the square of the distance from the
magnet, it is evident there can be no absolute boundary to it. At a
distance from an ordinary magnet it becomes too weak to be detected by
our methods, not that there is a limit to it. It is customary to think
of iron as being peculiarly endowed with magnetic quality, but all kinds
of matter possess it in some degree. Wood, stone, paper, oats, sulphur,
and all the rest, are attracted by a magnet, and will stick to it if the
magnet be a strong one. Whether a piece of iron itself exhibits the
property depends upon its temperature, for near 700 degrees it becomes
as magnetically indifferent as a piece of copper at ordinary
temperature. Oxygen, too, at 200 degrees below the zero of Centigrade
adheres to a magnet like iron.

In this as in so many other particulars, how a piece of matter behaves
depends upon its temperature, not that the essential qualities are
modified in any degree, but temperature interferes with atomic
arrangement and aggregation, and so disguises their phenomena.

As every kind of matter is thus affected by a magnet, the manifestations
differing but in degree, it follows that all kinds of atoms--all the
elements--are magnetic. An inherent property in them, as much so as
gravitation or inertia; apparently a quality depending upon the
structure of the atoms themselves, in the same sense as gravitation is
thus dependent, as it is not a quality of the ether.

An atom must, then, be thought of as having polarity, different
qualities on the two sides, and possessing a magnetic field as extensive
as space itself. The magnetic field is the stress or pressure in the
ether produced by the magnetic body. This ether pressure produced by a
magnet may be as great as a ton per square inch. It is this pressure
that holds an armature to the magnet. As heat is a molecular condition
of vibration, and radiant energy the result of it, so is magnetism a
property of molecules, and the magnetic field the temporary condition in
the ether, which depends upon the presence of a magnetic body. We no
longer speak of the wave-motion in the ether which results from heat, as
heat, but call it radiation, or ether waves, and for a like reason the
magnetic field ought not to be called magnetism.


THE ETHER IS NON-MAGNETIC.

A magnetic field manifests itself in a way that implies that the ether
structure, if it may be said to have any, is deformed--deformed in such
a sense that another magnet in it tends to set itself in the plane of
the stress; that is, the magnet is twisted into a new position to
accommodate itself to the condition of the medium about it. The new
position is the result of the reaction of the ether upon the magnet and
ether pressure acting at right angles to the body that produced the
stress. Such an action is so anomalous as to suggest the propriety of
modifying the so-called third law of motion, viz., action and reaction
are equal and opposite, adding that sometimes action and reaction are at
right angles.

There is no condition or property exhibited by the ether itself which
shows it to have any such characteristic as attraction, repulsion, or
differences in stress, except where its condition is modified by the
activities of matter in some way. The ether itself is not attracted or
repelled by a magnet; that is, it is not a magnetic body in any such
sense as matter in any of its forms is, and therefore cannot properly be
called magnetic.

It has been a mechanical puzzle to understand how the vibratory motions
called heat could set up light waves in the ether seeing that there is
an absence of friction in the latter. In the endeavour to conceive it,
the origin of sound-waves has been in mind, where longitudinal air-waves
are produced by the vibrations of a sounding body, and molecular impact
is the antecedent of the waves. The analogy does not apply. The
following exposition may be helpful in grasping the idea of such
transformation and change of energy from matter to the ether.

Consider a straight bar permanent magnet to be held in the hand. It has
its north and south poles and its field, the latter extending in every
direction to an indefinite distance. The field is to be considered as
ether stress of such a sort as to tend to set other magnets in it in new
positions. If at a distance of ten feet there were a delicately-poised
magnet needle, every change in the position of the magnet held in the
hand would bring about a change in the position of the needle. If the
position of the hand magnet were completely reversed, so the south pole
faced where the north pole faced before, the field would have been
completely reversed, and the poised needle would have been pushed by the
field into an opposite position. If the needle were a hundred feet away,
the change would have been the same except in amount. The same might be
said if the two were a mile apart, or the distance of the moon or any
other distance, for there is no limit to an ether magnetic field.
Suppose the hand magnet to have its direction completely reversed once
in a second. The whole field, and the direction of the stress, would
necessarily be reversed as often. But this kind of change in stress is
known by experiment to travel with the speed of light, 186,000 miles a
second; the disturbance due to the change of position of the magnet will
therefore be felt in some degree throughout space. In a second and a
third of a second it will have reached the moon, and a magnet there will
be in some measure affected by it. If there were an observer there with
a delicate-enough magnet, he could be witness to its changes once a
second for the same reason one in the room could. The only difference
would be one of amount of swing. It is therefore theoretically possible
to signal to the moon with a swinging magnet. Suppose again that the
magnet should be swung twice a second, there would be formed two waves,
each one half as long as the first. If it should swing ten times a
second, then the waves would be one-tenth of 186,000 miles long. If in
some mechanical way it could be rotated 186,000 times a second, the wave
would be but one mile long. Artificial ways have been invented for
changing this magnet field as many as 100 million times a second, and
the corresponding wave is less than a foot long. The shape of a magnet
does not necessarily make it weaker or stronger as a magnet, but if the
poles are near together the magnetic field is denser between them than
when they are separated. The ether stress is differently distributed for
every change in the relative positions of the poles.

A common U-magnet, if struck, will vibrate like a tuning-fork, and gives
out a definite pitch. Its poles swing towards and away from each other
at uniform rates, and the pitch of the magnet will depend upon its size,
thickness, and the material it is made of.

Let ten or fifteen ohms of any convenient-sized wire be wound upon the
bend of a commercial U-magnet. Let this wire be connected to a telephone
in its circuit. When the magnet is made to sound like a tuning-fork, the
pitch will be reproduced in the telephone very loudly. If another magnet
with a different pitch be allowed to vibrate near the former, the pitch
of the vibrating body will be heard in the telephone, and these show
that the changing magnetic field reacts upon the quiescent magnet, and
compels the latter to vibrate at the same rate. The action is an ether
action, the waves are ether waves, but they are relatively very long. If
the magnet makes 500 vibrations a second, the waves will be 372 miles
long, the number of times 500 is contained in 186,000 miles. Imagine the
magnet to become smaller and smaller until it was the size of an atom,
the one-fifty-millionth of an inch. Its vibratory rate would be
proportionally increased, and changes in its form will still bring about
changes in its magnetic field. But its magnetic field is practically
limitless, and the number of vibrations per second is to be reckoned
as millions of millions; the waves are correspondingly short,
small fractions of an inch. When they are as short as the
one-thirty-seven-thousandth of an inch, they are capable of affecting
the retina of the eye, and then are said to be visible as red light. If
the vibratory rate be still higher, and the corresponding waves be no
more than one-sixty-thousandth of an inch long, they affect the retina
as violet light, and between these limits there are all the waves that
produce a complete spectrum. The atoms, then, shake the ether in this
way because they all have a magnetic hold upon the ether, so that any
disturbance of their own magnetism, such as necessarily comes when they
collide, reacts upon the ether for the same reason that a large magnet
acts thus upon it when its poles approach and recede from each other. It
is not a phenomenon of mechanical impact or frictional resistance, since
neither are possible in the ether.


19. MATTER EXISTS IN SEVERAL STATES.

Molecular cohesion exists between very wide ranges. When strong, so if
one part of a body is moved the whole is moved in the same way, without
breaking continuity or the relative positions of the molecules, we call
the body a solid. In a liquid, cohesion is greatly reduced, and any part
of it may be deformed without materially changing the form of the rest.
The molecules are free to move about each other, and there is no
definite position which any need assume or keep. With gases, the
molecules are without any cohesion, each one is independent of every
other one, collides with and bounds away from others as free elastic
particles do. Between impacts it moves in what is called its free path,
which may be long or short as the density of the gas be less or greater.

These differing degrees of cohesion depend upon temperature, for if the
densest and hardest substances are sufficiently heated they will become
gaseous. This is only another way of saying that the states of matter
depend upon the amount of molecular energy present. Solid ice becomes
water by the application of heat. More heat reduces it to steam; still
more decomposes the steam molecules into oxygen and hydrogen molecules;
and lastly, still more heat will decompose these molecules into their
atomic state, complete dissociation. On cooling, the process of
reduction will be reversed until ice has been formed again.

Cohesive strength in solids is increased by reduction of temperature,
and metallic rods become stronger the colder they are.

No distinction is now made between cohesion and chemical affinity, and
yet at low temperatures chemical action will not take place, which
phenomenon shows there is a distinction between molecular cohesion and
molecular structure. In molecular structure, as determined by chemical
activity, the molecules and atoms are arranged in definite ways which
depend upon the rate of vibrations of the components. The atoms are set
in definite positions to constitute a given molecule. But atoms or
molecules may cohere for other reasons, gravitative or magnetic, and
relative positions would be immaterial. In the absence of temperature, a
solid body would be solider and stronger than ever, while a gaseous mass
would probably fall by gravity to the floor of the containing vessel
like so much dust. The molecular structure might not be changed, for
there would be no agency to act upon it in a disturbing way.


THE ETHER HAS NO CORRESPONDING STATES.

Degrees of density have already been excluded, and the homogeneity and
continuity of the ether would also exclude the possibility of different
states at all comparable with such as belong to matter. As for cohesion,
it is doubtful if the term ought to be applied to such a substance. The
word itself seems to imply possible separateness, and if the ether be a
single indivisible substance, its cohesion must be infinite and is
therefore not a matter of degree. The ether has sometimes been
considered as an elastic solid, but such solidity is comparable with
nothing we call solid in matter, and the word has to be defined in a
special sense in order that its use may be tolerated at all. In addition
to this, some of the phenomena exhibited by it, such as diffraction and
double refraction, are quite incompatible with the theory that the ether
is an elastic solid. The reasons why it cannot be considered as a liquid
or gas have been considered previously.

The expression _states of matter_ cannot be applied to the ether in any
such sense as it is applied to matter, but there is one sense when
possibly it may be considered applicable. Let it be granted that an atom
is a vortex-ring of ether in the ether, then the state of being in ring
rotation would suffice to differentiate that part of the ether from the
rest, and give to it a degree of individuality not possessed by the
rest; and such an atom might be called a state of ether. In like manner,
if other forms of motion, such as transverse waves, circular and
elliptical spirals, or others, exist in the ether, then such movements
give special character to the part thus active, and it would be proper
to speak of such states of the ether, but even thus the word would not
be used in the same sense as it is used when one speaks of the states of
matter as being solid, liquid, and gaseous.


20. SOLID MATTER CAN EXPERIENCE A SHEARING STRESS, LIQUIDS AND GASES
CANNOT.

A sliding stress applied to a solid deforms it to a degree which depends
upon the stress and the degree of rigidity preserved by the body. Thus
if the hand be placed upon a closed book lying on the table, and
pressure be so applied as to move the upper side of the book but not the
lower, the book is said to be subject to a shearing stress. If the
pressing hand has a twisting motion, the book will be warped. Any solid
may be thus sheared or warped, but neither liquids nor gases can be so
affected. Molecular cohesion makes it possible in the one, and the lack
of it, impossible in the others. The solid can maintain such a
deformation indefinitely long, if the pressure does not rupture its
molecular structure.


THE ETHER CAN MAINTAIN A SHEARING STRESS.

The phenomena in a magnetic field show that the stress is of such a sort
as to twist into a new directional position the body upon which it acts
as exhibited by a magnetic needle, also as indicated by the transverse
vibrations of the ether waves, and again by the twist given to plane
polarized light when moving through a magnetic field. These are all
interpreted as indicative of the direction of ether stress, as being
similar to a shearing stress in solid matter. The fact has been adduced
to show the ether to be a solid, but such a phenomenon is certainly
incompatible with a liquid or gaseous ether. This kind of stress is
maintained indefinitely about a permanent magnet, and the mechanical
pressure which may result from it is a measure of the strength of the
magnetic field, and may exceed a thousand pounds per square inch.


21. OTHER PROPERTIES OF MATTER.

There are many secondary qualities exhibited by matter in some of its
forms, such as hardness, brittleness, malleability, colour, etc., and
the same ultimate element may exhibit itself in the most diverse ways,
as is the case with carbon, which exists as lamp-black, charcoal,
graphite, jet, anthracite and diamond, ranging from the softest to the
hardest of known bodies. Then it may be black or colourless. Gold is
yellow, copper red, silver white, chlorine green, iodine purple. The
only significance any or all of such qualities have for us here is that
the ether exhibits none of them. There is neither hardness nor
brittleness, nor colour, nor any approach to any of the characteristics
for the identification of elementary matter.

