Halkon, who descended with his ships on our city and carried off
everything of value, including the vast amount of scrip credits owned
by the state which were entrusted to my grandfather. You know the
Ganymedan debtor's law?"

He did indeed! It was one of the most infamous laws of the Universe:
ruling that the debts of the father descended to the children and
their children's children until paid.

       *       *       *       *       *

"My family is now poor," she went on. "For a century or more we have
striven to pay off the debt caused by the loss of those state funds.
That's the way matters stood when I received a letter from my brother
Tom in Chicago, who was employed in the office of Helgers' legitimate
importing business, little aware of the smuggling. Tom had somehow got
wind of the near discovery of Halkon's treasure, and I saw a chance to
get a part of it by joining Helgers' party. He might not want us, but
he would be practically forced to take us to keep our mouths shut. I
felt that we were honestly entitled to a part of that treasure which
had been stolen from our family, and with it we could pay off that old
debt that had ridden our family like an Old Man of the Sea for more
than a century.

"Getting into the expedition proved much simpler than I had expected.
When Tom told Helgers about me he was very eager to help us--he is one
of those men who is always anxious to help a girl if he thinks she is
good-looking enough. So you see when I held you up in your stateroom I
was merely performing my part of the scheme, although I didn't know
then that Helgers had already slain the old Martian and leaped out
into space.

"After that the _Osprey_--the ship down there on the
plateau--overhauled the _Western Star_ and took us off, and shortly
afterward I learned most unpleasantly that Helgers had no intention of
giving Tom and me our share unless I gave myself to him in exchange. I
told Tom, and trouble started. It came to a head yesterday and there
was a fight and--and Helgers killed Tom."

She began to weep quietly. Penrun stared grimly down at the black,
motionless ship. Presently the girl resumed her story.

"I managed to get the air-lock open and escaped from the ship. Then
that horrid spider caught me. You know the rest."

Her voice trailed off. Penrun remained silent for a while.

"You haven't even told me your name," he reminded her gently.

"Irma Boardle," she replied with a wan smile.

"I am Dick Penrun, in case you don't already know me. Captain Halkon
was my grandfather. We always tried to keep the knowledge of it a
family secret, since we were ashamed of it. If I--we get our hands on
that treasure, I can promise you that the debt hanging over your
family shall be paid first, Miss Boardle."

"Not Miss Boardle. Call me Irma," she said, the wan smile growing
suddenly warm.

Penrun looked at her thoughtfully.

"But we aren't near the treasure yet," he said. "Between the spider
monsters and the human monsters in the ship, our chances are rather
slim. We'll just have to wait until we get a break."

       *       *       *       *       *

As the day wore on there was a note of menace in the silence that hung
over the Trap-Door City. It was nothing tangible, unless it was the
appearance of two long silvery rods mounted on the top of the huge
cocoon-palace of the Queen aiming down at Helgers' ship. Penrun could
have sworn they were not there yesterday. The sight of them made him
uneasy.

Helgers must have interpreted the silence differently, for presently a
man emerged from the ship, protected against the heat by a clumsy
space-suit. He hesitated, then walked slowly away from the ship, and
paused again, waiting for the spiders to attack. Not a movement was
made in the city. Presently he moved on again toward the cataract
which had dwindled in the heat of the day to a mere trickle of hot
water down to the pool in the gorge more than half a mile below.

After a time the man reached the cataract. He descended the short path
that led down under the lip of rock to another ledge a few feet below
it. The entrance to the Caves opened out onto this lower ledge. Little
wonder, thought Penrun, that no one knew where the Caves were.

Some time later two other men from the ship followed him.

"Fools!" muttered Penrun, following them through his glasses. "They
think the spiders are afraid of their ray artillery. I'll bet the
monsters are either waiting until all the men wander out of the ship,
or else they're getting ready to spring some hellish surprise."

Other men came out of the ship, carrying rock drills, a roll of cable
and a powerful little windlass. Instead of going to the Caves, they
went round the ship to the other side under the doubtful protection of
the ray-guns, and sank two shafts into the granite. Into these they
drove steel posts and anchored the windlass. One end of the cable was
attached to the windlass and the other to the nose of the ship. Then
they slowly dragged the big craft across the plateau on rollers from
the ship's store room.

       *       *       *       *       *

"That's strange!" exclaimed Penrun. "The ship can't rise! I wonder
what's wrong, and why they are pulling it away from instead of toward
the Caves."

"I don't know what's the matter with the ship, but I believe I know
why they are moving it," volunteered Irma. "They're taking it to that
hiding-place I told you Helgers picked out--there behind that upthrust
of rock. You see, they think you know where the Caves are because you
have explored Titan, and they think you will come directly here, so
they want the ship hidden to make sure you land."

Half a hundred men in their space-suits toiled like ants about the big
cylindrical craft until they at last jockeyed it into position behind
the natural screen of rock. Even before it was in place other men were
swarming over the ship with paint machines, coloring it a granite
gray. When they had finished the ship was nearly invisible from the
sky.

Penrun paid little attention to their preparations. His attention was
centered on those two shining rods atop the Queen's silken palace.
They now aimed at the ship in its new position. A strange idea flashed
through his mind. Those rods had in some mysterious way put the
elevating machinery of the _Osprey_ out of commission!

Suppose the spiders turned them next on his own space-sphere up here
on the peak? The thought sent a shudder through him. Visions of the
final flight across the nightmarish, distorted granite, the running
down and capture of himself and Irma, the paralyzing bite of the
monsters in the cavern of the Living Dead flashed across his mind.
Cold sweat stood out on his forehead. Instinctively his hand leaped to
the propulsion control and hovered there.

       *       *       *       *       *

Yet why hadn't the spiders attacked the ship, now that they had it
helpless? It was not their usual tactics to give their victims a
chance to free themselves. Why, why? There could be only one answer.
They were waiting for something! Penrun's eyes glinted suddenly.

"Irma," he said rapidly, "we are in serious danger. The spiders have
