
He and Micheals were in the living room of an evacuated Schroon Lake
house. O'Donnell had made it his new command post.

"Why are they hedging?" O'Donnell demanded impatiently. "The leech has
to be blown up quick. What are they fooling around for?"

"They're afraid of a chain reaction," Micheals told him. "A
concentration of hydrogen bombs might set one up in the Earth's crust or
in the atmosphere. It might do any of half a dozen things."

"Perhaps they'd like me to order a bayonet attack," O'Donnell said
contemptuously.

Micheals sighed and sat down in an armchair. He was convinced that the
whole method was wrong. The government scientists were being rushed into
a single line of inquiry. The pressure on them was so great that they
didn't have a chance to consider any other approach but force--and the
leech thrived on that.

Micheals was certain that there were times when fighting fire with fire
was not applicable.

Fire. Loki, god of fire. And of trickery. No, there was no answer there.
But Micheals' mind was in mythology now, retreating from the unbearable
present.

Allenson came in, followed by six other men.

"Well," Allenson said, "there's a damned good chance of splitting the
Earth wide open if you use the number of bombs our figures show you
need."

"You have to take chances in war," O'Donnell replied bluntly. "Shall I
go ahead?"

Micheals saw, suddenly, that O'Donnell didn't care if he did crack the
Earth. The red-faced general only knew that he was going to set off the
greatest explosion ever produced by the hand of Man.

"Not so fast," Allenson said. "I'll let the others speak for
themselves."

The general contained himself with difficulty. "Remember," he said,
"according to your own figures, the leech is growing at the rate of
twenty feet an hour."

"And speeding up," Allenson added. "But this isn't a decision to be made
in haste."

Micheals found his mind wandering again, to the lightning bolts of Zeus.
That was what they needed. Or the strength of Hercules.

Or--

He sat up suddenly. "Gentlemen, I believe I can offer you a possible
alternative, although it's a very dim one."

They stared at him.

"Have you ever heard of Antaeus?" he asked.

       *       *       *       *       *

The more the leech ate, the faster it grew and the hungrier it became.
Although its birth was forgotten, it did remember a long way back. It
had eaten a planet in that ancient past. Grown tremendous, ravenous, it
had made the journey to a nearby star and eaten that, replenishing the
cells converted into energy for the trip. But then there was no more
food, and the next star was an enormous distance away.

It set out on the journey, but long before it reached the food, its
energy ran out. Mass, converted back to energy to make the trip, was
used up. It shrank.

Finally, all the energy was gone. It was a spore, drifting aimlessly,
lifelessly, in space.

That was the first time. Or was it? It thought it could remember back to
a distant, misty time when the Universe was evenly covered with stars.
It had eaten through them, cutting away whole sections, growing,
swelling. And the stars had swung off in terror, forming galaxies and
constellations.

Or was that a dream?

Methodically, it fed on the Earth, wondering where the rich food was.
And then it was back again, but this time above the leech.

It waited, but the tantalizing food remained out of reach. It was able
to sense how rich and pure the food was.

Why didn't it fall?

For a long time the leech waited, but the food stayed out of reach. At
last, it lifted and followed.

The food retreated, up, up from the surface of the planet. The leech
went after as quickly as its bulk would allow.

The rich food fled out, into space, and the leech followed. Beyond, it
could sense an even richer source.

The hot, wonderful food of a sun!

       *       *       *       *       *

O'Donnell served champagne for the scientists in the control room.
Official dinners would follow, but this was the victory celebration.

"A toast," the general said, standing. The men raised their glasses. The
only man not drinking was a lieutenant, sitting in front of the control
board that guided the drone spaceship.

"To Micheals, for thinking of--what was it again, Micheals?"

"Antaeus." Micheals had been drinking champagne steadily, but he didn't
feel elated. Antaeus, born of Ge, the Earth, and Poseidon, the Sea. The
invincible wrestler. Each time Hercules threw him to the ground, he
arose refreshed.

Until Hercules held him in the air.

Moriarty was muttering to himself, figuring with slide rule, pencil and
paper. Allenson was drinking, but he didn't look too happy about it.

"Come on, you birds of evil omen," O'Donnell said, pouring more
champagne. "Figure it out later. Right now, drink." He turned to the
