Max unlocked my cabin door this morning. He looked drawn. "Listen," he
said. "I've checked my respiration, pulse, saliva, temperature. All
normal."

"So?"

"Come here," he said. I followed him into the lab. He indicated a
microscope. His eyes were bright.

"Well?"

"A drop of my blood," he said. "Look."

I squinted into the microscope. I saw purple discs. Oddly, they did not
attack the red blood cells. There was no fission, no mitosis. The
leucocytes, strangely enough, let them alone.

My hands were shaking as I took a sterile slide and pricked my finger. I
put the slide under the microscope. I adjusted the lens and stared.

Purple discs, swimming in my bloodstream. Thriving. Minding their own
business.

"Me, too," I said.

"They're inert," Max said hoarsely. "They don't affect metabolism, cause
fever, or interfere with the body chemistry in any way. Do they remind
you of anything?"

I thought about it. Then I went to the slide file that was marked
_flora--negative_.

"Right," Max said. "The purple thistle. Spores! The atmosphere is
clogged with them. Greta, my sweet, we're infected."

"I feel fine," I said.

All day long we ran tests. Negative tests. We seem to be disgustingly
healthy. "Symbiosis," Max said finally. "Live and let live. Apparently
we're hosts."

Only one thing disturbs me.

Most symbiotes _do_ something for their host. Something to enhance the
host's survival potential.

We played chess this evening. I won. Max is furious. He's such a poor
sport.

       *       *       *       *       *

_March 11_

Max talked with Senator Farragut this morning. He gave Epsilon a clean
bill of health and the Senator thanked God. "The first starship will
leave tonight," the Senator said. "Right on schedule, with ten thousand
colonists aboard. You're world heroes!"

Max and I played chess the rest of the day. Max won consistently. He
utilizes a fianchetto that is utterly impregnable. If he wins tomorrow,
I shall have to kill him.

       *       *       *       *       *

MAX

_March 13_

It was, of course, necessary for me to destroy Armitage and Bishop. They
won far too often. But I am sorry about Greta. Yet I had to strangle
her.

If she hadn't started that infernal queen's pawn opening it would have
been different. She beat me six times running, and on the last game I
pulled a superb orang-outang, but it was too late. She saw mate in four
and gave me that serpent smirk I know so well.

How could I have ever been in love with her?

       *       *       *       *       *

_March 14_

Frightfully boring to be alone. I have a thought. Chess. Right hand
against left. White and black. Jolly good.

       *       *       *       *       *

_March 16_

I haven't much time.

Left was black this morning and I beat him, four out of five. We're in
the lab now. He's watching me scribble this. His thumb and forefinger
are twitching in fury. He looks like some great white spider about to
