
"I mean that we no longer need to fear the dust," she said, and now her
smile was radiant. "It never really did hurt people the way the doctors
said it would. Remember how it was with me, Hank, the exposure I had and
recovered from, although the doctors said I wouldn't at first--and
without even losing my hair? Hank, those who were brave enough to stay
outside, and who weren't killed by terror and suggestion and panic--they
adapted to the dust. They changed, but they changed for the better.
Everything--"

"Effie, he told you lies!" Hank interrupted, but still in that same
agitated, broken voice, cowed by her beauty.

"Everything that grew or moved was purified," she went on ringingly.
"You men going outside have never seen it, because you've never had eyes
for it. You've been blinded to beauty, to life itself. And now all the
power in the dust has gone and faded, anyway, burned itself out. That's
true, isn't it?"

She smiled at Patrick for confirmation. His face was strangely veiled,
as if he were calculating obscure changes. He might have given a little
nod; at any rate, Effie assumed that he did, for she turned back to her
husband.

"You see, Hank? We can all go out now. We need never fear the dust
again. Patrick is a living proof of that," she continued triumphantly,
standing straighter, holding him a little tighter. "Look at him. Not a
scar or a sign, and he's been out in the dust for years. How could he be
this way, if the dust hurt the brave? Oh, believe me, Hank! Believe what
you see. Test it if you want. Test Patrick here."

"Effie, you're all mixed up. You don't know--" Hank faltered, but
without conviction of any sort.

"Just test him," Effie repeated with utter confidence, ignoring--not
even noticing--Patrick's warning nudge.

"All right," Hank mumbled. He looked at the stranger dully. "Can you
count?" he asked.

Patrick's face was a complete enigma. Then he suddenly spoke, and his
voice was like a fencer's foil--light, bright, alert, constantly
playing, yet utterly on guard.

"Can I count? Do you take me for a complete simpleton, man? Of course I
can count!"

"Then count yourself," Hank said, barely indicating the table.

"Count myself, should I?" the other retorted with a quick facetious
laugh. "Is this a kindergarten? But if you want me to, I'm willing." His
voice was rapid. "I've two arms, and two legs, that's four. And ten
fingers and ten toes--you'll take my word for them?--that's twenty-four.
A head, twenty-five. And two eyes and a nose and a mouth--"

"With this, I mean," Hank said heavily, advanced to the table, picked up
the Geiger counter, switched it on, and handed it across the table to
the other man.

But while it was still an arm's length from Patrick, the clicks began to
mount furiously, until they were like the chatter of a pigmy machine
gun. Abruptly the clicks slowed, but that was only the counter shifting
to a new scaling circuit, in which each click stood for 512 of the old
ones.

       *       *       *       *       *

With those horrid, rattling little volleys, fear cascaded into the room
and filled it, smashing like so much colored glass all the bright
barriers of words Effie had raised against it. For no dreams can stand
against the Geiger counter, the Twentieth Century's mouthpiece of
ultimate truth. It was as if the dust and all the terrors of the dust
had incarnated themselves in one dread invading shape that said in words
stronger than audible speech, "Those were illusions, whistles in the
dark. This is reality, the dreary, pitiless reality of the Burrowing
Years."

Hank scuttled back to the wall. Through chattering teeth he babbled,
"... enough radioactives ... kill a thousand men ... freak ... a
freak ..." In his agitation he forgot for a moment to inhale through
the respirator.

Even Effie--taken off guard, all the fears that had been drilled into
her twanging like piano wires--shrank from the skeletal-seeming shape
beside her, held herself to it only by desperation.

Patrick did it for her. He disengaged her arm and stepped briskly away.
Then he whirled on them, smiling sardonically, and started to speak, but
instead looked with distaste at the chattering Geiger counter he held
between fingers and thumb.

"Have we listened to this racket long enough?" he asked.

Without waiting for an answer, he put down the instrument on the table.
The cat hurried over to it curiously and the clicks began again to
mount in a minor crescendo. Effie lunged for it frantically, switched it
off, darted back.

"That's right," Patrick said with another chilling smile. "You do well
to cringe, for I'm death itself. Even in death I could kill you, like a
snake." And with that his voice took on the tones of a circus barker.
"Yes, I'm a freak, as the gentleman so wisely said. That's what one
doctor who dared talk with me for a minute told me before he kicked me
out. He couldn't tell me why, but somehow the dust doesn't kill me.
Because I'm a freak, you see, just like the men who ate nails and walked
on fire and ate arsenic and stuck themselves through with pins. Step
right up, ladies and gentlemen--only not too close!--and examine the man
the dust can't harm. Rappaccini's child, brought up to date; his
embrace, death!

"And now," he said, breathing heavily, "I'll get out and leave you in
your damned lead cave."

He started toward the window. Hank's gun followed him shakingly.

"Wait!" Effie called in an agonized voice. He obeyed. She continued
