"It would make hunting easy," said Good Fox, "but we do not want it even
if given to us."

He drew back from the rifle, and the others edged away from it.

George put it down.

Sidney held up a sheaf of papers. "I've got it all, George," he said
exultantly in English, "right here! I asked Huk if they can stay with us
in our time, at least for a while. We can study them more, maybe even
take them back to show the world."

"What did he say?"

"He didn't have a chance to reply when you shot the rifle."

George put it formally to the Indians, addressing Huk, Good Fox, Moon
Water and the rest. "You have seen something of the modern world. We
would like you to stay in it if it is your wish. I don't know how long
you could stay in Huk's vision, but if you can remain here permanently
and not go back to your time and--well, not being alive there any
more--we hope you will consider this."

Huk replied, "It is possible that we could stay in your time, at least
as long as my vision lasts, which might be for as long as I lived." He
glanced at Good Fox.

The young chief in turn looked at Moon Water. Her gaze went to the
station wagon, to the TV, then up at the sky where the plane had
appeared, at the rifle, the camera, the thermos, and all else of the
white man. She seemed to weigh their values and disadvantages, looking
dubious and doubtful.

Good Fox announced, "We will hold a council about it. As is our custom,
all have words to say about such a thing."

Abruptly he led his people away, into the excavations and over a slight
rise of ground, behind which they disappeared.

Sidney murmured, "I don't like that so much."

"They must do as they want." George led the way to the card table and
they sat there. On it rested Huk's aspergill.

"He gave it to me," Sidney explained.

George placed Good Fox's netted clay water jug and his atlatl and furred
quiver of lances on the table, together with the pictures he had taken
of the ancient Indians. They waited.

Sidney, glancing at the low hill behind which the Indians had gone,
said, "What they're doing is choosing between living in modern
civilization and remaining dead. What do you think they'll do?"

"I don't know," said George. "They didn't think so much of us."

"But they couldn't choose death and complete oblivion!"

"We'll see."

They waited some more.

"At least," said Sidney, indicating the articles on the table, "we'll
have these for evidence." He held up the sheaf of papers containing
Huk's story. "And this, giving the real reason the cliff dwellers left.
I haven't told you what it was, George. It's so simple that--"

He didn't complete his sentence, for just then Huk, Good Fox, Moon
Water, and the other warriors made their choice. It was announced
dramatically.

The water jug, the aspergill, and the atlatl and quiver of lances
disappeared from the table. In their places, suddenly, there were the
thermos and the binoculars.

Sidney stared stupidly at them.

George said quietly, "They've gone back."

"But they can't do this!" George protested.

"They have."

Sidney's hand shook as he picked up the sheaf of papers holding Huk's
story. Indicating it and the photographs, he said, "Well, they haven't
taken these away."

"Haven't they?" asked George. He picked up some of the pictures. "Look."

Sidney looked and saw that the pictures were now blank. His glance went
quickly to the typewritten sheets of paper in his hands. He cried out
and then shuffled them frantically.

They, too, were blank.

Sidney jumped up. "I don't care!" he exclaimed. "He told me and I've got
it here!" He pointed to his head. "I can remember it, anyway."

"Can you?" asked George.

"Why, certainly I can," Sidney asserted confidently. "The reason the
cliff dwellers left, George, was that they ..." Sidney stopped.

