switched on the dying hum of the radio and tried futilely to transmit a
message.

The faint crackle of the radio grew more distant. He slumped forward in
the bucket seat, his head striking the controls in front of him--and,
for him, the sounds of the muted radio died out completely.

The burning heat seared into the metal hull of the MR4. Its outer hull
was almost at the boiling point. Inside, it was a burning, suffocating
hell. Perhaps it was the heat that aroused Hal Burnett once again.
Somehow he managed to stumble to the Tele-screen. With the last vestige
of a waning strength, he managed to switch it on and hold himself erect.

The stupendous white blast of the Sun struck across his staring eyes,
but he did not flinch. Unconscious, his hands clutched at the control
knobs as his sagging legs let him drift weightlessly toward the floor.
He was like a drowning swimmer, out of control and helplessly floating
under water.

He seemed to become aware for a moment as a last flicker of
consciousness crossed his mind. He mouthed something unintelligible--a
last, forgotten word.

Anchored only by his grip on the control knobs, his weightless body
floated aimlessly in the almost steaming cabin as the awful stillness
re-echoed throughout the hollow vault of the ship.

Down below, with ever-growing closeness, the Sun waited patiently, like
a bright and hovering vulture.

The MR4 swung and pivoted gently like a ship at sea straining at its
anchor in the first, fresh breezes of a gathering storm. For a moment it
seemed to hesitate like a coy maiden on the verge of some unknown
threshold. Then, abruptly, she climaxed her voyage and plunged directly
toward the waiting Sun some twenty million miles below, carrying with
her only her dead cargo; her pilot--

       *       *       *       *       *

The radio crackled noisily after Hal Burnett's last incoherent
transmission. It crackled aimlessly for a few moments--and then was
still.

"Something's wrong," said Williams, a thin thread of moisture shining
down his face. "Something's gone wrong up there!"

"It sure has," said Donnelly, quietly. "And I know who I'm going to ask
about it."

The little doctor said nothing. His face was an embittered parchment
mask. "It's happened. God help me. It's happened. He's gone," he
muttered, almost inaudibly.

Donnelly sighed heavily, a look almost of defeat sweeping momentarily
across his features. "See here, Doc," he said exhaustedly. "Don't be so
heartless about people. You've got a son of your own in space, so you
ought to understand how other people feel. What kind of a father would
do a thing like this to another man's son anyway?"

"Look, Donnelly," said the little man with bitter weariness. "Do me a
favor will you? You fill out the reports tonight. Somehow or other I
just don't feel up to it."

"Maybe it's your conscience," said Donnelly, sarcastically. "But I'll be
damned if I'll do it for you. You don't like to do your own dirty work,
do you, Doc? I thought you just loved to fill out Government reports."

"Donnelly, Donnelly," cried the doctor in sudden anguish. "Can't you
understand yet. Even an undertaker's job is unpleasant but somebody's
got to do it. Don't you see yet? _It has to be done!_"

With a muffled groan of disgust, Donnelly sprang to the radio once
again, pushing Williams roughly aside. Futilely, and in desperation he
strained at the controls for a moment and then, with a roar of fury, he
turned back to the doctor.

"Now see here, Doc--" he thundered, and then stopped in amazement.

The door to the dim and ill-lighted outer hallway of the lab was
standing open. And at the far end, the outer door was quietly closing
behind the disappearing figure of the bent-shouldered little man.

Donnelly started to spring after him, and then abruptly stopped. His
huge figure slumped in sudden despairing futility as he recognized the
tragic hopelessness of the situation.

"Let him go," rasped Williams. "There's nothing we can do now anyway,
Joe."

"Yeah, yeah. Let's write the report up ourselves. That's real important,
you know. The Government needs it."

He sat down at the typewriter, his heavy features twisted in hopeless
bitterness and anger. He started typing, and then stopped for a moment.

"What was this kid pilot's full name, Williams?"

Williams checked the Government order sheet. "Hell," he said.
"Strangely, it's the same as the doctor's, Dr. Alfred Burnett. Only the
kid's name is Harold Burnett."

