it if we see fit to do so."

Korvin tried to look grateful. "Well, then," he said, "what is your
government?"

The Ruler beckoned to a heavy-set green being, who stepped forward
from a knot of Tr'en, inclined his head in Korvin's direction, and
began. "Our government is the only logical form of government," he
said in a high, sweet tenor. "The Ruler orders all, and his subjects
obey. In this way uniformity is gained, and this uniformity aids in
the speed of possible action and in the weight of action. All Tr'en
act instantly in the same manner. The Ruler is adopted by the previous
Ruler; in this way we are assured of a common wisdom and a steady
judgment."

"You have heard our government defined," the Ruler said. "Now, you
will define yours for us."

Korvin shook his head. "If you insist," he said, "I'll try it. But you
won't understand it."

The Ruler frowned. "We shall understand," he said. "Begin. Who governs
you?"

"None," Korvin said.

"But you are governed?"

Korvin nodded. "Yes."

"Then there is a governor," the Ruler insisted.

"True," Korvin said. "But everyone is the governor."

"Then there is no government," the Ruler said. "There is no single
decision."

"No," Korvin said equably, "there are many decisions binding on all."

"Who makes them binding?" the Ruler asked. "Who forces you to accept
these decisions? Some of them must be unfavorable to some beings?"

"Many of them are unfavorable," Korvin said. "But we are not forced to
accept them."

"Do you act against your own interests?"

Korvin shrugged. "Not knowingly," he said. The Ruler flashed a look at
the technicians handling the lie-detector. Korvin turned to see their
expression. They needed no words; the lie-detector was telling them,
perfectly obviously, that he was speaking the truth. But the truth
wasn't making any sense. "I told you you wouldn't understand it," he
said.

"It is a defect in your explanation," the Ruler almost snarled.

"My explanation is as exact as it can be," he said.

The Ruler breathed gustily. "Let us try something else," he said.
"Everyone is the governor. Do you share a single mind? A racial mind
has been theorized, though we have met with no examples--"

"Neither have we," Korvin said. "We are all individuals, like
yourselves."

"But with no single ruler to form policy, to make decisions--"

"We have no need of one," Korvin said calmly.

"Ah," the Ruler said suddenly, as if he saw daylight ahead. "And why
not?"

"We call our form of government _democracy_," Korvin said. "It means
the rule of the people. There is no need for another ruler."

One of the experts piped up suddenly. "The beings themselves rule each
other?" he said. "This is clearly impossible; for, no one being can
have the force to compel acceptance of his commands. Without his
force, there can be no effective rule."

"That is our form of government," Korvin said.

"You are lying," the expert said.

One of the technicians chimed in: "The machine tells us--"

"Then the machine is faulty," the expert said. "It will be corrected."

Korvin wondered, as the technicians argued, how long they'd take
studying the machine, before they realized it didn't have any defects
to correct. He hoped it wasn't going to be too long; he could foresee
another stretch of boredom coming. And, besides, he was getting
homesick.

It took three days--but boredom never really had a chance to set in.
Korvin found himself the object of more attention than he had hoped
for; one by one, the experts came to his cell, each with a different
method of resolving the obvious contradictions in his statements.

Some of them went away fuming. Others simply went away, puzzled.

On the third day Korvin escaped.

It wasn't very difficult; he hadn't thought it would be. Even the most
logical of thinking beings has a subconscious as well as a conscious
