
Or gone. What was the difference, anyway?

But Kelly had no difficulty in remembering _why_ they had come.

They had come into space because that was how it was with those who
fought their way up to being the dominate life form of whatever world
they had lived on and grown and died on. If you were the kind who went
into space, you went because space was there.

Who needed a better reason than that?

"Kew," he whispered. "Lakrit, Lljub, Urdaz, listen now--I thought I was
doing the right thing--maybe my idea was right--but I just made a
mistake in the calculations. I just made a helluva mistake--"

The wind sighed over the naked rock and the rusted metal and the rock
and the dead blue water.

He turned and pushed his head against the rock, and his body curled up
against the bitter wind. "You've got to forgive me," he said.

"'_Has anybody here seen Kelly? K-E-double-L-Y?_'"

He shivered and kept his eyes closed. It was part of the wind. He did
not want to go out that way, hearing crazy voices in the wind.

"'Has anybody here seen Kelly--?'"

He raised his head and blinked and the wind drove tears down his cheeks.

"Am I just hearing something that's going crazy inside my head?" He
peered around. There was nothing, nothing anywhere of course, nothing
where nothing had ever been, and nothing else but nothing could ever be.

"You're wrong, Kelly. Your Crew's here."

Kelly raised himself painfully to an elbow. "Where--_where_?"

"Right here, Kelly. We had a difficult time locating you. Sure, we
forgive you. You were trying to do what was right. We know that."

"There's nothing--nothing--" Kelly said.

"You're wrong. The Crew's here and we're waiting."

He stared at the rock. He put his face against it and pushed his hands
to it. There was a kind of dull glow in it, a faint hint of warmth in
the rock.

"How can this be?" Kelly said.

"This is the life here, Kelly. Perhaps there is life everywhere in the
most impossible seeming places. And where life is, Kelly, we can live
with it and be welcomed by it. Here, this rock is life, and it has taken
us in. It has been here a long time. And it will be here for a much
longer time."

"Rock," Kelly said.

"But hurry and come back."

"But no one will ever know. How long--how long can we wait?"

"Who can answer that, Kelly? But maybe they will find the Crew someday."

Kelly looked up once at the completely unfamiliar distances growing
darker. Sometime, he thought, they'll come from wherever Earth is and
find the Crew of the ship, find a rock here waiting the ages out.

"Hurry, Kelly!"

His head dropped against the rock. His hands slid down it, and a smile
moved over his lips and froze there as the wind whispered over it.


                                                           ... THE END




Transcriber's Note:

    This etext was produced from _If Worlds of Science Fiction_ July
    1954. Extensive research did not uncover any evidence that the U.S.
    copyright on this publication was renewed. Minor spelling and
    typographical errors have been corrected without note.


