
"Oh, sure. One could have imagined that old Thaddeus McIlvaine had
looked somewhat like his nephew when he himself was a young man. But
don't let the old man's rigmarole about rejuvenation make too deep an
impression on you. The first thing the young fellow did was to get rid
of that machine of his uncle's. Can you imagine his uncle having done
something like that?"

       *       *       *       *       *

I shook my head, but I could not help thinking what an ironic thing it
would have been if there had been something to McIlvaine's story, and in
the process to which he had been subjected from out of space he had not
been rejuvenated so much as just sent back in time, in which case he
would have no memory of the machine nor of the use to which it had been
put. It would have been as ironic for the inhabitants of McIlvaine's
star, too; they would doubtless have looked forward to keeping this
contact with Earth open and failed to realize that McIlvaine's
construction differed appreciably from theirs.

"He virtually junked it. Said he had no idea what it could be used for,
and didn't know how to operate it."

"And the telescope?"

"Oh, he kept that. He said he had some interest in astronomy and meant
to develop that if time permitted."

"So much ran in the family, then."

"Yes. More than that. Old McIlvaine had a trick of seeming shy and
self-conscious. So did this nephew of his. Wherever he came from, his
origins must have been backward. I suspect that he was ashamed of them,
and if I had to guess, I'd put him in the Kentucky hill-country or the
Ozarks. Modern concepts seemed to be pretty well too much for him, and
his thinking would have been considerably more natural at the turn of
the century.

"I had to see him several times. The police chivvied him a little, but
not much; he was so obviously innocent of everything that there was
nothing for them in him. And the search for the old man didn't last
long; no one had seen him after that last night at Bixby's, and, since
everyone had already long since concluded that he was mentally a little
off center, it was easy to conclude that he had wandered away somewhere,
probably an amnesiac. That he might have anticipated that is indicated
in the hasty preparation of his will, which came out of the blue, said
Barnevall, who drew it up for him.

"I felt sorry for him."

"For whom?"

"The nephew. He seemed so lost, you know--like a man who wanted to
remember something, but couldn't. I noticed that several times when I
tried to talk to him; I had the feeling each time that there was
something he wanted desperately to say, it hovered always on the rim of
his awareness, but somehow there was no bridge to it, no clue to put it
into words. He tried so hard for something he couldn't put his finger
on."

"What became of him?"

"Oh, he's still around. I think he found a job somewhere. As a matter of
fact, I saw him just the other evening. He had apparently just come from
work and he was standing in front of Bixby's with his face pressed to
the window looking in. I came up nearby and watched him. Leopold and
Alexander were sitting inside--a couple of lonely old men looking out.
And a lonely young man looking in. There was something in McIlvaine's
face--that same thing I had noticed so often before, a kind of
expression that seemed to say there was something he ought to know,
something he ought to remember, to do, to say, but there was no way in
which he could reach back to it."

"Or forward," I said with a wry smile.

"As you like," said Harrigan. "Pour me another, will you?"

I did and he took it.

"That poor devil!" he muttered. "He'd be happier if he could only go
back where he came from."

"Wouldn't we all?" I asked. "But nobody ever goes home again. Perhaps
McIlvaine never had a home like that."

"You'd have thought so if you could have seen his face looking in at
Leopold and Alexander. Oh, it may have been a trick of the streetlight
there, it may have been my imagination. But it sticks to my memory, and
I keep thinking how alike the two were--old McIlvaine trying so
desperately to find someone who could believe him, and his nephew now
trying just as hard to find someone to accept him or a place he could
accept on the only terms he knows."


