Ronny looked at him. "Sorry," he said. "I am a citizen of the United
Planets, not any one planet, even Earth. UP citizens have complete
religious freedom. In my case I am unaffiliated with any church."

The Sub-Bishop let it pass. He said sourly, "I am afraid that even here on
New Delos, I am seldom honoured by my title any more. Go on, you say you
deal with Interplanetary Security."

"That's correct. In cases like this we're interested in checking to see if
there is any possibility that citizens of planets other than New Delos are
involved in your internal affairs."

The other's eyes were suddenly slits. He said, heavily, "You suspect that
David the One was assassinated by an alien?"

Ronny had to tread carefully here. "I make no such suggestion. I am merely
here to check on the possibility. If such was the case, my duty would be
to arrest the man, or men."

"If we got hold of him, you'd have small chance of asserting your
authority," the priest growled. "What did you want to know?"

"I understand that no interplanetary craft have left New Delos since the
assassination."

"None except a United Planets ship which was carefully inspected."

Ronny said tightly, "But what facilities do you have to check on secret
spaceports, possibly located in some remote desert or mountain area?"

The New Delian laughed sourly. "There is no other planet in all the United
Planets with our degree of security. We even imported the most recent
developments in artificial satellites equipped with the most delicate of
detection devices. I assure you, it is utterly impossible for a spacecraft
to land or take off from New Delos without our knowledge."

Ronny Bronston's eyes lit with excitement. "These security measures of
yours. To what extent do you keep under observation all aliens on the
planet?"

The priest's chuckle had a nasty quality. "You are quite ignorant of our
institutions, evidently. Every person on New Delos, in every way of life,
was under constant survey from the cradle to the grave. Aliens were highly
discouraged. When they appeared on New Delos at all, they were restricted
in their movements to this, our capital city."

Ronny let air whistle from his lungs. "Then," he said triumphantly, "if
any alien had anything to do with this, he is still on the planet. Can you
get me a list of all aliens?"

The other laughed again, still sourly. "But there are none. None except
you employees of United Planets. I'm afraid you're on a wild-goose chase."

Ronny stared at him blankly. "But commercial representatives, cultural
exchange--"

The priest said flatly, "No. None at all. All commerce was handled through
UP. We encouraged no cultural exchanges. We wished to keep our people
uncorrupted. United Planets alone had the right to land on our one
spaceport."

The Section G agent came to his feet. This was much simpler than he could
ever have hoped for. He thanked the other, but avoided the necessity of
shaking hands, and left.

                  -------------------------------------

He found a helio-cab and dialed it to the UP building, finding strange the
necessity of slipping coins into the vehicle's slots until the correct
amount for his destination had been deposited. Coinage was no longer in
use on Earth.

At the UP building he retraced his steps of the day before to the single
office of Section G.

To his surprise, not only Mouley Hassan was there, but Tog as well. Hassan
had evidently had at least a few hours of sleep. He was in better shape.

They exchanged the usual amenities and took their chairs again.

Hassan said, "We were just gossiping. It's been years since I've been in
Greater Washington. Lee Chang tells me that Sid Jakes is now a Supervisor.
I worked with him for a while, when I first joined Section G. How about a
glass of wine?"

Ronny said, "Look. If Tommy Paine was connected with this, and it's almost
positive he was, we've got him."

The others looked at him.

"You've evidently been busy," Tog said mildly.

He turned to her. "He's trapped, Tog! He can't get off the planet."

Mouley Hassan rubbed a hand through his hair. "It'd be hard, all right.
They've got the people under rein here such as you've never seen before.
Or they did until this blew up."

Ronny sketched the situation to Tog, winding up with, "The only thing that
makes sense is that it's a Tommy Paine job. The local citizens would never
have been able to get their hands on such a bomb, or been able to have
made the arrangements for its delivery. They're under too much
surveillance."

Tog said thoughtfully, "but how did he escape all this surveillance?"

"Don't you understand? He's working here, in this building, as an employee
of UP. There is no other alternative."

They stared at him.

"I think perhaps you're right," Tog said finally.

Ronny turned to Mouley Hassan. "Can you get a list of all UP employees?"

"Of course." He flicked his order box, barked a command into it.

Ronny said, "It's going to be a matter of eliminating the impossible. For
instance, what is the earliest known case of Tommy Paine's activity?"

Tog thought back. "So far as we know definitely, about twenty-two years
ago."

"Fine," Ronny said, increasingly excited. "That will eliminate all persons
less than, say, forty years of age. We can assume he was at least twenty
when he began."

Hassan said, "Can we eliminate all women employees?"

Ronny said, "I'd think so. The few times he's been seen, all reports are
of a man. And that case on the planet Mother where he put himself over as
a Holy Man. He could hardly have been a woman in disguise in a Stone Age
culture such as that."

Hassan said, "And this Tommy Paine has been flitting around this part of
the galaxy for years, so anyone who has been here steadily for a period of
even a couple of years or so, can't be suspect."

Mouley Hassan thrust his hand into a delivery drawer and brought forth a
handful of punched cards, possibly fifty in all.

"Surely there's more people than that working in this building," Ronny
protested.

Mouley Hassan said, "No. I've eliminated already everyone who is a citizen
of New Delos. Obviously, Tommy Paine is an alien. We have only forty-eight
Earthlings and other United Planets citizens working here."

He carried the cards to a small collator and worked for a moment on its
controls, as Tog and Ronny watched him with mounting tension. "Let's see,"
he muttered. "We eliminate all women, all those less than forty, all who
haven't done a great deal of travel, those who have been here for several
years."

The end of it was that they eliminated everyone employed in the UP
building.

The cards were stacked back on Mouley Hassan's desk again, and the three
of them sat around and looked glumly at them.

Ronny said, "He's tinkered with the files. He counterfeited fake papers
for himself, or something. Possibly he's pulled his own card and it isn't
in this stack you have."

Mouley Hassan said, "We'll double-check all those possibilities, but
you're wrong. Possibly a few hundred years ago, but not today. Forgery and
counterfeiting are things of the past. And, believe me, the Bureau of
Investigation and especially Section G, may look on the slipshod side, but
they aren't. We're not going to find anything wrong with those cards.
Tommy Paine simply is not working for UP on New Delos."

"Then," Ronny said, "there's only one alternative. He's on this UP ship
going to, what was the name of its destination?"

"Avalon," Mouley Hassan said, his face thoughtful.

Tog said, "Do you have any ideas on the men aboard?"

Mouley Hassan said, "There were four crew men, and six of our agents."

Tog said, "Unless one of them has faked papers, the six agents are
eliminated. That leaves the crew members. Do you know anything about
them?"

Hassan shook his head.

Ronny said, "Let's communicate with Avalon. Tell our representatives there
to be sure that none of the occupants of that ship leaves Avalon until we
get there."

Mouley Hassan said, "Good idea." He turned to his screen and said into it,
"Section G, Bureau of Investigation, on the Planet Avalon."

In moment the screen lit up. An elderly agent, as Section G agents seemed
to go, looked up at them.

Mouley Hassan held his silver badge so the other could see it and on the
Avalon agent's nod said, "I'm Hassan from New Delos. We've just had a
crisis here and there seems to be a chance that it's a Tommy Paine job.
Agent Bronston here is on an assignment tracking him down. I'll turn it
over to Bronston."

The Avalon agent nodded again, and looked at Ronny.

Ronny said urgently, "We haven't the time to give you details, but every
indication is that Paine is on a UP spacecraft with Avalon as its
destination. There are only ten men aboard, and six of them are Section G
operatives."

The other pursed his lips. "I see. You think you have the old fox
cornered, eh?"

"Possibly," Ronny said. "There are various ifs. Miss Tog and I can double
check here. Then as soon as we can clear exit visas, we'll make immediate
way for Avalon."

The Avalon Section G agent said, "I haven't the authority to control the
movements of other agents, they have as high rank as I have," he added,
expressionlessly, "and probably higher than yours."

Ronny said, "But the four-man crew?"

The other said, "These men are coming to Avalon to work on a job that will
take at least six months. We'll make a routine check, and I'll try and
make sure the whole ten will still be on Avalon when and if you arrive."

They had to be satisfied with that. They checked all ways from the middle,
nor did it take long. There was no doubt. If this was a Tommy Paine job,
and it almost surely was, then there was only one way in which he could
have escaped from the planet and that was by the single spacecraft that
had left, destination Avalon. He was not on the planet, that was definite
Ronny felt. A stranger on New Delos was as conspicuous as a walrus in a
goldfish bowl. There simply were no such.

They spent most of their time checking and rechecking United Planets
personnel, but there was no question there either.

Mouley Hassan and others of UP personnel helped cut the red tape involved
in getting exit visas from New Delos. It wasn't as complicated as it might
have been a week or two before. No one seemed to be so confident of his
authority in the new provisional government that he dared veto a United
Planets request.

Mouley Hassan was able to arrange for a small space yacht, slower than a
military craft, but capable of getting them to Avalon in a few days time.
A one-man crew was sufficient, Ronny, and especially Tog, could spell him
on the watches.

Time aboard was spent largely in studying up on Avalon, going over and
over again anything known about the elusive Tommy Paine, and playing
Battle Chess and bickering with Tog Lee Chang Chu.

If it hadn't been for this ability to argue against just about anything
Ronny managed to say, he could have been attracted to her to the detriment
of the job. She was a good traveler, few people are; she was an
ultra-efficient assistant; she was a joy to look at; and she never
intruded. But, Great Guns, the woman could bicker.

The two of them were studying in the ship's luxurious lounge when Ronny
looked up and said, "Do you have any idea why those six agents were sent
to Avalon?"

"No," she said.

He indicated the booklet he was reading. "From what I can see here, it
sounds like one of the most advanced planets in the UP. They've made some
of the most useful advances in industrial techniques of the past century."

"Oh, I don't know," Tog mused. "I haven't much regard for Industrial
Feudalism myself. It starts off with a bang, but tends to go sterile."

"Industrial feudalism," he said indignantly. "What do you mean? The
government is a constitutional monarchy with the king merely a powerless
symbol. The standard of living is high. Elections are honest and
democratic. They've got a three-party system...."

"Which is largely phony," Tog interrupted. "You've got to do some reading
between the lines, especially when the books you're reading are turned out
by the industrial feudalistic publishing companies in Avalon."

"What's this industrial feudalism, you keep talking about? Avalon has a
system of free enterprise."

"A gobbledygook term," Tog said, irritatingly. "Industrial feudalism is a
socio-economic system that develops when industrial wealth is concentrated
into the hands of a comparatively few families. It finally gets to the
point of a closed circle all but impossible to break into. These
industrial feudalistic families become so powerful that only in rare
instances can anyone lift himself into their society. They dominate every
field, including the so-called labor unions, which amount to one of the
biggest businesses of all. With their unlimited resources they even own
every means of dispensing information."

"You mean," Ronny argued, "that on Avalon you can't start up a newspaper
of your own and say whatever you wish?"

"Certainly you can, theoretically. If you have the resources.
Unfortunately, such enterprises become increasingly expensive to start. Or
you could start a radio, TV or Tri-Di station--if you had the resources.
However, even if you overcame all your handicaps and your newspaper or
broadcasting station became a success, the industrial feudalistic families
in control of Avalon's publishing and broadcasting fields have the endless
resources to buy you out, or squeeze you out, by one nasty means or
another."

Ronny snorted. "Well, the people must be satisfied or they'd vote some
fundamental changes."

Tog nodded. "They're satisfied, and no wonder. Since childhood every means
of forming their opinions have been in the hands of industrial feudalistic
families--including the schools."

"You mean the schools are private?"

"No, they don't have to be. The government is completely dominated by the
fifty or so families which for all practical purposes own Avalon. That
includes the schools. Some of the higher institutions of learning are
private, but they, too, are largely dependent upon grants from the
families."

                  -------------------------------------

Ronny was irritated by her know-all air. He tapped the book he'd been
reading with a finger. "They don't control the government. Avalon's got a
three-party system. Any time the people don't like the government, they
can vote in an alternative."

"That's an optical illusion. There are three parties, but each is
dominated by the fifty families, and election laws are such that for all
practical purposes it's impossible to start another party. Theoretically
it's possible, actually it isn't. The voters can vary back and forth
between the three political parties but it doesn't make any difference
which one they elect. They all stand for the same thing--a continuation of
the status quo."

"Then you claim it isn't democracy at all?"

Tog sighed. "That's a much abused word. Actually, pure democracy is seldom
seen. They pretty well had it in primitive society where government was
based on the family. You voted for one of your relatives in your clan to
represent you in the tribal councils. Every one in the tribe was equal so
far as apportionments of the necessities of life were concerned. No one,
even the tribal chiefs, ate better than anyone else, no one had a better
home."

Ronny said, snappishly, "And if man had remained at that level, we'd never
have gotten anywhere."

"That's right," she said. "For progress, man needed a leisure class.
Somebody with the time to study, to experiment, to work things out."

He said, "We're getting away from the point. You said in spite of
appearances they don't have democracy on Avalon."

"They have a pretense of it. But only free men can practice democracy. So
long as your food, clothing and shelter are controlled by someone else,
you aren't free. Wait until I think of an example." She put her right
forefinger to her chin, thoughtfully.

Holy smokes, she was a cute trick. If only she wasn't so confounded
irritating.

Tog said, "Do you remember the State of California in Earth history?"

"I think so. On the west coast of North America."

"That's right. Well, back in the Twentieth Century, Christian calendar,
they had an economic depression. During it a crackpot organization called
Thirty Dollars Every Thursday managed to get itself on the ballot. Times
were bad enough but had this particular bunch got into power it would have
become chaotic. At first no thinking person took them seriously, however a
majority of people in California at that time had little to lose and in
the final week or so of the election campaign the polls showed that Thirty
Dollars Every Thursday was going to win. So, a few days before voting many
of the larger industries and businesses in the State ran full page ads in
the newspapers. They said substantially the same thing. _If Thirty Dollars
Every Thursday wins this election, our concern will close its doors. Do
not bother to come back to work Monday._"

Ronny was scowling at her. "What's your point?"

She shrugged delicate shoulders. "The crackpots were defeated, of course,
which was actually good for California. But my point is that the voters of
California were not actually free since their livelihoods were controlled
by others. This is an extreme case, of course, but the fact always
applies."

