
Allen's mind remained in confusion, shot through with anger at himself
that he should waste thoughts now on anything but the coming interview.
The room was beginning to fill quietly with others.

His number was called a few minutes later.

And Nedda's was called along with it.

Well--the place to get the answer was the counsel chamber. He got up
slowly, barely noticing that Nedda continued to hold his hand as they
went in.

The brilliant room was two stories high, with fluted walls and no
windows. Obviously the size was to impress interviewees. But why should
they have to be impressed? Wasn't the wisdom of the five tech doctors
sufficient by itself? Wasn't it?

He sat in a chair indicated by the dark-skinned one, and listened while
the very old one in the center talked to Nedda.

Had dating the B Sector park champion solved her difficulty with the man
she had reported? Fine. It was the second such report about him in a
year--the other also coming from a girl who was highly sexed. Did Nedda
not consider herself to have a problem which required psychoconditioning?
No? Well, perhaps in later years, when her beauty and her mind were
somewhat changed.... No, there would seem to be no justification for
giving her a compartment in another sector, unless she had persuaded the
champion or another to share a double with her. Would that be all? Much
happiness to her.

Abruptly, Allen realized Nedda had left and that the frail old man was
talking to him.

"... unusual to have joint interviews without a more definite emotional
tie, but we felt you would like to know how you had rendered civic aid."

So pitting him without choice against any of several men was their idea
of civic aid. No wonder he'd met so many protected girls in the past.
This time, they'd harnessed Nedda's restless passion to the task of
dissuading him from a DP. Very neat.

It made him feel better to know they'd failed where he was concerned,
and his resentment abated somewhat. He said, "Glad I could help,"
careful to keep his voice emotionless. Then, determined to have no
further subtleties, "If I can have my departure permit, I won't trouble
you further."

Maybe his approach wasn't right, but all they could do would be to
refuse him. In which case there were other ways--and the hell with
legality.

"We hope," smiled the old doctor benignly, "there may be another way.
Perhaps, if we discuss your problem, we can find a solution which won't
cost the city a handsome young citizen."

Allen made it a direct attack. "Why should the city miss any citizen? In
fact, what good is the city itself--what good is any city?"

And almost, the techs seemed startled. But a younger one said easily, "A
city, Mr. Kinderwood, permits a maximum of efficient service and
pleasure, with a minimum of waste and discomfort."

Allen leaned back and stubbornly folded his arms. "I've had enough of
pleasures and comforts without meaning, and I've nothing to do, and it
doesn't look like anyone's making any progress anywhere. Even on the
planets they're just repeating backtime stuff with modern equipment."

The old man waved a hand at the others and looked at Allen intently. His
voice was softly insistent. "The one continuous thread in human history
has been the seeking of more pleasure and greater comfort for all
members of the race. Our technology gives us a maximum of both. No one
labors, and the few who work prefer to do so. No one is diseased, no one
stays in pain longer than the time necessary to reach a medic. Everyone
can have everything he needs, without striving and without debt. And as
technology advances, there will be even greater benefits for all. What
more can be done to make the citizens of Earth happy?"

For the first time, Allen felt confused. "I don't know," he said slowly.
"The way you put it, it sounds right. But where does it all lead? What
reason have I got for living? What reason does the human race have for
surviving?"

The sociologist looked even older. "In all seriousness, sir, can you
answer the questions you have just asked?" His eyes were expectant--but
there didn't seem to be much hope reflected in their depths.

Allen noted a tenseness around the table. Why were they asking him for
answers they were supposed to know? Or was it another of their
subtleties?

"No," he said curtly, "I don't know the answer to any of them. Has it
got a bearing on my getting a DP?"

The central figure sighed. "None at all." He pressed several tiny
buttons on the polished table and an inscribed card rose halfway out of
a slot. "We merely hope that some day a man will come along who can tell
us--before someone who may not be a man comes along and makes the
answers futile." He handed Allen the card. "Here is your permit. You may
take it to the third office south on the corridor through that door. We
don't feel it is the answer to your problem, but we admit we don't--"

"Pardon me, sir," interrupted Allen. He wet his lips. "Did you say
'someone who may _not be a man_'?"

