assume the attitude represented by fig. 49, and it is the duty of
teachers to correct this position when assumed. When a child or adult
has contracted a habit of stooping, and has become round-shouldered,
it can be measurably, and generally, wholly, remedied by moderate and
repeated efforts to bring the shoulders back, and the spinal column in
an erect position. This deformity can and should be remedied in our
schools. It may take months to accomplish the desired end, yet it can
be done as well under the direction of the kind instructor, as under
the stern, military drill sergeant, who never fails to correct this
deformity among his raw recruits.

  -=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=

200. What suggestion when it is necessary to call into action a part
of the muscular system? Give the experiment that illustrates this
principle. 201. Why should a child he taught to stand erect? 202. How
can round shoulders acquired by habit be remedied?

  -=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=

[Illustration: Fig. 50. A proper position in sitting.]

203. _The child should be taught to sit erect when employed in study
or work._ This attitude favors a healthy action of the various organs
of the system, and conduces to beauty and symmetry of form. Scholars
are more or less inclined to lean forward and place the elbow on the
table or desk, for support and this is often done when their seats
are provided with backs. Where there is a predisposition to curvature
of the spine, no position is more unfavorable or more productive of
deformities than this; for it is usually continued in one direction,
and the apparent deformity it induces is a projection of the
shoulders. If the girl is so feeble that she cannot sit erect, as
represented by fig. 50, let her stand or recline on a couch; either is
preferable to the position represented by fig. 51. In furnishing
school-rooms, care should be taken that the desks are not so low as to
compel the pupils to lean forward in examining their books.

  -=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=

203. Why should the erect attitude be assumed in sitting?

  -=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=

[Illustration: Fig. 51. An improper position in sitting.]

204. _The muscles, when exhausted, cannot endure continued effort._
When the energies of the muscular system have been expended by severe
and long-continued exercise, or the brain and nervous system
prostrated by protracted mental effort, the muscles are unfitted to
maintain the body erect in standing or sitting for a long time, as the
nervous system, in its exhausted state, cannot supply a sufficient
amount of its peculiar influence to maintain the supporting muscles of
the body and head in a state of contraction. Hence, a child or adult,
when much fatigued, should not be compelled to stand or sit erect in
one posture, but should be permitted to vary the position frequently,
as this rests and recruits both the muscular and the nervous system.

205. _A slight relaxation of the muscles tends to prevent their
exhaustion._ In walking, dancing, and most of the mechanical
employments, there will be less fatigue, and the movements will be
more graceful, when the muscles are slightly relaxed. When riding in
cars or coaches, the system does not suffer so severely from the jar
if there is a slight relaxation of the muscles, as when they are in a
state of rigid contraction.

_Experiments._ Attempt to bow with the muscles of the limbs and trunk
rigid, and there will be a stiff bending of the body only at the
hip-joint. On the other hand, attempt to bow with the muscles
moderately relaxed; the ankle, the knee, and the hip-joint will
slightly bend, accompanied with an easy and graceful curve of the
body.

206. The muscles when relaxed, together with the yielding character of
the cartilage, and the porous structure of the ends of the bones that
form a joint, diffuse or deaden the force of jars, or shocks, in
stepping suddenly down stairs, or in falling from moderate heights.
Hence, in jumping or falling from a carriage, or any height, the shock
to the organs of the system may be obviated in the three following
ways: 1st. Let the muscles be relaxed, not rigid. 2d. Let the limbs be
bent at the ankle, knee, and hips; the head should be thrown slightly
forward, with the trunk a little stooping. 3d. Fall upon the toes, not
the heel.

  -=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=

204. When are the muscles unfitted to maintain the system erect either
in standing or sitting? What is necessary when this condition of the
system exists? 205. Why should the muscular system be slightly relaxed
in walking, &c.? Give illustrative experiments. 206. What is the
reason that we do not feel the jar in falling from a moderate height?

  -=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=

_Experiments._ Stand with the trunk and lower limbs firm, and the
muscles rigid; then jump a few inches perpendicularly to the floor,
and fall upon the heels. Again, slightly bend the limbs, jump a few
inches, and fall upon the toes, and the difference in the force of the
shock, to the brain and other organs, will be readily noticed.

207. _The muscles require to be educated, or trained._ The power of
giving different intonations in reading, speaking, singing, the varied
and rapid executions in penmanship, and all mechanical or agricultural
employments, depend, in a measure, upon the education of the muscles.
In the first effort of muscular education, the contractions of the
muscular fibres are irregular and feeble, as may be seen when the
child begins to walk, or in the first efforts of penmanship.

208. _Repetition of muscular action is necessary._ To render the
action of the muscles complete and effective, they must be called into
action repeatedly and at proper intervals. This education must be
continued until not only each muscle, but every fibre of the muscle,
is fully under the control of the will. In this way persons become
skilful in every employment. In training the muscles for effective
action, it is very important that correct movements be adopted at the
commencement. If this is neglected, the motions will be constrained
and improper, while power and skill will be lost.

  -=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=

How is this shown by experiment? 207. Upon what do the different
intonations of sound or mechanical employments depend? Why are the
first efforts in educating the muscles indifferent or irregular? 208.
Why is repetition of muscular action necessary? Why is it important
that correct movements be adopted in the first efforts of muscular
education?

  -=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=

_Illustration._ If a boy, while learning to mow, is allowed to swing
his scythe in a stooping position, twisting his body at every sweep of
the scythe, he will never become an easy, efficient mower. Proper
instruction is as necessary in many of the agricultural branches as in
the varied mechanical employments.

[Illustration: Fig. 52. An improper, but not an unusual position, when
writing.]

[Illustration: Fig. 53. A proper position, when writing.]

209. _Good penmanship requires properly trained muscles._ To a
deficient analysis of the movements of the arm, hand, and fingers, on
the part of teachers and pupils in penmanship, together with an
improper position in sitting, is to be ascribed the great want of
success in acquiring this art. The pen should be held loosely, and
when the proper position is attained, the scholar should make an
effort to imitate some definite copy as nearly as possible. The
movements of the fingers, hand, and arm, necessary to accomplish this,
should be made with ease and rapidity, striving, at each effort, to
imitate the copy more nearly.

  -=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=

How is this illustrated? 209. Why have so many pupils failed in
acquiring good penmanship?

  -=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=

210. When the arm, hand, and fingers are rigid, the large muscles,
that bend and extend these parts, are called into too intense action.
This requires of the small muscles, that produce the lateral
movements, which are essential to rapidity in writing, an effort which
they cannot make, or can with difficulty accomplish.

_Experiment._ Vigorously extend the fingers by a violent and rigid
contraction of the muscles upon the lower part of the arm, and the
lateral movement which is seen in their separation cannot be made. But
gently extend the fingers, and their oblique movements are made with
freedom.

211. An individual who is acquainted with the laws of health, whose
muscles are well trained, will perform a certain amount of labor with
less fatigue and waste to the system, than one who is ignorant of the
principles of hygiene, and whose muscles are imperfectly trained.
Hence the laboring poor have a deep interest in acquiring a knowledge
of practical physiology, as well as skill in their trade or vocation.
It is emphatically true to those who earn their bread by the "sweat of
their brow," that "knowledge is power."

  -=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=

210. What is said of the lateral and oblique movements of the arm,
hand, and fingers in writing? How is this shown by experiment? 211.
Why is the study of physiology and hygiene of utility to the laborer?

  -=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=




CHAPTER XII.

THE TEETH.


212. The teeth, in composition, nutrition, and growth, are different
from other bones of the body. They vary in number at different periods
of life, and, unlike other bones, they are exposed to the immediate
action of atmospheric air and foreign substances. The bones of the
system, generally, when fractured, unite; but there is never a
permanent union of a tooth when broken.


ANATOMY OF THE TEETH.

213. The TEETH are attached to the upper and lower jaw-bone, by means
of bony sockets, called _al've-o-lar_ processes. These give great
solidity to the attachment of the teeth, and frequently render their
extraction difficult. The gums, by their fibrous, fleshy structure,
serve to fix the teeth more firmly in the jaw.

_Observation._ When a _permanent_ tooth is extracted, these bony
processes are gradually absorbed, so that in advanced age there
remains only the jaw-bone covered by the lining membrane of the gum.
This accounts for the narrow jaw and falling in of the lips in old
age. Frequently, a piece of the alveolar process comes out with the
tooth when extracted, and the dentist has then the credit of "breaking
the jaw." No great injury results from the removal of the process in
this manner.

  -=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=

212. What is said of the teeth? In what respect do they differ from
other bones of the body? 213-218. _Give the anatomy of the teeth._
213. What confines the teeth in the jaw-bone? What becomes of the
socket when a tooth is removed? What effect has this absorption upon
the jaw and lips?

  -=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=

214. The teeth are formed in the interior of the jaws, and within
_dent'al cap'sules_, (membranous pouches,) which are enclosed within
the substance of the bone, and present in their interior a fleshy bud,
or granule, from the surface of which exudes the ivory, or the bony
part of the tooth. In proportion as the tooth is formed, it rises in
the socket, which is developed simultaneously with the tooth, and
passes through the gum, and shows itself without.

[Illustration: Fig. 54. 1, The body of the lower jaw. 2, Ramus, or branch
of the jaw, to which the muscles that move it are attached. 3, 3, The
processes which unite the lower jaw with the head. _i_, The middle and
lateral incisor tooth of one side. _b_, The bicuspid teeth. _c_, The
cuspids, or eye teeth. m, The three molar teeth. A, shows the relation of
the permanent to the temporary teeth.]

215. The first set, which appears in infancy, is called _tem'po-ra-ry_,
or milk teeth. They are twenty in number; ten in each jaw. Between
six and fourteen years of age, the temporary teeth are removed, and the
second set appears, called _per'ma-nent_ teeth. They number
thirty-two, sixteen in each jaw.

  -=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=

214. Where and how are the teeth formed? Explain fig. 54. 215. What
are the first set called? How many in each jaw? The second set? How
many in number?

  -=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=

216. The four front teeth in each jaw are called _in-ci'sors_,
(cutting teeth;) the next tooth in each side, the _cus'pid_, (eye
tooth;) the next two, _bi-cus'pids_, (small grinders;) the next two,
_mo'lars_, (grinders.) The last one on each side of the jaw is called
a _wisdom tooth_, because it does not appear until a person is about
twenty years old. The incisors, cuspids, and bicuspids, have each but
one root. The molars of the upper jaw have three roots, while those of
the lower jaw have but two.

[Illustration: Fig. 55. The permanent teeth of the upper and lower jaw.
_a_, _b_, The incisors. _c_, The cuspids. _d_, _e_, The bicuspids. _f_,
_g_, The molars, (double teeth.) _h_, The wisdom teeth.]

_Observation._ The shape of the teeth in different species of animals
is adapted to the kind of food on which they subsist. Those animals
that feed exclusively on flesh, as the lion, have the cuspids, or
canine teeth, largely developed, and the molars have sharp cutting
points. Those animals that feed on grass and grain, as the horse and
the sheep, have their molar teeth more rounded and flat on the crown.
The human teeth are adapted to feed on fruits, grain, or flesh, as
they are less pointed than those of the cat, and more pointed than
those of the sheep.

  -=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=

216. Give the names of the permanent teeth. What teeth have but one
root, or "fang"? How many roots have the molars of the upper jaw? Of
the lower jaw? What is said of the shape of the teeth in different
species of animals?

  -=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=

217. The teeth are composed principally of two substances--the
_i'vo-ry_ and the _en-am'el_. The internal part of the tooth or the
ivory, is harder and more enduring than bone, and forms the body of
the tooth. The enamel is remarkable for its hardness, and varies
somewhat in color with the age, temperament, habits, and manner of
living of different individuals. When any part of the enamel is
destroyed, it is never regenerated.

[Illustration: Fig. 56. A side view of the body and enamel of a front
tooth.]

[Illustration: Fig. 57. A side view of a molar tooth. 1, The enamel. 2,
The body of the tooth. 3, The cavity in the crown of the tooth that
contains the pulp. 4, A nerve that spreads in the pulp of the tooth. 5,
An artery that ramifies in the pulp of the tooth.]

218. Each tooth is divided into two parts, namely, _crown_ and _root_.
The crown is that part which protrudes from the jaw-bone and gum, and
is covered by the highly polished enamel. The root, or "fang," is
placed in the sockets of the jaw, and consists of bony matter. Through
this bony substance several small vessels pass, to aid in the growth
and also in the removal of the tooth. There are, beside these
vessels, small white cords passing to each tooth, called _nerves_.
(See fig. 57.) When these nerves are diseased, we have the toothache.

  -=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=

217. Give the structure of the teeth. What is said of the enamel? 218.
Into how many parts are the teeth divided? Describe the crown. The
root. What vessels pass through the bony matter? What is their use?

  -=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=


PHYSIOLOGY OF THE TEETH.

219. The use of the teeth is twofold. 1st. By the action of the
incisors the food is divided, while the molars grind or break down the
more solid portions of it. By these processes, the food is prepared to
pass more easily and rapidly into the stomach.

220. In the mastication of food there are two movements of the lower
jaw--the action by which the teeth are brought together, and the
lateral motion. In the former, the food is cut or divided, the jaws
acting like shears. This movement is produced by the action of two
large muscles situated on each side of the head and face.

_Observation._ The muscles attached to the lower jaw are of great
strength; by their action alone, some persons are enabled to bite the
hardest substances. By putting the fingers upon the side of the head
above and in front of the ears, and upon the face above the angle of
the jaw, while masticating food, the alternate swelling and relaxation
of these muscles will be clearly felt.

221. The lateral, or grinding movement of the teeth, is produced by
the action of a strong muscle that is attached to the lower jaw on the
inside.

_Observation._ Those animals that live solely on flesh, have only the
cutting, or shear-like movement of the jaws. Those that use
vegetables for food, have the grinding motion; while man has both the
cutting and grinding movement.

  -=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=

219-222. _Give the physiology of the teeth._ 219. Give one of the
functions of the teeth. 220. How many movements of the lower jaw in
masticating food? What effect has the first movement upon the food?
How produced? What is the character of the masticating muscles? 221.
How is the grinding motion of the teeth produced? What is said of the
movements of the teeth in different animals?

  -=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=

222. 2d. The teeth aid us in articulating with distinctness certain
letters and words. An individual who has lost his front teeth cannot
enunciate distinctly certain letters called dental. Again, as the
alveolar processes are removed by absorption soon after the removal of
the teeth, the lips and cheeks do not retain their former full
position, thus marring, in no slight degree, the symmetry of the lower
part of the face. Consequently, those simple observances that tend to
the preservation of the teeth are of great practical interest to all
persons.


HYGIENE OF THE TEETH.

223. _To preserve the teeth, they must be kept clean._ After eating
food, they should be cleansed with a brush and water, or rubbed with a
piece of soft flannel, to prevent the _tartar_ collecting, and to
remove the pieces of food that may have lodged between them.
Toothpicks may be useful in removing any particles inaccessible to the
brush. They may be made of bone, ivory, or the common goose-quill.
Metallic toothpicks should not be used, as they injure the enamel.

224. _The mouth should be cleansed with pure tepid water at night, as
well as in the morning_; after which the teeth should be brushed
upward and downward, both on the posterior and anterior surfaces. It
may be beneficial to use refined soap, once or twice every week, to
remove any corroding substance that may exist around the teeth; care
being taken to thoroughly rinse the mouth after its use.

225. _Food or drink should not be taken into the mouth when very hot
or very cold._ Sudden changes of temperature will crack the enamel,
and finally produce decayed teeth.

  -=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=

222. What is another use of the teeth? 223-232. _Give the hygiene of
the teeth._ 223. How can the teeth be preserved? By what means? 224.
How often should they be cleansed? 225. What is said of very hot or
cold drinks?

  -=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=

_Observation._ On this account, smoking is pernicious, because the
teeth are subjected to an alternate inhalation of both cold and warm
air.

226. _The temporary teeth should be removed as soon as they become
loose._ If a permanent tooth makes it appearance before the first is
removed, or has become loose, the milk tooth, although not loose,
should be removed without delay. This is necessary that the second set
of teeth may present a regular and beautiful appearance.

227. _In general, when the permanent teeth are irregular, one or more
should be removed._ If the teeth are crowded and irregular, in
consequence of the jaw being narrow and short, or when they press so
hard upon each other as to injure the enamel, remove one or more to
prevent their looking unsightly, and in a few months the remaining
teeth, with a little care, will fill the spaces.

_Observation._ When it is necessary to remove a tooth, apply to some
skilful operator. It requires as much skill and knowledge to extract
teeth _well_, as it does to amputate a limb; yet some persons, who
possess strong arms, will obtain a pair of forceps, or a tooth-key,
and hang out the sign of "surgeon-dentist," although ignorant of the
principles that should guide them.

228. _It is not always necessary to have teeth extracted when they
ache._ The nerve, or the investing membrane of the root, may be
diseased, and the tooth still be sound. In such instances, the tooth
should not be extracted, but the diseased condition may be remedied by
proper medication. There are many sound teeth, that become painful, as
already mentioned, which are unnecessarily removed.

  -=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=

Why is smoking injurious to the teeth? 226. What remark respecting the
temporary teeth? 227. What remarks respecting the permanent teeth? Do
those persons that extract teeth require skill as well as knowledge?
228. Why should not teeth be extracted at all times when they are
painful?

  -=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=

_Illustration._ Dr. H. M., of Belfast, Me., related to me that an
individual in that vicinity had his teeth, (all of them sound,) on one
side of the lower jaw, extracted by an ignoramus of a "tooth-puller,"
and this without any relief from pain. The disease was tic douloureux,
which was relieved by Dr. M.

229. _The preservation of the teeth requires that they be frequently
examined._ When a part of the enamel is removed, and a small portion
of the body of the tooth has become carious, in many instances such
teeth may be preserved from further decay by having them filled or
"plugged" with _gold foil_. All amalgams, pastes, and cheap patent
articles for filling, should be avoided, if you would preserve both
the teeth and the general health.

230. The practice of cracking nuts with the teeth, or of lifting heavy
bodies, and the constant habit of biting thread, should be avoided, as
they finally destroy the enamel.

231. _All acidulated drinks and mineral waters, that "set the teeth on
edge," are injurious._ All tooth-powders and washes that contain any
article that is acid, corrosive, or grinding, should be banished from
the toilet. Tobacco is not a preservative of the teeth. It contains
"grit," which wears away the enamel; beside, when chewed, it
debilitates the vessels of the gums, turns the teeth yellow, and
renders the breath and the appearance of the mouth disagreeable.

232. Healthy persons have generally sound teeth, while feeble persons
have decayed teeth. For this reason, we should try to learn and
practise the few simple rules that promote health.

  -=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=

Give an illustration of the removal of sound teeth. 229. How may
decaying teeth be preserved? What should be avoided in the filling of
teeth? 230. What practices should also be avoided? 231. What is said
of acidulated drinks? What effect has the chewing of tobacco upon the
teeth? 232. What is one reason for preserving health?

  -=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=




CHAPTER XIII.

THE DIGESTIVE ORGANS.


233. From the earliest existence of the human system to the last ray
of life, change is impressed upon it by the Giver of this curious
fabric. New atoms of matter are deposited, while the old and now
useless particles are constantly removed. The material necessary to
sustain the growth of the body in early life, and also to repair the
waste that is unceasing to animal existence, is the food we eat.

234. Food, animal or vegetable, contains most of the elements of the
different tissues of the system, yet it must undergo certain essential
alterations before it can become a part of the body. The first change
is effected by the action of the _Digestive Organs_.


ANATOMY OF THE DIGESTIVE ORGANS

235. The DIGESTIVE ORGANS are the _Mouth_, _Teeth_,[7] _Sal'i-va-ry
Glands_, _Phar'ynx_, _OE-soph'a-gus_, (gullet,) _Stom'ach_,
_In-tes'tines_, (bowels,) _Lac'te-als_, (milk, or chyle vessels,)
_Tho-rac'ic Duct_, _Liv'er_, and the _Pan'cre-as_, (sweetbread.)

   [7] See Chapter XII.

  -=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=

233. What is impressed upon the human system from its earliest
existence? What maintains this change? 234. Has animal or vegetable
food any resemblance to the different tissues of which it finally
forms a part? By what organs is the first change in the food effected?
235-258. _Give the anatomy of the digestive organs._ 235. Name them.
236. Describe the mouth.

  -=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=

MOUTH is an irregular cavity, which contains the instruments of
mastication and the organs of taste. It is bounded in front by the
lips; on each side by the internal surface of the cheeks; above, by
the _hard palate_ (roof of the mouth) and teeth of the upper jaw;
below, by the tongue and teeth of the lower jaw; behind, it is
continuous with the pharynx, but is separated from it by a kind of
movable curtain, called the _soft palate_. This may be elevated or
depressed, so as to close the passage or leave it free.

237. The SALIVARY GLANDS are six in number; three on each side of the
jaw. They are called the _pa-rot'id_, the _sub-max'il-la-ry_ and the
_sub-lin'gual_.

[Illustration: Fig. 58. A view of the salivary glands in their proper
situations. 1, The parotid gland. 2, Its duct. 3, The submaxillary gland.
4, Its duct. 5, The sublingual gland, brought to view by the removal of a
section of the lower jaw.]

238. The PAROTID GLAND, the largest, is situated in front of the
external ear, and behind the angle of the jaw. A duct (Steno's) from
this gland opens into the mouth, opposite the second molar tooth of
the upper jaw.

  -=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=

237. How many glands about the mouth? Give their names. What does fig.
58 represent? 238. Describe the parotid gland.

  -=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=

239. The SUBMAXILLARY GLAND is situated within the lower jaw, anterior
to its angle. Its excretory duct (Wharton's) opens into the mouth by
the side of the _frae'num lin'guae_, (bridle of the tongue.)

240. The _SUBLINGUAL GLAND_ is elongated and flattened, and situated
beneath the mucous membrane of the floor of the mouth, on each side of
the fraenum linguae. It has seven or eight small ducts, which open into
the mouth by the side of the bridle of the tongue.

_Observation._ In the "mumps," the parotid gland is diseased. The
swelling under the tongue called the "frog" is a disease of the
sublingual gland.

[Illustration: Fig. 59. A side view of the face, oesophagus, and trachea.
1, The trachea (wind pipe.) 2, The larynx. 3, The oesophagus. 4, 4, 4,
The muscles of the upper portion of the oesophagus forming the pharynx.
5, The muscle of the cheek. 6, The muscle that surrounds, the mouth. 7,
The muscle that forms the floor of the mouth.]

  -=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=

239. The submaxillary. 240. The sublingual. What observation
respecting these glands? What does fig. 59 represent?

  -=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=

241. The PHARYNX is a membranous sac, situated upon the upper portion
of the spinal column. It extends from the base of the skull to the top
of the _tra'che-a_, (windpipe,) and is continuous with the oesophagus.
From the pharynx are four passages; one opens upward and forward to
the nose, the second leads forward to the mouth, the third downward to
the trachea and lungs, the fourth downward and backward to the
stomach.

242. The OESOPHAGUS is a large membranous tube that extends behind the
trachea, the heart, and lungs, pierces the diaphragm, and terminates
in the stomach. It is composed of two membranes--an internal, or
mucous, and a muscular coat. The latter is composed of two sets of
fibres; one extends lengthwise, the other is arranged in circular
bands.

243. The STOMACH is situated in the left side of the abdomen,
immediately below and in contact with the diaphragm. It has two
openings; one connected with the oesophagus, called the _car'di-ac_
orifice; the other connected with the upper portion of the small
intestine, called the _py-lor'ic_ orifice. It is composed of three
coats, or membranes. The exterior or serous coat is very tough and
strong, and invests every part of this important organ. The middle, or
muscular coat is composed of two layers of muscular fibres, one set of
which is arranged longitudinally, the other circularly. The interior
coat is called the mucous, and is arranged in _ru'gae_, (folds.) The
stomach is provided with a multitude of small glands, in which is
secreted the gastric fluid.

_Illustration._ The three coats of the stomach anatomically resemble
tripe, which is a preparation of the largest stomach of the cow or ox.
The outer coat is smooth and highly polished. The middle coat is
composed of minute threads, which are arranged in two layers. The
fibres of these layers cross each other. The inner coat is soft, and
presents many folds, usually named "the honey-comb."

  -=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=

241. Describe the pharynx and the passages leading from it. 242. Give
the structure of the oesophagus. 243. Where is the stomach situated?
How many coats has it? Describe them. What article prepared for food
does the stomach resemble?

  -=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=

[Illustration: Fig. 60. The inner surface of the stomach and duodenum. 1,
The lower portion of the oesophagus. 2, The opening through which the
food is passed into the stomach. 8, The stomach. 9, The opening through
which the food passes out of the stomach into the duodenum, or upper
portion of the small intestine. 10, 11, 14, The duodenum 12, 13, Ducts
through which the bile and pancreatic fluid pass into it. _a_, _b_, _c_,
The three coats of the stomach.]

244. The INTESTINES, or alimentary canal, are divided into two
parts--the _small_ and _large_. The small intestine is about
twenty-five feet in length, and is divided into three portions,
namely, the _Du-o-de'num_, the _Je-ju'num_, and the _Il'e-um_. The
large intestine is about five feet in length, and is divided into
three parts, namely, the _Cae'cum_, the _Co'lon_, and the _Rec'tum_.
(Appendix D.)

245. The DUODENUM is somewhat larger than the rest of the small
intestine, and has received its name from being in length about the
breadth of twelve fingers. It commences at the pylorus, and ascends
obliquely backward to the under surface of the liver. It then descends
perpendicularly in front of the right kidney, and passes transversely
across the lower portion of the spinal column, behind the colon, and
terminates in the jejunum. The ducts from the liver and pancreas open
into the perpendicular portion, about six inches from the stomach.

  -=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=

244. Explain fig. 60. What is the length of the small intestine, and
how is it divided? What is the length of the large intestine? Give its
divisions. 245. Describe the duodenum.
