Edway Tarnhorst didn't honestly know. All he knew was that he saw a
new spark of human life, a spark of intelligence, a spark of ability,
out in the Belt. He didn't dare tell anyone--he hardly dared admit it
to himself--but he thought those people were better somehow than the
common clods of Earth. Those people didn't think that just because a
man could slop color all over an otherwise innocent sheet of canvas,
making outre and garish patterns, that that made him an artist. They
didn't think that just because a man could write nonsense and use
erratic typography, that that made him a poet. They had other beliefs,
too, that Edway Tarnhorst saw only dimly, but he saw them well enough
to know that they were better beliefs than the obviously stupid belief
that every human being had as much right to respect and dignity as
every other, that a man had a _right_ to be respected, that he
_deserved_ it. Out there, they thought that a man had a right only to
what he earned.

But Edway Tarnhorst was as much a product of his own society as Sam
Fergus. He could only behave as he had been taught. Only on
occasion--on very special occasion--could his native intelligence
override the "common sense" that he had been taught. Only when an
emergency arose. But when one did, Edway Tarnhorst, in spite of his
environmental upbringing, was equal to the occasion.

Actually, his own mind was never really clear on the subject. He did
the best he could with the confusion he had to work with.

"Now we've got to be careful, Sam," he said. "Very careful. We don't
want a war with the Belt Cities."

Sam Fergus snorted. "They wouldn't dare. We got 'em outnumbered a
thousand to one."

"Not if they drop a rock on us," Tarnhorst said quietly.

"They wouldn't dare," Fergus repeated.

But both of them could see what would happen to any city on Earth if
one of the Belt ships decided to shift the orbit of a good-sized
asteroid so that it would strike Earth. A few hundred thousand tons of
rock coming in at ten miles per second would be far more devastating
than an expensive H-bomb.

"They wouldn't dare," Fergus said again.

"Nevertheless," Tarnhorst said, "in dealings of this kind we are
walking very close to the thin edge. We have to watch ourselves."

[Illustration]


VI

Commodore Sir Harry Morgan was herded into a prison cell, given a
shove across the smallish room, and allowed to hear the door slam
behind him. By the time he regained his balance and turned to face the
barred door again, it was locked. The bully-boys who had shoved him in
turned away and walked down the corridor. Harry sat down on the floor
and relaxed, leaning against the stone wall. There was no furniture of
any kind in the cell, not even sanitary plumbing.

"What do I do for a drink of water?" he asked aloud of no one in
particular.

"You wait till they bring you your drink," said a whispery voice a few
feet from his head. Morgan realized that someone in the cell next to
his was talking. "You get a quart a day--a halfa pint four times a
day. Save your voice. Your throat gets awful dry if you talk much."

"Yeah, it would," Morgan agreed in the same whisper. "What about
sanitation?"

"That's your worry," said the voice. "Fella comes by every Wednesday
and Saturday with a honey bucket. You clean out your own cell."

"I _thought_ this place smelled of something other than attar of
roses," Morgan observed. "My nose tells me this is Thursday."

There was a hoarse, humorless chuckle from the man in the next cell.
"'At's right. The smell of the disinfectant is strongest now. Saturday
mornin' it'll be different. You catch on fast, buddy."

"Oh, I'm a whiz," Morgan agreed. "But I thought the Welfare World took
care of its poor, misled criminals better than this."

Again the chuckle. "You shoulda robbed a bank or killed somebody. Then
theyda given you a nice rehabilitation sentence. Regular prison. Room
of your own. Something real nice. Like a hotel. But this's
different."

"Yeah," Morgan agreed. This was a political prison. This was the place
where they put you when they didn't care what happened to you after
the door was locked because there would be no going out.

Morgan knew where he was. It was a big, fortresslike building on top
of one of the highest hills at the northern end of Manhattan
Island--an old building that had once been a museum and was built like
a medieval castle.

"What happens if you die in here?" he asked conversationally.

"Every Wednesday and Saturday," the voice repeated.

"Um," said Harry Morgan.

"'Cept once in a while," the voice whispered. "Like a couple days ago.
When was it? Yeah. Monday that'd be. Guy they had in here for a week
or so. Don't remember how long. Lose tracka time here. Yeah. Sure lose
tracka time here."

There was a long pause, and Morgan, controlling the tenseness in his
voice, said: "What about the guy Monday?"

"Oh. Him. Yeah, well, they took him out Monday."

Morgan waited again, got nothing further, and asked: "Dead?"

"'Course he was dead. They was tryin' to get somethin' out of him.
Somethin' about a cable. He jumped one of the guards, and they
blackjacked him. Hit 'im too hard, I guess. Guard sure got hell for
that, too. Me, I'm lucky. They don't ask me no questions."

"What are you in for?" Morgan asked.

"Don't know. They never told me. I don't ask for fear they'll
remember. They might start askin' questions."

Morgan considered. This could be a plant, but he didn't think so. The
voice was too authentic, and there would be no purpose in his
information. That meant that Jack Latrobe really was dead. They had
killed him. An ice cold hardness surged along his nerves.

       *       *       *       *       *

The door at the far end of the corridor clanged, and a brace of heavy
footsteps clomped along the floor. Two men came abreast of the
steel-barred door and stopped.

One of them, a well-dressed, husky-looking man in his middle forties,
said: "O.K., Morgan. How did you do it?"

"I put on blue lipstick and kissed my elbows--both of 'em. Going
widdershins, of course."

"What are you talking about?"

"What are you talking about?"

"The guy in your hotel suite. You killed him. You cut off both feet,
one hand, and his head. How'd you do it?"

Morgan looked at the man. "Police?"

"Nunna your business. Answer the question."

"I use a cobweb I happened to have with me. Who was he?"

The cop's face was whitish. "You chop a guy up like that and then
don't know who he is?"

"I can guess. I can guess that he was an agent for PMC 873 who was
trespassing illegally. But I didn't kill him. I was in ... er ...
custody when it happened."

"Not gonna talk, huh?" the cop said in a hard voice. "O.K., you've had
your chance. We'll be back."

