job, and I could close my eyes and feel the orchestra in front of me.

This time I was thorough, right down the line, from the cabinets that
held luxury food and wine to the little drawer where he kept his
dress-suit studs; they might have been rutiles, but I had a hunch they
were genuine catseyes.

He laughed when I finished, and handed me a glass of the first decent wine
I'd tasted in months. "Even a small ozonator to make the air seem more
breathable, and a dehumidifier, Tremaine. I like to live decently. I
started saving my money once with the idea of getting a ship of my own--"
There was a real dream in his eyes for a second. Then he shrugged. "But
ships got bigger and more expensive. So I decided to live. At forty, I've
got maybe twenty years ahead here, and I mean to enjoy it. And--well,
there are ways of making a bit extra...."

I nodded. So it's officially smuggling to carry a four-ounce Martian
fur to Earth where it's worth a fortune, considering the legal duty.
But most officers did it now and then. He put on Sibelius' Fourth
while I finished the wine. "If this mess is ever over, Paul, or you
get a chance, drop down," he said. "I like a man who knows good
things--and I liked your reaction when you spotted that Haydn for
Hohmann's recording. Muller pretends to know music, but he likes the
flashiness of Mohlwehr."

Hell, I'd cut my eye teeth on that stuff; my father had been first
violinist in an orchestra, and had considered me a traitor when I was
born without perfect pitch. We talked about Sibelius for awhile,
before I left to go out into the stinking rest of the ship. Grundy was
sitting before the engines, staring at them. Wilcox had said the big
ape liked to watch them move ... but he was supposed to be locked up.

       *       *       *       *       *

I stopped by Lomax's door; the shutter was open, and I could see the
big man writhing about, but he was apparently unconscious. Napier came
back from somewhere, and nodded quickly.

"Concussion," he said. "He's still out, but it shouldn't be too
serious."

"Grundy's loose." I'd expected surprise, but there was none. "Why?"

He shrugged. "Muller claimed he needed his mate free to handle the
crew, and that there was no place the man could go. I think it was
because the men are afraid they'll be outnumbered by your group." His
mouth smiled, but it was suddenly bitter. "Jenny talked Pietro into
agreeing with Muller."

Mess was on when I reached the group. I wasn't hungry. The wine had
cut the edge from my appetite, and the slow increase of poison in the
air was getting me, as it was the others. Sure, carbon dioxide isn't a
real poison--but no organism can live in its own waste, all the same.
I had a rotten headache. I sat there playing a little game I'd
invented--trying to figure which ones I'd eliminate if some had to
die. Jenny laughed up at Muller, and I added him to the list. Then I
changed it, and put her in his place. I was getting sick of the little
witch, though I knew it would be different if she'd been laughing up
at me. And then, because of the sick-calf look on Bill Sanderson's
face as he stared at Eve, I added him, though I'd always liked the
guy. Eve, surprisingly, had as many guys after her as Jenny; but she
didn't seem interested. Or maybe she did--she'd pulled her hair back
and put on a dress that made her figure look good. Either flattery was
working, or she was entering into the last-days feeling most of us
had.

Napier came in and touched my shoulder. "Lomax is conscious, and he's
asking for you," he said, too low for the others to hear.

I found the chemist conscious, all right, but sick--and scared. His
face winced, under all the bandages, as I opened the door. Then he saw
who it was, and relaxed. "Paul--what happened to me? The last I
remember is going up to see that second batch of plants poisoned.
But--well, this is something I must have got later...."

I told him, as best I could. "But don't you remember anything?"

"Not a thing about that. It's the same as Napier told me, and I've
been trying to remember. Paul, you don't think--?"

I put a hand on his shoulder and pushed him back gently. "Don't be a
damned fool, Hal. I know you're no killer."

"But somebody is, Paul. Somebody tried to kill me while I was
unconscious!"

He must have seen my reaction. "They did, Paul. I don't know how I
know--maybe I almost came to--but somebody tried to poke a stick
through the door with a knife on it. They want to kill me."

[Illustration]

I tried to calm him down until Napier came and gave him a sedative.
The doctor seemed as sick about Hal's inability to remember as I was,
though he indicated it was normal enough in concussion cases. "So is
the hallucination," he added. "He'll be all right tomorrow."

In that, Napier was wrong. When the doctor looked in on him the next
time, the big chemist lay behind a door that had been pried open, with
a long galley knife through his heart. On the bloody sheet, his finger
had traced something in his own blood.

"_It was_...." But the last "s" was blurred, and there was nothing
more.


IV

I don't know how many were shocked at Hal's death, or how many looked
around and counted one less pair of lungs. He'd never been one of the
men I'd envied the air he used, though, and I think most felt the
same. For awhile, we didn't even notice that the air was even thicker.

Phil Riggs broke the silence following our inspection of Lomax's
cabin. "That damned Bullard! I'll get him, I'll get him as sure as he
got Hal!"

There was a rustle among the others, and a suddenly crystallized hate
on their faces. But Muller's hoarse shout cut through the babble that
began, and rose over even the anguished shrieking of the cook. "Shut
up, the lot of you! Bullard couldn't have committed the other crimes.
Any one of you is a better suspect. Stop snivelling, Bullard, this
isn't a lynching mob, and it isn't going to be one!"

"What about Grundy?" Walt Harris yelled.

Wilcox pushed forward. "Grundy couldn't have done it. He's the logical
suspect, but he was playing rummy with my men."

The two engine men nodded agreement, and we began filing back to the
mess hall, with the exception of Bullard, who shoved back into a
niche, trying to avoid us. Then, when we were almost out of his sight,
he let out a shriek and came blubbering after us.

I watched them put Hal Lomax's body through the 'tween-hulls lock, and
turned toward the engine room; I could use some of that wine, just as
the ship could have used a trained detective. But the idea of watching
helplessly while the engines purred along to remind me I was just a
handyman for the rest of my life got mixed up with the difficulty of
breathing the stale air, and I started to turn back. My head was
throbbing, and for two cents I'd have gone out between the hulls
beside Lomax and the others and let the foul air spread out there and
freeze....

The idea was slow coming. Then I was running back toward the engines.
I caught up with Wilcox just before he went into his own quarters.
"Wilcox!"

He swung around casually, saw it was me, and motioned inside. "How
about some Bartok, Paul? Or would you rather soothe your nerves with
some first-rate Buxtehude organ...."

"Damn the music," I told him. "I've got a wild idea to get rid of this
carbon dioxide, and I want to know if we can get it working with what
we've got."

He snapped to attention at that. Half-way through my account, he
fished around and found a bottle of Armagnac. "I get it. If we pipe
our air through the passages between the hulls on the shadow side, it
will lose its heat in a hurry. And we can regulate its final
temperature by how fast we pipe it through--just keep it moving enough
to reach the level where carbon dioxide freezes out, but the oxygen
stays a gas. Then pass it around the engines--we'll have to cut out
the normal cooling set-up, but that's okay--warm it up.... Sure, I've
got equipment enough for that. We can set it up in a day. Of course,
it won't give us any more oxygen, but we'll be able to breathe what we
have. To success, Paul!"

I guess it was good brandy, but I swallowed mine while calling Muller
down, and never got to taste it.

It's surprising how much easier the air got to breathe after we'd
double-checked the idea. In about fifteen minutes, we were all milling
around in the engine room, while Wilcox checked through equipment. But
there was no question about it. It was even easier than we'd thought.
We could simply bypass the cooling unit, letting the engine housings
stay open to the between-hulls section; then it was simply a matter of
cutting a small opening into that section at the other end of the ship
and installing a sliding section to regulate the amount of air flowing
in. The exhaust from the engine heat pumps was reversed, and run out
through a hole hastily knocked in the side of the wall.

Naturally, we let it flow too fast at first. Space is a vacuum, which
means it's a good insulator. We had to cut the air down to a trickle.
Then Wilcox ran into trouble because his engines wouldn't cool with
that amount of air. He went back to supervise a patched-up job of
splitting the coolers into sections, which took time. But after that,
we had it.

I went through the hatch with Muller and Pietro. With air there there
was no need to wear space suits, but it was so cold that we could take
it for only a minute or so. That was long enough to see a faint, fine
mist of dry ice snow falling. It was also long enough to catch a sight
of the three bodies there. I didn't enjoy that, and Pietro gasped.
Muller grimaced. When we came back, he sent Grundy in to move the
bodies to a hull-section where our breathing air wouldn't pass over
them. It wasn't necessary, of course. But somehow, it seemed
important.

By lunch, the air seemed normal. We shipped only pure oxygen at about
three pounds pressure, instead of loading it with a lot of useless
nitrogen. With the carbon dioxide cut back to normal levels, it was as
good as ever. The only difference was that the fans had to be set to
blow in a different pattern. We celebrated, and even Bullard seemed to
have perked up. He dug out pork chops and almost succeeded in making
us cornbread out of some coarse flour I saw him pouring out of the
food chopper. He had perked up enough to bewail the fact that all he
had was canned spinach instead of turnip greens.

But by night, the temper had changed--and the food indicated it again.
Bullard's cooking was turning into a barometer of the psychic
pressure. We'd had time to realize that we weren't getting something
for nothing. Every molecule of carbon-dioxide that crystallized out
took two atoms of oxygen with it, completely out of circulation.

       *       *       *       *       *

We were also losing water-vapor, we found; normally, any one of our
group knew enough science to know that the water would fall out before
the carbon dioxide, but we hadn't thought of it. We took care of that,
however, by having Wilcox weld in a baffle and keep the section where
the water condensed separate from the carbon dioxide snowfall. We
could always shovel out the real ice, and meantime the ship's controls
restored the moisture to the air easily enough.

But there was nothing we could do about the oxygen. When that was
gone, it stayed gone. The plants still took care of about two-thirds
of our waste--but the other third was locked out there between the
hulls. Given plants enough, we could have thawed it and let them
reconvert it; a nice idea, except that we had to wait three months to
take care of it, if we lived that long.

Bullard's cooking began to get worse. Then suddenly, we got one good
meal. Eve Nolan came down the passage to announce that Bullard was
making cake, with frosting, canned huckleberry pie, and all the works.
We headed for the mess hall, fast.

It was the cook's masterpiece. Muller came down late, though, and
regarded it doubtfully. "There's something funny," he said as he
settled down beside me. Jenny had been surrounded by Napier and
Pietro. "Bullard came up babbling a few minutes ago. I don't like it.
Something about eating hearty, because he'd saved us all, forever and
ever. He told me the angels were on our side, because a beautiful
angel with two halos came to him in his sleep and told him how to save
