
If it had been a Land-woman who made such a blunt proposal he would
have listened with equanimity. There was no modesty, false or
otherwise in the country of the Skin-wearers. But to hear such a thing
from a woman whose mouth had drunk the blood of a living man filled
him with disgust.

Yet, he had to admit Lusine was beautiful. If she had not been a
blood-drinker....

Though he lacked his receptive Skin, Mapfarity seemed to sense
Rastignac's emotions. He said, "You must not blame her too much,
Jean-Jacques. Sea-changelings are conditioned from babyhood to love
blood. And for a very definite purpose, too, unnatural though it is.
When the time comes for hordes of Changelings to sweep out of the sea
and overwhelm the Landfolk, they will have no compunctions about
cutting the throats of their fellow-creatures."

Lusine laughed. The rest of them shifted uneasily but did not comment.
Rastignac changed the subject.

"How did you find out about the Earthman, Mapfarity?" he said.

The Ssassaror smiled. Two long yellow canines shone wetly; the nose,
which had nostrils set in the sides, gaped open; blue sparks shot out
from it; at the same time the feathered tufts on the ends of the
elephantine ears stiffened and crackled with red-and-blue sparks.

"I have been doing something besides breeding geese to lay golden
eggs," he said. "I have set traps for Waterfolk, and I have caught
two. These I caged in a dungeon in my castle, and I experimented with
them. I removed their Skins and put them on me, and I found out many
interesting facts."

He leered at Lusine, who was no longer laughing, and he said, "For
instance, I discovered that the Sea-King can locate, talk to, and
punish any of his subjects anywhere in the sea or along the coast. He
has booster Skins planted all over his realm so that any message he
sends will reach the receiver, no matter how far away he is. Moreover,
he has conditioned each and every Skin so that, by uttering a certain
code-word to which only one particular Skin will respond, he may
stimulate it to shock or even to kill its carrier."

Mapfarity continued, "I analyzed those two Skins in my lab and then,
using them as models, made a number of duplicates in my fleshforge.
They lacked only the nerves that would enable the Sea-King to shock
us."

Rastignac smiled his appreciation of this coup. Mapfarity's ears
crackled blue sparks of joy, his equivalent of blushing.

"Ah, then you have doubtless listened in to many broadcasts. And you
know where the Earthman is located?"

"Yes," said the Giant. "He is in the palace of the Amphib King, upon
the island of Kataproimnoin. That is only thirty miles out to the
sea."

Rastignac did not know what he would do, but he had two advantages in
the Amphibs' Skins and in Lusine. And he burned to get off this doomed
planet, this land of men too sunk in false happiness, sloth, and
stupidity to see that soon death would come from the water.

He had two possible avenues of escape. One was to use the newly
arrived Earthman's knowledge so that the fuels necessary to propel the
ferry-rockets could be manufactured. The rockets themselves still
stood in a museum. Rastignac had not planned to use them because
neither he nor any one else on this planet knew how to make fuel for
them. Such secrets had long ago been forgotten.

But now that science was available through the newcomer from Earth,
the rockets could be equipped and taken up to one of the Six Flying
Stars. The Earthman could study the rocket, determine what was needed
in the way of supplies, then it could be outfitted for the long
voyage.

An alternative was the Terran's vessel. Perhaps he might invite him to
come along in it....

The huge gateway to Mapfarity's castle interrupted his thoughts.


VIII

He halted the Renault, told Archambaud to find the Giant's servant and
have him feed their vehicle, rub its legs down with liniment, and
examine the hooves for defective shoes.

Archambaud was glad to look up Mapfabvisheen, the Giant's servant,
because he had not seen him for a long time. The little Ssassaror had
been an active member of the Egg-stealer's Guild until the night three
years ago when he had tried to creep into Mapfarity's strongroom. The
crafty guildsman had avoided the Giant's traps and there found the
two geese squatting upon their bed of minerals.

These fabulous geese made no sound when he picked them up with
lead-lined gloves and put them in his bag, also lined with lead-leaf.
They were not even aware of him. Laboratory-bred, retort-shaped, their
protoplasm a blend of silicon-carbon, unconscious even that they
lived, they munched upon lead and other elements, ruminated, gestated,
transmuted, and every month, regular as the clockwork march of stars
or whirl of electrons, each laid an octagonal egg of pure gold.

Mapfabvisheen had trodden softly from the strongroom and thought
himself safe. And then, amazingly, frighteningly, and totally
unethically, from his viewpoint, the geese had begun honking loudly!

He had run, but not fast enough. The Giant had come stumbling from his
bed in response to the wild clamor and had caught him. And, according
to the contract drawn up between the Guild of Egg-stealers and the
League of Giants, a guildsman seized within the precincts of a castle
must serve the goose's owner for two years. Mapfabvisheen had been
greedy; he had tried to take both geese. Therefore, he must wait upon
the Giant for a double term.

Afterwards, he found out how he'd been trapped. The egglayers
themselves hadn't been honking. Mouthless, they were utterly incapable
of that. Mapfarity had fastened a so-called "goose-tracker" to the
strong-room's doorway. This device clicked loudly whenever a goose was
nearby. It could smell out one even through a lead-leaf-lined bag.
When Mapfabvisheen passed underneath it, its clicks woke up a small
Skin beside it. The Skin, mostly lung-sac and voice organs, honked its
warning. And the dwarf, Mapfabvisheen, began his servitude to the
Giant, Mapfarity.

Rastignac knew the story. He also knew that Mapfarity had infected the
fellow with the philosophy of Violence and that he was now a good
member of his Underground. He was eager to tell him his servitor days
were over, that he could now take his place in their band as an equal.
Subject, of course, to Rastignac's order.

Mapfabvisheen was stretched out upon the floor and snoring a sour
breath. A grey-haired man was slumped on a nearby table. His head,
turned to one side, exhibited the same slack-jawed look that the
Ssassaror's had, and he flung the ill-smelling gauntlet of his breath
at the visitors. He held an empty bottle in one loose hand. Two other
bottles lay on the stone floor, one shattered.

Besides the bottles lay the men's Skins. Rastignac wondered why they
had not crawled to the halltree and hung themselves up.

"What ails them? What is that smell?" said Mapfarity.

"I don't know," replied Archambaud, "but I know the visitor. He is
Father Jules, priest of the Guild of Egg-stealers."

Rastignac raised his queer, bracket-shaped eyebrows, picked up a
bottle in which there remained a slight residue, and drank.

"Mon Dieu, it is the sacrament wine!" he cried.

Mapfarity said, "Why would they be drinking that?"

"I don't know. Wake Mapfabvisheen up, but let the good father sleep.
He seems tired after his spiritual labors and doubtless deserves a
rest."

Doused with a bucket of cold water the little Ssassaror staggered to
his feet. Seeing Archambaud, he embraced him. "Ah, Archambaud, old
baby-abductor, my sweet goose-bagger, my ears tingle to see you
again!"

They did. Red and blue sparks flew off his ear-feathers.

"What is the meaning of this?" sternly interrupted Mapfarity. He
pointed at the dirt swept into the corners.

Mapfabvisheen drew himself up to his full dignity, which wasn't much.
"Good Father Jules was making his circuits," he said. "You know he
travels around the country and hears confession and sings Mass for us
poor egg-stealers who have been unlucky enough to fall into the
clutches of some rich and greedy and anti-social Giant who is too
stingy to hire servants, but captures them instead, and who won't
allow us to leave the premises until our servitude is over...."

"Cut it!" thundered Mapfarity. "I can't stand around all day,
listening to the likes of you. My feet hurt too much. Anyway, you know
I've allowed you to go into town every week-end. Why don't you see a
priest then?"

Mapfabvisheen said, "You know very well the closest town is ten
kilometers away and it's full of Pantheists. There's not a priest to
be found there."

Rastignac groaned inwardly. Always it was thus. You could never hurry
these people or get them to regard anything seriously.

Take the case they were wasting their breath on now. Everybody knew
the Church had been outlawed a long time ago because it opposed the
use of the Skins and certain other practices that went along with it.
So, no sooner had that been done than the Ssassarors, anxious to
establish their check-and-balance system, had made arrangements
through the Minister of Ill-Will to give the Church unofficial legal
recognizance.

Then, though the aborigines had belonged to that pantheistical
organization known as the Sons of Good And Old Mother Nature, they
had all joined the Church of the Terrans. They operated under the
theory that the best way to make an institution innocuous was for
everybody to sign up for it. Never persecute. That makes it thrive.

       *       *       *       *       *

Much to the Church's chagrin, the theory worked. How can you fight an
enemy who insists on joining you and who will also agree to everything
you teach him and then still worship at the other service? Supposedly
driven underground, the Church counted almost every Landsman among its
supporters from the Kings down.

Every now and then a priest would forget to wear his Skin out-of-doors
and be arrested, then released later in an official jail-break. Those
who refused to cooperate were forcibly kidnapped, taken to another
town and there let loose. Nor did it do the priest any good to
proclaim boldly who he was. Everybody pretended not to know he was a
fugitive from justice. They insisted on calling him by his official
pseudonym.

However, few priests were such martyrs. Generations of Skin-wearing
had sapped the ecclesiastical vigor.

The thing that puzzled Rastignac about Father Jules was the sacrament
wine. Neither he nor anybody else in L'Bawpfey, as far as he knew, had
ever tasted the liquid outside of the ceremony. Indeed, except for
certain of the priests, nobody even knew how to make wine.

He shook the priest awake, said, "What's the matter, Father?"

Father Jules burst into tears. "Ah, my boy, you have caught me in my
sin. I am a drunkard."

Everybody looked blank. "What does that word _drunkard_ mean?"

"It means a man who's damned enough to fill his Skin with alcohol, my
boy, fill it until he's no longer a man but a beast."

"Alcohol? What is that?"

"The stuff that's in the wine, my boy. You don't know what I'm talking
about because the knowledge was long ago forbidden except to us of the
cloth. Cloth, he says! Bah! We go around like everybody, naked except
for these extradermal monstrosities which reveal rather than conceal,
which not only serve us as clothing but as mentors, parents, censors,
interpreters, and, yes, even as priests. Where's a bottle that's not
empty? I'm thirsty."

Rastignac stuck to the subject "Why was the making of this alcohol
forbidden?"

"How should I know?" said Father Jules. "I'm old, but not so ancient
that I came with the Six Flying Stars.... Where is that bottle?"

Rastignac was not offended by his crossness. Priests were notorious
for being the most ill-tempered, obstreperous, and unstable of men.
They were not at all like the clerics of Earth, whom everybody knew
from legend had been sweet-tempered, meek, humble, and obedient to
authority. But on L'Bawpfey these men of the Church had reason to be
out of sorts. Everybody attended Mass, paid their tithes, went to
confession, and did not fall asleep during sermons. Everybody believed
what the priests told them and were as good as it was possible for
human beings to be. So, the priests had no real incentive to work, no
evil to fight.

Then why the prohibition against alcohol?

"_Sacre Bleu!_" groaned Father Jules. "Drink as much as I did last
night and you'll find out. Never again, I say. Ah, there's another
bottle, hidden by a providential fate under my traveling robe. Where's
that corkscrew?"

Father Jules swallowed half of the bottle, smacked his lips, picked up
his Skin from the floor, brushed off the dirt and said, "I must be
going, my sons. I've a noon appointment with the bishop, and I've a
