
"They are no longer alive," Lhar told me. "They still move and
breathe, but they are dead, sustained only by the life-force of the
Other. I do not think it will harm me. Apparently it prefers other
food."

"That's why you've stayed here?" I asked.

The shining velvety calyx swayed. "I shall die soon. For a little
while I thought that I might manage to survive in this alien world,
this alien time. Your blood has helped." The cool tentacle withdrew
from my arm. "But I lived in a younger time, where space was filled
with--with certain energizing vibratory principles.

"They have faded now almost to nothing, to what you call cosmic rays.
And these are too weak to maintain my life. No, I must die. And then
my poor robot will be alone." I sensed elfin amusement in that last
thought. "It seems absurd to you that I should think affectionately of
a machine. But in our world there is a rapport--a mental
symbiosis--between robot and living beings."

There was a silence. After a while I said, "I'd better get out of
here. Get help--to end the menace of the other...." What sort of help
I did not know. Was the Other vulnerable?

Lhar caught my thought. "In its own shape it is vulnerable, but what
that shape is I do not know. As for your escaping from this
valley--you cannot. The fog will bring you back."

"I've got my compass." I glanced at it, saw that the needle was
spinning at random.

Lhar said: "The Other has many powers. Whenever you go into the fog,
you will always return here."

"How do you know all this?" I asked.

"My robot tells me. A machine can reason logically, better than a
colloid brain."

I closed my eyes, trying to think. Surely it should not be difficult
for me to retrace my steps, to find a path out of this valley. Yet I
hesitated, feeling a strange impotence.

"Can't your robot guide me?" I persisted.

"He will not leave my side. Perhaps--" Lhar turned to the sphere, and
the cilia fluttered excitedly. "No," she said, turning back to me.
"Built into his mind is one rule--never to leave me. He cannot disobey
that."

       *       *       *       *       *

I couldn't ask Lhar to go with me. Somehow I sensed that the frigid
cold of the surrounding mountains would destroy her swiftly. I said,
"It must be possible for me to get out of here. I'm going to try,
anyway."

"I will be waiting," she said, and did not move as I slipped out
between two trunks of the banyan-like tree.

It was daylight and the silvery grayness overhead was palely luminous.
I headed for the nearest rampart of fog.

Lhar was right. Each time I went into that cloudy fog barrier I was
blinded. I crept forward step by step, glancing behind me at my
footprints in the snow, trying to keep in a straight line. And
presently I would find myself back in the valley....

I must have tried a dozen times before giving up. There were no
landmarks in that all-concealing grayness, and only by sheerest chance
would anyone blunder into this valley--unless hypnotically summoned,
like the Indio girls.

I realized that I was trapped. Finally I went back to Lhar. She hadn't
moved an inch since I had left, nor had the robot, apparently.

"Lhar," I said. "Lhar, can't you help me?"

The white flame of the flower was motionless, but the robot's cilia
moved in quick signals. Lhar moved at last.

"Perhaps," her thought came. "Unless both induction and deduction
fail, my robot has discovered a chance for you. The Other can control
your mind through emotions. But I, too, have some power over your
mind. If I give you strength, wall you with a psychic shield against
intrusion, you may be able to face the Other. But you cannot destroy
it unless it is in its normal shape. The Indio girls must be killed
first...."

"Killed?" I felt a sense of horror at the thought of killing those
poor simple native girls.

"They are not actually alive now. They are now a part of the Other.
They can never be restored to their former life."

"How will--destroying them--help me?" I asked.

Again Lhar consulted the robot. "The Other will be driven from their
bodies. It will then have no hiding-place and must resume its own
form. Then it can be slain."

Lhar swayed and curtseyed away. "Come," she said. "It is in my mind
that the Other must die. It is evil, ruthlessly selfish, which is the
same thing. Until now I have not realized the solution to this evil
being. But seeing into your thoughts has clarified my own. And my
robot tells me that unless I aid you, the Other will continue ravening
into your world. If that happens, the time-pattern will be broken....
I do not quite understand, but my robot makes no mistakes. The Other
must die...."

She was outside of the banyan now, the sphere gliding after her. I
followed. The three of us moved swiftly across the blue moss, guided
by the robot.

In a little while we came to where the six Indio girls were squatting.
They had apparently not moved since I had left them.

"The Other is not here," Lhar said.

The robot held me back as Lhar advanced toward the girls, the
skirt-like frill at her base convoluting as she moved. She paused
beside them and her petals trembled and began to unfold.

From the tip of that great blossom a fountain of white dust spurted
up. Spores or pollen, it seemed to be. The air was cloudy with the
whiteness.

The robot drew me back, back again. I sensed danger....
