chirping noise shrilled through the sound stage. Its tough skin
vibrated--blurred. It sprang suddenly to its multipods and charged
Flaubert.

Flaubert screamed an unholy scream. He threw the chair and the whip
and the gun at the monster and dove from the exit. Dr. Mildume opened
the cage door with his rope and Flaubert went through it--himself a
blur. The monster, in his wake, slammed into the door and stayed
there, trembling, still chirping its rage.

"Hully gee, what kitties!" said Flaubert, pale and sweating.

Mr. Untz groaned.

"I got some of it!" yelled Eddie Tamoto from his camera. "It was
terrific! But we need more!"

Then--simultaneously--there were several loud screams of alarm. Mr.
Untz looked at the cage again. The smaller monster had found a crack,
and was moving the cage door and squeezing through.

"Harold!" shouted Mr. Untz. "_Do something!_"

Harold stepped forward. "Back everybody," he said in his best calm
voice. "Walk--do not run--to the nearest exit."

The second monster was already vibrating across the cage and the
smaller one was holding the door open for it. Dr. Mildume had tried to
maneuver the control ropes to close the door again, but hadn't been
able to work them--and now he had left his post.

Harold pointed to the man with the rifle and said, "Fire!"

The rifleman fired.

Nothing--nothing at all happened. He fired several times more. The
monsters didn't even jerk when the bullets hit them.

"They're--they're impervious yet!" cried Mr. Untz.

After that it was every man for himself.

Moments later Harold found himself outside of the sound stage and on
the studio street, bunched with the others and staring at the thick
closed door. Nobody spoke. Everybody just thrummed silently with the
knowledge that two alien monsters were in there, wreaking heaven knew
what damage....

And then, as they stared, the thick door began to open again. "It
isn't locked!" breathed Mr. Untz. "Nobody remembered to lock it
again!"

A tentacle peeked out of the crack of the door.

Everybody scattered a second time.

Harold never remembered the order in which things happened amidst the
confusion that followed. It seemed he and Mr. Untz ran blindly, side
by side, down the studio street for awhile. It seemed all kinds of
people were also running, in all kinds of directions.

Bells were ringing--sirens blew--a blue studio police car took a
corner on two wheels and barely missed them. Harold had a glimpse of
uniformed men with drawn pistols.

They ended up somehow at Mr. Untz's office-cottage. They went inside
and Mr. Untz locked the door and slammed his back to it. He leaned
there, panting. He said, "Trouble, trouble, trouble. I should have
stayed in Vienna. And in Vienna I should have stood in bed."

The door of the shower and dressing-room opened and Jimsy LaRoche came
out. He had a number of snails in his out-stretched hand and he coolly
kept them there, making no attempt to conceal his obvious purpose in
the shower. He looked directly at Mr. Untz with his dark disconcerting
eleven-year-old eyes and said, "Well, Max, what goof-off did you pull
this time?"

"_You!_" roared Mr. Untz, whirling and shooting a finger at the child
star. A focusing point for all his troubles, at last. His jowls shook.
"You, Jimsy LaRoche," he said, "are going to get your first old
fashioned spanking on the bottom! From me, personally!" He advanced
toward the boy, who backed away hastily.

Jimsy began to look a little frightened.

"Now wait a minute, Max," said Harold, stepping forward. "We've got
enough _big_ monsters to think about without worrying about this
_little_ monster too."

Mr. Untz stared at Harold queerly. Suddenly he said, "Why didn't I
think of it before?"

"Think of what?" asked Harold.

But Mr. Untz had already grabbed Jimsy LaRoche's hand and dragged him
through the door.

There were several reasons why Harold Potter did not immediately
pursue. For one thing he stood there for several moments stupified
with surprise. Then, when he did recover, he plunged forward and
promptly tripped on the cream-colored carpet and fell flat on his
face. He tripped again going over the step to the cottage door. He
bumped into a studio policeman rounding the next corner. He snagged
his coat on a fence picket going around the corner after that. But he
kept Mr. Untz and the dragged youngster in sight.

Eventually he came to the door of Sound Stage Six.

Speaking from a police standpoint all laymen had disappeared. A ring
of studio police and firemen, along with some policemen and detectives
from the outside, had been drawn around the monsters and everybody and
his brother was shooting off pistols and rifles at them. With no
result, of course. Nor did anyone dare get too close.

