neuronic activation varies in inverse proportion to the quantative
memory factor. Only actual experience could give you Disraeli's
memories, but your reactivity-thresholds have been altered until
perception and emotional-indices approximate the Disraeli ratio."

"Oh," Martin said. "But how would _you_, say, assert yourself against a
medieval steam-shovel?"

"By plugging my demountable brain into a larger steam-shovel," ENIAC
told him.

        *        *       *        *        *

Martin seemed pensive. His hand rose, adjusting an invisible monocle,
while a look of perceptive imagination suddenly crossed his face.

"You mentioned Russia in Ivan's time," he said. "Which Ivan would that
be? Not, by any chance--?"

"Ivan the Fourth. Very well adjusted to his environment he was, too.
However, enough of this chit-chat. Obviously you'll be one of the
failures in our experiment, but our aim is to strike an average, so if
you'll put the ecologizer on your--"

"That was Ivan the Terrible, wasn't it?" Martin interrupted. "Look here,
could you impress the character-matrix of Ivan the Terrible on my
brain?"

"That wouldn't help you a bit," the robot said. "Besides, it's not the
purpose of the experiment. Now--"

"One moment. Disraeli can't cope with a medievalist like St. Cyr on his
own level, but if I had Ivan the Terrible's reactive thresholds, I'll
bet I could throw a bluff that might do the trick. Even though St. Cyr's
bigger than I am, he's got a veneer of civilization ... now wait. He
trades on that. He's always dealt with people who are too civilized to
use his own methods. The trick would be to call his bluff. And Ivan's
the man who could do it."

"But you don't understand."

"Didn't everybody in Russia tremble with fear at Ivan's name?"

"Yes, in--"

"Very well, then," Martin said triumphantly. "You're going to impress
the character-matrix, of Ivan the Terrible on my mind, and then I'm
going to put the bite on St. Cyr, the way Ivan would have done it.
Disraeli's simply too civilized. Size is a factor, but character's more
important. I don't _look_ like Disraeli, but people have been reacting
to me as though I were George Arliss down to the spit-curl. A good big
man can always lick a good little man. But St. Cyr's never been up
against a really uncivilized little man--one who'd gladly rip out an
enemy's heart with his bare hands." Martin nodded briskly. "St. Cyr will
back down--I've found that out. But it would take somebody like Ivan to
make him stay all the way down."

"If you think I'm going to impress Ivan's matrix on you, you're wrong,"
the robot said.

"You couldn't be talked into it?"

"I," said ENIAC, "am a robot, semantically adjusted. Of course you
couldn't talk me into it."

Perhaps not, Martin reflected, but Disraeli--hm-m. "Man is a machine."
Why, Disraeli was the one person in the world ideally fitted for
robot-coercion. To him, men _were_ machines--and what was ENIAC?

"Let's talk this over--" Martin began, absently pushing the desk-lamp
toward the robot. And then the golden tongue that had swayed empires was
loosed....

"You're not going to like this," the robot said dazedly, sometime later.
"Ivan won't do at ... oh, you've got me all confused. You'll have to
eyeprint a--" He began to pull out of his sack the helmet and the
quarter-mile of red ribbon.

"To tie up my bonny grey brain," Martin said, drunk with his own
rhetoric. "Put it on my head. That's right. Ivan the Terrible, remember.
I'll fix St. Cyr's Mixo-Lydian wagon."

"Differential depends on environment as much as on heredity," the robot
muttered, clapping the helmet on Martin's head. "Though naturally Ivan
wouldn't have had the Tsardom environment without his particular
heredity, involving Helena Glinska--there!" He removed the helmet.

"But nothing's happening," Martin said. "I don't feel any different."

"It'll take a few moments. This isn't your basic character-pattern,
remember, as Disraeli's was. Enjoy yourself while you can. You'll get
the Ivan-effect soon enough." He shouldered the sack and headed
uncertainly for the door.

"Wait," Martin said uneasily. "Are you sure--"

"Be quiet. I forgot something--some formality--now I'm all confused.
Well, I'll think of it later, or earlier, as the case may be. I'll see
you in twelve hours--I hope."

The robot departed. Martin shook his head tentatively from side to side.
Then he got up and followed ENIAC to the door. But there was no sign of
the robot, except for a diminishing whirlwind of dust in the middle of
the corridor.

_Something began to happen in Martin's brain...._

Behind him, the telephone rang.

Martin heard himself gasp with pure terror. With a sudden, impossible,
terrifying, absolute certainty he _knew_ who was telephoning.

_Assassins!_

        *        *       *        *        *

"Yes, Mr. Martin," said Tolliver Watt's butler to the telephone. "Miss
Ashby is here. She is with Mr. Watt and Mr. St. Cyr at the moment, but I
will give her your message. You are detained. And she is to call for
you--where?"

"The broom-closet on the second floor of the Writers' Building," Martin
said in a quavering voice. "It's the only one near a telephone with a
long enough cord so I could take the phone in here with me. But I'm not
at all certain that I'm safe. I don't like the looks of that broom on my
left."

"Sir?"

"Are you _sure_ you're Tolliver Watt's butler?" Martin demanded
nervously.

"Quite sure, Mr.--eh--Mr. Martin."

"I _am_ Mr. Martin," cried Martin with terrified defiance. "By all the
laws of God and man, Mr. Martin I am and Mr. Martin I will remain, in
spite of all attempts by rebellious dogs to depose me from my rightful
place."

"Yes, sir. The broom-closet, you say, sir?"

"The broom-closet. Immediately. But swear not to tell another soul, no
matter how much you're threatened. I'll protect you."

"Very well, sir. Is that all?"

"Yes. Tell Miss Ashby to hurry. Hang up now. The line may be tapped. I
have enemies."

There was a click. Martin replaced his own receiver and furtively
surveyed the broom-closet. He told himself that this was ridiculous.
There was nothing to be afraid of, was there? True, the broom-closet's
narrow walls were closing in upon him alarmingly, while the ceiling
descended....

Panic-stricken, Martin emerged from the closet, took a long breath, and
threw back his shoulders. "N-not a thing to be afraid of," he said.
"Who's afraid?" Whistling, he began to stroll down the hall toward the
staircase, but midway agoraphobia overcame him, and his nerve broke.

He ducked into his own office and sweated quietly in the dark until he
had mustered up enough courage to turn on a lamp.

The Encyclopedia Britannica, in its glass-fronted cabinet, caught his
eye. With noiseless haste, Martin secured _ITALY_ to _LORD_ and opened
the volume at his desk. Something, obviously, was very, very wrong. The
robot had said that Martin wasn't going to like being Ivan the Terrible,
come to think of it. But was Martin wearing Ivan's character-matrix?
Perhaps he'd got somebody else's matrix by mistake--that of some arrant
coward. Or maybe the Mad Tsar of Russia had really been called Ivan the
Terrified. Martin flipped the rustling pages nervously. Ivan, Ivan--here
it was.

Son of Helena Glinska ... married Anastasia Zakharina-Koshkina ...
private life unspeakably abominable ... memory astonishing, energy
indefatigable, ungovernable fury--great natural ability, political
foresight, anticipated the ideals of Peter the Great--Martin shook his
head.

Then he caught his breath at the next line.

Ivan had lived in an atmosphere of apprehension, imagining that every
man's hand was against him.

"Just like me," Martin murmured. "But--but there was more to Ivan than
just cowardice. I don't understand."

"Differential," the robot had said, "depends on environment as much as
on heredity. Though naturally Ivan wouldn't have had the Tsardom
environment without his particular heredity."

Martin sucked in his breath sharply. Environment does make a difference.
No doubt Ivan IV had been a fearful coward, but heredity plus
environment had given Ivan the one great weapon that had enabled him to
keep his cowardice a recessive trait.

Ivan the Terrible had been Tsar of all the Russias.

Give a coward a gun, and, while he doesn't stop being a coward, it won't
show in the same way. He may act like a violent, aggressive tyrant
instead. That, of course, was why Ivan had been ecologically
successful--in his specialized environment. He'd never run up against
many stresses that brought his dominant trait to the fore. Like
Disraeli, he had been able to control his environment so that such
stresses were practically eliminated.

Martin turned green.

Then he remembered Erika. Could he get Erika to keep St. Cyr busy,
somehow, while he got his contract release from Watt? As long as he
could avoid crises, he could keep his nerve from crumbling, but--_there
were assassins everywhere_!

Erika was on her way to the lot by now. Martin swallowed.

He would meet her outside the studio. The broom-closet wasn't safe. He
could be trapped there like a rat--

"Nonsense," Martin told himself with shivering firmness. "This isn't me.
All I have to do is get a g-grip on m-myself. Come, now. Buck up.
_Toujours l'audace!_"

But he went out of his office and downstairs very softly and cautiously.
After all, one never knew. And when every man's hand was against one....

Quaking, the character-matrix of Ivan the Terrible stole toward a studio
gate.

        *        *       *        *        *

The taxi drove rapidly toward Bel-Air.

"But what were you doing up that tree?" Erika demanded.

Martin shook violently.

"A werewolf," he chattered. "And a vampire and a ghoul and--I _saw_
them, I tell you. There I was at the studio gate, and they all came at
me in a mob."

"But they were just coming back from dinner," Erika said. "You know
Summit's doing night shooting on _Abbott and Costello Meet Everybody_.
Karloff wouldn't hurt a fly."

"I kept telling myself that," Martin said dully, "but I was out of my
mind with guilt and fear. You see, I'm an abominable monster. But it's
not my fault. It's environmental. I grew up in brutal and degrading
conditions--oh, look!" He pointed toward a traffic cop ahead. "The
police! Traitors even in the palace guards!"

"Lady, is that guy nuts?" the cabbie demanded.

"Mad or sane, I am Nicholas Martin," Martin announced, with an abrupt
volte face. He tried to stand up commandingly, bumped his head, screamed
"_Assassins!_" and burrowed into a corner of the seat, panting horribly.

Erika gave him a thoughtful, worried look.

"Nick," she said, "How much have you had to drink? What's wrong?"

Martin shut his eyes and lay back against the cushions.

"Let me have a few minutes, Erika," he pleaded. "I'll be all right as
soon as I recover from stress. It's only when I'm under stress that
Ivan--"

"You can accept your contract release from Watt, can't you? Surely
you'll be able to manage that."

