Then the rain really came down, not as it had come before, which was
hard enough. It came in huge globes of water and each globe was as big
as your head and if it hit it could stun you.

"Slade?" someone cried as the globes exploded violently in the surf
around them.

"He's dead. He'll keep."

And they went back to the helicopter with Marcia, to await the end of
the storm there.

When it was over, when the sky was not black but merely the color of
lead, they returned down the beach for Slade's body.

But Slade wasn't there.

"But he was dead!" Marcia said incredulously.

One of the men smiled. "He didn't go anyplace under his own power. He
was dead, all right. The storm took his body out to sea, is all."

They stood there for a moment, gazing out across the black troubled
water of the infant ocean on the infant earth. A billion years ago....

Slade was out there. Slade, dead. Out there with the tides and the
waters and the frequent electric storms--

"Out there with a million bacteriological parasites on his dead body
and in his dead body, which he brought with him," Marcia said,
dreamily.

"What are you talking about, miss?"

Out there in the electric dawn of earth, with the bacteria which lived
in his body as they lived in all other bodies. Out there with them,
dead.

Food for them.

Food and water and air heavy with ozone and the electric storms.

Marcia laughed hysterically. It was a story she wanted to write.

But she wouldn't write it.

Slade was a killer, condemned to die. But Slade, dead out there with
his bacteria, Slade evil to man and human society but not necessarily
evil in the implacable ways of nature or perhaps grimly, terribly
evil--Slade out there, dead on the bosom of the primordial waters,
Slade back in time a billion years before life had been born on
Earth....

She laughed hysterically as they led her away from the water. They
slapped her face, gently at first, then harder. "I'll be all right,"
she managed to say.

She would be all right. She could live to forget it.

But Slade out there.

Slade.

Slade fathering all life on earth there in the sea with his dead body.
Slade who had sinned and was taken back here to die for his sins so
that life could be born.

Slade, whose first name was Adam.

       *       *       *       *       *







End of Project Gutenberg's Prison of a Billion Years, by C.H. Thames

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK PRISON OF A BILLION YEARS ***

***** This file should be named 32150.txt or 32150.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/3/2/1/5/32150/

Produced by Sankar Viswanathan, Greg Weeks, and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net
