of him and smiling down on him with their bland, professional smiles.
Lee felt the upsurge of intense dislike. He had seen those smiles
before, often--too often: they seemed to be standard equipment with the
medical profession whenever a fellow was about to be dispatched to the
"table", or worse, to the psychopathic ward. Instinct told him that
there was something in the air and also that his best bet would be a
brave show of normalcy:

"This test, these new methods of psychoanalysis, they are extremely
interesting," he said with an effort.

"Thank you, Dr. Lee," it was Mellish who spoke. "We knew you would find
the experience worthwhile even if we put you under a considerable
strain. A complete analysis in those olden days of Dr. Freud took three
years; now thanks to The Brain we get approximately the same results
within as many hours; that's some progress, isn't it?"

"Enormous," Lee said dryly while his eyes wandered over to Bondy; he
knew the pattern, it would be Bondy's turn now to have a shot at him.
There it came; and how he loathed the false heartiness of that voice.

"Dr. Lee, I'm afraid we have a bit of bad news for you--your test--the
results have been negative. You have failed."

"Failed?" For a fraction of a second Lee's heart stopped beating. "In
what sense? And what does that mean?"

Now it was Mellish's turn. "Dr. Lee, there must be frankness amongst
colleagues and as a fellow scientist you'll understand. In the first
place the decision isn't ours; we merely conduct the test on behalf of
The Brain. The Brain, as you know, is the most highly developed machine
in all the world. Its functions, its whole existence depend entirely
upon the human skills and the human loyalties amongst its staff. A
three-billion-dollar investment, plus the vital role of The Brain in our
national defence, justify the extreme precautions which we are forced to
take for its protection."

"What exactly are you driving at?"

"Please don't take it as an insult," now it was Bondy again. "There's
nothing personal in this. It's merely that your emotional-reaction chart
definitely shows a certain antagonism which from childhood-experience
and war-experience you have built up against technology. It's nothing
but a potential; it is confined to your subconscious. But even a
potential danger of subconscious revolt is more than The Brain can risk
amongst its associates. We fully appreciate the wish of our Dr. Scriven
to enlist your very valuable aid, but...."

"I see" Lee interrupted, "but you would feel safer if I were to return
to Australia by the next plane."

His head bent under the blow. A short 24 hours ago The Brain had been a
nebulous, almost a non-existent thing. Since then a whole new world had
been opened to him in revelations blinding and magnetic with infinite
possibilities. His work--the efforts of a lifetime--would not equal what
he could do in days with the aid of The Brain. His love--he would never
see Oona Dahlborg again as he left under a shadow, rejected by The
Brain.

"Sorry I wasted so much of your time," he said aloud. "I do not believe
in this analysis; I cannot disprove it though. That's all, I guess; I
better be going now."

"Here's your pass, Dr. Lee." He took mechanically the yellow slip which
Bondy handed him....

He had already opened the door when somebody sharply called: "Dr. Lee,
one moment please."

He whirled around. "Yes?"

"Will you please read what's written on your slip?"

Suspiciously he looked at the yellow paper; what more torture were these
fellows going to inflict? Then his eyes popped as he read: "Lee, Semper
Fidelis, 39: Cortex capacity 119%, Sensitivity 208%, Personality
integration 95%, Service qualification 100%...." There were more data,
but he didn't read them as wide-eyed he stared at the medics. With their
faces beaming they looked like identical twins to him; Lee never knew
who said the words:

"Congratulations Lee. That has been your last test. We just had to find
out how you would take a serious frustration. You've passed it with
flying colors. Shake."




CHAPTER IV


Apperception 36, Lee's lab within The Brain, looked much like
Apperception 27 except for its interior fittings. As a matter of fact,
all the several hundred Apperception Centers were built after the same
plan, like suites in a big office building in many respects. They were
spread over The Brain occipital region; they were built inside the
concrete wall of the "dura matter" which in turn lay within the shell of
the "bone matter", a mile or so of solid rock. Each apperception center
had its own elevator shaft which went through the concrete of the "dura
matter" down to "Grand Central", the traffic center below The Brain.
Each one was also connected at the other end of its corridor with the
glideways which snaked through the interior of The Brain. There were,
however, no transversal or direct communications from one apperception
center to the next. Because of the extraordinary diversity and secrecy
of the projects submitted to The Brain' processings, each apperception
center was completely insulated against its neighbors.

Life hadn't changed so much from what it had been in the Australian
desert Lee had found; at least not his working life. For all he knew
some nuclear physicists might be working in the lab next door; or they
might be ballistics experts working with The Brain on curves for
long-range rockets to be aimed at the vital centers of some foreign
land; it might be some mild looking librarian submitting the current
products of foreign literature to the analysis as to "idea-content"; or
else it could be a lab to plot campaigns of chemical warfare; or some
astronomer, happily abstracted from all bellicose ideas, might employ
The Brain's superhuman faculties in mathematics to figure comet courses
and eclipses which in turn would form material for the timing and the
camouflaging of those man-made meteorites science would use in another
war. Directly or indirectly, he knew, practically every project
submitted to The Brain would be of a military nature. Of this there
could be no doubt.

Sometimes, especially when tired, he could feel the weight of those
billions of rock tons over his head and it was like being buried alive
in the tomb of the Pharaoh. And also in that state of mental exhaustion
at the end of a long day, he sensed the emanations of The Brain's
titanic cerebrations as one senses the presence of genius in human man.
The knowledge that all this mighty work was being devoted to war had
deeply depressing effects on him. Would there be anybody else in this
vast apperception area who worked for the prevention of war? A few
perhaps; Scriven would be one of them in case he had a lab somewhere in
here and time to work in it. Lee didn't know whether he had. He hadn't
seen Scriven again after that inauguration speech he had made when Lee,
together with other newly appointed scientific workers had taken "The
Oath of The Brain."

They had assembled in that vast subterranean dome of the luminous murals
at the feet of the giant statue of The Thinker, looking almost forlorn
in the expanse, though there had been several hundred of them. The
atmosphere had been solemn, the silence hushed, as Scriven mounted the
statue's pedestal. The address by that mighty voice resounding from the
cupola had been worthy of the majestic scene:

"As we stand gathered here, the eons in evolution of our human race are
looking down upon us...."

The speech had been followed by the taking of the oath, deeply stirring
to the emotions of the young neophytes who formed the large majority of
the new group. The chorus of their voices had resounded in awed and
solemn tones as they repeated the formula; even now after six months
some of it echoed in Lee's ears:

"I herewith solemnly swear:

"That I will serve The Brain with undivided loyalty and with all my
faculties.

"That I will at all times obey the orders of the Brain Trust on behalf
of The Brain.

"That I will never betray or reveal any secrets of The Brain's design or
work, be they military or not, neither to the world outside nor to any
of my fellow workers except by special permission...."

It had been almost like taking holy orders. There had been mystery in
the atmosphere of the vast crypt, something medieval in the
unconditional surrender to The Brain.

       *       *       *       *       *

Lee looked up from the charts on which he had been working; his eyes
were tired and so was his mind after ten hours of hard concentration.
That was probably what set his thoughts wandering. But strange that they
should always wander to those blind spots in his mental vision so
intriguing because he knew there was something there that he could not
lay a finger on.

The first of these blind spots hovered somewhere between Scriven's words
and Scriven's deeds; between The Brain as an ideal of science and The
Brain's reality as in instrument of national defense. Somehow the two
didn't connect; there was a break, some layer of thin ice, a danger zone
which nobody seemed willing to discuss or tread, not even Oona Dahlborg.

Oona; she was that other white spot on Lee's mental map and to him it
was much bigger and more dangerous than the first. He loved her as can
only a man who discovers loves secret with greying hair and after the
loneliness of a desert hermit. He understood, or thought he understood,
that because he had failed to live his life to the full in its proper
time, this love had come to him as a belated nemesis. His brain knew
that it was hopeless; every morning when he shaved, his mirror told him
very plainly one big reason why. But then, as the brain told the heart
in unmistakable terms what was the matter, the heart talked back to the
brain to the effect that the brain didn't know what it was talking
about. It was a new thing and a painful thing for Lee to discover that
he knew very little about himself and less about the girl.

He had seen Oona on and off over these last months, mostly at the hotel,
but he had never been really alone with her. She always seemed to be on
some mission, always the center of some group or other of "very
important persons", senators from Washington, ranking officers in
civvies, big businessmen. Her duties as Scriven's private secretary
apparently included the role of a first lady for Cephalon.

Despite this preoccupation an intimate and tense relationship existed
between him and her. Sometimes she would invite him to join her group
and then for one or two brief moments their eyes would meet above the
conversation and her eyes seemed to ask: "What do you think of these
people?" or "How do I look tonight?"

His eyes would answer:

"These people are strangers to me; you know that I'm a bit out of this
world. But you handle them expertly and you are looking wonderful
tonight."

She was tremendously popular, especially with the set of the young
scientists who made the hotel their club. This new generation, born in
the days of the Second World War, was changing the horses of its
feminine ideals in the mid-stream of its youth. The old ideal, the
"problematic woman" who had ruled over and had made life miserable for
three generations of American males, was on its way out. The new ideal
was the woman who would unite beauty and intellect into one fully
integrated, non-problematical personality. The ideal being new, the
feminine type which represented it was rare. Oona in her perfect poise,
in her rare beauty combined with her importance as Scriven's
confidential secretary was the perfect expression of the new desired
type; it was natural that these young men should worship her as "the
woman of the future."

With the hopeless and--in consequence--unselfish love he had for her,
Lee wasn't jealous of her popularity. On the contrary, he was rather
proud of it like a knight-errant who rejoices in the adoration bestowed
upon the lady of his heart. What worried him was a very different
problem: Was Oona really all those others thought she was? Was she
really that "fully integrated", that "non-problematical" personality she
appeared to be?

He couldn't believe it, and the conflict came in because all those
others were so certain that she was. He couldn't get over his first
impression of her. He had met her in that cabin in the sky, the most
synthetic, the most perversely artificial setup one could dream up in
the second half of the 20th century. She had impressed him as something
"out of this world", a goddess, a Diana with a golden helmet for hair,
so radiant as to blind the eyes of mortal men. She was the confidential
secretary of a man of genius, Scriven, one of those rare comets which
fall down upon this earth and remain forever foreign to its atmosphere.
With all these thoroughly abnormal elements entering into her life and
forming her, it would be a miracle for any girl to develop into a
"non-problematical", a "fully integrated" personality.

Was it possible that he alone was right and all those others were wrong
about Oona? Like innumerable men before him when they stood face to face
with the Sphinx or with the Gioconda or even with the smile of a mere
mortal woman, Lee drew a sigh: Man's only answer to the riddle of the
eternal feminine....

No, he probably would never be able to chart these white spots on his
mental map. The effort was wasted; it would be much better for him to
return to those charts right in front of him, the data of which were
exact because they came from The Brain.

In Apperception 36 the sensory organs of The Brain had been especially
adapted to the analysis of "_Ant-termes-pacificus-Lee_". The apparatus
was essentially the same as in Apperception 27, dedicated to personality
analysis. As Lee strongly suspected, it would be essentially the same in
any other field of analysis. The Brain possessed five sensory organs
just as did man. One difference between The Brain's senses and human
senses lay in their range, their penetration and in their sensitivity;
these were a multiple of man's sensory capacities. Another difference
was that The Brain translated all its sensory apperceptions into visual
form, i.e. into the language best understood by Man, the eye being Man's
most highly developed sensory organ. The third and perhaps the most
significant difference was that the five senses of The Brain were at all
times working in concert so that in its analysis of, for instance, a
manuscript, The Brain not only conveyed the ideas expressed in that
manuscript, but also the author's personality, the smell of his room,
the feel of his paper and the ideas he had hidden between the lines of
that manuscript.

       *       *       *       *       *

The flow of observations processed by The Brain and pouring back to
Apperception 36 via teletype and visual screen was prodigious. Lee had
been forced to ask for an assistant; between the two of them they were
working for 20 out of the 24 hours to match the working time of The
Brain, charting results in the main.

Some of The Brain's findings had been most unexpected and rather
strange. It had observed, for instance, an increasing acidity of the
nasi-corn secretions with "_Ant-termes-pacificus_". Formidable as this
chemical artillery already was, in another ten thousand generations it
would eat through every known substance including glass and high-carbon
steel.

Another development which had escaped human observation, was a mutation
of the workers' mandibles; it went very fast. Within no more than maybe
a thousand generations they would double in size and strength, would
become veritable jumping tools.

While the bellicose spirit had been successfully bred out of the new
species, its capacities for material destructions had increased.
Likewise the appetite of "_Ant-termes_" was even more ferocious than
that of the older species; Lee was feeding all kinds of experimental
foods, but woodpulp remained the staple, the very stuff which in its
liquid form, lignin, embedded the nerve paths of The Brain.

Lifting his strained eyes from the charts, Lee looked over the row of
air conditioned glass cubicles wherein "_Ant-termes-pacificus_"
continued its lives undisturbed by the new habitat, undisturbed by the
rays which flowed over and through their bodies, unconscious that a
superhuman intelligence was probing steadily into every manifestation of
the mysterious collective brains of their race.

They had built their new mounds pointing due North as had their
ancestors for the past 100 million years. To the human eye nothing
betrayed the teeming life within except the tiny tunnels creeping out
from the mounds in the direction of the foods which were placed
different from day to day. Cemented from loam and saliva by the
invisible sappers, the tunnels, like threads of grey wool, unerringly
moved to the deposits of pulpwood, up the shelves, up the tin cans and
glass containers they had determined to destroy. Their instincts were
uncanny, their destruction as methodical and "scientific" as was modern
war.

In Northern Australia Lee had come across big eucalyptus trees,
healthy-looking and in full bloom, and then they would collapse under
the first stroke of an axe or even as one pushed hard against them.

The termites had hollowed them out from roof to top, had transformed
them into thin walled pipes, leaving just enough "flesh" to keep some
sap-circulation going, to maintain a semi-balance of life in order to
exploit it more efficiently. Over here in the lab they would open up a
number 3 tin can within a couple of hours; first with the soldiers'
