
There was the smell of warm soil, flowers, greenery. He heard irrigation
water trickling. The sweetcorn rustled in the wind of fans he'd set up
to circulate the air. Bees buzzed. Chickens, approaching adolescence,
peeped contentedly as they dusted themselves and stretched luxuriously
in the shadows of the cornfield.

For John Endlich it was all like the echo of a somnolent summer of his
boyhood. There was peace in it: it was like a yearning fulfilled. An end
of wanderlust for him, here on Vesta. In contrast to the airless
desolation outside, the interior of this five-acre greenhouse was the
one most desirable place to be. So, except for the vaguest of stirrings
sometimes in his mind, there was not much incentive to seek fun
elsewhere. If he ever had time.

And there was a lot of the legendary, too, in what his family and he had
accomplished. It was like returning a little of the blue sky and the
sounds of life to this land of ruins and roadways and the ghosts of dead
beauty. Maybe there'd be a lot more of all that, soon, when the rumored
major influx of homesteaders reached Vesta.

"Yes, Johnny," Rose said once. "'Legendary' is a lot nicer word than
'ghostly'. And the ghosts are changing their name to legends."

Rose had to teach the kids their regular lessons. That children would be
taught was part of the agreement you had to sign at the A. H. O. before
you could be shipped out with them. But the kids had time for whimsy,
too. In make-believe, they took their excursions far back to former
ages. They played that they were "Old People."

Endlich, having repaired his atomic battery, didn't draw power anymore
from the unit that had supplied the ancient buildings. But the relics
remained. From a device like a phonograph, there was even a bell-like
voice that chanted when a lever was pressed.

And it was the kids who found the first "tay-tay bug," a day
after its trills were heard from among the new foliage.
"Ta-a-a-ay-y-y--ta-a-a-a-ay-y-yy-y--" The sound was like that of a
little wheel, humming with the speed of rotation, and then slowing to a
scratchy stop.

A one-legged hopper, with a thin but rigid gliding wing of horn.
Opalescent in its colors. It had evidently hatched from a tiny egg,
preserved by the cold for ages.

Wise enough not to clutch it with his bare hands, Bubs came running with
it held in a leaf.

It proved harmless. It was ugly and beautiful. Its great charm was that
it was a vocal echo from the far past.

       *       *       *       *       *

Sure. Life got to be fairly okay, in spite of hard work. The Endlichs
had conquered the awful stillness with life-sounds. Growing plants kept
the air in their greenhouse fresh and breathable by photosynthesis. John
Endlich did a lot of grinning and whistling. His temper never flared
once. Deep down in him there was only a brooding certainty that the calm
couldn't last. For, from all reports, trouble seethed at the mining
camp. At any time there might be a blowup, a reign of terror that would
roll over all of Vesta. A thing to release pent-up forces in men who had
seen too many hard stars, and had heard too much stillness. They were
like the stuff inside a complaining volcano.

The Endlichs had sought to time their various crops, so that they would
all be ready for market on as nearly as possible the same day. It was
intended as a trick of advertising--a dramatically sudden appearance of
much fresh produce.

So, one morning, in a jet-equipped space-suit, Endlich arced out for the
mining camp. Inside the suit he carried samples from his garden. Six
tomatoes. Beauties.

"Have luck with them, Johnny! But watch out!" Rose flung after him by
helmet phone. With a warm laugh. Just for a moment he felt maybe a
little silly. Tomatoes! But they were what he was banking on, and had
forced toward maturity, most. The way he figured, they were the kind of
fruit that the guys in the camp--gagged by a diet of canned and
dehydrated stuff, because they were too busy chasing mineral wealth to
keep a decent hydroponic garden going--would be hungriest for.

Well--he was rather too right, in some ways, to be fortunate. Yeah--they
still call what happened the Tomato War.

Poor Johnny Endlich. He was headed for the commissary dome to display
his wares. But vague urges sidetracked him, and he went into the
recreation dome of the camp, instead.

And into the bar.

The petty sin of two drinks hardly merits the punishing trouble which
came his way as, at least partially, a result. With his face-window
open, he stood at the bar with men whom he had never seen before. And he
began to have minor delusions of grandeur. He became a little too proud
of his accomplishments. His wariness slipped into abeyance. He had a
queer idea that, as a farmer with concrete evidence of his skills to
show, he would win respect that had been denied him. Dread of
consequences of some things that he might do, became blurred. His hot
temper began to smolder, under the spark of memory and the fury of
insult and malicious tricks, that, considering the safety of his loved
ones, he had had no way to fight back against. Frustration is a
dangerous force. Released a little, it excited him more. And the tense
mood of the camp--a thing in the very air of the domes--stirred him up
more. The camp--ready to explode into sudden, open barbarism for
days--was now at a point where nothing so dramatic as fresh tomatoes and
farmers in a bar was needed to set the fireworks off.

John Endlich had his two drinks. Then, with calm and foolhardy
detachment, he set the six tomatoes out in a row before him on the
synthetic mahogany.

       *       *       *       *       *

He didn't have to wait at all for results. Bloodshot eyes, some of them
belonging to men who had been as gentle as lambs in their ordinary lives
on Earth, turned swiftly alert. Bristly faces showed swift changes of
expression: surprise, interest, greed for possession--but most of all,
aggressive and Satanic humor.

"_Jeez--tamadas!_" somebody growled, amazed.

Under the circumstances, to be aware of opportunity was to act. Big
paws, some bare and calloused, some in the gloves of space suits,
reached out, grabbed. Teeth bit. Juice squirted, landing on hard metal
shaped for the interplanetary regions.

So far, fine. John Endlich felt prouder of himself--he'd expected a
certain fierceness and lack of manners. But knowing all he did know, he
should have taken time to visualize the inevitable chain-reaction.

"Thanks, pal.... You're a prince...."

Sure--but the thanks were more of a mockery than a formality.

"Hey! None for me? Whatsa idea?..."

"Shuddup, Mic.... Who's dis guy?... Say, Friend--you wouldn't be that
pun'kin-head we been hearin' about, would you?... Well--my gracious--bet
you are! Dis'll be nice to watch!..."

"Where's Alf Neely, Cranston? What we need is excitement."

"Seen him out by the slot-machines. The bar is still out of bounds for
him. He can't come in here."

"Says who? Boss Man Mahoney? For dis much sport Neely can go straight to
hell! And take Boss Man with him on a pitchfork.... Hey-y-y!...
Ne-e-e-e-l-y-y-y!..."

The big man whose name was called lumbered to the window at the entrance
to the bar, and peered inside. During the last couple of months he'd
been in a perpetual grouch over his deprivation of liberty, which had
rankled him more as an affront to his dignity.

When he saw the husband of the authoress of his woes--the little bum,
who, being unable to guard his own, had allowed his woman to holler
"Cop!"--Neely let out a yell of sheer glee. His huge shoulders hunched,
his pendulous nose wobbled, his squinty eyes gleamed and he charged into
the bar.

John Endlich's first reaction was curiously similar to Neely's. He felt
a flash of savage triumph under the stimulus of the thought of immediate
battle with the cause of most of his troubles. Temper blazed in him.

Belatedly, however, the awareness came into his mind that he had started
an emotional avalanche that went far beyond the weight and fury of one
man like Neely. Lord, wouldn't he ever learn? It was tough as hell to
crawl, but how could a man put his wife and kids in awful jeopardy at
the hands of a flock of guys whom space had turned into gorillas?

Endlich tried for peace. It was to his credit that he did so quite
coolly. He turned toward his charging adversary and grinned.

"Hi, Neely," he said. "Have a drink--on me."

The big man stopped short, almost in unbelief that anyone could stoop so
low as to offer appeasement. Then he laughed uproariously.

"Why, I'd be delighted, Mr. Pun'kins," he said in a poisonous-sweet
tone. "Let bygones be bygones. Hey, Charlie! Hear what Pun'kins says?
The drinks are all on him! And how is the Little Lady, Mrs. Pun'kins?
Lonesome, I bet. Glad to hear it. I'm gonna fix that!"

With a sudden lunge Neely gripped Endlich's hand, and gave it a savage
if momentary twist that sent needles of pain shooting up the
homesteader's arm. It was a goading invitation to battle, which grim
knowledge of the sequel now compelled Endlich to pass up.

"Don't call him Pun'kins, Neely!" somebody yelled. "It ain't polite to
mispronounce a name. It's Mr. Tomatoes. I just saw. Bet he's got a
million of 'em, out there on the farm!"

       *       *       *       *       *

The whole crowd in the bar broke into coarse shouts and laughs and
comments. "... We ain't good neighbors--neglecting our social duties.
Let's pay 'em a visit.... Pun'kins! What else you got besides tamadas?
Let's go on a picnic!... Hell with the Boss Man!... Yah-h-h--We need
some diversion.... I'm not goin' on shift.... Come on, everybody!
There's gonna be a fight--a moider!... Hell with the Boss Man...."

Like the flicker of flame flashing through dry gunpowder, you could feel
