loving the hot, the suffocating thrill of death in their throats. Now
they wanted, and would have, the ultimate thrill.

"Death!" The solid structure rocked to the crescendo roar of the demand.
"_Death_! DEATH!"

Nero's right thumb pressed horizontally against his chest. Every vestal
was making the same sign. Pollice verso. Death. The strained and
strident yelling of the mob grew even louder.

Patroclus lowered his dagger and delivered the unnecessary and unfelt
thrust; and--

"Peractum est!" arose one deafening yell.

       *       *       *       *       *

Thus the red-haired Thracian lived; and also, somewhat to his own
surprise, did Livius.

"I'm glad to see you, Bronze-heart, by the white thighs of Ceres, I am!"
that worthy exclaimed, when the two met, the following day. Patroclus
had never seen the Bithynian so buoyant. "Pallas Athene covered you,
like I asked her to. But by the red beak of Thoth and the sacred Zaimph
of Tanit, it gave me the horrors when you made that throw so quick and
missed it, and I went as crazy as the rest of them when you pulled the
real coup. But now, curse it, I suppose that we'll all have to be on the
lookout for it--or no, unlimiteds aren't common, thank Ninib the Smiter
and his scarlet spears!"

"I hear you didn't do so badly, yourself," Patroclus interrupted his
friend's loquacity. "I missed your first two, but I saw you take
Kalendios. He's a high-rater--one of the best of the locals--and I was
afraid he might snare you, but from the looks of you, you got only a
couple of stabs. Nice work."

"Prayer, my boy. Prayer is the stuff. I prayed to 'em in order, and hit
the jackpot with Shamash. My guts curled up again, like they belong, and
I knew that the portents were all in my favor. Besides, when you were
walking out to meet Fermius, did you notice that red-headed Greek
posturer making passes at you?"

"Huh? Don't be a fool. I had other things to think of."

"So I figured. So did she, probably, because after a while she came
around behind with a lanista and made eyes at me. I must have the next
best shape to you here, I guess. What a wench! Anyway, I felt better and
better, and before she left I knew that no damn retiarius that ever
waved a trident could put a net past my guard. And they couldn't either.
A couple more like that and I'll be a Grand Champion myself. But they're
digging holes for the crosses and there's the horn that the feast is
ready. This show is going to be really good."

They ate, hugely and with unmarred appetite, of the heaped food which
Nero had provided. They returned to their assigned places to see
crosses, standing as close together as they could be placed and each
bearing a suffering Christian, filling the whole vast expanse of the
arena.

And, if the truth must be told, those two men enjoyed thoroughly every
moment of that long and sickeningly horrible afternoon. They were the
hardest products of the hardest school the world has ever known: trained
rigorously to deal out death mercilessly at command; to accept death
unflinchingly at need. They should not and can not be judged by the
higher, finer standards of a softer, gentler day.

The afternoon passed; evening approached. All the gladiators then in
Rome assembled in the Claudian Grove, around tables creaking under their
loads of food and wine. Women, too, were there in profusion; women for
the taking and yearning to be taken; and the tide of revelry ran open,
wide, and high. Although all ate and apparently drank with abandon, most
of the wine was in fact wasted. And as the sky darkened, most of the
gladiators, one by one, began to get rid of their female companions upon
one pretext or another and to drift toward the road which separated the
festivities from the cloaked and curious throng of lookers-on.

At full dark, a red glare flared into the sky from Caesar's garden and
the gladiators, deployed now along the highway, dashed across it and
seemed to wrestle briefly with cloaked figures. Then armed,
more-or-less-armored men ran back to the scene of their reveling.
Swords, daggers, and gladii thrust, stabbed, and cut. Tables and benches
ran red; ground and grass grew slippery with blood.

The conspirators turned then and rushed toward the Emperor's brilliantly
torch-lit garden. Patroclus, however, was not in the van. He had had
trouble in finding a cuirass big enough for him to get into. He had been
delayed further by the fact that he had had to kill three strange
lanistae before he could get at his owner, the man he really wanted to
slay. He was therefore some little distance behind the other gladiators
when Petronius rushed up to him and seized him by the arm.

White and trembling, the noble was not now the exquisite Arbiter
Elegantiae; nor the imperturbable Augustian.

"Patroclus! In the name of Bacchus, Patroclus, why do the men go there
now? No signal was given--I could not get to Nero!"

"What?" the Thracian blazed. "Vulcan and his fiends! It _was_ given--I
heard it myself! What went wrong?"

"Everything." Petronius licked his lips. "I was standing right beside
him. No one else was near enough to interfere. It was--should have
been--easy. But after I got my knife out I couldn't move. It was his
_eyes_, Patroclus--I swear it, by the white breasts of Venus! He has the
evil eye--I couldn't move a muscle, I tell you! Then, although I didn't
want to, I turned and ran!"

"How did you find _me_ so quick?"

"I--I--I--don't know," the frantic Arbiter stuttered. "I ran and ran,
and there you were. But what are we--you--going to do?"

Patroclus' mind raced. He believed implicitly that Jupiter guarded him
personally. He believed in the other gods and goddesses of Rome. He more
than half believed in the multitudinous deities of Greece, of Egypt, and
even of Babylon. The other world was real and close; the evil eye only
one of the many inexplicable facts of every-day life. Nevertheless, in
spite of his credulity--or perhaps in part because of it--he also
believed firmly in himself; in his own powers. Wherefore he soon came to
a decision.

"Jupiter, ward from me Ahenobarbus' evil eye!" he called aloud, and
turned.

"Where are you going?" Petronius, still shaking, demanded.

"To do the job _you_ swore to do, of course--to kill that bloated toad.
And then to give Tigellinus what I have owed him so long."

At full run, he soon overtook his fellows, and waded resistlessly into
the fray. He was Grand Champion Patroclus, working at his trade; the
hard-learned trade which he knew so well. No Praetorian or ordinary
soldier could stand before him save momentarily. He did not have all of
his Thracian armor, but he had enough. Man after man faced him, and man
after man died.

And Nero, sitting at ease with a beautiful boy at his right and a
beautiful harlot at his left, gazed appreciatively through his emerald
lens at the flaming torches; the while, with a very small fraction of
his Eddorian mind, he mused upon the matter of Patroclus and Tigellinus.

Should he let the Thracian kill the Commander of his Guard? Or not? It
didn't really matter, one way or the other. In fact, nothing about this
whole foul planet--this ultra-microscopic, if offensive, speck of cosmic
dust in the Eddorian Scheme of Things--really mattered at all. It would
be mildly amusing to watch the gladiator consummate his vengeance by
carving the Roman to bits. But, on the other hand, there was such a
thing as pride of workmanship. Viewed in that light, the Thracian could
not kill Tigellinus, because that bit of corruption had a few more jobs
to do. He must descend lower and lower into unspeakable depravity,
finally to cut his own throat with a razor. Although Patroclus would not
know it--it was better technique not to let him know it--the Thracian's
proposed vengeance would have been futility itself compared with that
which the luckless Roman was to wreak on himself.

Wherefore a shrewdly-placed blow knocked the helmet from Patroclus' head
and a mace crashed down, spattering his brains abroad.

       *       *       *       *       *

Thus ended the last significant attempt to save the civilization of
Rome; in a fiasco so complete that even such meticulous historians as
Tacitus and Suetonius mention it merely as a minor disturbance of Nero's
garden party.

       *       *       *       *       *

_The planet Tellus circled its sun some twenty hundred times. Sixty-odd
generations of men were born and died, but that was not enough. The
Arisian program of genetics required more. Therefore the Elders, after
due deliberation, agreed that that Civilization, too, must be allowed to
fall. And Gharlane of Eddore, recalled to duty from the middle of a
much-too-short vacation, found things in very bad shape indeed and went
busily to work setting them to rights. He had slain one fellow-member of
the Innermost Circle, but there might very well have been more than one
Master involved._




BOOK TWO

THE WORLD WAR




CHAPTER 4

1918


Sobbing furiously, Captain Ralph Kinnison wrenched at his stick--with
half of his control surfaces shot away the crate was hellishly logy. He
could step out, of course, the while saluting the victorious Jerries,
but he wasn't on fire--yet--and hadn't been hit--yet. He ducked and
flinched sidewise as another burst of bullets stitched another seam
along his riddled fuselage and whanged against his dead engine. Afire?
Not yet--good! Maybe he could land the heap, after all!

Slowly--oh, _so_ sluggishly--the Spad began to level off, toward the
edge of the wheatfield and that friendly, inviting ditch. If the krauts
didn't get him with their next pass....

He heard a chattering beneath him--Brownings, by God!--and the expected
burst did not come. He knew that he had been just about over the front
when they conked his engine; it was a toss-up whether he would come down
in enemy territory or not. But now, for the first time in ages, it
seemed, there were machine-guns going that were not aimed at him!

His landing-gear swished against stubble and he fought with all his
strength of body and of will to keep the Spad's tail down. He almost
succeeded; his speed was almost spent when he began to nose over. He
leaped, then, and as he struck ground he curled up and rolled--he had
been a motorcycle racer for years--feeling as he did so a wash of heat:
a tracer had found his gas-tank at last! Bullets were thudding into the
ground; one shrieked past his head as, stooping over, folded into the
smallest possible target, he galloped awkwardly toward the ditch.

The Brownings still yammered, filling the sky with cupro-nickeled lead;
and while Kinnison was flinging himself full length into the protecting
water and mud, he heard a tremendous crash. One of those Huns had been
too intent on murder; had stayed a few seconds too long; had come a few
meters too close.

The clamor of the guns stopped abruptly.

"We got one! We got one!" a yell of exultation.

"Stay down! Keep low, you boneheads!" roared a voice of authority, quite
evidently a sergeant's. "Wanna get your blocks shot off? Take down them
guns; we gotta get to hell out of here. Hey, you flyer! Are you O.K., or
wounded, or maybe dead?"

Kinnison spat out mud until he could talk. "O.K.!" he shouted, and
started to lift an eye above the low bank. He stopped, however, as
whistling metal, sheeting in from the north, told him that such action
would be decidedly unsafe. "But I ain't leaving this ditch right
now--sounds mighty hot out there!"

"You said it, brother. It's hotter than the hinges of hell, from behind
that ridge over there. But ooze down that ditch a piece, around the
first bend. It's pretty well in the clear there, and besides, you'll
find a ledge of rocks running straight across the flat. Cross over there
and climb the hill--join us by that dead snag up there. We got to get
out of here. That sausage over there must have seen this shindig and
they'll blow this whole damn area off the map. Snap it up! And you, you
goldbricks, get the lead out of your pants!"

Kinnison followed directions. He found the ledge and emerged, scraping
thick and sticky mud from his uniform. He crawled across the little
plain. An occasional bullet whined through the air, far above him; but,
as the sergeant had said, this bit of terrain was "in the clear." He
climbed the hill, approached the gaunt, bare tree-trunk. He heard men
moving, and cautiously announced himself.

"OK., fella," came the sergeant's deep bass. "Yeah, it's us. Shake a
leg!"

"That's easy!" Kinnison laughed for the first time that day. "I'm
shaking already, like a hula-hula dancer's empennage. What outfit is
this, and where are we?"

"BRROOM!" The earth trembled, the air vibrated. Below and to the north,
almost exactly where the machine-guns had been, an awe-inspiring cloud
billowed majestically into the air; a cloud composed of smoke, vapor,
pulverized earth, chunks of rock, and debris of what had been trees. Nor
was it alone.

"Crack! Bang! Tweet! Boom! Wham!" Shells of all calibers, high explosive
and gas, came down in droves. The landscape disappeared. The little
company of Americans, in complete silence and with one mind, devoted
themselves to accumulating distance. Finally, when they had to stop for
breath:

"Section B, attached to the 76th Field Artillery," the sergeant answered
the question as though it had just been asked. "As to where we are,
somewhere between Berlin and Paris is about all I can tell you. We got
hell knocked out of us yesterday, and have been running around lost ever
since. They shot off a rally signal on top of this here hill, though,
and we was just going to shove off when we seen the krauts chasing you."

"Thanks. I'd better rally with you, I guess--find out where we are, and
what's the chance of getting back to my own outfit."

"Damn slim, I'd say. Boches are all around us here, thicker than fleas
on a dog."

They approached the summit, were challenged, were accepted. They saw a
gray-haired man--an old man, for such a location--seated calmly upon a
rock, smoking a cigarette. His smartly-tailored uniform, which fitted
perfectly his not-so-slender figure, was muddy and tattered. One leg of
his breeches was torn half away, revealing a blood-soaked bandage.
Although he was very evidently an officer, no insignia were visible. As
Kinnison and the gunners approached, a first lieutenant--practically
spic-and-span--spoke to the man on the rock.

"First thing to do is to settle the matter of rank," he announced,
crisply. "I'm First Lieutenant Randolph, of...."

"Rank, eh?" The seated one grinned and spat out the butt of his
cigarette. "But then, it was important to me, too, when I was a first
lieutenant--about the time that you were born. Slayton, Major-General."

"Oh ... excuse me, sir...."

"Skip it. How many men you got, and what are they?"

"Seven, sir. We brought in a wire from Inf...."

"A _wire_! Hellanddamnation, why haven't you got it with you, then? Get
it!"

The crestfallen officer disappeared; the general turned to Kinnison and
the sergeant.

"Have you got any ammunition, sergeant?"

"Yes, sir. About thirty belts."

"Thank God! We can use it, and you. As for you, Captain, I don't
know...."

The wire came up. The general seized the instrument and cranked.

"Get me Spearmint ... Spearmint? Slayton--give me Weatherby.... This is
Slayton ... yes, but ... No, but I want ... Hellanddamnation, Weatherby,
shut up and let me talk--don't you know that this wire's apt to be cut
any second? We're on top of Hill Fo-wer, Ni-yun, Sev-en--that's
right--about two hundred men; maybe three. Composite--somebody,
apparently, from half the outfits in France. Too fast and too far--both
flanks wide open--cut off ... Hello! Hello! Hello!" He dropped the
instrument and turned to Kinnison. "You want to go back, Captain, and I
need a runner--bad. Want to try to get through?"

"Yes, sir."

"First phone you come to, get Spearmint--General Weatherby. Tell him
Slayton says that we're cut off, but the Germans aren't in much force
nor in good position, and for God's sake to get some air and tanks in
here to keep them from consolidating. Just a minute. Sergeant, what's
your name?" He studied the burly non-com minutely.

"Wells, sir."

"What would you say ought to be done with the machine-guns?"

"Cover that ravine, there, first. Then set up to enfilade if they try to
come up over there. Then, if I could find any more guns, I'd...."

"Enough. Second Lieutenant Wells, from now. GHQ will confirm. Take
charge of all the guns we have. Report when you have made disposition.
Now, Kinnison, listen. I can probably hold out until tonight. The enemy
doesn't know yet that we're here, but we are due for some action pretty
quick now, and when they locate us--if there aren't too many of their
own units here, too--they'll flatten this hill like a table. So tell
Weatherby to throw a column in here as soon as it gets dark, and to
advance Eight and Sixty, so as to consolidate this whole area. Got it?"

"Yes, sir."

"Got a compass?"
