that finally it is impossible not only to kill yourself, but even to
think of attempting it."

Marquis couldn't say anything. The memory called up by the mention of
self-destruction rasped along his spine like chalk on a blackboard. He
could feel the total-recall of sensation, the threatening bursts of
pain. "No...." he whispered over and over. "No--please--no--"

The Manager said. "We won't mention it anymore. You'll never be able to
try any overt act of self-destruction again."

The bright light from the ceiling lanced like splinters into the tender
flesh of Marquis' eyeballs, danced about the base of his brain in
reddened choleric circles. His face had drawn back so that his
cheekbones stood out and his nose was beak-like. His irises became a
bright painful blue in the reddened ovals of his eyes.

The Manager yawned as he finished explaining. "Each prisoner entering
here has an identification punch-plate made of his unique
electro-magnetic vibratory field. That's the secret of our immortality
and yours. Like all matter, human difference is in the electro-magnetic,
vibratory rates. We have these punch-plates on file for every prisoner.
We have one of you. Any dead human body we merely put in a tank which
dissolves it into separate cells, a mass of stasis with potentiality to
be reformed into any type of human being of which we have an
identification punch-plate, you see? This tank of dissociated cells is
surrounded by an electro-magnetic field induced from a machine by one of
the identification punch-plates. That particular human being lives
again, the body, its mind, its life pattern identical to that from which
the original punch-plate was made. Each time you have died, we reduced
your body, regardless of its condition, to dissociated cells in the
tank. The identification punch-plate was put in the machine. Your unique
electro-magnetic field reformed the cells into you. It could only be
you, as you are now. From those cells we can resurrect any one of whom
we have an identification plate.

"That is all, No. 5274. Now that you're indoctrinated, you will work
from now on in the food-mart, because of your experience."

       *       *       *       *       *

For an undeterminable length of time, he followed the routines of the
bells. In the big food-mart, among the hydroponic beds, and the canning
machines; among the food-grinders and little belts that dropped cans of
food-concentrate into racks and sent them off into the walls.

He managed to talk more and more coherently with No. 4901. He stopped
referring to suicide, but if anyone had the idea that Marquis had given
up the idea of dying, they were wrong. Marquis was stubborn. Somewhere
in him the flame still burned. He wouldn't let it go out. The bells
couldn't put it out. The throbbing machines couldn't put it out. And now
he had at last figured out a way to beat the game.

During an eating period, Marquis said to 4901. "You want to die. Wait a
minute--I'm talking about something we can both talk and think about. A
murder agreement. You understand? We haven't been conditioned against
killing each other. It's only an overt act of selfdes--all right, we
don't think about that. But we can plan a way to kill each other."

4901 looked up. He stopped eating momentarily. He was interested.
"What's the use though?" Pain shadowed his face. "We only go through
it--come back again--"

"I have a plan. The way I have it worked out, they'll never bring either
one of us back."

That wasn't exactly true. _One_ of them would have to come back. Marquis
hoped that 4901 wouldn't catch on to the fact that he would have to be
resurrected, but that Marquis never would. He hoped that 4901's mind was
too foggy and dull to see through the complex plan. And that was the way
it worked.

Marquis explained. 4901 listened and smiled. It was the first time
Marquis had ever seen a prisoner smile.

He left what remained of the capsule of poison where 4901 could get it.
During one of the next four eating periods, 4901 was to slip the poison
into Marquis' food can. Marquis wouldn't know what meal, or what can. He
had to eat. The bells had conditioned him that much. And not to eat
would be an overt act of self-destruction.

He wasn't conditioned not to accept death administered by another.

And then, after an eating period, 4901 whispered to him. "You're
poisoned. It was in one of the cans you just ate."

"Great!" almost shouted Marquis. "All right. Now I'll die by the end of
the next work period. That gives us this sleep period and all the next
work period. During that time I'll dispose of you as I've said."

4901 went to his bed and the bells rang and the dark came and both of
them slept.

       *       *       *       *       *

Number 4901 resisted the conditioners enough to follow Marquis past his
regular work room into the food-mart. As planned, 4901 marched on and
stood in the steaming shadows behind the hydroponic beds.

Marquis worked for a while at the canning machines, at the big grinding
vats. Then he went over to 4901 and said. "Turn around now."

4901 smiled. He turned around. "Good luck," he said. "Good luck--to
you!"

Marquis hit 4901 across the back of the neck with an alloy bar and
killed him instantly. He changed clothes with the dead man. He put his
own clothes in a refuse incinerator. Quickly, he dragged the body over
and tossed it into one of the food-grinding vats. His head bobbed up
above the gray swirling liquid once, then the body disappeared entirely,
was ground finely and mixed with the other foodstuff.

Within eight hours the cells of 4901 would be distributed minutely
