here quite a while. Long enough to have set up a small colony. We've
built a city near a uranium mine. There are large processing works,
rocket installations and living quarters. There are atomic warhead
rockets too...."

He stopped. His legs were weak, so much pressure for such light
gravity....

... rockets on the moon's dark side, out of your reach. But we can
reach you. The world is just a target rotating beneath us. We have
unlimited deposits of uranium and other radioactive metals; you are
completely helpless. Any further attempts to come to the moon will
meet with destruction. We will enforce peace if we can. Any indication
down there of any power planning to start a war, and we'll send our
own atomic warhead rockets down.

"We are primarily scientists and technicians. The annihilation of
civilization would have been inevitable anyway, so we've nothing to
lose by this last attempt to maintain peace by the only means left--by
force. We'll bomb any power that attempts to launch atom bombs, or
begins any form of military aggression. And remember--no more rockets
to the moon!

"And who are we? WE are not America, Russia, France, Britain,
Yugoslavia, China, Japan, Italy, Germany, Norway, Sweden, Denmark,
Spain, Portugal, Canada, Texas, or any South American country. We are
no country at all. We are of ALL countries. We are here to protect all
countries from every other country, and we will try to do this by
force if necessary. Remember--no more rockets to the moon. We will
atom-bomb any nation attempting any form of military aggression."

       *       *       *       *       *

The Brotherhood was very old, the outgrowth of an ancient Eastern
philosophical cult of non-resistance and peace. With six months more,
the Brotherhood could win the peace, maybe forever. If the speech just
made frightened the Americans enough, they wouldn't try anything. The
only other powers that might start a war within six months were
Russia, China, Yugoslavia. And they were too uncertain as to whether
or not America had already reached the moon. Who controlled the Moon
controlled Earth. They had been afraid for some time that perhaps
America had already gotten to the moon. Mutual fear of retaliation had
postponed the last war this long.

The Brotherhood knew social-psychology. They figured this would work.

Barlow felt himself backing away from the rocket. They were watching
him, the rocket's eyes and ears. Taking his voice and image back to
earth, back to voices and laughter and music and sound and warmth and
women ... with a sob, he twisted away from the rocket, turned, fell
to his thighs in thick pumice-dust, kept on struggling through lazy
streaming dust ribbons and he didn't look back. He was watched; he
mustn't look back at the rocket again.

Meteors exploded soundlessly on the beds of lava and seas of dust,
shooting up thick motionless sprays that seemed almost solid. Above
him, like splintered steel, stretched the thousands of feet of crater
wall. He reached the sharp wall of rock, managed to get around it and
out of sight of the rocket. He fell. He lay there, his suit blending
with the cold and airless landscape.

He screamed. He clawed his way up, started back again, back toward the
rocket. Hell with the Brotherhood. He was for Hal Barlow. Just for Hal
Barlow. He'd tell the truth. It wouldn't be long then. They'd send
other rockets up then. This was for Hal Barlow. The isolation pressed
in, pressed him faster, throwing him crazily over the dust toward the
rocket. Then they'd know the truth, send up other rockets, ... not
this way, with no more sounds, voices, any moving thing. No way for a
man to die....

It wasn't death; it was the way of dying. No one should die this
way--so alone. Especially Barlow, who feared loneliness more than
anything else.

He fell. One foot slid into a crack filled with pumice dust fine as
powder. He hooked the big steel hooks on the ends of his arms at the
rock, and clung there, his helmet barely pushing up through the dust.
He struggled for a while, desperately with his mind filling with
visions of the rocket. He wanted to live now, make up for all the
living he'd missed for so long.

He looked around, still struggling. Light gravity, little weight, but
he was so weak now, and still the rocket wasn't in sight. He crawled
on his stomach, dragging the bulbous suit over the rock. He could get
around the rock. He had to. Out of sight, but so near, was the warm
human rocket.

He ran into the rock and collapsed with a long wet sigh. He gasped.
Pain throbbed damply over his chest. He moved ... just enough to turn
over on his back. He slid up a little so that he was sitting there
staring at the frigid, barren, naked emptiness of utter silence and
desolation. What had the man said? "_No man is alone who has learned
the secret of oneness with the world...?_"

He thought about the Brotherhood, seriously now, for the first time.
Many men before him had died for it. An entirely new approach to
society and the individual. Working from the inside out, there would
be more than a mere deflection of evil. There would be suppression at
