
Burl had no wise theories. He merely knew facts, but he knew that the
ants had some form of speech or transmission of ideas. Now, however, he
was moving cautiously along toward the stamping grounds of his tribe, in
complete ignorance of the black blanket of living creatures creeping
over the ground toward him.

A million tragedies marked the progress of the insect army. There was a
tiny colony of mining bees--Zebra bees--a single mother, some four feet
long, had dug a huge gallery with some ten cells, in which she laid her
eggs and fed her grubs with hard-gathered pollen. The grubs had waxed
fat and large, became bees, and laid eggs in their turn, within the
gallery their mother had dug out for them.

Ten such bulky insects now foraged busily for grubs within the ancestral
home, while the founder of the colony had grown draggled and wingless
with the passing of time. Unable to forage herself, the old bee became
the guardian of the nest or hive, as is the custom among the mining
bees. She closed the opening of the hive with her head, making a living
barrier within the entrance, and withdrawing to give entrance and exit
only to duly authenticated members of the extensive colony.

The ancient and draggled concierge of the underground dwelling was at
her post when the wave of army ants swept over her. Tiny, evil-smelling
feet trampled upon her. She emerged to fight with mandible and sting for
the sanctity of the hive. In a moment she was a shaggy mass of biting
ants, rending and tearing at her chitinous armour. The old bee fought
madly, viciously, sounding a buzzing alarm to the colonists yet within
the hive. They emerged, fighting as they came, for the gallery leading
down was a dark flood of small insects.

       *       *       *       *       *

For a few moments a battle such as would make an epic was in progress.
Ten huge bees, each four to five feet long, fighting with legs and jaw,
wing and mandible, with all the ferocity of as many tigers. The tiny,
vicious ants covered them, snapping at their multiple eyes, biting at
the tender joints in their armour--sometimes releasing the larger prey
to leap upon an injured comrade wounded by the huge creature they
battled in common.

The fight, however, could have but one ending. Struggle as the bees
might, herculean as their efforts might be, they were powerless against
the incredible numbers of their assailants, who tore them into tiny
fragments and devoured them. Before the last shred of the hive's
defenders had vanished, the hive itself was gutted alike of the grubs it
had contained and the food brought to the grubs by such weary effort of
the mature bees.

The army ants went on. Only an empty gallery remained, that and a few
fragments of tough armour, unappetizing even to the omniverous ants.

Burl was meditatively inspecting the scene of a recent tragedy, where
rent and scraped fragments of a great beetle's shiny casing lay upon the
ground. A greater beetle had come upon the first and slain him. Burl was
looking upon the remains of the meal.

Three or four minims, little ants barely six inches long, foraged
industriously among the bits. A new ant city was to be formed and the
queen-ant lay hidden a half-mile away. These were the first hatchlings,
who would feed the larger ants on whom would fall the great work of the
ant-city. Burl ignored them, searching with his eyes for a spear or
weapon.

Behind him the clicking roar, the high-pitched stridulations of the
horde of army ants, rose in volume. Burl turned disgustedly away. The
best he could find in the way of a weapon was a fiercely toothed hind
leg. He picked it up, and an angry whine rose from the ground.

One of the black minims was working busily to detach a fragment of flesh
from the joint of the leg, and Burl had snatched the morsel from him.
The little creature was hardly half a foot in length, but it advanced
upon Burl, shrilling angrily. He struck it with the leg and crushed it.
Two of the other minims appeared, attracted by the noise the first had
made. Discovering the crushed body of their fellow, they unceremoniously
dismembered it and bore it away in triumph.

Burl went on, swinging the toothed limb in his hand. It made a fair
club, and Burl was accustomed to use stones to crush the juicy legs of
such giant crickets as his tribe sometimes came upon. He formed a
half-defined idea of a club. The sharp teeth of the thing in his hand
made him realize that a sidewise blow was better than a spearlike
thrust.

The sound behind him had become a distant whispering, high-pitched, and
growing nearer. The army ants swept over a mushroom forest, and the
yellow, umbrella-like growths swarmed with black creatures devouring the
substance on which they found a foothold.

A great bluebottle fly, shining with a metallic luster, reposed in an
ecstasy of feasting, sipping through its long proboscis the dark-colored
liquid that dripped slowly from a mushroom. Maggots filled the mushroom,
and exuded a solvent pepsin that liquefied the white firm "meat."

They fed upon this soup, this gruel, and a surplus dripped to the ground
below, where the bluebottle drank eagerly. Burl drew near, and struck.
The fly collapsed into a writhing heap. Burl stood over it for an
instant, pondering.

The army ants came nearer, down into a tiny valley, swarming into and
through a little brook over which Burl had leaped. Ants can remain under
water for a long time without drowning, so the small stream was but a
minor obstacle, though the current of water swept many of them off their
feet until they choked the brook-bed, and their comrades passed over
their struggling bodies dry-shod. They were no more than temporarily
annoyed, however, and presently crawled out to resume their march.

About a quarter of a mile to the left of Burl's line of march, and
perhaps a mile behind the spot where he stood over the dead bluebottle
fly, there was a stretch of an acre or more where the giant, rank
cabbages had so far resisted the encroachments of the ever present
mushrooms. The pale, cross-shaped flowers of the cabbages formed food
for many bees, and the leaves fed numberless grubs and worms, and
loud-voiced crickets which crouched about on the ground, munching busily
at the succulent green stuff. The army ants swept into the green area,
ceaselessly devouring all they came upon.

A terrific din arose. The crickets hurtled away in a rocketlike flight,
in a dark cloud of wildly beating wings. They shot aimlessly in any
direction, with the result that half, or more than half, fell in the
midst of the black tide of devouring insects and were seized as they
fell. They uttered terrible cries as they were being torn to bits.
Horrible inhuman screams reached Burl's ears.

A single such cry of agony would not have attracted Burl's attention--he
lived in the very atmosphere of tragedy--but the chorus of creatures in
torment made him look up. This was no minor horror. Wholesale slaughter
was going on. He peered anxiously in the direction of the sound.

A wild stretch of sickly yellow fungus, here and there interspersed with
a squat toadstool or a splash of vivid color where one of the many
"rusts" had found a foothold. To the left a group of awkward, misshapen
fungoids clustered in silent mockery of a forest of trees. There a mass
of faded green, where the giant cabbages stood.

With the true sun never shining upon them save through a blanket of
thick haze or heavy clouds, they were pallid things, but they were the
only green things Burl had seen. Their nodding white flowers with four
petals in the form of a cross glowed against the yellowish green leaves.
But as Burl gazed toward them, the green became slowly black.

From where he stood, Burl could see two or three great grubs in lazy
contentment, eating ceaselessly on the cabbages on which they rested.
Suddenly first one and then the other began to jerk spasmodically. Burl
saw that about each of them a tiny rim of black had clustered. Tiny
black motes milled over the green surfaces of the cabbages. The grubs
became black, the cabbages became black. Horrible contortions of the
writhing grubs told of the agonies they were enduring. Then a black wave
appeared at the further edge of the stretch of the sickly yellow fungus,
a glistening, living wave, that moved forward rapidly with the roar of
clickings and a persistent overtone of shrill stridulations.

The hair rose upon Burl's head. He knew what this was! He knew all too
well the meaning of that tide of shining bodies. With a gasp of terror,
all his intellectual preoccupations forgotten, he turned and fled in
ultimate panic. And the tide came slowly on after him.

       *       *       *       *       *

He flung away the great mass of edible mushroom, but clung to his
sharp-toothed club desperately, and darted through the tangled aisles of
the little mushroom forest with a heedless disregard of the dangers that
might await him there. Flies buzzed about him loudly, huge creatures,
glittering with a metallic luster. Once he was struck upon the shoulder
by the body of one of them, and his skin was torn by the swiftly
vibrating wings of the insect, as long as Burl's hand.

Burl thrust it away and sped on. The oil with which he was partly
covered had turned rancid, now, and the odor attracted them,
connoisseurs of the fetid. They buzzed over his head, keeping pace even
with his headlong flight.

A heavy weight settled upon his head, and in a moment was doubled. Two
of the creatures had dropped upon his oily hair, to sip the rancid oil
through their disgusting proboscises. Burl shook them off with his hand
and ran madly on. His ears were keenly attuned to the sound of the army
ants behind him, and it grew but little farther away.

The clicking roar continued, but began to be overshadowed by the buzzing
of the flies. In Burl's time the flies had no great heaps of putrid
matter in which to lay their eggs. The ants--busy scavengers--carted
away the debris of the multitudinous tragedies of the insect world long
before it could acquire the gamey flavor beloved by the fly maggots.
Only in isolated spots were the flies really numerous, but there they
clustered in clouds that darkened the sky.

Such a buzzing, whirling cloud surrounded the madly running figure of
Burl. It seemed as though a miniature whirlwind kept pace with the
little pink-skinned man, a whirlwind composed of winged bodies and
multi-faceted eyes. He twirled his club before him, and almost every
stroke was interrupted by an impact against a thinly armoured body which
collapsed with a spurting of reddish liquid.

An agonizing pain as of a red-hot iron struck upon Burl's back. One of
the stinging flies had thrust its sharp-tipped proboscis into Burl's
flesh to suck the blood.

Burl uttered a cry and--ran full tilt into the thick stalk of a
blackened and draggled toadstool. There was a curious crackling as of
wet punk or brittle rotten wood. The toadstool collapsed upon itself
with a strange splashing sound. Many flies had laid their eggs in the
fungoid, and it was a teeming mass of corruption and ill-smelling
liquid.

With the crash of the toadstool's "head" upon the ground, it fell into a
dozen pieces, and the earth for yards around was spattered with a
stinking liquid in which tiny, headless maggots twitched convulsively.

The buzzing of the flies took on a note of satisfaction, and they
settled by hundreds about the edges of the ill-smelling pools, becoming
lost in the ecstacy of feasting while Burl staggered to his feet and
darted off again. This time he was but a minor attraction to the flies,
and but one or two came near him. From every direction they were
hurrying to the toadstool feast, to the banquet of horrible, liquefied
fungus that lay spread upon the ground.

Burl ran on. He passed beneath the wide-spreading leaves of a giant
cabbage. A great grasshopper crouched upon the ground, its tremendous
jaws crunching the rank vegetation voraciously. Half a dozen great worms
ate steadily from their resting-places among the leaves. One of them had
slung itself beneath an overhanging leaf--which would have thatched a
dozen homes for as many men--and was placidly anchoring itself in
preparation for the spinning of a cocoon in which to sleep the sleep of
metamorphosis.

A mile away, the great black tide of army ants was advancing
relentlessly. The great cabbage, the huge grasshopper, and all the
stupid caterpillars upon the wide leaves would soon be covered with the
tiny biting insects. The cabbage would be reduced to a chewed and
destroyed stump, the colossal, furry grubs would be torn into a myriad
mouthfuls and devoured by the black army ants, and the grasshopper would
strike out with terrific, unguided strength, crushing its assailants by
blows of its powerful hind legs and bites of its great jaws. But it
would die, making terrible sounds of torment as the vicious mandibles of
the army ants found crevices in its armour.

The clicking roar of the ants' advance overshadowed all other sounds,
now. Burl was running madly, breath coming in great gasps, his eyes wide
with panic. Alone of all the world about him, he knew the danger behind.
The insects he passed were going about their business with that
terrifying efficiency found only in the insect world.

       *       *       *       *       *

There is something strangely daunting in the actions of an insect. It
moves so directly, with such uncanny precision, with such utter
indifference to anything but the end in view. Cannibalism is a rule,
almost without exception. The paralysis of prey, so it may remain alive
and fresh--though in agony--for weeks on end, is a common practice. The
eating piecemeal of still living victims is a matter of course.

Absolute mercilessness, utter callousness, incredible inhumanity beyond
anything known in the animal world is the natural and commonplace
practice of the insects. And these vast cruelties are performed by
armoured, machine-like creatures with an abstraction and a routine air
that suggests a horrible Nature behind them all.

Burl nearly stumbled upon a tragedy. He passed within a dozen yards of a
space where a female dung-beetle was devouring the mate whose honeymoon
had begun that same day and ended in that gruesome fashion. Hidden
behind a clump of mushrooms, a great yellow-banded spider was coyly
threatening a smaller male of her own species. He was discreetly ardent,
but if he won the favor of the gruesome creature he was wooing, he would
furnish an appetizing meal for her some time within twenty-four hours.

Burl's heart was pounding madly. The breath whistled in his
nostrils--and behind him, the wave of army ants was drawing nearer. They
came upon the feasting flies. Some took to the air and escaped, but
others were too engrossed in their delicious meal. The twitching little
