This little book, reprinted in 1556 and in 1596, and one of the most
popular of the mathematical writings in England during that century,
must have interested the English in the new doctrine even before
Bruno's emphatic presentation of it to them in the eighties.

Yet the English did not welcome it cordially. One of the most popular
books of this period was Sylvester's translation (1591) of DuBartas's
_The Divine Weeks_ which appeared in France in 1578, a book loved
especially by Milton.[192] DuBartas writes:[193]

    "Those clerks that think--think how absurd a jest!
    That neither heavens nor stars do turn at all,
    Nor dance around this great, round earthly ball,
    But the earth itself, this massy globe of our's,
    Turns round about once every twice twelve hours!
    And we resemble land-bred novices
    New brought aboard to venture on the seas;
    Who at first launching from the shore suppose
    The ship stands still and that the firm earth goes."

[Footnote 192: DuBartas: _The Divine Weeks_ (Sylvester's trans. edited
by Haight): Preface, pp. xx-xxiii and note.]

[Footnote 193: _Op. cit._: 72.]

Quite otherwise was the situation in the sixteenth century at the
University of Salamanca. A new set of regulations for the University,
drawn up at the King's order by Bishop Covarrubias, was published in
1561. It contained the provision in the curriculum that "Mathematics
and Astrology are to be given in three years, the first, Astrology,
the second, Euclid, Ptolemy or Copernicus _ad vota audientium_," which
also indicates, as Vicente de la Fuente points out, that at this
University "the choice of the subject-matter to be taught lay not with
the teachers but with the students, a rare situation."[194] One
wonders what happened there when the professors and students received
word[195] from the Cardinal Nuncio at Madrid in 1633 that the
Congregations of the Index had decreed the Copernican doctrine was
thereafter in no way to be held, taught or defended.

[Footnote 194: La Fuente: _Historia de la Universidades ... de
Espana_: II, 314.]

[Footnote 195: _Doc. 86_ in Favaro: 130.]

One of the graduates of this University, Father Zuniga,[196] (better
known as Didacus a Stunica), wrote a commentary on Job that was
licensed to be printed in 1579, but was not published until 1584 at
Toledo. Another edition appeared at Rome seven years later. It
evidently was widely read for it was condemned _donec corrigatur_ by
the Index in 1616 and the mathematical literature of the next half
century contains many allusions to his remarks on Job: IX: 6; "Who
shaketh the earth out of her place, and the pillars thereof tremble."
After commenting here upon the greater clarity and simplicity of the
Copernican theory, Didacus a Stunica then states that the theory is
not contradicted by Solomon in Ecclesiastes, as that "text signifieth
no more but this, that although the succession of ages, and
generations of men on earth be various, yet the earth itself is still
one and the same, and continueth without any sensible variation" ...
and "it hath no coherence with its context (as Philosophers show) if
it be expounded to speak of the earth's immobility. The motion that
belongs to the earth by way of speech is assigned to the sun even by
Copernicus himself, and those who are his followers.... To conclude,
no place can be produced out of Holy Scriptures which so clearly
speaks the earth's immobility as this doth its mobility. Therefore
this text of which we have spoken is easily reconciled to this
opinion. And to set forth the wonderful power and wisdom of God who
can indue the frame of the whole earth (it being of monstrous weight
by nature) with motion, this our Divine pen-man added; 'And the
pillars thereof tremble:' As if he would teach us, from the doctrine
laid down, that it is moved from its foundations."[197]

[Footnote 196: _Diccionario Enciclopedico Hispano-Americano de
literatura, ciencias y artes_ (Barcelona, 1898).]

[Footnote 197: Quoted in Salusbury: _Math. Coll._: I, 468-470 (1661),
as a work inaccessible to most readers at that time because of its
extreme rarity. It remained on the Index until the edition of 1835.]

French thinkers, like the English, did not encourage the new doctrine
at this time. Montaigne[198] was characteristically indifferent: "What
shall we reape by it, but only that we neede not care which of the two
it be? And who knoweth whether a hundred yeares hence a third opinion
will arise which happily shall overthrow these two praecedent?" The
famous political theorist, Jean Bodin, (1530-1596), was as thoroughly
opposed to it as DuBartas had been. In the last year of his life,
Bodin wrote his _Universae Naturae Theatrum_[199] in which he discussed
the origin and composition of the universe and of the animal,
vegetable, mineral and spiritual kingdoms. These five books (or
divisions) reveal his amazing ideas of geology, physics and astronomy
while at the same time they show a mind thoroughly at home in Hebrew
and Arabian literature as well as in the classics. His answer to the
Copernican doctrine is worth quoting to illustrate the attitude of one
of the keenest thinkers in a brilliant era:

     "THEORIST: Since the sun's heat is so intense that we read
     it has sometimes burned crops, houses and cities in
     Scythia,[200] would it not be more reasonable that the sun
     is still and the earth indeed revolves?

     "MYSTIC: Such was the old idea of Philolaus, Timaeus,
     Ecphantes, Seleucus, Aristarchus of Samos, Archimedes and
     Eudoxus, which Copernicus has renewed in our time. But it
     can easily be refuted by its shallowness although no one has
     done it thoroughly.

     "THE.: What arguments do they rely on who hold that the
     earth is revolved and that the sun forsooth is still?

     "MYS.: Because the comprehension of the human mind cannot
     grasp the incredible speed of the heavenly spheres and
     especially of the tenth sphere which must be ten times
     greater than that of the eighth, for in twenty-four hours it
     must traverse 469,562,845 miles, so that the earth seems
     like a dot in the universe. This is the chief argument.
     Besides this, we get rid entirely of epicycles in
     representing the motions of the planets and what is taught
     concerning the motion of trepidation in the eighth sphere
     vanishes. Also, there is no need for the ninth and tenth
     spheres. There is one argument which they have omitted but
     which seems to me more efficacious than any, viz.: rest is
     nobler than movement, and that celestial and divine things
     have a stable nature while elemental things have motion,
     disturbance and unrest; therefore it seems more probable
     that the latter move rather than the former. But while
     serious absurdities result from the idea of Eudoxus, far
     more serious ones result from that of Copernicus.

     "THE.: What are these absurdities?

     "MYS.: Eudoxus knew nothing of trepidation, so his idea
     seems to be less in error. But Copernicus, in order to
     uphold his own hypothesis, claims the earth has three
     motions, its diurnal and annual ones, and trepidation; if we
     add to these the pull of weight towards the center, we are
     attributing four natural motions to one and the same body.
     If this is granted, then the very foundations of physics
     must fall into ruins; for all are agreed upon this that each
     natural body has but one motion of its own, and that all
     others are said to be either violent or voluntary.
     Therefore, since he claims the earth is agitated by four
     motions, one only can be its own, the others must be
     confessedly violent; yet nothing violent in nature can
     endure continuously. Furthermore the earth is not moved by
     water, much less by the motion of air or fire in the way we
     have stated the heavens are moved by the revolutions of the
     enveloping heavens. Copernicus further does not claim that
     all the heavens are immobile but that some are moved, that
     is, the moon, Mercury, Venus, Mars, Jupiter and Saturn. But
     why such diversity? No one in his senses, or imbued with the
     slightest knowledge of physics, will ever think that the
     earth, heavy and unwieldy from its own weight and mass,
     staggers up and down around its own center and that of the
     sun; for at the slightest jar of the earth, we would see
     cities and fortresses, towns and mountains thrown down. A
     certain courtier Aulicus, when some astrologer in court was
     upholding Copernicus's idea before Duke Albert of Prussia,
     turning to the servant who was pouring the Falernian, said:
     "Take care that the flagon is not spilled."[201] For if the
     earth were to be moved, neither an arrow shot straight up,
     nor a stone dropped from the top of a tower would fall
     perpendicularly, but either ahead or behind. With this
     argument Ptolemy refuted Eudoxus. But if we search into the
     secrets of the Hebrews and penetrate their sacred
     sanctuaries, all these arguments can easily be confirmed;
     for when the Lord of Wisdom said the sun swept in its swift
     course from the eastern shore to the west, he added this:
     Terra vero stat aeternam. Lastly, all things on finding
     places suitable to their natures, remain there, as Aristotle
     writes. Since therefore the earth has been alloted a place
     fitting its nature, it cannot be whirled around by other
     motion than its own.

     "THE.: I certainly agree to all the rest with you, but
     Aristotle's law I think involves a paralogism, for by this
     argument the heavens should be immobile since they are in a
     place fitting their nature.

     "MYS.: You argue subtly indeed, but in truth this argument
     does not seem necessary to me; for what Aristotle admitted,
     that, while forsooth all the parts of the firmament changed
     their places, the firmament as a whole did not, is
     exceedingly absurd. For either the whole heaven is at rest
     or the whole heaven is moved. The senses themselves disprove
     that it is at rest; therefore it is moved. For it does not
     follow that if a body is not moved away from its place, it
     is not moved in that place. Furthermore, since we have the
     most certain proof of the movement of trepidation, not only
     all the parts of the firmament, but also the eight spheres,
     must necessarily leave their places and move up and down,
     forward and back."[202]

[Footnote 198: Montaigne: _Essays_: Bk. II, c. 2: _An Apologie of
Raymonde Sebonde_ (II, 352).]

[Footnote 199: This book, published at Frankfort in 1597, was
translated into French by M. Fougerolles and printed in Lyons that
same year. It has become extremely rare since its "atheistic
atmosphere" (Peignot: _Dictionnaire_) caused the Roman Church to place
it upon the Index by decree of 1628, where it has remained to this
day.]

[Footnote 200: Cromer in History of Poland.]

[Footnote 201: Cromer in History of Poland.[A]]

[Footnote A: I could not find this reference in either of Martin
Kromer's books; _De Origine et Rebus Gestis Polonorum, ad 1511_, or in
his _Res Publicae sive Status Regni Poloniae_.]

[Footnote 202: Bodin: _Univ. Nat. Theatrum_: Bk. V, sec. 2 (end).]

This was the opinion of a profound thinker and experienced man of
affairs living when Tycho Brahe and Bruno were still alive and Kepler
and Galileo were beginning their astronomical investigations. But he
was not alone in his views, as we shall see; for at the close of the
sixteenth century, the Copernican doctrine had few avowed supporters.
The Roman Church was still indifferent; the Protestants clinging to
the literal interpretation of the Bible were openly antagonistic; the
professors as a whole were too Aristotelian to accept or pay much
attention to this novelty, except Kepler and his teacher Maestlin
(though the latter refused to uphold it in his textbook);[203] while
astronomers and mathematicians who realized the insuperable objections
to the Ptolemaic conception, welcomed the Tychonic system as a _via
media_; and the common folk, if they heard of it at all, must have
ridiculed it because it was so plainly opposed to what they saw in the
heavens every day. In the same way their intellectual superiors
exclaimed at the "delirium" of those supporting such a notion.[204]
One thinker, however was to see far more in the doctrine than
Copernicus himself had conceived, and by Giordano Bruno the Roman
Church was to be aroused.

[Footnote 203: Delambre: _Astr. Mod._: I, 663.]

[Footnote 204: Justus-Lipsius: _Physiologiae Stoicorum_: Bk. II,
dissert. 19 (Dedication 1604, Louvain), (IV, 947); "Vides deliria,
quomodo aliter appellent?"]




CHAPTER II.

BRUNO AND GALILEO.


When the Roman Catholic authorities awoke to the dangers of the new
teaching, they struck with force. The first to suffer was the famous
monk-philosopher, Giordano Bruno, whose trial by the Holy Office was
premonitory of trouble to come for Galileo.[205]

[Footnote 205: Berti: 285.]

After an elementary education at Naples near his birth-place,
Nola,[206] Filippo Bruno[207] entered the Dominican monastery in 1562
or 1563 when about fourteen years old, assuming the name Giordano at
that time. Before 1572, when he entered the priesthood, he had fully
accepted the Copernican theory which later became the basis of all his
philosophical thought. Bruno soon showed he was not made for the
monastic life. Various processes were started against him, and fleeing
to Rome he abandoned his monk's garments and entered upon the sixteen
years of wandering over Europe, a peripatetic teacher of the
philosophy of an infinite universe as deduced from the Copernican
doctrine and thus in a way its herald.[208] He reached Geneva in 1579
(where he did not accept Calvinism as was formerly thought),[209] but
decided before many months had passed that it was wise to depart
elsewhere because of the unpleasant position in which he found himself
there. He had been brought before the Council for printing invectives
against one of the professors, pointing out some twenty of his
errors. The Council sent him to the Consistory, the governing body of
the church, where a formal sentence of excommunication was passed
against him. When he apologized it was withdrawn. Probably a certain
stigma remained, and he left Geneva soon thereafter with a warm
dislike for Calvinism. After lecturing at the University of Toulouse
he appeared in Paris in 1581, where he held an extraordinary
readership. Two years later he was in England, for he lectured at
Oxford during the spring months and defended the Copernican theory
before the Polish prince Alasco during the latter's visit there in
June.[210]

[Footnote 206: McIntyre: 3-15.]

[Footnote 207: Four lives of Bruno have been written within the last
seventy-five years. The first is _Jordano Bruno_ by Christian
Bartholmess (2 vol., Paris 1846). The next, _Vita di Giordano Bruno da
Nola_ by Domenico Berti (1868, Turin), quotes in full the official
documents of his trial. Frith's _Life of Giordano Bruno_ (London,
1887), has been rendered out of date by J.L. McIntyre's _Giordano
Bruno_ (London, 1903), which includes a critical bibliography. In
addition, W.R. Thayer's _Throne Makers_ (New York, 1899), gives
translations of Bruno's confessions to the Venetian Inquisition.
Bruno's Latin works (_Opera Latina Conscripta_), have been republished
by Fiorentino (3 vol., Naples, 1879), and the _Opere Italiane_ by
Gentile (3 vol., Naples, 1907).]

[Footnote 208: Bartholmess: I, 134.]

[Footnote 209: Libri: IV, 144.]

[Footnote 210: McIntyre: 16-40.]

To Bruno belongs the glory of the first public proclamation in England
of the new doctrine,[211] though only Gilbert[212] and possibly Wright
seem to have accepted it at the time. Upon Bruno's return to London,
he entered the home of the French ambassador as a kind of secretary,
and there spent the happiest years of his life till the ambassador's
recall in October, 1585. It was during this period that he wrote some
of his most famous books. In _La Cena de la Ceneri_ he defended the
Copernican theory, incidentally criticising the Oxford dons most
severely,[213] for which he apologized in _De la Causa, Principio et
Uno_. He developed his philosophy of an infinite universe in _De
l'Infinito e Mondi_, and in the _Spaccio de la Bestia Trionphante_
"attacked all religions of mere credulity as opposed to religions of
truth and deeds."[214] This last book was at once thought to be a
biting attack upon the Roman Church and later became one of the
grounds of the Inquisition's charges against him. During this time in
London also, he came to know Sir Philip Sydney intimately, and Fulk
Greville as well as others of that brilliant period. He may have known
Bacon;[215] but it is highly improbable that he and Shakespeare
met,[216] or that Shakespeare ever was influenced by the other's
philosophy.[217]

[Footnote 211: Bartholmess: I, 134.]

[Footnote 212: Gilbert: _De Magnete_ (London, 1600).]

[Footnote 213: Berti: 369, Doc. XIII.]

[Footnote 214: McIntyre: 16-40.]

[Footnote 215: Bartholmess: I, 134.]

[Footnote 216: Beyersdorf: _Giordano Bruno und Shakespear_, 8-36.]

[Footnote 217: Such passages as _Troilus and Cressida_: Act I, sc. 3;
_King John_, Act III, sc. 1; and _Merry Wives_, Act III, sc. 2,
indicate that Shakespeare accepted fully the Ptolemaic conception of a
central, immovable earth. See also Beyersdorf: _op. cit._]

Leaving Paris soon after his return thither, Bruno wandered into
southern Germany. At Marburg he was not permitted to teach, but at
Wittenberg the Lutherans cordially welcomed him into the university.
After a stay of a year and a half, he moved on to Prague for a few
months, then to Helmstadt, Frankfort and Zurich, and back to Frankfort
again where, in 1591, he received an invitation from a young Venetian
patrician, Moecenigo, to come to Venice as his tutor. He re-entered
Italy, therefore, in August, much to the amazement of his
