They still had plenty of Martian food left--for what it was worth to
human insides. Perhaps unified purpose and action brightened their
outlook a little, helping their bodies. They could never work very
long--even in the almost total absence of gravity. But--at least--their
weakness wasn't increasing now.

During those last four months they drove several ships away. Earth and
Moon swelled to spheres, ahead. Brulow's Comet lengthened its tail under
increased solar light-pressure. Intensified radiation made its shifting
colors glorious.

Brinker and Copeland lined their gigantic missile up on its target as
perfectly as they could. Fifty hours before the crash was due, they
smashed most of the jets. The remaining ones they tried, feebly, to
refit into their ship, meaning thus to escape.

       *       *       *       *       *

Three Space Patrol craft showed up, and they had to man their weapons.
Copeland hated to be an outlaw; but now he could not see effort brought
to nothing. Brinker and he had survived so far, accomplishing much--far
better results than he had expected; it made him surer that their
purpose was generally sound.

More missiles were fired carefully--not to do damage, but to discourage
the intruders; the latter were held at bay for another twelve hours.
Copeland and Brinker left radio commands and threats unanswered, so it
was hard for their opponents to get a fix on their position in the
whirling nucleus.

Explosions blazed around them, but never very close. Masses of iron and
stone were shattered and half vaporized, cooling subsequently to fine
dust. The nucleus of Brulow's Comet expanded a bit under the battering
that went on within it.

At an opportune moment, Copeland and Brinker clung to one of their
jet-tubes and, gunning it very lightly, rode it from the central
core-mass of the nucleus to a lesser meteor, and hid in a cleft. A
dust-poll had concealed their change of position. And now, with so many
other large meteors around them, they would be almost impossible to
find.

They glimpsed the Patrol craft invading the heart of the comet. Men
poured forth, struggling to set up jets in the hope of still deflecting
this juggernaut from the Moon. But the comet was already much too close;
before the setting-up was half completed it had to be abandoned. Still,
the ships remained almost to the last.

Copeland wondered tensely if they'd ever go. His withered palms
perspired.

"We could still yell for help--have them take us off," Brinker suggested
when they had left. He spoke by sound-channel contact.

The Moon loomed huge and ugly ahead. Copeland gave it a scared glance,
and then laughed grimly. "Ironic, that would be," he snapped, "No--we've
got this jet to ride, and we're still at liberty."

From space, lashed to the flaming propulsion tube, they saw the crash
happen. It was a terrific spectacle. Copeland's hopes now had jagged
cracks of worry. The comet seemed to move slowly, its coma flattening
over the Moon's spaceward hemisphere. There were blinding flashes as the
chunks of its nucleus bit into the lunar crust, their energy of velocity
converting largely to heat. Then dust masked the region of impact. The
comet's tail collapsed over the Moon like a crumbling tower.

Copeland gulped. He saw that Brinker had gone limp--fainted. Weakness
was enough to cause that; but the fact of a plan carried out had a shock
in it, too.

Copeland worked the jury-rigged controls of the jet, continuing to
decelerate. At spotty intervals, under the terrible thrust of reducing
speed, he was unconscious, too.

       *       *       *       *       *

There was no such thing as picking a landing-spot. Checking velocity
soon enough, so close to the Moon, took all of the propulsion tube's
power--so he just followed the comet down. Almost at a stand-still at
last, balanced on a streamer of flame, he toppled into hot dust Feebly
he worked to unlash himself from the tube. Brinker, jolted back to
semi-consciousness, managed to do the same.

Weakened and spent, they could not even lift themselves against the
slight lunar gravity for a while.

The darkness around them was Stygian. But as more dust settled, the sky
cleared, and the normal stars of the lunar night blazed out. Their
attention was drawn in one direction inevitably.

Red-hot lava glowed there, in scattered areas over what was clearly an
extensive expanse of territory. White vaporous plumes spurted high above
the ground, and against the sides of new-formed meteor-craters, a white
layer was collecting.

Copeland staggered erect. "Frost and snow!" he stammered. "From volcanic
steam! The first frost and snow on the Moon in a billion years! We've
done it, Brinker! Brulow's Comet really did crack the thick lunar
crust...."

He heard Brinker's grunt of premature enthusiasm.

The Patrol picked them up hours later, wandering dazedly. They were
emaciated ghosts of men--almost skeletons in armor. They gave their
names, but didn't really come to their senses until the prison doctor in
Tycho Station treated them, and they had slept for a long time.

"Don't worry, fellas. Relax," he said--with fury in his eyes.

Other faces were grim.

       *       *       *       *       *

At the speedy trial in Tycho Station, sharp-featured Krell was among
many who flung accusations.

"In the impact-zone itself--an area a hundred miles across--mining
installations and machinery of tremendous value were utterly destroyed,"
he said. "But lesser damage extends to a far wider circle. Thousands of
claims have been buried in dust, till much of the far lunar hemisphere
will have to be resurveyed. Luckily, miners and explorers were warned in
time, and sought safety. But the charge of wholesale vandalism--terrible
enough--does not stand alone. These men are to be remembered as accused
robbers and murderers."

