
Mercury can be readily found, early in July, a few degrees south of
the point of sunset; the planet moves rapidly southward, but can be
followed, and may be seen as late as the 20th. On July 18 Mercury has
nearly the declination of Regulus.


VENUS.

Venus keeps nearly the path of the sun, setting after the sun late in
July, but so nearly with it that the planet is not likely to be seen.


MARS.

Mars has moved from its position nearly in line with Castor and Pollux
toward Leo. It sets on July 1 at 9h. 44m. P.M. On the 31st Mars sets
at 8h. 32m.

On the 31st, at meridian passage, Mars and Uranus are nearly together.
Uranus is east of Mars and half a degree south.


JUPITER.

Jupiter is coming into the evening hours.

On July 1 Jupiter rises a few minutes after midnight. On July 31
Jupiter rises a few minutes after 10 P.M. It will be known at once by
its brilliancy.

Besides the ordinary belts of Jupiter the planet still shows at this
time (June 10) the large ruddy spot spoken of by many persons some
weeks since. This spot is elliptical in shape; its longest diameter is
about one-fifth that of Jupiter. A small glass will show it, and the
ordinary observer can, by watching its appearance and disappearance
and reappearance, determine the time of rotation of Jupiter on its
axis, or the length of the planet's day.

The best evenings for looking at Jupiter are those of July 23, when
the satellite nearest to Jupiter goes across its face, preceded by
its shadow; July 28, when the first and second satellites will make
similar transits; and July 29, when Jupiter will rise without the
presence of its third satellite, which will be in eclipse, and will
come out of the shadow after midnight.


SATURN.

Saturn follows close upon Jupiter, but keeps further north in
declination by about 21/2 deg..

On July 1 Saturn rises 36m. after midnight. On the 31st Saturn rises
at 10h. 38m. P.M.

The waning moon will pass north of Jupiter and Saturn on the 27th to
28th.

Any one who has a glass sufficient to show the ring of Saturn and the
largest satellite, Titan, will find this planet intensely interesting,
and the movements of the satellite will show the time of its
revolution in its orbit around Saturn.


URANUS.

Uranus rises after the sun, and sets too nearly with the sun to be
seen.


NEPTUNE.

Neptune may be seen, with a good telescope, in the early morning hour.
Neptune is 21/4 deg. west of Alpha Ceti, and 11 deg. north. It approaches Alpha
Ceti during the month, and if it can be found, may be known to be a
planet by that movement.

       *       *       *       *       *




FIRES IN NEW YORK.

The report of the Board of Fire Commissioners, just printed, shows
that during the year 1879 there were in this city 1,551 fires, of
which 1,029 were discovered by persons not connected with the Fire
or Police Department. In 1,456 cases the fires were confined to the
buildings in which they originated. Twenty-five buildings were totally
destroyed, and 69 were greatly damaged. Of all the fires, 1,001 were
extinguished by buckets of water and fire extinguishers. The total
estimated loss by fire during the year was $900,280 on buildings
and $4,771,300 on stock, making a total of $5,671,580. The
estimated insurances on the buildings were $7,276,446, and on stock,
$14,525,264, making a total of $21,801,710. The estimated uninsured
loss was $180,060. In three cases the loss was between $100,000 and
$115,000; in one case $168,908; in one case $352,185; in one case
$333,900; and in one case $1,978,991. In 1,066 cases the loss was less
than $100.

Nearly a quarter of all the fires were caused by carelessness, and 100
are attributed to children playing with matches and fire. Forty fires
were caused by the spontaneous combustion of oily rags and other
materials, and 93 by exploding kerosene lamps. Four members of the
department and 12 citizens died of injuries received at fires during
the year, and 139 firemen and 54 citizens were more or less injured.

There are 729 uniformed members of the department The pay roll of the
whole department for 1879 was $1,030,822.14, and the appropriation for
all expenses was $1,254,970. The appropriation for the present year
is $1,307,670. The department now possesses 233 horses, 1 marine steam
fire engine, 58 steam fire engines, of which 5 are self propelling,
10 chemical engines, 24 hook and ladder trucks, 108 chemical fire
extinguishers, and 4 aerial ladders, together with other fire
apparatus.

The annual inspection of the department showed that the quickest
average time in hitching a team was 3.17 seconds, and in hitching
a single horse, 5.66 seconds. The general average in hitching all
apparatus was, in 1879, 9.54 seconds; in 1878, 10.26 seconds; and in
1877, 13.03 seconds.

During the year, $30,300 was collected for licenses for the sale of
kerosene oil, each license costing $10. The Fire Department Relief
Fund now amounts to $422,569.07, and the insurance fund to $12,780.

       *       *       *       *       *




ASPIRATOR AND COMPRESSOR.

Professor Marangoni, of Pavia, has invented an aspirator for measuring
gases which is much simpler than many now in use in laboratories,
which latter have the defect that the air or gas ascends through
the descending liquid and makes thus the measuring of the former
uncertain. The improved apparatus is shown in our illustration. It
consists of two vessels attached to a fixed horizontal shaft, FE,
which is placed upon two upright supports. This shaft has several ways
or passages made in it which performs the functions of the taps.
The water of the upper receptacle passes into the lower one by the
passage, A, and thence through the tube, BC, issuing at its lowest
extremity at C. The air contained in the lower vessel is thus emitted
by the channel DE, cut into the shaft, while the air or gas is
aspirated in the same ratio by the passage and tube, FG. The apparatus
acts thus at the same time as aspirator and compressor. It is simple,
and will be a useful addition to the laboratory.

[Illustration]

       *       *       *       *       *




NEW PHOTOGLYPTIC PROCESS.[1]

[Footnote 1: A communication to the Photographic Society of France.]


WALTER B. WOODBURY.

It is now thirteen years since I had the honor of introducing in
France my new photoglyptic process, which, up to the present time, has
remained in the hands of very few, owing to the great expense hitherto
necessary to start the working of it. For some time I have been
engaged in making experiments with a view to discover a system which
should be at the same time simple and inexpensive; and the process
which I have this evening the honor to bring before your notice is the
result of my researches.

The summary of the new system is as follows:

To obtain from negatives reliefs on glass similar to transparencies by
the carbon process, but modified in the quantity of materials used.

To attach, and keep in absolute contact with the relief so obtained, a
sheet of tin foil.

To solidify this sheet of tinfoil by coating it with copper; then
backing it up with another sheet of plate glass covered with a
composition; and then to detach the whole from the first relief--the
result being a mould ready to place in the press and print one
thousand or more proofs.

I commence by showing you the relief made from the negative, and
explaining how this is obtained.

I take a sheet of plate glass of a convenient size, and place it in
hot water, together with a sheet of paper a little smaller; then,
having driven out the excess of water by means of a squeegee, I
place it on a leveling stand. Having prepared a solution composed of
gelatine 200 parts, water 1,000 parts, glycerine 20 parts, white sugar
30 parts, with a little Indian ink, and filtered the same, I pour a
sufficient quantity on the paper and spread it up to the corners with
the finger. These plates are then dried in a dry place and can be kept
until wanted.

To sensitize the plates I employ a bath of bichromate of potash of
six per cent., and again dry them. Without doubt this method is rather
long; but one should consider that each proof made is capable of
giving five or ten thousand prints if necessary, as the same relief
will make many printing moulds. I tried, with the aid of the Autotype
Company, of London, to get a suitable tissue; but as this requires
a uniform thickness of half a millimeter the ordinary system did not
succeed. When the sensitized plate is dry the edges are cut with a
knife, the glasses serving over and over again. I show you a piece of
this prepared paper.

As in the carbon process, it is necessary to place a border of black
paper at the back of the negative, and to cut the sensitized tissue a
little larger than the opening.

After the exposure the gelatine is fixed on a collodionized glass by
placing them both in water and squeegeeing the surface; but in dry
weather it is as well to use albumen in place of collodion, as used
by M. Ferrier for his transparencies in carbon. The glass holding the
gelatine is now placed in a hot water bath heated to 42 deg. Centigrade,
and left till the paper comes away from the gelatine, when it is
placed in this apparatus by the frame holding the grooves.

By means of this small gas regulator the temperature is kept always
the same, namely, 50 deg. Centigrade. The water should be now and then
agitated by lifting up and down the frame holding the glasses.

After a space of three or four hours the reliefs will be sufficiently
washed, and can be taken out and placed in alcohol to dry quickly
and sharp at the same time. In this stage of the process all spots or
scratches that may have been on the negative can be removed (being in
relief on the gelatine) by means of a piece of glass. The relief is
now ready to be covered with the tin. You will observe that up to the
present the operations have been almost the same as those necessary to
produce a transparency in carbon.

As it is of the first necessity that the tin should be kept in
absolute contact with the gelatine relief, I prepare the latter by
rubbing it over with a piece of flannel charged with a greasy matter
(pomatum answers as well as anything). I then make a border of
India-rubber in benzine round the glass. The effect of this is to
prevent any air from returning between the tin and the relief when
once it has been driven out.

Taking care that the back of the glass is perfectly clean, it is now
placed on the steel or glass bed of a rolling-press. A sheet of tin
foil (without holes) that has been smoothed on a sheet of glass by a
soft brush is now laid on it, and then three or four thicknesses of
blotting paper. The whole is then passed under the cylinder several
times, each time increasing the pressure. The surface of the tin
is now ready to place in the electrotyping cell, but must first be
cleaned with a solution of caustic potash to remove any grease, and
bordered with shellac varnish to prevent the copper from depositing
where not required.

Electric contact is made by means of the small apparatus, on removing
a small proportion of the lac varnish. After two or three hours
sufficient copper will have been deposited, and after drying can be
then attached to another glass, on which it will remain.

This glass is covered while hot with a composition of shellac, resin,
and Venice turpentine, and can be prepared in advance, using an iron
plate heated direct by the gas flame. The same iron plate is employed
to again soften the composition and attach it to the copper; but this
time heated only by boiling water, this temperature being sufficient
to soften it until it enters into all the hollows of the copper. On
placing a weight on the two glasses the excess of the composition is
forced out at the edges. When cold the glass plate on which the copper
and tin are now attached can be separated from the relief, which can
then be used over and over again to produce fresh matrices.

The matrix or intaglio is now ready to place in the printing press,
and the remaining operations of printing are exactly the same as those
used in the old process of photoglyptic printing.

In placing the mould in the press it is advisable to place one or
two thicknesses of stout blotting paper, previously wetted, under the
mould to give to it a slight amount of elasticity and, at the same
time, to keep it in place.

As in all other mechanical processes a reversed or pellicle negative
is required; but it is very simple to print upon a specially prepared
transfer paper, and, instead of mounting the print with the face
uppermost, to attach it under water to the mount, and when dry to
detach the paper on which the print has been made. By this means there
remains only one thickness of paper instead of two, thus doing away
with an objection which has often been found in mounted photographs
for book illustration.

       *       *       *       *       *




NEW INVENTIONS.

An improved combined cutting and clinching tool has been patented by
Mr. Peter D. Graham, of Black Hawk, Col. The object of this invention
is to provide a new, useful, and convenient tool for cutting and
clinching horseshoe nails.

Mr. John J. Berger, of Brooklyn, N. Y., has patented an improved
hand perforating or check stamp of the class which are used to cut or
perforate the paper with figures and letters as a safeguard against
alterations of the check; and the object of this improvement is to
perforate the check with needle points, and at the same time ink
the perforations, whereby the numbers may be clearly marked without
cutting large openings in the paper.

An improved apparatus for the manufacture of nitric acid has been
patented by Mr. Paul Marcelin, of Black Rock, Conn. The object of this
invention is to furnish apparatus for manufacturing nitric acid so
constructed that the stronger acid may be separated from the weaker
acid as the acid passes from the retort to the receiving bottles,
to obtain a strong acid suitable for use in manufacturing
nitro-glycerine.

Mr. Max Rubin, of New York city, has patented an improved shawl strap,
so constructed that either strap may be wound up alone, or both may be
wound up together, or one may be wound up tighter than the other, by
adjusting the handle.

Mr. Ambrose Madden, of Asbury Park, N. J., has patented an attachment
for use with halters for preventing horses from cribbing and to
cure them of that pernicious habit; and the invention consists in a
combination of rigid arms and straps hung upon the halter and carrying
a spiked plate, which is retained beneath the animal's under lip in
such manner that the motions of the horse in the act of cribbing cause
the spikes to prick.

       *       *       *       *       *




BUSINESS AND PERSONAL.

_The Charge for Insertion under this head is One Dollar a line for
each insertion; about eight words to a line. Advertisements must be
received at publication office as early as Thursday morning to appear
in next issue._

-->_The publishers of this paper guarantee to advertisers a
circulation of not less than 50,000 copies every weekly issue._

       *       *       *       *       *

Lubricene, Gear Grease, Cylinder and Machinery Oils. R. J. Chard, 6
Burling Slip, New York.

Telephones repaired, parts of same for sale. Send stamp for circulars.
P.O. Box 205, Jersey City, N. J.

The genuine Asbestos Liquid Paints are the purest, finest, richest,
and most durable paints ever made for structural purposes. H. W. Johns
M'f'g Co., 87 Maiden Lane, sole manufacturers.

The Finger Annunciator, and all other electr. apparatus, by Finger
Annunciator Co., 73 Cornhill, Boston.

The most popular Pens in use are those of the Esterbrook Steel Pen
Company. For sale everywhere. Everybody send Circular to R. K. Teller,
Unadilla, N. Y.

A few pat. Centering and Squaring Attachments for Lathes, made by R.
E. State & Co., entirely new, for sale cheap. J. & W. State, Lock Box
291, Springfield, Ohio.

Soapstone and Empire Gum Core Packing, the best for Railroads. Greene,
Tweed & Co., New York.

Our new Stylographic Pen (just patented), having the duplex
interchangeable point section, is the very latest improvement. The
Stylographic Pen Co., Room 13, 169 Broadway, N. Y.

Shaw's U. S. Standard of Pressure. Mercury Gauges, all pressures,
Steam, Hydraulic, and Vacuum. Best for pumping stations and pipe
lines. 915 Ridge Ave., Philadelphia, Pa.

For Sale low--52 x 17 feet Sidewheel Boat, and one 23 x 51/2 feet
Launch; best condition. S. E. Harthan, Worcester, Mass.

Wanted.--Farm Engine, with Steam Plow Attachment. Address P. O. Box
18, Reinbeck, Iowa.

Advertising of all kinds in all American Newspapers. Special lists
free. Address E. N. Freshman & Bros., Cincinnati, O.

Patent for Sale Cheap.--Entire Patent or State Rights. Just the thing
for the summer. Money can be made out of it. Other business prevents
owner from handling it. A. H. Watkins, 294 Harrison Ave., Boston,
Mass.

We keep a full assortment of Esterbrook's, Gillott's, Spencerian,
Perry's, and Lamar's Pens. Send for price list to J. Leach, 86 Nassau
St., New York.

For Sale.--A Baltimore City Fire Department Steam Fire Engine, in
complete working order. Address P.O. Box 676, Baltimore, Md.

Metallic Piston Rod Packing Company, 773 Broad St., Newark, N. J.
Agents wanted; terms liberal.

Skinner & Wood, Erie, Pa., Portable and Stationary Engines, are full
of orders, and withdraw their illustrated advertisement. Send for
their new circulars.

Asbestos Board on Chimneys prevents their heat from affecting the
temperature of rooms through which they pass. Asbestos Pat. Fiber Co.,
lim., 194 Broadway, N. Y.

Sweetland & Co., 126 Union St., New Haven, Conn., manufacture the
Sweetland Combination Chuck.

Power, Foot, and Hand Presses for Metal Workers. Lowest prices.
Peerless Punch & Shear Co., 52 Dey St., N. Y. The Brown Automatic
Cut-off Engine; unexcelled for workmanship, economy, and durability.
Write for information. C. H. Brown & Co., Fitchburg, Mass.

Corrugated Traction Tire for Portable Engines, etc. Sole
manufacturers, H. Lloyd, Son & Co., Pittsburg, Pa.

For the best Stave, Barrel, Keg, and Hogshead Machinery, address H. A.
Crossley, Cleveland, Ohio.

Best Oak Tanned Leather Belting. Wm. F. Forepaugh, Jr., & Bros. 531
Jefferson St., Philadelphia, Pa.

National Steel Tube Cleaner for boiler tubes. Adjustable, durable.
Chalmers-Spence Co., 40 John St., N. Y.

Split Pulleys at low prices, and of same strength and appearance
as Whole Pulleys. Yocom & Son's Shafting Works, Drinker St.,
Philadelphia, Pa.

Stave, Barrel, Keg, and Hogshead Machinery a specialty by E. & B.
Holmes, Buffalo, N. Y.

Solid Emery Vulcanite Wheels--The Solid Original Emery Wheel other
kinds imitations and inferior. Caution.--Our name is stamped in full
on all our best Standard Belting, Packing, and Hose. Buy that only.
The best is the cheapest. New York Belting and Packing Company, 37 and
38 Park Bow. N. Y.

For Separators, Farm & Vertical Engines, see adv. p. 382.

Walrus Leather, Emery, and Polishing Goods. Greene, Tweed & Co., 118
Chambers St., New York.

Nickel Plating.--Sole manufacturers cast nickel anodes, pure nickel
salts, importers Vienna lime, crocus, etc. Condit, Hanson & Van
Winkle, Newark, N. J., and 92, and 94 Liberty St., New York.

Presses, Dies, and Tools for working Sheet Metal, etc. Fruit & other
can tools. Bliss & Williams, B'klyn, N. Y.

Bradley's cushioned helve hammers. See illus. ad. p. 397.

Instruction in Steam and Mechanical Engineering. A thorough practical
education, and a desirable situation as soon as competent, can be
obtained at the National Institute of Steam Engineering, Bridgeport,
Conn. For particulars, send for pamphlet.

Hydraulic Jacks, Presses and Pumps. Polishing and Buffing Machinery
Patent Punches, Shears, etc. E. Lyon & Co., 470 Grand St., New York.

Forsaith & Co., Manchester, N. H., & 207 Centre St., N. Y. Bolt
Forging Machines, Power Hammers, Comb'd Hand Fire Eng. & Hose
Carriages, New & 2d hand Machinery. Send stamp for illus. cat. State
just what you want.

For Mill Mach'y & Mill Furnishing, see illus. adv. p. 381.

Air Compressors, Blowing Engines, Steam Pumping Machinery, Hydraulic
Presses. Philadelphia Hydraulic Works, Philadelphia, Pa.

For Patent Shapers and Planers, see ills. adv. p. 380.

For Pat. Safety Elevators, Hoisting Engines, Friction Clutch Pulleys,
Cut-off Coupling, see Frisbie's ad. p. 316.

Machine Knives for Wood-working Machinery, Book Binders, and Paper
Mills. Large knife work a specialty. Also manufacturers of Soloman's
Parallel Vise. Taylor. Stiles & Co., Riegelsville, N. J.

For Alcott's Improved Turbine, see adv. p. 297.

Mineral Lands Prospected, Artesian Wells Bored, by Pa. Diamond Drill
Co. Box 423, Pottsville, Pa. See p. 381.

Rollstone Mac. Co's Wood Working Mach'y ad. p. 380

Improved Solid Emery Wheels and Machinery, Automatic Knife Grinders,
Portable Chuck Jaws. _Important_, that users should have prices of
these first class goods. American Twist Drill Co., Meredithville, N.
H.

For Standard Turbine, see last or next number.

Burgess' Non-conductor for Heated Surfaces; easily applied, efficient,
and inexpensive. Applicable to plain or curved surfaces, pipes, elbows
and valves. See p. 284.

Diamond Saws. J. Dickinson, 64 Nassau St., N. Y.

Steam Hammers, Improved Hydraulic Jacks, and Tube Expanders. R.
Dudgeon, 24 Columbia St., New York.

Wanted--The address of 40,000 Sawyers and Lumbermen for a copy of
Emerson's Hand Book of Saws. New edition 1880. Over 100 illustrations
and pages of valuable information. Emerson, Smith & Co., Beaver Falls,
Pa.

Eagle Anvils, 10 cents per pound. Fully warranted.

For Wood-Working Machinery, see illus. adv. p. 413.

Eclipse Portable Engine. See illustrated adv., p. 413.

