made before us is of the ordinary size that we see used generally, but
there are a great many different sizes of glow-lamps. For instance, here
is a very small lamp; above me you will see, if I may call the small one a
dwarf, there is a giant glow-lamp. It is a lamp invented by the Honorable
Charles Parsons, it is made by the Sunbeam Lamp Company, of Gateshead, and
is called the Sunbeam lamp; it has the same proportion to an ordinary lamp
that an ostrich egg has to a hen's egg, and the light from it is of
equally large proportion, as you see now the current has been turned on to
it. It gives a light of four hundred candles, but it is rather too
brilliant I see by your faces, and we will go back to our old friends of
the ordinary size. There are also above us lamps of various sizes; there
is a five-candle, ten-candle, sixteen-candle, twenty-candle, and a
hundred-candle lamp. Here also are a fifty-candle Swan lamp, a
sixteen-candle Swan, and an eight-candle Swan lamp. There are the ordinary
sixteen-candle lamp; these are being burned from the Grosvenor Gallery.
Here is a miner's lamp, which is supplied with a current by the
Schanschieff battery, the same as I showed you at first. The peculiarity
of this arrangement is that when the battery is turned upside down the
light goes off, the zincs and carbons occupy one half of the cell, and the
solution the other half, the zincs and carbons being at the bottom, and
the battery is not excited unless contact is made with the carbons and
zinc. Such a battery as this will maintain its lamp for 12 or 13 hours.
There are several forms of the Schanschieff battery. Here is a portable
form, and lamp connected with it by a flexible wire, which can be used
when traveling; or in the night, when you want to know the time, you can
have a lamp and battery like this by your bedside, and you can turn it
upside down, and produce a light, see the hour, and turn the battery back.

These glow-lamps are used for different purposes and ways. They may be
used with care, they may be used recklessly; their duration depends a good
deal upon the care with which they are used. A practiced eye, one who is
accustomed to deal with electric lamps, can tell at a glance when the lamp
is raised to a proper incandescence; but there is a point in all lamps
that is a sign of danger, and indicates "breakers (or breakage) ahead."
Whenever in an electric light installation a glow-lamp begins to show a
blue effect, then breakers are ahead; the current must be reduced or other
steps taken. I want to show you this blue effect, which is extremely
pretty, and I want you to see the gradual stages through which a lamp
passes from long life to death, or rather to a very short and merry life.
We can make the life of a lamp just exactly what we like; we can make a
lamp last a minute, or we can make it last a hundred years, and the number
of years of its duration is simply dependent upon the current employed. I
have here a glow-lamp, and I pass a current through it. There is no blue
effect at present; the current is increased, and the carbon filament is
raised to a high state of incandescence. In such a state it would not last
for a long time, not more than ten minutes or a quarter of an hour; but it
does not show the blue effect yet. On further increasing the current the
blue effect appears, though I doubt whether it is visible to many of the
audience; a little more current is put on, and the blue effect is very
marked, the globe itself looks very brilliant, and--there--the current has
been increased until the filament has parted.

It is always better, when making an observation or experiment, to know
what you are going to see, so that you can direct your attention to
exactly what is being done or to what you want to know. If I put another
lamp through the same experiment, you will be better able to understand
this blue effect, and see just that point where the lamp is about to give
out. The current is now on, and is being gradually increased; the lamp is
now intensely blue, and--there--it has gone in the same way exactly as the
other one did. The way in which lamps burst is sometimes very beautiful;
they disintegrate, they seem to volatilize, and the substance of the lamp
is projected with great force against the side of the globe. On the table
there are several beautiful specimens showing this effect.

The glow-lamp in process of manufacture before you is now being unsealed
from the pump; it is now exhausted, and we will pass a current through it
so as to raise it to incandescence. The current is now on, and you see the
lamp burns with full brilliancy. The next experiment is rather a cruel
one, because it is willful destruction. I will not destroy the lamp that
has just been made before us, for I will keep it as a memento of this
evening. I want to show the safety of the electric lamp. Many people
imagine that there is a great deal of danger about it. I will take a
handkerchief, and in it place a lighted lamp, when, on the globe being
broken, the carbon filament instantly goes out, and there is no damage to
the handkerchief, or the slightest appearance of scorching or heating upon
it. On breaking that lamp you heard a report. That is due to the vacuum,
which, on sudden rupture, the air rushes in to fill. These lamps will not
only burn in air, but will actually burn in water. Here I have a lamp
which on placing in a bowl of water continues alight in the water just as
well as in the air. You can imagine what an immense boon that is to our
divers and others who unfortunately have to work under water for our
benefit.

I will not attempt to occupy your time in speaking of the beauties of this
wonderful light, how it removes really poison from our air, how it is very
good for sore eyes, because it burns with such steadiness that those who
work under it really never find, in any shape or form, any inconvenience
or discomfort to the eyes. It is extremely cleanly; it does not fill the
air we breathe with noxious fumes. People are little aware of it, but it
is a very simple calculation to show that thirty gas burners produce a
gallon of water in an hour, so that if you have thirty burners in a shop,
for instance, alight for six hours, six gallons of water are produced and
the water can very often be seen running down the cold windows of shops.
That water absorbs sulphur and sulphuric acid, and when deposited on books
and decorations destroys them. If we could only get the electric light
cheap, delivered at our doors, then everybody who has an idea of luxury
and comfort would at once take it.

I want now to show you some of the dodges of the electric light. First I
will show you that by the action of a cut-out an excess of current is
prevented from injuring the lamps. A cut-out is inserted so as to protect
a group of lamps here, and on a large current being sent you hear a crack,
and the lamps have gone out; the safety fuse has perished in performing
its duty. To prove this we will renew the cut-out, and on the proper
current being turned on, you see the lamps are sound. Here is an electric
cigar lighter. I raise this up and the wire in front of it comes to a
state of incandescence, and I have there, as you see, sufficient heat to
light my cigarette. Some years ago, I had my daughter's doll house, which
was furnished by herself, fitted up with the electric light, and I thought
that some of my younger hearers to-night, who were still in the doll age,
would appreciate the way in which a doll's house can be lighted up by
electricity. You now see the doll's house illuminated; it has a hall door
lamp which lights up on the opening of the door; the house has rooms
furnished, occupied with handsome dolls, and fitted with every kind of
contrivance; the doll who occupies the drawing room has the convenience of
a portable lamp, which she can move about wherever she likes, and each
room and the kitchen has a particular form of lamp.

I have also here a model of that famous ship the Captain, which was
wrecked off Cape Finisterre. The model has been fitted with electric
light, and you now see the mast head-light, the red light for the port
side, and the green light for the starboard side; there are high jinks
going on in the saloon by the aid of the electric light, and there is also
a search light which can be used for looking for the advance of the enemy.
A beautiful phosphorescent effect is produced upon the water, which is
covered with blue cotton wool, in which a lamp is placed, causing really a
very pretty illustration of what the phosphorescence of the sea is like.

Here I have an apparatus for heating curling tongs by electricity; here is
a flat iron treated in the same way, and here is a kettle in which the
current is carried to boil water. I travel a good deal, and I always carry
in my traveling bag a battery like this, which is one of Pitkin's
secondary batteries; it is light and extremely convenient. I can strap it
on my shoulder like an opera glass. To this is attached a reading lamp
which I fix in my waistcoat, and to the astonishment of my fellow
travelers, when the shades of evening are beginning to set, I take out the
lamp and put it in operation--so. My reading lamp is thus provided, and it
is fixed in the most convenient position, for the light falls just where
it is wanted, it does not offend the eye, and enables me to read the
smallest print. I have always got with me my own light, perhaps much to
the annoyance of my fellow passengers, and with the electric light
machinery at my own house, I have little or no trouble in recharging the
battery, or keeping it in order. The Pitkin battery is also applied to a
miner's lamp.




  EFFECT OF CHLORINE ON THE ELECTRO-MOTIVE FORCE OF A VOLTAIC COUPLE.[6]

                          By D. G. GORE, F.R.S.


If the electro-motive force of a small voltaic couple of unamalgamated
magnesium and platinum and distilled water is balanced through the coil of
a moderately sensitive galvanometer of about 100 ohms resistance, by means
of that of a small Daniells cell, plus that of a sufficient number of
couples of iron and German silver of a suitable thermo-electric pile (see
Proc. Birm. Phil. Soc., vol. iv., p. 130), the degree of potential being
noted, and sufficiently minute quantities of very dilute chlorine water
are then added in succession to the distilled water, the degree of
electro-motive force of the couple is not affected until a certain
definite proportion of chlorine has been added; the potential then
suddenly commences to increase, and continues to do so with each further
addition within a certain limit. Instead of making the experiment by
adding chlorine water, it may be made by gradually diluting a very weak
aqueous solution of chlorine.

[6] Read before the Royal Society, May 3, 1888.

The minimum proportion of chlorine necessary to cause this sudden change
of electro-motive force is extremely small; in my experiments it has been
one part in 17,000 million parts of water;[7] or less than 1/7000 part of
that required to yield a barely perceptible opacity in ten times the bulk
of a solution of sal-ammoniac by means of nitrate of silver. The quantity
of liquid required for acting upon the couple is small, and it would be
easy to detect the effect of the above proportion or of less than one
ten-thousand millionth part of a grain of chlorine in one tenth of a cubic
centimeter of distilled water by this process. The same kind of action
occurs with other electrolytes, but requires larger proportions of
dissolved substance.

[7] As one part of chlorine in 17,612 million parts of water had no
visible effect, and one in 17,000 million had a distinct effect, the
influence of the difference, or of one part in 500,000 millions, has been
detected.

As the degree of sensitiveness of the method appears extreme, I add the
following remarks: The original solution of washed chlorine in distilled
water was prepared in a dark place by the usual method from hydrochloric
acid and manganic oxide, and was kept in an opaque, well-stoppered bottle
in the dark. The strength of this liquid was found by means of volumetric
analysis with a standard solution of argentic nitrate in the usual manner.
The accuracy of the silver solution being proved by means of a known
weight of pure chloride of sodium. The chlorine liquid contained 2.3
milligrammes or 0.03565 grain of chlorine per cubic centimeter, and was
just about three-fourths saturated.

One tenth of a cubic centimeter of this solution ("No. 1") or 0.003565
grain of chlorine was added to 9.9 c. c. of distilled water and mixed. One
cubic centimeter of this second liquid ("No. 2"), or 0.0003565 grain of
chlorine, was added to 99 c. c. of water and mixed; the resulting liquid
("No. 3") contained 0.000003565 grain of chlorine per cubic centim. To
make the solutions ("No. 4") for exciting voltaic couple, successive
portions of 1/10 or 1/20 c. c. of "No. 3" liquid were added to 900 cubic
centimeters of distilled water and mixed.

I have employed the foregoing method for examining the states and degrees
of combination of dissolved substances in electrolytes, and am also
investigating its various relations.




                   THE WIMSHURST INFLUENCE MACHINE.


In our last number we gave illustrations of this machine, in which 12
plates 30 in. in diameter are used, and sparks nearly 14 in. in length are
obtained. The engraving, from photographs, shows sparks 13-1/2 in. in length,
obtained from this machine.

[Illustration: DISCHARGE FROM THE WIMSHURST INFLUENCE MACHINE.]




                     SANITATION IN MASSACHUSETTS.


This subject was prominently considered by Dr. H. P. Walcott, of Boston,
in his address on state medicine, at the meeting of the American Medical
Association recently. The vital statistics of Massachusetts, he said,
showed a declining death rate for the last thirty-six years, under the
influence of state sanitation. The most marked decrease had been observed
in the mortality from zymotic diseases; there had been a less decided
reduction of that from constitutional diseases; that from local diseases
had increased; and that from mental diseases and from violence had
remained stationary. In 1876 there was not a single death from small-pox.
Typhoid fever had diminished most in cities having a good system of
sewerage and water supply, and least in towns without such improvements.
Diphtheria, which reached its maximum in 1877, had since declined, until
it now caused only one per cent. of the total mortality. Ovariotomy saved
more lives than any other surgical operation, but, taking Somerville as a
basis of calculation, the ascertained results of preventive medicine had
saved more lives in ten years, among thirty thousand people, than
ovariotomy would save in the same time among two millions. Great attention
was given to small-pox, which had killed but 5,500 persons in
Massachusetts in thirty-six years, and to cholera, which had destroyed
only 2,000; but too little heed was given to scarlet fever, with its
mortality of 37,000, and to typhoid fever, with its mortality of
45,000.--_N. Y. Med. Jour._




                       THE CARE OF THE EYES.[8]

                     By Prof. DAVID WEBSTER, M.D.

                               SPECTACLES.


A vast amount of popular misapprehension and prejudice exists as to the
use of spectacles. Many persons who need them object to wearing them for
various reasons. Some fear that it will lead their friends to suspect that
they are getting old. Others think it will cause them to be suspected of
wishing to appear learned or cultured. Some persons do not want to begin
to wear them lest, having acquired the habit, they may not be able to
leave them off or to see well without them. Others again object to glasses
only on account of their inconvenience. I have personally met with many of
all these classes of persons, but I have frequently heard of another class
that I have never met with, namely, those who do not need glasses, but who
wear them just for effect and to attract attention. Now, the simple truth
is that there are just two good reasons for wearing spectacles, and only
two. One is that we may see better, the other is that our eyes may be
relieved of strain. Often both these reasons are combined in the same
case. Many children begin to be near-sighted after they have attended
school a few years. They first find it out by observing that they cannot
see letters or figures on the blackboard as far as the other children.
They can use their eyes as much as they want to without fatigue or
blurring, or smarting, or burning, or itching, or pain in the eyes, or
headache. In short, they show no symptoms of eye strain. They simply do
not see distant objects distinctly. Such children should be fitted with
glasses at once that will enable them to see as well as others at a
distance, and these glasses should be worn constantly. The child should be
instructed to take them off only when necessary to wipe them or to wipe or
bathe the eyes and on going to bed. The sooner the eyes get accustomed to
them the less likely is the near-sightedness to increase. Moreover, the
child who sees clearly only a few feet away from him loses a very
important part of his education. Our eyes gather information for us when
we are least thinking of it, by taking cognizance of the many objects that
come within our field of vision just as our ears gather material for the
proper development of our minds in listening to general conversation or to
the sounds of nature and of busy life about us. It is the duty of every
one to make the best possible use of the faculties the Creator has
bestowed upon him. The near-sighted person who does not have his vision
corrected by glasses fails in the performance of this duty.

[8] Continued from SUPPLEMENT, No. 647, page 10342.

From a paper by David Webster. M.D., professor of ophthalmology in the New
York Polyclinic and surgeon to the Manhattan Eye and Ear Hospital, New
York.

Again, the time comes in the life of every one who is not near-sighted,
and who lives to a good old age, when he cannot see near objects well
without glasses. Between the ages of 40 and 50, the crystalline lenses of
his eyes having hardened along with the other tissues of his body, he
finds it impossible to focalize as he used to. He holds his book farther
and farther away from his eyes, and finally he finds that he cannot read
fine print at all, or without straining his eyes. Then he must accept the
unpleasant fact that he is getting old-sighted, and if he wishes to use,
and not abuse, his eyes, he must get glasses to take the place of his lost
accommodation and with which he can read easily. Some persons who are
near-sighted in one eye and far-sighted in the other never need glasses,
but always do their reading and other near work with the near-sighted eye
and their distant seeing with the far-sighted eye. I believe I read a long
time ago, in an article by himself in the New York _Ledger_, that this was
the case with the late Rev. Henry Ward Beecher. But the vast majority of
persons who wear glasses, both for the distance and for the near, can see
quite as well without them. They do not wear them in order to be able to
see, but in order to have the strain removed from their eyes, and to be
relieved from the many disagreeable symptoms, both direct and reflex, that
result from eye strain.


                             FOCALIZATION.

The act of focalization is a muscular act and requires an effort, an
output of nervous energy, just as much in proportion as any other
muscular act, such as lifting a weight or shoving a saw or a jack plane.
The eye that is normally shaped forms pictures of objects, more than a few
feet distant, on its back wall without any muscular effort, and has to
focalize only when engaged in near work. But the oversighted eye is
compelled to do this extra work all the time, except when closed. If it
did not focalize, it would see indistinctly. This it refuses to do,
independently of any volition on the part of its owner. The eye that _can_
see distinctly _will_ see distinctly, no matter how great the strain, and
this by a volition apparently entirely its own. The results are headache,
vertigo, nausea, nervousness, irritability, and other disagreeable reflex
conditions, besides the pain and inflammation, and other symptoms
manifested in the eyes themselves. Of course, the only remedy in such
cases is glasses, and these glasses should be carefully selected by a
competent person, and should be worn as much of the time as is necessary
to relieve the eye strain. I find in _Taggart's Times_, February 5, 1888,
the following: "A French philosopher has said that a man who wears
gold-bowed spectacles always admires himself, and it would seem as though
spectacles were becoming a sort of badge of distinction, since young and
old who have the slightest excuse for using them put them on.


                                HEADACHE.

"When one suffers from headache, he is told that he overstrains the nerves
of the eyes, and must relieve this by the use of spectacles. When things
dance before the sight, the cure for that is also spectacles; and when
tired with close attention to work, the cure for wearied eyes is not rest,
but spectacles.

"People who live much out of doors are usually very keen-sighted, owing
probably to the ever-varying impressions made on the eyes, and this might
reasonably suggest that the proper relief for a great many eye troubles
would be a change from overwork."

I can only say that the person who wrote it seems not only to be
prejudiced against glasses, but to know very little of the anatomy and
physiology of the eye. The fact is that oversighted and astigmatic eyes,
needing glasses to relieve the constant and severe strain upon the
accommodative muscular apparatus, are benefited by rest and by change of
air and occupation only to a limited degree. Real rest for such eyes is
possible only from the use of glasses. Moreover, it is not possible for
all who suffer from fatigue of the eyes to take the time for rest. It is
necessary for many to use their eyes daily and almost constantly in order
to make a living for themselves and for those dependent upon them. There
is much more good sense in the paragraphs which follow and which are
extracted from the same article.

"It is not surprising that so many school children suffer with weak eyes
when we consider the conditions under which they are forced to use them.
The very fact that the light in many school rooms is twice strained
through glass partitions before it penetrates the inside rooms is in
itself a severe test of sight. The preponderance of sash-wood over the
panes of glass is anything but propitious to clear seeing. With heads bent
over desks doing arithmetical examples, or studying the fine printed
school books, or reading their own imperfect handwriting from which many
of the lessons must be learned, the only wonder is that all the little
ones are not purblind before they reach the grammar schools.


                             FLUFFY BANGS.

"But this is not all. Girls wear long and fluffy bangs, intercepting the
sight, and both boys and girls seldom bathe their faces with clear cold
water. In the matutinal face washing the eyes are usually closed, while a
wet towel is delicately passed over the eyelids. Few persons can bear the
pain of opening their eyes wide in a basin of cold water, yet Mr. A. M.
Spangler told, in his interesting lecture on Nassau, how the native
population would dive to the bottom of the sea and bring up shells,
sponges, etc., that had been pointed out to them by curious visitors
through a sea glass. Not only men divers, but also little boys and girls
could keep their eyes open in the water and search for cents which had
been thrown in for them to pick up. This shows that even salt water is not
injurious to eyes accustomed to it, and that habit makes the eye
unnaturally sensitive."

As to the statement that "people who live much out of doors are usually
very keen-sighted," it is an expression of a popular idea, but, like most
popular ideas, is true only to a limited extent. The fact is that persons
who do not live much out of doors generally use their eyes more for near
work, such as reading, sewing, drawing, etc., and hence are more likely to
develop near-sightedness. Persons living indoors who are not near-sighted
are able to see as well and as far as those who live outdoors. It is true
that the old sailor will recognize a ship in the horizon, or any other
distant object at sea, sooner than a landsman. But it is not because he is
any more "keen-sighted." It is because he knows just what to look for. He
has seen such objects amid similar surroundings a thousand times, and
recognizes them, even though his vision be considerably impaired by
disease. I have often found, on testing the vision of such persons, that
it was not more than one-half the normal, and yet they declared, and, I
believe, conscientiously so, that they could discern a ship at sea as far
as any one. A very large proportion of the North American Indians, who
live much out of doors, have poor sight from inflammatory diseases of
their eyes caused by exposure to smoke in their wigwams, and by contagious
eye diseases, the propagation of which is favored by their unsanitary
methods of living. But, no doubt, many of them can discern distant objects
upon the prairies and in the forests farther than their white brothers
because of their greater familiarity with the appearances of such objects.

It seems to me that the practice of opening the eyes under water is not to
be specially recommended, except in cases of necessity. While many bear it
well, to others it is more or less painful and irritating. Moreover,
nature furnishes a fluid with which to wash the eyeballs, and applies it
herself. It is only necessary to keep the eyelids scrupulously clean, and
especially the edges of the eyelids where the eyelashes grow out. For
bathing the eyelids when uninflamed, nothing is better than pure cold
water. When the eyes become red and inflamed, the best domestic remedy is
salt and water, about a teaspoonful to the pint, and applied warm or cold,
or at whatever temperature seems most agreeable to the eyes in any
particular case.


                             NO POULTICES.

Under no circumstances should poultices be applied to the eyes unless
ordered by a physician. I have seen many cases in which a simple
inflammation of the inside lining of the eyelids had been greatly
aggravated by bread and milk poultices, or tea leaves, bound upon the
closed eyelids and left on overnight. In fact, a distinguished professor
of diseases of the eye has formulated the results of his observations
thus: "Poultices spoil eyes."

All patent eye washes, eye salves, and other remedies advertised to cure
all diseases of the eye should be avoided. Different diseases require
different remedies. What will benefit one may injure another. When one
gets something the matter with his eyes and resorts to the use of a patent
medicine for its relief, he is in danger of losing valuable time. He may
lose an eye from want of proper treatment at the outset of the disease. In
a great city like New York, every one may easily avail himself of the
services of the most skillful physician. If unable to visit them at their
offices and pay their fees, they may consult them at the numerous
dispensaries, hospitals, and medical schools and colleges, where it will
cost them nothing.


                         USE OF INFLAMED EYES.

A lesson that is very difficult for many of us to learn is that inflamed
eyes should not be used actively. Children with sore eyes should not be
allowed to go to school for two reasons. First, the use of their eyes in
reading will prevent or retard their recovery. Secondly, sore eyes are
usually communicable, and one such child may infect a whole school. It is
highly important that all persons with inflamed eyes should use only their
own wash basins, towels, and handkerchiefs, and so avoid spreading the
disease. We not infrequently see a catarrhal inflammation of the eyes run
through a whole family. Of course, they catch it one from another, and, as
there is no disease of the eye which is, like measles, or scarlet fever,
or smallpox, communicable through the air, such spread of the disease
might easily be prevented by proper care of the person first affected.
Persons whose eyes are sensitive to light should not be kept in dark
rooms, which are always unhealthy. They may have their eyes protected by
shades or by smoke colored glasses, but should keep them open and exposed
to the air, and should remain out of doors as much as possible.


              EFFECT OF ALCOHOL AND TOBACCO UPON THE EYES.

