and seemed very pleased. He spoke sharply; and others, standing around,
sprang into action.

They brought a red cloth, and tied it around the captive's loins. They
forced him to crawl back and forth on the floor, while the big man
looked on, nodding and chuckling. Then the big man ran hot, cushion-like
hands over his head and body; pried open his mouth; grasped his hand and
shook it vigorously up and down; and, with a final nod, turned and
walked away.

He understood none of this, and was very unhappy.

They placed him upon a high, draped platform, where there was a small
chair and nothing else. There were a number of similar platforms in the
room.

It was impossible for him to maintain his previous indifference to his
surroundings. Around the walls of the room were long rows of barred
enclosures, containing creatures of every conceivable size, shape, and
color. Some were hideous; some were strangely beautiful; all were
absorbingly interesting. For a time, he forgot everything else while he
watched them and listened to the sounds that they made. Certainly, he
thought, a scientist of the Loten would give twenty years of his life
for the opportunity to see these creatures! Some of them were amazingly
like reconstructions that had been made from fossilized bones found on
the Loten.

They brought him food, which he judged must be the cooked seeds of
grain. It was soft, and he forced himself to eat a little, although he
was not hungry. He feared that he would have to learn to eat daily, for
food concentrates seemed to be unknown here.

His mind was occupied trying to understand the meaning of this place.
Great numbers of people were crowding into the room, now. Rows of them
stood around his platform.

The other platforms were now occupied also. On them were beings
resembling the people around them, but each one differing in some
strange way from the normal. Some were enormously large, some small. And
he saw one which was shaped like the men of Toon, yet was no taller than
himself.

An endless stream of people surged through the room, circulating around
the platforms and cages--gazing fixedly at their occupants.

He began to understand. These were exhibits--creatures strange to the
crowds who came to look at them. Toon was very large; and transportation
methods were poorly developed. Perhaps, therefore, these people had
never seen many of the parts of their own globe.

Their staring eyes made him uncomfortable. Wherever he looked they
were--staring eyes and gaping mouths. He felt suddenly ashamed. He
wanted to hide himself--but they would not let him do that, he knew. How
long would they keep him here, he wondered? There seemed to be no limit
to the crowds. This must be a great center of population....

And in a flash he had forgotten the people, with their staring eyes,
forgotten his shame, forgotten his bodily discomfort.... A center of
population! Those words blazed in his mind. Once more, he knew the joy
of hope.

With a sudden clear perception he realized that they could not have
helped him more if they had done it consciously. He had arrived at a
goal, which, a few days ago, had seemed impossible of attainment. Here,
if anywhere, he would find help....

He must learn the language. That was imperative.... And again his good
fortune amazed him. These people were constantly talking. His position
was ideal for studying their speech. From what he already knew, it was
quite simple; and it should not take long to learn enough to serve his
purpose.

       *       *       *       *       *

It took longer than he had expected, mainly because the people were not
there all of the time. They came only at certain periods of the day; and
he soon made a surprising discovery--that they slept during a great part
of every night. In fact, almost one third of their time seemed to be
spent in an unconscious state. The creatures in the cages slept even
more. He could see no signs of intelligence in these caged creatures.
They were dumb, and were completely dominated by the men.

He missed the sun badly. These people, in their dark houses and their
draped bodies, did not seem to need it. Often he felt quite ill, but
tried not to worry about his health.

At night, when alone, he practiced the sounds he had learned; and
rehearsed the things he was going to say when his chance came.

He passed through a sleep period; and then, on the ninth day, decided
that he was ready. To the attendant who brought his food he said:

"I talk."

The man started violently, and gaped at him.

"Talk?" he repeated blankly.

"Yes!"

The attendant looked at him uncertainly for a long time, and then walked
slowly away.

He was disappointed. But he was not kept waiting long. Soon the man
returned, accompanied by another.

"Blumberg wants to see you," they said. He did not understand that, and
shook his head. However, they lifted him from his platform, and carried
him out of the room. They took him up a long series of steps and through
dark corridors, into a small room.

Here it was cool and light. In the center was a desk, and behind it sat
the large man he had seen once before.

"Set him on the desk here," ordered the large man. "Now, little
feller--they tell me you're talking!"

"I talk."

"Well, well, well!" said the large man jovially. "What'll we talk
about?... I'm Blumberg, and I run this circus.... Who are you?"

He understood only the last words, but they were what he was waiting
for.

"I am man of Loten," he said carefully. "Loten is world more far from
heat star."

"What? Say that again!"

"I not live in your world--in this world...."

"The hell you don't."

Again he did not understand what the large man meant, and looked around
helplessly. Then he saw a writing instrument on the desk, and picked it
up. Blumberg pushed forward a piece of white paper. Quickly he drew, in
its center, a large circle with lines extending from its circumference
to indicate radiation. Outside it he drew four small circles at varying
distances from the central one.

"Hey, Edgar--come here!" called Blumberg.

A pale young man who had been sitting in a corner approached the desk,
saying, "Yes?"

He looked pleadingly at the pale young man. He placed his fingertip on
the large circle, and said, "Heat star!"

"Sun," said the young man quickly.

"Sun!" he repeated gratefully. Next he indicated the third little circle
from the center.

"This world?" he said.

"Earth," said the young man.

"Earth? This world is Earth?"

"Yes."

Blumberg grumbled: "What is this--a joke?"

He could not understand Blumberg. Eagerly he looked into the face of the
pale young man, and indicated the fourth little circle.

"Mars," said Edgar.

"Mars!" he cried jubilantly. He pointed his finger at himself. "I am man
of Mars," he said.

There was silence in the room, while they both stared at him. Then the
big man began to laugh. His body shook, and his red cheeks jumped up and
down.

"So you are a Martian--eh?"
