the sponge!"

Cragley was thinking fast. It was unlike him to give up without a fight.
But what was he to do when his weapons had been shorn of their force,
leaving him utterly helpless before the superior strength of the
brigands.

Several figures rushed from the bushes. They were panic-stricken
passengers. In alarm, despite the warning cry the captain hurled at
them, they rushed straight past the advancing figures with their
encumbering spirals. Frightened, bewildered, and hemmed in by the play
of lightning, they ran directly in the path of the electric fence. The
crackling bolts enfolded three of them before the fourth became startled
out of his madness, retreating from the flashing death.

One of the spiral clad figures turned and regarded the frightened man
for a moment. Raising his electric pistol, he fired, and the passenger
from the ill-fated _C-49_ joined his companions who had futilely rushed
the electric barrier.

A voice from the space ship of the brigands suddenly gave out an order.
The voice came from a speaker and was many times amplified.

"Crew and passengers of the _C-49_--come out in the open. Bring the
platinum with you. Keep away from the electric fence unless you wish to
die. Come out--or we shall come in and hunt you down."

The spiralled figures inside the fence had stopped at sound of the voice
and were waiting for us to comply with the order from the space ship.
More of the brigands in their electric resistors were advancing through
the lightning bolts which crackled noisily. The powerful voltage danced
and played upon the spirals, disappearing into the ground.

Cragley paused, undecided. Lines of broken resolve creased his face.
Previously, he had remained strong and stubborn in the face of
overwhelming adversity when chances were slim. There now remained not
even the slimmest of chances, and stubborn courage yielded to reason.

"I guess the game's up, Quentin." He turned to regard his under officer
in speculation.

Quentin waited for his captain's orders. Again came the voice from the
outlaw craft in its strident tones. They were tinged with a touch of
impatience.

"Show yourselves inside of one minute, or else be executed at once!
Unless----"

"Hold out!" cried a new voice from the speaker, breaking in upon the
first voice. "You have friends on----"

Then came sounds of scuffling. To our ears came imprecations and curses.

"Don't go out there!" warned the second voice in laboring gasps.
"Stay----"

With a sudden snap, the speaker was cut off. Nothing more was heard. For
a moment the lightning bolts comprising the electric fence flashed
out--then reappeared. A few seconds later they disappeared once more,
returning shortly to flicker in a peculiar manner.

It was evident that some sort of a struggle was taking place inside the
outlaw ship. The electric display crackled and sputtered louder than
ever. With a sudden, explosive thunder clap, the four terminal posts
blew to pieces.

The spiralled figures turned in alarm back toward their craft. One of
them, hovering close to our haven of retreat, did not follow his
comrades. Instead, he drew forth from a long side pocket a black object.
At first glance, it seemed shaped like a pistol. But it was much longer
and was proportioned differently.

He waited patiently until several more of the brigands had returned to
the ship. Raising the black weapon, he aimed carefully at his fellow
outlaws. The man's strange actions amazed me. He was turning upon his
own comrades. Several of the brigands fell backward off the deck of the
outlaw craft.

Cragley, beside me, was speechless in surprise at the rapid succession
of events. The outlaw's strange weapon which emitted no flash had us all
wondering. Later, we discovered that it was a radium gun, a new
instrument of destruction still in the experimental stage.

"Who is he?" voiced Cragley.

"Can't be the fellow we heard over the speaker," observed Quentin. "This
man came through the electric fence with the first ones."

"Somebody over there is pulling for us," insisted Cragley, "and the man
with the black gun must be a friend, too."

A flash darted out from the ship, hitting the spiralled figure operating
his mystifying weapon. The spiral glowed brilliantly. The man inside the
spiral remained unaffected, continuing to manipulate the knob of his
weapon. Something went wrong with it, for the outlaw who had so suddenly
turned against his friends tinkered with it a moment, then threw it from
him in disgust. Meanwhile, the brigands had massed inside the ship.

       *       *       *       *       *

With a loud crackling, the speaker's volume was thrown on again. An
alarmed voice vibrated in our ears. Above the words came a rattling and
banging--also the muffled sound of shouting men.

"Jasper! Come t' the control room! I'm locked in! They're bustin' down
the door! Bring that gun o' yours! Hurry, lad!"

Jasper looked upon his broken weapon, hesitated a moment, then picked it
up--butt foremost. Seizing it in cudgel fashion, he made for the ship.

"Come on!" roared Cragley exultantly. "Now's our chance!"

We found our numbers reduced to ten, but every one of us leaped forward
at Cragley's order, ready to stake everything on the one desperate,
fighting chance which had come so unexpectedly. We had nearly overtaken
the man we had heard addressed as Jasper when a crackling flame of
lightning leaped out at us. A hissing roar smote our ear drums and we
were temporarily dazzled by an intense light. The aim had been too high.
The electric charge had gone over our heads. The man in the control room
had frustrated the attempt to electrocute us.

Several of the brigands jumped out of the ship to meet us. They still
wore the encumbering spirals. A powerful gas of paralyzing effect was
shot into our faces. We became as immobile as statues. Jasper, too, was
overcome. Instantly, we were divested of our weapons.

The man locked in the control room of the ship had been taken. Whoever
these two men were who had championed our cause, their desperate efforts
had failed, and now we were all in the same boat. The one who had
addressed us over the speaker was led out of the ship and shoved into
our group beside his fellow traitor, Jasper. The latter's spiral was
promptly torn off.

As the outlaws passed among us, searching for concealed weapons, I felt
a cold object thrust cautiously into my hand. My heart thrilled to the
contact of a pistol. I held my hand close to my side that none might
see. The effects of the gas wore off quickly.

The chief of the brigands, his brutal face set in anger, strode up to
the pair who had turned against him during the stress of combat. His
dark eyes blazed, and he raised his clutching hands menacingly above the
two. Jasper and his friend stared back unabashed, a reckless glitter in
their eyes, ready for what might happen.

"I don't know who you are, but I've got suspicions!" snapped the outlaw.
"You'll both die horribly--the kind of death we reserve for such as
you!"

He turned upon Cragley. "Where's the platinum?" he demanded. "Is it over
there?" He pointed to the clump of bushes from which we had lately
emerged. "Or have you hidden it?"
