cavernously empty, its lights a harsh glare. It was very quiet here.

"Well, sir, I'm a middling smart chap, if I say it as shouldn't. And you
know, I'd like to express my appreciation of all you're doing for us."

"Can't say we're doing much." Jorun locked the machine.

"Oh, the apple-knockers may not like it, but really, good sir, this
hasn't been any place for a man of enterprise. It's dead. I'd have got
out long ago if there'd been any transportation. Now, when we're getting
back into civilization, there'll be some real opportunities. I'll make
my pile inside of five years, you bet."

Jorun smiled, but there was a bleakness in him. What chance would this
barbarian have even to get near the gigantic work of civilization--let
alone comprehend it or take part in it. He hoped the little fellow
wouldn't break his heart trying.

"Well," he said, "goodnight, and good luck to you."

"Goodnight, sir. We'll meet again, I trust."

Jorun switched off the lights and went out into the square. It was
completely deserted. The moon was up now, almost full, and its cold
radiance dimmed the lamps. He heard a dog howling far off. The dogs of
Earth--such as weren't taken along--would be lonely, too.

_Well_, he thought, _the job's over. Tomorrow, or the next day, the
ships come._


4

He felt very tired, but didn't want to sleep, and willed himself back to
alertness. There hadn't been much chance to inspect the ruins, and he
felt it would be appropriate to see them by moonlight.

Rising into the air, he ghosted above roofs and trees until he came to
the dead city. For a while he hovered in a sky like dark velvet, a
faint breeze murmured around him, and he heard the remote noise of
crickets and the sea. But stillness enveloped it all, there was no real
sound.

Sol City, capital of the legendary First Empire, had been enormous. It
must have sprawled over forty or fifty thousand square kilometers when
it was in its prime, when it was the gay and wicked heart of human
civilization and swollen with the lifeblood of the stars. And yet those
who built it had been men of taste, they had sought out genius to create
for them. The city was not a collection of buildings; it was a balanced
whole, radiating from the mighty peaks of the central palace, through
colonnades and parks and leaping skyways, out to the temple-like villas
of the rulers. For all its monstrous size, it had been a fairy sight, a
woven lace of polished metal and white, black, red stone, colored
plastic, music and light--everywhere light.

Bombarded from space; sacked again and again by the barbarian hordes who
swarmed maggot-like through the bones of the slain Empire; weathered,
shaken by the slow sliding of Earth's crust; pried apart by patient,
delicate roots; dug over by hundreds of generations of archaeologists,
treasure-seekers, the idly curious; made a quarry of metal and stone for
the ignorant peasants who finally huddled about it--still its empty
walls and blind windows, crumbling arches and toppled pillars held a
ghost of beauty and magnificence which was like a half-remembered dream.
A dream the whole race had once had.

_And now we're waking up._

Jorun moved silently over the ruins. Trees growing between tumbled
blocks dappled them with moonlight and shadow; the marble was very white
and fair against darkness. He hovered by a broken caryatid, marveling at
its exquisite leaping litheness; that girl had borne tons of stone like
a flower in her hair. Further on, across a street that was a lane of
woods, beyond a park that was thick with forest, lay the nearly complete
outline of a house. Only its rain-blurred walls stood, but he could
trace the separate rooms: here a noble had entertained his friends,
robes that were fluid rainbows, jewels dripping fire, swift cynical
interplay of wits like sharpened swords rising above music and the clear
sweet laughter of dancing-girls; here people whose flesh was now dust
had slept and made love and lain side-by-side in darkness to watch the
moving pageant of the city; here the slaves had lived and worked and
sometimes wept; here the children had played their ageless games under
willows, between banks of roses. Oh, it had been a hard and cruel time;
it was well gone but it had lived. It had embodied man, all that was
noble and splendid and evil and merely wistful in the race, and now its
late children had forgotten.

A cat sprang up on one of the walls and flowed noiselessly along it,
hunting. Jorun shook himself and flew toward the center of the city, the
imperial palace. An owl hooted somewhere, and a bat fluttered out of his
way like a small damned soul blackened by hellfire. He didn't raise a
wind-screen, but let the air blow around him, the air of Earth.

       *       *       *       *       *

The palace was almost completely wrecked, a mountain of heaped rocks,
bare bones of "eternal" metal gnawed thin by steady ages of wind and
rain and frost, but once it must have been gigantic. Men rarely built
that big nowadays, they didn't need to; and the whole human spirit had
changed, become ever more abstract, finding its treasures within itself.
But there had been an elemental magnificence about early man and the
works he raised to challenge the sky.

One tower still stood--a gutted shell, white under the stars, rising in
a filigree of columns and arches which seemed impossibly airy, as if it
were built of moonlight. Jorun settled on its broken upper balcony,
dizzily high above the black-and-white fantasy of the ruins. A hawk flew
shrieking from its nest, then there was silence.

No--wait--another yell, ringing down the star ways, a dark streak across
the moon's face. "Hai-ah!" Jorun recognized the joyful shout of young
Cluthe, rushing through heaven like a demon on a broomstick, and scowled
in annoyance. He didn't want to be bothered now.

Well, they had as much right here as he. He repressed the emotion, and
even managed a smile. After all, he would have liked to feel gay and
reckless at times, but he had never been able to. Jorun was little older
than Cluthe--a few centuries at most--but he came of a melancholy folk;
he had been born old.

Another form pursued the first. As they neared, Jorun recognized
Taliuvenna's supple outline. Those two had been teamed up for one of the
African districts, but--

They sensed him and came wildly out of the sky to perch on the balcony
railing and swing their legs above the heights. "How're you?" asked
Cluthe. His lean face laughed in the moonlight. "Whoo-oo, what a
flight!"

"I'm all right," said Jorun. "You through in your sector?"

"Uh-huh. So we thought we'd just duck over and look in here. Last chance
anyone'll ever have to do some sight-seeing on Earth."

Taliuvenna's full lips drooped a bit as she looked over the ruins. She
came from Yunith, one of the few planets where they still kept cities,
and was as much a child of their soaring arrogance as Jorun of his hills
and tundras and great empty seas. "I thought it would be bigger," she
said.

"Well, they were building this fifty or sixty thousand years ago," said
Cluthe. "Can't expect too much."

"There is good art left here," said Jorun. "Pieces which for one reason
