The car suddenly shifted to the outer lane. Krenner gripped a handle on
the inside and held tight. He felt the swerving motion, and suddenly the
car moved out of the tunnel into the open night air. He climbed up the
side and peered over the edge. There were five cars in the consignment;
he was on the last. Travelling almost at Road speed along the auxiliary
cutoff. Swiftly they moved along through the night, through the edge of
the Pittsburgh steel yards. Outside he fancied he could hear the rattle
of machinery in the yards, the shouts of the men at their work. Making
steel was a twenty-four hour proposition.

Then they were clear of the first set of yards. The car made another
switch, and Krenner's heart beat faster. A white sign along the side
said, "Private Property. Keep off. Markson Foundries Line." Soon now
they would come to a crunching halt. Men would be there, but his gun was
intact. No matter how many men he met, he had to get to Markson.

The car shuddered a little, but the acceleration continued. They were
rising high in the air now, above the foundries. He looked down, and
could see the mighty furnaces thrusting their slim necks to the sky.

A bolt of fear went through him. How far did the automatic system go?
Automatic loading of coal from the fields, automatic switching onto the
Rolling Roads. Automatic transfer of cars onto a private line which led
the cars to the foundries. Where did the automatic handling stop? Where
did the _men_ come into it? Twenty-seven-year-old concepts slid through
his mind, of how freight was carried, of how machines were tended, of
how steel was made. In a world of rapidly changing technology,
twenty-seven years can bring changes, in every walk of life, in every
form of production--

Even steel--

A voice from within him screamed, "Get off, Krenner, get off! This is a
one way road--" He climbed quickly to the top of the car, to find a
place to jump, and turned back, suddenly sick with fear.

The car was going too fast.

The first car had moved with its load to a high point on the elevated
road. A thundering crash came to Krenner's ears as its bottom opened to
dislodge its contents. Without stopping. Without men. Automatically.
From below he could hear a rushing, roaring sound, and the air was
suddenly warmer than before--

The next car followed the first. And the next. Krenner scrambled to the
top of the car in rising horror as the car ahead moved serenely, jerked
suddenly, and jolted loose its load with a crash of coal against steel.
Twenty tons of coal hurtled down a chute into roaring redness--

Twenty-seven years had changed things. He hadn't heard men, for there
were no men. No men to tend the fires. Glowing, white-hot furnaces,
Markson's furnaces, which were fed on a regular, unerring, merciless
consignment belt, running directly from the Roads. Efficient,
economical, completely automatic.

Krenner's car gave a jolt that threw his head against the side and shook
him down onto the coal load like a bag of potatoes. He clawed
desperately for a grip on the side, clawed and missed. The bottom of the
car opened, and the load fell through with a roar, and the roar drowned
his feeble scream as Krenner fell with the coal.

The last thing he saw below, rushing up, was the glowing, blistering,
white-hot maw of the blast furnace.





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Consignment, by Alan E. Nourse

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK CONSIGNMENT ***

***** This file should be named 41565.txt or 41565.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/4/1/5/6/41565/

Produced by Greg Weeks, Mary Meehan and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
