Every feature had been mapped--every climactic condition recorded. Life
had been named and numbered ... then photographed. And these were but
first considerations. Actually, what wasn't known about the Solar System
had not occurred as yet. But that would probably be remedied by a
machine to view the future.

There was physics, biology, anthropology, zoology, geology,
bacteriology, botany--and 'ologies' and 'otonies' and 'onomies' such as
ran into figures which only machines could calculate.

A book could indeed have been written of the accomplishments of super
race. But this is of the WAR itself, and how it came about, and how
it all ended.

Stated simply, in 2150 the point of DIMINISHING UTILITY had been
reached. To the hungry man, the first course of dinner is wonderfully
delicious, the second good, the third satisfying. Through the ages
people have hungered after luxury and leisure--but when he finds his
food, a lot of it, MAN finds suddenly that it no longer appeals to him.
In fact, too much is bound to make him sick and often disagreeable. He
looks around for something else. So did the people of the 22nd Century.
They had all of the pleasurable amusements they wanted, but it was all
so intellectual. Everything was culture. They had surfeited with it. And
suddenly they wanted to forget it. All play and no work made MAN a
discontented citizen. A reaction set in. Man was not completely
civilized as yet----THE WAR!

Twenty-one years the war raged. And scarcely a million survived. Bit by
bit this million was whittled down by the weapons of destruction to
ragged handfuls of things that once had been cultured. Finally only one
hundred humans remained alive--and they kept fighting blindly, none of
them realizing how close to oblivion they were crowding themselves and
the future of humanity--and they went on killing, killing, killing!

It is doubtless but what the entire human race would have vanished,
leaving the world to the more competent, though half-ignorant, hands of
the beasts, who fought and killed one another for self-preservation and
for food--not because of madness ... and who did not have books and talk
and have _culture_. The human race would have gone, had it not been for
the record.

The fighters of WAR'S END, leaving their machines and countries to
congregate for personal combat, were engaging in hand-to-hand attacks in
the ruins of what once had been a tall and powerful city in the
Twentieth Century, but now lay crumbling, its proud buildings falling to
the ground, sticking out iron-rusted skeletons to the sky--and the city
was LOS ANGELES!

HEDRIK HUNSON was fighting with phosphorized fists--hand inclosed in
chemically treated gloves that burned as they struck the antagonist,
insulated on the interior for the wearer--when suddenly the two of them
were caught by a spreader. The other man died instantly, but Hedrik got
it in the side and was whirled about sickeningly, and survived.

He was lying painfully on something when he came to, but felt too dizzy
and sick to move. At last, when his head had cleared a bit, he rolled
over into a sitting position and reached out his arms to grasp--a
phonograph!

Big things came in small packages in the days of 2171, and a portable
phonograph might well be taken for a weapon of some sort--which was
exactly what Hedrik thought! And you can hardly blame him, because no
one in that generation had ever seen one of the things.

There was a curious story connected with the dying of music, concerning
the days of 2050 when there was a movement to stamp out all symphonies
and songs and things even slightly sentimental.

--but back to Hedrik!

Hedrik found the crank that wound the portable, turned it, reasoning
that perhaps it gave power--and then--holding it away from him--he
waited for rays to spurt out or something to explode. Nothing happened!
Hedrik was disappointed. After an agony of perspiration and puzzlement
he finally accidentally placed the needled arm onto the disk. The disk,
he noticed, was black and filled with little undulations. The disk was
like a wheel--so Hedrik thought--it should revolve like one, shouldn't
it? He pushed the starter thoughtfully and was more than surprised when
the disk started spinning.

From the phonograph came music--music and singing! The lost Art had
returned! The Art banished under compulsion had made a comeback.

Some man was singing on the record--in a queerly interesting and
familiar tongue, the ancient English. The singer seemed sad, almost
crying. And Hedrik was thrilled as he played it over and over again,
drinking in the new experience like wine on the lips of a connoisseur.
The voice rose, fell, lingered. And Hedrik suddenly didn't feel like
fighting anymore!

The music floated out over the tumbled ruins, descended to the ears of
the other people. AND THE FIGHTING CEASED! They were transformed. They
came running to crowd about the machine.

And there in that aged music shop they stood enthralled--music filled
their souls. It was exactly what they had needed and wanted for many
years. And it had been denied them. Music was the balancing force ...
the force that would help them struggle ahead rebuilding the world. And
next time they would be saner ... they knew ... the lesson of luxury had
been learned and learned well. Never again would they leave all of the
work to the machines. Now they would work and sing and play.

It would be work ... hard work ... for some time to come. But they had
found music again, and that would anchor them to sanity.

And thus was mankind saved through a record--_SONNY BOY!_

       *       *       *       *       *

FUTURIA FANTASIA! FALL ISSUE COMING UP AS SOON AS YE EDITOR RETURNS FROM
