many bees. The leaves fed numberless grubs and worms. Under the
fallen-away dead foliage--single leaves were twenty feet across at their
largest--crickets hid and fed.

The ant-army flowed into this space, devouring every living thing it
encountered. A terrible din arose. The crickets hurtled away in erratic
leapings. They shot aimlessly in any direction. More than half of them
landed blindly in the carpeting of clicking black bodies which were the
ants from whose vanguard they had fled. Their blind flight had no effect
save to give different individuals the opportunity to seize them as they
fell and instantly begin to devour them. As they were torn to fragments,
horrible screamings reached Burl's ears.

A single such cry of agony would not have attracted Burl's attention. He
lived in a world of nightmare horror. But a chorus of creatures in
torment made him look up. This was no minor horror. Something wholesale
was in progress. He jerked his head about to see what it was.

A wild stretch of sickly yellow fungus was interspersed here and there
with a squat toadstool, or a splash of vivid color where one of the many
rusts had found a foothold. To the left a group of branched fungoids
clustered in silent mockery of a true forest. Burl saw the faded green
of the cabbages.

With the sun never shining on the huge leaves save through the
cloud-bank overhead, the cabbages were not vivid. There were even some
mouldy yeasts of a brighter green and slime much more luridly tinted.
Even so, the cabbages were the largest form of true vegetation Burl had
ever seen. The nodding white cruciform flowers stood out plainly
against the yellowish, pallid green of the leaves. But as Burl gazed at
them, the green slowly became black.

Three great grubs, in lazy contentment, were eating ceaselessly of the
cabbages on which they rested. Suddenly first one and then another began
to jerk spasmodically. Burl saw that around each of them a rim of black
had formed. Then black motes milled all over them.

The grubs became black--covered with biting, devouring ants. The
cabbages became black. The frenzied contortions of the grubs told of the
agonies they underwent as they were literally devoured alive. And then
Burl saw a black wave appear at the nearer edge of the stretch of yellow
fungus. A glistening, living flood flowed forward over the ground with a
roar of clickings and a persistent overtone of shrill stridulations.

Burl's scalp crawled. He knew what this meant. And he did not pause to
think. With a gasp of pure panic he turned and fled, all intellectual
preoccupations forgotten.

The black tide came on after him.

He flung away the edible mushroom he had carried under his arm. Somehow,
though, he clung to the sharp-toothed club as he darted between tangled
masses of fungus, ignoring now the dangers that ordinarily called for
vast caution.

Huge flies appeared. They buzzed about him loudly. Once he was struck on
the shoulder by one of them--at least as large as his hand--and his skin
torn by its swiftly vibrating wings.

He brushed it away and sped on. But the oil with which he was partly
covered had turned rancid, now, and the fetid odor attracted them. There
were half a dozen--then a dozen creatures the size of pheasants, droning
and booming as they kept pace with his wild flight.

A weight pressed onto his head. It doubled. Two of the disgusting
creatures had settled upon his oily hair to sip the stuff through their
hairy feeding-tubes. Burl shook them off with his hand and raced madly
on, his ears attuned to the sounds of the ants behind him.

That clicking roar continued, but in Burl's ears it was almost drowned
out by the noise made by the halo of flies accompanying him. Their
buzzing had deepened in pitch with the increase in size of all their
race. It was now the note close to the deepest bass tone of an organ.
Yet flies--though greatly enlarged on the forgotten planet--had not
become magnified as much as some of the other creatures. There were no
great heaps of putrid matter for them to lay their eggs in. The ants
were busy scavengers, carting away the debris of tragedies in the insect
world long before it could acquire the gamey flavor beloved of
fly-maggots. Only in isolated spots were the flies really numerous. In
such places they clustered in clouds.

Such a cloud began to form about Burl as he fled. It seemed as though a
miniature whirlwind kept pace with him--a whirlwind composed of furry,
revolting bodies and multi-faceted eyes. Fleeing, Burl had to swing his
club before him to clear the way. Almost every stroke was interrupted by
an impact against some thinly-armored body which collapsed with the
spurting of reddish liquid.

Then an anguish as of red-hot iron struck upon Burl's back. One of the
stinging flies had thrust its sharp-tipped proboscis into his flesh to
suck the blood. Burl uttered a cry and ran full-tilt into the stalk of a
blackened, draggled toadstool.

There was a curious crackling as of wet punk. The toadstool collapsed
upon itself with a strange splashing sound. A great many creatures had
laid their eggs in it, until now it was a seething mass of corruption
and ill-smelling liquid.

When the toadstool crashed to the ground, it crumbled into a dozen
pieces, spattering the earth for yards all about with stinking stuff in
which tiny, headless maggots writhed convulsively.

The deep-toned buzzing of the flies took on a note of solemn
satisfaction. They settled down upon this feast. Burl staggered to his
feet and darted off again. Now he was nothing but a minor attraction to
the flies, only three or four bothering to come after him. The others
settled by the edges of the splashing fluid, quickly absorbed in an
ecstasy of feasting. The few still hovering about his head, Burl
killed,--but he did not have to smash them all. The remaining few
descended to feast on their fallen comrades twitching feebly at his
feet.

He ran on and passed beneath the wide-spreading leaves of an isolated
giant cabbage. A great grasshopper crouched on the ground, its
tremendous radially-opening jaws crunching the rank vegetation. Half a
dozen great worms ate steadily of the leaves that supported them. One
had swung itself beneath an overhanging leaf--which would have thatched
houses for men--and was placidly anchoring itself for the spinning of a
cocoon in which to sleep the sleep of metamorphosis.

A mile away, the great black tide of army ants advanced relentlessly.
The great cabbage, the huge grasshopper, and all the stupid caterpillars
on the leaves would presently be covered with small, black demons. The
cocoon would never be spun. The caterpillars would be torn into
thousands of furry fragments and devoured. The grasshopper would strike
out with his terrific, unguided strength, crushing its assailants with
blows of its great hind-legs and powerful jaws. But it would die, making
terrible sounds of torments as the ants consumed it piecemeal.

The sound of the ants' advance overwhelmed all other noises now. Burl
ran madly, his breath coming in great gasps, his eyes wide with panic.
Alone of the world about him, he knew the danger that followed him. The
insects he passed went about their business with that terrifying,
abstracted efficiency found only in the insect world.

Burl's heart pounded madly from his running. The breath whistled in his
nostrils--and behind him the flood of army ants kept pace. They came
upon the feasting flies. Some took to the air and escaped. Others were
too absorbed in their delicious meal. The twitching maggots, stranded by
the scattering of their soupy broth, were torn to shreds and eaten. The
flies who were seized vanished into tiny maws. And the serried ranks of
ants moved on.

Burl could hear nothing else, now, but the clickings of their limbs and
the stridulating challenges and cross-challenges they uttered. Now and
then another sound pierced the noises made by the ants themselves: a
cricket, perhaps, seized and dying, uttering deep-bass cries of agony.

Before the horde there was a busy world which teemed with life.
Butterflies floated overhead on lazy wings; grubs waxed fat and huge;
crickets feasted; great spiders sat quietly in their lairs, waiting with
implacable patience for prey to fall into the trap-doors and snares;
great beetles lumbered through the mushroom forests, seeking food and
making love in monstrous, tragic fashion.

Behind the wide front of the army ants was--chaos. Emptiness.
Desolation. All life save that of the army ants was exterminated, though
some bewildered flying creatures still fluttered helplessly over the
silent landscape. Yet even behind the army ants little bands of
stragglers from the horde marched busily here and there, seeking some
trace of life that had been overlooked by the main body.

Burl put forth his last ounce of strength. His limbs trembled. His
breathing was agony. Sweat stood out upon his forehead. He ran for his
life with the desperation of one who knows that death is at his heels.
He ran as if his continued existence among the million tragedies of the
single day were the purpose for which the universe had been created.

There was redness in the west and in the cloud-bank overhead. To the
east gray sky became a deeper gray--much deeper. It was not yet time for
the creatures of the day to seek their hiding-places, nor for the
night-insects to come forth. But in many secret spots there were vague
and sleepy stirrings.

Heedless of the approaching darkness Burl sped over an open space a
hundred yards across. A thicket of beautifully golden mushrooms barred
his way. Danger lay there. He dogged aside and saw in the gray dusk a
glistening sheet of white, barely a yard above the ground. It was the
web of the morning-spider which, on Earth, was noted only in hedges and
such places when the dew of earliest dawn exposed it as a patternless
plate of diamond-dust. There were anchor-cables, of course, but no
geometry. Tidy housewives--also on Earth--used to mop it out of corners
as a filmy fabric of irritating gossamer. On the forgotten planet it was
a net with strength and bird-lime qualities that increased day by day,
as its spinner moved restlessly over the surface, always trailing sticky
cord behind itself.

Burl had no choice but to avoid it, even though he lost ground to the
ant-horde roaring behind him. And night was definitely on the way. It
was inconceivable that a human should travel in the lowlands after dark.
It literally could not be done over the normal nightmare terrain. Burl
had not only to escape the army ants, but find a hiding-place quickly if
he was to see tomorrow's light. But he could not think so far ahead,
just now.

He blundered through a screen of puffballs that shot dusty powder toward
the sky. Ahead, a range of strangely colored hills came into
view--purple, green, black and gold--melting into each other and
branching off, inextricably mingled. They rose to a height of perhaps
sixty or seventy feet. A curious grayish haze had gathered above them.
It seemed to be a layer of thin vapor, not like mist or fog, clinging to
certain parts of the hills, rising slowly to coil and gather into an
indefinitely thicker mass above the ridges.

The hills themselves were not geological features, but masses of fungus
that had grown and cannibalized, piling up upon themselves to the
thickness of carboniferous vegetation. Over the face of the hills grew
every imaginable variety of yeast and mould and rust. They grew within
and upon themselves, forming freakish conglomerations that piled up into
a range of hills, stretching across the lunatic landscape for miles.

Burl blundered up the nearest slope. Sometimes the surface was a hard
rind that held him up. Sometimes his feet sank--perhaps inches, perhaps
to mid-leg. He scrambled frantically. Panting, gasping, staggering from
the exhaustion of moving across the fungus quicksand, he made his way to
the top of the first hill, plunged down into a little valley on the
farther side, and up another slope. He left a clear trail behind him of
disturbed and scurrying creatures that had inevitably found a home in
the mass of living stuff. Small sinuous centipedes scuttled here and
there, roused by his passage. At the bottom of his footprints writhed
fat white worms. Beetles popped into view and vanished again....

A half mile across the range and Burl could go no farther. He stumbled
and fell and lay there, gasping hoarsely. Overhead the gray sky had
become a deep-red which was rapidly melting into that redness too deep
to be seen except as black. But there was still some light from the
west.

Burl sobbed for breath in a little hollow, his sharp-toothed club still
clasped in his hands. Something huge, with wings like sails, soared in
silhouette against the sunset. Burl lay motionless, breathing in great
gasps, his limbs refusing to lift him.

The sound of the army ants continued. At last, above the crest of the
last hillock he had surmounted, two tiny glistening antennae appeared,
then the small, deadly shape of an army ant. The forerunner of its
horde, it moved deliberately forward, waving its antennae ceaselessly.
It made its way toward Burl, tiny clickings coming from its limbs.

A little wisp of vapor swirled toward the ant. It was the vapor that had
gathered over the whole range of hills as a thin, low cloud. It
enveloped the ant which seemed to be thrown into a strange convulsion,
throwing itself about, legs moving aimlessly. If it had been an animal
instead of an insect, it would have choked and gasped. But ants breathe
through air-holes in their abdomens. It writhed helplessly on the spongy
stuff across which it had been moving.

Burl was conscious of a strange sensation. His body felt remarkably
warm. It felt hot. It was an unparalleled sensation, because Burl had no
experience of fire or the heat of the sun. The only warmth he had ever
known was when huddling together with his tribesmen in some hiding-place
to avoid the damp chill of the night.

Then, the heat of their breath and flesh helped to combat discomfort.
But this was a fiercer heat. It was intolerable. Burl moved his body
with a tremendous effort and for a moment the fungus soil was cool
beneath him. Then the sensation of hotness began again and increased
until Burl's skin was reddened and inflamed.

The tenuous vapor, too, seemed to swirl his way. It made his lungs smart
and his eyes water. He still breathed in painful gasps, but even that
short period of rest had done him some good. But it was the heat that
drove him to his feet again. He crawled painfully to the crest of the
next hill. He looked back.

This was the highest hill he had come upon and he could see most of the
purple range in the deep, deep dusk. Now he was more than halfway
through the hills. He had barely a quarter-mile to go, northward. But
east and west the range of purple hills was a ceaseless, undulating mass
of lifts and hollows, of ridges and spurs of all imaginable colorings.

And at the tips of most of them were wisps of curling gray.

From his position he could see a long stretch of the hills not hidden by
the surrounding darkness. Back along the way he had come, the army ants
now swept up into the range of hills. Scouts and advance-guard parties
scurried here and there. They stopped to devour the creatures inhabiting
the surface layers. But the main body moved on inexorably.

The hills, though, were alive, not upheavals of the ground but festering
heaps of insanely growing fungus, hollowed out in many places by
tunnels, hiding-places, and lurking-places. These the ants invaded. They
swept on, devouring everything....

Burl leaned heavily upon his club and watched dully. He could run no
more. The army ants were spreading everywhere. They would reach him
soon.

Far to the right, the vapor thickened. A thin column of smoke arose in
the dim half-light. Burl did not know smoke, of course. He could not
conceivably guess that deep down in the interior of the insanely growing
hills, pressure had killed and oxidation had carbonized the once-living
material. By oxidation the temperature down below had been raised. In
the damp darkness of the bowels of the hills spontaneous combustion had
begun.

The great mounds of tinderlike mushroom had begun to burn very slowly,
quite unseen. There had been no flames because the hills' surface
remained intact and there was no air to feed the burning. But when the
army ants dug ferociously for fugitive small things, air was admitted to
tunnels abandoned because of heat.

Then slow combustion speeded up. Smoulderings became flames. Sparks
became coals. A dozen columns of fume-laden smoke rose into the heavens
and gathered into a dense pall above the range of purple hills. And Burl
apathetically watched the serried ranks of army ants march on toward the
widening furnaces that awaited them.

They had recoiled from the river instinctively. But their ancestors had
never known fire. In the Amazon basin, on Earth, there had never been
forest fires. On the forgotten planet there had never been fires at all,
unless the first forgotten colonists tried to make them. In any case the
army ants had no instinctive terror of flame. They marched into the
blazing openings that appeared in the hills. They snapped with their
mandibles at the leaping flames, and sprang to grapple with the burning
coals.

The blazing areas widened as the purple surface was consumed. Burl
watched without comprehension--even without thankfulness. He stood
breathing more and more easily until the glow from approaching flames
reddened his skin and the acrid smoke made tears flow from his eyes.
Then he retreated slowly, leaning on his club and often looking back.

Night had fallen, but yet it was light to the army ants. They marched
