devils on this island are as cruel as these sea-wolves.'

And tearing himself from her reluctant grasp, he swung quickly down the
cliffs.

Looking fearfully from her eyrie, Olivia saw the band had neared the
foot of the cliffs. Even as she looked, Conan stepped out from among the
boulders and faced them, sword in hand. They gave back with yells of
menace and surprize; then halted uncertainly to glare at this figure
which had appeared so suddenly from the rocks. There were some seventy
of them, a wild horde made up of men from many nations: Kothians,
Zamorians, Brythunians, Corinthians, Shemites. Their features reflected
the wildness of their natures. Many bore the scars of the lash or the
branding-iron. There were cropped ears, slit noses, gaping eye-sockets,
stumps of wrists--marks of the hangman as well as scars of battle. Most
of them were half naked, but the garments they wore were fine;
gold-braided jackets, satin girdles, silken breeches, tattered, stained
with tar and blood, vied with pieces of silver-chased armor. Jewels
glittered in nose-rings and ear-rings, and in the hilts of their
daggers.

Over against this bizarre mob stood the tall Cimmerian in strong
contrast with his hard bronzed limbs and clean-cut vital features.

'Who are you?' they roared.

'Conan the Cimmerian!' His voice was like the deep challenge of a lion.
'One of the Free Companions. I mean to try my luck with the Red
Brotherhood. Who's your chief?'

'I, by Ishtar!' bellowed a bull-like voice, as a huge figure swaggered
forward: a giant, naked to the waist, where his capacious belly was
girdled by a wide sash that upheld voluminous silken pantaloons. His
head was shaven except for a scalp-lock, his mustaches dropped over a
rat-trap mouth. Green Shemitish slippers with upturned toes were on his
feet, a long straight sword in his hand.

Conan stared and glared.

'Sergius of Khrosha, by Crom!'

'Aye, by Ishtar!' boomed the giant, his small black eyes glittering with
hate. 'Did you think I had forgot? Ha! Sergius never forgets an enemy.
Now I'll hang you up by the heels and skin you alive. At him, lads!'

'Aye, send your dogs at me, big-belly,' sneered Conan with bitter scorn.
'You were always a coward, you Kothic cur.'

'Coward! To me?' The broad face turned black with passion. 'On guard,
you northern dog! I'll cut out your heart!'

In an instant the pirates had formed a circle about the rivals, their
eyes blazing, their breath sucking between their teeth in bloodthirsty
enjoyment. High up among the crags Olivia watched, sinking her nails
into her palms in her painful excitement.

Without formality the combatants engaged, Sergius coming in with a rush,
quick on his feet as a giant cat, for all his bulk. Curses hissed
between his clenched teeth as he lustily swung and parried. Conan fought
in silence, his eyes slits of blue bale-fire.

The Kothian ceased his oaths to save his breath. The only sounds were
the quick scuff of feet on the sward, the panting of the pirate, the
ring and clash of steel. The swords flashed like white fire in the early
sun, wheeling and circling. They seemed to recoil from each other's
contact, then leap together again instantly. Sergius was giving back;
only his superlative skill had saved him thus far from the blinding
speed of the Cimmerian's onslaught. A louder clash of steel, a sliding
rasp, a choking cry--from the pirate horde a fierce yell split the
morning as Conan's sword plunged through their captain's massive body.
The point quivered an instant from between Sergius's shoulders, a hand's
breadth of white fire in the sunlight; then the Cimmerian wrenched back
his steel and the pirate chief fell heavily, face down, and lay in a
widening pool of blood, his broad hands twitching for an instant.

Conan wheeled toward the gaping corsairs.

'Well, you dogs!' he roared. 'I've sent your chief to hell. What says
the law of the Red Brotherhood?'

Before any could answer, a rat-faced Brythunian, standing behind his
fellows, whirled a sling swiftly and deadly. Straight as an arrow sped
the stone to its mark, and Conan reeled and fell as a tall tree falls to
the woodsman's ax. Up on the cliff Olivia caught at the boulders for
support. The scene swam dizzily before her eyes; all she could see was
the Cimmerian lying limply on the sward, blood oozing from his head.

The rat-faced one yelped in triumph and ran to stab the prostrate man,
but a lean Corinthian thrust him back.

'What, Aratus, would you break the law of the Brotherhood, you dog?'

'No law is broken,' snarled the Brythunian.

'No law? Why, you dog, this man you have just struck down is by just
rights our captain!'

'Nay!' shouted Aratus. 'He was not of our band, but an outsider. He had
not been admitted to fellowship. Slaying Sergius does not make him
captain, as would have been the case had one of us killed him.'

'But he wished to join us,' retorted the Corinthian. 'He said so.'

At that a great clamor arose, some siding with Aratus, some with the
Corinthian, whom they called Ivanos. Oaths flew thick, challenges were
passed, hands fumbled at sword-hilts.

At last a Shemite spoke up above the clamor: 'Why do you argue over a
dead man?'

'He's not dead,' answered the Corinthian, rising from beside the
prostrate Cimmerian. 'It was a glancing blow; he's only stunned.'

At that the clamor rose anew, Aratus trying to get at the senseless man
and Ivanos finally bestriding him, sword in hand, and defying all and
sundry. Olivia sensed that it was not so much in defense of Conan that
the Corinthian took his stand, but in opposition to Aratus. Evidently
these men had been Sergius's lieutenants, and there was no love lost
between them. After more arguments, it was decided to bind Conan and
take him along with them, his fate to be voted on later.

The Cimmerian, who was beginning to regain consciousness, was bound with
leather girdles, and then four pirates lifted him, and with many
complaints and curses, carried him along with the band, which took up
its journey across the plateau once more. The body of Sergius was left
where it had fallen; a sprawling, unlovely shape on the sun-washed
sward.

Up among the rocks, Olivia lay stunned by the disaster. She was
incapable of speech or action, and could only lie there and stare with
horrified eyes as the brutal horde dragged her protector away.

How long she lay there, she did not know. Across the plateau she saw the
pirates reach the ruins and enter, dragging their captive. She saw them
swarming in and out of the doors and crevices, prodding into the heaps
of debris, and clambering about the walls. After awhile a score of them
came back across the plateau and vanished among the trees on the western
rim, dragging the body of Sergius after them, presumably to cast into
the sea. About the ruins the others were cutting down trees and securing
material for a fire. Olivia heard their shouts, unintelligible in the
distance, and she heard the voices of those who had gone into the woods,
echoing among the trees. Presently they came back into sight, bearing
casks of liquor and leathern sacks of food. They headed for the ruins,
cursing lustily under their burdens.

Of all this Olivia was but mechanically cognizant. Her overwrought brain
was almost ready to collapse. Left alone and unprotected, she realized
how much the protection of the Cimmerian had meant to her. There
intruded vaguely a wonderment at the mad pranks of Fate, that could make
the daughter of a king the companion of a red-handed barbarian. With it
came a revulsion toward her own kind. Her father, and Shah Amurath, they
were civilized men. And from them she had had only suffering. She had
never encountered any civilized man who treated her with kindness unless
there was an ulterior motive behind his actions. Conan had shielded her,
protected her, and--so far--demanded nothing in return. Laying her head
in her rounded arms she wept, until distant shouts of ribald revelry
roused her to her own danger.

She glanced from the dark ruins about which the fantastic figures, small
in the distance, weaved and staggered, to the dusky depths of the green
forest. Even if her terrors in the ruins the night before had been only
dreams, the menace that lurked in those green leafy depths below was no
figment of nightmare. Were Conan slain or carried away captive, her only
choice would lie between giving herself up to the human wolves of the
sea, or remaining alone on that devil-haunted island.

As the full horror of her situation swept over her, she fell forward in
a swoon.




3


The sun was hanging low when Olivia regained her senses. A faint wind
wafted to her ears distant shouts and snatches of ribald song. Rising
cautiously, she looked out across the plateau. She saw the pirates
clustered about a great fire outside the ruins, and her heart leaped as
a group emerged from the interior dragging some object she knew was
Conan. They propped him against the wall, still evidently bound fast,
and there ensued a long discussion, with much brandishing of weapons. At
last they dragged him back into the hall, and took up anew the business
