_Sentry_ learned today. Such recognition, if obtained, would be followed
immediately by a demand for "foreign aid."

"'It is the thesis of the self-proclaimed king--known until 24 hours ago
as just plain Hector--that the satellite status of Superior, the
traveling townoid, makes it a potentially effective arm of U. S.
diplomacy. King Hector will point out to the State Department the
benefits of bolstering Superior's economy, especially during its
expected foray over Europe and, barring such misfortune as being shot
down en route, into the Soviet domain.

"'The King will not suggest in so many words that Superior would make a
good spy platform, but the implication is there. It will also be implied
that unless economic aid--which in plain English means food and fuel to
keep Superior from starving and freezing to death--is forthcoming from
the United States, Superior may choose the path of neutrality ...'

"That's as far as I've got," Clark said.

"I suppose the 'path of neutrality' means Superior might consider hiring
itself out to the highest bidder?" Don asked.

"That would be one way of putting it," Clark said. "Undiplomatic but
accurate."

"How does Civek intend to get his message to Washington?" asked Don,
aware that it had already been transmitted to the Pentagon via the
transceiver under his collar. "Bottle over the side?"

"My sources tell me they've got WCAV working on short wave. That right,
Alis?"

"Don't ask me. I only live there."

"Do you still think Civek is fronting for the Cavalier crowd?" Don asked
her.

"I don't remember saying that," she said. "I think I agreed with you
when you said Civek was ineffectual. Who do _you_ think is behind him?
Do you think he's king of the kangaroos?"

"Well," Don said, "they're the ones who took him away last night. And
when he came back this morning he had all the trappings. He didn't get
that coach-and-six from foreign aid."

Ed Clark said, "This is all very fascinating, kids, but it's not helping
me get out my extra. Don, why don't you take the little lady out to
lunch? You can continue your theorizing over the blueplate special at
the Riverside Inn. Only place in town still open, they tell me."

       *       *       *       *       *

Doc Bendy was hurrying out of the Riverside Inn as they reached it. He
waved to them. "Save your money. His Gracious Majesty is throwing a free
lunch for everybody."

"Where?"

"At the palace, of course."

"What palace?" Alis asked.

"The bubble gum factory. He's taken it over."

"Why the gum factory?"

"Cheeky McFerson offered it to him. Not the factory itself but the big
old house near the west wing. The mansion that's been closed up since
the old man died. They say Cheeky's been given a title as part of the
bargain."

"Sir Cheeky?" Alis asked, giggling.

"Something like that. Lord Chicle, maybe, or Baron de Mouthful. Come on.
It should be quite a show."

Dozens of people were in the streets, all heading in the same direction.
Word of the king's largess spread fast and, on the factory grounds,
guards were directing the crowd to a line that disappeared into a side
door of the old McFerson mansion.

A flag flew from the top of a pole at the front of the house. It was
whipping in a stiff breeze and Don couldn't make out the device, except
that a crown formed part of it.

One of the guards recognized Alis Garet and directed her to the front
door. She took Doc Bendy and Don by their arms. "Come on," she said.
"We're VIP's. Father must have sworn allegiance."

The chief of police was sitting behind a desk in the wide front hall but
he now wore a military tunic with a chestful of decorations (including
the Good Conduct Medal, Sergeant Cort noticed), and the visor of his
military cap was overrun with gold curlicues.

"Well, Vince," Bendy said. "I see you got in on the ground floor."

"General Sir Vincent Grande, Minister of Defense," Grande said with a
stiff little bow, "at your service."

"Enchanted," Bendy said, bowing back. "Tell me, Vince, how do you keep a
straight face?"

"I'll overlook that, Bendy, and I'll give you a friendly tip. The
country is on a sound basis now and we intend to keep it that way.
Obstructionists will be dealt with."

"The country, eh? Well, let's go in and see how it's being run."

A clattery hubbub came from the big room on the right. To Don it sounded
like any GI mess hall. It also looked like one. The line of people
coming in through the side door helped themselves to tin trays and
silverware, then moved slowly past a row of huge pots from which
white-coated men and women ladled out food. At the end of the serving
line stood Cheeky McFerson, splendid in purple velvet. He was putting a
piece of bubble gum on each tray.

On the other side of the room, opposite the servers, King Hector sat on
a raised chair, crown on head, scepter in hand, nodding benevolently to
anyone who looked at him. On each side of the king, sitting in lower
chairs, were members of what must have been his court. Professor Osbert
Garet was one of them, and Maynard Rubach, president of the Cavalier
Institute of Applied Sciences, was another.

"Oh, dear, there's Father," Alis said in dismay. "What is that silly hat
he's wearing? It makes him look like Merlin."

"But Civek doesn't look a bit like King Arthur," Bendy said. "Let's go
pay our respects. Straight faces, now."

"Ah, my dear," the king said when he saw Alis. "And gentlemen. Welcome
to our court. May we introduce two of our associates? Sir Osbert Garet,
Royal Astronaut, and Lord Rubach, Minister of Education."

"Father!" Alis spoke sharply to the Royal Astronaut. "How silly can you
get?"

"Now, now, child," the king said reprovingly. "You must not risk our
displeasure. For the time being our rule must be absolute--until the
safety of our kingdom has been assured. Sir Osbert," he said, "we trust
that at a more propitious time you will have a serious talk with your
charming but impetuous daughter."

"My liege, I shall deal with her," the Royal Astronaut said, glowering
at Alis. "As Your Majesty has so wisely observed, she is but a slip of a
girl."

Her father's apparent sincerity left Alis speechless. She looked from
Bendy to Don, but they seemed to consider discretion and masklike faces
the better part of candor.

"Well spoken, Sir Osbert," the king said. He clapped his hands and a
servant jumped. "Dinner for these three. Find a table, my friends, and
you will be served."

Don firmly guided Alis away. She had seemed about to explode. They found
an empty table out of earshot of the king, and three footmen looking
like refugees from _Alice in Wonderland_ immediately began to serve
them.

Bendy spread a napkin over his lap. "Let's curb our snickers and fill
our stomachs," he said, "and later we can go out behind the barn and
laugh our heads off. Meanwhile, keep your eyes open."

They were eating meat loaf and potatoes. The meat loaf was so highly
spiced that it could have been almost anything.

"I wonder where His Worship got all the grub," Alis said.

"I don't know," Don said, "but it certainly doesn't look as if he needs
any foreign aid."

Alis put down her fork suddenly and her eyes got big. She said, "You
don't suppose--"

"Suppose what?" Bendy said, spearing a small potato.

"I just had a horrible thought." She laughed feebly. "It's ridiculous,
of course, but I wondered if by any chance we were eating Joe Negus."

"Don't be silly," Don said, but he put down his fork too.

"Of course it's ridiculous," Bendy said. "Hector only put Negus to
sleep. He didn't kill him. Besides, Joe Negus wouldn't stretch far
enough to feed this crowd."

"Is that why you're not eating any more?" Alis asked him.

"Why, no," Bendy said. "It's merely that I've had enough. It's true that
Hector could have used his scepter on other transgressors, but--no, I
refuse to admit that he's turned cannibal."

"_He_ isn't eating," Don pointed out.

"I'll guarantee you he has, though. I've never known Hector to miss a
meal. No. Hector may be a fool and a dupe, and power-hungry to boot, but
he's not a cruel man, or a deranged one."

"No?" Alis said. "I dare you to ask him what's in the meat loaf."

"All right." Bendy got up. "I'll ask to see the kitchen--to compliment
the chef. Want to come?"

"No, thanks. I might be mean to Father again."

She and Don watched Doc Bendy go to the improvised throne and talk to
Civek. The king laughed and stood up and he and Bendy crossed the room.
They went through a door behind the line of servers.

Don pushed his plate away. "You've certainly spoiled my appetite."

"I'm sorry," Alis said. "Maybe it's hereditary. Look at Father in that
idiot hat. Sir Osbert! Honestly, Don, if we ever get back to Earth I'm
going to get out of Superior as fast as I can. What's it like in
Washington?"

"Dull," he said. "Humid in the summer. And when you've exhausted the
national monuments there's nothing to do."

"Nothing? Don't tell me you don't have a girl friend back there. No,
_don't_ tell me--I don't want to know. Oh, Don, what a terribly boring
place this must be for you."

"Boring!" he said. "I've never had such a wild, crazy time in my life.
Furthermore," he said, "there's nobody like you back in Washington."

She beamed. "I'd kiss you right here, only Doc Bendy's coming back.
Heck, I'll kiss you anyway."

She did.

"Ahem," said Bendy. "Also cough-cough. If you two can spare the time,
there's someone I'd like you to meet."

"We're through, for now," Alis said. "Who?"

"One of our hosts. The power behind the shaky throne of Hector the
First. I think you'll like him. He has a magnificent tail."

       *       *       *       *       *

"Hector was very co-operative," Doc Bendy said. "I guess he figured he
couldn't keep it a secret for long anyhow, so he decided to be frank.
After all, half the town saw them take him away."

"You mean Civek admits he's only a figurehead?" Don asked.

"Oh, he wouldn't admit that. His story is that it's a working
arrangement--a treaty of sorts. He's absolute monarch as far as the
human inhabitants are concerned, but the kangaroos control Superior as a
piece of geography."

"I knew Father couldn't have done it," Alis murmured.

They went down a flight of stairs off the main hall to a basement room.
It was luxuriously furnished, as every room in the mansion must have
been. There was a rug over inlaid linoleum and a blazing fireplace. A
huge round mahogany table stood in the center of the room.

Hector Civek sat in one of the half-dozen leather armchairs drawn up to
the table. In another sat a furry, genial-looking blue-gray kangaroo.

Only it wasn't really a kangaroo, Don realized. It was more human than
animal in several ways. Its bearing, for instance, had dignity, and its
round eyes had intelligence. A thick tail at least three feet long stuck
through a space under the backrest of the armchair. As Doc Bendy had
said, the tail was magnificent.

Civek nodded and smiled, apparently willing to forget his flare-up at
Alis. "I'll introduce you," Civek said. "I mean _we'll_ introduce you.
Oh, the hell with the royal 'we,' as long I'm among friends. This is
Gizl, and what I'm trying to say is that he doesn't speak English.
Doesn't talk at all, as far as I can tell. But he understands the
language and he can read and write it. That's why all this."

He indicated the letter and number squares on the table. They were from
sets of games--Scrabble, Anagrams, I-Qubes, Lotto and poker dice.

"My granddaughter met Gizl, you'll recall," Doc Bendy said. "Either this
one or one like him. We don't know yet whether Gizl is a personal name
or a generic one."

"Let's find out," Don said. He sat down at the table and began to form
squares into a question.

"Wait a minute." Doc Bendy broke up Don's sequence. "The amenities
first. Spell out 'Greetings,' or some such things. Manners, boy."

"Sorry." Don started over. He spelled GREETINGS, then ALIS GARET, then
DON CORT, and pointed from the squares to Alis and himself. "I assume
you've already introduced yourself?" he asked Bendy.

Bendy nodded and the kangaroo-like creature inclined his furry head in
acknowledgment to Alis and Don. Then he--Don had already stopped
thinking of the creature as an "it"--formed two words with his tapering,
black-nailed fingers.

PLEASANT, he communicated. "GIZL." And he tapped his chest.

Don turned to Bendy. "Now can I ask him?"

"With His Majesty's permission," Bendy said solemnly.

Hector nodded. Don left the three names intact, distributing the rest,
then put three squares together to spell _Man_. He pointed to the word
and then to Civek, Bendy, Alis and himself, excluding the creature.

"Well, I like that!" Alis said. "Do I look like a man?"

"Let's keep it simple, woman," Don said.

The creature nodded and pointed again to GIZL, then to himself, "He
doesn't understand," Don said.

"It's quite possible his people don't have individual names," Bendy
said. "Let's call him Gizl for now and go on."

"Okay." Don thought for a moment, then formed a question. "Might as well
get basic," he said.

Q. ARE YOU FROM EARTH.

A. NO.

At the risk of irritating the others, Don repeated the questions and
answers aloud for the benefit of his eavesdropper in the Pentagon.

Q. ARE YOU FROM SOLAR SYSTEM

A. NOT YOURS

Q. WHEN DID YOU REACH EARTH

A. 1948 YOUR CALENDAR

Q. WHY

A. FRIENDSHIP

Q. WHY HAS NO ONE SEEN YOU SOONER

A. FEAR

Q. YOU MEAN YOU FRIGHTENED OUR PEOPLE

A. NO I MEAN FEAR OF YOUR PEOPLE

Q. WHY

A. GIZL RESEMBLE EARTH ANIMALS

Q. WAS SUPERIOR THE FIRST PLACE YOU LANDED

A. NO

Q. WHERE WAS IT

A. AUSTRALIA

"The home of the kangaroo," Doc Bendy said. "No wonder they had a bad
time. I can imagine some stockman in the outback taking umbrage at a
kangaroo asserting its equality. Let me talk to him a while, Don."

Q. HOW MANY ARE THERE OF YOU

A. MANY

Q. HOW MANY

A. NO SPECIFIC COMMENT

Q. ARE YOU RESPONSIBLE FOR RAISING SUPERIOR

A. ENTIRELY

Q. HOW

A. IMPOSSIBLE TO EXPLAIN WITH THESE

Q. WHERE IS SUPERIOR GOING

A. EAST FOR NOW

Q. AND LATER

A. NO SPECIFIC COMMENT

Q. 3000 LIVES ARE IN YOUR HANDS

A. GIZLS HAVE NO MALEVOLENT DESIGNS

Q. THANKS. YOU SAID FRIENDSHIP BROUGHT YOU. WHAT ELSE.

A. TRADE. CULTURAL EXCHANGE

Q. WHAT HAVE YOU TO TRADE

A. WILL DISCUSS THIS LATER WITH DULY CONSTITUTED AUTHORITY

Q. WHO. KING HECTOR

A. TERMINATING INTERVIEW WITH GOOD WILL ASSURANCES

"Wait," Alis said. "I haven't had a chance to talk to him." She formed
letters into words. "I don't think he's being very frank with us but I
have a few random questions."

Q. HOW MANY SEXES HAVE GIZLS

A. THREE

Q. MALE FEMALE AND

A. NEUTER

Q. ARE THERE BABIES AMONG YOU

A. BABIES ARE NEUTER AND DEVELOP ACCORDING TO NEED

Q. CONFIDENTIALLY WHAT DO YOU THINK OF FATHERS SCIENCE

A. UNFATHOMABLE OUR MEAGER KNOWLEDGE

Q. FLATTERER

A. ENDING CONVERSATION WITH PLEASANT REGARD

Q. LIKEWISE

Gizl slid back his chair and got up. King Hector stood and bowed as
Gizl, who had nodded politely to each in turn, walked manlike, without
hopping, to a corner of the room which then sank out of sight.

"He's quite a guy, that Gizl," Hector said, taking off his crown and
putting it on the table. "Makes me sweat," he said, wiping his forehead.

"Are you the duly constituted authority?" Bendy asked him.

"Who else? Somebody's got to be in charge till we get Superior back to
Earth."

"Sure," Bendy said, "but you don't have to rig yourself up in ermine. I
also have a sneaking suspicion that you aren't exactly anxious to get
Superior down in a hurry."

"I'll overlook that remark for old time's sake. But I defend the
kingship. A show of force was necessary to prevent crime from running
rampant."

"Maybe," Bendy said. "Anyhow I appreciate your frankness in introducing
us to Gizl and what he modestly describes as his meager knowledge. Since
you've already admitted that he's the one who provided the big feed,
will you ease Alis's mind now and assure her that what she was eating
wasn't Negusburger?"

"Negusburger?" The king laughed. "Is that what you thought, Alis?"

"Not really," she said. "But I couldn't help wondering where all the
food came from all of a sudden."

"Over here." The king led them to the corner where Gizl had sunk from
sight. The top of the elevator, now level with the floor, blended
exactly with the linoleum tile. "I don't know how it works, but Gizl
and his people have their headquarters down there somewhere. All I have
to do is place the order and up comes food or whatever I need. Would you
like to try it?"

"Love to," Bendy said. "What shall I ask for?"

"Anything."

"Anything?"

"Anything at all."

"Well." Bendy looked impressed. "This will take a moment of thought. How
about a gallon--no, as long as I'm asking I might as well ask for a
keg--of rum, 151 proof."

Up it came, complete with spigot and tankard.

"Fabulous!" Bendy said. He rolled it out of the elevator and the
elevator went down again.

"Let me try!" Alis said. "If Doc can get a keg, I ought to be able to
have--oh, say a pint of Channel No. 5. Would that be too extravagant?"

"A simple variation in formula, I should think," the king said.

What came up for Alis didn't look in the least like an expensive Paris
perfume. In fact, it looked like a lard pail with a quantity of liquid
sloshing lazily in it. But its aroma belied its looks.

"Oh, heaven!" Alis said. "Smell it!" She lifted it by its handle, stuck
a finger in it and rubbed behind each ear.

"It's a bit overpowering by the pint," Bendy said. He'd drained off part
of a tankard of rum and looked quite at peace with the world. "You'd
better get yourself a chaperone, Alis, if you're going to carry that
around with you."

"I'll admit they're not very good in the packaging department, but
that's just a quibble. Could I have--how many ounces in a pint?--sixteen
one-ounce stoppered bottles? And a little funnel?"

"Easiest thing in the world," the king said. "Don? Anything you'd like
at the same time? Save it a trip."

"I've got an idea, Your Majesty, but I don't know whether you'd
approve. Even though I work in a bank, I've never seen a ten thousand
dollar bill. Do you think they could whip one up?"

"I really don't know," Hector said. "It could upset the economy if we
let the money get out of hand. But we can always send it right back.
Let's see what happens."

The elevator came up with the bottles, the funnel and a green and gold
bill.

It was, on the face of it, a ten thousand dollar bill. But the portrait
was that of Hector Civek, crowned and ermined. And the legend on it was:

"_Payable to Bearer on Demand, Ten Thousand Dollars. This Note is
Legal Tender for all Debts, Public and Private, and is Redeemable in
Lawful Money at the Treasury of the Kingdom of Superior._ (Signed)
_Gizl, Secretary of the Treasury._"




X


Don didn't know what he might learn by skulking around the freezing
grounds of Hector's palace in the faint moonlight. He hoped for a
glimpse of the kangaroo-Gizl to see if he were as sincere off-guard as
he had been during their interview.

But his peering into basement windows had revealed nothing, and he was
about to head back to the campus for a night's sleep when someone called
his name.

It was a girl's voice, from above. He looked up. Red-headed Geneva
Jervis was leaning out of one of the second-story windows.

"Well, hello," he said. "What are you doing up there?"

"I've sworn fealty," she said. "Come on up."

"What?" he said. "How?"

She disappeared from his sight, then reappeared. "Here." She dropped a
rope ladder.

Don climbed it, feeling Like Romeo. "Where'd you get this?"

"They've got them in all the rooms. Fire escapes. Old McFerson was a
