To his splendor the huge Cimmerian opposite him offered a strong
contrast, with his square-cut black mane, brown scarred countenance and
burning blue eyes. He was clad in black mesh-mail, and the only glitter
about him was the broad gold buckle of the belt which supported his
sword in its worn leather scabbard.

They were alone in the silk-walled tent, which was hung with gilt-worked
tapestries and littered with rich carpets and velvet cushions, the loot
of the caravans. From outside came a low, incessant murmur, the sound
that always accompanies a great throng of men, in camp or otherwise. An
occasional gust of desert wind rattled the palm-leaves.

'Today in the shadow, tomorrow in the sun,' quoth Olgerd, loosening his
crimson girdle a trifle and reaching again for the wine-jug. 'That's the
way of life. Once I was a hetman on the Zaporoska; now I'm a desert
chief. Seven months ago you were hanging on a cross outside Khauran. Now
you're lieutenant to the most powerful raider between Turan and the
western meadows. You should be thankful to me!'

'For recognizing my usefulness?' Conan laughed and lifted the jug. 'When
you allow the elevation of a man, one can be sure that you'll profit by
his advancement. I've earned everything I've won, with my blood and
sweat.' He glanced at the scars on the insides of his palms. There were
scars, too, on his body, scars that had not been there seven months ago.

'You fight like a regiment of devils,' conceded Olgerd. 'But don't get
to thinking that you've had anything to do with the recruits who've
swarmed in to join us. It was our success at raiding, guided by my wit,
that brought them in. These nomads are always looking for a successful
leader to follow, and they have more faith in a foreigner than in one of
their own race.

'There's no limit to what we may accomplish! We have eleven thousand men
now. In another year we may have three times that number. We've
contented ourselves, so far, with raids on the Turanian outposts and the
city-states to the west. With thirty or forty thousand men we'll raid no
longer. We'll invade and conquer and establish ourselves as rulers. I'll
be emperor of all Shem yet, and you'll be my vizier, so long as you
carry out my orders unquestioningly. In the meantime, I think we'll ride
eastward and storm that Turanian outpost at Vezek, where the caravans
pay toll.'

Conan shook his head. 'I think not.'

Olgerd glared, his quick temper irritated.

'What do you mean, _you_ think not? I do the thinking for this army!'

'There are enough men in this band now for my purpose,' answered the
Cimmerian. 'I'm sick of waiting. I have a score to settle.'

'Oh!' Olgerd scowled, and gulped wine, then grinned. 'Still thinking of
that cross, eh? Well, I like a good hater. But that can wait.'

'You told me once you'd aid me in taking Khauran,' said Conan.

'Yes, but that was before I began to see the full possibilities of our
power,' answered Olgerd. 'I was only thinking of the loot in the city. I
don't want to waste our strength unprofitably. Khauran is too strong a
nut for us to crack now. Maybe in a year--'

'Within the week,' answered Conan, and the _kozak_ stared at the
certainty in his voice.

'Listen,' said Olgerd, 'even if I were willing to throw away men on such
a hare-brained attempt--what could you expect? Do you think these wolves
could besiege and take a city like Khauran?'

'There'll be no siege,' answered the Cimmerian. 'I know how to draw
Constantius out into the plain.'

'And what then?' cried Olgerd with an oath. 'In the arrow-play our
horsemen would have the worst of it, for the armor of the _asshuri_ is
the better, and when it came to sword-strokes their close-marshaled
ranks of trained swordsmen would cleave through our loose lines and
scatter our men like chaff before the wind.'

'Not if there were three thousand desperate Hyborian horsemen fighting
in a solid wedge such as I could teach them,' answered Conan.

'And where would you secure three thousand Hyborians?' asked Olgerd with
vast sarcasm. 'Will you conjure them out of the air?'

'I _have_ them,' answered the Cimmerian imperturbably. 'Three thousand
men of Khauran camp at the oasis of Akrel awaiting my orders.'

'_What?_' Olgerd glared like a startled wolf.

'Aye. Men who had fled from the tyranny of Constantius. Most of them
have been living the lives of outlaws in the deserts east of Khauran,
and are gaunt and hard and desperate as man-eating tigers. One of them
will be a match for any three squat mercenaries. It takes oppression and
hardship to stiffen men's guts and put the fire of hell into their
thews. They were broken up into small bands; all they needed was a
leader. They believed the word I sent them by my riders, and assembled
at the oasis and put themselves at my disposal.'

'All this without my knowledge?' A feral light began to gleam in
Olgerd's eye. He hitched at his weapon-girdle.

'It was _I_ they wished to follow, not _you_.'

'And what did you tell these outcasts to gain their allegiance?' There
was a dangerous ring in Olgerd's voice.

'I told them that I'd use this horde of desert wolves to help them
destroy Constantius and give Khauran back into the hands of its
citizens.'

'You fool!' whispered Olgerd. 'Do you deem yourself chief already?'

The men were on their feet, facing each other across the ebony board,
devil-lights dancing in Olgerd's cold gray eyes, a grim smile on the
Cimmerian's hard lips.

'I'll have you torn between four palm-trees,' said the _kozak_ calmly.

'Call the men and bid them do it!' challenged Conan. 'See if they obey
you!'

Baring his teeth in a snarl, Olgerd lifted his hand--then paused. There
was something about the confidence in the Cimmerian's dark face that
shook him. His eyes began to burn like those of a wolf.

'You scum of the western hills,' he muttered, 'have you dared seek to
undermine my power?'

'I didn't have to,' answered Conan. 'You lied when you said I had
nothing to do with bringing in the new recruits. I had everything to do
with it. They took your orders, but they fought for me. There is not
room for two chiefs of the Zuagirs. They know I am the stronger man. I
understand them better than you, and they, me; because I am a barbarian
too.'

'And what will they say when you ask them to fight for Khauran?' asked
Olgerd sardonically.

'They'll follow me. I'll promise them a camel-train of gold from the
palace. Khauran will be willing to pay that as a guerdon for getting rid
of Constantius. After that, I'll lead them against the Turanians as you
have planned. They want loot, and they'd as soon fight Constantius for
it as anybody.'

In Olgerd's eyes grew a recognition of defeat. In his red dreams of
empire he had missed what was going on about him. Happenings and events
that had seemed meaningless before now flashed into his mind, with their
true significance, bringing a realization that Conan spoke no idle
boast. The giant black-mailed figure before him was the real chief of
the Zuagirs.

'Not if you die!' muttered Olgerd, and his hand flickered toward his
hilt. But quick as the stroke of a great cat, Conan's arm shot across
the table and his fingers locked on Olgerd's forearm. There was a snap
of breaking bones, and for a tense instant the scene held: the men
facing each other as motionless as images, perspiration starting out on
Olgerd's forehead. Conan laughed, never easing his grip on the broken
arm.

'Are you fit to live, Olgerd?'

His smile did not alter as the corded muscles rippled in knotting ridges
along his forearm and his fingers ground into the _kozak's_ quivering
flesh. There was the sound of broken bones grating together and Olgerd's
face turned the color of ashes; blood oozed from his lip where his teeth
sank, but he uttered no sound.

With a laugh Conan released him and drew back, and the _kozak_ swayed,
caught the table edge with his good hand to steady himself.

'I give you life, Olgerd, as you gave it to me,' said Conan tranquilly,
'though it was for your own ends that you took me down from the cross.
It was a bitter test you gave me then; you couldn't have endured it;
neither could anyone, but a western barbarian.

'Take your horse and go. It's tied behind the tent, and food and water
are in the saddle-bags. None will see your going, but go quickly.
There's no room for a fallen chief on the desert. If the warriors see
you, maimed and deposed, they'll never let you leave the camp alive.'

Olgerd did not reply. Slowly, without a word, he turned and stalked
across the tent, through the flapped opening. Unspeaking he climbed into
the saddle of the great white stallion that stood tethered there in the
shade of a spreading palm-tree; and unspeaking, with his broken arm
thrust in the bosom of his _khalat_, he reined the steed about and rode
eastward into the open desert, out of the life of the people of the
Zuagir.

Inside the tent Conan emptied the wine-jug and smacked his lips with
relish. Tossing the empty vessel into a corner, he braced his belt and
strode out through the front opening, halting for a moment to let his
gaze sweep over the lines of camel-hair tents that stretched before him,
and the white-robed figures that moved among them, arguing, singing,
mending bridles or whetting tulwars.

He lifted his voice in a thunder that carried to the farthest confines
of the encampment: '_Aie_, you dogs, sharpen your ears and listen!
Gather around here. I have a tale to tell you.'




5 The Voice from the Crystal


In a chamber in a tower near the city wall a group of men listened
attentively to the words of one of their number. They were young men,
but hard and sinewy, with a bearing that comes only to men rendered
desperate by adversity. They were clad in mail shirts and worn leather;
swords hung at their girdles.

'I knew that Conan spoke the truth when he said it was not Taramis!' the
speaker exclaimed. 'For months I have haunted the outskirts of the
palace, playing the part of a deaf beggar. At last I learned what I had
believed--that our queen was a prisoner in the dungeons that adjoin the
palace. I watched my opportunity and captured a Shemitish
jailer--knocked him senseless as he left the courtyard late one
night--dragged him into a cellar near by and questioned him. Before he
died he told me what I have just told you, and what we have suspected
all along--that the woman ruling Khauran is a witch: Salome. Taramis, he
said, is imprisoned in the lowest dungeon.

'This invasion of the Zuagirs gives us the opportunity we sought. What
Conan means to do, I can not say. Perhaps he merely wishes vengeance on
Constantius. Perhaps he intends sacking the city and destroying it. He
is a barbarian and no one can understand their minds.
