of his own rebellious subjects. He had left Khosatral lying upon the
golden dais with the mystic knife across his breast for a spell to hold
him senseless and inanimate until doomsday.

But the ages passed and the priest died, the towers of deserted Dagon
crumbled, the tales became dim, and the Yuetshi were reduced by plagues
and famines and war to scattered remnants, dwelling in squalor along the
seashore.

Only the cryptic dome resisted the rot of time, until a chance
thunderbolt and the curiosity of a fisherman lifted from the breast of
the god the magic knife and broke the spell. Khosatral Khel rose and
lived and waxed mighty once more. It pleased him to restore the city as
it was in the days before its fall. By his necromancy he lifted the
towers from the dust of forgotten millenniums, and the folk which had
been dust for ages moved in life again.

But folk who have tasted death are only partly alive. In the dark
corners of their souls and minds death still lurks unconquered. By night
the people of Dagon moved and loved, hated and feasted, and remembered
the fall of Dagon and their own slaughter only as a dim dream; they
moved in an enchanted mist of illusion, feeling the strangeness of their
existence but not inquiring the reasons therefor. With the coming of day
they sank into deep sleep, to be roused again only by the coming of
night, which is akin to death.

All this rolled in a terrible panorama before Conan's consciousness as
he crouched beside the tapestried wall. His reason staggered. All
certainty and sanity were swept away, leaving a shadowy universe through
which stole hooded figures of grisly potentialities. Through the belling
of the voice which was like a tolling of triumph over the ordered laws
of a sane planet, a human sound anchored Conan's mind from its flight
through spheres of madness. It was the hysterical sobbing of a woman.

Involuntarily he sprang up.




6


Jehungir Agha waited with growing impatience in his boat among the
reeds. More than an hour passed, and Conan had not reappeared. Doubtless
he was still searching the island for the girl he thought to be hidden
there. But another surmise occurred to the Agha. Suppose the _hetman_
had left his warriors near by, and that they should grow suspicious and
come to investigate his long absence? Jehungir spoke to the oarsmen, and
the long boat slid from among the reeds and glided toward the carven
stairs.

Leaving half a dozen men in the boat, he took the rest, ten mighty
archers of Khawarizm, in spired helmets and tiger-skin cloaks. Like
hunters invading the retreat of the lion, they stole forward under the
trees, arrows on string. Silence reigned over the forest except when a
great green thing that might have been a parrot swirled over their heads
with a low thunder of broad wings, and then sped off through the trees.
With a sudden gesture Jehungir halted his party, and they stared
incredulously at the towers that showed through the verdure in the
distance.

'Tarim!' muttered Jehungir. 'The pirates have rebuilt the ruins!
Doubtless Conan is there. We must investigate this. A fortified town
this close to the mainland!--Come!'

With renewed caution they glided through the trees. The game had
altered; from pursuers and hunters they had become spies.

And as they crept through the tangled growth, the man they sought was in
peril more deadly than their filigreed arrows.

       *       *       *       *       *

Conan realized with a crawling of his skin that beyond the wall the
belling voice had ceased. He stood motionless as a statue, his gaze
fixed on a curtained door through which he knew that a culminating
horror would presently appear.

It was dim and misty in the chamber, and Conan's hair began to lift on
his scalp as he looked. He saw a head and a pair of gigantic shoulders
grow out of the twilight gloom. There was no sound of footsteps, but the
great dusky form grew more distinct until Conan recognized the figure of
a man. He was clad in sandals, a skirt and a broad shagreen girdle. His
square-cut mane was confined by a circlet of gold. Conan stared at the
sweep of the monstrous shoulders, the breadth of the swelling breast,
the bands and ridges and clusters of muscles on torso and limbs. The
face was without weakness and without mercy. The eyes were balls of dark
fire. And Conan knew that this was Khosatral Khel, the ancient from the
Abyss, the god of Dagonia.

No word was spoken. No word was necessary. Khosatral spread his great
arms, and Conan, crouching beneath them, slashed at the giant's belly.
Then he bounded back, eyes blazing with surprise. The keen edge had rung
on the mighty body as on an anvil, rebounding without cutting. Then
Khosatral came upon him in an irresistible surge.

There was a fleeting concussion, a fierce writhing and intertwining of
limbs and bodies, and then Conan sprang clear, every thew quivering from
the violence of his efforts; blood started where the grazing fingers had
torn the skin. In that instant of contact he had experienced the
ultimate madness of blasphemed nature; no human flesh had bruised his,
but _metal_ animated and sentient; it was a body of living iron which
opposed his.

Khosatral loomed above the warrior in the gloom. Once let those great
fingers lock and they would not loosen until the human body hung limp in
their grasp. In that twilit chamber it was as if a man fought with a
dream-monster in a nightmare.

Flinging down his useless sword, Conan caught up a heavy bench and
hurled it with all his power. It was such a missile as few men could
even lift. On Khosatral's mighty breast it smashed into shreds and
splinters. It did not even shake the giant on his braced legs. His face
lost something of its human aspect, a nimbus of fire played about his
awesome head, and like a moving tower he came on.

With a desperate wrench Conan ripped a whole section of tapestry from
the wall and whirling it, with a muscular effort greater than that
required for throwing the bench, he flung it over the giant's head. For
an instant Khosatral floundered, smothered and blinded by the clinging
stuff that resisted his strength as wood or steel could not have done,
and in that instant Conan caught up his scimitar and shot out into the
corridor. Without checking his speed he hurled himself through the door
of the adjoining chamber, slammed the door and shot the bolt.

Then as he wheeled he stopped short, all the blood in him seeming to
surge to his head. Crouching on a heap of silk cushions, golden hair
streaming over her naked shoulders, eyes blank with terror, was the
woman for whom he had dared so much. He almost forgot the horror at his
heels until a splintering crash behind him brought him to his senses. He
caught up the girl and sprang for the opposite door. She was too
helpless with fright either to resist or to aid him. A faint whimper was
the only sound of which she seemed capable.

Conan wasted no time trying the door. A shattering stroke of his
scimitar hewed the lock asunder, and as he sprang through to the stair
that loomed beyond it, he saw the head and shoulders of Khosatral crash
through the other door. The colossus was splintering the massive panels
as if they were of cardboard.

Conan raced up the stair, carrying the big girl over one shoulder as
easily as if she had been a child. Where he was going he had no idea,
but the stair ended at the door of a round, domed chamber. Khosatral was
coming up the stair behind them, silently as a wind of death, and as
swiftly.

The chamber's walls were of solid steel, and so was the door. Conan shut
it and dropped in place the great bars with which it was furnished. The
thought struck him that this was Khosatral's chamber, where he locked
himself in to sleep securely from the monsters he had loosed from the
Pits to do his bidding.

Hardly were the bolts in place when the great door shook and trembled to
the giant's assault. Conan shrugged his shoulders. This was the end of
the trail. There was no other door in the chamber, nor any window. Air,
and the strange misty light, evidently came from interstices in the
dome. He tested the nickel edge of his scimitar, quite cool now that he
was at bay. He had done his volcanic best to escape; when the giant came
crashing through that door he would explode in another savage onslaught
with his useless sword, not because he expected it to do any good, but
because it was his nature to die fighting. For the moment there was no
course of action to take, and his calmness was not forced or feigned.

The gaze he turned on his fair companion was as admiring and intense as
if he had a hundred years to live. He had dumped her unceremoniously on
the floor when he turned to close the door, and she had risen to her
knees, mechanically arranging her streaming locks and her scanty
garment. Conan's fierce eyes glowed with approval as they devoured her
thick golden hair, her clear wide eyes, her milky skin, sleek with
exuberant health, the firm swell of her breasts, the contours of her
