not tasty enough to be consumed. Here, in the first hour of their
exploration, they saw no sign that any insect from the lowlands had ever
come to this place at all. But they interpreted the fact quite correctly
as rarity, rather than complete absence of huge creatures blundering up
into the sunlight.

They were relieved that they had found a cave. There was no thicket of
trees close-growing enough to shelter them. They were ludicrously amazed
when they found that trees were hard and solid, because the fungi they
knew were easily cut by sawtoothed tools. They found nothing to eat, but
they were not yet hungry. They did not worry about it while they still
had bits of edible mushroom from their climb.

When the sun sank low and the crimson colorings filled the western
horizon, they shivered. They watched the glory of their first sunset
with scared, incredulous eyes. Yellows and reds and purples reared
toward the zenith. It became possible to look and gaze directly at the
sun. They saw it descend behind something they could not guess at. Then
there was dark.

The fact stunned them. So night came like this!

Then they saw the stars as they winked singly into being. And the folk
from the lowland crowded frantically into the cave with its faint odor
of having once been occupied. They filled the cave tightly. But Burl was
somewhat reluctant to admit his fear, and Saya lingered close to him.
They were the last to enter.

       *       *       *       *       *

Nothing happened. Nothing. The sounds of evening continued. They were
strange but infinitely soothing and somehow what night-sounds ought to
be. Burl and the others could not possibly analyze it, but for the first
time in many generations they were in an environment really similar to
that intended for their race. It had a rightness and a goodness about it
which was perceptible for all its novelty. And because Burl had once
been lost from his tribe, he was capable of estimating novelties a
little better than the rest.

He listened to the night-noises from close by the cave's small entrance.
He heard the breathing of his tribesmen. He felt the heat of their
bodies, keeping the crowded enclosure warm enough for all. Saya was
close beside him. She held fast to his arm for reassurance. He was
wakeful, and thinking very busily and very painfully.

Saya was filled with a tumult that was combined fear of the unknown and
relief from much greater fear of the familiar ... and warm, proud
memories of the sight of Burl leading and commanding the others, and
memories of the look and feel of sunshine, and pictures of sky and
grass and trees which she had never seen before. Emotion-filled memories
of Burl as he killed a spider! Flinging a ball-fungus at a hatchling
mantis, saving a young boy. Grandly leading the others up the
mountainside which it had never occurred to anybody else to climb.
Keeping onward sternly when it seemed that the solid ground had twisted
and would drop them into a misplaced sky. And now, between her and the
doorway to the strange and very beautiful night outside.

Saya felt an absorbed, impassioned, delectable disquiet from the touch
of Burl's arm beneath her fingers.

He stirred. She whispered a question.

"I am going out," he murmured in her ear. "I wish to see the lights. To
see if they come nearer, or move."

It had occurred to him that the first few stars they had seen glowed in
darkness like the giant fireflies of the valley. They were comparable in
size to all the enlarged insect kingdom. They were a yard and more in
length, and sometimes at night they soared and wheeled above the lowland
fungus jungles, and the segmented larval females of their kind, which
never grew wings, grew frantic at the sight. They climbed recklessly
upon the flat tops of toadstools and waved their dimmer twinned lanterns
at the flying males.

But this was not the lowland. Burl freed his arm from Saya's fingers. He
crept through the constricted opening of the cave, carrying his lance
before him. He already had a vague idea that it should be not only an
instrument but a weapon. He imagined stabbing enemy creatures with
it--but only vaguely, as yet.

He stood upright in the open air. There was coolness. Night had fallen,
but only a little while since. There were smells in the air such as Burl
had never smelled before--green things growing, and the peculiar clean
odor of wind that has been bathed in sunshine, and the peculiarly
satisfying fragrance of coniferous trees.

But Burl raised his eyes to the heavens. He saw the stars in all their
glory, and he was the first man in at least forty generations to look at
them from this planet. There were myriads upon myriads of them, varying
in brightness from stabbing lights to infinitesimal twinklings. They
were of every possible color. They hung in the sky above him, immobile
and unthreatening. They had not come nearer. They were very beautiful.

[Illustration: "_... he was the first man in ... forty generations to
look at them._"]

Burl stared. And then he noticed that he was breathing deeply, with a
new zest. He was filling his lungs with clean, cool, fragrant air such
as men were intended to breathe from the beginning, and of which Burl
and many others had been deprived. It was almost intoxicating to feel so
splendidly alive and unafraid.

There was a rustling. Saya stood beside him, trembling a little. To
leave the others had required great courage. But she had come to realize
that if any danger befell Burl she wished to share it. So she had come.
They shared the starlight.

They heard the nightwind and the orchestra of night-singers. They
wandered aside from the cave-mouth, and Saya found completely primitive
and wholly atavistic pride in the courage of Burl, who was actually not
afraid of the dark! Her own uneasiness became merely something to give
more savor to her pride in him. She stayed close beside him, not only
for reassurance but also for joy in being close to him.

Presently they heard a new sound in the night. It was very far away and
not in the least like any sound they had ever heard before. It changed
in pitch. Insect-cries do not. It was a baying, yelping sound. It rose
in pitch, and held the higher note, and abruptly dropped in pitch before
it ceased. Minutes later it came again.

Saya shivered, but Burl said thoughtfully:

"That is a good sound."

He didn't know why. Saya shivered once more. She said reluctantly:

"I am cold."

It had been a rare sensation in the lowlands. It came only after one of
the infrequent thunderstorms, when wetted human bodies were exposed to
the gusty winds that otherwise rarely blew there. But here the nights
grew cold, after sundown. The heat in the ground radiated to outer space
at night, not being trapped by a layer of clouds. Before dawn, the
temperature would be close to freezing, though anything worse than a
light fleeting hoar-frost would be rare on this plateau.

The two of them went back to the cave. It was warm there. The cave was
so packed with humans that their body-heat kept the air from growing
chill. Burl and Saya crouched among the rest, and became drowsy and
comfortable. Presently Saya dropped off to sleep, her hand trustfully in
Burl's.

But he remained awake for a long time, blinking. He thought of the
stars, but they were too strange. He thought of the trees and grass. But
most of the impressions of this upper world were so remote from previous
knowledge that he could only accept them as they were and defer
reflection upon them until later. But he did feel an enormous
complacency, what with having brought his followers to an effective
paradise of safety, and having arrived at a completely satisfactory
emotional status with Saya.

But the last thing he actually thought about, before his eyes blinked
shut in sleep, was that yelping noise he had heard in the night. It was
totally novel in kind, yet there was something buried among his racial
heritages that told him it was good.

       *       *       *       *       *

Burl was first awake of all the tribesmen and he looked out into a cold
and pallid grayness. He saw trees. One side of the cluster was brightly
lighted, the other side was dark. He heard tiny singing noises of the
creatures of this place. Presently he crawled out of the cave to scout
for danger.

The air was biting in its chill. It was an excellent reason why giant
insects could not survive here, but it was particularly invigorating as
he breathed it in. Then he summoned courage to move to where he could
peer at the source of this strange light.

He saw the top of the sun as it peered above the eastern cloud-bank. The
sky grew lighter. He blinked at the sun and saw it rise more fully into
view. He thought to look upward, and the stars that had bewildered him
were nearly gone.

He ran to call Saya.

The rest of the tribe waked as he roused her. One by one they followed,
to watch their first sunrise. The men and women gaped at the sun as it
filled the east with colorings and rose above the seemingly steaming
layer of clouds and then appeared to spring free of the horizon and swim
on upward.

The children blinked and shivered and crept to their mothers for warmth.
The women enclosed them in their cloaks, and they thawed and peered out
once more at the glory of sunshine and the day. Soon, though, they
realized that warmth came from the glaring body in the sky. The
children presently discovered a game. It was the first game they had
ever played, and it consisted simply of running into a shaded place
until they shivered, and then of running out into the sunshine again
where they were warm. Until this dawning they had never been free enough
from fear to play at all. But this discovery of the nightly chill and of
the utility of cloaks for warmth up here as well as it had been against
the nightly rain of the lowlands, was a specific suggestion of the value
of clothing. Which was to have another significance, a short time later.

In this first dawn of their experience, the tribesmen ate of the edible
mushroom they had brought up the mountain-flank. But there was not an
indefinite amount of food left. Burl shared the meal Saya brought him.
She touched him fondly. But he regarded his happy fellows with something
like a scowl. They were quite contented, and they had for the moment no
need of his guidance. They did not look to him for orders. And Burl
wanted attention.

He spoke abruptly.

"We do not want to go back to the place we came from," he said sternly.
"We must look for food here, so we can stay for always. Today we look
for food."

It was a seizure of the initiative. It was the linking of what the folk
most craved with obedience to Burl. It was the instinct of a leader. The
eating men murmured agreement. There was a certain definite idea of
goodness--not moral virtue, but of the desirable--becoming associated
