to call him to dinner, he found Danby dead. Choked to death, his face
ripped open, and the cowboy gone. When they went to look for Williams,
he was gone. When they next heard of him, the police got a call to
investigate a brawl in a Laredo saloon. When they arrived and broke
through the circle, they saw two men struggling. Suddenly one fell,
and then before they could reach Williams, he lifted his spurred foot,
and slashed the face of the fallen man. Then they got him. Then the
police started for him. They got him after a terrible fight. The other
fellow died in the hospital shortly after." The warden shook his head.
"He's a tough one. Never a muscle when they sentenced him."

"Too bad." Jim Kelton rose and picked up his hat. "Well, guess I'd
better run along. Come out for a game of bridge some night, Tom. Ellen
was saying the other day that we never see you any more."

The warden opened the door for his friend. "I'll be out some night
soon," he promised, smiling.

As Williams stood waiting for the trusty to unlock the door of his
cell, his eyes met those of Lawrie, the man in the next cell. Between
the two had grown up an active dislike, the more threatening because
unspoken. At least, so far. It remained for Claffin, across the way,
to bring the thing out into the open. They were all discussing an
expected arrival.

Said Claffin, "I guess this new bird it plenty tough. He murdered his
wife and two kids. That's even worse than 'cowboy' there."

Lawrie cut in sneeringly. "I don't agree with you. He didn't carve 'em
up afterwards like Williams did. Nobody in their right mind could do a
thing like that. I couldn't, and neither could any of the rest of you
fellows," he charged. No one answered. The others knew of the enmity
between the two, and a strained silence filled the place. Then at
last, Williams spoke, his voice hoarse, fairly quivering with rage.

"All right, Lawrie, you've said plenty. I'll remember it. And don't
forget this; you'll be next! You'll be next!" he repeated, harshly.
Lawrie laughed, mockingly. The guard coming down the hall put a stop
to further conversation for the time being. But now the quarrel
between the two was out in the open, and through the following days
and weeks, Lawrie seemed possessed of some imp of perversity and
taunted and gibed at Williams continuously. Much of the time, the
'cowboy murderer' lay on his back on the cot and stared sullenly at
the ceiling, only turning at times to throw Lawrie a venomous glance.
At times, Lawrie grew ashamed for taunting a doomed man, but something
inside of him, stronger than he, urged him on implacably. Once in a
while, he shuddered at the looks given him by the other, and silently
he blessed the bars that kept them apart.

Then came William's last morning. The prison chaplain came to
administer the last rites, but fled before the storm of curses that
met him. After his departure, a long silence fell that lasted till
they came for him. Even Lawrie was silent and sat soberly watching. As
they brought him out, and he passed Lawrie, he stopped and looked in.
His eyes, filled with immeasurable hatred, met those of Lawrie. On his
face was a malignant sneer.

"Remember, you're next," he said slowly, and passed on down the
corridor. Lawrie watched his retreating form till it passed from
sight. Claffin called across in a hoarse whisper. "What do you make of
this; Williams asked them to bury him with his spurs on. Funny, isn't
it?"

Lawrie did not answer for the reason that at the word 'spurs,' a
queerly premonitory chill passed over him. Uneasily, he recalled the
other's parting word and the cold, evil hatred of the other's glance.
He tried to shake off the cold, chilly feeling that was settling
over him, but without success. There seemed to be an indefinable
change in the atmosphere, a sense of something horrible about to
happen. They all felt it, in a lesser degree. The gray day dragged
along, and conversation lagged. By common consent, they all avoided
glancing at the empty cell. It seemed too potent a reminder of the
thing that waited for them all. Dusk settled down and shadows began to
fill the corners. And then Lawrie glancing idly out the door of his
cell, gave a startled cry. There in the shadows before his cell door,
he saw something. A shadow that formed, that seemed to pause and
linger before him. Then, as he cried out, it melted into nothing and
was gone.

His heart was beating fast, pounding with the nameless fear that held
him in an ever-tightening grip. The sense of impending calamity drew
closer. He began to shake.

"What's wrong?" called Claffin, curiously, his voice low.

Lawrie, eyes fastened on the empty cell next to him, did not answer.
He could not. He was watching something--something that formed before
his eyes into a man, a shadowy figure that smiled horribly and wore
gleaming spurs. He saw it form, growing clearer and drawing nearer the
bars. The shadowy eyes gazed back into his terrified ones, and then he
screamed at the thing he read in them. A scream that died in his
throat in a gurgle as he fell heavily.

The guard came running. "What's going on here?" he demanded, angrily.
He peered in suspiciously at the fallen figure. At last they entered
the silent cell and raised him to his cot. He was dead. And across the
horror that death had stamped indelibly on his face, there ran the
livid gash of a spur!




ABOUT AUTHORS


Clark Ashton Smith makes very little use of alliterations and has
probably invented more alien names for the characters in his stories
than any other author.... There are quite a few writers whose first
initials are E. E.... A few of them are: Speight, Smith, Repp,
Chappelow, and Newton.... Miss Leslie F. Stone was taken for a man,
even after her picture had been printed in Wonder. Probably that is
why a new one was drawn for "The Hell Planet" in the June, 1932
number.... Jack Williamson wrote science fiction more than three years
before he tackled weird stories, and now seems to be doing a good job
at both.... Malcolm Afford's story, "The Gland Men of the Island" in
Wonder was printed in Amazing by mistake over two years later under
the name of "The Ho-Ming Gland." This case shows to what extent the
editors revise each story. Compare both stories and you will find many
changes of one over the other, especially at the conclusion ... Kaw,
Anthos, and Marius: authors without first names.... Gernsback was the
only editor who imported foreign stories and translated them into
English for his science fiction publications. Fletcher Pratt, an
author of note himself, usually does the translating.... Weird Tales
has had the largest number of authors who have never had a second
story appear.... How many are familiar with Bertram Atkey's fantastic
stories in Blue Book? In 1930 he had a series of humorous
reincarnation stories published there....

                     *      *      *      *      *

Come over to "Our Readers Say" and "The Boiling Point" and join in.




THE BOILING POINT


The Smith-Ackerman debate is still going strong, with Smith in the
lead. However, the Ackerman side is taking a big leap with the
following defenses. The first comes from Allen Glasser, who says:

"I am surprised at the vicious remarks being made about Forrest
Ackerman. He really doesn't deserve any such abuse. Perhaps his
writings are a bit flamboyant and over-enthusiastic; but surely that's
no great fault. To those who know him well, Forrest is a fine fellow;
and his zeal for science-fiction merits praise rather than censure."
