"No matter. Take him to the rear. Feed him."

"You _expected_ this raid, sire," Tedric said, rather than asked, after
scouts and runner had disappeared.

"Aye. 'Twas no raid, but the first skirmish of a war. No fool, Taggad
of Sarlon; nor Issian of Devoss, barbarian though he is. They knew
what loomed, and struck first. The only surprise was Hurlo's death ...
he had my direct orders not to do battle 'gainst any force, however
slight-seeming, but to withdraw forthwith into the castle, which was to
be kept stocked to withstand a siege of months ... this keeps me from
boiling him in oil for stupidity, incompetence, and disloyalty."

Phagon frowned in thought, then went on: "Were there forces that
appeared not...? Surely not--Taggad would not split his forces at
all seriously: 'tis but to annoy me ... or perhaps they are mostly
barbarians despite the Sarlonian iron ... to harry and flee is no doubt
their aim, but for Lomarr's good not one of them should escape. Knowst
the Upper Midvale, Tedric, above the lake?"

"But little, sire; a few miles only. I was there but once."

"'Tis enough. Take half the Royal Guard and a century of bowmen. Cross
the Midvale at the ford three miles above us here. Go up and around the
lake. The Upper Midvale is fordable almost anywhere at this season, so
stay far enough away from the lake that none see you. Cross it, swing
in a wide circle toward the peninsula on which sits Middlemarch Castle,
and in three days...?"

"Three days will be ample, sire."

"Three days from tomorrow's dawn, exactly as the top rim of the sun
clears the meadow, make your charge out of the covering forest, with
your archers spread to pick off all who seek to flee. I will be on this
side of the peninsula; between us they'll be ground like ling. None
shall get away!"

Phagon's assumptions, however, were slightly in error. When Tedric's
riders charged, at the crack of the indicated dawn, they did not tear
through a motley horde of half-armored, half-trained barbarians.
Instead, they struck two full centuries of Sarlon's heaviest armor! And
Phagon the King fared worse. At first sight of that brilliant golden
armor a solid column of armored knights formed as though by magic and
charged it at full gallop!

Phagon fought, of course; fought as his breed had always fought. At
first on horse, with his terrible sword, under the trenchant edge of
which knight after knight died. His horse dropped, slaughtered; his
sword was knocked away; but, afoot, the war-axe chained to his steel
belt by links of super-steel was still his. He swung and swung and
swung again; again and again; and with each swing an enemy ceased to
live; but sheer weight of metal was too much. Finally, still swinging
his murderous weapon, Phagon of Lomarr went flat on the ground.

At the first assault on their king, Tedric with his sword and Sciro
with his hammer had gone starkly berserk. Sciro was nearer, but Tedric
was faster and stronger and had the better horse.

"Dreegor!" he yelled, thumping his steed's sides with his armored legs
and rising high in his stirrups. Nostrils flaring, the mighty beast
raged forward and Tedric struck as he had never struck before. Eight
times that terrific blade came down, and eight men and eight horses
died. Then, suddenly--Tedric never did know how it happened, since
Dreegor was later found uninjured--he found himself afoot. No place
for sword, this, but made to order for axe. Hence, driving forward as
resistlessly as though a phalanx of iron were behind him, he hewed his
way toward his sovereign.

Thus he was near at hand when Phagon went down. So was doughty Sciro;
and by the time the Sarlonians had learned that sword nor axe nor
hammer could cut or smash that gold-seeming armor fury personified was
upon them. Tedric straddled his king's head, Sciro his feet; and, back
to back, two of Lomarr's mightiest armsmasters wove circular webs of
flying steel through which it was sheerest suicide to attempt to pass.
Thus battle raged until the last armored foeman was down.

"Art hurt, sire?" Tedric asked anxiously as he and Sciro lifted Phagon
to his feet.

"Nay, my masters-at-arms," the monarch gasped, still panting for
breath. "Bruised merely, and somewhat winded." He opened his visor
to let more air in; then, as he regained control, he shook off the
supporting hands and stood erect under his own power. "I fear me,
Tedric, that you and that vixen daughter of mine were in some sense
right. Methinks I may be--Oh, the veriest trifle!--out of condition.
But the battle is almost over. Did any escape?"

None had.

"'Tis well. Tedric, I know not how to honor...."

"Honor me no farther, sire, I beg. Hast honored me already far more
than I deserved, or ever will.... Or, at least, at the moment ... there
may be later, perhaps ... that is, a thing ..." he fell silent.

"A thing?" Phagon grinned broadly. "I know not whether Rhoann will
be overly pleased at being called so, but 'twill be borne in mind
nonetheless. Now you, Sciro; Lord Sciro now and henceforth, and all
your line. Lord of what I will not now say; but when we have taken
Sarlo you and all others shall know."

"My thanks, sire, and my obeisance," said Sciro.

"Schillan, with me to my pavilion. I am weary and sore, and would fain
rest."

As the two Lords of the Realm, so lately commoners, strode away to do
what had to be done:

"Neither of us feels any nobler than ever, I know," Sciro said, "but in
one way 'tis well--very well indeed."

"The Lady Trycie, eh? The wind does set so, then, as I thought."

"Aye. For long and long. It wondered me often, your choice of the Lady
Rhoann over _her_. Howbeit, 'twill be a wondrous thing to be your
brother-in-law as well as in arms."

Tedric grinned companionably, but before he could reply they had to
separate and go to work.

The king did not rest long; the heralds called Tedric in before half
his job was done.

"What thinkst you, Tedric, should be next?" Phagon asked.

"First punish Devoss, sire!" Tedric snarled. "Back-track them--storm
High Pass if defended--raze half the steppes with sword and
torch--drive them the full length of their country and into Northern
Sound!"

"Interesting, my impetuous youngblade, but not at all practical,"
Phagon countered. "Hast considered the matter of time--the avalanches
of rocks doubtless set up and ready to sweep those narrow paths--what
Taggad would be doing while we cavort through the wastelands?"

Tedric deflated almost instantaneously. "Nay, sire," he admitted
sheepishly. "I thought not of any such."

"'Tis the trouble with you--you know not _how_ to think." Phagon was
deadly serious now. "'Tis a hard thing to learn; impossible for many;
but learn it you must if you end not as Hurlo ended. Also, take heed:
disobey my orders but once, as Hurlo did, and you hang in chains from
the highest battlement of your own Castle Middlemarch until your bones
rot apart and drop into the lake."

His monarch's vicious threat--or rather, promise--left Tedric
completely unmoved. "'Tis what I would deserve, sire, or less; but
no fear of that. Stupid I may be, but disloyal? Nay, sire. Your word
always has been and always will be my law."

"Not stupid, Tedric, but lacking in judgment, which is not as bad;
since the condition is, if you care enough to make it so, remediable.
You _must_ care enough, Tedric. You _must_ learn, and quickly; for much
more than your own life is at hazard."

The younger man stared questioningly and the king went on: "My life,
the lives of my family, and the future of all Lomarr," he said quietly.

"In that case, sire, wilt learn, and quickly," Tedric declared; and, as
days and weeks went by, he did.

       *       *       *       *       *

"ALL previous attempts on the city of Sarlo were made in what seemed
to be the only feasible way--crossing the Tegula at Lower Ford, going
down its north bank through the gorge to the West Branch, and down
that to the Sarlo." Phagon was lecturing from a large map, using a
sharp stick as pointer; Tedric, Sciro, Schillan, and two or three other
high-ranking officers were watching and listening. "The West Branch
