satisfying to us to radiate it. You get the same release by deep sighs,
by long breaths, by stretching your limbs. Unfortunately, when we
radiate rapidly in air, we glow. It has made us conspicuous."

"We all have our hobbies," said Evers, shifting his swollen ankle and
wincing. "Did you ever hear of the Liars' Club? If you like to hold
office, you could be President."

Dzell did not appear offended. "I said you would not believe. When it
is again my turn to explore, I will search for your Liars' Club. I can
see from your thoughts that it is concerned with jokes. And this is the
one thing about you that we have not mastered. Other explorers have
also felt baffled. The function of odd misstatement escapes us."

"'Other explorers'?" Evers' voice lost its note of ridicule, and
Drinkard leaned forward with new interest. "You mean there are a lot of
incandescent guys like you prowling about?"

Dzell shrugged. "All are not from my environment. Many are so unlike
you that they cannot mingle and so must observe from hiding. Others
cannot exist in your atmosphere without artificial help. We contact
them constantly. Your unawareness is a marvel to us all. For creatures
so well supplied with adaptations for sensation, you are indeed blind."

       *       *       *       *       *

Chuck Evers drew a long breath. "If I could radiate, I'd be lit up like
a theater marquee. You sound like an old professor I had once. I didn't
understand him, either."

Had Dzell comprehended humor, he would have smiled. But he simply
turned away with finality.

"Dzorr is waiting by the glacier," he said. "We have plans for this
time. When you return to the settlements below, it would perhaps be
wisest not to attempt to explain the lights."

The next instant, he was gone without a sound.

The two young men sat silently by the dying fire. A few minutes later,
both looked up, as though by signal, toward the upper reaches of the
glacier. Two glowing spots, dull cherry red, moved steadily across the
ice. They were visible for brief minutes, then slowly faded.

Chuck Evers shifted restlessly. He shook his head as though a bee were
buzzing inside it.

"Did you hear something?" he asked.

"Not with my ears," said Drinkard. "But as plain as a voice, Dzell just
said to my brain 'Good luck, boys!' in good American."

"Now I know I'm nuts," grunted Chuck Evers. "That's what he said to me."

To descend Precipice Peak, even if only from Bighorn Glacier, is no fit
task for a cripple. Still, Evers and Drinkard knew it had to be done,
so, in the early morning, they set about it without haste and without
complaint.

Where the going allowed it, big John simply back-packed Evers. They
made use of every ledge, for Chuck could rappel himself down spots he
could not climb or be carried. Both were mountain men and tough, but by
mid-afternoon they knew they had had enough.

So nothing had ever looked better than the cheerful figure of Heine
Kolb, slouched in the saddle of his dainty-footed pinto mare, and
leading two pack horses loaded with fish panniers. The ranger was
headed down.

"The complete Samaritan, that's me," said Heine. "I haul fish up and
Poor Fish down. Two loads for the price of one."

"We will accept your insults along with the ride," Chuck Evers said
wearily. "I never knew what a pretty thing a horse could be!"

Heine dropped his fish cans, helped to hoist Evers onto one of the pack
horses. Drinkard climbed aboard the other.

"What happened?" asked the ranger. "I saw by the headquarters record
that you were going up."

Evers shrugged and John Drinkard said, "The boy here was playing
rockchuck on the stretch below the glacier and one rolled with him."
Evers grinned wryly, and John added, "It could happen to anybody, but
it's the kind of thing that's partial to tender-feet."

"Next time," said Evers humbly, "just leave me up there. I ain't worth
saving."

They stopped only once. At the big switchback, John Drinkard swung from
his horse, pried up a stone, tossed the tobacco can to Evers without a
word. The ranger only raised his eyebrows.

       *       *       *       *       *

Back at their tent camp on the lake shore, Evers and Drinkard were not
disturbed by questions. When men fail on the peaks, they tell their own
stories in their own time. Chuck's ankle showed quick improvement and
in a couple of days he was hobbling about. Only young Royston came to
visit.

"You have not been back to the Lodge," he said. "Perhaps you are afraid
to show your faces?"

