abide by the wicked compact he had made--a compact which would doom his
own offspring, who would doubtless be as am I, their mother.  The
alternative was flight until Du-seen should have been overcome and
punished.  I chose the latter and fled toward the south.  Beyond the
confines of the Galu country is little danger from the Wieroo, who seek
ordinarily only Galus of the highest orders.  There are two excellent
reasons for this:  One is that from the beginning of time jealousy has
existed between the Wieroo and the Galus as to which would eventually
dominate the world.  It seems generally conceded that that race which
first reaches a point of evolution which permits them to produce young
of their own species and of both sexes must dominate all other
creatures.  The Wieroo first began to produce their own kind--after
which evolution from Galu to Wieroo ceased gradually until now it is
unknown; but the Wieroo produce only males--which is why they steal our
female young, and by stealing cos-ata-lo they increase their own
chances of eventually reproducing both sexes and at the same time
lessen ours.  Already the Galus produce both male and female; but so
carefully do the Wieroo watch us that few of the males ever grow to
manhood, while even fewer are the females that are not stolen away.  It
is indeed a strange condition, for while our greatest enemies hate and
fear us, they dare not exterminate us, knowing that they too would
become extinct but for us.

"Ah, but could we once get a start, I am sure that when all were true
cos-ata-lo there would have been evolved at last the true dominant race
before which all the world would be forced to bow."

Ajor always spoke of the world as though nothing existed beyond Caspak.
She could not seem to grasp the truth of my origin or the fact that
there were countless other peoples outside her stern barrier-cliffs.
She apparently felt that I came from an entirely different world.
Where it was and how I came to Caspak from it were matters quite beyond
her with which she refused to trouble her pretty head.

"Well," she continued, "and so I ran away to hide, intending to pass
the cliffs to the south of Galu and find a retreat in the Kro-lu
country.  It would be dangerous, but there seemed no other way.

"The third night I took refuge in a large cave in the cliffs at the
edge of my own country; upon the following day I would cross over into
the Kro-lu country, where I felt that I should be reasonably safe from
the Wieroo, though menaced by countless other dangers.  However, to a
cos-ata-lo any fate is preferable to that of falling into the clutches
of the frightful Wieroo, from whose land none returns.

"I had been sleeping peacefully for several hours when I was awakened
by a slight noise within the cavern.  The moon was shining brightly,
illumining the entrance, against which I saw silhouetted the dread
figure of a Wieroo.  There was no escape.  The cave was shallow, the
entrance narrow.  I lay very still, hoping against hope, that the
creature had but paused here to rest and might soon depart without
discovering me; yet all the while I knew that he came seeking me.

"I waited, scarce breathing, watching the thing creep stealthily toward
me, its great eyes luminous in the darkness of the cave's interior, and
at last I knew that those eyes were directed upon me, for the Wieroo
can see in the darkness better than even the lion or the tiger.  But a
few feet separated us when I sprang to my feet and dashed madly toward
my menacer in a vain effort to dodge past him and reach the outside
world.  It was madness of course, for even had I succeeded temporarily,
the Wieroo would have but followed and swooped down upon me from above.
As it was, he reached forth and seized me, and though I struggled, he
overpowered me.  In the duel his long, white robe was nearly torn from
him, and he became very angry, so that he trembled and beat his wings
together in his rage.

"He asked me my name; but I would not answer him, and that angered him
still more.  At last he dragged me to the entrance of the cave, lifted
me in his arms, spread his great wings and leaping into the air,
flapped dismally through the night.  I saw the moonlit landscape
sliding away beneath me, and then we were out above the sea and on our
way to Oo-oh, the country of the Wieroo.

"The dim outlines of Oo-oh were unfolding below us when there came from
above a loud whirring of giant wings.  The Wieroo and I glanced up
simultaneously, to see a pair of huge jo-oos" (flying
reptiles--pterodactyls) "swooping down upon us.  The Wieroo wheeled and
dropped almost to sea-level, and then raced southward in an effort to
outdistance our pursuers.  The great creatures, notwithstanding their
enormous weight, are swift on their wings; but the Wieroo are swifter.
Even with my added weight, the creature that bore me maintained his
lead, though he could not increase it.  Faster than the fastest wind we
raced through the night, southward along the coast.  Sometimes we rose
to great heights, where the air was chill and the world below but a
blur of dim outlines; but always the jo-oos stuck behind us.

"I knew that we had covered a great distance, for the rush of the wind
by my face attested the speed of our progress, but I had no idea where
we were when at last I realized that the Wieroo was weakening.  One of
the jo-oos gained on us and succeeded in heading us, so that my captor
had to turn in toward the coast.  Further and further they forced him
to the left; lower and lower he sank.  More labored was his breathing,
and weaker the stroke of his once powerful wings.  We were not ten feet
above the ground when they overtook us, and at the edge of a forest.
One of them seized the Wieroo by his right wing, and in an effort to
free himself, he loosed his grasp upon me, dropping me to earth.  Like
a frightened ecca I leaped to my feet and raced for the sheltering
sanctuary of the forest, where I knew neither could follow or seize me.
Then I turned and looked back to see two great reptiles tear my
abductor asunder and devour him on the spot.

"I was saved; yet I felt that I was lost.  How far I was from the
country of the Galus I could not guess; nor did it seem probable that I
ever could make my way in safety to my native land.

"Day was breaking; soon the carnivora would stalk forth for their first
kill; I was armed only with my knife.  About me was a strange
landscape--the flowers, the trees, the grasses, even, were different
from those of my northern world, and presently there appeared before me
a creature fully as hideous as the Wieroo--a hairy manthing that barely
walked erect.  I shuddered, and then I fled.  Through the hideous
dangers that my forebears had endured in the earlier stages of their
human evolution I fled; and always pursuing was the hairy monster that
had discovered me.  Later he was joined by others of his kind.  They
were the speechless men, the Alus, from whom you rescued me, my Tom.
From then on, you know the story of my adventures, and from the first,
I would endure them all again because they led me to you!"

It was very nice of her to say that, and I appreciated it.  I felt that
she was a mighty nice little girl whose friendship anyone might be glad
to have; but I wished that when she touched me, those peculiar thrills
would not run through me.  It was most discomforting, because it
reminded me of love; and I knew that I never could love this half-baked
little barbarian.  I was very much interested in her account of the
Wieroo, which up to this time I had considered a purely mythological
creature; but Ajor shuddered so at even the veriest mention of the name
that I was loath to press the subject upon her, and so the Wieroo still
remained a mystery to me.

While the Wieroo interested me greatly, I had little time to think
about them, as our waking hours were filled with the necessities of
existence--the constant battle for survival which is the chief
occupation of Caspakians.  To-mar and So-al were now about fitted for
their advent into Kro-lu society and must therefore leave us, as we
could not accompany them without incurring great danger ourselves and
running the chance of endangering them; but each swore to be always our
friend and assured us that should we need their aid at any time we had
but to ask it; nor could I doubt their sincerity, since we had been so
instrumental in bringing them safely upon their journey toward the
Kro-lu village.

This was our last day together.  In the afternoon we should separate,
To-mar and So-al going directly to the Kro-lu village, while Ajor and I
made a detour to avoid a conflict with the archers.  The former both
showed evidence of nervous apprehension as the time approached for them
to make their entry into the village of their new people, and yet both
were very proud and happy.  They told us that they would be well
received as additions to a tribe always are welcomed, and the more so
as the distance from the beginning increased, the higher tribes or
races being far weaker numerically than the lower.  The southern end of
the island fairly swarms with the Ho-lu, or apes; next above these are
the Alus, who are slightly fewer in number than the Ho-lu; and again
there are fewer Bo-lu than Alus, and fewer Sto-lu than Bo-lu.  Thus it
goes until the Kro-lu are fewer in number than any of the others; and
here the law reverses, for the Galus outnumber the Kro-lu.  As Ajor
explained it to me, the reason for this is that as evolution
practically ceases with the Galus, there is no less among them on this
score, for even the cos-ata-lo are still considered Galus and remain
with them.  And Galus come up both from the west and east coasts.
There are, too, fewer carnivorous reptiles at the north end of the
island, and not so many of the great and ferocious members of the cat
family as take their hideous toll of life among the races further south.

By now I was obtaining some idea of the Caspakian scheme of evolution,
which partly accounted for the lack of young among the races I had so
far seen.  Coming up from the beginning, the Caspakian passes, during a
single existence, through the various stages of evolution, or at least
many of them, through which the human race has passed during the
countless ages since life first stirred upon a new world; but the
question which continued to puzzle me was: What creates life at the
beginning, cor sva jo?

I had noticed that as we traveled northward from the Alus' country the
land had gradually risen until we were now several hundred feet above
the level of the inland sea.  Ajor told me that the Galus country was
still higher and considerably colder, which accounted for the scarcity
of reptiles.  The change in form and kinds of the lower animals was
even more marked than the evolutionary stages of man.  The diminutive
ecca, or small horse, became a rough-coated and sturdy little pony in
the Kro-lu country.  I saw a greater number of small lions and tigers,
though many of the huge ones still persisted, while the woolly mammoth
was more in evidence, as were several varieties of the Labyrinthadonta.
These creatures, from which God save me, I should have expected to find
further south; but for some unaccountable reason they gain their
greatest bulk in the Kro-lu and Galu countries, though fortunately they
are rare.  I rather imagine that they are a very early life which is
rapidly nearing extinction in Caspak, though wherever they are found,
they constitute a menace to all forms of life.

It was mid-afternoon when To-mar and So-al bade us good-bye.  We were
not far from Kro-lu village; in fact, we had approached it much closer
than we had intended, and now Ajor and I were to make a detour toward
the sea while our companions went directly in search of the Kro-lu
chief.

Ajor and I had gone perhaps a mile or two and were just about to emerge
from a dense wood when I saw that ahead of us which caused me to draw
back into concealment, at the same time pushing Ajor behind me.  What I
saw was a party of Band-lu warriors--large, fierce-appearing men.  From
the direction of their march I saw that they were returning to their
caves, and that if we remained where we were, they would pass without
discovering us.

Presently Ajor nudged me.  "They have a prisoner," she whispered.  "He
is a Kro-lu."

And then I saw him, the first fully developed Kro-lu I had seen.  He was
a fine-looking savage, tall and straight with a regal carriage.  To-mar
was a handsome fellow; but this Kro-lu showed plainly in his every
physical attribute a higher plane of evolution.  While To-mar was just
entering the Kro-lu sphere, this man, it seemed to me, must be close
indeed to the next stage of his development, which would see him an
envied Galu.

"They will kill him?" I whispered to Ajor.

"The dance of death," she replied, and I shuddered, so recently had I
escaped the same fate.  It seemed cruel that one who must have passed
safely up through all the frightful stages of human evolution within
Caspak, should die at the very foot of his goal.  I raised my rifle to
my shoulder and took careful aim at one of the Band-lu.  If I hit him,
I would hit two, for another was directly behind the first.

Ajor touched my arm.  "What would you do?" she asked.  "They are all
our enemies."

"I am going to save him from the dance of death," I replied, "enemy or
no enemy," and I squeezed the trigger.  At the report, the two Band-lu
lunged forward upon their faces.  I handed my rifle to Ajor, and
drawing my pistol, stepped out in full view of the startled party.  The
Band-lu did not run away as had some of the lower orders of Caspakians
at the sound of the rifle.  Instead, the moment they saw me, they let
out a series of demoniac war-cries, and raising their spears above
their heads, charged me.

The Kro-lu stood silent and statuesque, watching the proceedings.  He
made no attempt to escape, though his feet were not bound and none of
the warriors remained to guard him.  There were ten of the Band-lu
coming for me.  I dropped three of them with my pistol as rapidly as a
man might count by three, and then my rifle spoke close to my left
shoulder, and another of them stumbled and rolled over and over upon
the ground.  Plucky little Ajor!  She had never fired a shot before in
all her life, though I had taught her to sight and aim and how to
squeeze the trigger instead of pulling it.  She had practiced these new
accomplishments often, but little had I thought they would make a
marksman of her so quickly.

With six of their fellows put out of the fight so easily, the remaining
six sought cover behind some low bushes and commenced a council of war.
I wished that they would go away, as I had no ammunition to waste, and
I was fearful that should they institute another charge, some of them
would reach us, for they were already quite close.  Suddenly one of
them rose and launched his spear.  It was the most marvelous exhibition
of speed I have ever witnessed.  It seemed to me that he had scarce
gained an upright position when the weapon was half-way upon its
journey, speeding like an arrow toward Ajor.  And then it was, with
that little life in danger, that I made the best shot I have ever made
in my life!  I took no conscious aim; it was as though my subconscious
mind, impelled by a stronger power even than that of self-preservation,
directed my hand.  Ajor was in danger!  Simultaneously with the thought
my pistol flew to position, a streak of incandescent powder marked the
path of the bullet from its muzzle; and the spear, its point shattered,
was deflected from its path.  With a howl of dismay the six Band-lu
rose from their shelter and raced away toward the south.

I turned toward Ajor.  She was very white and wide-eyed, for the
clutching fingers of death had all but seized her; but a little smile
came to her lips and an expression of great pride to her eyes.  "My
Tom!" she said, and took my hand in hers.  That was all--"My Tom!" and
a pressure of the hand.  Her Tom!  Something stirred within my bosom.
Was it exaltation or was it consternation?  Impossible!  I turned away
almost brusquely.

"Come!" I said, and strode off toward the Kro-lu prisoner.

The Kro-lu stood watching us with stolid indifference.  I presume that
he expected to be killed; but if he did, he showed no outward sign of
fear.  His eyes, indicating his greatest interest, were fixed upon my
pistol or the rifle which Ajor still carried.  I cut his bonds with my
knife.  As I did so, an expression of surprise tinged and animated the
haughty reserve of his countenance.  He eyed me quizzically.

"What are you going to do with me?" he asked.

"You are free," I replied.  "Go home, if you wish."

"Why don't you kill me?" he inquired.  "I am defenseless."

"Why should I kill you? I have risked my life and that of this young
lady to save your life.  Why, therefore should I now take it?"  Of
course, I didn't say "young lady" as there is no Caspakian equivalent
for that term; but I have to allow myself considerable latitude in the
translation of Caspakian conversations.  To speak always of a beautiful
young girl as a "she" may be literal; but it seems far from gallant.

The Kro-lu concentrated his steady, level gaze upon me for at least a
full minute.  Then he spoke again.

"Who are you, man of strange skins?" he asked.  "Your she is Galu; but
you are neither Galu nor Kro-lu nor Band-lu, nor any other sort of man
which I have seen before.  Tell me from whence comes so mighty a
warrior and so generous a foe."

"It is a long story," I replied, "but suffice it to say that I am not
of Caspak.  I am a stranger here, and--let this sink in--I am not a
foe.  I have no wish to be an enemy of any man in Caspak, with the
possible exception of the Galu warrior Du-seen."

"Du-seen!" he exclaimed.  "You are an enemy of Du-seen?  And why?"

"Because he would harm Ajor," I replied.  "You know him?"

"He cannot know him," said Ajor.  "Du-seen rose from the Kro-lu long
ago, taking a new name, as all do when they enter a new sphere.  He
cannot know him, as there is no intercourse between the Kro-lu and the
Galu."

The warrior smiled.  "Du-seen rose not so long ago," he said, "that I
do not recall him well, and recently he has taken it upon himself to
abrogate the ancient laws of Caspak; he had had intercourse with the
Kro-lu.  Du-seen would be chief of the Galus, and he has come to the
Kro-lu for help."

Ajor was aghast.  The thing was incredible.  Never had Kro-lu and Galu
had friendly relations; by the savage laws of Caspak they were deadly
enemies, for only so can the several races maintain their individuality.

"Will the Kro-lu join him?" asked Ajor.  "Will they invade the country
of Jor my father?"

"The younger Kro-lu favor the plan," replied the warrior, "since they
believe they will thus become Galus immediately.  They hope to span the
long years of change through which they must pass in the ordinary
course of events and at a single stride become Galus.  We of the older
Kro-lu tell them that though they occupy the land of the Galu and wear
the skins and ornaments of the golden people, still they will not be
Galus till the time arrives that they are ripe to rise.  We also tell
them that even then they will never become a true Galu race, since
there will still be those among them who can never rise.  It is all
right to raid the Galu country occasionally for plunder, as our people
do; but to attempt to conquer it and hold it is madness.  For my part,
I have been content to wait until the call came to me.  I feel that it
cannot now be long."

"What is your name?" asked Ajor.

"Chal-az," replied the man.

"You are chief of the Kro-lu?" Ajor continued.

"No, it is Al-tan who is chief of the Kro-lu of the east," answered
Chal-az.

"And he is against this plan to invade my father's country?"

"Unfortunately he is rather in favor of it," replied the man, "since he
has about come to the conclusion that he is batu.  He has been chief
ever since, before I came up from the Band-lu, and I can see no change
in him in all those years.  In fact, he still appears to be more
Band-lu than Kro-lu.  However, he is a good chief and a mighty warrior,
and if Du-seen persuades him to his cause, the Galus may find
themselves under a Kro-lu chieftain before long--Du-seen as well as the
others, for Al-tan would never consent to occupy a subordinate
position, and once he plants a victorious foot in Galu, he will not
withdraw it without a struggle."

I asked them what batu meant, as I had not before heard the word.
Literally translated, it is equivalent to through, finished, done-for,
as applied to an individual's evolutionary progress in Caspak, and with
this information was developed the interesting fact that not every
individual is capable of rising through every stage to that of Galu.
Some never progress beyond the Alu stage; others stop as Bo-lu, as
Sto-lu, as Band-lu or as Kro-lu.  The Ho-lu of the first generation may
rise to become Alus; the Alus of the second generation may become
Bo-lu, while it requires three generations of Bo-lu to become Band-lu,
and so on until Kro-lu's parent on one side must be of the sixth
generation.

It was not entirely plain to me even with this explanation, since I
couldn't understand how there could be different generations of peoples
who apparently had no offspring.  Yet I was commencing to get a slight
glimmer of the strange laws which govern propagation and evolution in
this weird land.  Already I knew that the warm pools which always lie
close to every tribal abiding-place were closely linked with the
Caspakian scheme of evolution, and that the daily immersion of the
females in the greenish slimy water was in response to some natural
law, since neither pleasure nor cleanliness could be derived from what
seemed almost a religious rite.  Yet I was still at sea; nor,
seemingly, could Ajor enlighten me, since she was compelled to use
words which I could not understand and which it was impossible for her
to explain the meanings of.

As we stood talking, we were suddenly startled by a commotion in the
bushes and among the boles of the trees surrounding us, and
simultaneously a hundred Kro-lu warriors appeared in a rough circle
about us.  They greeted Chal-az with a volley of questions as they
approached slowly from all sides, their heavy bows fitted with long,
