never produced, and here one of the secondary radicles is developed at an
early age into a so-called bulb.** Again, certain species of Chaerophyllum
and Corydalis produce only a single cotyledon;*** in the former the
hypocotyl, and in the latter the radicle is enlarged, according to Irmisch,
into a bulb.

In the several foregoing cases one of the cotyledons is delayed in its
development, or reduced in size, or rendered rudimentary, or quite aborted;
but in other cases both cotyledons are represented by mere rudiments. With
Opuntia basilaris this is not the case, for both cotyledons are thick and
large, and the hypocotyl shows at first no signs of enlargement; but
afterwards, when the cotyledons have withered and disarticulated
themselves, it becomes thickened, and from its tapering form, together with
its smooth, tough, brown skin, appears, when ultimately drawn down to some
depth into the soil, like a root. On the other

* Dr. H. Gressner, 'Bot. Zeitung,' 1874, p. 824.

** Irmisch, 'Beiträge zur Morphologie der Pflanzen,' 1854, pp. 11, 12;
'Bot. Zeitung,' 1874, p. 805.

*** Delpino, 'Rivista Botanica,' 1877, p. 21. It is evident from Vaucher's
account ('Hist. Phys. des Plantes d'Europe,' tom. i. 1841, p. 149) of the
germination of the seeds of several species of Corydalis, that the bulb or
tubercule begins to be formed at an extremely early age.
[page 97]

hand, with several other Cacteae, the hypocotyl is from the first much
enlarged, and both cotyledons are almost or quite rudimentary. Thus with
Cereus Landbeckii two little triangular projections, representing the
cotyledons, are narrower than the hypocotyl, which is pear-shaped, with the
point downwards. In Rhipsalis cassytha the cotyledons are represented by
mere points on the enlarged hypocotyl. In Echinocactus viridescens the
hypocotyl is globular, with two little prominences on its summit. In
Pilocereus Houlletii the hypocotyl, much swollen in the upper part, is
merely notched on the summit; and each side of the notch evidently
represents a cotyledon. Stapelia sarpedon, a member of the very distinct
family of the Asclepiadeae, is fleshy like a cactus; and here again the
upper part of the flattened hypocotyl is much thickened and bears two
minute cotyledons, which, measured internally, were only .15 inch in
length, and in breadth not equal to one-fourth of the diameter of the
hypocotyl in its narrow axis; yet these minute cotyledons are probably not
quite useless, for when the hypocotyl breaks through the ground in the form
of an arch, they are closed or pressed against one another, and thus
protect the plumule. They afterwards open.

From the several cases now given, which refer to widely distinct plants, we
may infer that there is some close connection between the reduced size of
one or both cotyledons and the formation, by the enlargement of the
hypocotyl or of the radicle, of a so-called bulb. But it may be asked, did
the cotyledons first tend to abort, or did a bulb first begin to be formed?
As all dicotyledons naturally produce two well-developed cotyledons, whilst
the thickness of the hypocotyl and of the radicle differs much in different
plants, it seems probable that these latter organs first became from
[page 98]
some cause thickened--in several instances apparently in correlation with
the fleshy nature of the mature plant--so as to contain a store of
nutriment sufficient for the seedling, and then that one or both
cotyledons, from being superfluous, decreased in size. It is not surprising
that one cotyledon alone should sometimes have been thus affected, for with
certain plants, for instance the cabbage, the cotyledons are at first of
unequal size, owing apparently to the manner in which they are packed
within the seed. It does not, however, follow from the above connection,
that whenever a bulb is formed at an early age, one or both cotyledons will
necessarily become superfluous, and consequently more or less rudimentary.
Finally, these cases offer a good illustration of the principle of
compensation or balancement of growth, or, as Goethe expresses it, "in
order to spend on one side, Nature is forced to economise on the other
side."

Circumnutation and other movements of Hypocotyls and Epicotyls, whilst
still arched and buried beneath the ground, and whilst breaking through
it.--According to the position in which a seed may chance to have been
buried, the arched hypocotyl or epicotyl will begin to protrude in a
horizontal, a more or less inclined, or in a vertical plane. Except when
already standing vertically upwards, both legs of the arch are acted on
from the earliest period by apogeotropism. Consequently they both bend
upwards until the arch becomes vertical. During the whole of this process,
even before the arch has broken through the ground, it is continually
trying to circumnutate to a slight extent; as it likewise does if it
happens at first to stand vertically up,--all which cases have been
observed and described, more or less fully, in the last chapter. After the
arch has grown to some
[page 99]
height upwards the basal part ceases to circumnutate, whilst the upper part
continues to do so.

That an arched hypocotyl or epicotyl, with the two legs fixed in the
ground, should be able to circumnutate, seemed to us, until we had read
Prof. Wiesner's observations, an inexplicable fact. He has shown* in the
case of certain seedlings, whose tips are bent downwards (or which nutate),
that whilst the posterior side of the upper or dependent portion grows
quickest, the anterior and opposite side of the basal portion of the same
internode grows quickest; these two portions being separated by an
indifferent zone, where the growth is equal on all sides. There may be even
more than one indifferent zone in the same internode; and the opposite
sides of the parts above and below each such zone grow quickest. This
peculiar manner of growth is called by Wiesner "undulatory nutation."
Circumnutation depends on one side of an organ growing quickest (probably
preceded by increased turgescence), and then another side, generally almost
the opposite one, growing quickest. Now if we look at an arch like this
[upside down U] and suppose the whole of one side--we will say the whole
convex side of both legs--to increase in length, this would not cause the
arch to bend to either side. But if the outer side or surface of the left
leg were to increase in length the arch would be pushed over to the right,
and this would be aided by the inner side of the right leg increasing in
length. If afterwards the process were reversed, the arch would be pushed
over to the opposite or left side, and so on alternately,--that is, it
would circumnutate. As an arched hypo-

* 'Die undulirende Nutation der Internodien,' Akad. der Wissench. (Vienna),
Jan. 17th, 1878. Also published separately, see p. 32.
[page 100]

cotyl, with the two legs fixed in the ground, certainly circumnutates, and
as it consists of a single internode, we may conclude that it grows in the
manner described by Wiesner. It may be added, that the crown of the arch
does not grow, or grows very slowly, for it does not increase much in
breadth, whilst the arch itself increases greatly in height.

The circumnutating movements of arched hypocotyls and epicotyls can hardly
fail to aid them in breaking through the ground, if this be damp and soft;
though no doubt their emergence depends mainly on the force exerted by
their longitudinal growth. Although the arch circumnutates only to a slight
extent and probably with little force, yet it is able to move the soil near
the surface, though it may not be able to do so at a moderate depth. A pot
with seeds of Solanum palinacanthum, the tall arched hypocotyls of which
had emerged and were growing rather slowly, was covered with fine
argillaceous sand kept damp, and this at first closely surrounded the bases
of the arches; but soon a narrow open crack was formed round each of them,
which could be accounted for only by their having pushed away the sand on
all sides; for no such cracks surrounded some little sticks and pins which
had been driven into the sand. It has already been stated that the
cotyledons of Phalaris and Avena, the plumules of Asparagus and the
hypocotyls of Brassica, were likewise able to displace the same kind of
sand, either whilst simply circumnutating or whilst bending towards a
lateral light.

As long as an arched hypocotyl or epicotyl remains buried beneath the
ground, the two legs cannot separate from one another, except to a slight
extent from the yielding of the soil; but as soon as the arch rises above
the ground, or at an earlier period if
[page 101]
the pressure of the surrounding earth be artificially removed, the arch
immediately begins to straighten itself. This no doubt is due to growth
along the whole inner surface of both legs of the arch; such growth being
checked or prevented, as long as the two legs of the arch are firmly
pressed together. When the earth is removed all round an arch and the two
legs are tied together at their bases, the growth on the under side of the
crown causes it after a time to become much flatter and broader than
naturally occurs. The straightening process consists of a modified form of
circumnutation, for the lines described during this process (as with the
hypocotyl of Brassica, and the epicotyls of Vicia and Corylus) were often
plainly zigzag and sometimes looped. After hypocotyls or epicotyls have
emerged from the ground, they quickly become perfectly straight. No trace
is left of their former abrupt curvature, excepting in the case of Allium
cepa, in which the cotyledon rarely becomes quite straight, owing to the
protuberance developed on the crown of the arch.

The increased growth along the inner surface of the arch which renders it
straight, apparently begins in the basal leg or that which is united to the
radicle; for this leg, as we often observed, is first bowed backwards from
the other leg. This movement facilitates the withdrawal of the tip of the
epicotyl or of the cotyledons, as the case may be, from within the
seed-coats and from the ground. But the cotyledons often emerge from the
ground still tightly enclosed within the seed-coats, which apparently serve
to protect them. The seed-coats are afterwards ruptured and cast off by the
swelling of the closely conjoined cotyledons, and not by any movement or
their separation from one another.

Nevertheless, in some few cases, especially with the
[page 102]
Cucurbitaceae, the seed-coats are ruptured by a curious contrivance,
described by M. Flahault.* A heel or peg is developed on one side of the
summit of the radicle or base of the hypocotyl; and this holds down the
lower half of the seed-coats (the radicle being fixed into the ground)
whilst the continued growth of the arched hypocotyl forced upwards the
upper half, and tears asunder the seed-coats at one end, and the cotyledons
are then easily withdrawn.

Fig. 62. Cucurbita ovifera: germinating seed, showing the heel or peg
projecting on one side from summit of radicle and holding down lower tip of
seed-coats, which have been partially ruptured by the growth of the arched
hypocotyl.

The accompanying figure (Fig. 62) will render this description
intelligible. Forty-one seeds of Cucurbita ovifera were laid on friable
peat and were covered by a layer about an inch in thickness, not much
pressed down, so that the cotyledons in being dragged up were subjected to
very little friction, yet forty of them came up naked, the seed-coats being
left buried in the peat. This was certainly due to the action of the peg,
for when it was prevented from acting, the cotyledons, as we shall
presently see, were lifted up still enclosed in their seed-coats. They
were, however, cast off in the course of two or three days by the swelling
of the cotyledons. Until this occurs light is excluded, and the cotyledons
cannot decompose carbonic acid; but no one probably would have thought that
the advantage thus gained by a little earlier cast-

* 'Bull. Soc. Bot. de France,' tom. xxiv. 1877, p. 201.
[page 103]

ing off of the seed-coats would be sufficient to account for the
development of the peg. Yet according to M. Flahault, seedlings which have
been prevented from casting their seed-coats whilst beneath the ground, are
inferior to those which have emerged with their cotyledons naked and ready
to act.

The peg is developed with extraordinary rapidity; for it could only just be
distinguished in two seedlings, having radicles .35 inch in length, but
after an interval of only 24 hours was well developed in both. It is
formed, according to Flahault, by the enlargement of the layers of the
cortical parenchyma at the base of the hypocotyl. If, however, we judge by
the effects of a solution of permanganate of potassium, it is developed on
the exact line of junction between the hypocotyl and radicle; for the flat
lower surface, as well as the edges, were coloured brown like the radicle;
whilst the upper slightly inclined surface was left uncoloured like the
hypocotyl, excepting indeed in one out of 33 immersed seedlings in which a
large part of the upper surface was coloured brown. Secondary roots
sometimes spring from the lower surface of the peg, which thus seems in all
respects to partake of the nature of the radicle. The peg is always
developed on the side which becomes concave by the arching of the
hypocotyl; and it would be of no service if it were formed on any other
side. It is also always developed with the flat lower side, which, as just
stated, forms a part of the radicle, at right angles to it, and in a
horizontal plane. This fact was clearly shown by burying some of the thin
flat seeds in the same position as in Fig. 62, excepting that they were not
laid on their flat broad sides, but with one edge downwards. Nine seeds
were thus planted, and the peg was developed in the
[page 104]
same position, relatively to the radicle, as in the figure; consequently it
did not rest on the flat tip of the lower half of the seed-coats, but was
inserted like a wedge between the two tips. As the arched hypocotyl grew
upwards it tended to draw up the whole seed, and the peg necessarily rubbed
against both tips, but did not hold either down. The result was, that the
cotyledons of five out of the nine seeds thus placed were raised above the
ground still enclosed within their seed-coats. Four seeds were buried with
the end from which the radicle protrudes pointing vertically downwards, and
owing to the peg being always developed in the same position, its apex
alone came into contact with, and rubbed against the tip on one side; the
result was, that the cotyledons of all four emerged still within their
seed-coats. These cases show us how the peg acts in co-ordination with the
position which the flat, thin, broad seeds would almost always occupy when
naturally sown. When the tip of the lower half of the seed-coats was cut
off, Flahault found (as we did likewise) that the peg could not act, since
it had nothing to press on, and the cotyledons were raised above the ground
with their seed-coats not cast off. Lastly, nature shows us the use of the
peg; for in the one Cucurbitaceous genus known to us, in which the
cotyledons are hypogean and do not cast their seed-coats, namely,
Megarrhiza, there is no vestige of a peg. This structure seems to be
present in most of the other genera in the family, judging from Flahault's
statements' we found it well-developed and properly acting in Trichosanthes
anguina, in which we hardly expected to find it, as the cotyledons are
somewhat thick and fleshy. Few cases can be advanced of a structure better
adapted for a special purpose than the present one.
[page 105]

With Mimosa pudica the radicle protrudes from a small hole in the sharp
edge of the seed; and on its summit, where united with the hypocotyl, a
transverse ridge is developed at an early age, which clearly aids in
splitting the tough seed-coats; but it does not aid in casting them off, as
this is subsequently effected by the swelling of the cotyledons after they
have been raised above the ground. The ridge or heel therefore acts rather
differently from that of Cucurbita. Its lower surface and the edges were
coloured brown by the permanganate of potassium, but not the upper surface.
It is a singular fact that after the ridge has done its work and has
escaped from the seed-coats, it is developed into a frill all round the
summit of the radicle.*

At the base of the enlarged hypocotyl of Abronia umbellata, where it blends
into the radicle, there is a projection or heel which varies in shape, but
its outline is too angular in our former figure (Fig. 61). The radicle
first protrudes from a small hole at one end of the tough, leathery, winged
fruit. At this period the upper part of the radicle is packed within the
fruit parallel to the hypocotyl, and the single cotyledon is doubled back
parallel to the latter. The swelling of these three parts, and especially
the rapid development of the thick heel between the hypocotyl and radicle
at the point where they are doubled, ruptures the tough fruit at the upper
end and allows the arched hypocotyl to emerge; and this seems to be the
function of the heel. A seed was cut out of the fruit and

* Our attention was called to this case by a brief statement by Nobbe in
his 'Handbuch der Samenkunde,' 1876, p. 215, where a figure is also given
of a seedling of Martynia with a heel or ridge at the junction of the
radicle and hypocotyl. This seed possesses a very hard and tough coat, and
would be likely to require aid in bursting and freeing the cotyledons.
[page 106]

allowed to germinate in damp air, and now a thin flat disc was developed
all round the base of the hypocotyl and grew to an extraordinary breadth,
like the frill described under Mimosa, but somewhat broader. Flahault says
that with Mirabilis, a member of the same family with Abronia, a heel or
collar is developed all round the base of the hypocotyl, but more on one
side than on the other; and that it frees the cotyledons from their
seed-coats. We observed only old seeds, and these were ruptured by the
absorption of moisture, independently of any aid from the heel and before
the protrusion of the radicle; but it does not follow from our experience
that fresh and tough fruits would behave in a like manner.

In concluding this section of the present chapter it may be convenient to
summarise, under the form of an illustration, the usual movements of the
hypocotyls and epicotyls of seedlings, whilst breaking through the ground
and immediately afterwards. We may suppose a man to be thrown down on his
hands and knees, and at the same time to one side, by a load of hay falling
on him. He would first endeavour to get his arched back upright, wriggling
at the same time in all directions to free himself a little from the
surrounding pressure; and this may represent the combined effects of
apogeotropism and circumnutation, when a seed is so buried that the arched
hypocotyl or epicotyl protrudes at first in a horizontal or inclined plane.
The man, still wriggling, would then raise his arched back as high as he
could; and this may represent the growth and continued circumnutation of an
arched hypocotyl or epicotyl, before it has reached the surface of the
ground. As soon as the man felt himself at all free, he would raise the
upper part of his body, whilst still on
[page 107]
his knees and still wriggling; and this may represent the bowing backwards
of the basal leg of the arch, which in most cases aids in the withdrawal of
the cotyledons from the buried and ruptured seed-coats, and the subsequent
straightening of the whole hypocotyl or epicotyl--circumnutation still
continuing.

Circumnutation of Hypocotyls and Epicotyls, when erect.--The hypocotyls,
epicotyls, and first shoots of the many seedlings observed by us, after
they had become straight and erect, circumnutated continuously. The
diversified figures described by them, often during two successive days,
have been shown in the woodcuts in the last chapter. It should be
recollected that the dots were joined by straight lines, so that the
figures are angular; but if the observations had been made every few
minutes the lines would have been more or less curvilinear, and irregular
ellipses or ovals, or perhaps occasionally circles, would have been formed.
The direction of the longer axes of the ellipses made during the same day
or on successive days generally changed completely, so as to stand at right
angles to one another. The number of irregular ellipses or circles made
within a given time differs much with different species. Thus with Brassica
oleracea, Cerinthe major, and Cucurbita ovifera about four such figures
were completed in 12 h.; whereas with Solanum palinacanthum and Opuntia
basilaris, scarcely more than one. The figures likewise differ greatly in
size; thus they were very small and in some degree doubtful in Stapelia,
and large in Brassica, etc. The ellipses described by Lathyrus nissolia and
Brassica were narrow, whilst those made by the Oak were broad. The figures
are often complicated by small loops and zigzag lines.

As most seedling plants before the development of true leaves are of low,
sometimes very low stature,
[page 108]
the extreme amount of movement from side to side of their circumnutating
stems was small; that of the hypocotyl of Githago segetum was about .2 of
an inch, and that of Cucurbita ovifera about .28. A very young shoot of
Lathyrus nissolia moved about .14, that of an American oak .2, that of the
common nut only .04, and a rather tall shoot of the Asparagus .11 of an
inch. The extreme amount of movement of the sheath-like cotyledon of
Phalaris Canariensis was .3 of an inch; but it did not move very quickly,
the tip crossing on one occasion five divisions of the micrometer, that is,
1/100th of an inch, in 22 m. 5 s. A seedling Nolana prostrata travelled the
same distance in 10 m. 38 s. Seedling cabbages circumnutate much more
quickly, for the tip of a cotyledon crossed 1/100th of an inch on the
micrometer in 3 m. 20 s.; and this rapid movement, accompanied by incessant
oscillations, was a wonderful spectacle when beheld under the microscope.

The absence of light, for at least a day, does not interfere in the least
with the circumnutation of the hypocotyls, epicotyls, or young shoots of
the various dicotyledonous seedlings observed by us; nor with that of the
young shoots of some monocotyledons. The circumnutation was indeed much
plainer in darkness than in light, for if the light was at all lateral the
stem bent towards it in a more or less zigzag course.

Finally, the hypocotyls of many seedlings are drawn during the winter into
the ground, or even beneath it so that they disappear. This remarkable
process, which apparently serves for their protection, has been fully
described by De Vries.* He shows that

* 'Bot. Zeitung,' 1879, p. 649. See also Winkler in 'Verhandl. des Bot.
Vereins der P. Brandenburg,' Jahrg. xvi. p. 16, as quoted by Haberlandt,
'Schutzeinrichungen der Keimpflanze,' 1877, p. 52.
[page 109]

it is effected by the contraction of the parenchyma-cells of the root. But
the hypocotyl itself in some cases contracts greatly, and although at first
smooth becomes covered with zigzag ridges, as we observed with Githago
segetum. How much of the drawing down and burying of the hypocotyl of
Opuntia basilaris was due to the contraction of this part and how much to
that of the radicle, we did not observe.

Circumnutation of Cotyledons.--With all the dicotyledonous seedlings
described in the last chapter, the cotyledons were in constant movement,
chiefly in a vertical plane, and commonly once up and once down in the
course of the 24 hours. But there were many exceptions to such simplicity
of movement; thus the cotyledons of Ipomoea caerulea moved 13 times either
upwards or downwards in the course of 16 h.. 18 m. Those of Oxalis rosea
moved in the same manner 7 times in the course of 24 h.; and those of
Cassia tora described 5 irregular ellipses in 9 h. The cotyledons of some
individuals of Mimosa pudica and of Lotus Jacobaeus moved only once up and
down in 24 h., whilst those of others performed within the same period an
additional small oscillation. Thus with different species, and with
different individuals of the same species, there were many gradations from
a single diurnal movement to oscillations as complex as those of the
Ipomoea and Cassia. The opposite cotyledons on the same seedling move to a
certain extent independently of one another. This was conspicuous with
those of Oxalis sensitiva, in which one cotyledon might be seen during the
daytime rising up until it stood vertically, whilst the opposite one was
sinking down.

Although the movements of cotyledons were generally in nearly the same
vertical plane, yet their upward and downward courses never exactly coin-
[page 110]
cided; so that ellipses, more or less narrow, were described, and the
cotyledons may safely be said to have circumnutated. Nor could this fact be
accounted for by the mere increase in length of the cotyledons through
growth, for this by itself would not induce any lateral movement. That
there was lateral movement in some instances, as with the cotyledons of the
cabbage, was evident; for these, besides moving up and down, changed their
course from right to left 12 times in 14 h. 15 m. With Solanum lycopersicum
the cotyledons, after falling in the forenoon, zigzagged from side to side
between 12 and 4 P.M., and then commenced rising. The cotyledons of Lupinus
luteus are so thick (about .08 of an inch) and fleshy,* that they seemed
little likely to move, and were therefore observed with especial interest;
they certainly moved largely up and down, and as the line traced was zigzag
there was some lateral movement. The nine cotyledons of a seedling Pinus
pinaster plainly circumnutated; and the figures described approached more
nearly to irregular circles than to irregular ovals or ellipses. The
sheath-like cotyledons of the Gramineae circumnutate, that is, move to all
sides, as plainly as do the hypocotyls or epicotyls of any dicotyledonous
plants. Lastly, the very young fronds of a Fern and of a Selaginella
circumnutated.

In a large majority of the cases which were carefully observed, the
cotyledons sink a little downwards in the forenoon, and rise a little in
the afternoon or evening. They thus stand rather more highly inclined
during the night than during the mid-day, at which

* The cotyledons, though bright green, resemble to a certain extent
hypogean ones; see the interesting discussion by Haberlandt ('Die
Schutzeinrichtungen,' etc., 1877, p. 95), on the gradations in the
Leguminosae between subaërial and subterranean cotyledons.
[page 111]

time they are expanded almost horizontally. The circumnutating movement is
thus at least partially periodic, no doubt in connection, as we shall
hereafter see, with the daily alternations of light and darkness. The
cotyledons of several plants move up so much at night as to stand nearly or
quite vertically; and in this latter case they come into close contact with
one another. On the other hand, the cotyledons of a few plants sink almost
or quite vertically down at night; and in this latter case they clasp the
upper part of the hypocotyl. In the same genus Oxalis the cotyledons of
certain species stand vertically up, and those of other species vertically
down, at night. In all such cases the cotyledons may be said to sleep, for
they act in the same manner as do the leaves of many sleeping plants. This
is a movement for a special purpose, and will therefore be considered in a
future chapter devoted to this subject.

In order to gain some rude notion of the proportional number of cases in
which the cotyledons of dicotyledonous plants (hypogean ones being of
course excluded) changed their position in a conspicuous manner at night,
one or more species in several genera were cursorily observed, besides
those described in the last chapter. Altogether 153 genera, included in as
many families as could be procured, were thus observed by us. The
cotyledons were looked at in the middle of the day and again at night; and
those were noted as sleeping which stood either vertically or at an angle
of at least 60o above or beneath the horizon. Of such genera there were 26;
and in 21 of them the cotyledons of some of the species rose, and in only 6
sank at night; and some of these latter cases are rather doubtful from
causes to be explained in the chapter on the sleep of cotyledons. When
[page 112]
cotyledons which at noon were nearly horizontal, stood at night at more
than 20o and less than 60o above the horizon, they were recorded as
"plainly raised;" and of such genera there were 38. We did not meet with
any distinct instances of cotyledons periodically sinking only a few
degrees at night, although no doubt such occur. We have now accounted for
64 genera out of the 153, and there remain 89 in which the cotyledons did
not change their position at night by as much as 20o--that is, in a
conspicuous manner which could easily be detected by the unaided eye and by
memory; but it must not be inferred from this statement that these
cotyledons did not move at all, for in several cases a rise of a few
degrees was recorded, when they were carefully observed. The number 89
might have been a little increased, for the cotyledons remained almost
horizontal at night in some species in a few genera, for instance,
Trifolium and Geranium, which are included amongst the sleepers, such
genera might therefore have been added to the 89. Again, one species of
Oxalis generally raised its cotyledons at night more than 20o and less than
60o above the horizon; so that this genus might have been included under
two heads. But as several species in the same genus were not often
observed, such double entries have been avoided.

In a future chapter it will be shown that the leaves of many plants which
do not sleep, rise a few degrees in the evening and during the early part
of the night; and it will be convenient to defer until then the
consideration of the periodicity of the movements of cotyledons.

On the Pulvini or Joints of Cotyledons.--With several of the seedlings
described in this and the last chapter, the summit of the petiole is
developed into a pulvinus,
[page 113]
cushion, or joint (as this organ has been variously called), like that with
which many leaves are provided. It consists of a mass of small cells
usually of a pale colour from the absence of chlorophyll, and with its
outline more or less convex, as shown in the annexed figure. In the case of
Oxalis sensitiva two-thirds of the petiole, and in that of Mimosa pudica,
apparently the whole of the short sub-petioles of the leaflets have been
converted into pulvini. With pulvinated leaves (i.e. those provided with a
pulvinus) their periodical movements depend, according to Pfeffer,* on the
cells of the pulvinus alternately expanding more quickly on one side than
on the other; whereas the similar movements of leaves not provided with
pulvini, depend on their growth being alternately more rapid on one side
than on the other.** As long as a leaf provided with a pulvinus is young
and continues to grow, its movement depends on both these causes
combined;*** and if the view now held by many botanists be sound, namely,
that growth is always preceded by the expansion of the growing cells, then
the difference between the movements induced by the aid of pulvini and

Fig. 63. Oxalis rosea: longitudinal section of a pulvinus on the summit of
the petiole of a cotyledon, drawn with the camera lucida, magnified 75
times: p, p, petiole; f, fibro-vascular bundle: b, b, commencement of blade
of cotyledon.

* 'Die Periodische Bewegungen der Blattorgane,' 1875.

** Batalin, 'Flora,' Oct. 1st, 1873

*** Pfeffer, ibid. p. 5.
[page 114]

without such aid, is reduced to the expansion of the cells not being
followed by growth in the first case, and being so followed in the second
case.

Dots were made with Indian ink along the midrib of both pulvinated
cotyledons of a rather old seedling of Oxalis Valdiviana; their distances
were repeatedly measured with an eye-piece micrometer during 8 3/4 days,
and they did not exhibit the least trace of increase. It is therefore
almost certain that the pulvinus itself was not then growing. Nevertheless,
during this whole time and for ten days afterwards, these cotyledons rose
vertically every night. In the case of some seedlings raised from seeds
purchased under the name of Oxalis floribunda, the cotyledons continued for
a long time to move vertically down at night, and the movement apparently
depended exclusively on the pulvini, for their petioles were of nearly the
same length in young, and in old seedlings which had produced true leaves.
With some species of Cassia, on the other hand, it was obvious without any
measurement that the pulvinated cotyledons continued to increase greatly in
length during some weeks; so that here the expansion of the cells of the
pulvini and the growth of the petiole were probably combined in causing
their prolonged periodic movements. It was equally evident that the
cotyledons of many plants, not provided with pulvini, increased rapidly in
length; and their periodic movements no doubt were exclusively due to
growth.

In accordance with the view that the periodic movements of all cotyledons
depend primarily on the expansion of the cells, whether or not followed by
growth, we can understand the fact that there is but little difference in
the kind or form of movement in the two sets of cases. This may be seen by
com-
[page 115]
paring the diagrams given in the last chapter. Thus the movements of the
cotyledons of Brassica oleracea and of Ipomoea caerulea, which are not
provided with pulvini, are as complex as those of Oxalis and Cassia which
are thus provided. The pulvinated cotyledons of some individuals of Mimosa
pudica and Lotus Jacobaeus made only a single oscillation, whilst those of
other individuals moved twice up and down in the course of 24 hours; so it
was occasionally with the cotyledons of Cucurbita ovifera, which are
destitute of a pulvinus. The movements of pulvinated cotyledons are
generally larger in extent than those without a pulvinus; nevertheless some
of the latter moved through an angle of 90o. There is, however, one
important difference in the two sets of cases; the nocturnal movements of
cotyledons without pulvini, for instance, those in the Cruciferae,
Cucurbitaceae, Githago, and Beta, never last even for a week, to any
conspicuous degree. Pulvinated cotyledons, on the other hand, continue to
rise at night for a much longer period, even for more than a month, as we
shall now show. But the period no doubt depends largely on the temperature
to which the seedlings are exposed and their consequent rate of
development.

[Oxalis Valdiviana.--Some cotyledons which had lately opened and were
horizontal on March 6th at noon, stood at night vertically up; on the 13th
the first true leaf was formed, and was embraced at night by the
cotyledons; on April 9th, after an interval of 35 days, six leaves were
developed, and yet the cotyledons rose almost vertically at night. The
cotyledons of another seedling, which when first observed had already
produced a leaf, stood vertically at night and continued to do so for 11
additional days. After 16 days from the first observation two leaves were
developed, and the cotyledons were still greatly raised at night. After 21
days the cotyledons during the day were deflected beneath the horizon, but
at night were raised 45o
[page 116]
above it. After 24 days from the first observation (begun after a true leaf
had been developed) the cotyledons ceased to rise at night.

Oxalis (Biophytum) sensitiva.--The cotyledons of several seedlings, 45 days
after their first expansion, stood nearly vertical at night, and closely
embraced either one or two true leaves which by this time had been formed.
These seedlings had been kept in a very warm house, and their development
had been rapid.

Oxalis corniculata.--The cotyledons do not stand vertical at night, but
generally rise to an angle of about 45o above the horizon. They continued
thus to act for 23 days after their first expansion, by which time two
leaves had been formed; even after 29 days they still rose moderately above
their horizontal or downwardly deflected diurnal position.

Mimosa pudica.--The cotyledons were expanded for the first time on Nov.
2nd, and stood vertical at night. On the 15th the first leaf was formed,
and at night the cotyledons were vertical. On the 28th they behaved in the
same manner. On Dec. 15th, that is after 44 days, the cotyledons were still
considerably raised at night; but those of another seedling, only one day
older, were raised very little.

Mimosa albida.--A seedling was observed during only 12 days, by which time
a leaf had been formed, and the cotyledons were then quite vertical at
night.

Trifolium subterraneum.--A seedling, 8 days old, had its cotyledons
horizontal at 10.30 A.M. and vertical at 9.15 P.M. After an interval of two
months, by which time the first and second true leaves had been developed,
the cotyledons still performed the same movement. They had now increased
greatly in size, and had become oval; and their petioles were actually .8
of an inch in length!

Trifolium strictum.--After 17 days the cotyledons still rose at night, but
were not afterwards observed.

Lotus Jacoboeus.--The cotyledons of some seedlings having well-developed
leaves rose to an angle of about 45o at night; and even after 3 or 4 whorls
of leaves had been formed, the cotyledons rose at night considerably above
their diurnal horizontal position.

Cassia mimosoides.--The cotyledons of this Indian species, 14 days after
their first expansion, and when a leaf had been formed, stood during the
day horizontal, and at night vertical.

Cassia sp? (a large S. Brazilian tree raised from seeds sent us
[page 117]
by F. Müller).--The cotyledons, after 16 days from their first expansion,
had increased greatly in size with two leaves just formed. They stood
horizontally during the day and vertically at night, but were not
afterwards observed.

Cassia neglecta (likewise a S. Brazilian species).--A seedling, 34 days
after the first expansion of its cotyledons, was between 3 and 4 inches in
height, with 3 well-developed leaves; and the cotyledons, which during the
day were nearly horizontal, at night stood vertical, closely embracing the
young stem. The cotyledons of another seedling of the same age, 5 inches in
height, with 4 well-developed leaves, behaved at night in exactly the same
manner.]

It is known* that there is no difference in structure between the upper and
lower halves of the pulvini of leaves, sufficient to account for their
upward or downward movements. In this respect cotyledons offer an unusually
good opportunity for comparing the structure of the two halves; for the
cotyledons of Oxalis Valdiviana rise vertically at night, whilst those of
O. rosea sink vertically; yet when sections of their pulvini were made, no
clear difference could be detected between the corresponding halves of this
organ in the two species which move so differently. With O. rosea, however,
there were rather more cells in the lower than in the upper half, but this
was likewise the case in one specimen of O. Valdiviana. the cotyledons of
both species (3 ½ mm. in length) were examined in the morning whilst
extended horizontally, and the upper surface of the pulvinus of O. rosea
was then wrinkled transversely, showing that it was in a state of
compression, and this might have been expected, as the cotyledons sink at
night; with O. Valdiviana it was the lower surface which was wrinkled, and
its cotyledons rise at night.

