fondness for astronomy; and the sole reason why he wanted to visit the
planets was that he couldn't see them well enough with his telescope. So
he dabbled a little in magnetism and so forth, and stumbled upon the
principle of the cube.

But he had no mechanical ability, and was on the point of giving up the
scheme when he met Smith. He was instantly impressed by the engineer's
highly commonplace face; he had had considerable experience with human
contrariness, and felt sure that Smith must be an absolute wonder, since
he looked so very ordinary.

Kinney's diagnosis proved correct. Smith knew his business; the
machinery was finished in a hurry and done right. However, when it came
to fitting the outfit into a suitable sky-car, Kinney was obliged to
call in an architect. That accounts for E. Williams Jackson. At the same
time, it occurred to the doctor that they would need a cook. Mrs. Kinney
had refused to have anything whatever to do with the trip, and so Kinney
put an ad in the paper. As luck would have it, Van Emmon, the geologist,
who had learned how to cook when he first became a mountaineer, saw the
ad and answered it in hope of adventure.

The doctor himself, besides his training in the mental and bodily
frailities of human beings, had also an unusual command of the related
sciences, such as biology. Smith's specialties have already been named;
he could drive an airplane or a nail with equal ease. Van Emmon, as a
part of his profession, was a skilled "fossilologist," and was well up
in natural history.

As for E. Williams Jackson--the architect was also the sociologist of
the four. Moreover, he had quite a reputation as an amateur antiquarian.
Nevertheless, the most important thing about E. Williams Jackson was not
learned until after the visit to Mercury, after the terrible end of that
exploration, after the architect, falling in a faint, had been revived
under the doctor's care.

"Gentlemen," said Kinney, coming from the secluded nook among the
dynamos which had been the architect's bunk; "gentlemen, I must inform
you that Jackson is not what we thought.

"He--I mean, she--is a woman!"

Which put an entirely new face upon matters. The three men, discussing
it, marveled that the architect had been able to keep her sex a secret
all the time they were exploring at Mercury. They did not know that none
of E. Williams Jackson's fellow architects had ever guessed the truth.
Ambitious and ingenious, with a natural liking for house-planning, she
had resolved that her sex should not stand in the way of success.

And when she finally came to herself, there in her bunk, and suspected
that her secret was out--instead of shame or embarrassment she felt only
chagrin. She walked, rather unsteadily, across the floor of the great
cube-shaped car to the window where the three were standing; and as they
quietly made a place for her, she took it entirely as a matter of
course, and without a word.

The doctor had been speaking of the peculiar fitness of the four for
what they were doing. "And if I'm not mistaken," he went on, "we're
going to need all the brains we can pool, when we get to Venus.

"I never would have claimed, when we started out, that Mercury had ever
been inhabited. But now that we've seen what we've seen, I feel dead
sure that Venus once was peopled."

The four looked out the triple-glazed vacuum-insulated window at the
steadily growing globe of "Earth's twin sister." Half in sunlight and
half in shadow, this planet, for ages the synonym for beauty, was now
but a million miles away. She looked as large as the moon; but instead
of a silvery gleam, she showed a creamy radiance fully three times as
bright.

"Let's see," reflected the geologist aloud. "As I recall it, the
brightness of a planet depends upon the amount of its air. That would
indicate, then, that Venus has about as much as the earth, wouldn't it?"
remembering how the home planet had looked when they left it.

The doctor nodded. "There are other factors; but undoubtedly we are
approaching a world which is a great deal like our own. Venus is nearly
as large as the earth, has about nine-tenths the surface, and a gravity
almost as strong. The main difference is that she's only two-thirds as
far from the sun as we are."

"How long is her day?" Smith wanted to know.

"Can't say. Some observers claim to have seen her clearly enough to
announce a day of the same length as ours. Others calculate that she's
like Mercury; always the same face toward the sun. If so, her day is
also her year--two hundred and twenty-five of our days."

Van Emmon looked disappointed. "In that case she would be blistering hot
on one side and freezing cold on the other; except," remembering
Mercury, "except for the 'twilight zone,' where the climate would be
neither one nor the other, but temperate." He pointed to the line down
the middle of the disk before them, the line which divided the lighted
from the unlighted, the day from the night.

The four looked more intently. It should be remembered that the very
brilliance of Venus has always hindered the astronomers; the planet as a
whole is always very conspicuous but its very glare makes it impossible
to see any details. The surface has always seemed to be covered by a
veil of hazy, faintly streaked vapor.

Smith gave a queer exclamation. For a moment or two he stared hard at
the planet; then looked up with an apologetic grin.

"I had a foolish idea. I thought--" He checked himself. "Say, doesn't
Venus remind you of something?"

The doctor slowly shook his head. "Can't say that it does, Smith. I have
always considered Venus as having an appearance peculiarly her own.
Why?"

The engineer started to answer, stopped, thought better of it, and
instead pointed out the half that was in shadow. "Why is it that we can
make out the black portion so easily?"

Kinney could answer this. "The fact is, it isn't really black at all,
but faintly lighted. Presumably it is star-shine."

"Star-shine!" echoed the architect, interested.

"Just that. You see," finished the doctor, "if that side is never turned
toward the sun, then it must be covered with ice, which would reflect
the star--"

"Ah!" exclaimed Smith with satisfaction. "I wasn't so crazy after all!
My notion was that the whole blamed thing is covered with ice!"

It looked reasonable. Certainly the entire sphere had a somewhat watery
appearance. It prompted the geologist to say:

"Kinney--if that reflection is really due to ice, then there must be
plenty of water vapor in the air. And if that's the case--"

"Not only is life entirely possible," stated the doctor quietly, "but
I'll bet you this sky-car against an abandoned soap-stone mine that we
find humans, or near-human beings there when we land tomorrow!"



II

SPEAKING OF VENUS


The architect was still dressed in the fashionably cut suit of men's
clothes she had worn while in the car. Van Emmon thought of this when he
said, somewhat awkwardly:

"Well, I'm going to fix something to eat. It'll be ready in half an
hour, Miss--er--Jackson."

She looked at him, slightly puzzled; then understood. "You mean to give
me time to change my clothes? Thanks; but I'm used to these. And
besides," with spirit, "I never could see why women couldn't wear what
they choose, so long as it is decent."

There was no denying that hers were both becoming and "decent." Modeled
after the usual riding costume, both coat and breeches were youthfully,
rather than mannishly, tailored; and the narrow, vertical stripe of the
dark gray material served to make her slenderness almost girlish. In
short, what with her poet-style hair, her independent manner and direct
speech, she was far more like a boy of twenty than a woman nearing
thirty.

She walked with Van Emmon, dodging machinery all the way, across the big
car to the little kitchenette over which he had presided. There, to his
dismay, the girl took off her coat, rolled up her sleeves, and announced
her intention of helping.

"You're a good cook, Van--I mean, Mr.--"

"Let it go at Van, please," said he hastily. "My first name is Gustave,
but nobody has ever used it since I was christened."

"Same with my 'Edna,' she declared. "Mother's name was Williams, and I
was nicknamed 'Billie' before I can remember. So that's settled," with
great firmness. The point is--Van--you're a good cook, but everything
tastes of bacon. I wish you'd let me boss this meal."

He looked rebellious for an instant, then gave a sigh of relief. "I'm
really tickled to death."

A little later the doctor and Smith, looking across, saw Van Emmon being
initiated into the system which constructs scalloped potatoes. Next, he
was discovering that there is more than one way to prepare dried beef.

"For once, we won't cream it," said E. Billie Jackson, dryly, as Van
Emmon laid down the can-opener. "We'll make an omelet out of it, and see
if anything happens."

She was already beating the eggs. He cut up the meat into small pieces,
and when he was finished, took the egg-beater away from her. He turned
it so energetically that a speck of foam flew into his face.

"Go slow," she advised, nonchalantly reaching up with a dish-towel and
wiping the fleck away. Whereupon he worked the machine more furiously
than ever.

Soon he was wondering how on earth he had come to assume, all along,
that she was not a woman. He now saw that what he had previously
considered boyishness in her was, in fact, simply the vigor and
freshness of an earnest, healthy, energetic girl. It dawned upon him
that her keen, gray eyes were not sharp, but alert; her mouth, not hard,
but resolute; her whole expression, instead of mannish, just as womanly
as that of any girl who has been thrown upon her own resources, and made
good. He soon found that his eyesight did not suffer in any way because
he looked at her.

"Now," she remarked, in her businesslike way, as she placed the brimming
pan into the oven, "I suppose that I'll hear various hints to the effect
that a woman has no business trying to do men's stunts. And I warn you
right now that I'm prepared to put up a warm argument!"

"Of course," said the geologist, with such gravity that the girl knew he
didn't mean it; "of course a woman's place is in the home. Surrounded by
seventeen or eighteen children, and cooking for that many more hired men
besides, she is simply ideal. We realize that."

"Then, admitting that much, why shouldn't a woman be as independent as
she likes? Think what women did during the war; remember what a lot of
women are doctors and lawyers! Is there any good reason why I couldn't
design a library as well as a man could?"

"None at all," agreed Van Emmon, handing over the dish of chopped meat.
The girl carefully folded the contents into the now spongelike omelet as
he went on: "By the way, a neighbor of mine told me, just before I left,
that he was having trouble with a broken sewer. How'd you like to--"

"About as well as you'd like to darn socks!" she came back, evidently
being primed for such comments. She took a look at the potatoes, and
then permitted the geologist to open their sixth can of peaches. "I must
say they're good," she admitted, as she noted the eagerness with which
he obeyed.

Bread and butter, olives, coffee and cake completed that meal. The table
was set with more care than usual, a clean cloth and napkins being
unearthed for the occasion. When Smith and Kinney were called, both
declared that they weren't hungry enough to do justice to it all.

"It's just as well you weren't very hungry," commented Billie, as she
finished giving each of them a second helping of the potatoes. "There's
barely enough left for me," and she took it.

"Say, I never thought of it before, Miss--er--Miss Billie," said Smith
coloring; "but you eat just as much as a man!"

"Ye gods, how shocking!" she jeered. "Come to think of it, Smith, you
eat MORE than a woman!"

The doctor's face grew red with some suppressed emotion. After a while
he said soberly: "I'll tell you what's worrying Smith. He's afraid that
women, having suddenly become very progressive, will forge entirely
ahead of men. You understand--having started, they can't stop. And I
must admit that I've thought seriously of it at times myself."

"Me too," added Van Emmon earnestly. "I have the same feeling about it
that an elderly man must have when he sees a young one get on the job.
Instead of being glad that the women are making good, I sort of resent
it."

"I knew it!" exclaimed the girl delightedly. "But I never heard a man
admit it before!"

"Perhaps it isn't as serious as we think," said the practical Smith,
scraping the bottom of the potato pan. "I believe that the progress of
women may have a fine effect upon men, making us less self-satisfied,
and more alert. For one thing," glancing about the cube, "we've got to
clean up a bit, now that we know you're a woman!"

The architect's eyes flashed. "Because you know mighty well I'll light
in and do it myself, if you don't; that's what you mean! Please take
notice that I'm to be respected, not because of what I AM, but because
of what I can DO!"

"In behalf of myself and companions, I surrender!" said the doctor
gallantly. Then he instantly added: "And yet, even when we are actually
chivalrous, we are disregarding your desire to be appreciated for what
you are worth. Pardon me, Miss Billie; I'll not forget again.

"At the same time, my dear," remembering that he had a daughter of his
own, nearly the builder's age, "we men have come to think of women
primarily as potential mothers, and secondarily as people of affairs.
And considering that motherhood is something that is denied to us lords
of the earth--"

"For which we can thank a merciful Providence," interjected the girl
solemnly.

"Considering this--excuse my seriousness--really amazing fact, you can't
blame us for expecting women to fulfil this vital function before taking
up other matters."

"Yes?" remarked the girl, watching the peaches with anxious eye as Van
Emmon helped himself. "Funny; but I always understood that the first
function of man was to father the race; yet, invariably the young
fellows try to make names for themselves before, not after, they marry!"

"Scalped!" chuckled Van Emmon, as the doctor hid his discomfiture behind
a large piece of cake. "You may know a lot about Venus, doc, but you
don't know much about women!"

"Speaking about Venus," Smith was reminded, "we may learn something
bearing upon the very point we have been discussing if Kinney's right
about the inhabitants."

The doctor nodded eagerly. "You see, if there's people still alive on
the planet, they're probably further advanced than we on the earth.
Other things being equal, of course. Being a smaller planet than ours,
she cooled off sooner, and thus became fit for life earlier. And having
been made from the same 'batch,' to use Van's expression, that Mercury
and all the rest were, why, in all likelihood evolution has taken place
there much the same as with us, only sooner.

"I should expect," he elaborated largely, "that we shall find the
inhabitants much the same as we humans, only extremely civilized. It may
be that they are as far above us as we are above monkeys."

Smith broke in by quoting an astronomer who contended that Venus kept
only one face toward the sun. "Maybe she always did, Kinney."

The doctor shook his head. "See how perfectly round she is? No
oblateness whatever. It proves that she once revolved, otherwise she'd
be pear-shaped, from the sun's pull."

There was a short silence, during which Billie concluded that the only
scraps left would be the coffee-grounds. Then Van Emmon pushed away from
the table, got to his feet, stretched a little to relieve his nerves,
and said:

"Well, whatever we find on Venus, I hope the women do the cooking!"



III

THE FIRST VENUSIAN


When the sky-car was within a thousand miles of the surface, Smith
adjusted the currents so that the floor was directed downward. The four
changed from the window to the deadlight, and watched the approaching
disk with every bit of the excitement and interest they had felt when
nearing Mercury.

The doctor had warned them that the heavy atmosphere which Venus was
known to possess would prevent seeing as clearly as in the case of the
smaller planet. All were much disappointed, however, to find that they
were still unable to make out a single definite detail. The great half-
shining, half-black world showed nothing but that vaguely streaked, ice-
like haze.

There was something very queer about it all. "Strange that we should see
no movement in those clouds," mused the doctor aloud. "That is, if they
really are clouds."

Van Emmon already doubted it. "Just what I was thinking. There ought to
be terrific winds; yet, so far as I have seen, there's been nothing
doing anywhere on the surface since we first began to observe it."

After a while the doctor put away his binoculars and rubbed his eyes.
"We might as well descend faster, Smith. Can't see a thing from here."

Unhindered by air to impede its progress the sky-car had been hurtling
through space at cometary speed. Now, however, Smith added the power of
the apparatus to the pull of the planet, so that the disk began to rush
toward them at a truly alarming rate. After a few seconds of it Billie
found herself unconsciously moving to the side of the geologist.

He looked down at her, understood, and flushed with pleasure. "There's
no danger," he confidently assured her, with the result that, her
courage fortified, the girl moved back to her place again. Van Emmon
inwardly kicked himself.

So deceptive was that peculiar fogginess Smith throttled their descent
as soon as they had reached the point where the planet's appearance
changed from round to flat. They were headed for the line which marked
the boundary of the shadow. This gray "twilight zone" was three or four
hundred miles in width; on the right of it--to the east--the dazzling
surface of that sunlit vapor contrasted sharply with the all but black
mistiness of the starward side. Clearly the zone ought to be temperate
enough.

Down they sank. As they came nearer a curious pinkish tint began to show
beneath them. Shortly it became more noticeable; the doctor gave a
sudden grunt of satisfaction, and Smith stopped the car.

A minute later the doctor had taken a sample of the surrounding ether
through his laboratory test-vestibule; and shortly announced that they
were now floating in air instead of space.

"Good deal like ours back home, too"--exultingly. "Pretty thin, of
course." He made a short calculation, referring to the aneroid barometer
which was mounted on the outer frame of a window, and said he judged
that their altitude was about five miles.

The descent continued, Smith using the utmost caution. The other three
kept their eyes glued to the deadlight; and their mystification was only
equaled by their uneasiness as that motionless, bleary glaze failed
absolutely to show anything they had not seen a thousand miles higher.
Not a single detail!

"It reminds me," said the girl in a low voice, "of something I once saw
from the top of a hill. It was the reflection of the sun from the
surface of a pond; not clear water, but covered with--"

"Good Heavens!" interrupted Van Emmon, struck with the thought. "Can it
be that the whole planet is under water?"

Beyond a doubt his guess was justified. There was an oily smoothness
about that dazzling haze which made it remarkably like a lake of still
and rather dirty water under a bright sun.

But the doctor said no. "Any water I ever heard of would make clouds,"
said he; "and we know there's air enough to guarantee plenty of wind.
Yet nothing seems to be in motion." He was frowning continually now.

It was Billie who first declared that she saw the surface. "Stop," she
said to Smith evenly, and he instantly obeyed. All four gathered around
the deadlight, and soon agreed that the peculiarly elusive skin of the
planet was actually within sight. However, it was like deciding upon the
distance of the moon--as easy to say that it were within arm's reach as
a long ways off.

The doctor went to a window. There he could look out upon the sun, a
painfully bright object much larger than it looks from the Earth. It was
just "ascending," and half of it was below the horizon. A blinding
streak of light was reflected from a point on the surface not far from
the cube. Shading his eyes with his hand the doctor could see that the
mysterious crust was absolutely smooth.

On the opposite side of the car the horizon ended in a sunrise glow of a
slightly greenish radiance. From that side the pinkish tint of the
surface was quite pronounced.

Before going any lower the doctor, struck with an idea, declared: "We
always want to remember that this car is perfectly soundproof. Suppose
we open the outer door of the vestibule. I imagine we'll learn something
peculiar."

It was possible to open this door without touching the inner valves,
using mechanism concealed within the walls. The moment it was done--the
door faced the "north"--pandemonium itself broke loose. A most terrific
shrieking and howling came from the outside; it was wind, passing at a
rate such as would make a hurricane seem a mere zephyr. The doctor
closed the door so that they could think.

"It's the draft," he concluded; "the draft from the sun-warmed side to
the cold side."

As for Van Emmon, he was getting out a rope and a heavy leaden weight.
On the rope he formed knots every five feet, about twenty of them; and
after getting into one of the insulated, aluminum-armored and oxygen-
helmeted suits with which they had explored Mercury, he locked himself
on the other side of the inner vestibule door and proceeded to "sound."

To the amazement of all except Billie "bottom" was reached in less than
twenty feet. "I thought so," she said with satisfaction; but she was not
at ease until Van Emmon had returned in safety from that booming,
whistling turmoil.

His first remark upon removing his helmet almost took them off their
feet. "The point is," said he, throttling his excitement--"the point is,
the rope was nearly jerked out of my hands!

"Understand what I mean? The surface is REVOLVING!"

This upset every idea they had had; it never occurred to any of them
that the planet could revolve at such speed that it would appear
stationary. Smith went at once to the eastern window and watched
closely, for fear some irregularity in that apparently perfect sphere
might catch them unawares. They did not learn till later that Venus's
day is a little less than twenty-five hours, and therefore, since they
had approached her near the equator, the wind they had encountered was
moving at nearly nine hundred miles per hour!

Bit by bit, though, the cube answered to the wind-pressure. Soon they
noted the sun rising slowly; and by the time it was two hours high the
surface, which had been whizzing under them like some highly polished
top, became entirely motionless: The cube had "stopped."

One minute later the car touched the level. Smith very slowly reduced
the repelling current so that the immense weight of the cube was but
gradually shifted to the unknown surface beneath. Ton after ton was
added until--

"Stop!" came from the doctor. He had noted through the window a slight
curvature in the material.

So the machinery was left in action. "At any rate," said Smith, "we know
that the confounded stuff isn't antimagnetic, whatever it is." Of course
this was true--even though the gelatinlike shell could not support the
cube's weight, yet it did not insulate the planet from the repelling
current.

The thermometer registered three hundred and thirty-five degrees
Fahrenheit. "Two hundred and eighty degrees higher than it would be at
home in the same latitude," remarked the doctor. "We'll have to use the
suits." He took it for granted that exploration should begin at once.

No one stayed behind. The machines could be relied upon, as they knew
from nearly two weeks of use, and certainly there was nothing in sight
which could possibly interfere with the cube. Nevertheless, the matter-
of-fact engineer took care to remove part of the door-operating
apparatus when he left the vestibule, and nobody commented upon it. It
seemed the sensible thing to do; that was all.

There was just about enough additional weight in their suits to balance
the slightly reduced gravitation, so they moved about, four misshapen,
metallic hulks, with as much freedom as though back home. Always they
kept within a few feet of each other so as to throw no strain on their
interconnecting telephone wires. The big, glass-faced helmets gave a
remarkable sense of security.

They made a complete circuit of the cube, and at the end of it looked at
each other in perplexity. Never, save in the middle of an ocean, in the
doldrums, did any man ever see such a totally barren spot. Not a tree,
much less a sign of human occupation; there was not even the slightest
mound. The planet was, in actual fact, as smooth and as bare as a
billiard ball!

Moreover, the surface itself remained as mysterious as before. Of course
they did not touch it with bare hands--all wore insulated mittens--but
the dazzling stuff was certainly as hard as steel and as highly
polished. It was neither transparent nor opaque, but translucent, "like
pink mother-of-pearl," as Billie suggested.

She was the first to propose that they move to another spot. "We ought
to try a place where it's not yet dawn," said she, shielding her eyes
from the glare. (It will be remembered that the suits protected them
from the heat itself.) "Can't see anything."

"Hush!" hissed the doctor. They turned and followed his gaze to a spot
not thirty feet from where they stood.

At the same instant they felt a faint jar in the material under their
feet. And next second they saw that a large section of the supposedly
solid surface was in motion.

A portion about ten feet square was being lifted bodily in front of
their eyes, and before another word was said this block of the unknown
substance was raised until they could see that it was all of a yard
thick. Up it went at the same deliberate rate; and the four
involuntarily moved closer together as they saw that there was something
underneath.

It was a cage, for all the world like that of an elevator except that it
was made of clear glass. Another second and it had stopped, with its
floor level with the surface; and the people from the earth saw that it
contained a man.

He was quite tall, slenderly built, and dressed in a queer satiny
material which fitted him like an acrobat's suit. He was extremely thin
as to legs, narrow as to shoulders, deep in the chest and short in the
waist. All this, however, they saw after their inspection of his head.

It was human! Marvelously refined in every detail, yet it was set upon a
graceful neck, and modeled upon much the same lines as that of any man.
It was not that of a brute, nor yet that of a bird; it was--human!

He stood at ease, resting slightly on one foot, and dispelled any notion
that he might be unreal by shifting his weight occasionally. Meanwhile
he watched the four with a grave, interested smile; and they, in turn,
came closer.

His chin was small, even retreating; but his mouth was wide and curved
into an exaggerated Cupid's bow. Even as he continued to smile the
curves did not leave his lips; they, however, were thin rather than
thick. His nose was quite small, with a decidedly Irish cast; but his
eyes, set far apart above quite shallow cheekbones, were exceedingly
large and of a brilliant blue. In fact, it was mainly his eyes that gave
character to his face; although none could overlook his breadth of
forehead, running back to a cranium that fairly bulged over the ears,
and seemed ready to rise like a tightly inflated balloon. His skin was
pure white.

And so they stood for uncounted minutes. At last the doctor noted that
the stranger was eying them with far less interest than they showed in
him; he stood as though he felt on display; and the doctor gave an
exclamation of perplexity that broke the spell. The four impulsively
drew up to the glass; Van Emmon touched it with his mitten; and that is
how the four explorers came to receive the vibrations that came next.

For the man in the cage, in turn, put out his hand and touched the glass
opposite Van Emmon. Then he opened his mouth.

"I am very glad to see you," said he in a soft, pulsating voice--and in
the best of English.



