
"What was that?" shouted out Hiram sharply, as there was a heavy
jarring shock.

"Grazed a rock, I think," replied Dave.  "I don't like this a bit.
If I knew my bearings, I'd run straight ashore."

"Do it, anyway, Dave," advised Hiram.  "We don't want to wreck the
Reliance on her first trip."

Dave gave the wheel a turn.  Just then a distinct yell rang out
across the muggy waters, and then, in rapid succession, seven quick,
snappy explosions.





CHAPTER VII

A RESCUE IN THE FOG


"What do your suppose that was?" inquired Hiram excitedly.

"It was kind of startling," said Dave.

"Listen."

With the power shut off, the hydroplane drifted, Dave checking its
slack running.  They were now in a dense fog; with night fast coming
on.  For the moment everything was still.  Then there rang through
the misty space one word:

"Help!"

"It was in that direction," said Hiram quickly, pointing.

"I think so, too," nodded Dave, "and not far away."

"What could have happened?  Those shots?"

"Probably fired to call assistance."

"If you could speed up the hydroplane a little--"

"I would have to get the starter in use, and we might run into
something.  Hello!  Hello!  Hello!"  Dave shouted loudly.  There was
a speedy reply.

"Here!  Hello! this wa-aa-ay!"

"That's a man's voice, and he's right near to us," declared Hiram,
leaning forward and peering through the mist.  "Hey, there!"

"I see you.  Good!"

There was a tilt of the machine.  The person in the water had seized
one of the wing stays.

"Careful, there," ordered Dave.  "Don't cling to that wing or bear
it down."

"I can't hold out."

Dave cautiously edged from his seat towards a form now plainly
visible.  It was that of a man about thirty years of age.

It was no easy task to take the man aboard.  One of his hands was
useless.  He seemed in pain and half choked with water he had
swallowed.

Hiram gave up his seat to the rescued man, who sank back as if
overcome with faintness and exhaustion.  Hiram himself found a
resting place on the platform supporting the two seats.

"Is there anybody else in trouble?" Dave asked of their passenger.

"No, no," replied the man.  "The launch is gone up.  Get me to land
quick as you can.  I'm afraid my arm is broken.  It pains me
terribly.  I must get to a surgeon soon as possible."

Dave got the hydroplane under way again.

He was fortunate in striking a course that brought them back to the
boat house in about an hour's time.

The rescued man was somewhat revived by this time, and when the
hydroplane was safely housed, Dave took his arm and piloted the way
from the beach.

"It is less than half a mile to the hangars," the young aviator
explained.  "When we get there we can find an automobile to take you
into town."

"It was when my launch struck a rock that I hurt my arm," the man
explained.

"Were you on board alone?" asked the curious Hiram.

"Yes.  I was driving ahead full speed, to get ashore out of the fog.
I heard your machine, and was afraid I'd get run into.  My launch
ran into a reef with terrific force.  I was thrown against it
bulkhead, arm sprained or broken, nearly stunned, and then into the
water."

"But the launch, Mister?" questioned the interested Hiram anxiously.

"Smashed.  I don't know if I could locate it again in the fog.  I
couldn't use my hurt arm, and I fired my revolver, yelled, and gave
up when your machine came along."

"Where did you come from, Mister?" pressed the persistent Hiram.

"Why--well, I came from up north.  Own a launch.  Had some business
this way, and got well on my way till the craft struck."

Dave noticed as the man spoke that it was in a hesitating, evasive
way.  He seemed anxious to change the conversation, for he said:

"You are taking me to the Columbus aero field?"

"Yes, we belong there," answered Dave.

"Some people there named Dawson?"

"Yes, father and son."

"That's it.  Here, now?"

"Oh, yes, they follow the different meets."

"Why, then, say," observed the man, "if you will just get me up
against them, I shall be pleased.  You see, they're friends of mine.
They'll take care of me."

Dave gave the man a look.  Hiram pulled a face at him behind his
back.  That settled it with Hiram.  In his mind he was sure that
anybody who knew the Dawsons in a friendly way could not possibly
amount to much.

The man did not mention his name.  He seemed to care nothing
whatever for the fate of the launch.  He barely thanked Dave, as,
reaching the aero grounds, our hero led him near to the headquarters
of the man for whom the Dawsons were working.

"You'll find your friends over there," he said.

"All right," nodded the man he had rescued.  "Lucky I met you.
Thanks."

"Say, Dave Dashaway, now what do you think of that!" burst out
Hiram, as the man got out of earshot.

"Think of what, Hiram?" inquired the young aviator.

"Friend of the Dawsons!"

"Well, they've got to know somebody, haven't they?"

"That's so, but I don't like the fellow you rescued."

"Why not, Hiram?"

"Did you notice the way he hesitated when we asked him where he had
come from?"

"Yes."

"And about that launch?  He didn't seem to care what had become of
it."

"Maybe it didn't belong to him."

"Well, anyway, hadn't he ought to have some concern about other
folks' property?"

Dave did not reply.  He had his own ideas and opinion of the rescued
man.  He was due for a public exhibition of the Reliance the next
day, and dismissed the incident from his mind as he got back to the
Baby Racer hangar.

Mr. King was to make a non-stop race also, and there was plenty of
detail to attend to at the Aegis headquarters as well.

That was a busy, exciting day, the one following.  The Aegis and her
competitors got started by ten o'clock.  There was a varied
programme from eleven to one.  At three o'clock Dave made his run
with the hydroplane.

Two other machines engaged in the contest, but not only were they of
inferior make, but their operators were clumsy and not up to
standard.

Dave won considerable praise.  The Reliance made a beautiful run,
and he felicitated himself that he had got onto the knack of running
it right.

"I don't believe much in hydroplanes," old Grimshaw observed to him
as he accompanied Dave back to the aero grounds, "but I believe in
you, and I will say you made a clever showing."

"Wait till the Interstate folks send on their latest improved
aero-hydroplane, Mr. Grimshaw," said Dave.  "You'll see some fine
work then."

"There's your friend, young Dobbs," remarked Grimshaw.

Dave saw Hiram on a run, headed towards them.  He came up
breathless.

"Some one at the hangar to see you, Dave," he reported.

"Who is it, Hiram?"

"He says he's a United States revenue officer."

"Hello!" spoke Grimshaw, "I hope your hydroplane hasn't got you into
any trouble running up against the government."

"Oh, I think not," replied Dave with a smile.

"It's a long story and a big story, Dave," replied Hiram.  "You know
the man you rescued he lake yesterday?"

"Yes, Hiram."

"Well, it turns out that he is a notorious smuggler and the
government is looking for him."





CHAPTER VIII

A PUZZLING DISAPPEARANCE


Dave hurried his steps.  Old Grimshaw turned off at the Aegis
headquarters.  Hiram led his companion by a short cut to the Baby
Racer hangar.

On a campstool inside the tent where the boys slept, Dave found a
keen-eyed, hatchet-faced man.  He sat stiff as a poker, and seemed
to pierce Dave through and through with his glance as he looked him
over critically.

"Dashaway, yes?" he interrogated, and as Dave bowed assent he added:
"Thought I'd wait and see you, although our young friend here has
been pretty dear."

"About what?" asked Dave.

"Ridgely."

"Who is he?"

"The man you rescued from the lake last evening.  As I have told
your friend, the man is a bad one, and we have chased him up and
down the lakes clear from Detroit."

"He is a criminal, then?"

"A smuggler.  He has outwitted the revenue officers for some time.
His last specialty was running Chinese emigrants over the border.
When he learned the chase was on, he stole a launch and scudded for
other waters.  He had the name and color of the launch changed.  Why
he came to Columbus we don't know."

"To see some people named Dawson, he said."

"Yes, they appear to be fiends."

"Can't Jerry Dawson tell you anything about him?" asked Dave.

"No."

"For a very good reason."

"And what is at?"

"Dawsons left last night."

"Left--left the meet?" exclaimed Dave in surprise.

"Yes, bag and baggage."

"That puzzles me," said Dave.

"It baffles us," observed the revenue officer, "for they have left
no clew to their future whereabouts."

"Won't Jerry's employer tell you?"

"He says he can't.  Professes to be quite at sea as to the meaning
of their sudden departure.  Angry, too, for it seems they had a
contract in the service."

"I wouldn't believe him," broke in Hiram.  "Anybody respectable
about the meet can tell you that he is not to be trusted."

"Well, the Dawsons are gone and Ridgely went away with them," said
the revenue officer definitely.  "I fancied you might give me some
hint that might help me, Dashaway, as to their antecedents,
friends."

"I'm a new one in the aviation line," said Dave.  "I found them in
the business when I joined it, only a few weeks ago."

"Well, I understand you are two pretty keen young fellows," said the
officer, "I'm going to leave you my card.  There it is."

Dave glanced at the bit of pasteboard his visitor extended.  It bore
simply a name: "James Price."

"If you get the faintest clew to Ridgely or the Dawsons," continued
Mr. Price, "wire the secret service bureau at Chicago.  I will
arrange so that I shall be advised at once."

"I will do what I can for you, Mr. Price," promised Dave.

"All right, and send in any reasonable bill you like for your
service.  We feel certain that this, Ridgely, driven from one
district, will begin operations in another.  Then, too, from what I
learn these Dawsons are not above engaging in of off-color schemes."

