"Good land a' massy! Where hab yo' been transmigatorying yo'se'f during
de period when the conglomeration of carbohydrates and protoids hab
been projected on to de interplanetary plane ob de rectangle?"

"Do you mean where have I been while supper was getting ready?" asked
Jack.

"Dat's 'zackly what I means, Massa Jack."

"Then why don't you say it?"

"I done did. Dat's what I done. Supper's cold. But where am Massa Mark?"

"What! Isn't Mark home?" cried Jack, starting back in alarm.

"No, Massa Jack, we ain't seed him sence yo' two went off togedder.
Where yo' all been?"

"Mark not home!" gasped Mark. "Where is Professor Henderson, Wash? I
must speak to him at once."

"He am out in de shed wif Massa Roumann."

With fear in his heart Jack dashed out toward the big shed.

"Ain't yo' goin' t' hab some supper?" called Washington.

"I don't want any supper--yet," flung back Jack over his shoulder.




CHAPTER IX

A DARING PLOT


Mark Sampson lay an inert mass in the arms of the man who had attacked
him. Through the sagging door of the old, deserted house the captive
lad was carried, and up creaking stairs.

"I guess no one saw me," whispered the man. "I'm safe, so far, and I
can work my scheme to perfection. Everything turned out well for me. I
was just wondering how I could get this youth in my power, and he
fairly walked into my hands! Now to keep him safe until I can take his
place in the projectile, and have my revenge. I have waited a long time
for it, but it has come at last!"

Pausing at the head of the creaking stairs the man looked behind him,
to make sure that he was not being followed, but not a sound broke the
stillness of the old house, save the rattle and bang of the ruined
shutters.

"I'm safe! Safe!" exulted the man, with a cruel chuckle. "Now to bind
him, and hide him in the secret chamber."

He laid Mark down on a pile of bagging in a corner of a room at the
head of the stairs. Then, still glancing behind him, as if fearful of
being observed, the man walked over to a mantlepiece, fumbled about a
bit of carving that adorned the centre, and pressed on a certain spot.
A moment later the mantle seemed to swing out, and there was revealed a
secret room, the existence of which would never have been suspected by
the casual observer.

Taking some of the bags from the pile where the unconscious lad was,
the man made a rude bed in the secret room. Then he carried Mark in,
and placed him in a fairly comfortable position, first taking the
precaution, however, of binding his hands and feet.

"There," whispered the man, when he had finished, "I guess you'll not
get away in a hurry. Now I'll wait until dark, and then I'll give you
something to eat, for I don't want you to starve. But I must keep in
hiding, for, very likely, there'll be a search made for him. Guess I'd
better stay here, and see what happens," and the mysterious man pressed
the spring that sent the mantle back into place again, hiding all
traces of the secret room.

"It's a good thing I stumbled upon this hiding place," he said to
himself. "It couldn't be better for what I want. Now to see what
happens next."

He did not have long to wait, for in a short time Jack, as we have
seen, appeared on the scene, and began his search. At the sound of his
voice, calling for Mark, the man started in his hiding place, and
glanced uneasily at Mark.

"He may hear, and wake up," he whispered.

Jack came upstairs in the deserted house, and continued his search
there, calling from time to time. He gave one loud shout at the head of
the stairs, and the very thing that the man feared would happen came to
pass.

The effect of the drug having worn off, Mark stirred uneasily, and
started up. He heard Jack's cry, and uttered a half-articulate answer.
In an instant the man was at his side, and had quickly gagged him. This
had the further effect of awakening the unfortunate lad; and he
struggled to loosen his bonds, but they were too strongly tied. He
endeavored to answer Jack, but only a meaningless mumble resulted, for
the gag was effective.

"All you have to do is to keep quiet," urged the man, as he knelt
beside Mark in the darkness. "As soon as your chum goes, I'll take that
thing out of your mouth, and give you something to eat."

Jack's voice died away, and presently, as the ears of the man told him,
the boy left the old house. Waiting some time, to make sure that he
would not return, the man removed the knot of rags from Mark's mouth,
and slightly loosened his bonds, first warning him, however, that if he
attempted to escape he would be harshly dealt with.

"But what right have you to keep me here?" demanded the youth. "Who are
you, and what have I done to you, that you should treat me this way?
Are you crazy? Don't you know that you are liable to arrest for this?"

"No one can arrest me," boasted the fellow.

"But why have you made me a prisoner?" demanded Mark.

"For reasons of my own. You'll see very soon."

"But what have I done to you?" persisted the lad. "I never saw you
before, that I know of, unless you are the man who sent me the note,
and who ran when my chum and I came to the bridge to meet you."

"I'm the man," was the answer, with a chuckle.

"Then you must be the one who tried to wreck our projectile," went on
Mark.

"Yes, I did that, and now I am sorry for it, for I have thought of a
much better scheme for getting even, and having my revenge on you."

"But why do you want to be revenged on us?"

"Because of what you have done!" and the man's voice took on an ugly
tone.

"But what did we do?" begged Mark.

"You'll know soon enough," was the answer, with a cunning laugh, and
then Mark was sure he had to deal with a lunatic. He ceased his
struggles to loosen the bonds, and resolved to meet cunning with
cunning. He would bide his time.

"Will you promise to be quiet, and not kick up a fuss if I get you
something to eat?" asked the man.

"Yes; but I'd rather have a drink of water first. I feel sick."

"Very well, you shall have some water. I'll have to go out and get it,
but I must first blindfold you, so that you will not discover the
secret of this room."

Mark could not help himself, for he was bound, and when the man had
tied a handkerchief over his eyes, Mark heard his captor moving about.

Next there came a sound as of some heavy body, or object, being pushed
across the room. Mark felt a draught of wind on his face, but it ceased
instantly, and he knew that he was alone. He tried to work the bandage
from over his eyes, and he endeavored to loosen his bonds, for he did
not consider that this violated his promise. But it was of no effect.

Presently he heard the moving, shoving sound again, and once more felt
the wind on his face. Then he heard the voice of his captor speaking.

"Here is food and drink. I'm going to untie your hands so you can eat,
but mind, no fighting, for I'm a desperate man, and I won't stand any
nonsense!"

He fumbled about the bonds, and soon Mark was free to stand up and use
his hands. The bandage was taken from his eyes, and he was able to peer
about his prison by the light of a candle which his captor had brought.

Mark's first glance was at the man. He was the same one who had emerged
from the house to attack and drug him, but as for recognizing in him
the person who had been at the bridge, this was impossible. As far as
Mark could tell he had never seen the man before, nor did he answer the
description given by Dick Johnson.

There was little danger that Mark would attempt violence. He was too
weak, and his jailer seemed a powerful fellow. Then, too, the lad felt
ill from the effects of the drug.

"Drink some water, and eat a bit, and you'll feel better," urged the
man, which advice Mark followed, though, his appetite was not of the
best, and he was much worried as to what his friends would think about
his strange disappearance.

"What do you intend to do with me?" asked Mark, when he felt a little
better from the effects of the food and drink. The man had sat on an
old soap box, and watched his captive while he ate.

"Do with you? Why, I'm going to keep you here until your friends have
left in the projectile," was the answer.

"But why don't you want me to go with them?"

"Oh, I have my reasons. You'll find out soon enough. You can't go,
that's all."

"But why do you take such an interest in me? Why didn't you capture my
chum Jack, too, while you were about it?"

"Two reasons. One was that Jack wouldn't answer my purpose, and the
other was that I didn't have a chance to get him. You walked right into
my trap, just when I was doing my best to think of another plan to get
hold of you, since my first one failed."

"But what is your purpose?" insisted the lad. "What do you want with
me?" He thought perhaps if he questioned the man closely enough he
might discover something that would give him a clew, or might aid him
to escape.

"You'll learn soon enough," was the answer.

"Will you tell me your name?" asked Marie quietly.

"No--why should I?" was the quick reply. "If I told you who I was you
would at once know why I have made you a captive here. No; you shall
hear all in good time, but that will not be until I am ready.

"Now," went on his captor, after a period of silence, "I shall have to
bind and blindfold you again."

"Why?" asked Mark, in some alarm.

"Because I don't want you to see how I get in and out of this room, and
that's the only way I can guard my secret. Though if you promise not to
remove the bandage from your eyes within five minutes from the time I
leave you, I will not have to tie your hands and feet. After I am gone
you may take the handkerchief off, but when you hear me rap on the
wall, ready to come back again, you must once more blindfold yourself.
Otherwise I shall have to tie you up."

Mark considered a moment. It was not pleasant to be tied with the cruel
ropes, and he felt that in time he could penetrate the mystery of how
the room opened, even if he did not see his jailer enter and leave.

"I promise," he said finally.

"That's good. It simplifies matters. Now you can blindfold yourself,
and I trust to your honor. You may remove the bandage in five minutes,
but when you hear me knock, you must replace it until I am in the
apartment. Then you can take it off again."

There was little choice but to obey, and Mark tied the handkerchief
over his eyes. He listened intently, heard the man moving about the
room, felt the wind on his cheeks, and then came silence.

He waited until he thought five minutes had passed, and then took off
the bandage. The candle was burning where the man had set it, but the
fellow himself was gone. He had taken with him the broken dishes, and
remains of the food Mark had not eaten. The glass and a pitcher of
water stood on a broken table, and Mark took a big drink.

"Now to see if I can't get out of this place," he murmured to himself.

Mark had invented many pieces of apparatus, and he was considered a
good mechanician. Consequently he went about his task in a systematic
manner. He examined the walls carefully by the candle, which he carried
in his hand, but no opening was apparent.

"Of course, there must be some secret spring to press," said the lad.
"That's how he gets in and out. A section of the wall moves, but where
it is I can't see. It will take time. I must look at every inch."

He was in the midst of his investigations when there sounded on the
wall back of him three raps.

"Ha! At least, that tells me where the opening is," thought the lad.
"It's on that side, but now I have to put that blamed bandage on. Well,
I may be able to escape yet."

True to his promise, he blindfolded himself well, and presently he
heard a noise, felt a draught of air, and he knew his captor was in the
room.

"You can now take off the handkerchief," said the man. "I have brought
you some more bags for bed clothing. It isn't much, but it is all I
have. They will keep you warm tonight."

"Are you going to imprison me over night?" asked Mark.

"Yes, and I'll stay here with you. No one can find us here. The secret
room is well hidden. But first I have another matter that needs
attention. I am going to ask you a question."

"What?" asked the captive, wondering what strange request the mentally
unbalanced man would make now.

The man leaned forward and whispered something in Mark's ear, as if he
was afraid the very walls would hear.

"I'll not do it!" cried the youth. "I'll never aid you to deceive my
friends, for that is your object. I'll never do it!"

"Then I shall have to use force," was the determined response. "You may
take your choice!"

Poor Mark did not know what to do, yet there was little he could choose
between. The man had him in his power, yet the lad was terribly afraid
of the result of the daring scheme which he knew was in the mind of the
lunatic, for such he believed the man to be.

"Will you not give up this plan?" begged Mark. "I know Professor
Henderson will pay you any sum in reason to let me go. You can become a
rich man."

"I don't want riches--I want revenge!" exclaimed the man. And he glared
at Mark, while throughout the dismal, deserted house there sounded the
rattle and bang of the flapping shutters.




CHAPTER X

MARK'S STRANGE ACTIONS


Jack Darrow fairly burst into the big shed where the two scientists
were at work over the ruined motor. They looked up at his excitable
entrance, and Mr. Henderson called out:

"Why, Jack, what's the matter?"

"Quite a lot, I'm afraid," answered the lad, and there was that in his
voice which alarmed the professors.

"What do you mean?" inquired Mr. Roumann, laying aside some of the
damaged motor plates.

"Mark's gone!" gasped Jack.

"Gone! Where?" exclaimed Mr. Henderson.

"I don't know, but he went to the deserted house, where we thought the
