matter. Possibly the different forms of matter may be due to a single
cause--polymerization. The limit of elasticity of a solid body is the
critical moment when the matter begins to flow under the action of the
pressure to which it is submitted, just as, e.g., ice at or below 0 deg. may
be liquefied by strong pressure. A brittle body is simply one which does
not possess the property of flowing under the action of pressure.

       *       *       *       *       *




HYDROGEN AMALGAM.


Hydrogen, although a gas, is recognized by chemists as a metal, and when
combined with any solid metal--as in the case known to electricians as
the polarization of a negative element,--the compound may correctly be
termed an alloy; while any compound of hydrogen with the fluid metal
mercury may with equal correctness be termed an amalgam of hydrogen, or
"hydrogen amalgam." The efforts of many chemists and mining engineers
have for many years been devoted to a search for some effective and
economical means for preventing the "sickening" of mercury and its
consequent "flouring" and loss. Some sixteen or more years ago,
Professor Crookes, F.R.S., discovered and, after a series of
experiments, patented the use of an amalgam of the metal sodium for this
purpose. He made the amalgam in a concentrated form, and it was added
in various proportions to the mercury used for gold amalgamation. Water
becoming present, it will readily be understood that the sodium, in
being converted into the hydrate (KHO) of that metal, caused a rapid
evolution of hydrogen. The hydrogen thus evolved was the excess over a
certain proportion which enters into combination with the mercury. While
the mercury retained the charge of hydrogen, the "quickness" of the
fluid metal was preserved; but upon the loss of the hydrogen the
"quickness" ceased, and the mercury was acted upon by the injurious
components contained in the ore.

Since the introduction of the sodium amalgam, many attempts have been
made, more especially in America, to overcome the tendency of mercury to
"sicken" and lose its "quickness." The greater number of these efforts
have been made by the use of electricity as the active agent in
attaining this end; but such efforts have been generally of a crude and
unscientific character. Latterly Mr. Barker, of the Electro-amalgamator
Company, Limited, has introduced a system--already detailed in these
pages--by which the mercury is "quickened." In his method the running
water passing over the tables, or other apparatus of a similar
character, is used as the electrolyte. In this arrangement, the mercury
being the cathode, plates or wires of copper constituting anodes are
brought into contact with the water passing over the mercury in each
"riffle." Both the cathode and the anodes are, of course, maintained in
contact with the poles of a suitable source of electrical supply. The
current then passes from the copper anode through the running water
to the mercury cathode, and so on to the negative pole of the
electro-motor. As a consequence of this arrangement, hydrogen is evolved
from the water, and has the effect of reducing any oxide or other
detrimental compound of the metal; in other words, it "quickens" and
prevents "sickening" of the fluid metal, and consequent "flouring" and
loss. While the hydrogen is evolved at the cathode, oxygen enters into
combination with the copper constituting the anodes. This to some extent
impairs the conductivity of the circuit.

The latest process, however, is that of Mr. Bernard C. Molloy, M.P.,
which we have already characterized as highly scientific and effective,
the production of a suitable amalgam being obtained under the most
economical and simple conditions. This process has the advantage of
producing not only a hydrogen amalgam, but also at will an amalgam of
hydrogen combined with any metal electro-positive to this latter. Thus
hydrogen potassium or hydrogen sodium can be obtained, as will be seen
by the following description.

Mr. Molloy's effort appears to have been, in the first place, directed
to a system which could be adapted to any existing apparatus, and in
certain cases where water was scarce, to avoid altogether the use of
that, in some districts, rare commodity. For the purpose of explanation
we select an ordinary amalgamating table fitted with mercury riffles.
The surface of the table is in no way interfered with or disturbed. The
bed of the riffle, however, is constructed of some porous material, such
as leather, non-resinous wood, or cement, which serves as the diaphragm
upon which the mercury rests, and separates the fluid metal from the
electrolyte beneath. Running the full length of the table is a thin
layer of sand, supported and pressing against the diaphragm, and lying
in this sand is the anode, formed preferably of lead. A peroxide of
that metal is formed by the action of the currents, and may be readily
reduced for use over and over again after working for from one to three
months. The peroxide of lead, as is well known, is a conductor of
electricity, and this fact constitutes an important advantage in the
working of the process. The thin layer of sand is saturated with an
electrolyte, such as dilute sulphuric acid (H_{2}SO_{4} + 20H_{2}O)
to give a simple hydrogen amalgam; (Na_{2}SO_{4} + xH_{2}O) to give a
hydrogen sodium amalgam; or (K_{2}SO_{4} + xH_{2}O) to give a hydrogen
potassium amalgam. Numerous other electrolytes constituted by acids,
alkalies, and salts can be used to form an amalgam permanently
maintained in a condition of "quickness" and freed from all liability
to "sicken," whatever the components of the ore may be. The mercury
is connected with the negative pole of the voltaic battery or other
electro-motor, and the lead made with the positive pole of the same
source. When the current passes there is formed according to the nature
of the electrolyte, a hydrogen amalgam, or an amalgam of hydrogen with a
metal electro-positive to hydrogen. The electrolyte, which, it will be
understood, is distinct and apart from the body of water passing over
the table, will last almost indefinitely, there being no consumption of
any of its constituents, excepting hydrogen and oxygen from the water
of solution. The quantity of acid or saline material contained in the
electrolyte is so very small that there can be no difficulty in finding
a supply in any district. The question of the supply of electricity is
one which in many mining districts involves considerations of practical
importance, since a large supply would necessitate water or steam power.
It has been found that two cells having an electromotive force of about
two volts each will in this process suffice; if preferred, however,
a very small dynamo machine can be used. In connection with the
electro-motive force it is requisite to use, it may be observed that an
amalgam of sodium containing only a small quantity of this metal would,
when constituting a positive element in conjunction with a lead negative
and on an aqueous electrolyte, give an opposing electro-motive force of
less than three volts. Such an amalgam could therefore be obtained under
an electro-motive force of about four volts. The electrical resistance
in the circuit constituted by the apparatus being very small, no
electrical power is wasted. When water constitutes the electrolyte, as
in Barker's system, then the electro-motive force required to obtain a
given current would be very much greater than that above specified.
The conditions assured under this process appear to be all that can
be required, while the amalgams obtained are those most calculated to
preserve the "quickness" and prevent the "sickening" of the mercury.

Mr. Molloy has designed a special form of amalgamating machine to be
used in conjunction with the above process, and with or without the aid
of water. By the employment of this machine, each particle of the ore
is slowly rolled in the quickened mercury for from fifteen to thirty or
more seconds.

When the extent of the gold and silver mining industries is considered,
and when it is borne in mind that a considerable percentage of the
precious metal present in the ore is, in the ordinary process of
extraction, lost through defective amalgamation--due to insufficient
contact with the mercury or to a total absence of contact, as in the
case of float gold--it is obvious that the introduction of any system
obviating such loss is a matter of very great importance to those who
are interested in the above mentioned industries. We expect shortly to
hear of the practical introduction on a large scale of Mr. Molloy's
process, and we look forward with interest to the results which may be
obtained from it.--_The Engineer_.

       *       *       *       *       *




TREATMENT OF ORES BY ELECTROLYSIS.

By M. KILIANI.


The author lays down general principles for electrolytic metallurgy.
Ores must be distinguished as good and bad conductors; the former
may serve directly as anodes, and are easily oxidized by the
electro-negative radicals formed at their contact, and dissolve readily
in the electrolyte. The bad conductors have to be placed in contact
with a conducting anode, formed of an inoxidizable substance, such as
platinum, manganese peroxide, or coke. In laboratory experiments a good
conducting ore is electrolyzed by suspension from a platinum wire in
connection with the source of electricity, and is then immersed in the
bath. On an industrial scale the ore, coarsely broken up, is placed in
one of the compartments of a trough divided by a diaphragm.

On the fragments of the ore which extend up outside of the electrolytic
bath is laid a plate of copper connected with the positive wire. Care
must be taken that this plate does not plunge into the bath, otherwise
the current would not traverse the ore at all. The cathode is preferably
formed of the same metal which is to be obtained. The bath should
not contain organic acids. In practice the common mineral acids are
employed, or their salts, selecting by preference a salt of the metal
which is to be isolated. It is convenient to pass the current through
the greatest possible number of small decomposition troughs, taking care
that the resistance in each is not too great. With a current of one and
the same intensity we obtain in n troughs n times as much metal as in a
single one. To keep down the resistance of the circuit we employ poles
of a large surface, i.e., plenty of ore and baths which are as good
conductors as possible.

The state in which the metal is deposited at the negative pole depends
on the secondary actions undergone by the electrolyte, and especially of
the escape of gas. This is a function of the _density_, of the current,
i.e., the proportion of its intensity to the surface of the cathode. If
the density is too great there is an escape of hydrogen, and the metal
is deposited in a spongy condition. If the density of the current falls
below a certain minimum, an oxide is deposited in place of metal. The
electrolytic treatment of ores often renders it possible to separate
the different metals which may be present. These are deposited in
succession, and are sharply separated if the electromotive power is not
too great.

1. _Zinc_.--The zinciferous compounds--calamine, blende, and zinc
ash--are all poor conductors. They are first dissolved, and the salts
obtained are electrolyzed, employing anodes of coke. Blende should be
roasted before it is dissolved. The electrolytic bath should be as
concentrated as possible to avoid sponginess of the metal and an escape
of hydrogen. In a saturated solution the formation of hydrogen decreases
as the density of the current augments.

2. _Lead_.--Galena is a good conductor, and may be directly
electrolyzed. The best bath is a solution of lead nitrate. The
arborescent crystallizations extend rapidly, and must be broken from
time to time to prevent the formation of a metallic connection between
the anode and the cathode. The sulphur of the galena falls to the bottom
of the bath, and may be separated from the gangue by solution in carbon
disulphide.

3. _Copper_.--Native copper sulphide, though a good conductor, cannot
be directly electrolyzed en account of the presence of iron sulphide,
whence iron would be deposited along with the copper. The copper pyrites
are roasted, dissolved in dilute sulphuric acid, and the liquid thus
obtained is submitted to electrolysis.

       *       *       *       *       *




A PEOPLE WITHOUT CONSUMPTION, AND SOME ACCOUNT OF THEIR COUNTRY--THE
CUMBERLAND TABLELAND.

By E. M. WIGHT, M.D., Chattanooga, Tenn., Late Professor of Diseases
of the Chest and State Medicine, Medical Department University of
Tennessee; Late Member of the Tennessee State Board of Health, and
ex-President of the Tennessee State Medical Society.


During the ten years that I have practiced medicine in the neighborhood
of the Cumberland Tablelands, I have often heard it said that the
people on the mountains never had consumption. Occasionally a traveling
newspaper correspondent from the North found his way down through the
Cumberlands, and wrote back filled with admiration for their grandeur,
their climate, their healthfulness, and almost invariably stated that
consumption was never known upon these mountains, excepting brought
there by some person foreign to the soil, who, if he came soon enough,
usually recovered. Similar information came to me in such a variety of
ways and number of instances, that I determined some four years ago,
when the attempt to get a State Board of Health organized was first
discussed by a few medical men of our State, that I would make an
investigation of this matter. These observations have extended over that
whole time, and have been made with great care and as much accuracy
as possible, and to my own astonishment and delight, I have become
convinced that pulmonary consumption does not exist among the people
native and resident to the Tablelands of the Cumberland Mountains.

In the performance of the work which has enabled me to arrive at this
conclusion, I have had the generous assistance of more than twenty
physicians, who have been many years in practice in the vicinity of
these mountains. Their knowledge of the diseases which had occurred
there extended over a, period of more than forty years. Some of these
physicians have reported the knowledge of the occurrence of deaths from
consumption on the Tablelands, but when carefully inquired into they
have invariably found that the person dying was not a native of the
mountains, but, a sojourner in search of health. In answer to the
question: "How many cases of pulmonary consumption have you known to
occur on Walden's Ridge, among the people native to the mountains?"
eleven physicians say, "Not one." All of these have been engaged in
practice there more than three years, four of them more than ten years,
one of them more than twenty, and one of them more than forty years. All
the physicians of whom inquiries have been made are now residents, or
have been, of the valleys contiguous to Walden's Ridge, and know the
mountain people well. Four other physicians in answer to the same
question say, that they have known from one to four cases, numbering
eleven in all, but had not ascertained whether five of them were born
and raised on the mountains or not. The names and place of death of all
these cases were given, and I have traced their history and found that
but three of them were "natives," or had lived there more than five
years, and that one of these was 57 years of age when she died, and had
suffered from cancer for three years before her death. The two others
died within six months after returning home from long service in the
army, where both contracted their disease.

All these investigations have been made with more particular reference
to that part of the Cumberlands known as Walden's Ridge than to the
mountains as a whole. This ridge is of equal elevation and of very
similar character to the main Cumberland range in the southern part of
Tennessee, northwest Georgia, and northwest Alabama, and what is true of
this particular part of the great Cumberland table is, in the main, true
of the remainder.

Sequatchee Valley lies between Walden's Ridge and what is commonly known
in that neighborhood as the Cumberland Mountains, and separates it from
the main range for a distance of about one hundred miles, from the
Tennessee River below Chattanooga to Grassy Cove, well up toward the
center line of the State. Grassy Cove is a small basin valley, which
was described to me there as a "sag in the mountains," just above the
Sequatchee Valley proper. It is here that the Sequatchee River rises,
and flowing under the belt of hills which unites the ridge and the main
range, for two miles or more, rises again at the head of Sequatchee
Valley. Above Grassy Cove the mountains unite and hold their union
firmly on their way north as far as our State reaches.

Topographically considered as a whole, the Cumberland range has its
southern terminus in Alabama, and its northern in Pennsylvania. It
is almost wholly composed of coal-bearing rocks, resting on Devonian
strata, which are visible in many places in the valleys.

But a small portion of the Cumberland lies above a plane of 2,000 feet.
Walden's Ridge and Lookout Mountain vary in height from 2,000 to 2,500
feet.

North of Grassy Cove, after the ridges are united, the variation from
2,000 feet is but little throughout the remainder of the State, and
the general character of the table changes but little. The great and
important difference is in the climate, the winters being much more
severe in these mountains in the northern part of the State than in the
southern, and the summers much more liable to sudden changes of weather.
Scott, Fentress, and Morgan counties comprise this portion of the table,
and these have not been included in my examination, excepting as to
general features.

In all our southern country, and I may say in our whole country, there
is no other large extent of elevated territory which offers mankind
a pleasant living place, a comfortable climate--none too cold or too
hot--and productive lands. We have east of the upper waters of the great
Tennessee River, in our State, and in North Carolina and Georgia, the
great Blue Ridge range of mountains, known as the Unaka, or Smoky,
Chilhowee, Great and Little Frog, Nantahala, etc., all belonging to the
same family of hills. This chain has the same general course as the
Cumberlands. It is a much bolder range of mountains, but it is vastly
less inhabitable, productive, or convenient of access. The winters there
are severely cold, and the nights in summer are too cold and damp for
health and comfort, as I know by personal experience of two summers on
Nantahala River. But the trout fishing is beyond comparison, and that
is one inducement of great value for a stout consumptive _who is a good
fellow_. These mountains are much more broken up into branches, peaks,
and spurs than the Cumberlands. They afford no table terrritory of
any extent. There are some excellent places there for hot summer
visits--Ashville, Warm Springs, Franklin, and others.

The Cumberland Mountains, as a whole, are flat, in broad level spaces,
broken only by the "divides," or "gulfs," as they are called by the
inhabitants, where the streams flow out into the valleys.

Walden's Ridge, of which we come now to speak particularly, is the best
located of any part of the Cumberlands as a place for living. From the
separation of this ridge from the main range of Grassy Cove to its
southern terminus at the Tennessee River, it maintains a remarkably
uniform character in every particular. From it access to commerce is
easy, having the Tennessee River and the new (now building) Cincinnati
Southern Railroad skirting its entire length on the east. It rises very
abruptly from both the Tennessee and Sequatchee Valleys, being from
1,200 to 1,500 feet higher than the valleys on each side. Looking from
below, on the Tennessee Valley side, the whole extent of the ridge
appears securely walled in at the top by a continuous perpendicular wall
of sandstone, from 100 to 200 feet high; and from the Sequatchee side
the appearance is very similar, excepting that the wall is not so
continuous, and of less height.

The top of the ridge is one level stretch of plain, broken only by the
"gulfs" before mentioned and an occasional prominent sandstone wall or
bowlder. The width on top is, I should judge, 6 or 7 miles. The soil is
of uniform character, light, sandy, and less productive for the ordinary
crops of the Tennessee farmer than the soil of the lowlands. The grape,
apple, and potato grow to perfection, better than in the valleys, and
are all never failing crops; so with rye and buckwheat. Corn grows
well, very well in selected spots, and where the land is made rich
by cultivation. The grasses are rich and luxuriant, even in the wild
forests, and when cultivated, the appearance is that of the rich farms
of the Ohio or Connecticut Rivers, only here they are green and growing
the greater part of the year; so much so that sheep, and in the mild
winters the young cattle, live by the wild grasses of the forests the
whole year. The great stock raisers of the Sequatchee and Tennessee
Valleys make this the summer pasture for their cattle, and drive them to
their own farms and barns or to market in winter. The whole Cumberland
table, with the exception of that small part which is under cultivation,
is one great free, open pasture for all the cattle of the valleys.
Thousands of cattle graze there whose owners never pay a dollar for
pasturage or own an acre of the range, though, as a rule, most of the
well-to-do stock farmers in the valleys own more or less mountain lands.
These lands have, until quite recently, been begging purchasers at from
121/2 to 25 cents per acre in large tracts of 10,000 acres and upward, and
perhaps the same could be said of the present time, leaving out choice
tracts and easily accessible places, which are held at from 50 cents to
$2 per acre, wooded virgin lands.

The forest growth of Walden's Ridge is almost entirely oak and chestnut.
Hickory, perhaps, comes next in frequency, and pine after. There is but
little undergrowth, and where the forests have never been molested there
are but few small trees. This is due to the annual fires which occur
every autumn, or some time in winter, almost without exception, and
overrun the whole ridge. It does not rage like a prairie fire. Its
progress is usually slow, the material consumed being only the dry
forest leaves and grasses. The one thing essential to its progress is
these dry leaves, hence it cannot march into the clearings. Nearly all
the small shrubs are killed by these fires, otherwise they are harmless,
and are greatly valued by the stock men for the help they render in the
growth of the wild grasses. The free circulation of air through these
great unbroken forests is certainly much facilitated by these fires,
since they destroy every year what would soon become impediments. The
destruction of this undergrowth leaves the woods open, and the lands are
mainly so level that a carriage may be driven for miles, regardless of
roads, through the forests in every direction.

The shrubs about the fields and places where the forests have
been interrupted by civilization and other causes are blackberry,
huckleberry, raspberry, sumac, and their usual neighbors, with the
azalia, laurel, and rhododendron on the slopes and in the shade of the
cliffs.

The kinds of wild grasses, I regret to say, I have not noted, and the
same of the rich and varied display of wild flowers.

The whole ridge is well supplied with clean, soft running water, even
in the driest of the season. There are no marshes, swamps, or bogs, no
still water--not even a "puddle" for long--for the soil is of such a
character, that surface water quickly filters away into the sands and
mingles with the streams in the gulfs. Springs of mineral water are
abundant everywhere. Probably there is not a square mile of Walden's
Ridge which does not furnish chalybeate water abundantly. Sulphur
springs with Epsom salts in combination are nearly as common.

The entire extent of Walden's Ridge is underlaid with veins of coal, and
iron ore is plentiful, especially in the foot hills. The coal and iron
are successfully mined in many places on the eastern slope; on the
western they are nearly untouched for the want of transportation. I find
that the impression prevails that the minerals of the Cumberlands are
largely controlled by land agents and speculators. This is only true as
applied to a very small part of the whole, not more than 1 per cent. The
mineral ownership remains with the lands almost entirely.

The prevailing winds on Walden's Ridge are from the southwest; northers
and northeasters are of rare occurrence. One old lady who had resided
there for forty years, in answer to my query upon this subject, said:
"Nine days out of ten, the year round, I can smell Alabama in the air."
This was the usual testimony of the residents. Winds of great velocity
never occur there. In summer there is always an evening breeze,
