a curious fact in chemistry, namely, that caustic soda or potash will
absorb steam, forming a compound which has a much higher temperature
than the steam absorbed. If, therefore, exhaust-steam be discharged
into the bottom of a vessel containing caustic alkali, not only will it
become condensed, but this condensation will raise the temperature of
the mass so high that it may be employed in the generation of fresh
steam. It is needless to observe how important will be the bearing of
this invention upon the working of steam engines for many purposes,
if only it can be established as a practical success. And if it is so
established there can be no doubt that the experience thus acquired will
reveal new and valuable facts with regard to the conditions of chemical
combination and absorption, in the elements thus brought together.

WALTER R. BROWNE.

       *       *       *       *       *




HYDRAULIC PLATE PRESS.


One of the most remarkable and interesting mechanical arrangements at
the Imperial Navy Yard at Kiel, Germany, is the iron clad plate bending
machine, by means of which the heavy iron clad plates are bent for the
use of arming iron clad vessels.

Through the mechanism of this remarkable machine it is possible to bend
the strongest and heaviest iron clad plates--in cold condition--so that
they can be fitted close on to the ship's hull, as it was done with the
man-of-war ships Saxonia, Bavaria, Wurtemberg, and Baden, each of which
having an iron strength of about 250 meters.

[Illustration: IMPROVED HYDRAULIC PLATE PRESS.]

One may make himself a proximate idea of the enormous power of pressure
of such a machine, if he can imagine what a strength is needed to bend
an iron plate of 250 meters thickness, in cold condition; being also 1.5
meters in width, and 5.00 meters in length, and weighing about 14,555
kilogrammes, or 14,555 tons.

The bending of the plates is done as follows: As it is shown in the
illustration, connected herewith, there are standing, well secured into
the foundation, four perpendicular pillars, made of heavy iron, all
of which are holding a heavy iron block, which by means of female nut
screws is lifted and lowered in a perpendicular direction. Beneath the
iron block, between the pillars, is lying a large hollow cylinder in
which the press piston moves up and down in a perpendicular direction.
These movements are caused by a small machine, or, better, press
pump--not noticeable in the illustration--which presses water from
a reservoir through a narrow pipe into the large hollow cylinder,
preventing at the same time the escape or return of the water so forced
in. The hollow cylinder up to the press piston is now filled with water,
so remains no other way for the piston as to move on to the top. The
iron clad plate ready to undergo the bending process is lying between
press piston and iron block; under the latter preparations are already
made for the purpose of giving the iron clad plate such a form as it
will receive through the bending process. After this the press piston
will, with the greatest force, steadily but slowly move upward, until
the iron clad plate has received its intended bending.

Lately the hydraulic presses are often used as winding machines, that
is, they are used as an arrangement to lift heavy loads up on elevated
points.

The essential contrivance of a hydraulic press is as follows:

One thinks of a powerful piston, which, through, human, steam, or water
power, is set in a moving up-and-down motion. Through the ascent of the
piston, is by means of a drawing pipe, ending into a sieve, the water
absorbed out of a reservoir, and by the lowering of the piston water is
driven out of a cylinder by means of a narrow pipe (communication pipe)
into a second cylinder, which raises a larger piston, the so-called
press piston. (See illustration.)

One on top opening drawing valve, on the top end of the drawing pipe
prevents the return of the water by the going down of the piston; and a
barring valve, which is lifted by the lowering of the piston, obstructs
the return of the water by the ascent of the piston, while the drawing
valve is lifted by means of water absorbed by the small drawing
pipe.--_Illustrirte Zeitung_.

       *       *       *       *       *




FAST PRINTING PRESS FOR ENGRAVINGS.


_Uber Land und Meer_, which is one of the finest illustrated newspapers
published in Germany, gives the following: We recently gave our readers
an insight into the establishment of _Uber Land und Meer_, and to-day we
show them the machine which each week starts our paper on its journey
around the world--a machine which embodies the latest and greatest
progress in the art of printing. The following illustration represents
one of the three fast presses which the house of Hallberger employs in
the printing of its illustrated journals.

With the invention of the cylinder press by Frederick Koenig was verified
the saying that the art of printing had lent wings to words. Everywhere
the primitive hand-press had to make way for the steam printing machine;
but even this machine, since its advent in London in 1810, has itself
undergone so many changes that little else remains of Koenig's invention
than the principle of the cylinder. The demands of recent times for
still more rapid machines have resulted in the production of presses
printing from a continuous roll or "web" of paper, from cylinders
revolving in one given direction. The first of this class of presses
(the "Bullock" press) was built in America. Then England followed,
and there the first newspaper to make use of one was the _Times_. The
Augsburg Machine Works were the first to supply Germany with them, and
it was this establishment which first undertook to apply the principle
of the web perfecting press (first intended for newspaper work only,
where speed rather than fine work is the object sought) to book
printing, in which far greater accuracy and excellence is required, and
the result has been the construction of a rotary press for the highest
grade of illustrated periodical publications, which meets all the
requirements with the most complete success.

[Illustration: IMPROVED FAST PRINTING PRESS FOR ENGRAVERS]

The building of rotary presses for printing illustrated papers was
attempted as early as 1874 or 1875 in London, by the _Times_, but
apparently without success, as no public mention has ever been made of
any favorable result. The proprietor of the _London Illustrated News_
obtained better results. In 1877 an illustrated penny paper, an
outgrowth of his great journal, was printed upon a rotary press which
was, according to his statement, constructed by a machinist named
Middleton. The first one, however, did not at all meet the higher
demands of illustrated periodical printing, and, while another machine
constructed on the same principle was shown in the Paris Exposition of
1878, its work was neither in quality nor quantity adequate to the needs
of a largely circulated illustrated paper. A second machine, also on
exhibition at the same time, designed and built by the celebrated French
machinist, P. Alauzet, could not be said to have attained the object.
Its construction was undertaken long after the opening of the
Exposition, and too late to solve the weighty question. But the
half-successful attempt gave promise that the time was at hand when a
press could be built which could print our illustrated periodicals more
rapidly, and a conference with the proprietors of the Augsburg Machine
Works resulted in the production by them of the three presses from which
_Uber Land und Meer_ and _Die Illustrirte Welt_ are to-day issued. As
a whole and in detail, as well as in its productions, the press is the
marvel of mechanic and layman.

As seen in the illustration, the web of paper leaves the roll at its
right, rising to a point at the top where it passes between two hollow
cylinders covered with felt and filled with steam, which serve to dampen
the paper as may be necessary, the small hand-wheel seen above these
cylinders regulating the supply of steam. After leaving these cylinders
the paper descends sloping toward the right, and passes through two
highly polished cylinders for the purpose of recalendering. After this
it passes under the lowest of the three large cylinders of the press,
winds itself in the shape of an S toward the outside and over the middle
cylinder, and leaves the press in an almost horizontal line, after
having been printed on both sides, and is then cut into sheets. The
printing is done while the paper is passing around the two white
cylinders. The cylinder carrying the first form is placed inside and
toward the center of the press, only a part of its cog-wheel and its
journal being shown in the engraving. The second form is placed upon the
uppermost cylinder, and is the outside or cut form. Each one of the form
cylinders requires a separate inking apparatus. That of the upper one is
placed to the right at the top, and the bottom one is also at the right,
but inside. Each one has a fountain the whole breadth of the press,
in which the ink is kept, and connected with which, by appropriate
mechanism, is a system of rollers for the thorough distribution of the
ink and depositing it upon the forms.

The rapidity with which the impressions follow each other does not allow
any time for the printing on the first side to dry, and as a consequence
the freshly printed sheet coming in contact with the "packing" of the
second cylinder would so soil it as to render clean printing absolutely
impossible. To avoid this, a second roll of paper is introduced into the
machine, and is drawn around the middle cylinder beneath the paper which
has already been printed upon one side, and receives upon its surface
all "offset," thus protecting and keeping perfectly clean both the
printed paper and the impression cylinder. This "offset" web, as it
leaves the press, is wound upon a second roller, which when full is
exchanged for the new empty roller--a very simple operation.

The machines print from 3,500 to 4,000 sheets per hour _upon both
sides_, a rate of production from twenty-eight to thirty-two times as
great as was possible upon the old-fashioned hand-press, which was
capable of printing not more than 250 copies upon _one side_ in the same
time.

The device above described for preventing "offset" is, we believe, the
invention of Mr. H.J. Hewitt, a well known New York printer, 27 Rose
Street.

       *       *       *       *       *




FRENCH CANNON.


Five new cannons, the largest yet manufactured in France, have been
successfully cast in the foundry of Ruelle near Angouleme. They are made
of steel, and are breech loading. The weight of each is 97 tons, without
the carriage. The projectile weighs 1,716 pounds, and the charge or
powder is 616 pounds. To remove them a special wagon with sixteen wheels
has had to be constructed, and the bridges upon the road from Ruelle to
Angouleme not being solid enough to bear the weight of so heavy a
load, a special roadway will be constructed for the transport of these
weapons, which are destined for coast defences and ironclads.

       *       *       *       *       *




WOODLANDS, STOKE POGIS, BUCKS.


The illustration represents a house recently reconstructed. The
dining-room wing was alone left in the demolition of the old premises,
and this part has been decorated with tile facings, and otherwise
altered to be in accordance with the new portion. The house is
pleasantly situated about a mile from Stoke Church of historic fame,
in about 15 acres of garden, shrubbery, and meadow land. The hall and
staircase have been treated in wainscot oak, and the whole of the work
has been satisfactorily carried out by Mr. G. Almond, builder, of
Burnham, under the superintendence of Messrs. Thurlow & Cross,
architects.--_The Architect_.

[Illustration: WOODLANDS, STOKE POGES, BUCKS]

       *       *       *       *       *




CHINA GRASS.


The following article appeared in a recent number of the _London Times_:

The subject of the cultivation and commercial utilization of the China
grass plant, or rhea, has for many years occupied attention, the
question being one of national importance, particularly as affecting
India. Rhea which is also known under the name of ramie, is a textile
plant which was indigenous to China and India. It is perennial, easy of
cultivation, and produces a remarkably strong fiber. The problem of its
cultivation has long being solved, for within certain limits rhea can
be grown in any climate. India and the British colonies offer unusual
facilities, and present vast and appropriate fields for that enterprise,
while it can be, and is, grown in most European countries. All this has
long been demonstrated; not so, however, the commercial utilization of
the fiber, which up to the present time would appear to be a problem
only partially solved, although many earnest workers have been engaged
in the attempted solution.

There have been difficulties in the way of decorticating the stems of
this plant, and the Indian Government, in 1869, offered a reward of
L5,000 for the best machine for separating the fiber from the stems and
bark of rhea in its green or freshly cut state. The Indian Government
was led to this step by the strong conviction, based upon ample
evidence, that the only obstacle to the development of an extensive
trade in this product was the want of suitable means for decorticating
the plant. This was the third time within the present century that rhea
had become the subject of official action on the part of the Government,
the first effort for utilizing the plant dating from 1803, when Dr.
Roxburg started the question, and the second from 1840, when attention
was again directed to it by Colonel Jenkins.

The offer of L5,000, in 1869, led to only one machine being submitted
for trial, although several competitors had entered their names. This
machine was that of Mr. Greig, of Edinburgh, but after careful trial
by General (then Lieutenant Colonel) Hyde it was found that it did not
fulfill the conditions laid down by the Government, and therefore the
full prize of L5,000 was not awarded. In consideration, however, of the
inventor having made a _bona fide_ and meritorious attempt to solve
the question, he was awarded a donation of L1,500. Other unsuccessful
attempts were subsequently made, and eventually the offer of L5,000 was
withdrawn by the Government.

But although the prize was withdrawn, invention did not cease, and the
Government, in 1881, reoffered the prize of L5,500. Another competition
took place, at which several machines were tried, but the trials, as
before, proved barren of any practical results, and up to the present
time no machine has been found capable of dealing successfully with this
plant in the green state. The question of the preparation of the fiber,
however, continued to be pursued in many directions. Nor is this to be
wondered at when it is remembered that the strength of some rhea fiber
from Assam experimented with in 1852 by Dr. Forbes Royle, as compared
with St. Petersburg hemp, was in the ratio of 280 to 160, while the wild
rhea from Assam was as high as 343. But, above and beyond this, rhea has
the widest range of possible applications of any fiber, as shown by an
exhaustive report on the preparation and use of rhea fiber by Dr. Forbes
Watson, published in 1875, at which date Dr. Watson was the reporter on
the products of India to the Secretary of State, at the India Office.
Last year, however, witnessed the solution of the question of
decortication in the green state in a satisfactory manner by M.A.
Favier's process, as reported by us at the time.

This process consists in subjecting the plant to the action of steam for
a period varying from 10 to 25 minutes, according to the length of time
the plant had been cut. After steaming, the fiber and its adjuncts
were easily stripped from the wood. The importance and value of this
invention will be realized, when it is remembered that the plant is
cultivated at long distances from the localities where the fiber
is prepared for the market. The consequence is, that for every
hundredweight of fiber about a ton of woody material has to be
transported. Nor is this the only evil, for the gummy matter in which
the fiber is embedded becomes dried up during transport, and the
separation of the fiber is thus rendered difficult, and even impossible,
inasmuch as some of the fiber is left adhering to the wood.

M. Favier's process greatly simplifies the commercial production of the
fiber up to a certain point, for, at a very small cost, it gives the
manufacturer the whole of the fiber in the plant treated. But it still
stops short of what is required, in that it delivers the fiber in
ribbons, with its cementitious matter and outer skin attached. To remove
this, various methods have been tried, but, as far as we are aware,
without general success--that is to say, the fiber cannot always
be obtained of such a uniformly good quality as to constitute a
commercially reliable article. Such was the position of the question
when, about a year ago, the whole case was submitted to the
distinguished French chemist, Professor Fremy, member of the Institute
of France, who is well-known for his researches into the nature of
fibrous plants, and the question of their preparation for the market.
Professor Fremy thoroughly investigated the matter from a chemical point
of view, and at length brought it to a successful and, apparently, a
practical issue.

One great bar to previous success would appear to have been the absence
of exact knowledge as to the nature of the constituents of that portion
of the plant which contains the fiber, or, in other words, the casing or
bark surrounding the woody stem of the rhea. As determined by Professor
Fremy, this consists of the cutose, or outer skin, within which is the
