[Footnote: _Dissolving shells distil_. l. 93. The lime-stone rocks have
had their origin from shells formed beneath the sea, the softer strata
gradually dissolving and filling up the interstices of the harder ones,
afterwards when these accumulations of shells were elevated above the
waters the upper strata became dissolved by the actions of the air and
dews, and filled up the interstices beneath, producing solid rocks of
different kinds from the coarse lime-stones to the finest marbles. When
those lime-stones have been in such a situation that they could form
perfect crystals they are called spars, some of which possess a double
refraction, as observed by Sir Isaac Newton. When these crystals are
jumbled together or mixed with some colouring impurities it is termed
marble, if its texture be equable and firm; if its texture be coarse and
porous yet hard, it is called lime-stone; if its texture be very loose
and porous it is termed chalk. In some rocks the shells remain almost
unchanged and only covered, or bedded with lime-stone, which seems to
have been dissolved and sunk down amongst them. In others the softer
shells and bones are dissolved, and only sharks teeth or harder echini
have preserved their form inveloped in the chalk or lime-stone; in some
marbles the solution has been compleat and no vestiges of shell appear,
as in the white kind called statuary by the workmen. See addit. notes,
No. XVI.]


     "Hence wearied HERCULES in marble rears
     His languid limbs, and rests a thousand years;
     Still, as he leans, shall young ANTINOUS please
     With careless grace, and unaffected ease;
105  Onward with loftier step APOLLO spring,
     And launch the unerring arrow from the string;
     In Beauty's bashful form, the veil unfurl'd,
     Ideal VENUS win the gazing world.
     Hence on ROUBILIAC'S tomb shall Fame sublime
110  Wave her triumphant wings, and conquer Time;
     Long with soft touch shall DAMER'S chissel charm,
     With grace delight us, and with beauty warm;
     FOSTER'S fine form shall hearts unborn engage,
     And MELBOURN's smile enchant another age.


[_Hence wearied Hercules_. l. 101. Alluding to the celebrated Hercules
of Glyco resting after his labours; and to the easy attitude of
Antinous; the lofty step of the Apollo of Belvidere; and the retreating
modesty of the Venus de Medici. Many of the designs by Roubiliac in
Westminster Abbey are uncommonly poetical; the allegory of Time and Fame
contending for the trophy of General Wade, which is here alluded to, is
beautifully told; the wings of Fame are still expanded, and her hair
still floating in the air; which not only shews that she has that moment
arrived, but also that her force is not yet expended; at the same time,
that the old figure of Time with his disordered wings is rather leaning
backwards and yielding to her impulse, and must apparently in another
instant be driven from his attack upon the trophy.]

[_Foster's fine form_. l. 113. Alluding to the beautiful statues of Lady
Elizabeth Foster and of Lady Melbourn executed by the ingenious Mrs.
Damer.]


115    V. GNOMES! you then taught transuding dews to pass
     Through time-fall'n woods, and root-inwove morass
     Age after age; and with filtration fine
     Dispart, from earths and sulphurs, the saline.


[_Root-inwove morass_. l. 116. The great mass of matter which rests upon
the lime-stone strata of the earth, or upon the granite where the lime-
stone stratum has been removed by earthquakes or covered by lava, has
had its origin from the recrements of vegetables and of air-breathing
animals, as the lime-stone had its origin from sea animals. The whole
habitable world was originally covered with woods, till mankind formed
themselves into societies, and subdued them by fire and by steel. Hence
woods in uncultivated countries have grown and fallen through many ages,
whence morasses of immense extent; and from these as the more soluble
parts were washed away first, were produced sea-salt, nitre, iron, and
variety of acids, which combining with calcareous matter were productive
of many fossil bodies, as flint, sea-sand, selenite, with the precious
stones, and perhaps the diamond. See additional notes, No. XVII.]


       1. "HENCE with diffusive SALT old Ocean steeps
120  His emerald shallows, and his sapphire deeps.
     Oft in wide lakes, around their warmer brim
     In hollow pyramids the crystals swim;
     Or, fused by earth-born fires, in cubic blocks
     Shoot their white forms, and harden into rocks.


[_Hence with diffusive salt_. l. 119. Salts of various kinds are
produced from the recrements of animal and vegetable bodies, such as
phosphoric, ammoniacal, marine salt, and others; these are washed from
the earth by rains, and carried down our rivers into the sea; they seem
all here to decompose each other except the marine salt, which has
therefore from the beginning of the habitable world been perpetually
accumulating.

There is a town in the immense salt-mines of Cracow in Poland, with a
market-place, a river, a church, and a famous statue, (here supposed to
be of Lot's wife) by the moist or dry appearance of which the
subterranean inhabitants are said to know when the weather is fair above
ground. The galleries in these mines are so numerous and so intricate,
that workmen have frequently lost their way, their lights having been
burnt out, and have perished before they could be found. Essais, &c. par
M. Macquart. And though the arches of these different stories of
galleries are boldly executed, yet they are not dangerous; as they are
held together or supported by large masses of timber of a foot square;
and these vast timbers remain perfectly sound for many centuries, while
all other pillars whether of brick, cement, or salt soon dissolve or
moulder away. Ibid. Could the timbers over water-mill wheels or cellars,
be thus preserved by occasionally soaking them with brine? These immense
masses of rock-salt seem to have been produced by the evaporation of
sea-water in the early periods of the world by subterranean fires. Dr.
Hutton's Theory of the Earth. See also Theorie des Sources Salees, par
Mr. Struve. Histoire de Sciences de Lausanne. Tom. II. This idea of Dr.
Hutton's is confirmed by a fact mentioned in M. Macquart's Essais sur
Minerologie, who found a great quantity of fossil shells, principally
bi-valves and madre-pores, in the salt-mines of Wialiczka near Cracow.
During the evaporation of the lakes of salt-water, as in artificial
salt-works, the salt begins to crystallize near the edges where the
water is shallowest, forming hollow inverted pyramids; which, when they
become of a certain size, subside by their gravity; if urged by a
stronger fire the salt fuses or forms large cubes; whence the salt
shaped in hollow pyramids, called flake-salt, is better tasted and
preserves flesh better, than the basket or powder salt; because it is
made by less heat and thence contains more of the marine acid. The sea-
water about our island contains from about one twenty-eighth to one
thirtieth part of sea-salt, and about one eightieth of magnesian salt.
See Brownrigg on Salt. See note on Ocymum, Vol. II. of this work.]


125      "Thus, cavern'd round in CRACOW'S mighty mines,
     With crystal walls a gorgeous city shines;
     Scoop'd in the briny rock long streets extend
     Their hoary course, and glittering domes ascend;
     Down the bright steeps, emerging into day,
130  Impetuous fountains burst their headlong way,
     O'er milk-white vales in ivory channels spread,
     And wondering seek their subterraneous bed.
     Form'd in pellucid salt with chissel nice,
     The pale lamp glimmering through the sculptured ice,
135  With wild reverted eyes fair LOTTA stands,
     And spreads to Heaven, in vain, her glassy hands;
     Cold dews condense upon her pearly breast,
     And the big tear rolls lucid down her vest.
     Far gleaming o'er the town transparent fanes
140  Rear their white towers, and wave their golden vanes;
     Long lines of lustres pour their trembling rays,
     And the bright vault returns the mingled blaze.

       2. "HENCE orient NITRE owes it's sparkling birth,
     And with prismatic crystals gems the earth,
145  O'er tottering domes in filmy foliage crawls,
     Or frosts with branching plumes the mouldering walls.
     As woos Azotic Gas the virgin Air,
     And veils in crimson clouds the yielding Fair,
     Indignant Fire the treacherous courtship flies,
150  Waves his light wing, and mingles with the skies.


[_Hence orient Nitre_. l. 143. Nitre is found in Bengal naturally
crystallized, and is swept by brooms from earths and stones, and thence
called sweepings of nitre. It has lately been found in large quantities
in a natural bason of calcareous earth at Molfetta in Italy, both in
thin strata between the calcareous beds, and in efflorescences of
various beautiful leafy and hairy forms. An account of this nitre-bed is
given by Mr. Zimmerman and abridged in Rozier's Journal de Physique
Fevrier. 1790. This acid appears to be produced in all situations where
animal and vegetable matters are compleatly decomposed, and which are
exposed to the action of the air as on the walls of stables, and
slaughter-houses; the crystals are prisms furrowed by longitudinal
groves.

Dr. Priestley discovered that nitrous air or gas which he obtained by
dissolving metals in nitrous acid, would combine rapidly with vital air,
and produce with it a true nitrous acid; forming red clouds during the
combination; the two airs occupy only the space before occupied by one
of them, and at the same time heat is given out from the new
combination. This dimunition of the bulk of a mixture of nitrous gas and
vital air, Dr. Priestley ingeniously used as a test of the purity of the
latter; a discovery of the greatest importance in the analysis of airs.

Mr. Cavendish has since demonstrated that two parts of vital air or
oxygene, and one part of phlogistic air or azote, being long exposed to
electric shocks, unite, and produce nitrous acid. Philos. Trans. Vols.
LXXV. and LXXVIII.

Azote is one of the most abundant elements in nature, and combined with
calorique or heat, it forms azotic gas or phlogistic air, and composes
two thirds of the atmosphere; and is one of the principal component
parts of animal bodies, and when united to vital air or oxygene produces
the nitrous acid. Mr. Lavoisier found that 211/2 parts by weight of
azote, and 431/2 parts of oxygene produced 64 parts of nitrous gas, and
by the further addition of 36 parts of oxygene nitrous acid was
produced. Traite de Chimie. When two airs become united so as to produce
an unelastic liquid much calorique or heat is of necessity expelled from
the new combination, though perhaps nitrous acid and oxygenated marine
acid admit more heat into their combinations than other acids.]


         "So Beauty's GODDESS, warm with new desire,
     Left, on her silver wheels, the GOD of Fire;
     Her faithless charms to fiercer MARS resign'd,
     Met with fond lips, with wanton arms intwin'd.
155  --Indignant VULCAN eyed the parting Fair,
     And watch'd with jealous step the guilty pair;
     O'er his broad neck a wiry net he flung,
     Quick as he strode, the tinkling meshes rung;
     Fine as the spider's flimsy thread He wove
160  The immortal toil to lime illicit love;
     Steel were the knots, and steel the twisted thong,
     Ring link'd in ring, indissolubly strong;
     On viewless hooks along the fretted roof
     He hung, unseen, the inextricable woof.--
165  --Quick start the springs, the webs pellucid spread,
     And lock the embracing Lovers on their bed;
     Fierce with loud taunts vindictive VULCAN springs,
     Tries all the bolts, and tightens all the strings,
     Shakes with incessant shouts the bright abodes,
170  Claps his rude hands, and calls the festive Gods.--
     --With spreading palms the alarmed Goddess tries
     To veil her beauties from celestial eyes,
     Writhes her fair limbs, the slender ringlets strains,
     And bids her Loves untie the obdurate chains;
175  Soft swells her panting bosom, as she turns,
     And her flush'd cheek with brighter blushes burns.
     Majestic grief the Queen of Heaven avows,
     And chaste Minerva hides her helmed brows;
     Attendant Nymphs with bashful eyes askance
180  Steal of intangled MARS a transient glance;
     Surrounding Gods the circling nectar quaff,
     Gaze on the Fair, and envy as they laugh.

       3. "HENCE dusky IRON sleeps in dark abodes,
     And ferny foliage nestles in the nodes;
185  Till with wide lungs the panting bellows blow,
     And waked by fire the glittering torrents flow;
     --Quick whirls the wheel, the ponderous hammer falls,
     Loud anvils ring amid the trembling walls,
     Strokes follow strokes, the sparkling ingot shines,
190  Flows the red slag, the lengthening bar refines;
     Cold waves, immersed, the glowing mass congeal,
     And turn to adamant the hissing Steel.


[_Hence dusky Iron_. l. 183. The production of iron from the
decomposition of vegetable bodies is perpetually presented to our view;
the waters oozing from all morasses are chalybeate, and deposit their
ochre on being exposed to the air, the iron acquiring a calciform state
from its union with oxygene or vital air. Where thin morasses lie on
beds of gravel the latter are generally stained by the filtration of
some of the chalybeate water through them. This formation of iron from
vegetable recrements is further evinced by the fern leaves and other
parts of vegetables, so frequently found in the centre of the knobs or
nodules of some iron-ores.

In some of these nodules there is a nucleus of whiter iron-earth
surrounded by many concentric strata of darker and lighter iron-earth
alternately. In one, which now lies before me, the nucleus is a prism of
a triangular form with blunted angles, and about half an inch high, and
an inch and half broad; on every side of this are concentric strata of
similar iron-earth alternately browner and less brown; each stratum is
about a tenth of an inch in thickness and there are ten of them in
number. To what known cause can this exactly regular distribution of so
many earthy strata of different colours surrounding the nucleus be
ascribed? I don't know that any mineralogists have attempted an
explanation of this wonderful phenomenon. I suspect it is owing to the
polarity of the central nucleus. If iron-filings be regularly laid on
paper by means of a small sieve, and a magnet be placed underneath, the
filings will dispose themselves in concentric curves with vacant
intervals between them. Now if these iron-filings are conceived to be
suspended in a fluid, whose specific gravity is similar to their own,
and a magnetic bar was introduced as an axis into this fluid, it is easy
to foresee that the iron filings would dispose themselves into
concentric spheres, with intervals of the circumnatant fluid between
them, exactly as is seen in these nodules of iron-earth. As all the
lavas consist of one fourth of iron, (Kirvan's Mineral) and almost all
other known bodies, whether of animal or vegetable origin, possess more
or less of this property, may not the distribution of a great portion of
the globe of the earth into strata of greater or less regularity be
owing to the polarity of the whole?]

[_And turn to adamant_. l. 192. The circumstances which render iron more
valuable to mankind than any other metal are, 1. its property of being
rendered hard to so great a degree and thus constituting such excellent
tools. It was the discovery of this property of iron, Mr. Locke thinks,
that gave such pre-eminence to the European world over the American one.
2. Its power of being welded; that is, when two pieces are made very hot
and applied together by hammering, they unite compleatly, unless any
scale of iron intervenes; and to prevent this it is usual for smiths to
dip the very hot bar in sand, a little of which fuses into fluid glass
with the scale and is squeezed out from between the uniting parts by the
force of hammering. 3. Its power of acquiring magnetism.

It is however to be wished that gold or silver were discovered in as
great quantity as iron, since these metals being indestructible by
exposure to air, water, fire or any common acids would supply wholesome
vessels for cookery, so much to be desired, and so difficult to obtain,
and would form the most light and durable coverings for houses, as well
as indestructible fire-grates, ovens, and boiling vessels. See
additional notes, No. XVIII. on Steel.]


       "Last MICHELL'S hands with touch of potent charm
     The polish'd rods with powers magnetic arm;
195  With points directed to the polar stars
     In one long line extend the temper'd bars;
     Then thrice and thrice with steady eye he guides,
     And o'er the adhesive train the magnet slides;
     The obedient Steel with living instinct moves,
200  And veers for ever to the pole it loves.


[_Last Michell's hands_. l. 193. The discovery of the magnet seems to
have been in very early times; it is mentioned by Plato, Lucretius,
Pliny, and Galen, and is said to have taken its name of magnes from
Magnesia, a sea-port of antient Lybia.

As every piece of iron which was made magnetical by the touch of a
magnet became itself a magnet, many attempts were made to improve these
artificial magnets, but without much success till Servingdon Savary,
Esq. made them of hardened steel bars, which were so powerful that one
of them weighing three pounds averdupois would lift another of the same
weight. Philos. Trans.

After this Dr. Knight made very successful experiments on this subject,
which, though he kept his method secret, seems to have excited others to
turn their attention to magnetism. At this time the Rev. Mr. Michell
invented an equally efficacious and more expeditious way of making
strong artificial magnets, which he published in the end of the year
1750, in which he explained his method of what he called "the double
touch", and which, since Mr. Knight's method has been known, appears to
be somewhat different from it.

This method of rendering bars of hardened steel magnetical consists in
holding vertically two or more magnetic bars nearly parallel to each
other with their opposite poles very near each other (but nevertheless
separated to a small distance), these are to be slided over a line of
bars laid horizontally a few times backward and forward. See Michell on
Magnetism, also a detailed account in Chamber's Dictionary.

What Mr. Michell proposed by this method was to include a very small
portion of the horizontal bars, intended to be made magnetical, between
the joint forces of two or more bars already magnetical, and by sliding
them from end to end every part of the line of bars became successively
included, and thus bars possessed of a very small degree of magnetism to
begin with, would in a few times sliding backwards and forwards make the
other ones much more magnetical than themselves, which are then to be
taken up and used to touch the former, which are in succession to be
laid down horizontally in a line.

There is still a great field remains for future discoveries in magnetism
both in respect to experiment and theory; the latter consists of vague
conjectures the more probable of which are perhaps those of Elpinus, as
they assimulate it to electricity.

One conjecture I shall add, viz. that the polarity of magnetism may be
owing to the earth's rotatory motion. If heat, electricity, and
magnetism are supposed to be fluids of different gravities, heat being
the heaviest of them, electricity the next heavy, and magnetism the
lightest, it is evident that by the quick revolution of the earth the
heat will be accumulated most over the line, electricity next beneath
this, and that the magnetism will be detruded to the poles and axis of
the earth, like the atmospheres of common air and of inflammable gas, as
explained in the note on Canto I. l. 123.

Electricity and heat will both of them displace magnetism, and this
shows that they may gravitate on each other; and hence when too great a
quantity of the electric fluid becomes accumulated at the poles by
descending snows, or other unknown causes, it may have a tendency to
rise towards the tropics by its centrifugal force, and produce the
northern lights. See additional notes, No. I.]


       "Hail, adamantine STEEL! magnetic Lord!
     King of the prow, the plowshare, and the sword!
     True to the pole, by thee the pilot guides
     His steady helm amid the struggling tides,
205  Braves with broad sail the immeasurable sea,
     Cleaves the dark air, and asks no star but Thee.--
     By thee the plowshare rends the matted plain,
     Inhumes in level rows the living grain;
     Intrusive forests quit the cultured ground,
210  And Ceres laughs with golden fillets crown'd.--
     O'er restless realms when scowling Discord flings
     Her snakes, and loud the din of battle rings;
     Expiring Strength, and vanquish'd Courage feel
     Thy arm resistless, adamantine STEEL!

215    4. "HENCE in fine streams diffusive ACIDS flow,
     Or wing'd with fire o'er Earth's fair bosom blow;
     Transmute to glittering Flints her chalky lands,
     Or sink on Ocean's bed in countless Sands.
     Hence silvery Selenite her chrystal moulds,
220  And soft Asbestus smooths his silky folds;
     His cubic forms phosphoric Fluor prints,
     Or rays in spheres his amethystine tints.
     Soft cobweb clouds transparent Onyx spreads,
     And playful Agates weave their colour'd threads;
225  Gay pictured Mochoes glow with landscape-dyes,
     And changeful Opals roll their lucid eyes;
     Blue lambent light around the Sapphire plays,
     Bright Rubies blush, and living Diamonds blaze.


[_Diffusive Acids flow_. l. 215. The production of marine acid from
decomposing vegetable and animal matters with vital air, and of nitrous
acid from azote and vital air, the former of which is united to its
basis by means of the exhalations from vegetable and animal matters,
constitute an analogy which induces us to believe that many other acids
have either their bases or are united to vital air by means of some part
of decomposing vegetable and animal matters.

The great quantities of flint sand whether formed in mountains or in the
sea would appear to derive its acid from the new world, as it is found
above the strata of lime-stone and granite which constitute the old
world, and as the earthy basis of flint is probably calcareous, a great
part of it seems to be produced by a conjunction of the new and old
world; the recrements of air-breathing animals and vegetables probably
afford the acid, and the shells of marine animals the earthy basis,
while another part may have derived its calcareous part also from the
decomposition of vegetable and animal bodies.

The same mode of reasoning seems applicable to the siliceous stones
under various names, as amethyst, onyx, agate, mochoe, opal, &c. which
do not seem to have undergone any process from volcanic fires, and as
these stones only differ from flint by a greater or less admixture of
argillaceous and calcareous earths. The different proportions of which
in each kind of stone may be seen in Mr. Kirwan's valuable Elements of
Mineralogy. See additional notes, No. XIX.]

[_Living diamonds blaze_. l. 228. Sir Isaac Newton having observed the
great power of refracting light, which the diamond possesses above all
other crystallized or vitreous matter, conjectured that it was an
inflammable body in some manner congealed. Insomuch that all the light
is reflected which falls on any of its interior surfaces at a greater
angle of incidence than 241/2 degrees; whereas an artificial gem of
glass does not reflect any light from its hinder surface, unless that
surface is inclined in an angle of 41 degrees. Hence the diamond
reflects half as much more light as a factitious gem in similar
circumstances; to which must be added its great transparency, and the
excellent polish it is capable of. The diamond had nevertheless been
placed at the head of crystals or precious stones by the mineralogists,
till Bergman ranged it of late in the combustible class of bodies,
because by the focus of Villette's burning mirror it was evaporated by a
heat not much greater than will melt silver, and gave out light. Mr.
Hoepfner however thinks the dispersion of the diamond by this great heat
should be called a phosphorescent evaporation of it, rather than a
combustion; and from its other analogies of crystallization, hardness,
transparency, and place of its nativity, wishes again to replace it
amongst the precious stones. Observ. sur la Physique, par Rozier, Tom.
XXXV. p. 448. See new edition of the Translation of Cronsted, by De
Costa.]


       "Thus, for attractive earth, inconstant JOVE
230  Mask'd in new shapes forsook his realms above.--
