notes.  The central note, D of the scale, represents the battle
ground between the field of kinetics.  This in simple
illustration is water turning into gas.

This is the great battle ground, the only one worth considering
in a general view.  There are minor "critical stages" which the
chemist studies, but for us, in this broad sketch of the
universe, the important battle-ground is that between solid and
liquid on one side representing gravity, and gas on the other,
representing apergy.

All the solids and liquids of this earth of ours gather at the
centre, in a core, each of the elements (or their combinations)
in this core vibrating in their three lower notes, producing the
attraction, which is "in proportion to the mass" and which
decreases from the surface of the core "as the square of the
substance."

Around this central core gather all the elements vibrating in the
three higher notes of their octave as gases, producing repulsion
which increases by 1.6 for each doubled time.  It is worth while
making this clear.  It has never before appeared in print.

Let the amount of apergy, or repulsion, or centrifugal force at
the surface of the earth be represented by x.  This is the result
of motion at the rate of 1,000 miles per hour.  Make this motion
2,000 miles per hour, and the apergy is increased 1.6.  Four
thousand miles above the surface of this earth the rotation
is at the rate of 2,000.  It is the globe of 48,000 miles in
circumference revolving in 24 hours, and the speed is doubled.
This apergy has increased by 1.6.  As the apergy increases at
this rate every time the speed is doubled, at a distance
of 21,000 miles the speed is 7,000 miles per hour and the
centrifugal force has been increased nearly four times what it
was at the surface of the ocean.  The attraction has been
decreased to about one-thirtieth.  At the surface it is equal to
120 x.  At 4,000 miles to one-quarter, or 30 x;  at 16,000 miles
to one-sixteenth, or 7 x;  and at 21,000 miles to 4 x.

If "equatorial gravity is about 120 times that of the equatorial
apergy," at the ocean level, then at the distance of 21,000 miles
from it, in a revolving globe, the two forces would be equal;
the "pull" of each being 4 x, and an anchor will weigh no more
than a feather, for weight is the excess of gravity or apergy.

If the pyramids had been built of the heaviest known material on
the gases 21,000 miles above us, and so that they should revolve
in the same time, 7,000 miles per hour, they would remain there.
All the attraction of the solid core of the earth that could be
exerted on them at that distance would not be enough to pull them
an inch nearer to it through our gaseous envelope.  Their gaseous
foundation there would be as firm as igneous rock here.

The force of repulsion created by the three higher notes of an
octave means just as much at the attraction created by the three
lower notes, whether it is in a chemical retort, within this
earth, or within this universe.  The two forces balance, and are
exactly equal.  They fight only within kinetic zones.

Given the vast manasic globe of differentiated matter, its atoms
uniting in different numbers to form molecules as the bases of
elementary substances, manasic substances, of course.  The thrill
of vibration is sweeping through it from the spiritual plane
above, and the elements (and their combinations) which answer in
the lower notes gather and form a core, the Invisible Central
Sun, with its attraction.  The elements answering in the higher
notes gather around it with their repulsion.  So the two opposing
forces were born, with a vast kinetic skin for a battle-ground
between them.

The attraction of the invisible central sun manifests itself to
us in prakriti as Light.  The repulsion of its covering, or the
higher static vibration of manasa, manifests itself to us as
Darkness.  The first creative act in or on matter was the
creation of Light and its separation from the Darkness.  The next
creative act was the establishment of a kinetic skin or zone
between them, a firmament in which the two forces of Light and
Darkness could strive for mastery.  "And God called the firmament
Heaven."  The third creative act was the gathering of the solids
and liquids together, and the beginning of the kinetic work in
the creation of forms and shapes, by the cross play of the two
forces in their combinations of solid with gases.

All this had to happen before the manasa combined and dropped in
vibration to prana--and before the pranic globes were formed and
the Light could be manifested to us through them.  It may be well
to read the first chapter of Genesis over and ask forgiveness for
our ignorance, from the writer who records this creation of the
pranic globes as the fourth act of creation, and the creation of
the etheric sun and prakritic moon to follow that.  That record
is mutilated, fragmentary;  but the writer of it knew the facts.
If we had the full story, instead of a sentence here and there,
taken from an older story not to tell of creation but to hide
another tale for the priest, the writer of Genesis would laugh
last.

But let us return to the kinetic skin of energy between Light and
the Darkness--the firmament which God calls Heaven--the battle
ground for gravity and apergy, or attraction and repulsion, or
good and evil, or the powers of light and darkness.  This skin is
like that of an onion, thickest at the equator and thinnest at
the poles--not only on this earth but in the solar, alcyonic,
and manasic globes.  The equatorial belt, where phenomena are
richest in the manasic globes, we call the Milky Way;  in the
solar globe we call it the plane of the ecliptic;  and on the
earth, the tropics.  Modern science has not yet found it in
Alcyonic globe--because it has never thought of looking for it.

This division of the Light from the Darkness was all that was
required for evolution on the manasic globe within the kinetic
belt.  This evolution was not confined to the making of a few
alcyonic or pranic globes.  It was (and is) a great and wonderful
evolution beyond words and almost beyond imagination.  It is the
Heaven which mankind has longed to see and know.  The writer of
Genesis mixed it with the creation of this earth, using earthly
metaphors.  Before finding fault, we should better his language.
We have not the words in physics to do it, and must wait for our
metaphysics.  But of one thing we may be sure, that the pranic-
alcyonic globes here and there at the "sea level" of the manasic
globe--in what God calls Heaven--amount to no more on that
globe, or in Heaven, than so many balls of thistle-down blown
across a meadow do on this earth of ours.  Everything that can be
created in thought must be there.  It is in thought only, but in
thought it is differentiated as sharply as anything in prakriti.
The manasic world, the Heaven of the Bible, is as real as our own
world can possibly be;  in fact, more real, for when ours is
resolved back into its final elements, it will be but "the dust
of the ground" of the manasic world.

The pranic globes created in this manasic skin by Sound, or the
Logos, or vibration, evolved in identically the same way--with a
central static core and an outer static envelope, of low and high
vibration in prana, creating attraction and repulsion, or gravity
and apergy.  The kinetic skin between, in which these forces play
in the pranic world, makes a real, not an imaginary pranic world,
though but a faint reflection of the manasic.  When our father,
the Central Invisible Sun, transfers his attraction to these
alcyonic suns, the Light has something in which to manifest
itself, and we "see" this manifesting core and call it Alcyone,
and its manifestation Light;  but light in its last material
analysis is but the static mind or thought vibrating in the three
lower notes of the octave.




Chapter Nine

The Dual Man


Within the alcyonic globes of differentiated pranic-manasic atoms
the vibration divided them also into solid-liquid cores and
gaseous envelopes, and a kinetic skin of phenomena.  And then a
new world--a world of Life, came into material existence.  All
the atoms of thought or manasa, surrounding each and every pranic
atom, and making its molecule of energy, so to speak, were that
particular kind of kinetic manasa ready to change its rate of
vibration within an octave, and the forms prana assumes from the
action of thought within the kinetic belt were living and
thinking.  Each pranic globe, which was a small state of product
of the manasic, consisted of two globes in coadunition--two in
one.  Each pranic atom was the centre of a manasic molecule and
represented the universe.  All things were two in one, created by
harmonic vibration between them, and existence by the greater
strength of the lower notes, or attraction.  It was at once less
and more wonderful than the manasic world--a specialized form of
it.

When within this kinetic belt of the prana the etheric solar
globes formed here and there, they were three fold, each atom of
the new plane of matter having its surrounding envelope of prana-
manasa--a specialization of the pranic world in which (what we
call) force had been added to life and mind.  The static ether,
vibrating in each of its elements through one octave, divided
into central core (our sun, and other suns) and outer covering,
with a skin or belt of kinetic energy, "as above" which developed
an etheric world.  All things on this etheric world were caused
by the harmonic vibration between the etheric atoms and their
surrounding envelopes, except that while all things in this
etheric world must have life, not all need have mind.  The chord
of three was not necessary to create;  the chord of two was
enough, and the manasic atoms might cease to vibrate in chord
with the prana and ether without affecting the creation.  Only in
the etheric world (and below it) could there be living mindless
ones.  To the etheric globes the stellar pranic cores transferred
their light, which manifested itself in the solid static ether as
Attraction and in the gaseous static ether as Repulsion, within
the kinetic skin of each etheric world more specialized and less
varied than the pranic.

Our sun is not of prakriti, but of static ether, composed of the
separate and individual elementary substances of the ether, and
their compounds vibrating in the lower notes of their octaves.
It is our father, not our elder brother.  Its envelope of static
ether in which the planet revolves is composed of the elementary
substances and combinations vibrating in the higher notes of
their octave.  The light transferred to this etheric globe from
its mother, Alcyone, manifests itself in the lower vibration of
the sun as Attraction;  in the higher vibrations of its envelope
as Repulsion, and within the kinetic skin wherein these forces
play, the prakritic globes, planets, were born.

Take our earth.  Each atom is fourfold--whether of the static
core or of the static gaseous envelope.  Creation on it is
limited to the kinetic skin, wherein the attraction of the lower
and repulsion of the higher notes in each octave of vibration
have full play.  All things on it must have come from the
chording vibrations of the atoms of the prakritic elementary
substances and their envelope of ether.  They may or may not have
life or mind the ether atom may have lost its chord with its
pranic envelope, or the pranic envelope may have lost its chord
with the manasic;  but the combination must have force or energy
within it.  It may have lost Mind and Life in acquiring it, or
after acquiring it;  but it had to have life before it could
become prakriti.

All things in the prakritic world flow from the Life of the
etheric and the Mind of the pranic worlds.  Everything in the
etheric world has life, and our unconscious personification or
"vivification" of etheric life transferred into fauna or flora,
or into force of any kind, has a natural explanation.  The
thrill of vibration in one octave through the differentiated
consciousness of the universe by which the light was separated
from the darkness, the lower from the higher, was all that was
required to create each star and sun, and world, and all that in
them is.  And it was all good.

Each thing on every lower world was but the translation into form
of the type of the next world (or plane) above.  As each element
on this prakritic type, so each combination of those elements
into crystal or tree or animal is but the translation.  The
normal earth from the crystal to (the animal) man was pure, and
clean, and holy.  Sin had not entered.

How did it come?

On the vast manasic world there was "a special creation"--that
of the Angel Man.  The three planes of Spirit above were
undifferentiated consciousness, but they were in different
octaves of vibration, and these working on the three highest
forms of differentiated consciousness (manasic matter) brought
them to chording Vibration so that when they combined and reached
their highest point in evolution they "created" the Angel (or
manasic) man.  He was the product in kinetic manasa of the three
spiritual planes above him, precisely as the animal man was the
product in kinetic prakriti of the three material planes above
him.  The latter was the "shadow" of the other.

The Angel-man had a material (manasic) body, but his energy life,
and mind were spiritual.  The animal man had a prakritic body,
with energy, life and mind that were material.

So far all was good.

The animal man has four bodies--one of prakriti, one of ether,
one of prana, and one of manasa.  It may be true, and probably
is, that his manasic body is not sounding in chord with his
prakritic body, but only with those atoms of it which are in his
brain and nerves;  but that is immaterial--for future
consideration.

The Angel man had but one body, of manasa, in which the spirit
dwelt;  but that body was identical in substance with the body
that made the mind of the animal man.  His manasic body joined
the manasic body of the animal man, joined with it by entering
into the animal man's mind, as easily as water from one glass is
added to water in another glass, and the animal "man became a
living soul," endowed with speech, while the Angel-man was given
"a skin coat."

The prakritic body of the animal man was the result in prakriti
of an etheric-pranic-manasic, or "astral" body, formed in
accordance with the Universal Law.  For what he was by nature, he
could not be blamed.  He stood naked and not ashamed before the
Radiance.  He did not make his astral body;  he was the mere
translation of it into prakriti, as all other created things
were, and that invisible astral self (figuratively) stood at his
right hand, moulding and shaping him.

But when the Angel-man entered his mind, all this was changed.
He "knew Good from Evil."  To his mind of manasa had been added
the Spirit--the Atma-Buddhi's Consciousness of the three
Spiritual planes.  He has become "as one of us," said the Angel-
men of the firmament, of Heaven.  He now held the seven planes
and was a creator.  Each thought and desire that, when an animal
only, fell harmless, now created on the pranic and etheric world.
Soon beside him, at his left hand (figuratively) there grew up a
second etheric or astral body, that of his desires;  and his
prakritic body was no longer the product of the astral body on
his right hand.  It was the joint product of the left-hand Kamic
