"You may be sentenced to the arena, or go to the pits to be used in
research work by the learned ones," he replied.

"And what will they do with me there?" I persisted.

"No one knows except the Mahars and those who go to the pits with them,
but as the latter never return, their knowledge does them but little
good.  It is said that the learned ones cut up their subjects while
they are yet alive, thus learning many useful things.  However I should
not imagine that it would prove very useful to him who was being cut
up; but of course this is all but conjecture.  The chances are that ere
long you will know much more about it than I," and he grinned as he
spoke.  The Sagoths have a well-developed sense of humor.

"And suppose it is the arena," I continued; "what then?"

"You saw the two who met the tarag and the thag the time that you
escaped?" he said.

"Yes."

"Your end in the arena would be similar to what was intended for them,"
he explained, "though of course the same kinds of animals might not be
employed."

"It is sure death in either event?" I asked.

"What becomes of those who go below with the learned ones I do not
know, nor does any other," he replied; "but those who go to the arena
may come out alive and thus regain their liberty, as did the two whom
you saw."

"They gained their liberty?  And how?"

"It is the custom of the Mahars to liberate those who remain alive
within the arena after the beasts depart or are killed.  Thus it has
happened that several mighty warriors from far distant lands, whom we
have captured on our slave raids, have battled the brutes turned in
upon them and slain them, thereby winning their freedom.  In the
instance which you witnessed the beasts killed each other, but the
result was the same--the man and woman were liberated, furnished with
weapons, and started on their homeward journey.  Upon the left shoulder
of each a mark was burned--the mark of the Mahars--which will forever
protect these two from slaving parties."

"There is a slender chance for me then if I be sent to the arena, and
none at all if the learned ones drag me to the pits?"

"You are quite right," he replied; "but do not felicitate yourself too
quickly should you be sent to the arena, for there is scarce one in a
thousand who comes out alive."

To my surprise they returned me to the same building in which I had
been confined with Perry and Ghak before my escape.  At the doorway I
was turned over to the guards there.

"He will doubtless be called before the investigators shortly," said he
who had brought me back, "so have him in readiness."

The guards in whose hands I now found myself, upon hearing that I had
returned of my own volition to Phutra evidently felt that it would be
safe to give me liberty within the building as had been the custom
before I had escaped, and so I was told to return to whatever duty had
been mine formerly.

My first act was to hunt up Perry, whom I found poring as usual over
the great tomes that he was supposed to be merely dusting and
rearranging upon new shelves.

As I entered the room he glanced up and nodded pleasantly to me, only
to resume his work as though I had never been away at all.  I was both
astonished and hurt at his indifference.  And to think that I was
risking death to return to him purely from a sense of duty and
affection!

"Why, Perry!" I exclaimed, "haven't you a word for me after my long
absence?"

"Long absence!" he repeated in evident astonishment.  "What do you
mean?"

"Are you crazy, Perry?  Do you mean to say that you have not missed me
since that time we were separated by the charging thag within the
arena?"

"'That time'," he repeated.  "Why man, I have but just returned from
the arena!  You reached here almost as soon as I. Had you been much
later I should indeed have been worried, and as it is I had intended
asking you about how you escaped the beast as soon as I had completed
the translation of this most interesting passage."

"Perry, you ARE mad," I exclaimed.  "Why, the Lord only knows how long
I have been away.  I have been to other lands, discovered a new race of
humans within Pellucidar, seen the Mahars at their worship in their
hidden temple, and barely escaped with my life from them and from a
great labyrinthodon that I met afterward, following my long and tedious
wanderings across an unknown world.  I must have been away for months,
Perry, and now you barely look up from your work when I return and
insist that we have been separated but a moment.  Is that any way to
treat a friend?  I'm surprised at you, Perry, and if I'd thought for a
moment that you cared no more for me than this I should not have
returned to chance death at the hands of the Mahars for your sake."

The old man looked at me for a long time before he spoke.  There was a
puzzled expression upon his wrinkled face, and a look of hurt sorrow in
his eyes.

"David, my boy," he said, "how could you for a moment doubt my love for
you?  There is something strange here that I cannot understand.  I know
that I am not mad, and I am equally sure that you are not; but how in
the world are we to account for the strange hallucinations that each of
us seems to harbor relative to the passage of time since last we saw
each other.  You are positive that months have gone by, while to me it
seems equally certain that not more than an hour ago I sat beside you
in the amphitheater.  Can it be that both of us are right and at the
same time both are wrong?  First tell me what time is, and then maybe I
can solve our problem.  Do you catch my meaning?"

I didn't and said so.

"Yes," continued the old man, "we are both right.  To me, bent over my
book here, there has been no lapse of time.  I have done little or
nothing to waste my energies and so have required neither food nor
sleep, but you, on the contrary, have walked and fought and wasted
strength and tissue which must needs be rebuilt by nutriment and food,
and so, having eaten and slept many times since last you saw me you
naturally measure the lapse of time largely by these acts.  As a matter
of fact, David, I am rapidly coming to the conviction that there is no
such thing as time--surely there can be no time here within Pellucidar,
where there are no means for measuring or recording time.  Why, the
Mahars themselves take no account of such a thing as time.  I find here
in all their literary works but a single tense, the present.  There
seems to be neither past nor future with them.  Of course it is
impossible for our outer-earthly minds to grasp such a condition, but
our recent experiences seem to demonstrate its existence."

It was too big a subject for me, and I said so, but Perry seemed to
enjoy nothing better than speculating upon it, and after listening with
interest to my account of the adventures through which I had passed he
returned once more to the subject, which he was enlarging upon with
considerable fluency when he was interrupted by the entrance of a
Sagoth.

"Come!" commanded the intruder, beckoning to me.  "The investigators
would speak with you."

"Good-bye, Perry!" I said, clasping the old man's hand.  "There may be
nothing but the present and no such thing as time, but I feel that I am
about to take a trip into the hereafter from which I shall never
return.  If you and Ghak should manage to escape I want you to promise
me that you will find Dian the Beautiful and tell her that with my last
words I asked her forgiveness for the unintentional affront I put upon
her, and that my one wish was to be spared long enough to right the
wrong that I had done her."

Tears came to Perry's eyes.

"I cannot believe but that you will return, David," he said.  "It would
be awful to think of living out the balance of my life without you
among these hateful and repulsive creatures.  If you are taken away I
shall never escape, for I feel that I am as well off here as I should
be anywhere within this buried world.  Good-bye, my boy, good-bye!" and
then his old voice faltered and broke, and as he hid his face in his
hands the Sagoth guardsman grasped me roughly by the shoulder and
hustled me from the chamber.



XI

FOUR DEAD MAHARS


A MOMENT LATER I WAS STANDING BEFORE A DOZEN Mahars--the social
investigators of Phutra.  They asked me many questions, through a
Sagoth interpreter.  I answered them all truthfully.  They seemed
particularly interested in my account of the outer earth and the
strange vehicle which had brought Perry and me to Pellucidar.  I
thought that I had convinced them, and after they had sat in silence
for a long time following my examination, I expected to be ordered
returned to my quarters.

During this apparent silence they were debating through the medium of
strange, unspoken language the merits of my tale.  At last the head of
the tribunal communicated the result of their conference to the officer
in charge of the Sagoth guard.

"Come," he said to me, "you are sentenced to the experimental pits for
having dared to insult the intelligence of the mighty ones with the
ridiculous tale you have had the temerity to unfold to them."

"Do you mean that they do not believe me?" I asked, totally astonished.

"Believe you!" he laughed.  "Do you mean to say that you expected any
one to believe so impossible a lie?"

It was hopeless, and so I walked in silence beside my guard down
through the dark corridors and runways toward my awful doom.  At a low
level we came upon a number of lighted chambers in which we saw many
Mahars engaged in various occupations.  To one of these chambers my
guard escorted me, and before leaving they chained me to a side wall.
There were other humans similarly chained.  Upon a long table lay a
victim even as I was ushered into the room.  Several Mahars stood about
the poor creature holding him down so that he could not move.  Another,
grasping a sharp knife with her three-toed fore foot, was laying open
the victim's chest and abdomen.  No anesthetic had been administered
and the shrieks and groans of the tortured man were terrible to hear.
This, indeed, was vivisection with a vengeance.  Cold sweat broke out
upon me as I realized that soon my turn would come.  And to think that
where there was no such thing as time I might easily imagine that my
suffering was enduring for months before death finally released me!

The Mahars had paid not the slightest attention to me as I had been
brought into the room.  So deeply immersed were they in their work that
I am sure they did not even know that the Sagoths had entered with me.
The door was close by.  Would that I could reach it!  But those heavy
chains precluded any such possibility.  I looked about for some means
of escape from my bonds.  Upon the floor between me and the Mahars lay
a tiny surgical instrument which one of them must have dropped.  It
looked not unlike a button-hook, but was much smaller, and its point
was sharpened.  A hundred times in my boyhood days had I picked locks
with a buttonhook.  Could I but reach that little bit of polished steel
I might yet effect at least a temporary escape.

Crawling to the limit of my chain, I found that by reaching one hand as
far out as I could my fingers still fell an inch short of the coveted
instrument.  It was tantalizing!  Stretch every fiber of my being as I
would, I could not quite make it.

At last I turned about and extended one foot toward the object.  My
heart came to my throat!  I could just touch the thing!  But suppose
that in my effort to drag it toward me I should accidentally shove it
still farther away and thus entirely out of reach!  Cold sweat broke
out upon me from every pore.  Slowly and cautiously I made the effort.
My toes dropped upon the cold metal.  Gradually I worked it toward me
until I felt that it was within reach of my hand and a moment later I
had turned about and the precious thing was in my grasp.

Assiduously I fell to work upon the Mahar lock that held my chain.  It
was pitifully simple.  A child might have picked it, and a moment later
I was free.  The Mahars were now evidently completing their work at the
table.  One already turned away and was examining other victims,
evidently with the intention of selecting the next subject.

Those at the table had their backs toward me.  But for the creature
walking toward us I might have escaped that moment.  Slowly the thing
approached me, when its attention was attracted by a huge slave chained
a few yards to my right.  Here the reptile stopped and commenced to go
over the poor devil carefully, and as it did so its back turned toward
me for an instant, and in that instant I gave two mighty leaps that
carried me out of the chamber into the corridor beyond, down which I
raced with all the speed I could command.

Where I was, or whither I was going, I knew not.  My only thought was
to place as much distance as possible between me and that frightful
chamber of torture.

Presently I reduced my speed to a brisk walk, and later realizing the
danger of running into some new predicament, were I not careful, I
moved still more slowly and cautiously.  After a time I came to a
passage that seemed in some mysterious way familiar to me, and
presently, chancing to glance within a chamber which led from the
corridor I saw three Mahars curled up in slumber upon a bed of skins.
I could have shouted aloud in joy and relief.  It was the same corridor
and the same Mahars that I had intended to have lead so important a
role in our escape from Phutra.  Providence had indeed been kind to me,
for the reptiles still slept.

My one great danger now lay in returning to the upper levels in search
of Perry and Ghak, but there was nothing else to be done, and so I
hastened upward.  When I came to the frequented portions of the
building, I found a large burden of skins in a corner and these I
lifted to my head, carrying them in such a way that ends and corners
fell down about my shoulders completely hiding my face.  Thus disguised
I found Perry and Ghak together in the chamber where we had been wont
to eat and sleep.

Both were glad to see me, it was needless to say, though of course they
had known nothing of the fate that had been meted out to me by my
judges.  It was decided that no time should now be lost before
attempting to put our plan of escape to the test, as I could not hope
to remain hidden from the Sagoths long, nor could I forever carry that
bale of skins about upon my head without arousing suspicion.  However
it seemed likely that it would carry me once more safely through the
crowded passages and chambers of the upper levels, and so I set out
with Perry and Ghak--the stench of the illy cured pelts fairly choking
me.

Together we repaired to the first tier of corridors beneath the main
floor of the buildings, and here Perry and Ghak halted to await me.
The buildings are cut out of the solid limestone formation.  There is
nothing at all remarkable about their architecture.  The rooms are
sometimes rectangular, sometimes circular, and again oval in shape.
The corridors which connect them are narrow and not always straight.
The chambers are lighted by diffused sunlight reflected through tubes
similar to those by which the avenues are lighted.  The lower the tiers
of chambers, the darker.  Most of the corridors are entirely unlighted.
The Mahars can see quite well in semidarkness.

Down to the main floor we encountered many Mahars, Sagoths, and slaves;
but no attention was paid to us as we had become a part of the domestic
life of the building.  There was but a single entrance leading from the
place into the avenue and this was well guarded by Sagoths--this
doorway alone were we forbidden to pass.  It is true that we were not
supposed to enter the deeper corridors and apartments except on special
occasions when we were instructed to do so; but as we were considered a
lower order without intelligence there was little reason to fear that
we could accomplish any harm by so doing, and so we were not hindered
as we entered the corridor which led below.

Wrapped in a skin I carried three swords, and the two bows, and the
arrows which Perry and I had fashioned.  As many slaves bore
skin-wrapped burdens to and fro my load attracted no comment.  Where I
left Ghak and Perry there were no other creatures in sight, and so I
withdrew one sword from the package, and leaving the balance of the
weapons with Perry, started on alone toward the lower levels.

Having come to the apartment in which the three Mahars slept I entered
silently on tiptoe, forgetting that the creatures were without the
sense of hearing.  With a quick thrust through the heart I disposed of
the first but my second thrust was not so fortunate, so that before I
could kill the next of my victims it had hurled itself against the
third, who sprang quickly up, facing me with wide-distended jaws.  But
fighting is not the occupation which the race of Mahars loves, and when
the thing saw that I already had dispatched two of its companions, and
that my sword was red with their blood, it made a dash to escape me.
But I was too quick for it, and so, half hopping, half flying, it
scurried down another corridor with me close upon its heels.

Its escape meant the utter ruin of our plan, and in all probability my
instant death.  This thought lent wings to my feet; but even at my best
I could do no more than hold my own with the leaping thing before me.

Of a sudden it turned into an apartment on the right of the corridor,
and an instant later as I rushed in I found myself facing two of the
Mahars.  The one who had been there when we entered had been occupied
with a number of metal vessels, into which had been put powders and
liquids as I judged from the array of flasks standing about upon the
bench where it had been working.  In an instant I realized what I had
stumbled upon.  It was the very room for the finding of which Perry had
given me minute directions.  It was the buried chamber in which was
hidden the Great Secret of the race of Mahars.  And on the bench beside
the flasks lay the skin-bound book which held the only copy of the
thing I was to have sought, after dispatching the three Mahars in their
sleep.

There was no exit from the room other than the doorway in which I now
stood facing the two frightful reptiles.  Cornered, I knew that they
would fight like demons, and they were well equipped to fight if fight
they must.  Together they launched themselves upon me, and though I ran
one of them through the heart on the instant, the other fastened its
gleaming fangs about my sword arm above the elbow, and then with her
sharp talons commenced to rake me about the body, evidently intent upon
disemboweling me.  I saw that it was useless to hope that I might
release my arm from that powerful, viselike grip which seemed to be
severing my arm from my body.  The pain I suffered was intense, but it
only served to spur me to greater efforts to overcome my antagonist.

Back and forth across the floor we struggled--the Mahar dealing me
terrific, cutting blows with her fore feet, while I attempted to
protect my body with my left hand, at the same time watching for an
opportunity to transfer my blade from my now useless sword hand to its
rapidly weakening mate.  At last I was successful, and with what seemed
to me my last ounce of strength I ran the blade through the ugly body
of my foe.

Soundless, as it had fought, it died, and though weak from pain and
loss of blood, it was with an emotion of triumphant pride that I
stepped across its convulsively stiffening corpse to snatch up the most
potent secret of a world.  A single glance assured me it was the very
thing that Perry had described to me.

And as I grasped it did I think of what it meant to the human race of
Pellucidar--did there flash through my mind the thought that countless
generations of my own kind yet unborn would have reason to worship me
for the thing that I had accomplished for them?  I did not.  I thought
of a beautiful oval face, gazing out of limpid eyes, through a waving
mass of jet-black hair.  I thought of red, red lips, God-made for
kissing.  And of a sudden, apropos of nothing, standing there alone in
the secret chamber of the Mahars of Pellucidar, I realized that I loved
Dian the Beautiful.



XII

PURSUIT


FOR AN INSTANT I STOOD THERE THINKING OF HER, and then, with a sigh, I
tucked the book in the thong that supported my loin cloth, and turned
to leave the apartment.  At the bottom of the corridor which leads
aloft from the lower chambers I whistled in accordance with the
prearranged signal which was to announce to Perry and Ghak that I had
been successful.  A moment later they stood beside me, and to my
surprise I saw that Hooja the Sly One accompanied them.

"He joined us," explained Perry, "and would not be denied.  The fellow
is a fox.  He scents escape, and rather than be thwarted of our chance
now I told him that I would bring him to you, and let you decide
whether he might accompany us."

I had no love for Hooja, and no confidence in him.  I was sure that if
he thought it would profit him he would betray us; but I saw no way out
of it now, and the fact that I had killed four Mahars instead of only
the three I had expected to, made it possible to include the fellow in
our scheme of escape.

"Very well," I said, "you may come with us, Hooja; but at the first
intimation of treachery I shall run my sword through you.  Do you
understand?"

He said that he did.

Some time later we had removed the skins from the four Mahars, and so
succeeded in crawling inside of them ourselves that there seemed an
excellent chance for us to pass unnoticed from Phutra.  It was not an
easy thing to fasten the hides together where we had split them along
the belly to remove them from their carcasses, but by remaining out
until the others had all been sewed in with my help, and then leaving
an aperture in the breast of Perry's skin through which he could pass
his hands to sew me up, we were enabled to accomplish our design to
really much better purpose than I had hoped.  We managed to keep the
heads erect by passing our swords up through the necks, and by the same
means were enabled to move them about in a life-like manner.  We had
our greatest difficulty with the webbed feet, but even that problem was
finally solved, so that when we moved about we did so quite naturally.
Tiny holes punctured in the baggy throats into which our heads were
thrust permitted us to see well enough to guide our progress.

Thus we started up toward the main floor of the building.  Ghak headed
the strange procession, then came Perry, followed by Hooja, while I
brought up the rear, after admonishing Hooja that I had so arranged my
sword that I could thrust it through the head of my disguise into his
vitals were he to show any indication of faltering.

As the noise of hurrying feet warned me that we were entering the busy
corridors of the main level, my heart came up into my mouth.  It is
with no sense of shame that I admit that I was frightened--never before
in my life, nor since, did I experience any such agony of soulsearing
fear and suspense as enveloped me.  If it be possible to sweat blood, I
sweat it then.

Slowly, after the manner of locomotion habitual to the Mahars, when
they are not using their wings, we crept through throngs of busy
slaves, Sagoths, and Mahars.  After what seemed an eternity we reached
the outer door which leads into the main avenue of Phutra.  Many
Sagoths loitered near the opening.  They glanced at Ghak as he padded
between them.  Then Perry passed, and then Hooja.  Now it was my turn,
and then in a sudden fit of freezing terror I realized that the warm
blood from my wounded arm was trickling down through the dead foot of
the Mahar skin I wore and leaving its tell-tale mark upon the pavement,
for I saw a Sagoth call a companion's attention to it.

The guard stepped before me and pointing to my bleeding foot spoke to
me in the sign language which these two races employ as a means of
communication.  Even had I known what he was saying I could not have
replied with the dead thing that covered me.  I once had seen a great
Mahar freeze a presumptuous Sagoth with a look.  It seemed my only
hope, and so I tried it.  Stopping in my tracks I moved my sword so
that it made the dead head appear to turn inquiring eyes upon the
gorilla-man. For a long moment I stood perfectly still, eyeing the
fellow with those dead eyes.  Then I lowered the head and started
slowly on.  For a moment all hung in the balance, but before I touched
him the guard stepped to one side, and I passed on out into the avenue.

On we went up the broad street, but now we were safe for the very
numbers of our enemies that surrounded us on all sides.  Fortunately,
there was a great concourse of Mahars repairing to the shallow lake
which lies a mile or more from the city.  They go there to indulge
their amphibian proclivities in diving for small fish, and enjoying the
cool depths of the water.  It is a fresh-water lake, shallow, and free
from the larger reptiles which make the use of the great seas of
Pellucidar impossible for any but their own kind.

In the thick of the crowd we passed up the steps and out onto the
plain.  For some distance Ghak remained with the stream that was
traveling toward the lake, but finally, at the bottom of a little gully
he halted, and there we remained until all had passed and we were
alone.  Then, still in our disguises, we set off directly away from
Phutra.

The heat of the vertical rays of the sun was fast making our horrible
prisons unbearable, so that after passing a low divide, and entering a
sheltering forest, we finally discarded the Mahar skins that had
brought us thus far in safety.

I shall not weary you with the details of that bitter and galling
flight.  How we traveled at a dogged run until we dropped in our
tracks.  How we were beset by strange and terrible beasts.  How we
barely escaped the cruel fangs of lions and tigers the size of which
would dwarf into pitiful insignificance the greatest felines of the
outer world.

On and on we raced, our one thought to put as much distance between
ourselves and Phutra as possible.  Ghak was leading us to his own
land--the land of Sari.  No sign of pursuit had developed, and yet we
were sure that somewhere behind us relentless Sagoths were dogging our
tracks.  Ghak said they never failed to hunt down their quarry until
they had captured it or themselves been turned back by a superior force.

Our only hope, he said, lay in reaching his tribe which was quite
strong enough in their mountain fastness to beat off any number of
Sagoths.

At last, after what seemed months, and may, I now realize, have been
years, we came in sight of the dun escarpment which buttressed the
foothills of Sari.  At almost the same instant, Hooja, who looked ever
quite as much behind as before, announced that he could see a body of
men far behind us topping a low ridge in our wake.  It was the
long-expected pursuit.

I asked Ghak if we could make Sari in time to escape them.

"We may," he replied; "but you will find that the Sagoths can move with
incredible swiftness, and as they are almost tireless they are
doubtless much fresher than we.  Then--" he paused, glancing at Perry.

I knew what he meant.  The old man was exhausted.  For much of the
period of our flight either Ghak or I had half supported him on the
march.  With such a handicap, less fleet pursuers than the Sagoths
might easily overtake us before we could scale the rugged heights which
confronted us.

"You and Hooja go on ahead," I said.  "Perry and I will make it if we
are able.  We cannot travel as rapidly as you two, and there is no
reason why all should be lost because of that.  It can't be helped--we
have simply to face it."

"I will not desert a companion," was Ghak's simple reply.  I hadn't
known that this great, hairy, primeval man had any such nobility of
character stowed away inside him.  I had always liked him, but now to
my liking was added honor and respect.  Yes, and love.

But still I urged him to go on ahead, insisting that if he could reach
his people he might be able to bring out a sufficient force to drive
off the Sagoths and rescue Perry and myself.

No, he wouldn't leave us, and that was all there was to it, but he
suggested that Hooja might hurry on and warn the Sarians of the king's
danger.  It didn't require much urging to start Hooja--the naked idea
was enough to send him leaping on ahead of us into the foothills which
we now had reached.

Perry realized that he was jeopardizing Ghak's life and mine and the
old fellow fairly begged us to go on without him, although I knew that
he was suffering a perfect anguish of terror at the thought of falling
into the hands of the Sagoths.  Ghak finally solved the problem, in
part, by lifting Perry in his powerful arms and carrying him.  While
the act cut down Ghak's speed he still could travel faster thus than
when half supporting the stumbling old man.


