which gives very high results, and the substance being practically
everlasting, the cost of production is extremely low.

It is proposed to feed this by a separate system of pipes to small gas
jets, and by converting them into practically oxyhydrogen blow pipes,
to raise solid masses of refractory material to incandescence, and
also by supplying oxygen in the same way to oil lamps of particular
construction, to obtain a very great increase in illuminating power.

Whether these methods of employing cheap oxygen would be successful or
not, I do not wish to discuss at the present time, but there is no
doubt but that cheap oxygen would be an enormous boon to the gas
manager, as by mixing 0.8 per cent. of oxygen with his coal gas before
purification, he could not only utilize the method so successfully
introduced by Mr. Valon at Ramsgate, but could also increase the
illuminating value of his gas.

In speaking of the structure of flame, I pointed out that close to the
burner from which the gas giving the flame is issuing, a space exists
in which no combustion is going on--in other words, a flame is never
in contact with the rim of the burner. This is best seen when the gas
is turned low--with a batswing burner, for instance--turned so low
that only a small non-luminous flame is left, the space between burner
and flame will appear as great as the flame itself, while, if the gas
is mixed with an inert diluent like carbon dioxide, the space can be
very much increased.

Several theories have been brought forward to explain this phenomenon,
but the true one is that the burner abstracts so much heat from the
flame at that point that it is unable to burn there, and this can be
proved by the fact that where a cold object touches the flame, a
dividing space, similar to that noticed between flame and burner, will
always be observed, and the colder the object and the more diluted the
gas the greater is the observed space. If a cold metal wire or rod is
held in a non-luminous flame, it causes an extinction of the gas for
some considerable space around itself; but as the temperature of the
rod rises, this space becomes smaller and smaller until the rod is
heated to redness, and then the flame comes in contact with the rod.

In the same way, if the burner from which the gas is issuing be heated
to redness, the space between burner and flame disappears. It has
already been shown that cooling the flame by an inert diluent reduces
the illuminating value, and finally renders it more luminous; and we
are now in a position to discuss the points which should be aimed at
in the construction of a good gas burner.

In the first place, a sensible diminution in light takes place when a
metal burner is employed, and the larger the surface and thickness of
the metal the worse will be its action on the illuminating power of
the flame; but this cooling action is only influencing the bottom of
the flame, so that with a small flame the total effect is very great,
and with a very large flame almost _nil_.

The first point, therefore, to attend to is that the burner shall be
made of a good non-conductor. In the next place, the flow of the gas
must be regulated to the burner, as, if you have a pressure higher
than that for which the burner is constructed, you at once obtain a
roaring flame and a loss of illuminating power, as the too rapid rush
of gas from the burner causes a mingling of gas and air and a
consequent cooling of the flame. The tap also which regulates the
flame is better at a distance from the burner than close to it, as any
constriction near the burner causes eddies, which give an unsteady
flame.

These general principles govern all burners, and we will now take the
ordinary forms in detail. In the ordinary flat flame burner, given a
good non-conducting material, and a well regulated gas supply, little
more can be done, while burning it in the ordinary way, to increase
its luminosity; and it is the large surface of flame exposed to the
cooling action of the air which causes this form of burner to give the
lowest service of any per cubic foot of gas consumed. Much is done,
moreover, by faulty fittings and shades, to reduce the already poor
light given out, because the light-yielding power of the flame largely
depends upon its having a well rounded base and broad, luminous zone;
and when a globe with a narrow opening is used with such a flame--as
is done in 99 out of 100 cases--the updraught drags the flame out of
shape, and seriously impairs its light-giving powers, a trouble which
can be got over by having the globe with an opening at the bottom not
less than 4 inches in diameter, and having small shoulders fixed to
the burner, which draw out the flame and protect the base from the
disturbing influence of draughts.

The Argand burner differs from the flat flame burners in that a
circular flame is employed. The air supply is regulated by a
cylindrical glass, and this form of burner gives a better service than
the flat flame burner, as not only can the supply of gas and air be
better adjusted, but the air being slightly warmed by the hot glass
adds to the temperature of the flame, which is also increased by
radiation from the opposite side of the flame itself.

The chief loss of light in such a burner depends upon the fact that,
being circular, the light from the inner surface has to pass through
the wall of flame, and careful photometric experiments show that the
solid particles present in the flame so reduce its transparency that a
loss amounting to about 25 per cent. of light takes place during its
transmission.

The height of the flame also must be carefully adjusted to the size of
the flame, as too long a chimney, by increasing the air supply unduly,
cools, and so lowers the illuminating power of the flame. Experiments
with carbureted water gas gave the following results, with a
consumption of 5 cubic feet per hour:

-----------------------------------------------------
 Size of Chimney. | Height of Flame. | Candle Power. |
------------------+------------------+---------------|
    6 X 1-7/8     |      2-1/2       |     21        |
    7 X 1-7/8     |      2-1/4       |     21.3      |
    8 X 1-7/8     |      2-1/8       |     20.8      |
    9 X 1-7/8     |      1-7/8       |     18.2      |
------------------+------------------+---------------+

For many years no advance was made upon these forms of burner, but
when, ten years ago, it was recognized that anything which cools the
flame reduces its value, while anything which increases its
temperature raises its illuminating power, then a change took place in
the forms of burner in use, and the regenerative burners, introduced
by such men as Siemens, Grimston, and Bower, commenced what was really
a revolution in gas lighting.

By utilizing the heat contained in the escaping products of combustion
to raise the temperature of the gas and air which are to enter into
combination in the flame, an enormous increase in the temperature of
the solid particles of carbon in the flame is obtained, and a far
greater and whiter light is the result.

The Bower lamp, in which (at any rate in the later forms) the flame
burns between a downward and an upward current of air, was one of the
first produced, and so well has it been kept up to date that it still
holds its own; while as types of the "inverted cone" regenerative
burner, we may also take the Cromarty and Wenham lights, which have
been followed by a host of imitators, and so closely are the original
types adhered to that one begins seriously to wonder what the use of
the Patent Office really is.

The Schulke, and the last form of Siemens regenerative burner,
however, stand apart from all the others by dealing with flat and not
conical flames, and in both regeneration is carried on to a high
degree. The only drawback to the regenerative burner is that it is by
far the best form of gas stove as well as burner, and that the amount
of heat thrown out by the radiant solid matter in the flame is, under
some circumstances, an annoyance. But, on the other hand, we must not
forget that this is the form best adapted for overhead burners, and
that nearly every form of regenerative lamp can be adapted as a
ventilating agent, and that with the withdrawal of the products of
combustion from the air of the room, the great and only serious
objection to gas as an illuminant disappears.

When coal gas is burned, the hydrogen is supposed to be entirely
converted into water vapor, and the carbon to finally escape into the
air as carbon dioxide; and if this were so, every cubic foot of gas
consumed would produce approximately 0.52 cubic foot of carbon dioxide
and 1.34 cubic feet of water vapor, while the illuminating power
yielded by the cubic foot of gas will, of course, vary with the kind
of burner used.

Roughly speaking, the ordinary types of burner give the following
results:

   ------------------------------------------------------------
                    | Illuminating    | Products of Combustion
                    |  Power in       |           per
    Name of Burner. | Candles per     |      Candle Power.
                    |  c.f. of gas    |------------------------
                    |  Consumed.      |   Carbon   |  Water
                    |                 |  Dioxide.  |  Vapor.
   -----------------+-----------------+------------+-----------
    Batswing.       |      2.9        | 0.18 c.f.  | 0.46 c.f.
    Argand.         |      3.3        | 0.16 c.f.  | 0.40 c.f.
    Regenerative.   |     10.0        | 0.05 c.f.  | 0.13 c.f.
   -----------------+-----------------+------------+------------

So that the regenerative forms of burner, by giving the greatest
illuminating power per cubic foot of gas consumed, yield a smaller
amount of vitiation to the air per candle of light emitted.

An ordinary room, say 16' X 12' X 10', would not be considered
properly illuminated unless the light were at least equal to 32 candle
power; and in the table below the amount of the oxygen used up and the
products of combustion formed by each class of illuminant and burner
in attaining this result are given, the number of adults who would
exhale the same amount during respiration being also stated.

From these data it appears, according to rules by which the degree of
vitiation of the air in any confined space is measured by the amount
of oxygen used up and carbon dioxide formed, that candles are the
worst offenders against health and comfort. Oil lamps come next, and
gas least. This, however, is an assumption which practical experience
does not bear out. Discomfort and oppression in a room lighted by
candles or oil are less felt than in one lighted by any of the older
forms of gas burner; and the partial explanation of this is to be
found in the fact that, when a room is illuminated with candles or
oil, people are contented with a feebler and more local light than
when using gas. In a room of the size described, the inmates would be
more likely to use two candles placed near their books, or on a table,
than thirty-two scattered about the room.

Moreover, the amount of water vapor given off during the combustion of
gas is greater than in the case of the other illuminants. Water vapor
having a great power of absorbing radiant heat from the burning gas
becomes heated, and diffusing itself about the room, causes great
feeling of oppression; the air also being highly charged with
moisture, is unable to take up so rapidly the water vapor which is
always evaporating from the surface of our skin, whereby the functions
of the body receive a slight check, resulting in a feeling of
_malaise_.

Added to these, however, is a far more serious factor which has, up to
the present, been overlooked, and that is that an ordinary gas flame,
in burning, yields distinct quantities of carbon monoxide and
acetylene, the prolonged breathing of which in the smallest traces
produces headache and general physical discomfort, while its effect
upon plant life is equally marked.


AMOUNT OF OXYGEN REMOVED FROM THE AIR, AND CARBON DIOXIDE AND WATER
VAPOR GENERATED TO GIVE AN ILLUMINATION EQUAL TO 32 CANDLE POWER.

(The amount of light required in a room 16' X 12' x 10'.)

              |Quantity of |          | Products of Combustion|      |
              |  Materials | Oxygen   |           |  Carbon   |      |
Illuminant    |    Used    | Removed  |Water Vapor|  Dioxide  |Adults|
--------------+------------+----------+-----------+-----------+------+
Sperm Candles |3,840 grains|19.27 c.f.|13.12 c.f. |13.12 c.f. | 21.8 |
Paraffin Oil  |1,984   "   |12.48 c.f.| 7.04 c.f. | 8.96 c.f. | 14.9 |
Gas (London)--|            |          |           |           |      |
 Burners:     |            |          |           |           |      |
  Batswing    |  11  c.f.  |13.06 c.f.|14.72 c.f. | 5.76 c.f. |  9.6 |
  Argand      |   9.7 c.f. |11.52 c.f.|12.80 c.f. | 5.12 c.f. |  8.5 |
  Regenerative|   3.2 c.f. | 3.68 c.f.| 4.16 c.f. | 1.60 c.f. |  2.6 |

Ever since the structure of flame has been noted and discussed, it has
been accepted as a fact beyond dispute that the outer almost invisible
zone which is interposed between the air and the luminous zone of the
flame is the area of complete combustion, and that here the unburnt
remnants of the flame gases, meeting the air, freely take up oxygen
and are converted into the comparatively harmless products of
combustion, carbon dioxide and water vapor, which only need partial
removal by any haphazard process of ventilation to keep the air of the
room fit to support animal life. I have, however, long doubted this
fact, and at length, by a delicate process of analysis have been able
to confirm my suspicions. The outer zone of a luminous flame is not
the zone of complete combustion; it is a zone in which luminosity is
destroyed in exactly the same way that it is destroyed in the Bunsen
burner; that is the air penetrating the flame so dilutes and cools
down the outer layer of incandescent gas that it is rendered
non-luminous, while some of the gas sinks below the point at which it
is capable of burning, with the result that considerable quantities of
the products of incomplete combustion carbon monoxide and acetylene
escape into the air, and render it actively injurious.

I have proved this by taking a small platinum pipe, with a circular
loop on the end, the interior of the loop being pierced with minute
holes, and by making a circular flame burn within the loop so that the
non-luminous zone of the flame just touched the inside of the loop,
and then by aspiration so gentle as not to distort the shape of the
flame, withdrawing the gases escaping from the outer zone. On
analyzing these by a delicate process, which will be described
elsewhere, I arrived at the following results:

    GASES ESCAPING FROM THE OUTER ZONE OF FLAME.

                             Luminous.   Bunsen.

    Nitrogen.                76.612      80.242
    Water vapor.             14.702      13.345
    Carbon dioxide.           2.201       4.966
    Carbon monoxide.          1.189       0.006
    Oxygen.                   2.300       1.430
    Marsh gas.                0.072       0.003
    Hydrogen.                 2.888       0.008
    Acetylene.                0.036        Nil.
                            -------     -------
                            100.000     100.000

The gases leaving the luminous flame show that the diluting action of
the nitrogen is so great that considerable quantities even of the
highly inflammable and rapidly burning hydrogen escape combustion,
while the products of incomplete combustion are present in sufficient
quantity to account perfectly for the deleterious effects of gas
burners in ill-ventilated rooms. The analyses also bring out very
clearly the fact that, although the dilution of coal gas by air in
atmospheric burners is sufficient to prevent the decomposition of the
heavy hydrocarbons with liberation of carbon, and so destroy
luminosity, yet the presence of the extra supply of oxygen does make
the combustion far more perfect, so that the products of incomplete
combustion are hardly to be found in the escaping gases.

These experiments are of the gravest import, as they show more clearly
than has ever been done before the absolute necessity for special and
perfect ventilation where coal gas is employed for the illumination of
our dwelling rooms.

When coal gas was first employed during the early part of this century
as an illuminating agent, the low pitch of the old fashioned rooms,
and the excess of impurities in the gas, rendered it imperative that
the products of combustion of the sulphur-laden gas should be
conducted from the apartment, and for this purpose arrangements of
tubes with funnel shaped openings were suspended over the burners. The
noxious gases were thus conveyed either to the flue or open air; but
this type of ventilator was unsightly in the extreme, and some few
attempts were made to replace it by a more elegant arrangement, as in
the ventilating lamp invented by Faraday, and in the adaptation of the
same principle by Mr. I.O.N. Rutter, who strove for many years to
direct attention to the necessity of removing the products of
combustion from the room. But with the increase of the gas industry,
the methods for purifying the coal gas became gradually more and more
perfect, while the rooms in the modern houses were made more lofty;
and the products of combustion being mixed with a larger volume of
air, and not containing so many deleterious constituents, became, if
not much less noxious, at all events less perceptible to the nose. As
soon as this point was reached, the ventilating tubes were discarded,
and from that day to this the air of our dwelling rooms has been
contaminated by illuminants, with hardly an effort to alleviate the
effect produced upon health. I say "hardly an effort," for the Messrs.
Boyle tried, by their concentric tube ventilators, to meet the
difficulty, while Mr. De la Garde and Mr. Hammond have each
constructed lamps more or less on the principle of the Rutter lamp;
but either from their being somewhat unsightly, or from their
diminishing the amount of light given out, none of them have met with
any degree of success. In places of public entertainment, where large
quantities of coal gas are consumed for illuminating purposes, the
absolute necessity for special ventilation gave rise to the "sun
burner," with its ventilating shaft. This, however, gives but a very
poor illuminating power per cubic foot of gas consumed, due partly to
the cooling of the flame by the current of air produced, and partly to
its distance from the objects to be illuminated.

The great difficulty which in the whole history of ventilation has
opposed itself to the adoption of proper arrangements for removing the
products of combustion has been the necessity of bringing the tube to
carry off the gases low down into the room, and of incasing the burner
in such a way that none of the products should escape; but with the
present revolution in gas burners this necessity is entirely done away
with, and the regenerative burner offers the means not only of
removing all the products of combustion but also of effecting thorough
ventilation of the room itself, as experiments made some few years ago
showed me that a ventilating regenerative burner, burning 20 cubic
feet of gas per hour and properly fitted, will not only remove all its
own products of combustion, but also over 5,000 cubic feet per hour of
the vitiated air from the upper part of the room. I am quite aware
that many regenerative lamp makers raise various objections to fitting
ventilating lamps, these being chiefly due to the fact that it
requires considerable trouble to fit them properly; but I think I have
said enough to show the absolute necessity of some such system, and
when there is a general demand for ventilating lamps, engineering
skill will soon find means to overcome any slight difficulties which
exist.

Having disposed in a few words of a subject which, if fully treated,
would occupy a long course of lectures by itself, I will pass on to
the consideration of gas as at present used as a fuel.

There is no doubt that gas is the most convenient and in many ways one
of the best forms of fuel for heating and cooking purposes, and the
efforts which all large gas companies are now making to popularize and
increase the use of gas for such purposes will undoubtedly bear fruit
in the future. But before the day can come for gas to be used in this
way on a large scale, there is one fact which the gas manager and gas
stove manufacturer must clearly realize and submit to, and that is
that no gas stove or gas water heater, of any construction, should be
sent out or fitted without just as great care being taken to provide
for the carrying away of the products of combustion as if an ordinary
fuel range was being fitted. Do not for one moment allow yourself to
be persuaded that, because a gas stove or geyser does not send out a
mass of black smoke, the products of combustion can be neglected and
with safety allowed to mingle with the atmosphere we are to breathe.

Scarcely a winter passes but one or more deaths are recorded from the
products of combustion given off from various forms of water heaters
used in bath rooms; scarcely a cookery class is given, with gas
stoves, that one or more ladies do not have to leave suffering from an
intense headache, and often in an almost fainting condition. And the
same cause which brings about these extreme cases, on a smaller scale
causes such physical discomfort to many delicately organized persons
that a large class exist who absolutely and resolutely decline to have
gas as an illuminant or fuel in any of their living rooms; and if the
use of gas, more especially as fuel, is to be extended, and if gas is
to hold its own in the future against such rivals as the electric
light, then those interested in gas and gas stoves must face the
problem, and by improving the methods of burning and using gas do away
with the present serious drawbacks which exist to its use.

The feeling has gradually been gaining ground in the public mind that,
when atmospheric burners and other devices for burning coal gas are
employed for heating purposes, certain deleterious products of
incomplete combustion find their way into the air, and that this takes
place to a considerable extent is shown by the facts brought forward
in a paper read by Mr. William Thomson before the last meeting of the
British Association.

Mr. Thomson attempted to separate and determine the quantity of carbon
monoxide and hydrocarbons present in the flue gases from various forms
of gas stoves and burners, but, like every other observer who has
attempted to solve this most difficult problem, he found it so beset
with difficulties that he had to abandon it, and contented himself
with determining the total amounts of carbon and hydrogen escaping in
an unburned condition, experiments which showed that the combustion of
gas in stoves for heating purposes is much more incomplete than one
had been in the habit of supposing, but his experiments give no clew
as to whether the incompletely burned matter consisted of such
deleterious gases as carbon monoxide and acetylene, or comparatively
harmless gases, such as marsh gas and hydrogen. After considerable
work upon the subject, I have succeeded in doing this by a very
delicate process of analysis, and I now wish to lay some of my results
before you.

If a cold substance, metal or non-metal, be placed in a flame, whether
it be luminous or non-luminous, it will be observed that there is a
clear space, in which no combustion is taking place, formed round the
cool surface, and that as the body gets heated so this space gets less
and less until, when the substance is at the same temperature as the
flame itself, there is contact between the two. Moreover, when a
luminous flame is employed in this experiment the space still exists
between the cool body and the flame, but you also notice that the
luminosity is decreased over a still larger area although the flame
exists.

This meaning that, in immediate contact with the cold body, the
temperature is so reduced that the flame cannot exist, and so is
extinguished over a small area; while over a still larger space the
temperature is so reduced that it is not hot enough to bring about
decomposition of the heavy hydrocarbons with liberation of carbon to
the same extent as in hotter portions of the flame. Now, inasmuch as
when water is heated or boiled in an open vessel, the temperature
cannot rise above 100 deg.C., and as the temperature of an ordinary flame
is over 1,000 deg.C., it is evident that the burning gas can never be in
contact with the bottom of the vessel, or, in other words, the gas is
put out before combustion is completed, and the unburned gas and
products of incomplete combustion find their way into the air and
render it perfectly unfit for respiration.

The portion of the flame which is supposed to be the hottest is about
half an inch above the tip of the inner zone of the flame, and it is
at this point that most vessels containing water to be heated are made
to impinge on the flame; and it is this portion of the flame, also,
which is utilized for raising various solids to a temperature at which
they radiate heat.

In order to gain an insight into the amount of contamination which the
air undergoes when a geyser or cooking stove is at work, I have
determined the composition of the products of combustion, and the
unburned gases escaping when a vessel containing water at the ordinary
temperatures is heated up to the boiling point by a gas flame, the
vessel being placed, in the first case, half an inch above the inner
cone of the flame, and in the second, at the extreme outer tip of the
