
When we consider that these institutions are intended to encourage
thrift and to relieve the community from the care of numberless widows
and orphans, it seems a clear violation of the principles of political
economy to levy a tax on this business; still, whatever our opinion
may be as to the justice or injustice of the imposition, the tax is
maintained and must be provided for. Consequently a further allowance
of 1/2 of one per cent. must be added to the net premium to cover the
same, making a total of 1 per cent. of the reserve for banking
expenses and taxes. Considering this point as settled for the time
being, let us proceed to investigate the insurance expenses.

Here, again, we are fortunate in being able to refer to the official
reports of a class of corporations doing nearly, if not quite pure
insurance.

The assessment societies, outside of the fraternal and benevolent,
reporting in 1889 to the insurance commissioner of Massachusetts, show
outstanding risks amounting to $733,515,366. Losses to the amount of
$7,270,238 were paid during the year at a cost for transacting the
business of $2,403,053, which includes among other items "agency
expenses and commissions," which amount to about $1,203,000, or 17 per
cent. of the cost value of the insurance actually done. It would seem
as if an allowance of 20 per cent. would be a liberal one in the case
of the regular companies, which surely have as good facilities for
doing business as the assessment societies.

As far as insurance is concerned, there is less difference between
regular and co-operative companies than is generally supposed. Regular
companies assess each policy in advance for a year's insurance at a
time, while co-operative societies furnish insurance only from one
assessment to another. The difficulty in the way of collecting the
assessment in the latter case would seem to be greater than in the
former, owing to the more permanent nature of the regular insurance
contract.

In compensating agents the assessment companies naturally pay in
proportion to the insurance obtained, inasmuch as there is no other
basis to go upon, but regular companies usually pay the agent a
percentage of the premium _which includes a considerable trust fund_
over and above the assessment for actual insurance. It is easily seen
that by the last method the agent's compensation increases in
proportion to the amount of savings bank business forced upon the
company.

To realize how far we are from anything like a scientific, not to say
common sense basis for insurance expenses, we have but to examine the
following list, which gives the ratios between the expenditures for
general expenses in 1889, and those for the extension of the business.
For every $100 used in a general way, the different companies spend
for commissions and agency expenses: $37, $66, $67, $78, $91, $106,
$110, $113, $120, $140, $157, $161, $173, $175, $186, $189, $200,
$202, $222, $264, $311, $346.

It will doubtless be said that I am taking a very advanced position
when I say that in the ideal life insurance scheme there is no place
for the commission system. Solicitors will be a necessity only so long
as they are in the field, but fifty years of life insurance has taught
our community its true value and, thanks to the modern press, the
institution it is no more likely to fall into desuetude than is
Christianity or the moral law.

For the convenience of bringing the company to the individual, the
latter should be willing to pay a fee. The man who renders another a
service or puts his superior knowledge at another's disposal should
look to the party benefited for his remuneration. Any compensation
given for such service to a go-between by a mutual company is paid by
all, and the question arises, Is the advantage to the company of
sufficient importance to warrant the imposition of this tax upon all
its members promiscuously? The following, from the Massachusetts
Insurance Commissioner's Report for 1885, leaves no doubt as to the
convictions of the writer on this important matter:

  "The expensiveness of the life insurance policy is not because the
  level net premium is too high, for the premium is absolutely just,
  and the policy holder gets full value; but the complaint justly
  applies to the excessive expense charge. A person who wants
  insurance, life or fire or other, should be able to buy it at
  first cost without paying tribute of profits to middlemen. To that
  complexion the matter will finally be brought by the force of
  intelligent opinion, whatever resistance may be opposed by persons
  whose thrift lies in the perpetuation of the expensive system now
  in fashion."

It requires but a slight degree of prophetic vision to predict that in
a very few years the companies in self defense will be obliged to
change their method of compensating agents.

Several companies have already begun the reform by grading
commissions; granting a percentage proportional to the amount of
insurance likely to be done on the policy. Other companies have simply
reduced the amount of the commission rate, thus virtually withdrawing
from active competition.

This will, in a certain degree, explain the wide variation in the
figures given above, where it is noticed that, in five companies out
of twenty-two, the total agency expenditures amount to less than the
general expenses, while in six cases the companies spend more than
double as much on the former as on the latter. In either class we find
representatives of the five largest companies in the country.

On applying the foregoing ratios to the business of the existing
companies we find that, calling the theoretical expenses $100, the
actual expenditures for 1889 were as follows: $112.67, $118.34,
$150.40, $194.48, $208.16, $208.53, $228.66, $235.89, $248.44,
$250.79, $258.33, $258.57, $265.14, $267.19, $267.92, $274.47,
$294.17, $314.96, $335.70, $377.94, $616.70.

In this discouraging exhibit there is one ray of comfort. The combined
assets of the two companies heading the list amount to over
$100,000,000. There is no question as to their financial standing, and
both show a large increase in membership over the previous year. I may
also say here that it is a difficult matter to get at the actual "cost
of insurance" in the various companies. Many of them, on their own
acknowledgment, do not compute the advance cost of carrying their
"amount at risk," and others, for reasons of their own, do not care to
state the figures. In cases where the correct figures were not
obtainable, I have assumed the cost to have been 1-1/3 per cent. of
the mean amount at risk.

If we should, in our comparison, omit the actual agency expenses and
commissions, the ratios would stand as follows:

Where I would allow $100 the companies actually used: $43.17, $55.90,
$65.21, $77.21, $82.39, $88.34, $91.99. $91.98. $92.19, $94.65,
$97.15. $99.55. $99.11. $102.86, $109.35, $125.05, $133.03, $141.92,
$195.90, $207.06, $287.72.

As might be supposed, the first two ratios are those companies before
alluded to. These companies might have doubled their advertising
account and expended $300,000 between them on agents' salaries, and
still have kept within my allowance.

Admitting, for the present at least, the reasonableness of the
proposed allowance for the expenses of the banking and insurance
departments of the business, we have before us the problem how to
equitably adjust the burden among the great variety of policies.

In the first place, _there should be no policy in the company that
does not contribute its proportionate share of the expense allowance
during every year of its life_. I make a special point of this, for at
present the policies which have become paid up, either by the payment
of a single premium at the outset or by the completion of a stipulated
number of payments, contribute practically nothing to the expense
account after the premium payments cease.

The following plan, I think, complies with all the requirements of the
problem. By the proposed method every policy, at all stages of its
existence, contributes its exact share to the expense fund, whatever
its plan of payment may be.

Let us, as an illustration, examine the case of a ten year endowment
policy, taken out at age 30, and consider it under three aspects,
first, as paid for in advance by a single payment, second, as paid by
five annual payments, and third, as paid for annually throughout the
term. I have used this short term endowment policy simply for
convenience, the rule applying equally to policies of longer term or
to the ordinary life policy, which is, in fact, an endowment policy
payable at death or age 100.[1]

[Footnote 1: The expense allowance on a plain life policy for $1,000,
taken at age 33, would be about $5.29; net premium (com. ex. 4 per
cent.), $18.04; total office premium, $23.33; present rate $24.10.]

Taking the case of the single premium endowment policy for $1,000, we
find that the following sums are required, each year to provide for
the care of the reserve and to pay the government fees (1 per cent. of
reserve):

  1st year    $6.9982 | 6th year       $8.4136
  2d   "       7.2560 | 7th  "          8.7381
  3d   "       7.5258 | 8th  "          9.0781
  4th  "       7.8082 | 9th  "          9.4346
  5th  "       8.1039 | 10th "          9.8086

The insurance expenses should be covered by the 20 per cent. allowance
given below:

  1st year    $ .4422 | 6th year       $ .2566
  2d   "        .4100 | 7th  "           .2076
  3d   "        .3762 | 8th  "           .1556
  4th  "        .3402 | 9th  "           .0988
  5th  "        .2996 | 10th "           .0344

Consequently the total contribution required from this policy each
year is:

  1st year    $7.4404 | 6th year       $8.6702
  2d   "       7.6660 | 7th  "          8.9457
  3d   "       7.9020 | 8th  "          9.2337
  4th  "       8.1484 | 9th  "          9.5334
  5th  "       8.4034 | 10th "          9.8430

The present value of all these contributions is found to be, at 4 per
cent. interest, $71.6394; in other words, this sum paid at the outset,
provides a fund from which we may deduct the current expenses of each
year in advance, and by accumulating the balance at the assumed rate
of interest from year to year, we shall have enough to pay the
anticipated expenses, leaving nothing over.

In the above case the sums in hand at the beginning of the year are as
follows:

  1st year   $71.3694 | 6th year      $42.6981
  2d   "      66.7669 | 7th  "         35.3890
  3d   "      61.4650 | 8th  "         27.5009
  4th  "      55.7055 | 9th  "         18.9979
  5th  "      49.4594 | 10th "          9.8430

We find a somewhat different condition existing during the first years
of a 5-year endowment policy. As there is more insurance and less
banking, the requirements are as follows:

  ------------+----------+-----------+--------+---------+
              | 1 P. Ct. | 20 P. Ct. |        |         |
              |   on     |    on     | Total. | Initial |
              | Reserve. |   Cost.   |        |  Fund.  |
  ------------+----------+-----------+--------+---------+
  1st year    | $1.5038  |  $1.2572  |$2.7610 |$12.9769 |
  2d   "      |  3.0406  |   1.0216  | 4.0622 | 23.6015 |
  3d   "      |  4.6503  |    .7852  | 5.4355 | 33.2979 |
  4th  "      |  6.3367  |    .5378  | 6.8745 | 41.9538 |
  5th  "      |  8.1039  |    .2996  | 8.4035 | 49.4594 |
  6th  "      |  8.4136  |    .2566  | 8.6702 | 42.6981 |
  7th  "      |  8.7381  |    .2076  | 8.9257 | 35.3890 |
  8th  "      |  9.0781  |    .1556  | 9.2337 | 27.5009 |
  9th  "      |  9.4346  |    .0988  | 9.5334 | 18.9979 |
  10th "      |  9.8086  |    .0344  | 9.8430 |  9.8430 |
  ------------+----------+-----------+--------+---------+

As the premium payments extend over only five years, the expense
contributions must all be paid during that time and are most
conveniently made by a uniform addition to the net premium.

The present value of the amounts in column 3 is $60.0819, and the
equivalent annuity for five years is $12.9769. This amount, received
for five consecutive years, will put the company in funds to pay
current expenses and leave a reserve of $42.6981 at the beginning of
the sixth year, which, as we have seen in the analysis of the
single-premium policy, is the sum required for future expenses on the
paid up basis.

In like manner we find that the 10-year annuity equivalent to the
present value of the annual contributions in the case of an
annual-payment policy is $5.534, thus:

  ------------+----------+-----------+--------+---------+
              | 1 P. Ct. | 20 P. Ct. |        |         |
              |   on     |    on     | Total. | Initial |
              | Reserve. |   Cost.   |        |  Fund.  |
  ------------+----------+-----------+--------+---------+
   1st year   |  $.8234  |  $1.3514  |$2.1748 |$ 5.5340 |
   2d   "     |  1.6473  |   1.2478  | 2.8951 |  9.0275 |
   3d   "     |  2.5096  |   1.1388  | 3.6484 | 11.9116 |
   4th  "     |  3.4124  |   1.0210  | 4.4334 | 14.1277 |
   5th  "     |  4.3572  |    .8916  | 5.2488 | 15.6161 |
   6th  "     |  5.3479  |    .7534  | 6.1013 | 16.3160 |
   7th  "     |  6.3853  |    .5966  | 6.9819 | 16.1572 |
   8th  "     |  7.4726  |    .4270  | 7.8996 | 15.0763 |
   9th  "     |  8.6127  |    .2418  | 8.8545 | 12.9977 |
  10th  "     |  9.8086  |    .0344  | 9.8430 |  9.8430 |
  ------------+----------+-----------+--------+---------+

The present value of the ten yearly expense items given in the "total"
column above is $46.6812, which is equal to a ten-year annuity of
$5.534. The several premiums stand now as follows:

    ENDOWMENT: $1,000, AGE 30, PAYABLE AT DEATH OR 40

                    Net Prem.[2] Margin.    Total.

At single premium.   $687.228   $71.6394   $758.8674
At five premiums.     150.615    12.9769    163.5939
At annual premiums.    84.172     5.5340     89.7060

[Footnote 2: Thirty American offices. Discount from middle of year,
Vx-1/2 or (M x 1.01961) / Dx.]

By the actuaries' rate we have, with the customary loading for
expense:

  Single premium: $721.66 (loaded, $34.36). Five premiums, $188.70
  (loaded $37.78). Annual premium, $105.65 (loaded $21.11).

Admitting the correctness of the new method, we must conclude that the
present single premium is not sufficiently loaded to cover its own
expenses, while the annual payment policy pays more than its just
share. A prominent and thoroughly informed life insurance president
says in this connection: "Many of the policies, particularly the short
term endowments, are charged with too high a percentage of expenses to
prove a good investment at maturity or profitable to the insured in
case of surrender." This is not to be wondered at when the applicant
for a 10-year endowment policy sees at a glance that he must pay, in
the gross, more than is returned unless he should die in the interim,
in which case a plain "life" or "term" policy would have answered the
purpose. Under the new system of assessing expenses one form is as
desirable as another, from the standpoint of the insured or the
company.

The new premium for the 10-year endowment policy, $89.71, commends
itself at once to the applicant, who can easily see that his total
outlay must fall short of the amount ultimately to be realized, of
course, disregarding interest and probable dividends in both cases.

In discounting the future expense contributions I have not taken the
chances of dying into account. Hence the expense reserve in any
instance applies only to that individual case, and, in the event of
death or surrender before the maturity of the policy, the amount of
the expense fund not used would naturally revert to the insured.

The scheme of expense assessment outlined above will doubtless be
pronounced impracticable by the majority of insurance men.

Such a far reaching reform is too much to hope for, at least in the
immediate future.

No well informed life insurance expert will deny that there are
opportunities for improvement in the business, but to graft new
methods on old companies is a hopeless undertaking.

It is well, however, to have new methods well matured in advance of
the public demand, and I feel convinced that the ideas here set forth
are in the line of the reform which, before long, must be instituted
by the companies if they would retain the confidence and patronage of
the community.

Doubtless many insurance presidents could tell of suggestions which
have impressed them favorably and which they would gladly have adopted
were it not for the injustice done thereby to older members and the
changes necessary to bring existing contracts into conformity with the
new system. Similar objections may be urged against the ideas here
advanced, and I must confess I hardly see a way by which the present
suggestions can be utilized by existing companies. We can only hope
that sooner or later some of the new theories may be practically
tested. Meanwhile the companies at present in the field are doing a
great work for the good of humanity, even though their methods may be,
in some particulars, more practical than scientific.

Winchester, Mass.                    FRANK J. WILLS.

       *       *       *       *       *




THE FLOOD AT KARLSBAD.


During the flood which occurred in Germany and Bohemia, the last week
of November, Karlsbad was especially unfortunate; it suffered such an
inundation as had never before been known in the "Sprudelstadt." On
the evening of November 23, the Tepl was very much swollen by the
rain, which had continued for several days, but it was supposed that
there was no danger of a flood, as the bed of the river had been put
in proper condition. During the forenoon of November 24, the water
suddenly began to rise with such astonishing rapidity that within half
an hour all the lower streets were like turbulent rivers and the Alte
and Neue Wiese were transformed into a lake. The stores on the Alte
Wiese were under water to the roofs, and the proprietors, who were
trying to save their goods, were surprised by the water and had to
take refuge in the trees. They were rescued by having ropes thrown to
them, and during this work a catastrophe occurred which was a great
misfortune to all classes of citizens. The beloved burgermeister of
Karlsbad, Dr. Rudolf Knoll, who had just recovered from a severe
illness, was, with others, directing the work from the balcony of one
of the houses, when a rope by which a man was being drawn through the
water broke, and the man was carried off by the waves. The fright and
excitement of the scene gave the burgermeister a shock which caused
his instant death, but the man who was in danger was brought safely
out of the water.

The water was 9 ft. in Marienbaderstrasse, the Marktplatz,
Muhlbadgasse, the Sprudelgasse, Kreuzgasse, Kaiserstrasse, and
Egerstrasse, and flooded the quay, causing great destruction. All
places of business were flooded, the doors and iron shutters were
pushed in by the force of the water and the goods were carried away or
ruined.

The house called "Zum Kaffeebaum" was undermined and part of it fell
to the ground; the same fate was feared for other buildings. The
Sophien and Curhaus bridges were carried away. Other bridges were
greatly damaged, and the masonry along the banks of the river was
partially destroyed. The Sprudelgasse was completely washed out, and
the condition of the Muhlbadgasse was almost as bad. The fire
department with its apparatus had great difficulty in saving the
inhabitants and guests, as there were very few boats or pontoons at
their command, and the soldiers (Pionniere) from Prague and the
firemen from the neighboring towns did not arrive until evening.
Fortunately the water began to fall in the night, and the next day it
had gone down so that it left its terrible work visible. The Sprudel
and the mineral springs were not injured, but, on the other hand, the
water pipes of the bathing establishments and the gas pipes were
completely destroyed.--_Illustrirte Zeitung._

       *       *       *       *       *




THEATRICAL WATER PLAYS.


In one of the plays at Hengler's Circus in London a water scene is
introduced, for which purpose the main ring is flooded with water in a
manner which is both striking and interesting.

[Illustration: FLOODING A CIRCUS RING.]

The ring is entirely lined with stout macintosh sheeting, and into
this, from two large conduits. 23,000 gallons of water are poured, the
tank being filled to a depth of some 2 ft. in the remarkably short
time of 35 seconds. A steamboat and other small craft are then
launched and the adventures of the heroine then proceed. She falls
overboard, we believe, but is saved after desperate and amusing
struggles. Our engravings, which are from the _Graphic_, illustrate
the mode of filling the ring with water, and the steamboat launch.

[Illustration: A THEATRICAL STEAMBOAT.]

       *       *       *       *       *




SCIENCE IN THE THEATER.


In the pretty little hall of the Boulevard des Italiens, at Paris, a
striking exhibition of simulated hypnotism is given every evening.

This entertainment, which has met with much success, was devised by
Mr. Melies, director of the establishment, which was founded many
years ago by the celebrated prestidigitator whose popular name (Robert
Houdin) it still bears. This performance carries instruction with it,
for it shows how easily the most surprising phenomena of the
pathologic state can be imitated. To this effect, several exhibitions
are given every evening.

Mr. Harmington, a convinced disciple of Mesmer, asks for a subject,
and finds one in the hall. A young artist named Marius presents
himself. Mr. Harmington makes him perform all sorts of extravagant
acts, accompanied with a continuous round of pantomimes that are
rendered the more striking by the supposed state of somnipathy of the
subject. At the moment at which Marius is finishing his most
extraordinary exercises, a policeman suddenly breaks in upon the stage
in order to execute the recent orders relative to hypnotism. But he
himself is subjugated by Mr. Harmington and thrown down by the
vibrations of which the encephalus of this terrible magnetizer is the
center. When the curtain falls, the representative of authority is
struggling against the catalepsy that is overcoming him.

All the phenomena of induced sleep are successively simulated with
much naturalness by Mr. Jules David, who plays the part of Marius in
this pleasing little performance.

At a certain moment, after skillfully simulated passes made by the
magnetizer, Mr. David suddenly becomes as rigid as a stick of wood,
and falls in pivoting on his heels (Fig. 1). Did not Mr. Harmington
run to his assistance, he would inevitably crack his skull upon the
floor, but the magnetizer stands just behind him in order to receive
him in his arms. Then he lifts him, and places him upon two chairs
just as he would do with a simple board. He places the head of the
subject upon the seat of one of the chairs and the heels upon that of
the other. Mr. David then remains in a state of perfect immobility.
Not a muscle is seen to relax, and not a motion betrays the
persistence of life in him. The simulation is perfect.

[Illustration: FIG. 1.--CATALEPTIC RIGIDITY.]

In order to complete the astonishment of the spectators, Mr.
Harmington seats himself triumphantly upon the abdomen of the subject
and slowly raises his feet and holds them suspended in the air to show
that it is the subject only that supports him, without the need of
any other point of support than the two chairs (Fig. 2).

[Illustration: FIG. 2.--EXPERIMENT ON THE SAME SUBJECT.]

Usually, there are plenty of persons ingenuous enough to think that
Mr. David is actually in a cataleptic sleep, one of the characters of
which is cadaveric rigidity.

As Mr. David's neck is entirely bare, it is not possible to suppose
that the simulator of catalepsy wears an iron corset concealed beneath
his clothing. He has performed a feat of strength and skill rendered
easy by the exercise that he has given to the muscles occupying the
_colliciae_ of his vertebral column. This part of the muscular system
is greatly developed in the weakest and least hardy persons. In fact,
in order that man may keep a vertical position and execute an infinite
multitude of motions in which stability is involved, nature has had to
give him a large number of different organs. The muscles of the back
are arranged upon several superposed layers, the vertebral column is
doubly recurved in order that it may have more strength, and, finally,
rachidion nerves issue from each vertebra in order to regulate the
contraction of each muscular fasciculus according to the requirements
of equilibrium. The trick is so easy that we have seen youths
belonging to the Ligue d'Education Physique immediately imitate Mr.
David after seeing him operate but once.

For the sake of those who would like to perform it, we shall add that
Mr. David takes care to bend his body in the form of an arch in such a
way that the convexity shall be beneath. As Mr. Harmington never fails
to place himself in the center of the line that joins Mr. David's head
and heels, his weight is divided into two parts, that is to say, 88
pounds on each side of the point of support. The result is that the
stress necessary is less than that of a strong man of the Halle
lifting a bag of wheat to his shoulder or of an athlete supporting a
human pyramid. The force of contraction of the muscular fibers brought
into play in this experiment is much greater than is commonly
believed. In his lectures on physiology, Milne-Edwards cites some
facts that prove that it may exceed 600 pounds per square inch of
section.

[Illustration: FIG. 3.--THE PERFORATE ARM.]
