often of its beauty as are the Flowers and Leaves.

The second practice, which generally produces a result similar to the
first, is quite as unthinking. It is more often practiced; and is
responsible for many of the labored and uninteresting designs which
are common. If the Pattern-artist deck-out the old worn-out and common
place spirals with leaves and flowers borrowed from Nature--the result
is like the "voice of Jacob and the hands of Esau;" it is merely a
Disguise of Artificiality.

An example of this method is given in Fig. 3. It was generally
practiced in Germany; and books like "Das Vegetabile Ornamente," by K.
Krumbholz, show it at its best.

[Illustration: FIG. 3.]

If this treatment were universally followed--there would soon be an
end to design with natural foliage. The spectator might observe one
border which appeared to be a Rose, another a Tulip, the third a
Thistle, and the fourth a Fuchsia; and, on examination, discover that
these were not Rose, Tulip, Thistle, and Fuchsia; but merely that very
artificial old friend--the Spiral-scroll--_in disguise_.

An apologist for this method remarks:--" ... In such matters as the
ramification of plants, ... nature is always making angles and elbows
[_sic_] which we are obliged, in decorative treatment, to change into
curves for our purpose;...". This opinion needs only to be applied to
animals in order to exhibit its absurdity; and with regard to plants,
it will be seen that this tampering has not even the poor merit of
success.


Sec. 7.--NOTE ON SYMMETRY.

A desire for Symmetry often accompanies these two treatments. This is
a quality to be avoided whenever possible in Natural foliage design.
The so-called "Turn-over patterns" are an economy in Weaving-design,
but the economy is of the wrong kind. An artist should spend his
thought to spare material or cost in working. When he spares his
_thought_--making the least amount of thought cover the greatest
amount of surface--then is his work worth to the world just what it
has cost him, i.e., very little.

So injurious is the influence of Symmetry in Natural foliage design,
that it might almost be a test question--"Is the design symmetrical?"
When the exigencies of Machine-reproduction necessitate this with
Natural foliage--it is a hardship which the Artist regretfully accepts,
and no one would willingly make a design for Hand-reproduction which
was symmetrical; rather would he spend himself to insure the worthier
result which ensues from Balance.

An example of Symmetry is given in Fig. 4; and of Balance in Fig. 5.
Each panel contains two classes of Elements:--Natural foliage (i.e.,
two branches of the Bay tree), and an Artificial object (i.e., a
Ribbon which ties them). The lower Element (i.e., the Ribbon) is
treated symmetrically in both panels: the higher Element (i.e., the
Branches) are _symmetrical_ in the former panel, and _balanced_ in the
latter. This latter treatment, will be seen to be not only the more
interesting, but the more like the infinite variety of Nature; while
the former is a wasted opportunity, and contrary to Nature.

[Illustration: FIG. 4.]

The Student will observe by experience that the mind soon tires of
Artificiality, both in Curvature and in Symmetry; the lines of Nature
have a pleasant freshness and inexhaustible variety; and the _Natural_
method of treating Nature is not only the most true, but also the most
beautiful.

[Illustration: FIG. 5.]


Sec. 8.--REALISM AND CONVENTIONALISM: DEFINITIONS.

REALISM--the result of _Realistic_ treatment, i.e., the attempt to
render the reproduction as like the reality as is possible, even to
the verge of deception--is the aim of the Pictorial-Artist. In
Pictures the surface appears to have been annihilated, and the
spectator beholds the scene as if there were a hole through the wall.
It is not the highest, and should not be the only aim in Art; but it
has always been sought for and admired. It requires perfect
conditions, of materials and tools; i.e., _complete Technical
appliances_.

CONVENTIONALISM--the result of _incomplete Technical appliances_, and
the attempt to render so much of the Beauty of the original as is
possible, with due regard to their capabilities--is the aim of the
Decorative-Artist. It is not the highest aim; though a necessary curb
in Decorative-Art, both for the technical reason, and also as a result
of the Position or Function of the object.

It will thus be seen that the two words, when used with regard to
foliage of any kind, refer to the _Method of representing it_, and not
to its Kind or its manner of Growth.


Sec. 9.--SCALES FROM REALISM TO CONVENTIONALISM.

These two methods, when applied absolutely, form the two
extremes:--The most complete REALISM being at one end, and the most
limited CONVENTIONALISM at the other. There are scales of gradual
reduction between them, which may be shown on two charts:

(i) Reduction in the NUMBER OF PARTS which preserve their Realistic
rendering.

(ii) Reduction in the DEGREE OF REALISM through all parts.

(i) According to the number of the features or parts of the design
which are treated with less than realism. Thus there might be a panel
representing a Window-opening with an architectural framing, with a
Flower-vase on the sill, and a Landscape-background. The first part to
be reduced in realistic rendering would be the Background, the second
would be the Framing, leaving the third, the Flower-vase, as the
survival. This is a Scale of reduction in _Number of Parts_.

It may be shown, in tabular arrangement, thus:--

  REALISM............................................CONVENTIONALISM.


    COMPLETE PICTORIAL REALISM, in which all parts are realistically
    represented (see Sec. 10).

      SEMI-PICTORIAL REALISM, in which the Back-ground is reduced to
      a flat-tint, while all the remaining parts are realistically
      represented (see Sec. 11).

        DECORATIVE REALISM, in which the chief Feature (_only_)
        is realistically represented, and all the other parts are
        reduced to conventional renderings (see Sec. 12).

          COMPLETE CONVENTIONALISM, in which all parts are reduced to
          conventional renderings (see Conventionalism).

Inasmuch as there is some realistic part remaining in each of the
first three methods--these are classified under the heading of
REALISM.

(ii) According to the Degree in which color, gradation, or shading, is
sacrificed, in consequence of the limited Means at the disposal of the
Artist; resulting in the gradual departure from Realism to the most
severe Conventionalism. The reduction is applied to all parts of the
work. This is a scale of reduction in _Degree_. There are two
Varieties in each degree; and they are marked with italic letters.

It may be shown, in tabular arrangement, thus:--

  REALISM.............................................CONVENTIONALISM.

  COMPLETE REALISM, in which all parts are represented, in
  proper colors, and perfect gradation, with correct light and
  shade (see Sec. 10).

    FIRST DEGREE OF CONVENTIONALISM, in which all parts are
    represented: (a) By a reduced number of Pigments, the other
    qualities remaining; (b) By reduction in gradation and
    shading to Flat-tints of several pigments (see Sec. 15).

      SECOND DEGREE OF CONVENTIONALISM, in which all parts are
      represented: (c) By a reduction to Monochrome of color, with
      Gradation (_only_) remaining; (d) By reduction to Monochrome
      of White and Black, with Gradation (_only_) remaining (see Sec.
      16).

        THIRD DEGREE OF CONVENTIONALISM, in which all parts are
        represented: (e) By reduction to a Flat-tint of one pigment
        on a ground of another; (f) By reduction to a Flat-tint of
        White on Black, or _vice versa_ (see Sec. 17).

          ULTIMATE CONVENTIONALISM, in which all parts are
          represented; (g) By reduction to Outline of several
          pigments; (h) Reduction to Outline of one pigment (see Sec.18).


Inasmuch as Realism ceases so soon as any reduction in the three
qualities (of color, gradation, and shadow) is introduced; and the
treatment becomes more Conventional in each method after the
first--these are classified under the heading of CONVENTIONALISM.

[There is an analogous scale of reduction in Form, from the
Complete-relief of an isolated Statue to the Flatness of a
Floor-plate; but this does not belong to the present subject.]


       *       *       *       *       *




THE CYCLOSTAT.


The various processes commonly employed for the observation of bodies
in motion (intermittent light or vision) greatly fatigue the observer,
and, as a general thing, give only images, that are difficult to
examine. We are going to show how Prof. Marc Thury, upon making
researches in a new direction, has succeeded in constructing an
apparatus that permits of the continuous observation of a body having
a rapid rotary motion. The principle of the method is of extreme
simplicity.

[Illustration: FIGS. 1, 2, AND 3.--DIAGRAMS EXPLANATORY OF THE
PRINCIPLE OF THE CYCLOSTAT.]

Let us consider (Fig. 1) a mirror, A B, reflecting an object, C D, and
revolving around it: when the mirror will have made a half revolution,
the image, C' D', of the object will have made an entire one. The
figure represents three successive positions of the mirror, distant by
an eighth of a revolution. The structure of the image shows that it
has made a quarter revolution in an opposite direction in each of its
positions. But if (Fig. 2) the body itself has revolved in the same
direction with an angular velocity double that of the mirror, its
image will have described a circle in remaining constantly parallel
with itself. The image will be just as insensible as the object
itself; but it is very easy to bring it back to a state of rest.

Let us suppose (Fig. 3a) the observer placed at O, the revolving
object at T, the axis of rotation being this time the line O F. Let us
place a mirror at A B and cause it to revolve around the same axis;
but, instead of looking at the image directly in the mirror, let us
receive it, before and after its reflection upon A B, upon two
mirrors, C D and D E, inclined 30 deg. upon the axis of rotation of the
system; the image, instead of being observed directly in the mirror, A
B, will always be seen in the axis, O F, and will consequently appear
immovable.

The same result may be obtained (Fig. 3b) with a rectangular isosceles
prism whose face, A B, serves as a mirror, while the faces, A C and B
D, break the ray--the first deflecting it from the axis to throw it on
the mirror, and the second throwing it back to the axis of rotation,
which is at the same time the line of direction of the sight.

The principle of the instrument, then, consists in causing the
revolution, around the axis of rotation of the object to be observed,
of a mirror parallel with such axis, and in observing it in the axis
itself after sending the image to it by two reflections or two
refractions. In reality, the entire instrument is contained in the
small prism above, properly mounted upon a wheel that may be revolved
at will; and, in this form, it may serve, for example, to determine
the rotary velocity of an inaccessible axis. For this it will suffice
to modify its velocity until the axis appears to be at rest, and to
apply the revolution counter to the wheel upon which the prism is
mounted, or to another wheel controlling the mechanism.

But Mr. Thury has constructed a completer apparatus, the _cyclostat_
(Fig. 4), which, opposite the prism, has a second plate whose
actuating wheel is mounted upon the same axis as the first, the
gearing being so calculated that the prism shall revolve with twice
less velocity than the second plate. This latter, observed through the
prism, will be always seen at rest, and be able to serve as a support
for the object that it is desired to examine.

[Illustration: FIG. 4.--THE CYCLOSTAT.

1. General view of the apparatus.
2. Section of the ocular, O.]

The applications are multitudinous. In the first place, in certain
difficult cases, it may serve for the observation of a swinging
thermometer, which is then read during its motion. Then it may be
employed for the continuous observation of a body submitted to
centrifugal force. Apropos of this, we desire to add a few words. Most
of the forces at our disposal, applied to a body, are transmitted from
molecule to molecule, and produce tension, crushing, etc. Gravity and
magnetic attraction form an exception; their point of application is
found in all the molecules of the body, and they produce pressures and
slidings of a peculiar kind. But these forces are of a very limited
magnitude; but it might nevertheless be of great interest to amplify
them in a strong measure. Let us, for example, suppose that a magician
has found a means of increasing the intensity of gravity tenfold in
his laboratory. All the conditions of life would be modified to the
extent of being unrecognizable. A living being borne in this space
would remain small and squat. All objects would be stocky and be
spread out in width or else be shattered. Viscid or semi-solid bodies,
such as pitch, would rapidly spread out and take on a surface as
plane and smooth as water under the conditions of gravity upon the
earth. On still further increasing the gravity, we would see the soft
metals behaving in the same way, and lead, copper and silver would in
turn flow away. These metals, in fact, are perfectly moulded under a
strong pressure, just like liquids, through the simple effect of the
attraction of the earth applied to all their molecules. Upon causing
an adequate attractive force to act upon the molecules of metals they
will be placed under conditions analogous to those to which they are
submitted in strong presses or in the mills that serve for coining
money. The sole difference consists in the fact that the action of
gravity is infinitely more regular, and purer, from a physical
standpoint, than that of the press or coining mill. Through very
simple considerations, we thus reach the principle which was
enunciated, we believe, by the illustrious Stokes, that our idea of
solid and liquid bodies is a necessary consequence of the intensity of
gravity upon the earth. Upon a larger or smaller planet, a certain
number of solid bodies would pass to a liquid state, or inversely. Let
us return to the cyclostat. In default of gravity, centrifugal force
gives us a means of realizing certain conditions that we would find in
the laboratory of our magician. The cyclostat permits us to observe
what is going on in that laboratory without submitting ourselves to
forces that might cause us great annoyance. We have hitherto been
content to put poor frogs therein and study upon them the effect of
the central anaemia and peripheral congestion produced on their
organism by the unrestrained motion of the liquids carried along by
centrifugal force. The results, it seems, have proved very
curious.--_La Nature_.

       *       *       *       *       *




MERCURY WEIGHING MACHINE.


We illustrate herewith a novel type of weighing machine. Hitherto the
weighing machines in common use have either been designed with some
kind of steelyard apparatus, upon which weights could be moved to
different distances from a fixed fulcrum, or springs have been so
applied as to be compressed to different degrees by different weights
put upon the scale pan, or table, of the machine. In other instances
more complicated mechanism is used, and various movable counterpoises
are usually required in order to balance the moving parts of the
machine.

[Illustration]

The type of machine which we now illustrate has been recently brought
out by Mr. G.E. Rutter, and the system has given very satisfactory
results with platform weighing machines. The engraving illustrates a
form of balance which may be applied to strength testing machines, or
for any work where an apparatus of the type of a Salter's balance
would be of use. It is simple in construction, and consists of a tube
A closed at the bottom and forming a reservoir for mercury. The body
which it is required to weigh is hung upon the hook B carried by the
crossbar C, which is connected by rigid rods to the upper part of the
tube, and by means of the internal rods D is attached to the cross
head E, which works freely inside the tube A. The top part of the tube
is, as will be clearly understood from the illustration, cut away to
allow of the descent of the rods. To the cross head E is attached the
piston F, which may be made of wood or of a hollow metal tube closed
at the end, or other suitable material. It will be easily understood
that when a weight is hung upon the hook B, the piston F is caused to
descend into the mercury which rises in the annular space between the
piston and the tube. The weight of the volume of displaced mercury is
proportional to the weight of the body hung upon the hook, and the
buoyancy of the piston in the mercury forms the upward force which
balances the downward pull of gravity. When the apparatus is at rest
the piston F descends into the mercury to such a distance as will
balance the weight of the rods, hook, and piston itself. If, now, the
cross bar G, provided with a pointer H, be fixed to the rods, it
should at that time register zero, upon the scale J fixed to the
outside of the tube, and as the descent of the piston into the mercury
is directly proportional to the weight of the body attached to the
hook B, the divisions of the scale will all be equal. It will thus be
seen that the apparatus is extremely simple in theory, and it only
remains to construct it in such a form that the mercury may not easily
be spilt in moving the instrument from place to place. This is
effected by causing the cross head E to fill the tube while working
freely therein, and a small valve is arranged to allow for the passage
of air. The cross bar G can be regulated upon the rods by means of set
screws.--_Industries._

       *       *       *       *       *




REEFING SAILS FROM THE DECK.


While this method may be applied to topsails and top-gallant-sails, I
especially apply it to courses, which, being so difficult to reef the
old way, may by this method be reefed from the deck in a few minutes.

After several years of trial by myself and others, on voyages around
Cape Horn under all circumstances of weather, of sleet and snow, this
method has always given the utmost satisfaction.

[Illustration: REEFING SAILS FROM THE DECK. Front View. Rear View.]

The average time required for reefing and setting was noted for five
years, being seven and one-half minutes.

This trial was made on a mainsail, the yard being seventy-one feet
long, and reefyard sixty-six feet long, eleven inches diameter at
center and nine at yard-arms.

By reference to the drawing it will be seen that it is not necessary
to have clewgarnets or buntlines in reefing. The operation is
performed by easing of the sheet and hauling the lee reef-tackle
first, also the midship reef tackle.

When the yardarm of the reefspar is up at the lee side, the sail
cannot sag to leeward when the tack is eased away. Now haul the
weather reef-tackle likewise midship, snug up to the yard, belay all
down the tack, and sheet aft.

As all the reef-tackles lead to the slings of the yard, there is no
impediment in swinging the yard when the reef-tackles are taut and
belayed.

The slack sail will not chafe, as it remains quiet, but if so desired
may be stopped up at leisure with only a few hands with stops provided
for that purpose.

In case of a sudden squall the sail may be hauled up the usual way.
The buntlines will draw the part of the sail below the reef well up on
the part above the reefyard, and remain becalmed, while the weight of
the reefspar will prevent any slatting or danger of losing the sail
any more than any other sail clewed up.

In case there is steam power at hand, all three reef-tackles may be
hauled simultaneously, easing sheet and tack sufficiently to let the
wind out of the sail without shaking.

There are other advantages gained by this method; while its
essentials are positive, quick reefing from the deck in all weathers,
it is also better reefed than by the old method. For by this new
method the sail is not strained or torn, and the sail will wear
longer, not being subject to such straining.

It may be carried longer, as the spar supports the sail like a band,
especially an old sail.

This method does not interfere with the use of the so called
midship-tack, but change of putting on bands, from the leech of the
sail at the reef to the center tack would be necessary.

The weight of the spar may be considered by some as objectionable, (an
old argument against double-topsail yards). The spar used for the reef
may be about one-half the diameter of the yard on which it is to be
used.

Such critics do not consider that a crew of men aloft on the yard are
several times heavier than such a spar.

L.K. MORSE.

Rockport, Me., Oct. 28, 1891.

       *       *       *       *       *




A NEW PROCESS FOR THE BLEACHING OF JUTE.

By Messrs. LEYKAM and TOSEFOTHAL.


Jute is well known as a very cheap fiber, and its employment in
textile industry is consequently both extensive and always increasing.
Accompanying this increase is a corresponding one in the amount of old
waste jute, which can be employed for the manufacture of paper.

Up to the present time, only very little use has been made of jute for
the manufacture of thread and the finer fabrics, because the
difficulty of bleaching the fiber satisfactorily has proved a very
serious hindrance to its improvement by chemical means. All the
methods hitherto proposed for bleaching jute are so costly that they
can scarcely be made to pay; and, moreover, in many cases, the jute is
scarcely bleached, and loses considerably in firmness and weight,
owing to the large quantities of bleaching agents which have to be
applied.

In consequence of this difficulty, the enormous quantities of jute
scraps, which are always available, are utilized in paper making
almost entirely for the production of ordinary wrapping paper, which
is, at the best, of medium quality. In the well known work of Hoffmann
and Muller, the authors refer to the great difficulty of bleaching
jute, and therefore recommend that it be not used for making white
papers.

Messrs. Leykam and Tosefothal have succeeded in bleaching it, and
rendering the fiber perfectly white, by a new process, simple and
cheap (which we describe below), so that their method can be very
advantageously employed in the paper industry.

The jute fiber only loses very little of its original firmness and
