examples of medicaments. Therefore a food is any substance that is
capable of directly contributing to the nutrition of the body, and
medicine is a substance competent, under proper conditions, to secure
the same results indirectly. Viewed in the light of the above
definition, cod-liver oil is to be regarded as a very valuable food,
as well as a most effective remedy both for the prevention and cure of
consumption.

I have previously stated that food is divided by physiologists into
three great classes. The albuminoids are used to build up the
organism, while the fatty and saccharine are burned in the body to
keep it warm. Although these are the chief functions devolving on the
above mentioned food elements, yet they are mutually interdependent on
each other for the proper performance of their several offices. Thus
the albuminoids cannot undergo the wonderful vitalizing process
necessary to fit them to enter into and form part of the living body,
except an adequate quantity of fatty matter be present to assist in
the vital transformation. On the other hand, the assistance of the
albuminoids is equally necessary to enable the fatty and saccharine
foods to maintain the internal heat of the body. Of all fatty matters,
whether derived from the animal or vegetable kingdom, none possesses
the property of stimulating and perfecting the nutritive processes in
so high a degree as cod-liver oil; it is more readily emulsified and
fitted for absorption by the pancreatic secretion during intestinal
digestion than any other fatty matter of which we have any knowledge.
The beneficial effects of its use have been proved in myriads of cases
of confirmed consumption, and if it were used for prolonged periods by
persons who are losing weight, and whose breathing capacity is too
little, along with effective cultivation of the latter function, many
persons would escape this disease who now succumb to it.


THE INFLUENCE OF NORMAL BREATHING ON THE FEMALE GENERATIVE
ORGANS.

[Illustration: FIG. 1.]

The body is divided into three separate stories by two partitions. The
diaphragm, A, separates the cavity of the chest from that of the
abdomen. The partition, _D_, forms a floor for the digestive cavity,
F, and a roof for the pelvis; the pelvic cavity is occupied mainly by
the generative organs. The upper part of the uterus is firmly fixed to
the partition, D, by which the pelvis is covered. Now, the diaphragm,
A, and the external respiratory muscles are in ceaseless motion
performing the act of breathing. The diaphragm acts like the piston of
a pump, both on the lungs above, and on the contents of the abdominal
and pelvic cavities below. When it rises from B to A, it diminishes
the size of the thoracic cavity, compresses the lungs, and assists in
the expiratory part of breathing; at the same time it acts through the
contents of the abdominal cavity on the pelvic roof, D, to which the
uterus is attached, and raises it from D to C. When the diaphragm
contracts, it descends from A to B, increases the size of the thoracic
cavity, inflates the lungs, promotes the inspiratory part of
breathing, pushes the walls of the chest and abdomen outward from F to
E, and lowers the pelvic roof at the same time the uterus sinks from C
to D. When the effect of these respiratory motions is not diminished
by muscular debility, rigidity of the thoracic walls, or by unsuitable
clothing, they have so direct an effect on the pelvic contents that
the uterus and its appendages make two distinct motions every time a
woman breathes. When the diaphragm rises and the breath is expelled,
the womb is elevated from one inch to one inch and a half, because the
roof of the pelvis, to which it is attached, is lifted about this
distance, because of gentle suction from above. The uterus and its
appendages are thus kept in constant motion, up and down, chiefly by
action of the muscles by which breathing is carried on.

Several influences combine to maintain the circulation of the blood.
The pumping action of the heart and the affinity of the blood for the
walls of the capillary vessels require to be assisted by the motion
both of the body as a whole and of its parts in order to keep the
circulation flowing equably through every tissue. Therefore muscular
action and the resulting bodily motion play a very important part in
maintaining the general and local blood circulation. During the
contraction of a muscle, the blood current flowing through it is, for
the time being, retarded, but when relaxation occurs the blood flows
into its vessels more freely than if no momentary cessation had taken
place. When the body or any of its parts is deprived of motion, the
blood circulation stagnates, and the nutrition, general or local, as
the case may be, promptly becomes impaired. This is specially true of
the uterus. Gentle but constant motion is absolutely essential to keep
up a healthy uterine blood circulation. Nature has provided for the
automatic performance of all the ceaseless internal motions that are
necessary to the continuance of life and the preservation of health;
thus the heart beats, the respiratory muscles act, the stomach
executes a churning motion during gastric digestion, the intestines
pass on their contents by worm-like contractions, automatically
without our supervision and without causing fatigue, being under the
control of the sympathetic system of nerves chiefly. It is equally
true, but not so well recognized, that the previously described
motions that are committed to the pelvic organs from the respiratory
apparatus are absolutely necessary to the continued health of the
uterus and its appendages. But the womb is not under the control of
the voluntary muscles, therefore it cannot be directly moved by them,
nor are its necessary motions influenced by the sympathetic system of
nerves as are the heart, stomach, and intestines, etc., but it is
fortunately under the indirect but positive control of involuntary
muscles that never, as long as breathing continues, cease their work.
Nature has thus made ample provision to keep the uterus in automatic
motion. As before stated, the natural ceaseless heavings of the lungs,
chest, and diaphragm, aided by the muscles inclosing the abdomen, have
the duty assigned them of communicating automatic motion to the uterus
and the other contents of the pelvis. When the diaphragm descends from
A to B, and the lungs are filled with air, the uterus sinks in the
pelvic cavity in obedience to the downward pressure from above, as
before stated; the circulation through the uterus is then for a moment
retarded, but the next instant, when the lungs are emptied of air and
the diaphragm rises, the blood flows forward more freely than if it
had not been momentarily obstructed. Ample provision has thus been
made to maintain a healthy circulation through the uterus.

The uterine motions I have described are fully adequate for the
purposes indicated. But when the natural stimulus of motion is
withheld, the circulation becomes sluggish causing congestion, which
may develop into inflammation. Under these conditions the uterus
gradually becomes displaced, falling backward, forward or downward as
the case may be. The blood vessels by which the uterus is supplied
thus have their caliber diminished by bending; the circulation through
them is retarded just as the flow of water in a rubber tube is
obstructed by a kink. A very good idea of what occurs in the uterus
under the conditions just described may be obtained by winding a
string around the fingers.

As the coats of the arteries are thick, and the pressure exerted by
the ligature has less power to prevent the arterial blood flowing
outward past the string to the end of the finger than it has to
prevent the return of the venous blood toward the heart, therefore the
part beyond the ligature soon becomes congested, the blood stagnating
in the capillaries. If the ligature be sufficiently tight and kept on
long enough, mortification will take place, but if the circulation be
only moderately obstructed, the congestion will continue until
ulceration occurs. A similar condition is developed in the uterus when
the necessary natural stimulus of motion fails to be communicated to
it or when it is so far out of its proper place that the circulation
through it is obstructed.

I believe the above described condition to be a most potent but
inadequately recognized cause of the various forms of uterine diseases
that distress so many women.


SHOWING HOW THE BREATHING POWERS MAY BE DEVELOPED.

When the circumference of the chest bears a due proportion to the size
of the body generally; when its walls and the lungs possess a suitable
degree of elasticity; when the strength of the respiratory muscles is
adequate to their work, and no undue opposition is offered to the
breathing motions by the clothing--then the vital volume is always up
to the full requirements of the system. But when one or all of these
are lacking in any important degree, the breathing capacity is
proportionately diminished. If the testimony of the spirometer be
corroborated by the impaired physical condition of the individual, its
correction should be sought in part at least by enlarging the chest,
increasing the elasticity of its walls and of the lungs, and by
augmenting the strength of the respiratory muscles. These results may
commonly be secured by diligent and persevering use of the following
exercises:

[Illustration: FIG. 2.]

A trapeze, Fig. 2, should be suspended from the ceiling, so that the
bar shall be six inches above the head of the person who is to use it;
the toes should be placed under straps nailed to the floor to keep
them in position. Then if the bar be grasped and the body thrown
forward, the trapeze, the arms, and the body will form the segment of
a circle.

The exercise is taken by causing the body to describe a complete
circle in the manner indicated in the cut. Little muscular effort is
required if the motion be rapid, because the momentum is sufficient to
carry the body around; but if the rotation be slow, more exertion is
required. This movement is specially adapted to the breathing powers
of weak persons, yet the most vigorous can readily get from it all the
exercise their chest and lungs require.

By means of these exercises the chest is gently but effectively
expanded in every direction and the elasticity of its walls promoted,
the air cells are expanded, and the lungs are rendered more permeable
to the respired air, and the strength of the respiratory muscles is
developed.

[Illustration: Fig. 3.]

Fig. 3 illustrates an exercise for the chest that is taken without any
apparatus other than an ordinary doorway. The exerciser should stand
in the position indicated in the engraving, and then step forward with
each foot alternately as far as possible without stretching the chest
too severely. The longer the step the more vigorous the exercise will
be.

[Illustration: Fig. 4.]

Fig. 4 shows an exercise taken between two chairs; the position
indicated in the cut having been assumed, the chest is then slowly
lowered and raised three to six times. This exercise is adapted to
strong persons only.


THE EFFECTS OF ADEQUATE RESPIRATION IN SPECIAL CASES.

When the nutrition of the body is promoted by effective respiration,
and waste matters are promptly removed, the chances that tubercle will
be developed in persons who are predisposed thereto are reduced to a
minimum.

Better materials are furnished by the nutritive processes to renew the
tissues, so that the occurrence of those degenerations that result in
various fatal affections, peculiar to the decline of life, are
rendered much less probable or are prevented altogether, and the
chances that death shall take place by old age is increased. The
system possesses much greater resisting power against the influence of
malaria and the poisons that give rise to typhoid fever, scarlatina,
diphtheria, measles, etc.

When the motions of a woman's respiratory organs are normal and are
properly communicated to the pelvic organs, she enjoys the greatest
possible immunity attainable against the development of any diseases
peculiar to the sex.

       *       *       *       *       *




VITAL DISCOVERIES IN OBSTRUCTED AIR AND VENTILATION.[1]

[Footnote 1: Read by Wm. C. Conant before the Polytechnic Association
of the American Institute, New York, May 10, 1883.]


I suppose that we all consider ourselves to be sufficiently impressed
with the importance of ventilation. If I should stop here to declaim
against foul exhalations, or to dwell upon the virtues of fresh air,
you might feel inclined to interrupt me by saying, "Oh, we know all
about that! If you have anything practical to advance, come to the
point." Gentlemen, I beg your pardon, but I must say that the great
fact concerning ventilation, as yet, is that its strongest advocates
are not conscious of one-half the seriousness of the subject; and the
second fact is that the supposed means of ventilation prescribed by
science _fail to secure it_.

This, then, is my point to-night--the supreme necessity, still urgent,
and _universally_ urgent, for a reformation of the breath of life. I
believe in a promised time when the days of a man's life shall again
be as the days of a tree. And next to the abolition of vice and sin, I
believe that the very grandest factor of such result must be an entire
disuse of obstructed air for the lungs. I propose to bring forward
some evidence of the necessity, and likewise of the possibility, of a
reform so radical and sweeping as this. The subject is too wide for
the occasion. I shall be able to read only extracts from what I have
prepared, in the few minutes that you can give with patience to my
unpracticed lecturing.

The best prescription that doctors have to give (when we are not too
far gone to take it) is to live out of doors. Why is this? Why is life
out of doors proverbially synonymous with robust health? Why is it
that a superior vitality, and a singular exemption from disease,
notoriously distinguish dwellers in the open air, by land or sea?
Without disparaging the virtues of exercise or of bracing temperature,
indispensable as these are for the recuperation of enfeebled
constitutions, we must admit that among the native and settled
inhabitants of the open air high health is the rule in warm climates
as well as in cold, and with the very laziest mortals that bask in the
sun, or loaf in the woods. The fact is that simple vegetative health
seems to be nearly independent of all other external conditions but
that of a pure natural diet for the lungs. Man in nature seems to
thrive as spontaneously as plants, by the free grace of air, earth,
and sun. On the other hand, the very diseases from which houses are
supposed to defend us--that most numerous class resulting from
colds--are the special scourge of the lives that are most carefully
shielded from their commonly supposed cause--exposure to the open air.
Those diseases diminish, and entirely disappear, just so far as
exposure in the pure and freely moving air becomes complete and
habitual. Soldiers, inured to camp life, catch cold if they once sleep
in a house; and, generally speaking, the inhabitants of the free air
contract colds _only_ by exposure to confined exhalations from their
own or other bodies, within the walls of houses. The explanation of
this is plain and simple: Carbonic acid detained within four walls
accumulates in place of the breath of life--oxygen--and narcotizes the
excretory function of the skin. The moment that this great and
continual vent of waste and impurity from the system is obstructed,
internal derangement ensues in every direction. All hands, so to
speak, are strained to extra duty to discharge the noxious
accumulation. The lungs labor to discharge the load thrown back upon
them, with hastened respiration, increased combustion, and feverish
heat. The pores of the mucous membrane in the nose, throat, alimentary
canal, or bronchial passages, are forced by an aggravated discharge
(or catarrh), and this congestive and inflammatory pressure is a fever
also. There is nothing of "cold" about it except as an auxiliary and
antecedent, in cases where an external chill has struck upon nerves
already half paralyzed by the universal narcotic--carbonic acid--which
house dwellers may be said to "smoke" perpetually.

So much for nerve-poison; but blood-poisoning is a still more terrible
characteristic of house-protected existence. It is now the almost
universal opinion of the medical profession that the whole class of
malarial and zymotic diseases that make such frightful progress and
havoc in the most civilized communities, are due to living germs with
which the exhalations of organic waste and decay are everywhere loaded
in inconceivable numbers. They are known to multiply themselves many
times over, every two or three hours. They swarm into the blood by
millions, through all the absorbents, especially those of the lungs,
that drink the atmosphere in which they are suffered to linger and
propagate. Mr. Dancer, the eminent microscopist, counted in a sample
from such an atmosphere a number of organized germs equivalent to
3,700,000 in the volume of air hourly inhaled by one person. That is
over 60,000 germs per minute, and about 2,000 in every breath. In the
blood, they still propagate, and feed, and grow, consuming its oxygen,
thus defeating its purification, and turning that stream of otherwise
healthful and invigorating nutrition into a stream of effete and
corrupt matter--a sewer rather than a river of life--or at best an
impoverished and impure supply for the support of existence.

The same pestilential but invisible hosts of bacteria, mustered and
bred in the close filthiness of Oriental cities, and jungles, swarm
out as Asiatic cholera on the wings of the wind, sweeping the wide
world with havoc. Settled on the tropical shores of the Eastern
Atlantic, they lie in wait for their victims in the sluggish and
terrible coast fever. On the western coast of the same ocean, perhaps
from some cause connected with oceanic or atmospheric currents, they
make devastating irruptions inland, as yellow fever, in every
direction where the walls of their enclosure are low enough to be
freely passed. These, let us remember, are all essentially the same
organic poison that is engendered _wherever_ life and death are plying
their perpetual game; and this, like Cleopatra's "worm, will do its
kind" in the veins of man, wherever obstructions, natural or
artificial, temporary or permanent, interfere with its prompt
diffusion in the vastness of the general atmosphere. Our "house of
life" stands generously open, for every "inmate bad" to come and go
through the absorbent, unquestioned, except in the stomach, where the
tangible poisons have to go by the act of swallowing and where they
are often challenged and ejected. It seems at first thought very
strange that we are not so well protected by natural instinct or
sensibility from the subtle poisons of the atmosphere as from those
that can affect us only by the voluntary act of swallowing. The
obvious explanation, however, of this apparent neglect is that Nature
protects us in general from gaseous poisons by her own system of
ventilation; and if, when we devise houses, necessarily excluding that
system, we fail to devise also a sufficient substitute for it, the
consequences of such negligence are as fairly due as when we swallow
tangible poison.

I have hitherto referred only to the _dispersion_ of poisonous
exhalations, as if the best and most necessary thing the atmosphere
can do for us were to dilute the dose to a comparatively harmless
potency. But this is now known to be not the true remedial process
with respect to the zymotic germs. The most wonderful achievement of
recent investigation reveals a philosophy of both bane and antidote
that astonishes us with its simplicity as much as with its efficiency.
At the moment when humanity stands aghast at the announcement that
germs are not destroyed by disinfectants, comes the counter discovery
that they are rendered harmless by oxygen. It seems that it makes no
difference, really, of what sort or from what source are the bacteria
that we take into the blood. The only material difference to us
depends on _the sort of atmosphere_ in which their hourly generations
are bred. For example, the bacteria _developed in confined air_, from
a simple infusion of hay, are found by experiment to be as capable of
generating that most terrible of blood poisoners, the malignant
pustule, as are the bacteria taken from the pustule itself.

On the other hand, the bacteria from the malignant pustule itself,
after propagating for a few hours in pure and free air, become a
perfectly harmless race, and are actually injected into the blood
with impunity. The explanation of the strange discovery is this--note
its extreme simplicity--bacteria bred in copious oxygen perish for
want of it as soon as they enter the blood vessels; whereas those
inured to an unventilated atmosphere for a few generations, which
means only a few hours, are prepared to thrive and propagate
infinitely within our veins; and that is the whole mystery of blood
poisoning and zymotic diseases. Taken in connection with the narcotic
or _nerve-poisoning_ power of carbonic acid (to which all the classes
of diseases resulting from colds are due), we have also in this simple
but grand discovery the whole mystery of the question with which we
set out--why free air is health, and why sickness is a purely domestic
product. The restitution of natural health to mankind demands only,
but demands absolutely, the constant diffusion in copious and
continuous floods of atmospheric oxygen, of the nerve-poisoning
carbonic acid of combustion (organic and inorganic), and of the
blood-poisoning bacteria of organic decomposition.

We find, then, as a matter both of experience and of philosophy, that
life or death, in the main and in the long run, turns on the single
pivot of atmospheric movement or obstruction. The resistance of mere
rising ground or dense vegetation to a free movement of the air from
low-lying levels performs an obstructive office similar to that of the
walls and roofs of houses, and with like effect. The invariable
condition of unhealthy _seasons_ and _days_ is a state of rarefaction
and stagnation of the atmosphere, when the poison-freighted vapor
cannot be lifted and dispersed, and every one complains of the sultry,
close, "muggy" (meaning _murky_) feeling of the air. Few reflect, when
fretted by the boisterous winds of March, upon the vital office they
perform in dispersing and sanitating the bacteria-laden exhalations
let loose by the first warmth from the soaked soil and the macerated
deposits of the former year.

The passing air, then, that we breathe so lightly, is on other
business, and carries a load we little think of, and that is not to be
trifled with. This grand carrier of nature, on business of life or
death, must not be detained, must not be hindered! or they who
interfere with the business by restraining walls and roofs will take
the consequences. It is a good deal like stopping a bullet, except as
to consciousness and suddenness of effect.

That men live at all in their obstructed and therefore poison-loaded
atmosphere, is a proof of the wonderful efficiency of the protective
economy of Nature within us; so wonderful, indeed, that few can
believe the fact of living to be consistent with the real existence of
such a deadly environment as science pretends to reveal. It is a
common impression, therefore, that actual results fail to justify the
alarm sounded by sanitarians. Hence the necessity for calling
attention at the outset to an ample and manifest equivalent for the
deadly dose of confined exhalations taken daily by all civilized men.
We perceive that that dose is not lost, like the Humboldt River, in a
"sink," but reappears, like the wide-sown grass, in a perennial and
universal crop of diseases, almost numberless and ever increasing in
number, peculiar to house-dwellers. The trail of these plagues stops
nowhere else; it leads straight to the imprisoned atmosphere in our
artificial inclosures, and there it ends. That marvelous protective
economy of Nature within us, to which we have referred, is no
perpetual guaranty against the consequences of our negligence; it is
only a limited reprieve, to afford space for repentance; and unless we
hasten to improve the day of grace, the suspended sentence comes down,
upon us at last with force the more accumulated by delay.

Now, therefore, the grand problem of sanitary science (almost
untouched, almost unrecognized) proves to be no other and no less than
this:

What can be done to remedy the obstructive nature of an inclosure, so
that its gaseous contents shall _move off_, and be replaced by pure
air, as freely, as rapidly, and as incessantly, as in the open
atmosphere?

It happens to be the most necessary preliminary in approaching this
problem, to show how _not_ to do it, for that, respectfully be it
spoken, is what we have hitherto practiced, as results abundantly
prove. Fallacies, both vulgar and scientific, obstruct our way. A
fundamental fallacy respects the very nature of the work, which is
supposed to be _to get in fresh air_. In point of fact, this care is
both unnecessary and comparatively useless. Take care of the bad air,
and the fresh air will take care of itself. Only make room for it, and
you cannot keep it out. On the other hand, unless you first make room
for it, you cannot keep it _in_; pump it in and blow it in as you may,
you only blow it _through_, as the Jordan flows comparatively
uncontaminated through the Dead Sea. This is a law of fluids that must
be kept in view. The pure air is quite as ready to get out as to get
in; while the air loaded with poisonous vapors is as sluggish as a
gorged serpent, and will not budge but on compulsion. Such compulsion
the grand system of wind _suction_, actuated by the sun, supplies on
the scale of the universe; and this we must imitate and adapt for our
more limited purposes.

It would seem as if we need not pause to notice so shallow though
common a notion as that which usually comes in right here, namely,
that confined air will move off somehow of itself, if you give it
liberty; being supposed to be much like a cat in a bag, wanting only a
hole to make its escape. Air is ponderable matter--as much so as
lead--and equally requires force of some kind to set it or keep it in
motion. But applied philosophy itself relies on a fallacious, or, at
best, inadequate source of motive power for ventilation. It gravely
prescribes ventilating flues and even holes, and promises us that the
warmed air within the house will rise through these flues and holes,
carrying its impurities away with it, from the pressure of the cooler
and denser air without. But we very well know that the best of flues
and chimneys will draw only by favor of lively fires or clear weather.
They fail us utterly when most needed, in warm and murky weather, when
the barometer is low, and the thin atmosphere drops, down its damp and
dirty contents, burying us to the chimney tops in a pestilent
congregation of vapors.

Nevertheless, so far as I can discover, these holes and flues, at best
a little fire at the bottom of the latter, are the sole and
all-sufficient expedients of science and architecture for ventilation
to this _day_, in spite of their total failure in experience. I can
find nothing in standard treatises or examples from philosophers or
architects, beyond a theoretical calculation on so much expansion of
air from so many units of heat, and hence so much ascensional force
_inferred_ in the ventilating flue--a result which never comes to
pass, yet none the less continues to be cheerfully relied on.
Unfortunately for the facts, they contradict the philosophy, and are
only to be ignored with silent contempt. A French Academician's report
on the ventilation of a large public building, lately reprinted by the
Smithsonian Institution, states with absolute assurance and exactness
the cubic feet of air changed per minute, with the precise volume and
velocity of its ascension, by burning a peck of coal at the bottom of
the trunk flue. No mention is made of the anemometer or any other
gauge of the result asserted, and we are left to the suspicion that it
is merely a matter of theoretical inference, as usual; for every one
who has had any acquaintance with practical tests in these matters
knows that no such movement of air ever takes place under such
conditions, unless by exceptional favor of the weather.

I have seen a tall steam boiler chimney induce through a four inch
pipe a suction strong enough to exhaust the air from a large room as
fast as perfect ventilation would require. But this, it is well known,
requires four hundred or five hundred degrees of heat in the chimney.
I never saw an ordinary domestic fire of coals produce any noticeable
ventilating suction, without the use of a blower, urging the
combustion to fury, and I presume nobody else ever did.

But, while nobody ever saw an active suction of air produced by the
mere heat of a still or unexcited fire--unless the _quantity_ of heat
were on a very large scale--everybody has seen a roaring current
sucked through the narrowed throat of a chimney or a stove by a
blazing handful of shavings, paper, or straw. It is very remarkable,
when you come to think of it, that the burning of an insignificant
piece of paper, with less heat in it, perhaps, than a pea of
anthracite, will cause a rush of air that a bushel of anthracite
cannot in the least degree imitate. It is not only a curious but a
