
                      BABBAGE'S DIFFERENCE MACHINE.

In the wonderful versatility of the human mind, the improvement, when
made, will very probably be made by paths where it is least expected.
The great inducement to Mr. Babbage to attempt the construction of an
engine by which astronomical tables could be calculated, and even
printed, by mechanical means and with entire accuracy, was the errors in
the requisite tables. Nineteen such errors, in point of fact, were
discovered in an edition of Taylor's Logarithms printed in 1796; some of
which might have led to the most dangerous results in calculating a
ship's place. These nineteen errors, (of which one only was an error of
the press), were pointed out in the _Nautical Almanac_ for 1832. In one
of these _errata_ the seat of the error was stated to be in cosine of 14
degrees 18 minutes 3 seconds. Subsequent examination showed that there
was an error of one second in this correction; and, accordingly, in the
_Nautical Almanac_ of the next year a new correction was necessary. But
in making the new correction of one second, a new error was committed of
ten degrees. Instead of cosine 14 degrees 18 minutes 2 seconds the
correction was printed cosine 4 degrees 18 minutes 2 seconds making it
still necessary, in some future edition of the _Nautical Almanac_, to
insert an _erratum_ in an _erratum_ of the _errata_ in Taylor's
logarithms.[A]

[Footnote A: Edinburgh Review, Vol. LIX., 282.]

In the hope of obviating the possibility of such errors, Mr. Babbage
projected his calculating, or, as he prefers to call it, his difference
machine. Although this extraordinary undertaking has been arrested, in
consequence of the enormous expense attending its execution, enough has
been achieved to show the mechanical possibility of constructing an
engine of this kind, and even one of far higher powers, of which Mr.
Babbage has matured the conception, devised the notation, and executed
the drawings--themselves an imperishable monument of the genius of the
author.

I happened on one occasion to be in company with this highly
distinguished man of science, whose social qualities are as pleasing as
his constructive talent is marvelous, when another eminent _savant_,
Count Strzelecki, just returned from his Oriental and Australian tour,
observed that he found among the Chinese, a great desire to know
something more of Mr. Babbage's calculating machine, and especially
whether, like their own _swampan_, it could be made to go into the
pocket. Mr. Babbage good-humouredly observed that, thus far, he had been
very much out of pocket with it.


               INCREASED COMMAND OF INSTRUMENTAL POWER.

Whatever advances may be made in astronomical science, theoretical or
applied, I am strongly inclined to think that they will be made in
connection with an increased command of instrumental power. The natural
order in which the human mind proceeds in the acquisition of
astronomical knowledge is minute and accurate observation of the
phenomena of the heavens, the skillful discussion and analysis of these
observations, and sound philosophy in generalizing the results.

In pursuing this course, however, a difficulty presented itself, which
for ages proved insuperable--and which to the same extent has existed in
no other science, viz.: that all the leading phenomena are in their
appearance delusive. It is indeed true that in all sciences superficial
observation can only lead, except by chance, to superficial knowledge;
but I know of no branch in which, to the same degree as in astronomy,
the great leading phenomena are the reverse of true; while they yet
appeal so strongly to the senses, that men who could foretell eclipses,
and who discovered the precession of the equinoxes, still believed that
the earth was at rest in the center of the universe, and that all the
host of heaven performed a daily revolution about it as a center.

It usually happens in scientific progress, that when a great fact is at
length discovered, it approves itself at once to all competent judges.
It furnishes a solution to so many problems, and harmonizes with so many
other facts,--that all the other _data_ as it were crystallize at once
about it. In modern times, we have often witnessed such an impatience,
so to say, of great truths, to be discovered, that it has frequently
happened that they have been found out simultaneously by more than one
individual; and a disputed question of priority is an event of very
common occurrence. Not so with the true theory of the heavens. So
complete is the deception practiced on the senses, that it failed more
than once to yield to the suggestion of the truth; and it was only when
the visual organs were armed with an almost preternatural instrumental
power, that the great fact found admission to the human mind.


                         THE COPERNICAN SYSTEM.

It is supposed that in the very dawn of science, Pythagoras or his
disciples explained the apparent motion of the heavenly bodies about the
earth by the diurnal revolution of the earth on its axis. But this
theory, though bearing so deeply impressed upon it the great seal of
truth, _simplicity_, was in such glaring contrast with the evidence of
the senses, that it failed of acceptance in antiquity or the middle
ages. It found no favor with minds like those of Aristotle, Archimedes,
Hipparchus, Ptolemy, or any of the acute and learned Arabian or mediaeval
astronomers. All their ingenuity and all their mathematical skill were
exhausted in the development of a wonderfully complicated and ingenious,
but erroneous history. The great master truth, rejected for its
simplicity, lay disregarded at their feet.

At the second dawn of science, the great fact again beamed into the mind
of Copernicus. Now, at least, in that glorious age which witnessed the
invention of printing, the great mechanical engine of intellectual
progress, and the discovery of America, we may expect that this
long-hidden revelation, a second time proclaimed, will command the
assent of mankind. But the sensible phenomena were still too strong for
the theory; the glorious delusion of the rising and the setting sun
could not be overcome. Tycho de Brahe furnished his Observatory with
instruments superior in number and quality to all that had been
collected before; but the great instrument of discovery, which, by
augmenting the optic power of the eye, enables it to penetrate beyond
the apparent phenomena, and to discern the true constitution of the
heavenly bodies, was wanting at Uranienburg. The observations of Tycho
as discussed by Kepler, conducted that most fervid, powerful, and
sagacious mind to the discovery of some of the most important laws of
the celestial motions; but it was not till Galileo, at Florence, had
pointed his telescope to the sky, that the Copernican system could be
said to be firmly established in the scientific world.


                          THE HOME OF GALILEO.

On this great name, my Friends, assembled as we are to dedicate a temple
to instrumental Astronomy, we may well pause for a moment.

There is much, in every way, in the city of Florence to excite the
curiosity, to kindle the imagination, and to gratify the taste.
Sheltered on the north by the vine-clad hills of Fiesoli, whose
cyclopean walls carry back the antiquary to ages before the Roman,
before the Etruscan power, the flowery city (Fiorenza) covers the sunny
banks of the Arno with its stately palaces. Dark and frowning piles of
mediaeval structure; a majestic dome, the prototype of St. Peter's;
basilicas which enshrine the ashes of some of the mightiest of the dead;
the stone where Dante stood to gaze on the Campanile; the house of
Michael Angelo, still occupied by a descendant of his lineage and name,
his hammer, his chisel, his dividers, his manuscript poems, all as if he
had left them but yesterday; airy bridges, which seem not so much to
rest on the earth as to hover over the waters they span; the loveliest
creations of ancient art, rescued from the grave of ages again to
enchant the world; the breathing marbles of Michael Angelo, the glowing
canvas of Raphael and Titian, museums filled with medals and coins of
every age from Cyrus the younger, and gems and amulets and vases from
the sepulchers of Egyptian Pharaohs coeval with Joseph, and Etruscan
Lucumons that swayed Italy before the Romans,--libraries stored with the
choicest texts of ancient literature,--gardens of rose and orange, and
pomegranate, and myrtle,--the very air you breathe languid with music
and perfume;--such is Florence. But among all its fascinations,
addressed to the sense, the memory, and the heart, there was none to
which I more frequently gave a meditative hour during a year's
residence, than to the spot where Galileo Galilei sleeps beneath the
marble door of Santa Croce; no building on which I gazed with greater
reverence, than I did upon the modest mansion at Arcetri, villa at once
and prison, in which that venerable sage, by command of the Inquisition,
passed the sad closing years of his life. The beloved daughter on whom
he had depended to smooth his passage to the grave, laid there before
him; the eyes with which he had discovered worlds before unknown,
quenched in blindness:

               Ahime! quegli occhi si son fatti oscuri,
               Che vider piu di tutti i tempi antichi,
               E luce fur dei secoli futuri.

That was the house, "where," says Milton (another of those of whom the
world was not worthy), "I found and visited the famous Galileo, grown
old--a prisoner to the Inquisition, for thinking on astronomy otherwise
than as the Dominican and Franciscan licensers thought."[A] Great
Heavens! what a tribunal, what a culprit, what a crime! Let us thank
God, my Friends, that we live in the nineteenth century. Of all the
wonders of ancient and modern art, statues and paintings, and jewels and
manuscripts,--the admiration and the delight of ages,--there was nothing
which I beheld with more affectionate awe than that poor, rough tube, a
few feet in length,--the work of his own hands,--that very "optic
glass," through which the "Tuscan Artist" viewed the moon,

              "At evening, from the top of Fesole,
               Or in Valdarno, to descry new lands,
               Rivers, or mountains, in her spotty globe."

that poor little spy-glass (for it is scarcely more) through which the
human eye first distinctly beheld the surface of the moon--first
discovered the phases of Venus, the satellites of Jupiter, and the
seeming handles of Saturn--first penetrated the dusky depths of the
heavens--first pierced the clouds of visual error, which, from the
creation of the world, involved the system of the Universe.

[Footnote A: Prose Works, vol. 1, p. 213.]

There are occasions in life in which a great mind lives years of rapt
enjoyment in a moment. I can fancy the emotions of Galileo, when, first
raising the newly-constructed telescope to the heavens, he saw fulfilled
the grand prophecy of Copernicus, and beheld the planet Venus crescent
like the moon. It was such another moment as that when the immortal
printers of Mentz and Strasburg received the first copy of the Bible
into their hands, the work of their divine art; like that when Columbus,
through the gray dawn of the 12th of October, 1492 (Copernicus, at the
age of eighteen, was then a student at Cracow), beheld the shores of San
Salvador; like that when the law of gravitation first revealed itself to
the intellect of Newton; like that when Franklin saw by the stiffening
fibers of the hempen cord of his kite, that he held the lightning in his
grasp; like that when Leverrier received back from Berlin the tidings
that the predicted planet was found.

Yes, noble Galileo, thou art right, _E pur si muove._ "It does move."
Bigots may make thee recant it; but it moves, nevertheless. Yes, the
earth moves, and the planets move, and the mighty waters move, and the
great sweeping tides of air move, and the empires of men move, and the
world of thought moves, ever onward and upward to higher facts and
bolder theories. The Inquisition may seal thy lips, but they can no more
stop the progress of the great truth propounded by Copernicus, and
demonstrated by thee, than they can stop the revolving earth.

Close now, venerable sage, that sightless, tearful eye; it has seen what
man never before saw--it has seen enough. Hang up that poor little
spy-glass--it has done its work. Not Herschell nor Rosse have,
comparatively, done more. Franciscans and Dominicans deride thy
discoveries now; but the time will come when, from two hundred
observatories in Europe and America, the glorious artillery of science
shall nightly assault the skies, but they shall gain no conquests in
those glittering fields before which thine shall be forgotten. Rest in
peace, great Columbus of the heavens--like him scorned, persecuted,
broken-hearted!--in other ages, in distant hemispheres, when the
votaries of science, with solemn acts of consecration, shall dedicate
their stately edifices to the cause of knowledge and truth, thy name
shall be mentioned with honor.


                 NEW PERIODS IN ASTRONOMICAL SCIENCE.

It is not my intention, in dwelling with such emphasis upon the
invention of the telescope, to ascribe undue importance, in promoting
the advancement of science, to the increase of instrumental power. Too
much, indeed, cannot be said of the service rendered by its first
application in confirming and bringing into general repute the
Copernican system; but for a considerable time, little more was effected
by the wondrous instrument than the gratification of curiosity and
taste, by the inspection of the planetary phases, and the addition of
the rings and satellites of Saturn to the solar family. Newton,
prematurely despairing of any further improvement in the refracting
telescope, applied the principle of reflection; and the nicer
observations now made, no doubt, hastened the maturity of his great
discovery of the law of gravitation; but that discovery was the work of
his transcendent genius and consummate skill.

With Bradley, in 1741, a new period commenced in instrumental astronomy,
not so much of discovery as of measurement. The superior accuracy and
minuteness with which the motions and distances of the heavenly bodies
were now observed, resulted in the accumulation of a mass of new
materials, both for tabular comparison and theoretical speculation.
These materials formed the enlarged basis of astronomical science
between Newton and Sir William Herschell. His gigantic reflectors
introduced the astronomer to regions of space before unvisited--extended
beyond all previous conception the range of the observed phenomena, and
with it proportionably enlarged the range of constructive theory. The
