positive in the ordinary thermo-electric series of metals only become
negative in the metal and liquid ones (viz., only 73 out of 286 in
weak solutions, and 48 out of the same number in strong ones), we may
conclude that the metals, more frequently than the liquids, have the
greatest thermo-electric influence, and also that the relative
largeness of the number of instances of thermo-electro-positive metals
in the series of metals and liquids, as in the series of metals only,
is partly a consequence of the circumstance that rise of temperature
usually makes substances--metals in particular--electro-positive.
These statements are also consistent with the view that the elementary
substances lose a portion of their molecular activity when they unite
to form acids or salts, and that electrolytes therefore have usually a
less degree of molecular motion than the metals of which they are
partly composed.

The current from a thermo-couple of metal and liquid, therefore, may
be viewed as the united result of difference of molecular motion,
first, of the two junctions, and second, of the two heated (or cooled)
substances; and in all cases, both of thermo- and chemico-electric
action, the immediate true cause of the current is the original
molecular vibrations of the substances, while contact is only a static
permitting condition. Also that while in the case of thermo-electric
action the sustaining cause is molecular motion, supplied by an
external source of heat, in the case of chemico-electric action it is
the motion lost by the metal and liquid when chemically uniting
together. The direction of the current in thermo-electric cases
appears to depend upon which of the two substances composing a
junction increases in molecular activity the fastest by rise of
temperature, or decreases the most rapidly by cooling.

       *       *       *       *       *




AIR REFRIGERATING MACHINE.


[Illustration: IMPROVED AIR REFRIGERATING MACHINE.]

Messrs. J. & E. Hall, Dartford, exhibit at the International Health
Exhibition, London, in connection with a cold storage room, two sizes
of Ellis' patent air refrigerator, the larger one capable of
delivering 5,000 cubic feet of cold air per hour, when running at a
speed of 150 revolutions per minute; and the smaller one 2,000 cubic
feet of cold air per hour, at 225 revolutions per minute. The special
features in these machines are the arrangement of parts, by which
great compactness is secured, and the adoption of flat slides for the
compressor, instead of the ordinary beat valves, which permits of a
high rate of revolution without the objectionable noise which is
caused by clacks beating on their seats. The engraving shows the
general arrangement of the apparatus. Figs. 1 to 4 show details of the
compression and expansion valves, which are ordinary flat slides,
partly balanced, and held up to their faces by strong springs from
behind. The steam, compression, and expansion cylinders are severally
bolted to the end of a strong frame, which though attached to the
cooler box does not form part of it, the object being to meet the
strains between the cylinders and shaft in as direct a manner as
possible without allowing them to act on the cooler casting. Each
cylinder is double acting, the pistons being coupled to the shaft by
three connecting rods, the two outer ones working upon crank pins
fixed to overhung disks, and the center one on a crank formed in the
shaft. The slide valves for all the cylinders are driven from two
weigh shafts, the main valve shaft being actuated by a follow crank,
and the expansion and cut off valves from the crosshead pin of the
compressor. The machines may be used either in the vertical position
as exhibited, or may be fixed horizontally; and it is stated that the
construction is such as to admit of speeds of 200 and 300 revolutions
per minute respectively for the larger and smaller machines, under
which conditions the delivery of cold air may be taken at about 7,000
and 2,600 cubic feet per hour. Messrs. Hall also make this class of
refrigerator without the steam cylinder, and arranged to be driven by
a belt from a gas engine or any existing motive power.

       *       *       *       *       *




A GAS RADIATOR AND HEATER.


[Illustration: Fig. 1 & Fig. 2 A GAS RADIATOR AND HEATER.]

There is now being introduced into Germany a gas radiator and heater,
the invention of Herr Wobbe. It consists, as will be seen in engraving
above, of a series of vertical U-shaped pipes, of wrought iron, 50
millimeters (2 inches) in diameter. The two legs of the U are of
unequal length; the longer being about 5 feet, and the shorter 3 feet
(exclusive of the bend at the top). Beneath the open end of the
shorter leg of each pipe is placed a burner, attached to a horizontal
gas-pipe, which turns upon an axis. The object of having this pipe
rotate is to bring the burners into an inclined position--shown by the
dotted lines in Fig. 2--for lighting them. On turning them back to the
vertical position, the heated products of combustion pass up the
shorter tube and down the longer, where they enter a common
receptacle, from which they pass into the chimney or out of doors.
Surrounding the pipes are plates of sheet iron, inclined at the angle
shown in Fig. 2. The object of the plates is to prevent the heated air
of the room from passing up to the ceiling, and send it out into the
room. To prevent any of the pipes acting as chimneys, and bringing the
products of combustion back into the room, as well as to avoid any
back-pressure, a damper is attached to the outlet receptacle. The
heated gas becomes cooled so much (to about 100 deg. Fahr.) that water is
condensed and precipitated, and collects in the vessel below the
outlet. Each burner has a separate cock, by which it may be kept
closed, half-open, or open. To obviate danger of explosion, there is a
strip of sheet iron in front of the burners, which prevents their
being lighted when in a vertical position; so that, in case any
unburned gas gets into the pipes, it cannot be ignited, for the
burners can only be lighted when inclined to the front. In starting
the stove the burners are lighted, in the inclined position; the chain
from the damper pulled up; the burners set vertical; and, as soon as
they are all drawing well into the tubes, the damper is closed. If
less heat is desired, the cocks are turned half off. It is not
permissible to entirely extinguish some of the burners, unless the
unused pipes are closed to prevent the products of combustion coming
back into the room. The consumption of gas per burner, full open, with
a pressure of 8/10, is said to be only 4-3/8 cubic feet per hour.

       *       *       *       *       *




CONCRETE WATER PIPES.


Concrete water pipes of small diameter, according to a foreign
contemporary, are used in parts of France, notably for water mains for
the towns of Coulommiers and Aix-en-Provence. The pipes were formed of
concrete in the trench itself. The mould into which the concrete was
stamped was sheet iron about two yards in length. The several pipes
were not specially joined to each other, the joints being set with
mortar. The concrete consisted of three parts of slow setting cement
and three parts of river sand, mixed with five parts of limestone
debris. The inner diameter of the pipes was nine inches; their
thickness, three inches. The average fall is given at one in five
hundred; the lowest speed of the current at one foot nine inches per
second. To facilitate the cleaning of the pipes, man-holes are
constructed every one hundred yards or so, the sides of which are also
made of concrete. The trenches are about five feet deep. The work was
done by four men, who laid down nearly two hundred feet of pipe in a
working day; the cost was about ninety-three cents per running yard.
It is claimed as an advantage for the new method that the pipes adhere
closely to the inequalities of the trench, and thus lie firmly on the
ground. When submitted to great pressure, however, they have not
proved effective, and the method, consequently, is only suitable for
pipes in which there is no pressure, or only a very trifling one.

       *       *       *       *       *




THE SELLERS STANDARD SYSTEM OF SCREW THREADS, NUTS, AND BOLT HEADS.


   _____________________________________________________
  |                                                     |
  |                  SCREW THREADS.                     |
  |_____________________________________________________|
  |        |        |                 |         |       |
  | Diam.  |Threads |    Diameter     | Area of | Width |
  |  of    |  per   |   at root of    | Bolt at |  of   |
  | Screw. | inch.  |     Thread.     | root of | Flat. |
  |        |        |                 | Thread. |       |
  |________|________|_________________|_________|_______|
  |        |        |       |         |         |       |
  |   1/4  | 20     |  .185 |   13/64 |    .026 | .0062 |
  |   5/16 | 18     |  .240 |   15/64 |    .045 | .0074 |
  |   3/8  | 16     |  .294 |   19/64 |    .067 | .0078 |
  |   7/16 | 14     |  .344 |   11/32 |    .092 | .0089 |
  |   1/2  | 13     |  .400 |   13/32 |    .125 | .0096 |
  |   9/16 | 12     |  .454 |   29/64 |    .161 | .0104 |
  |   5/8  | 11     |  .507 |   33/64 |    .201 | .0113 |
  |   3/4  | 10     |  .620 |    5/8  |    .301 | .0125 |
  |   7/8  |  9     |  .731 |   47/64 |    .419 | .0138 |
  |        |        |       |         |         |       |
  | 1      |  8     |  .837 |   27/32 |    .550 | .0156 |
  | 1-1/8  |  7     |  .940 |   15/16 |    .693 | .0178 |
  | 1-1/4  |  7     | 1.065 | 1- 1/16 |    .890 | .0178 |
  | 1-3/8  |  6     | 1.160 | 1- 5/32 |   1.056 | .0208 |
  | 1-1/2  |  6     | 1.284 | 1- 9/32 |   1.294 | .0208 |
  | 1-5/8  |  5-1/2 | 1.389 | 1-25/64 |   1.515 | .0227 |
  | 1-3/4  |  5     | 1.491 | 1-31/64 |   1.746 | .0250 |
  | 1-7/8  |  5     | 1.616 | 1-39/64 |   2.051 | .0250 |
  |        |        |       |         |         |       |
  | 2      |  4-1/2 | 1.742 | 1-23/32 |   2.301 | .0277 |
  | 2-1/4  |  4-1/2 | 1.962 | 1-31/32 |   3.023 | .0277 |
  | 2-1/2  |  4     | 2.176 | 2-11/64 |   3.718 | .0312 |
  | 2-3/4  |  4     | 2.426 | 2-27/64 |   4.622 | .0312 |
  |        |        |       |         |         |       |
  | 3      |  3-1/2 | 2.629 | 2- 5/8  |   5.428 | .0357 |
  | 3-1/4  |  3-1/2 | 2.879 | 2- 7/8  |   6.509 | .0357 |
  | 3-1/2  |  3-1/4 | 3.100 | 3- 3/32 |   7.547 | .0384 |
  | 3-3/4  |  3     | 3.317 | 3- 5/16 |   8.614 | .0413 |
  |        |        |       |         |         |       |
  | 4      |  3     | 3.567 | 3- 9/16 |   9.993 | .0413 |
  | 4-1/4  |  2-7/8 | 3.798 | 3-51/64 |  11.329 | .0435 |
  | 4-1/2  |  2-3/4 | 4.028 | 4- 1/32 |  12.742 | .0454 |
  | 4-3/4  |  2-5/8 | 4.256 | 4- 1/4  |  14.226 | .0476 |
  |        |        |       |         |         |       |
  | 5      |  2-1/2 | 4.480 | 4-31/64 |  15.763 | .0500 |
  | 5-1/4  |  2-1/2 | 4.730 | 4-47/64 |  17.570 | .0500 |
  | 5-1/2  |  2-3/8 | 4.953 | 4-61/64 |  19.267 | .0526 |
  | 5-3/4  |  2-3/8 | 5.203 | 5-13/64 |  21.261 | .0526 |
  | 6      |  2-1/4 | 5.423 | 5-27/64 |  23.097 | .0555 |
  |________|________|_________________|_________|_______|
   _____________________________________________________________
  |                                                              |
  |                              NUTS.                           |
  |___________________ __________________________________________|
  |         |          |          |          |         |         |
  | Short   | Short    |  Long    |  Long    | Thick-  | Thick-  |
  | Diam.   | Diam.    |  Diam.   |  Diam.   |  ness   |  ness   |
  | Rough.  | Finish.  |  Rough.  |  Rough.  | Rough.  | Finish. |
  |         |          |          |          |         |         |
  | (Hex.)  | (Hex.)   |  (Hex.)  | (Square) |         |         |
  |_________|_________ |__________|__________|_________|_________|
  |         |          |          |          |         |         |
  |    1/2  |    7/16  |    37/64 |     7/10 |    1/4  |    3/16 |
  |   19/32 |   17/32  |    11/16 |    10/12 |    5/16 |    1/4  |
  |   11/16 |    5/8   |    51/64 |    63/64 |    3/8  |    5/16 |
  |   25/32 |   23/33  |     9/10 |  1- 7/64 |    7/16 |    3/8  |
  |    7/8  |   13/16  |  1       |  1-15/64 |    1/2  |    7/16 |
  |   31/32 |   29/32  |  1- 1/8  |  1-23/64 |    9/16 |    1/2  |
  |  1-1/16 |  1       |  1- 7/32 |  1- 1/2  |    5/8  |    9/16 |
  |  1-1/4  |  1-3/16  |  1- 7/16 |  1-49/64 |    3/4  |   11/16 |
  |  1-7/16 |  1-3/8   |  1-21/32 |  2- 1/32 |    7/8  |   13/16 |
  |         |          |          |          |         |         |
  |  1- 5/8 |  1-9/16  |  1- 7/8  |  2-19/64 |  1      |   15/16 |
  |  1-13/16|  1- 3/4  |  2- 5/32 |  2- 9/16 |  1-1/8  | 1- 1/16 |
  |  2      |  1-15/16 |  2- 5/16 |  2-53/64 |  1-1/4  | 1- 3/16 |
  |  2- 3/16|  2- 1/8  |  2-17/32 |  3- 3/32 |  1-3/8  | 1- 5/16 |
  |  2- 3/8 |  2- 5/16 |  2- 3/4  |  3-23/64 |  1-1/2  | 1- 7/16 |
  |  2- 9/16|  2- 1/2  |  2-31/32 |  3- 5/8  |  1-5/8  | 1- 9/16 |
  |  2- 3/4 |  2-11/16 |  3- 3/16 |  3-57/64 |  1-3/4  | 1-11/16 |
  |  2-15/16|  2- 7/8  |  3-13/32 |  4- 5/32 |  1-7/8  | 1-13/16 |
  |         |          |          |          |         |         |
  |  3-1/8  |  3- 1/16 |  3- 5/8  |  4-27/64 |  2      | 1-15/16 |
  |  3-1/2  |  3- 7/16 |  4- 1/16 |  4-61/64 |  2-1/4  | 2- 3/16 |
  |  3-7/8  |  3-13/16 |  4- 1/2  |  5-31/64 |  2-1/2  | 2- 7/16 |
  |  4-1/4  |  4- 3/16 |  4-29/32 |  6       |  2-3/4  | 2-11/16 |
  |         |          |          |          |         |         |
  |  4-5/8  |  4- 9/16 |  5- 3/8  |  6-17/32 |  3      | 2-15/16 |
  |  5      |  4-15/16 |  5-13/16 |  7- 1/16 |  3-1/4  | 3- 3/16 |
  |  5-3/8  |  5- 5/16 |  6- 7/32 |  7-39/64 |  3-1/2  | 3- 7/16 |
  |  5-3/4  |  5-11/16 |  6-21/32 |  8- 1/8  |  3-3/4  | 3-11/16 |
  |         |          |          |          |         |         |
  |  6-1/8  |  6- 1/16 |  7- 3/32 |  8-41/64 |  4      | 3-15/16 |
  |  6-1/2  |  6- 7/16 |  7- 9/16 |  9- 3/16 |  4-1/4  | 4- 3/16 |
  |  6-7/8  |  6-13/16 |  7-31/32 |  9- 3/4  |  4-1/2  | 4- 7/16 |
  |  7-1/4  |  7- 3/16 |  8-13/32 | 10- 1/4  |  4-3/4  | 4-11/16 |
  |         |          |          |          |         |         |
  |  7-5/8  |  7- 9/16 |  8-27/32 | 10-49/64 |  5      | 4-15/16 |
  |  8      |  7-15/16 |  9- 9/32 | 11-23/64 |  5-1/4  | 5- 3/16 |
  |  8-3/8  |  8- 5/16 |  9-23/32 | 11- 7/8  |  5-1/2  | 5- 7/16 |
  |  8-3/4  |  8-11/16 | 10- 5/32 | 12- 3/8  |  5-3/4  | 5-11/16 |
  |  9-1/8  |  9- 1/16 | 10-19/32 | 12-15/16 |  6      | 5-15/16 |
  |_________|__________|__________|__________|_________|_________|
   _____________________________________________________________
  |                                                             |
  |                          BOLT HEADS.                        |
  |_____________________________________________________________|
  |         |         |          |          |         |         |
  | Short   | Short   |  Long    |  Long    | Thick-  | Thick-  |
  | Diam.   | Diam.   |  Diam.   |  Diam.   |  ness   |  ness   |
  | Rough.  | Finish. |  Rough.  |  Rough.  | Rough.  | Finish. |
  |         |         |          |          |         |         |
  | (Hex.)  | (Hex.)  |  (Hex.)  | (Square) |         |         |
  |_________|_________|__________|__________|_________|_________|
  |         |         |          |          |         |         |
  |    1/2  |    7/16 |    37/64 |     7/10 |    1/4  |    3/16 |
  |   19/32 |   17/32 |    11/16 |    10/12 |   19/64 |    1/4  |
  |   11/16 |    5/8  |    51/64 |    63/64 |   11/32 |    5/16 |
  |   25/32 |   23/32 |     9/16 |   1-7/64 |   25/64 |    3/8  |
  |    7/8  |   13/16 |  1       |  1-15/64 |    7/16 |    7/16 |
  |   31/32 |   29/32 |  1- 1/8  |  1-23/64 |   31/64 |    1/2  |
  | 1- 1/16 | 1       |  1- 7/32 |  1- 1/2  |   17/32 |    9/16 |
  | 1- 1/4  | 1- 3/16 |  1- 7/16 |  1-49/64 |    5/8  |   11/16 |
  | 1- 7/16 | 1- 3/8  |  1-21/32 |  2- 1/32 |   23/32 |   13/16 |
  |         |         |          |          |         |         |
  | 1- 5/8  | 1- 9/16 |  1- 7/8  |  2-19/64 |   13/16 |   15/16 |
  | 1-13/16 | 1- 3/4  |  2- 5/32 |  2- 7/16 |   29/32 | 1- 1/16 |
  | 2       | 1-15/16 |  2- 5/16 |  2-53/64 | 1       | 1- 3/16 |
  | 2- 3/16 | 2- 1/8  |  2-17/32 |  3- 3/32 | 1- 3/32 | 1- 5/16 |
  | 2- 3/8  | 2- 5/16 |  2- 3/4  |  3-23/64 | 1- 3/16 | 1- 7/16 |
  | 2- 9/16 | 2- 1/2  |  2-31/32 |  3- 5/8  | 1- 9/32 | 1- 9/16 |
  | 2- 3/4  | 2-11/16 |  3- 3/16 |  3-57/64 | 1- 3/8  | 1-11/16 |
  | 2-15/16 | 2- 7/8  |  3-13/32 |  4- 5/32 | 1-15/32 | 1-13/16 |
  |         |         |          |          |         |         |
  | 3- 1/8  | 3- 1/16 |  3- 5/8  |  4-27/64 | 1- 9/16 | 1-15/16 |
  | 3- 1/2  | 3- 7/16 |  4- 1/16 |  4-61/64 | 1- 3/4  | 2- 3/16 |
  | 3- 7/8  | 3-13/16 |  4- 1/2  |  5-31/64 | 1-15/16 | 2- 7/16 |
  | 4- 1/4  | 4- 3/16 |  4-29/32 |  6       | 2- 1/8  | 2-11/16 |
  |         |         |          |          |         |         |
  | 4- 5/8  | 4- 9/16 |  5- 3/8  |  6-17/32 | 2- 5/16 | 2-15/16 |
  | 5       | 4-15/16 |  5-13/16 |  7- 1/16 | 2- 1/2  | 3- 3/16 |
  | 5- 3/8  | 5- 5/16 |  6- 7/32 |  7-39/64 | 2-11/16 | 3- 7/16 |
  | 5- 3/4  | 5-11/16 |  6-21/32 |  8- 1/8  | 2- 7/8  | 3-11/16 |
  |         |         |          |          |         |         |
  | 6- 1/8  | 6- 1/16 |  7- 3/32 |  8-41/64 | 3- 1/16 | 3-15/16 |
  | 6- 1/2  | 6- 7/16 |  7- 9/16 |  9- 3/16 | 3- 1/4  | 4- 3/16 |
  | 6- 7/8  | 6-13/16 |  7-31/32 |  9- 3/4  | 3- 7/16 | 4- 7/16 |
  | 7- 1/4  | 7- 3/16 |  8-13/32 | 10- 1/4  | 3- 5/8  | 4-11/16 |
  |         |         |          |          |         |         |
  | 7- 5/8  | 7- 9/16 |  8-27/32 | 10-49/64 | 3-13/16 | 4-15/16 |
  | 8       | 7-15/16 |  9- 9/32 | 11-23/64 | 4       | 5- 3/16 |
  | 8- 3/8  | 8- 5/16 |  9-23/32 | 11- 7/8  | 4- 3/16 | 5- 7/16 |
  | 8- 3/4  | 8-11/16 | 10- 5/32 | 12- 3/8  | 4- 3/8  | 5-11/16 |
  | 9- 1/8  | 9- 1/16 | 10-19/32 | 12-15/16   4- 9/16 | 5-15/16 |
  |_________|_________|__________|__________|_________|_________|


The dimensions given for diameter at root of threads are also those
for diameter of hole in nuts and diameter of lap drills. All bolts and
studs 3/4 in. diameter and above, screwed into boilers, have 12
threads per inch, sharp thread, a taper of 1/16 in. per 1 inch; tap
drill should be 9/64 in. less than normal diameter of bolts.

The table is based upon the following general formulae for certain
dimensions:

  Short diam. rough nut or head = 11/2 diam. of bolt + 1/8.
       "   finished nut or head = 11/2 diam. of bolt + 1/16.
  Thickness rough nut = diameter of bolt.
  Thickness finished nut = diameter of bolt - 1/16.
  Thickness rough head = 1/2 short diameter.
  Thickness finished head = diameter of bolt - 1/16.

       *       *       *       *       *




AN ENGLISH RAILWAY FERRY BOAT.


[Illustration: AN ENGLISH RAILWAY FERRY BOAT.]

The illustrations above represent a double screw steam ferry boat for
transporting railway carriages, vehicles, and passengers, etc.,
designed and constructed by Messrs. Edwards and Symes, of Cubitt Town,
London. The hull is constructed of iron, and is of the following
dimensions: Length 60 ft.; beam 16 ft.; over sponsons 25 ft. The
vessel was fitted with a propeller, rudder, and steering gear at each
end, to enable it to run in either direction without having to turn
around. The boat was designed for the purpose of working the train
service across the bay of San Juan, in the island of Puerto Rico, and
for this purpose a single line of steel rails, of meter gauge, is laid
along the center of the deck, and also along the hinged platforms at
each end. In the engraving these platforms are shown, one hoisted up,
and the other lowered to the level of the deck. When the boat is at
one of the landing stages, the platform is lowered to the level of the
rails on the pier, and the carriages and trucks are run on to the deck
by means of the small hauling engine, which works an endless chain
running the whole length of the deck. The trucks, etc., being on
board, the platform is raised by means of two compact hand winches
