of the reduction, and the entire furnace made air-tight by luting with
fire clay. Within a few minutes after starting the dynamo, a stream of
carbonic oxide issued through the openings, burning usually with a
flame eighteen inches in height. The time required for complete
reduction was ordinarily about an hour.

The furnace at present in use is charged in substantially the same
manner, and the current is supplied by a Brush machine of variable
electromotive force driven by an equivalent of forty horse power. A
Brush machine capable of utilizing 125 horse power, or two and
one-half times as large as any hitherto constructed by the Brush
Electric Company, is being made for the Cowles Electric Smelting and
Aluminum Company, and this machine will soon be in operation.
Experiments already made so that aluminum, silicon, boron, manganese,
magnesium, sodium and potassium can be reduced from their oxides with
ease. In fact, there is no oxide that can withstand temperatures
attainable in this electrical furnace. Charcoal is changed to
graphite. Does this indicate fusion or solution of carbon? As to what
can be accomplished by converting enormous electrical energy into heat
within a limited space, it can only be said that it opens the way into
an extensive field for both pure and applied chemistry. It is not
difficult to conceive of temperatures limited only by the capability
of carbon to resist fusion. The results to be obtained with the large
Brush machine above mentioned will be of some importance in this
direction.

Since the cost of the motive power is the chief expense in
accomplishing reductions by this method, its commercial success is
closely connected with the cheapest form of power to be obtained.
Realizing the importance of this point, the Cowles Electric Smelting
and Aluminum Company has purchased an extensive and reliable water
power, and works are soon to be erected for the utilization of 1,200
horse power. An important feature in the use of these furnaces, from a
commercial standpoint, is the slight technical skill required in their
manipulation. The four furnaces in operation in the experimental
laboratory at Cleveland are in charge of two young men twenty years of
age, who, six months ago, knew absolutely nothing of electricity. The
products at present manufactured are the various grades of aluminum
bronze made from a rich furnace product that is obtained by adding
copper to the charge of ore, silicon bronze prepared in the same
manner, and aluminum silver, an alloy of aluminum with several other
metals. A boron bronze may be prepared by the reduction of boracic
acid in contact with copper.

As commercial results may be mentioned the production in the
experimental laboratory, which averages fifty pounds of 10 per cent.
aluminum bronze daily, and it can be supplied to the trade in large
quantities at prices based on $5 per pound for the aluminum contained,
the lowest market quotation of this metal being at present $15 per
pound. Silicon bronze can be furnished at prices far below those of
the French manufacturers.

The alloys which the metals obtained by the methods above described
form with copper have been made the subject of careful study. An alloy
containing 10 per cent. of aluminum and 90 per cent. of copper forms
the so-called aluminum bronze with a fine golden color, which it
retains for a long time. The tensile strength of this alloy is usually
given as 100,000 pounds to the square inch; but castings of our ten
per cent. bronze have stood a strain of 109,000 pounds. It is a very
hard, tough alloy, with a capacity to withstand wear far in excess of
any other alloy in use. All grades of aluminum bronze make fine
castings, taking very exact impressions, and there is no loss in
remelting, as in the case of alloys containing zinc. The 5 per cent.
aluminum alloy is a close approximation in color to 18 carat gold, and
does not tarnish readily. Its tensile strength in the form of castings
is equivalent to a strain of 68,000 pounds to the square inch. An
alloy containing 2 or 3 per cent. aluminum is stronger than brass,
possesses greater permanency of color, and would make an excellent
substitute for that metal. When the percentage of aluminum reaches 13,
an exceedingly hard, brittle alloy of a reddish color is obtained, and
higher percentages increase the brittleness, and the color becomes
grayish-black. Above 25 per cent. the strength again increases.

The effect of silicon in small proportions upon copper is to greatly
increase its tensile strength. When more than 5 per cent. is present,
the product is exceedingly brittle and grayish-black in color. It is
probable that silicon acts to a certain extent as a fluxing material
upon the oxides present in the copper, thereby making the metal more
homogeneous. On account of its superior strength and high conductivity
for electrical currents, silicon bronze is the best material known for
telegraph and telephone wire.

The element boron seems to have almost as marked an effect upon copper
as carbon does upon iron. A small percentage in copper increases its
strength to 50,000 or 60,000 pounds per square inch without
diminishing to any large extent its conductivity.

Aluminum increases very considerably the strength of all metals with
which it is alloyed. An alloy of copper and nickel containing a small
percentage of aluminum, called Hercules metal, withstood a strain of
105,000 pounds, and broke without elongation. Another grade of this
metal broke under a strain of 111,000 pounds, with an elongation
equivalent to 33 per cent. It must be remembered that these tests were
all made upon castings of the alloys. The strength of common brass is
doubled by the addition of 2 or 3 per cent. of aluminum. Alloys of
aluminum and iron are obtained without difficulty; one product was
analyzed, containing 40 per cent. of aluminum. In the furnace iron
does not seem to be absorbed readily by the reduced aluminum when
copper is present; but in one experiment a mixture composed of old
files, 60 per cent.; nickel, 5 per cent.; and of 10 per cent. aluminum
bronze 35 per cent., was melted together, and it gave a malleable
product that stood a strain of 69,000 pounds.

When the reduction of aluminic oxide by carbon is conducted without
the addition of copper, a brittle product is obtained that behaves in
many respects like pig iron as it comes from the blast furnace. The
same product is formed in considerable quantities, even when copper is
present, and frequently the copper alloy is found embedded in it.
Graphite is always found associated with it, even when charcoal is the
reducing material, and analysis invariably shows a very high
percentage of metallic aluminum. This extremely interesting substance
is at present under examination.

       *       *       *       *       *




THE COWLES ELECTRIC SMELTING PROCESS.


The use of electricity in the reduction of metals from their ores is
extending so rapidly, and the methods of its generation and
application have been so greatly improved within a few years, that the
possibility of its becoming the chief agent in the metallurgy of the
future may now be admitted, even in cases where the present cost of
treatment is too high to be commercially advantageous.

The refining of copper and the separation of copper, gold, and silver
by electrolysis have thus far attracted the greatest amount of
attention, but a commercial success has also been achieved in the dry
reduction by electricity of some of the more valuable metals by the
Cowles Electric Smelting and Aluminum Company, of Cleveland, Ohio.
Both this method of manufacture and the qualities of the products are
so interesting and important that it is with pleasure we call
attention to them as steps toward that large and cheap production of
aluminum that the abundance of its ores and the importance of its
physical properties have for several years made the unattained goal of
many skillful metallurgists.

The Messrs. Cowles have succeeded in greatly reducing the market value
of aluminum and its alloys, and thereby vastly extending its uses, and
they are now by far the largest producers in the world of these
important products. As described in their patents, the Cowles process
consists essentially in the use for metallurgical purposes of a body
of granular material of high resistance or low conductivity interposed
within the circuit in such a manner as to form a continuous and
unbroken part of the same, which granular body, by reason of its
resistance, is made incandescent, and generates all the heat required.
The ore or light material to be reduced--as, for example, the hydrated
oxide of aluminum, alum, chloride of sodium, oxide of calcium, or
sulphate of strontium--is usually mixed with the body of granular
resistance material, and is thus brought directly in contact with the
heat at the points of generation, at the same time the heat is
distributed through the mass of granular material, being generated by
the resistance of all the granules, and is not localized at one point
or along a single line. The material best adapted for this purpose is
electric light carbon, as it possesses the necessary amount of
electrical resistance, and is capable of enduring any known degree of
heat when protected from oxygen without disintegrating or fusing; but
crystalline silicon or other equivalent of carbon can be employed for
the same purpose. This is pulverized or granulated, the degree of
granulation depending upon the size of the furnace. Coarse granulated
carbon works better than finely pulverized carbon, and gives more even
results. The electrical energy is more evenly distributed, and the
current can not so readily form a path of highest temperature, and
consequently of least resistance through the mass along which the
entire current or the bulk of the current can pass. The operation must
necessarily be conducted within an air-tight chamber or in a
non-oxidizing atmosphere, as otherwise the carbon will be consumed and
act as fuel. The carbon acts as a deoxidizing agent for the ore or
metalliferous material treated, and to this extent it is consumed, but
otherwise than from this cause, it remains unimpaired.

Fig. I. of the accompanying drawings is a vertical longitudinal
section through a retort designed for the reduction of zinc ore,
according to this process, and Fig. II. is a front elevation of the
same. Fig. III. is a perspective view of a furnace adapted to
withstand a very high temperature, and Figs. IV. and V. are
respectively longitudinal and transverse sections of the same.

[Illustration: THE COWLES ELECTRIC SMELTING PROCESS.]

This retort consists of a cylinder, A, made of silica or other
non-conducting material, suitably embedded in a body, B, of powdered
charcoal, mineral wool, or of some other material which is not a good
conductor of heat. The rear end of the retort-cylinder is closed by
means of a carbon plate, C, which plate forms the positive electrode,
and with this plate the positive wire of the electric circuit is
connected. The outer end of the retort is closed by means of an
inverted graphite crucible, D, to which the negative wire of the
electric circuit is attached. The graphite crucible serves as a plug
for closing the end of the retort. It also forms a condensing chamber
for the zinc fumes, and it also constitutes the negative electrode.
The term "electrode" is used in this case as designating the terminals
of the circuit proper, or that portion of it which acts simply as an
electrical conductor, and not with the intention of indicating the
ends of a line between which there is no circuit connection. The
circuit between the "electrodes," so called, is continuous, being
established by means of and through the body of broken carbon
contained in the retort, A. There is no deposit made on either plate
of the decomposed constituents of the material reduced. The mouth of
the crucible is closed with a luting of clay, or otherwise, and the
opening, _d_, made in the upper side of the crucible, near its
extremity, comes entirely within the retort, and forms a passage for
the zinc fumes from the retort chamber into the condensing chamber.
The pipe, E, serves as a vent for the condensing chamber. The zinc ore
is mixed with pulverized or granular carbon, and the retort charged
nearly full through the front end with the mixture, the plug, D, being
removed for this purpose.

A small space is left at the top, as shown. After the plug has been
inserted and the joint properly luted, the electric circuit is closed
and the current allowed to pass through the retort, traversing its
entire length through the body of mixed ore and carbon. The carbon
constituents of the mass become incandescent, generating a very high
degree of heat, and being in direct contact with the ore, the latter
is rapidly and effectually reduced and distilled. The heat evolved
reduces the ore and distills the zinc, and the zinc fumes are
condensed in the condensing chamber, precisely as in the present
method of zinc making, with this important exception that, aside from
the reaction produced by heating carbon in the presence of zinc oxide,
the electric current, in passing through the zinc oxide, has a
decomposing and disintegrating action upon it, not unlike the effect
produced by an electric current in a solution. This action accelerates
the reduction, and promotes economy in the process.

Another form of furnace is illustrated by Fig. III., which is a
perspective view of a furnace adapted for the reduction of ores and
salts of non-volatile metals and similar chemical compounds. Figs. IV.
and V. are longitudinal and transverse sections, respectively, through
the same, illustrating the manner of packing and charging the furnace.

The walls and floors L L', of the furnace are made of fire bricks, and
do not necessarily have to be very thick or strong, the heat to which
they are subjected not being excessive. The carbon plates are smaller
than the cross section of the box, as shown, and the spaces between
them and the end walls are packed with fine charcoal.

The furnace is covered with a removable slab of fireclay, N, which is
provided with one or more vents, _n_, for the escaping gases.

The space between the carbon plates constitutes the working part of
the furnace. This is lined on the bottom and sides with a packing of
fine charcoal, O, or such other material as is both a poor conductor
of heat and electricity--as, for example, in some cases, silica or
pulverized corundum or well-burned lime--and the charge, P, of ore and
broken, granular, or pulverized carbon occupies the center of the box,
extending between the carbon plates. A layer of granular charcoal, O',
also covers the charge on top. The protection afforded by the charcoal
jacket, as regards the heat, is so complete, that with the
covering-slab removed, the hand can be held within a few inches of the
exposed charcoal jacket; but with the top covering of charcoal also
removed and the core exposed, the hand cannot be held within several
feet. The charcoal packing behind the carbon plates is required to
confine the heat and to protect them from combustion.

With this furnace, aluminum can be reduced directly from its ores; and
chemical compounds from corundum, cryolite, clay, etc., and silicon,
boron, calcium, manganese, magnesium, and other metals are in like
manner obtained from their ores and compounds. The reduction of ores
according to this process can be practiced, if circumstances require
it, without any built furnace.

At present, the Cowles company is engaged mostly in the producing of
aluminum bronze and aluminum silver and silicon bronze. The plant,
were it run to its full capacity, is capable of turning out eighty
pounds of aluminum bronze, containing 10 per cent. of aluminum daily;
or, were it to run upon silicon bronze, could turn out one hundred and
twenty pounds of that per day, or, we believe, more aluminum bronze
daily than can be produced by all other plants in the world combined.
This production, however, is but that of the experimental laboratory,
and arrangements are making to turn out a ton of bronze daily, and the
works have an ultimate capacity of from eight to ten thousand horse
power. The energy consumed by the reduction of the ore is almost
entirely electrical, only enough carbon being used to unite with the
oxygen of the ore to carry it out of the furnace in the form of the
carbon monoxide, the aluminum remaining behind. Consequently, the
plant necessary to produce aluminum on a large scale involves a large
number of the most powerful dynamos. These are to be driven by
water-power or natural gas and marine engines of great capacity.

The retail price of standard 10 per cent. aluminum bronze is $1 per
pound avoirdupois, which means less than $9 per pound for aluminum,
the lowest price at which it has ever been sold, yet the Cowles
company has laid a proposition before the Government to furnish this
same bronze in large quantities at very much lower prices than this.
The Hercules alloy, castings of which will stand over 100,000 pounds
to the square inch tensile strain, sells at 75 c. a pound, and is also
offered the Government or other large consumers at a heavy discount.
The alloys are guaranteed to contain exactly what is advertised; they
are standardized into 10 per cent., 7.5 per cent., 5 per cent. and 2.5
per cent. aluminum bronze before shipment.

The current available at the Cowles company's works was, until
recently, 330 amperes, driven by an electromotive force of 110 volts
and supplied by two Edison dynamos; but the company has now added a
large Brush machine that has a current of 560 amperes and 52 volts
electromotive force. We shall, on another occasion, give some
particulars of experiments in the reduction of refractory ores by the
process.--_Eng. and Mining Jour._

       *       *       *       *       *




OPTICAL TELEGRAPHY.[1]

   [Footnote 1: Continued from page 8094.]


CRYPTOGRAPHY.--PRESERVATION OF TELEGRAMS.

Optical telegraphy, by reason of its very principle, presents both the
advantage and inconvenience of leaving no automatic trace of the
correspondence that it transmits. The advantage is very evident in
cases in which an optical station falls into the hands of the enemy;
on the other hand, the inconvenience is shown in cases where a badly
transmitted or badly collated telegram allows an ambiguity to stand
subject to dispute. Moreover, in case of warfare between civilized
nations that have all the resources of science at their disposal,
there may be reason to fear lest one of the enemy's optical stations
substitute itself for the corresponding station, and take advantage of
the situation to throw confusion into the orders transmitted. The
remedy for this appears to reside in the use of cryptography and in
the exchange, at various intervals, of certain words that have been
agreed upon beforehand, and that the enemy is ignorant of.

As for the automatic preservation of telegrams, the problem has not
been satisfactorily solved. It has been proposed to connect the key of
the manipulator of the optical apparatus with the manipulator of an
ordinary Morse apparatus, thus permitting the telegram to be preserved
upon a band of paper. It is unnecessary to say that the space occupied
by a dispatch thus transmitted would be considerable; but this is not
what has stopped innovators. The principal objection resides in the
increase in muscular work imposed by this arrangement upon the
telegrapher. Obliged to keep his eye fixed intently at the receiving
telescope, while at the same time maneuvering the manipulator and
spelling aloud the words that he is receiving, the operator should
have a very sensitive manipulator at his disposal, and not be
submitted to mental or physical overtaxation. So the apparatus that
have been devised have not met with much success.

Two French officers, working independently, have hit upon the same
idea of receiving the indications transmitted by the vibration of the
luminous fascicle directly upon their travel. The method consists in
the use of that peculiar property of selenium of becoming a good
conductor under the action of a luminous ray, while in darkness it
totally prevents the passage of the electric current. Such
modification of the physical properties of selenium, moreover, occurs
without the perceptible development of any mechanical work. If, then,
in the line of travel of the luminous fascicle emitted by the optical
apparatus, or in a portion of such fascicle, we interpose a fragment
of selenium connected with the two poles of a local pile, it is easy
to see that the current from the latter will be opened or closed
according as the luminous ray from the apparatus will or will not
strike the selenium, and that the length of time during which the
current passes will depend upon the length of the luminous attacks. A
Morse apparatus interposed in this annexed circuit will therefore give
an automatic inscription of the correspondence exchanged. Such is the
principle. But, practically, very great difficulties present
themselves, these being connected with the rapid weakening of the
electric properties of the selenium, and with the necessity of having
recourse to infinitely small mechanical actions only. The problem is
nevertheless before us, and it is to be hoped that the perseverance of
the scientists who are at work upon it will some day succeed in
solving it.

Finally, we may call attention to the attempts made to receive the
luminous impression upon a band prepared with gelatino-bromide of
silver. In practice this band would unwind uniformly at the focus of
the receiving telescope, which would be placed in a box, forming a
camera obscura. The velocity of this band prepared for photographing
the signals would be regulated by clockwork. The experiments that have
been made have not given results that are absolutely satisfactory, by
reason of the length of the signals received and the mechanical
complication of the device.


OPTICAL TELEGRAPHY BY MEANS OF PROJECTORS.

[Illustration: FIG. 23.]

The projectors employed for lighting to a distance the surroundings of
a stronghold or of a ship have likewise been applied in optical
telegraphy. For this purpose Messrs. Sautter, Lemonnier & Co. have
added to their usual projecting apparatus some peculiar arrangements
that permit of occultations of the luminous focus at proper intervals.
Figs. 21 and 22 show the arrangement of the apparatus, the principle
of which is as follows: When the axis of the projector points toward
the clouds, and in the direction occupied by a corresponding station,
the occultations of the luminous source placed in the focus of the
apparatus produce upon the clouds, which act as a screen, an alternate
series of flashes and extinctions. It is therefore possible with this
arrangement, and by the use of the Morse alphabet, to establish an
optical communication at a distance. The use of this projector (the
principal inconvenience of which is that it requires a clouded sky)
even permits two observers who are hidden from each other by the
nature of the ground to easily communicate at a distance of 36 or 48
miles.


USE OF THE PROJECTOR IN OPTICAL TELEGRAPHY.

[Illustration: FIGS. 21 AND 22.--FRONT VIEW AND LONGITUDINAL SECTION
OF THE MANGIN PROJECTOR.

(Scale 1/15). A. Elliptical mirror. B. Arm of the same. C. Nut for
fixing the mirror. D. Support of the mirror. E. Occultator. F. Support
for same. G. Lever for maneuvering the occultator. I. Support of the
occultator rod. J. Screw for fixing the mirror support. K. Screw for
fixing the support of the occultator rod. L. Screw for fixing the
occultator support.]

The apparatus shown in Figs. 21 and 22 permits of signaling in three
ways:

1. _Upon the Clouds._--In this case the mirror, A, is removed, and the
projector inclined above the horizon in such a way as to illuminate
the clouds to as great a distance as possible. A maneuver of the
occultator, E, between the lamp and the mirror arrests the luminous
rays of the source, or allows them to pass, and thus produces upon the
clouds the dots and dashes of the conventional alphabet.

2. _Isolated Communication by Luminous Fascicles._--When it is desired
to correspond to a short distance of 2 or 3 miles, and establish a
communication between two isolated posts, the mirror, A, is put in
place upon its support, B. The luminous fascicle emanating from the
source reflected by the mirror is thrown vertically. By revolving the
mirror 90 deg. around its horizontal axis the fascicle becomes horizontal,
and may thus be thrown in a given direction at unequal intervals and
during irregular times, and furnish conventional signs.

3. _Night Communication upon the Entire Horizon._--When we wish to
correspond at a short distance, say two miles, and make signals
visible from the entire horizon, the mirror, A, is put in place, so
that it shall reflect the luminous fascicle vertically. The fascicle,
at a distance of about fifty feet, meets a white balloon which it
renders visible from every point in the horizon. The maneuver of the
occultator brings the balloon out of darkness or plunges it thereinto
again, and thus produces the signs necessary for aerial communication.

[Illustration: FIG. 24.]

These ingenious arrangements, which depend upon the state of the
atmosphere, do not appear to have been imitated outside of the navy.


CAPT. GAUMET'S OPTICAL TELEGRAPH.
