23.9 per cent.; for the Warren oil, 26.5 per cent.; for the Washington
oil, 26.6 per cent.; and for the Middle District oil, 28.2 per cent.

The question now arises, What value has this determination of the
proto-paraffine which may exist in an oil? As before said, a portion
of the paraffine is always decomposed in distillation at temperatures
sufficiently high to drive over the paraffine oils, so the yield of
pyro-paraffine is always less than the proto-paraffine shown to be
present originally. Zaloziecki found this in the case of the several
Galician oils he examined. Corresponding to the 4.6, 5.8 and 6.5 per
cent. of proto-paraffine in the several oils he obtained 2.18, 2.65
and 2.35 per cent., respectively, of pyro-paraffine.

For the present, however, the extraction of proto-paraffine on a large
scale by means of such solvents as amyl and ethyl alcohols is out of
the question on account of their cost. A distillation, under reduced
pressure and with superheated steam, would, however, prevent much of
the decomposition of the original proto-paraffine and increase the
yield of pyro-paraffine.

This study of Zaloziecki's method and the examination of American oils
was suggested by Professor Sadtler and carried out in his laboratory.

       *       *       *       *       *




TRANSMISSION OF PRESSURE IN FLUIDS.

By ALBERT B. PORTER.


The young student of physics occasionally has difficulty in grasping
the laws of pressure in fluids. His every day experience has taught
him that a push against a solid body causes it to push in the same
direction, and he often receives with some doubt the statement that
pressure applied to a fluid is transmitted equally in every direction.
The experiments ordinarily shown in illustration of this principle
prove that pressure is transmitted in all directions, but do not prove
the equality of transmission, and in spite of all the text books may
tell him, the student is apt to cling to the idea that a downward
pressure applied to a liquid is more apt to burst the bottom than the
side of the containing vessel.

[Illustration: Figs. 1. and 2.]

The little piece of apparatus shown in Fig. 1 was designed to furnish
a clear demonstration of the principle under consideration. It is
essentially an arrangement by which a downward pressure is applied to
a confined mass of air or water, and the resultant pressures measured
in the three directions, down, up, and sideways. By means of a broken
rat tail file kept wet with turpentine three holes are bored through a
bottle, one through the bottom, one through the side, and one through
the shoulder, as near the neck as may be convenient. The operation is
quick and easy, the only precaution to be observed being to work very
slowly and use but a slight pressure when the glass is nearly
perforated. The holes may be enlarged to any size required by careful
filing with the wet file. From each of the holes a rubber tube leads
to one of the glass manometer tubes at the right in the figure, the
joints being made air tight by slipping into each rubber tube a piece
of glass tubing about half an inch long in order to swell it to the
size of the hole it is to fit. The ends of these glass tubes must be
well rounded by partial fusion in a gas flame, that there may be no
sharp edges to cut the rubber. The bottle rests in a depression in the
turned wood base, the lower rubber tube passing out through a hole in
the wood. Fig. 2 shows the shape of the manometer tubes. They are made
of quarter inch glass tubing bent to shape in a flame and left open at
both ends. They are mounted on a scale board which has several
equidistant horizontal lines running across it. The two bent wires
which support the scale board fit loosely in holes in it and in the
base. This method of mounting is very handy, since it permits the
scale board to be swung to right or left as may be convenient, or
turned round so as to show the fittings on its back, without moving
the bottle. The three manometers are filled to the same level with
mercury, the quantity being adjusted by means of a pipette. A
perforated rubber stopper, fitted with a glass tube on which is
slipped a rubber syringe bulb, completes the apparatus.

When the bulb is pinched between the fingers, the mercury is forced up
to the same height in each of the manometers, thus proving that the
pressure is exerted equally in the three directions, up, down, and
sideways. With the bottle filled with water the same effect follows,
the law being the same for liquids and gases. When using water in the
apparatus it is essential that the rubber tubes, as well as the
bottle, be filled, and when used in the class room it is better to
show the experiment with water first, it being easier and quicker to
empty the bottle and tubes than to fill them.

       *       *       *       *       *




PEAR DUCHESSE D'ANGOULEME.


Although well known to fruit growers and generally represented in all
parts of Britain, this noble French pear has not become a universal
favorite. If the quality of the fruit, independently of its fine,
handsome appearance, was bad, or even indifferent, it might be
exterminated from our lists, but this we know is not the case, as any
one who has tasted good samples grown in France, the Channel Islands,
and upon favorable soils in this country will bear out the statement
that the flavor is superb. Some fruits, we know, are quite incapable
of being good, as they have no quality in them; but here we have one
of the hardiest of trees, capable of giving us quantity as well as
quality, provided we cultivate properly. Pears, no doubt, are
capricious, like our seasons, but given a good average year, soils and
stocks which suit them, a light, warm, airy aspect, and good culture,
a great number of varieties formerly only good enough for stewing are
now elevated, and most deservedly so, to the dessert table. But,
assuming that some sorts known to be good do not reach their highest
standard of excellence every year, they are infinitely superior to
many of the old stewers, as they carry their own sugar, a quality
which fits them for consumption by the most delicate invalids. Indeed,
so prominently have choice dessert pears, and apples too for that
matter, come to the front for cooking purposes, that a new demand is
now established, and although Duchesse d'Angouleme, always juicy and
sweet, from bad situations does not always come up to the fine quality
met within Covent Garden in November, it is worthy of our skill, as we
know it has all the good points of a first rate pear when properly
ripened.

The original tree of this pear was observed by M. Anne Pierre
Andusson, a nurseryman at Angers, growing in a farm garden near
Champigne, in Anjou, and having procured grafts of it, he sold the
trees, in 1812, under the name of Poire des Eparannais. In 1820, he
sent a basket of the fruit to the Duchesse d'Angouleme, with a request
to be permitted to name the pear in honor of her. The request was
granted, and the pear has since borne its present name.

That such a fine pear, which does so well in France, would soon find
its way to England there exists little doubt, as we find that within a
few years it became established and well known throughout the United
Kingdom. All the earliest trees would be worked upon the pear or free
stock, and as root pruning until recently was but little practiced, we
may reasonably suppose that the majority of them are deeply anchored
in clay, marl, and other subsoils calculated to force a crude, gross
growth from which high flavored fruit could not be expected. These
defects under modern culture upon the quince and double grafting are
giving way, as we find, on reference to the report of the committee of
the pear conference, held at Chiswick in 1885, that twenty counties in
England, also Scotland, Ireland, and Wales, contributed no less than
121 dishes to the tables, and thirty-eight growers voted in favor of
the Duchesse being recognized as one of our standard dessert
varieties. This step looks like progress, as it is a record of facts
which cannot be gainsaid, and it now remains to be seen whether the
English grower, whose indomitable will has brought him to the front in
the subjugation of other fruits, will be successful with the fine
Duchesse d'Angouleme. Although this remarkable pear cannot easily be
mistaken, for the benefit of those who do not know it, the following
description may not be out of place. Fruit large, often very large, 31/2
inches wide and 3 inches to 4 inches high, roundish obovate, uneven,
and bossed in its outline. Skin greenish yellow, changing to pale dull
yellow, covered with veins and freckles of pale brown russet, and when
grown against a south wall it acquires a brown cheek. Eye open, with
erect dry segments, set in a deep irregular basin. Stalk 1 inch long,
inserted in a deep irregular cavity. Flesh white, buttery, and
melting, with a rich flavor when well ripened; otherwise rather coarse
grained and gritty.

As to culture, experienced fruitists say the tree grows vigorously and
well. It bears abundantly, and succeeds either on the pear or quince
stock, forming handsome pyramids, but is better on the quince. Here,
then, we have the key to the secret of success: The cordon on the
quince; roots near the surface; loam, sound, sandy, and good; and good
feeding. Aspect, a good wall facing south or west--the latter,
perhaps, the best. Those who have not already done so, should try
trees on the quince as pyramids and bushes, as this, like some other
capricious pears, although the fruit be smaller, may put in better
flavor than is met with in fruit from hot walls.--_The Garden._

       *       *       *       *       *




SUCCESSION OF FOREST GROWTHS.


The following is from an address delivered by Mr. Robert Douglas
before the Association of American Nurserymen at the meeting in
Chicago recently.

It is the prevailing and almost universal belief that when native
forests are destroyed they will be replaced by other kinds, for the
simple reason that the soil has been impoverished of the constituents
required for the growth of that particular tree or trees. This I
believe to be one of the fallacies handed down from past ages, taken
for granted, and never questioned. Nowhere does the English oak grow
better than where it grew when William the Conqueror found it at the
time he invaded Britain. Where do you find white pines growing better
than in parts of New England where this tree has grown from time
immemorial? Where can you find young redwoods growing more thriftily
than among their giant ancestors, nearly or quite as old as the
Christian era?

The question why the original growth is not reproduced can best be
answered by some illustrations. When a pine forest is burned over,
both trees and seeds are destroyed, and as the burned trees cannot
sprout from the stump like oaks and many other trees, the land is left
in a condition well suited for the germination of tree seeds, but
there are no seeds to germinate. It is an open field for pioneers to
enter, and the seeds which arrive there first have the right of
possession. The aspen poplar (_Populus tremuloides_) has the advantage
over all other trees. It is a native of all our northern forests, from
the Atlantic to the Pacific. Even fires cannot eradicate it, as it
grows in moist as well as dry places, and sprouts from any part of the
root. It is a short-lived tree, consequently it seeds when quite young
and seeds abundantly; the seeds are light, almost infinitesimal, and
are carried on wings of down. Its seeds ripen in spring, and are
carried to great distances at the very time when the ground is in the
best condition for them. Even on the dry mountain sides in Colorado,
the snows are just melting and the ground is moist where they fall.

To grow this tree from seed would require the greatest skill of the
nurseryman, but the burnt land is its paradise. Wherever you see it on
high, dry land you may rest assured that a fire has been there. On
land slides you will not find its seeds germinating, although they
have been deposited there as abundantly as on the burned land.

Next to the aspen and poplars comes the canoe birch, and further north
the yellow birch, and such other trees as have provision for
scattering their seeds. I have seen acorns and nuts germinating in
clusters on burned lands in a few instances. They had evidently been
buried there by animals and had escaped the fires. I have seen the red
cherry (_Prunus Pennsylvanica_) coming up in great quantities where
they might never have germinated had not the fires destroyed the
debris which covered the seed too deeply.

A careful examination around the margin of a burned forest will show
the trees of surrounding kinds working in again. Thus by the time the
short-lived aspens (and they are very short-lived on high land) have
made a covering on the burned land, the surrounding kinds will be
found re-established in the new forest, the seeds of the conifers,
carried in by the winds, the berries by the birds, the nuts and acorns
by the squirrels, the mixture varying more or less from the kinds
which grew there before the fire.

It is wonderful how far the seeds of berries are carried by birds. The
waxwings and cedar birds carry seeds of our tartarean honeysuckles,
purple barberries and many other kinds four miles distant, where we
see them spring up on the lake shore, where these birds fly in flocks
to feed on the juniper berries. It seems to be the same everywhere. I
found European mountain ash trees last summer in a forest in New
Hampshire; the seed must have been carried over two miles as the crow
flies.

While this alternation is going on in the East, and may have been
going on for thousands of years, the Rocky Mountain district is not so
fortunate. When a forest is burned down in that dry region, it is
doubtful if coniferous trees will ever grow again, except in some
localities specially favored. I have seen localities where short-lived
trees were dying out and no others taking their places. Such spots
will hereafter take their places above the timber line, which seems to
me to be a line governed by circumstances more than by altitude or
quality of soil.

There are a few exceptions where pines will succeed pines in a
burned-down forest. _Pinus Murrayana_ grows up near the timber line in
the Rocky Mountains. This tree has persistent cones which adhere to
the trees for many years. I have counted the cones of sixteen years on
one of these trees, and examined burned forests of this species, where
many of the cones had apparently been bedded in the earth as the trees
fell. The heat had opened the cones and the seedlings were growing up
in myriads; but not a conifer of any other kind could be seen as far
as the fire had reached.

In the Michigan Peninsula, northern Wisconsin and Minnesota, _P.
Banksiana_, a comparatively worthless tree, is replacing the valuable
red pine (_P. resinosa_), and in the Sierras _P. Murrayana_ and _P.
tuberculata_ are replacing the more valuable species by the same
process.

In this case, also, the worthless trees are the shortest lived. So we
see that nature is doing all that she can to remedy the evil. Man only
is reckless, and especially the American man. The Mexican will cut
large limbs off his trees for fuel, but will spare the tree. Even the
poor Indian, when at the starvation point, stripping the bark from the
yellow pine (_P. ponderosa_), for the mucilaginous matter being formed
into sap wood, will never take a strip wider than one third the
circumference of the tree, so that its growth may not be injured.

We often read that oaks are springing up in destroyed forests where
oaks had never grown before. The writers are no doubt sincere, but
they are careless. The only pine forests where oaks are not intermixed
are either in land so sandy that oaks cannot be made to grow on them
at all, or so far north that they are beyond their northern limit. In
the Green Mountains and in the New England forests, in the pine
forests in Pennsylvania, in the Adirondacks, in Wisconsin and
Michigan--except in sand--I have found oaks mixed with the pines and
spruces. In northwestern Minnesota and in northern Dakota the oaks are
near their northern limit, but even there the burr oak drags on a bare
existence among the pines and spruces. In the Black Hills, in Dakota,
poor, forlorn, scrubby burr oaks are scattered through the hills among
the yellow pines. In Colorado we find them as shrubs among the pines
and Douglas spruces. In New Mexico we find them scattered among the
pinons. In Arizona they grow like hazel bushes among the yellow pines.
On the Sierra Nevada the oak region crosses the pine region, and
scattering oaks reach far up into the mountains. Yet oaks will not
flourish between the one hundredth meridian and the eastern base of
the Sierras, owing to the aridity of the climate. I recently found
oaks scattered among the redwoods on both sides of the Coast Range
Mountains.

Darwin has truly said, "The oaks are driving the pines to the sands."
Wherever the oak is established--and we have seen that it is already
established whereever it can endure the soil and climate--there it
will remain and keep on advancing. The oak produces comparatively few
seeds. Where it produces a hundred, the ash and maple will yield a
thousand, the elm ten thousand, and many other trees a hundred
thousand. The acorn has no provision for protection and transportation
like many tree seeds. Many kinds are furnished with wings to float
them on the water and carry them in the air. Nearly every tree seed,
except the acorn, has a case to protect it while growing, either
opening and casting the seeds off to a distance when ripe or falling
with them to protect them till they begin to germinate. Even the
equally large seeds of other kinds are protected in some way. The
hickory nut has a hard shell, which shell itself is protected by a
strong covering until ripe. The black walnut has both a hard shell and
a fleshy covering. The acorn is the only seed I can think of which is
left by nature to take care of itself. It matures without protection,
falls heavily and helplessly to the ground, to be eaten and trodden on
by animals, yet the few which escape and those which are trodden under
are well able to compete in the race for life. While the elm and maple
seeds are drying up on the surface, the hickories and the walnuts
waiting to be cracked, the acorn is at work with its coat off. It
drives its tap root into the earth in spite of grass, and brush, and
litter. No matter if it is shaded by forest trees so that the sun
cannot penetrate, it will manage to make a short stem and a few leaves
the first season, enough to keep life in the root, which will drill in
deeper and deeper. When age or accident removes the tree which has
overshadowed it, then it will assert itself. Fires may run over the
land, destroying almost everything else, the oak will be killed to the
ground, but it will throw up a new shoot the next spring, the root
will keep enlarging, and when the opportunity arrives it will make a
vigorous growth, in proportion to the strength of the root, and throw
out strong side roots, and after that care no more for its tap root,
which has been its only support, than the frog cares for the tail of
the tadpole after it has got on its own legs.

There is no mystery about the succession of forest growths, nothing in
nature is more plain and simple. We cannot but admire her wisdom,
economy, and justness, compensating in another direction for any
disadvantage a species may have to labor under. Every kind of tree has
an interesting history in itself. Seeds with a hard shell, or with a
pulpy or resinous covering which retards their germination, are often
saved from becoming extinct by these means.

The red cedar (_Juniperus Virginiana_) reaches from Florida to and
beyond Cape Cod; it is among the hills of Tennessee, through the
Middle States and New England. It is scattered through the Western
States and Territories, at long distances apart, creeping up the
Platte River, in Nebraska. (I found only three in the Black Hills, in
Dakota, in an extended search for the different trees which grow
there. Found only one in a long ramble in the hills at Las Vegas, New
Mexico.) Yet this tree has crept across the continent, and is found
here and there in a northwesterly direction between the Platte and the
Pacific Coast. It is owing to the resinous coating which protects its
seeds that this tree is found to-day scattered over that immense
region.

       *       *       *       *       *

[NATURE.]




THE "HATCHERY" OF THE SUN-FISH.


I have thought that an example of the intelligence (instinct?) of a
class of fish which has come under my observation during my excursions
into the Adirondack region of New York State might possibly be of
interest to your readers, especially as I am not aware that any one
except myself has noticed it, or, at least, has given it publicity.

The female sun-fish (called, I believe, in England, the roach or
bream) makes a "hatchery" for her eggs in this wise. Selecting a spot
near the banks of the numerous lakes in which this region abounds, and
where the water is about 4 inches deep, and still, she builds, with
her tail and snout, a circular embankment 3 inches in height and 2
thick. The circle, which is as perfect a one as could be formed with
mathematical instruments, is usually a foot and a half in diameter;
and at one side of this circular wall an opening is left by the fish
of just sufficient width to admit her body, thus:

[Illustration]

The mother sun-fish, having now built or provided her "hatchery,"
deposits her spawn within the circular inclosure, and mounts guard at
the entrance until the fry are hatched out and are sufficiently large
to take charge of themselves. As the embankment, moreover, is built up
to the surface of the water, no enemy can very easily obtain an
entrance within the inclosure from the top; while there being only one
entrance, the fish is able, with comparative ease, to keep out all
intruders.

I have, as I say, noticed this beautiful instinct of the sun-fish for
the perpetuity of her species more particularly in the lakes of this
region; but doubtless the same habit is common to these fish in other
waters.

William L. Stone.

Jersey City Heights, N.J.

       *       *       *       *       *




ANCIENT LAKE DWELLINGS.


Among the many traces which man has left of his existence in long past
ages on the face of the earth, says a correspondent of the _Scotsman_,
none are more interesting and instructive than the lake dwellings of
Switzerland and other countries, which have been discovered within the
last fifty years or so. Although these relics of the past are far more
modern than those which we referred to in a late article on "Primeval
Man," and are probably included within the range of Egyptian and
other chronologies, yet they stretch far beyond the historic period,
so far as Europe is concerned, and throw a flood of light on the
habits of our ancestors, or at any rate predecessors, in these
regions. We are tolerably well acquainted with the history of the Jews
when David worked his way up from the shepherd's staff to the royal
scepter, or when Joshua drove out the Canaanites and took possession
of their land, but of what was going on in Europe in these times we
have hitherto had no knowledge whatever. These lake dwellings,
however, were in all probability inhabited by human beings somewhere
about the time when the events we have referred to took place, and may
have been inhabited before the earlier of them.

The first hint we had of the existence of these remarkable dwellings
was obtained in 1829, when an excavation was being made on the shore
of a Swiss lake. Some wooden piles, apparently very old, and other
antiquities were found by the workmen. Not much attention, however,
was paid to this discovery till 1854, when a Mr. Aeppli drew attention
to some remains of human handiwork found near his house, in part of
the bed of a lake which had been left dry during a season of great
drought. The workmen employed in recovering some land from the lake
found the heads of a great many wooden piles protruding through the
mud, and also a number of stags' horns, and implements of various
descriptions. Stimulated by this discovery, search was made in various
lakes, and the result was truly astonishing. In every direction
remains of the habitations of prehistoric man were discovered, and
relics were found in such abundance that the history of this unknown
past could be traced through long ages, and the habits of the people
ascertained with a very considerable amount of probability. The
details are so numerous that it would be impossible in the space at
our disposal to go into them all.

Of course, during the long time that has elapsed since these
structures were erected, their remains have been reduced to mere
ruins, and it is only by comparing one with another that we are able
to picture to ourselves what they were originally like and what sort
of life was led by the men who inhabited them. The oldest of these
dwellings belong to the stone age, when man had not acquired any
knowledge of the use of metal; when all his instruments were merely
sharpened stones, fixed in wooden handles, or pieces of bone, horn, or
other natural material. They are therefore somewhat roughly finished,
but at the same time exhibit considerable ingenuity and skill. The
method of construction seems to have been somewhat as follows: A
suitable situation, not far from the shore, where the water was not
very deep, having been fixed upon, these prehistoric builders drove
into the muddy bottom of the lake a number of piles or long stakes,
arranged generally pretty close together, and in some sort of regular
order. These piles were formed generally from stems of trees, with the
bark on, but occasionally from split wood. The ends were sharpened to
a point by the aid of fire or by cutting with stone axes. On a
sufficient number being driven in, and their upper ends brought to a
level above the surface of the water, platform beams were laid across,
fastened by wooden pegs, or in some cases fixed into notches cut in
the heads of the vertical piles. The platform was generally very
