  Dust from blast   |             |            |             |
    furnaces        |             |            |      185    |     0.6
Organic Sources:    |             |            |             |
  Kelp              |    1,556    |    16.0    |    3,752    |    10.9
  Molasses residue  |             |            |             |
    from distillers |    1,845    |    19.0    |    2,846    |     8.8
  Wood ashes        |      412    |     4.2    |      621    |     1.9
  Waste liquors     |             |            |             |
    from beet-sugar |             |            |             |
    refineries      |             |            |      369    |     1.1
  Miscellaneous     |             |            |             |
    industrial      |             |            |             |
    wastes          |       63    |       .7   |      305    |     1.0
                    | ___________ | __________ | ___________ | __________
                    |             |            |             |
Total               |    9,720    |    100.0   |   32,573    |   100.0

    --From U S. Bureau of Mines Report, 1918.


This table shows how inadequate was the reaction of the United States to
the war demand for potassium salts. The minimum yearly requirements of
the United States are estimated to be 250,000 tons of potash.

This completes our survey of the visible sources of potash in America.
In 1917 under the pressure of the embargo and unprecedented prices the
output of potash (K_{2}O) in various forms was raised to 32,573 tons,
but this is only about a tenth as much as we needed. In 1918 potash
production was further raised to 52,135 tons, chiefly through the
increase of the output from natural brines to 39,255 tons, nearly twice
what it was the year before. The rust in cotton and the resulting
decrease in yield during the war are laid to lack of potash. Truck crops
grown in soils deficient in potash do not stand transportation well. The
Bureau of Animal Industry has shown in experiments in Aroostook County,
Maine, that the addition of moderate amounts of potash doubled the yield
of potatoes.

Professor Ostwald, the great Leipzig chemist, boasted in the war:

     America went into the war like a man with a rope round his neck
     which is in his enemy's hands and is pretty tightly drawn. With
     its tremendous deposits Germany has a world monopoly in potash,
     a point of immense value which cannot be reckoned too highly
     when once this war is going to be settled. It is in Germany's
     power to dictate which of the nations shall have plenty of food
     and which shall starve.

If, indeed, some mineralogist or metallurgist will cut that rope by
showing us a supply of cheap potash we will erect him a monument as big
as Washington's. But Ostwald is wrong in supposing that America is as
dependent as Germany upon potash. The bulk of our food crops are at
present raised without the use of any fertilizers whatever.

As the cession of Lorraine in 1871 gave Germany the phosphates she
needed for fertilizers so the retrocession of Alsace in 1919 gives
France the potash she needed for fertilizers. Ten years before the war a
bed of potash was discovered in the Forest of Monnebruck, near
Hartmannsweilerkopf, the peak for which French and Germans contested so
fiercely and so long. The layer of potassium salts is 16-1/2 feet thick
and the total deposit is estimated to be 275,000,000 tons of potash. At
any rate it is a formidable rival of Stassfurt and its acquisition by
France breaks the German monopoly.

When we turn to the consideration of the third plant food we feel
better. While the United States has no such monopoly of phosphates as
Germany had of potash and Chile had of nitrates we have an abundance and
to spare. Whereas we formerly _imported_ about $17,000,000 worth of
potash from Germany and $20,000,000 worth of nitrates from Chile a year
we _exported_ $7,000,000 worth of phosphates.

Whoever it was who first noticed that the grass grew thicker around a
buried bone he lived so long ago that we cannot do honor to his powers
of observation, but ever since then--whenever it was--old bones have
been used as a fertilizer. But we long ago used up all the buffalo bones
we could find on the prairies and our packing houses could not give us
enough bone-meal to go around, so we have had to draw upon the old
bone-yards of prehistoric animals. Deposits of lime phosphate of such
origin were found in South Carolina in 1870 and in Florida in 1888.
Since then the industry has developed with amazing rapidity until in
1913 the United States produced over three million tons of phosphates,
nearly half of which was sent abroad. The chief source at present is the
Florida pebbles, which are dredged up from the bottoms of lakes and
rivers or washed out from the banks of streams by a hydraulic jet. The
gravel is washed free from the sand and clay, screened and dried, and
then is ready for shipment. The rock deposits of Florida and South
Carolina are more limited than the pebble beds and may be exhausted in
twenty-five or thirty years, but Tennessee and Kentucky have a lot in
reserve and behind them are Idaho, Wyoming and other western states with
millions of acres of phosphate land, so in this respect we are
independent.

But even here the war hit us hard. For the calcium phosphate as it comes
from the ground is not altogether available because it is not very
soluble and the plants can only use what they can get in the water that
they suck up from the soil. But if the phosphate is treated with
sulfuric acid it becomes more soluble and this product is sold as
"superphosphate." The sulfuric acid is made mostly from iron pyrite and
this we have been content to import, over 800,000 tons of it a year,
largely from Spain, although we have an abundance at home. Since the
shortage of shipping shut off the foreign supply we are using more of
our own pyrite and also our deposits of native sulfur along the Gulf
coast. But as a consequence of this sulfuric acid during the war went up
from $5 to $25 a ton and acidulated phosphates rose correspondingly.

Germany is short on natural phosphates as she is long on natural potash.
But she has made up for it by utilizing a by-product of her steelworks.
When phosphorus occurs in iron ore, even in minute amounts, it makes the
steel brittle. Much of the iron ores of Alsace-Lorraine were formerly
considered unworkable because of this impurity, but shortly after
Germany took these provinces from France in 1871 a method was discovered
by two British metallurgists, Thomas and Gilchrist, by which the
phosphorus is removed from the iron in the process of converting it into
steel. This consists in lining the crucible or converter with lime and
magnesia, which takes up the phosphorus from the melted iron. This slag
lining, now rich in phosphates, can be taken out and ground up for
fertilizer. So the phosphorus which used to be a detriment is now an
additional source of profit and this British invention has enabled
Germany to make use of the territory she stole from France to outstrip
England in the steel business. In 1910 Germany produced 2,000,000 tons
of Thomas slag while only 160,000 tons were produced in the United
Kingdom. The open hearth process now chiefly used in the United States
gives an acid instead of a basic phosphate slag, not suitable as a
fertilizer. The iron ore of America, with the exception of some of the
southern ores, carries so small a percentage of phosphorus as to make a
basic process inadvisable.

Recently the Germans have been experimenting with a combined fertilizer,
Schroeder's potassium phosphate, which is said to be as good as Thomas
slag for phosphates and as good as Stassfurt salts for potash. The
American Cyanamid Company is just putting out a similar product,
"Ammo-Phos," in which the ammonia can be varied from thirteen to twenty
per cent. and the phosphoric acid from twenty to forty-seven per cent.
so as to give the proportions desired for any crop. We have then the
possibility of getting the three essential plant foods altogether in
one compound with the elimination of most of the extraneous elements
such as lime and magnesia, chlorids and sulfates.

For the last three hundred years the American people have been living on
the unearned increment of the unoccupied land. But now that all our land
has been staked out in homesteads and we cannot turn to new soil when we
have used up the old, we must learn, as the older races have learned,
how to keep up the supply of plant food. Only in this way can our
population increase and prosper. As we have seen, the phosphate question
need not bother us and we can see our way clear toward solving the
nitrate question. We gave the Government $20,000,000 to experiment on
the production of nitrates from the air and the results will serve for
fields as well as firearms. But the question of an independent supply of
cheap potash is still unsolved.




IV

COAL-TAR COLORS


If you put a bit of soft coal into a test tube (or, if you haven't a
test tube, into a clay tobacco pipe and lute it over with clay) and heat
it you will find a gas coming out of the end of the tube that will burn
with a yellow smoky flame. After all the gas comes off you will find in
the bottom of the test tube a chunk of dry, porous coke. These, then,
are the two main products of the destructive distillation of coal. But
if you are an unusually observant person, that is, if you are a born
chemist with an eye to by-products, you will notice along in the middle
of the tube where it is neither too hot nor too cold some dirty drops of
water and some black sticky stuff. If you are just an ordinary person,
you won't pay any attention to this because there is only a little of it
and because what you are after is the coke and gas. You regard the
nasty, smelly mess that comes in between as merely a nuisance because it
clogs up and spoils your nice, clean tube.

Now that is the way the gas-makers and coke-makers--being for the most
part ordinary persons and not born chemists--used to regard the water
and tar that got into their pipes. They washed it out so as to have the
gas clean and then ran it into the creek. But the neighbors--especially
those who fished in the stream below the gas-works--made a fuss about
spoiling the water, so the gas-men gave away the tar to the boys for use
in celebrating the Fourth of July and election night or sold it for
roofing.

[Illustration: THE PRODUCTION OF COAL TAR

A battery of Koppers by-product coke-ovens at the plant of the Bethlehem
Steel Company, Sparrows Point, Maryland. The coke is being pushed out of
one of the ovens into the waiting car. The vapors given off from the
coal contain ammonia and the benzene compound used to make dyes and
explosives]

[Illustration: IN THESE MIXING VATS AT THE BUFFALO WORKS, ANILINE DYES
ARE PREPARED]

But this same tar, which for a hundred years was thrown away and nearly
half of which is thrown away yet in the United States, turns out to be
one of the most useful things in the world. It is one of the strategic
points in war and commerce. It wounds and heals. It supplies munitions
and medicines. It is like the magic purse of Fortunatus from which
anything wished for could be drawn. The chemist puts his hand into the
black mass and draws out all the colors of the rainbow. This
evil-smelling substance beats the rose in the production of perfume and
surpasses the honey-comb in sweetness.

Bishop Berkeley, after having proved that all matter was in your mind,
wrote a book to prove that wood tar would cure all diseases. Nobody
reads it now. The name is enough to frighten them off: "Siris: A Chain
of Philosophical Reflections and Inquiries Concerning the Virtues of Tar
Water." He had a sort of mystical idea that tar contained the
quintessence of the forest, the purified spirit of the trees, which
could somehow revive the spirit of man. People said he was crazy on the
subject, and doubtless he was, but the interesting thing about it is
that not even his active and ingenious imagination could begin to
suggest all of the strange things that can be got out of tar, whether
wood or coal.

The reason why tar supplies all sorts of useful material is because it
is indeed the quintessence of the forest, of the forests of untold
millenniums if it is coal tar. If you are acquainted with a village
tinker, one of those all-round mechanics who still survive in this age
of specialization and can mend anything from a baby-carriage to an
automobile, you will know that he has on the floor of his back shop a
heap of broken machinery from which he can get almost anything he wants,
a copper wire, a zinc plate, a brass screw or a steel rod. Now coal tar
is the scrap-heap of the vegetable kingdom. It contains a little of
almost everything that makes up trees. But you must not imagine that all
that comes out of coal tar is contained in it. There are only about a
dozen primary products extracted from coal tar, but from these the
chemist is able to build up hundreds of thousands of new substances.
This is true creative chemistry, for most of these compounds are not to
be found in plants and never existed before they were made in the
laboratory. It used to be thought that organic compounds, the products
of vegetable and animal life, could only be produced by organized
beings, that they were created out of inorganic matter by the magic
touch of some "vital principle." But since the chemist has learned how,
he finds it easier to make organic than inorganic substances and he is
confident that he can reproduce any compound that he can analyze. He
cannot only imitate the manufacturing processes of the plants and
animals, but he can often beat them at their own game.

When coal is heated in the open air it is burned up and nothing but the
ashes is left. But heat the coal in an enclosed vessel, say a big
fireclay retort, and it cannot burn up because the oxygen of the air
cannot get to it. So it breaks up. All parts of it that can be volatized
at a high heat pass off through the outlet pipe and nothing is left in
the retort but coke, that is carbon with the ash it contains. When the
escaping vapors reach a cool part of the outlet pipe the oily and tarry
matter condenses out. Then the gas is passed up through a tower down
which water spray is falling and thus is washed free from ammonia and
everything else that is soluble in water.

This process is called "destructive distillation." What products come
off depends not only upon the composition of the particular variety of
coal used, but upon the heat, pressure and rapidity of distillation. The
way you run it depends upon what you are most anxious to have. If you
want illuminating gas you will leave in it the benzene. If you are after
the greatest yield of tar products, you impoverish the gas by taking out
the benzene and get a blue instead of a bright yellow flame. If all you
are after is cheap coke, you do not bother about the by-products, but
let them escape and burn as they please. The tourist passing across the
coal region at night could see through his car window the flames of
hundreds of old-fashioned bee-hive coke-ovens and if he were of
economical mind he might reflect that this display of fireworks was
costing the country $75,000,000 a year besides consuming the
irreplaceable fuel supply of the future. But since the gas was not
needed outside of the cities and since the coal tar, if it could be sold
at all, brought only a cent or two a gallon, how could the coke-makers
be expected to throw out their old bee-hive ovens and put in the
expensive retorts and towers necessary to the recovery of the
by-products? But within the last ten years the by-product ovens have
come into use and now nearly half our coke is made in them.

Although the products of destructive distillation vary within wide
limits, yet the following table may serve to give an approximate idea of
what may be got from a ton of soft coal:

  1 ton of coal may give
      Gas, 12,000 cubic feet
      Liquor (Washings) ammonium sulfate (7-25 pounds)
      Tar (120 pounds)  benzene (10-20 pounds)
                        toluene (3 pounds)
                        xylene  (1-1/2 pounds)
                        phenol  (1/2 pound)
                        naphthalene (3/8 pound)
                        anthracene  (1/4 pound)
                        pitch (80 pounds)
      Coke (1200-1500 pounds)

When the tar is redistilled we get, among other things, the ten "crudes"
which are fundamental material for making dyes. Their names are:
benzene, toluene, xylene, phenol, cresol, naphthalene, anthracene,
methyl anthracene, phenanthrene and carbazol.

There! I had to introduce you to the whole receiving line, but now that
that ceremony is over we are at liberty to do as we do at a reception,
meet our old friends, get acquainted with one or two more and turn our
backs on the rest. Two of them, I am sure, you've met before, phenol,
which is common carbolic acid, and naphthalene, which we use for
mothballs. But notice one thing in passing, that not one of them is a
dye. They are all colorless liquids or white solids. Also they all have
an indescribable odor--all odors that you don't know are
indescribable--which gives them and their progeny, even when odorless,
the name of "aromatic compounds."

[Illustration: Fig. 8. Diagram of the products obtained from coal and
some of their uses.]

The most important of the ten because he is the father of the family is
benzene, otherwise called benzol, but must not be confused with
"benzine" spelled with an _i_ which we used to burn and clean our
clothes with. "Benzine" is a kind of gasoline, but benzene _alias_
benzol has quite another constitution, although it looks and burns the
same. Now the search for the constitution of benzene is one of the most
exciting chapters in chemistry; also one of the most intricate chapters,
