and up to the pass. The way's clear and easy; if you put off the bomb
just this side of it, you'll start a rock-slide that'll block
everything."

"All right. Pick me up, a couple of you. Don't take hold of me below the
knees. And hurry."

       *       *       *       *       *

A hairy shape appeared on the ledge below them; one of the older boys
used his throwing-stick to drive a javelin into it. Two of the girls
picked up Dard; Bo-Bo and his woman gathered up the big spear and the
axe and the bomb-bag.

They hurried forward, picking their way along the top of a talus of
rubble at the foot of the cliff, and came to where the stream gushed out
of a narrow gorge. The air was wet with spray there, and loud with the
roar of the waterfall. Kalvar Dard looked around; Dorita had chosen the
spot well. Not even a sure-footed mountain-goat could make the ascent,
once that gorge was blocked.

"All right; put me down here," he directed. "Bo-Bo, take my belt, and
give me the big bomb. You have one light grenade; know how to use it?"

"Of course, you have often showed me. I turn the top, and then press in
the little thing on the side, and hold it in till I throw. I throw it at
least a spear-cast, and drop to the ground or behind something."

"That's right. And use it only in greatest danger, to save everybody.
Spare your cartridges; use them only to save life. And save everything
of metal, no matter how small."

"Yes. Those are the rules. I will follow them, and so will the others.
And we will always take care of Varnis."

"Well, goodbye, son." He gripped the boy's hand. "Now get everybody out
of here; don't stop till you're at the pass."

"You're not staying behind!" Varnis cried. "Dard, you promised us! I
remember, when we were all in the ship together--you and I and Analea
and Olva and Dorita and Eldra and, oh, what was that other girl's name,
Kyna! And we were all having such a nice time, and you were telling us
how we'd all come to Tareesh, and we were having such fun talking about
it...."

"That's right, Varnis," he agreed. "And so I will. I have something to
do, here, but I'll meet you on top of the mountain, after I'm through,
and in the morning we'll all go to Tareesh."

She smiled--the gentle, childlike smile of the harmlessly mad--and
turned away. The son of Kalvar Dard made sure that she and all the
children were on the way, and then he, too, turned and followed them,
leaving Dard alone.

Alone, with a bomb and a task. He'd borne that task for twenty years,
now; in a few minutes, it would be ended, with an instant's searing
heat. He tried not to be too glad; there were so many things he might
have done, if he had tried harder. Metals, for instance. Somewhere there
surely must be ores which they could have smelted, but he had never
found them. And he might have tried catching some of the little horses
they hunted for food, to break and train to bear burdens. And the
alphabet--why hadn't he taught it to Bo-Bo and the daughter of Seldar
Glav, and laid on them an obligation to teach the others? And the
grass-seeds they used for making flour sometimes; they should have
planted fields of the better kinds, and patches of edible roots, and
returned at the proper time to harvest them. There were so many things,
things that none of those young savages or their children would think of
in ten thousand years....

Something was moving among the rocks, a hundred yards away. He
straightened, as much as his broken legs would permit, and watched. Yes,
there was one of them, and there was another, and another. One rose from
behind a rock and came forward at a shambling run, making bestial
sounds. Then two more lumbered into sight, and in a moment the ravine
was alive with them. They were almost upon him when Kalvar Dard pressed
in the thumbpiece of the bomb; they were clutching at him when he
released it. He felt a slight jar....

       *       *       *       *       *

When they reached the pass, they all stopped as the son of Kalvar Dard
turned and looked back. Dorita stood beside him, looking toward the
waterfall too; she also knew what was about to happen. The others merely
gaped in blank incomprehension, or grasped their weapons, thinking that
the enemy was pressing close behind and that they were making a stand
here. A few of the smaller boys and girls began picking up stones.

Then a tiny pin-point of brilliance winked, just below where the
snow-fed stream vanished into the gorge. That was all, for an instant,
and then a great fire-shot cloud swirled upward, hundreds of feet into
the air; there was a crash, louder than any sound any of them except
Dorita and Varnis had ever heard before.

"He did it!" Dorita said softly.

"Yes, he did it. My father was a brave man," Bo-Bo replied. "We are
safe, now."

Varnis, shocked by the explosion, turned and stared at him, and then she
laughed happily. "Why, there you are, Dard!" she exclaimed. "I was
wondering where you'd gone. What did you do, after we left?"

"What do you mean?" The boy was puzzled, not knowing how much he looked
like his father, when his father had been an officer of the Frontier
Guards, twenty years before.

His puzzlement worried Varnis vaguely. "You.... You are Dard, aren't
you?" she asked. "But that's silly; of course you're Dard! Who else
could you be?"

"Yes. I am Dard," the boy said, remembering that it was the rule for
everybody to be kind to Varnis and to pretend to agree with her. Then
another thought struck him. His shoulders straightened. "Yes. I am Dard,
son of Dard," he told them all. "I lead, now. Does anybody say no?"

He shifted his axe and spear to his left hand and laid his right hand on
the butt of his pistol, looking sternly at Dorita. If any of them tried
to dispute his claim, it would be she. But instead, she gave him the
nearest thing to a real smile that had crossed her face in years.

"You are Dard," she told him; "you lead us, now."

"But of course Dard leads! Hasn't he always led us?" Varnis wanted to
know. "Then what's all the argument about? And tomorrow he's going to
take us to Tareesh, and we'll have houses and ground-cars and aircraft
and gardens and lights, and all the lovely things we want. Aren't you,
Dard?"

"Yes, Varnis; I will take you all to Tareesh, to all the wonderful
things," Dard, son of Dard, promised, for such was the rule about
Varnis.

Then he looked down from the pass into the country beyond. There were
lower mountains, below, and foothills, and a wide blue valley, and,
beyond that, distant peaks reared jaggedly against the sky. He pointed
with his father's axe.

"We go down that way," he said.

       *       *       *       *       *

