sometimes in clusters. They were metal crystal formations. He guessed
that once, long ages ago, the asteroid had been a part of something much
bigger, perhaps a planet. One theory said the asteroids were formed when
a planet exploded. This asteroid might have been a pocket of pure thorium
in the planet.

There would be plenty to do in a short while, but meanwhile he enjoyed
the sensation of being on a tiny world in space with only a handful of
Planeteers for company. He smiled. "King Foster," he said to himself.
"Monarch of a thorium space speck." It was a rather nice feeling, even
though he laughed at himself for thinking it. Since he was in command of
the detachment, he could in all truth say that this was his own personal
planet. It would be a good bit of space humor to spring on the folks back
on Terra.

"Yep, once I was boss of a whole world. Made myself king. Emperor of all
the metal molecules and king of the thorium spurs. And my subjects obeyed
my every command." He added, "Thanks to Planeteer discipline. The
detachment commander is boss."

He reminded himself that he had better stop gathering space dust and
start acting like a detachment commander. He walked back to the landing
boat, stepping with care. With such low gravity, a false step could send
him high above the asteroid. Of course, that would not be dangerous,
since space suits were equipped with six small compressed-air bottles for
emergency propulsion. But it would be embarrassing.

Inside the boat, Dowst and Nunez were setting up the compartment.
Sections of the rear wall swung out and locked into place against
airtight seals, forming a box at the rear end of the boat. Equipment
sealed in the stern, next to the rocket tube, supplied light, heat, and
air. It was a simple but necessary arrangement. Without it, the
Planeteers could not have eaten.

There was no air lock for the compartment. The half of the detachment not
on duty would walk in, seal it up, turn on the equipment, wait until the
gauges registered sufficient air and heat, and then remove their space
suits. When it was time to leave, they would don suits, open the door,
and walk out, and the next shift would enter and repeat the process.
Earlier models had permanent compartments, but they took up too much room
in craft designed for carrying as many men and as much equipment as
possible. They were strictly work boats, and hard experience had dictated
the best design.

The rocket launcher was already set up near the boat. It was a simple
affair, with three adjustable legs bolted to ground spikes. The legs
held a movable cradle in which the rocket racks were placed. High-geared
hand controls enabled the gunner to swing the cradle at high speed in
any direction except straight down. A simple, illuminated optical sight
was all the gunner needed. Since there were neither gravity nor
atmosphere in space, the missiles flashed out in a straight line,
continuing on into infinity if they missed their targets. Proximity fuses
made this a remote possibility. If the rocket got anywhere near the
target, the shell would explode.

Rip found his astrogation instruments set carefully to one side. He
removed the data sheets from his case and examined them. Now came the
work of finding the spots in which to place his atomic charges. Since the
computer aboard ship had done all the mathematics necessary, he needed
only to take sights to determine the precise positions.

He took a transit-like instrument from the case, pulled out the legs of
its self-contained tripod, then carried it to a spot near where he had
estimated the first charge would be placed. The instrument was equipped
with three movable rings to be set for the celestial equator, for the
zero meridian, and for the right ascension of any convenient star. Using
a regular level would have been much simpler. The instrument had one, but
with so little gravity to activate it, the thing was useless.

The sights were specially designed for use in space, and his bubble was
no obstacle in taking observations. He merely put the clear plastic
against the curved sight and looked into it much as he would have looked
through a telescope on Earth.

As he did so, a hint of pale pink light caught the corner of his eye. He
backed away from the instrument and turned his head quickly, looking at
the colorimeter-type radiation detector at the side of his helmet. It was
glowing.

An icy chill sent a shiver through him. Great, gorgeous galaxies! He had
forgotten ... had Koa and the others? He turned so fast that he lost his
balance and floated above the surface like a captive balloon. Santos, who
had been standing nearby to help if requested, hooked a toe on the ground
spike, caught him, and set him upright on the ground again.

"Get me the radiation detection instruments," he ordered.

Koa sensed the urgency in his voice and got the instruments himself. Rip
switched them on and read the illuminated dial on the alpha counter.
Plenty high, as was natural. But no danger there--alpha particles
couldn't penetrate the space suits. Then, his hand clammy inside the
space glove, he switched on the other meter. The gamma count was far
below the alpha, but there were too many of the rays around for comfort.
Inside the helmet his face turned pale.

There was no immediate danger. It would take many days to build up a dose
of gamma that could hurt them. But gamma was not the only radiation. They
were in space, fully exposed to equally dangerous cosmic radiation.

The Planeteers had gathered while he read the instruments. Now they stood
watching him.

They knew the significance of what he had found.

"I ought to be busted to recruit," he told them. "I knew this asteroid
was thorium and that thorium is radioactive. If I had used my head, I
would have added nuclite shielding to the list of supplies the _Scorpius_
provided. We could have had enough of it to protect us while around our
base, even if we couldn't be protected while working on the charges. That
would at least have kept our dosage down enough for safety."

"No one else thought of it, either, sir," Koa reminded him.

"It was my job to think of it, and I didn't. So I've put us in a time
squeeze. If the _Scorpius_ gets back soon, we can get the shielding
before our radiation dosage has built up very high. If the ship doesn't
come back, the dosage will mount."

He looked at them grimly. "It won't kill us, and it won't even make us
very sick. I'll have the ship take us off before we build up that much
dosage."

Santos started. "But, sir! That means--"

"I know what it means," Rip stated bitterly. "It means the ship has got
to return in time to give us some nuclite shielding, or we'll be the
laughingstock of the Special Order Squadrons--the detachment that started
a job the spacemen had to finish!"




CHAPTER SEVEN

Earthbound!


There was something else that Rip didn't add, although he knew the
Planeteers would realize it in a few minutes. Probably some of them
already had thought of it.

To move the asteroid into a new orbit, they were going to fire nuclear
bombs. Most of the highly radioactive fission products would be blown
into space, but some would be drawn back by the asteroid's slight
gravity. The craters would be highly radioactive, and some radioactive
debris was certain to be scattered around, too. Every particle would add
to the problem.

"Is there anything we can do, sir?" Koa asked.

Rip shook his head inside the transparent bubble. "If you have a good
luck charm in your pocket, you might talk to it. That's about all."

Nuclear physics had been part of his training. He read the gamma meter
again and did some quick calculations. They would be exposed for the
entire trip, at a daily dosage of--

Koa interrupted his train of thought. Evidently the sergeant major had
been doing some calculations of his own. "How long will we be on this
rock, sir? You've never told us just how long the trip will take."

Rip said quietly, "With luck, it will take us a little more than three
weeks."

He could see their faces faintly in the dim sunlight. They were shocked.
Spaceships blasted through space between the inner planets in a matter
of hours. The nuclear drive cruisers, which could approach almost half
the speed of light, had brought even distant Pluto within easy reach.
The inner planets could be covered in a matter of minutes on a straight
speed run, although to take off from one and land on the other meant
considerable time used in acceleration and deceleration.

The Planeteers were used to such speed. Hearing that it would take over
three weeks to reach Earth had jarred them.

"This piece of metal isn't a spaceship," Rip reminded them. "At the
moment, our speed around the sun is just slightly more than ten miles a
second. If we just shifted orbits and kept the same speed, it would take
us months to reach Terra. But we'll use one bomb for retrothrust, then
fire two to increase speed. The estimate is that we'll push up to about
forty miles a second."

Koa spoke up. "That's not bad when you think that Mercury is the fastest
planet, and it only makes about thirty miles a second."

"Right," Rip agreed. "After the asteroid is kicked out of orbit, it will
fall toward the sun. At our closest approach to the sun, we'll have
enough velocity to carry us past safely. Then we'll lose speed constantly
until we come into Earth's gravitational field and have to brake."

It was just space luck that Terra was on the other side of the sun from
the asteroid's present position. By the time they approached, it would
be in a good place, just far enough from the line to the sun to avoid
changing course. Of course, Rip's planned orbit was not aiming the
asteroid at Earth, but at where Earth would be at the end of the trip.

"That means more than three weeks of radiation, then," Corporal Santos
observed. "Can we take it, sir?"

Rip shrugged, but the gesture couldn't be seen inside his space suit. "At
the rate we're getting radiation now, plus what I estimate we'll get from
the nuclear explosions, we'll get the maximum safety limit in just three
weeks. That leaves us no margin, even if we risk getting radiation
sickness. So we have to get shielding pretty soon. If we do, we can last
the trip."

Private Dominico saluted and moved forward. "Sir, may I ask a question?"

Rip turned to face the Planeteer, still worrying over the problem. He
nodded and said, "What is it, Dominico?"

"Sir, I think we can't worry too much about this radiation, eh? You will
think of some way to take care of it. What I want to ask, sir, is when do
we let go the bombs? I do not know much about radiation, but I can set
those bombs like you want them."

Rip was touched by the Planeteer's faith in his ability to solve the
radiation problem. That was why being an officer in the Special Order
Squadrons was so challenging. The men knew the kind of training their
officers had, and they expected them to come up with technical solutions
as the situation required.

"You'll have a chance to set the bombs in just a short while," he said
crisply. "Let's get busy. Koa, load all bombs but one ten KT on the
landing boat. Stake the rest of the equipment down. While you're doing
that, I'll find the spots where we plant the charges. I'll need two men
now and more later."

He went back to his instrument, putting the radiation problem out of his
mind--a rather hard thing to do with the colorimeter glowing pink next to
his shoulder. Koa detailed men to load the nuclear bombs into the landing
craft, left Pederson to supervise, and then brought Santos with him to
help Rip.

"The bombs are being put on the boat, sir," Koa reported.

"Fine. There isn't too much chance of the blasts setting them off, but
we'll take no chances at all. Koa, I'm going to shoot a line straight out
toward Alpha Centauri. You walk that way and turn on your belt light.
I'll tell you which way to move."

He adjusted his sighting rings while the sergeant major glided away.
Moving around on a no-weight world was more like skating than walking. A
regular walk would have lifted Koa into space with every step. Of course,
the asteroid had some gravity, but so little that it hardly mattered.

Rip centered the top of the instrument's vertical hairline on Alpha
Centauri, then waited until Koa was almost out of sight over the
asteroid's horizon, which was only a few hundred yards away.

He turned up the volume on his helmet communicator. "Koa, move about ten
feet to your left."

Koa did so. Rip sighted past the vertical hairline at the belt light.
"That's a little too far. Take a small step to the right. That's
good ... just a few inches more ... hold it. You're right in position.
Stand where you are."

"Yessir."

Rip turned to Santos. "Stand here, Corporal. Take a sight at Koa to get
your bearings, then hold position."

Santos did so. Now the two lights gave Rip one of the lines he needed. He
called for two more men, and Trudeau and Nunez joined him. "Follow me,"
he directed.

Rip picked up the instrument and carried it to a point ninety degrees
from the line represented by Koa and Santos. He put the instrument down
and zeroed it on Messier 44, the Beehive star cluster in the
constellation Cancer. For the second sighting star he chose Beta Pyxis
as being closest to the line he wanted, made the slight adjustments
necessary to set the line of sight, since Pyxis wasn't exactly on it,
then directed Trudeau into position as he had Koa. Nunez took position
behind the instrument, and Rip had his cross fix.

He called for Dowst, then carried the instrument to the center of the
cross formed by the four men. Using the instrument, he rechecked the
lines from the center out. They were within a hair or two of being
exactly on, and a slight error wouldn't hurt, anyway. He knew he would
have to correct with rocket blasts once the asteroid was in the new
orbit.

"X marks the spot," he told Dowst. He put his toe on the place where the
crosslines met.

Dowst used a spike to make an X in the metal ground.

"All set," Rip announced. "You four men can move now. Let's have the
cutting equipment over here, Koa."

The Planeteers were all waiting for instructions now. In a few moments
the equipment was ready, fuel and oxygen bottles attached.

"Who's the champion torchman?" Rip asked.

Koa replied, "Kemp is, sir."

Kemp, one of the two American privates, took the torch and waited for
orders. "We need a hole six feet across and twenty feet deep," Rip told
him. "Go to it."

"How about direction, sir?" Kemp asked.

"Straight down. We'll take a bearing on an overhead star when you're in a
few feet."

Dowst inscribed a circle around the X he had made and stood back. Kemp
pushed the striker button and the torch flared. "Watch your eyes," he
warned. The Planeteers reached for belt controls and turned the rheostats
that darkened the clear bubbles electronically. Kemp adjusted his flame
until it was blue-white, a knife of fire brighter by far than the light
of the sun at this distance.

Koa stepped behind Kemp and leaned against his back, because the flame of
the torch was like an exhaust, driving Kemp backward. Kemp bent down, and
the torch sliced into the metal of the asteroid like a hot knife into
ice. The metal splintered a little as the heat raised it instantly from
almost absolute zero to many thousands of degrees.

When the circle was completed, Kemp adjusted his torch again, and the
flame lengthened. He moved inside the circle and cut at an angle toward
the perimeter. His control was quick and certain. In a moment he stood
aside, and Koa lifted out a perfect ring of thorium. It varied from a
knife edge on the inner side to eighteen inches on the outer side.

In the middle of the circle there was now a cone of metal. Kemp cut
around it, the torch angling toward the center. A piece shaped like
two cones set base to base came free. Since the metal cooled in the
bitter chill of space almost as fast as Kemp could cut it, there was no
heat to worry about.

Alternately cutting from the outside and the center of the hole, Kemp
worked his way downward until his head was below ground level. Rip
called a halt. Kemp gave a little jump and floated straight upward. Koa
caught him and swung him to one side. Rip stepped into the hole, and
Santos gave him a slight push to send him to the bottom. Rip knelt and
sighted upward. Kemp had done a good job. The star Rip had chosen as a
guide was straight overhead.

He bounced out of the hole, and, as Koa caught him, he told Kemp to go
ahead. "Dominico, here's your chance. Get tools and wire. Find a timer
