of L'Esperance, at Oberhausen, exhibited similar products, quite pure
as to sulphur and phosphorus, and they had a double interest at the
exhibition, in consideration of the agitation over the Thomas and
Gilchrist process (see the discussions which were raised at the
meeting of the Iron and Steel Institute). This process unfortunately
requires for its prompt success the use of a very large quantity of
spiegel or of ferro-manganese, in order to sufficiently carburize and
deoxidize the burnt iron, which is the final product of the blowing.

The production of ferro-manganese by the blast furnace depends upon
the following conditions.

    1. A high temperature.

    2. On a proper mixture of the iron ores and the manganese.

    3. On the production of slag rich in bases.

These different conditions may be obtained with but slight variations
at the different works, but the condition of a high temperature is one
of the most important considerations, not only for the alloys of
manganese, but equally as well for the alloys of iron, manganese,
silicium, those of chromium, of tungsten, etc. It is also necessary to
study the effects produced either in the crucible or in the blast
furnace, and to examine the ores which for a long while have been
regarded as not reducible.

The works of Terre Noire especially made at the same time, in the
blast furnace, ferro-silicon with manganese, alloys which are daily
becoming more important for the manufacture of steels tempered soft
and half soft without blowing.

These alloys, rich in silicon, present the peculiarity of being poor
in carbon, the amount of this latter element varying with the
proportions of manganese. In addition to the alloys used in the iron
and steel industry, we shall proceed to relate the recent progress
obtained in the metallurgy of other materials (especially copper) by
the use of _cupro-manganese_:

+---+---------+-------+---------+---------+------+------------------------------
|   |   Mn.   |   C.  |    Si.  |    S.   |  P.  |
|   |per cent.|       |         |         |      |
+---+---------+-------+---------+---------+------+
| A | 18 to 20| 2 to 3| 10 to 12| Traces  |      |Extra Quality for soft metals.
| B | 15 to 18| 3.00  | 10 to 8 | scarcely|About |} Medium Quality
| C | 15 to 10| 3.25  |  8 to 6 | percep- |0.100.|}
| D |  5 to 10| 3.50  |  4 to 6 | tible.  |      |Ordinary for hard metals.
+---+---------+-------+---------+---------+------+------------------------------

The first alloys of manganese and copper were made in 1848, by Von
Gersdorff; soon after Prof. Schroetter of Vienna made compounds
containing 18 or 20 per cent. of manganese by reducing in a crucible
the oxides of copper and manganese mixed with wood charcoal and
exposing to a high heat.

These alloys were quite ductile, very hard, very tenacious, and
capable of receiving a beautiful polish; their color varies from white
to rose color, according to the respective proportions of the two
bodies; they are particularly interesting on account of the results
which were obtained by adding them to certain metallic fusions.

It is well known that in the fining of copper by oxidation there is
left in the fined metal the suboxide of copper, which must then be
removed by the refining process, using carbon to reduce the copper to
its metallic state. M. Manhes, taking advantage of the greater
affinity of manganese for oxygen, found that if this last element was
introduced into the bath of copper during the operation of refining,
the copper suboxide would be reduced and the copper obtained in its
metallic condition. For this purpose during these last years real
cupro-manganese has been prepared, occupying the same position to
copper as the spiegel or the ferro-manganese does toward the
manufacture of steel. M. Manhes used these same alloys for the fusion
of bronze and brass, and recommended the following proportions:

      3 to 4 kilog. of cupro-manganese for 100 kilog. of bronze.
  0.250 to 1         do.           do.       do.         brass.
  0.150 to 1.2       do.           do.       do.         copper.

In every case the alloy is introduced at the moment of pouring, as is
the case in the Bessemer or Martin process, taking care to cover the
fusion with charcoal in order to prevent the contact with air,
together with the use of some kind of a flux to aid in the
scorification of the manganese.

According to M. Manhes a slight proportion of manganese added to
bronze appears to increase its resistance and its ductility, as is
shown in the following table, provided, however, that these different
alloys have been subjected to the same operations from a physical
point of view; that is, pouring, rolling, etc.

--------------------------+-----+-----+------+----------+------------+
                          |     |     |      |  Weight  |            |
                          | Cu. | Sn. |  Mn. |   of     | Elongation |
                          |     |     |      | fracture |            |
--------------------------+-----+-----+------+----------+------------+
Ordinary Bronze           | 90  | 10  |      | 20 kil.  |    4.00    |
Bronze with Manganese, A, | 90  | 10  |  0.5 | 24  "    |   15.00    |
    Do.    do.         B, | 90  | 10  |  1.0 | 26  "    |   20.00    |
--------------------------+-----+-----+------+----------+------------+

The White Brass Co., of London, exhibited at Paris, in 1878, manganese
bronzes of four grades of durability, destined for different uses and
corresponding to about 20 to 25 kilos of the limit of elasticity, and
36 to 37 kilos of resistance to fracture; the number 0 is equivalent
after rolling to a resistance to fracture of 46.5 kilos, and 20 to 25
per cent. of elongation.

Such results show beyond contradiction the great interest there is in
economically producing alloys of copper, manganese, tin, zinc, etc. In
addition, they may be added to metallic fusions, for deoxidizing and
also to communicate to the commercial alloys (such as bronze, brass,
etc.) the greatest degree of resistance and tenacity.

While many investigators have tried to form alloys of copper and
manganese by combining them in the metallic state (that is to say, by
the simultaneous reduction of their oxides), the Hensler Bros., of
Dillenburg, have found it best to first prepare the _metallic
manganese_ and then to alloy it in proper proportions with other
metals. Their method consisted of reducing the pure pyrolusite in
large plumbago crucibles, in the presence of carbon and an extra basic
flux; the operation was carried on in a strong coke fire, and at the
end of about six hours the _crude manganese_ is poured out, having the
following composition:

  Manganese          90   to 92
  Carbon              6   to  6.5
  Iron                0.5 to  1.5
  Silicon             0.5 to  1.2

By refining, the manganese can be brought up to 94 to 95 per cent. of
purity. It is from this casting of pure manganese that is obtained the
substance used as a base for the alloys. This metal is white,
crystalline, when exposed to the damp air slowly oxidizes, and readily
combines with copper to form the _cupro-manganese_ of the variety
having the composition--

  Copper             70
  Manganese          30

Cast in ingots or in pigs it becomes an article of commerce which may
be introduced in previously determined proportions into bronze, gun
metal, bell metal, brass, etc. It may also be used, as we have already
mentioned, for the refining of copper according to Manhes's process.

Tests made from this standpoint at the works of Mansfield have shown
that the addition of 0.45 per cent. of cupro-manganese is sufficient
to give tenacity to the copper, which, thus treated, will not contain
more than 0.005 to 0.022 of oxygen, the excess passing off with the
manganese into the scorias.

On the other hand, the addition of cupro-manganese is recommended,
when it is desirable to cast thin pieces of the metal, such as tubes,
caldrons, kitchen utensils, which formerly could only be obtained by
beating and stamping.

The tenacity obtained for tubes of only three centimeters in diameter
and 1.75 millimeters in thickness is such that they are able to
withstand a pressure of 1,100 pounds to the square inch.

The _manganese bronze_, which we have previously referred to, and
which is used by the White Brass Company of London, is an alloy of
copper, with from one to ten per cent. of manganese; the highest
qualities of resistance, ductility, tenacity, and durability are
obtained with one to four per cent. of manganese, while with twelve
per cent. the metal becomes too weak for industrial uses.

  +-----------+---------+-----------+-------------+------------+
  | Manganese |         |           | Weight of   |            |
  | bronze.   |  Copper.| Manganese.| fracture in | Elongation.|
  |           |         |           | kilos per   |            |
  |           |         |           | square mm.  |            |
  +-----------+---------+-----------+-------------+------------+
  | A         |  96.00  |    4.00   |    19.00    |   14.60    |
  | B         |  95.00  |    5.00   |    20.62    |   10.00    |
  | C         |  94.00  |    6.00   |    20.80    |   14.60    |
  | D         |  90.00  |   10.00   |    16.56    |    5.00    |
  +-----------+---------+-----------+-------------+------------+

The preceding table gives some of the experimental results obtained
with the testing machine at Friedrich-Wilhelmshuette on the crude cast
ingots; the resistance is increased, as with copper, by rolling or
hammering.

The _manganese German silver_ consists of

  Copper................ 70.00
  Manganese............. 15.00
  Zinc.................. 15.00

But as this alloy often breaks in rolling, the preference is given to
the following proportions:

  Copper................ 80.00
  Manganese............. 15.00
  Zinc..................  5.00

This results in a white, ductile metal, which is easily worked and
susceptible of receiving a beautiful polish, like the alloys of
nickel, which it may in time completely replace.

The _bronzes of manganese, tin, and zinc_ were perhaps the first upon
which important investigations were made; they were obtained by adding
to an alloy of copper, zinc, and tin (ordinary bronze) a definite
quantity of the cupro-manganese of the type indicated above (Cu 70, Mn
30). By this means the resistance is increased fully nine per cent.,
probably in the same way as the copper, that is, by the deoxidizing
effect of the manganese, as both the copper and the tin are always
more or less oxidized in ordinary bronzes.

Manganese combines with tin just the same as it does with copper, and
the proportion which is recommended as giving the highest resistances
is three to six per cent. of cupro-manganese.

However, notwithstanding the use of cupro-manganese, the tin, as in
ordinary bronzes, has a tendency to liquate in those portions of the
mould which are the hottest, and which become solid the last,
especially in the case of moulds having a great width.

From a series of experiments made at Isabelle Huette, it has been found
that the metal which has the greatest resisting qualities was obtained
from

  Copper......................85.00
  Manganese................... 6.00
  Zinc........................ 5.00

5 per cent. of cupro-manganese = manganese 1.00 remaining in the
metal.

The best method of procedure is first to melt the copper in a
crucible, and then to add the tin and the zinc; finally the
cupro-manganese is added just at the moment of pouring, as in the
Manhes process; then the reaction on the oxides is very effective,
there is a boiling with scintillation similar to the action produced
in the Bessemer and Martin process when ferro-manganese is added to
the bath of steel.

The following are some of the results obtained from thirteen alloys
obtained in this manner. These samples were taken direct from the
casting and were tested with the machine at Friedrich-Wilhelms-huette,
and with the one at the shops of the Rhine Railroad. Their resistance
was considerably increased, as with the other alloys, by rolling or
hammering.

-------+------+------+-----+---------+---------+----------+--------+-------+
       |      |      |     |         |         |          | Weight |       |
       |      |      |     |         |         |Limit of  |  of    | Elong-|
       |Nature|      |     |         |         |elasticity|fracture| ation,|
       |  of  |      |     |         |  Cupro- |in kilos  |in kilos|  per- |
Numbers|mould.|Copper| Tin.|  Zinc.  |manganese|per mm.   | per mm.|centage|
-------+------+------+-----+---------+---------+----------+--------+-------+
   1   | Sand | 85.00| 6.00|   5.00  |         |   11.30  |  16.00 |   --  |
   2   |  --  | 85.00| 6.00|   5.00  |   4.00  |   13.00  |  16.10 |  2.00 |
   3   | Cast.| 87.00| 8.70|   4.30  |   4.00  |     --   |  19.40 |   --  |
   4   |  --  | 85.00| 6.90|   5.00  |   6.00  |     --   |  18.80 |  6.00 |
   5   |  --  | 85.00| 6.00|   5.00  |   6.00  |     --   |  19.75 |  7.00 |
   6   |  --  | 85.00| 6.00|   5.00  |  10.00  |     --   |  17.15 |  4.00 |
   7   | Sand | 87.00| 5.20|   4.33  |   3.47  |     --   |  19.70 |  8.70 |
   8   |  --  | 87.00| 5.20|   4.33  |   3.47  |     --   |  19.70 |  8.90 |
   9   |  --  | 85.00| 6.00|   5.00  |   3.00  |   16.80  |  22.00 |   --  |
  10   |  --  | 74.00|10.00|   5.00  |   3.30  |   13.80  |  18.70 |   --  |
       |      |      |     |(7.66 Pb)|         |          |        |       |
  11   |  --  | 78.70| 8.00| ( 8 Pb) |   3.30  |   13.80  |  20.70 |   --  |
  12   |  --  | 82.00| 9.80|   4.90  |   3.30  |   14.75  |  19.75 |   --  |
  13   |  --  | 86.20|16.50|    --   |   3.30  |   14.30  |  24.70 |   --  |
-------+------+------+-----+---------+---------+----------+--------+-------+

The results of the tests of ductility which are here given, with
reference to the _cupro-manganese_, _manganese bronze_, the _alloys_
with _zinc_ and _tin_, are taken from M.C. Hensler's very valuable
communication to the Berlin Society for the Advancement of the
Industrial Arts.

These various alloys, as well as the _phosphorus bronze_, of which we
make no mention here, are at present very largely used in the
manufacture of technical machines, as well as for supports, valves,
stuffing-boxes, screws, bolts, etc., which require the properties of
resistance and durability. They vastly surpass in these qualities the
brass and like compounds which have been used hitherto for these
purposes.--_Bull. Soc. Chim., Paris_, xxxvi. p. 184.

       *       *       *       *       *




THE ECONOMICAL WASHING OF COAL GAS AND SMOKE.


In a recent number of the _Journal des Usines a Gaz_ appears a note by
M. Chevalet, on the chemical and physical purification of gas, which
was one of the papers submitted to the Societe Technique de
l'Industrie du Gaz en France at the last ordinary meeting. This
communication is noticeable, apart from the author's conclusions, for
the fact that the processes described were not designed originally for
use in gas manufacture, but were first used to purify, or rather to
remove the ammonia which is to be found in all factory chimneys, and
especially in certain manufactories of bone-black, and in spirit
distilleries. It is because of the success which attended M.
Chevalet's treatment of factory smoke that he turned his attention to
coal gas. The communication in which M. Chevalet's method is described
deals first with chimney gases, in order to show the difficulties of
the first class of work done by the author's process. Like coal gas,
chimney gases contain in suspension solid particles, such as soot and
ashes. Before washing these gases in a bath of sulphuric acid, in
order to retain the ammonia, there were two problems to be solved. It
was first of all necessary to cool the gases down to a point which
should not exceed the boiling-point of the acid employed in washing;
and then to remove the solid particles which would otherwise foul the
acid. In carrying out this mechanical purification it was impossible,
for two reasons, to make use of apparatus of the kind used in gas
works; the first obstacle was the presence of solid particles carried
forward by the gaseous currents, and the other difficulty was the
volume of gas to be dealt with. In the example to which the author's
attention was directed he had to purify 600 cubic meters of chimney
gas per minute, or 36,000 cubic meters per hour, while the gas
escaped from the flues at a temperature of from 400 deg. to 500 deg. C. (752 deg.
to 932 deg. Fahr.), and a large quantity of cinders had frequently to be
removed from the main chimney flues. After many trials a simple
appliance was constructed which successfully cooled the gases and
freed them from ashes. This consisted of a vertical screen, with bars
three mm. apart, set in water. This screen divided the gases into thin
sheets before traversing the water, and by thus washing and
evaporating the water the gases were cooled, and threw down the soot
and ashes, and these impurities fell to the bottom of the water bath.
The gases after this process are divested of the greater part of any
tarry impurities which they may have possessed, and are ready for the
final purification, in which ammonia is extracted. This is effected by
means of a series of shallow trays, covered with water or weak acid,
and pierced with a number of fine holes, through which the gas is made
to bubble. The washing apparatus is therefore strangely similar in
principle to that designed by Mr G. Livesey. M. Chevalet states that
this double process is applicable to gas works as well as to the
purification of smoke, with the difference that for the latter purpose
the washing trays are filled with acid for the retention of ammonia,
while in the former application gas liquor or water is used. The
arrangement is said to be a practical success.--_Journal of Gas
Lighting._

       *       *       *       *       *


DETERMINATION OF NITROGEN IN HAIR, WOOL, DRIED BLOOD, FLESH MEAL,
AND LEATHER SCRAPS.

BY DR. C. KRAUCH.


Differences obtained in the estimation of nitrogen in the above
substances are frequently the source of much annoyance. The cause of
these discrepancies is chiefly due to the lack of uniformity in the
material, and from its not being in a sufficiently fine state during
the combustion. The hair which is found in commerce for the
manufacture of fertilizers, is generally mixed with sand and dust.
Wool dust often contains old buttons, pieces of wood, shoe pegs, and
all sorts of things. The flesh fertilizers are composed of light
particles of flesh mixed with the heavier bone dust.

Even after taking all possible precautions to finely comminute these
substances by mechanical means, still only imperfect results are
obtained, for the impurities, that is to say, the sand, can never be
so intimately mixed with the lighter particles that a sample of 0.5 to
0.8 gramme, such as is used in the determination of nitrogen, will
correspond to the correct average contents. In substances such as
dried blood, pulverization is very tedious. A very good method of
overcoming these difficulties, and of obtaining from the most mixed
substances a perfectly homogeneous mass, is that recommended by
Grandeau[1] of decomposing with sulphuric acid--a method which as yet
does not seem to be generally known. From a large quantity of the
substance to be examined, the coarse stones, etc., are removed by
picking or sifting, and the prepared substance, or in cases where the
impurities cannot be separated, the original substance, is treated
with sulphuric acid; after it is decomposed, the acid is neutralized
with calcium carbonate, and the nitrogen is determined in this mass.

   [Footnote 1: _Handbook d. Agrict. Chem. Analyst._, p. 18.]

In order to operate rapidly, it is best to use as little sulphuric
acid as possible. If too much sulphuric acid is used, necessarily a
large amount of calcium carbonate is essential to get it into proper
condition for pulverizing. Under such circumstances the percentage of
nitrogen becomes very low, and a slight error will become
correspondingly high.

20 c.c. of concentrated sulphuric acid and 10 c.c. are sufficient for
30 to 40 grammes of material. After the substance and liquid have been
thoroughly stirred in a porcelain dish, they are warmed on a water
bath and continually stirred until the mass forms a homogeneous
liquid. The sirupy liquid thus obtained is then mixed with 80 to 100
grammes of pulverized calcium carbonate (calcspar), dried for fifteen
minutes at 40 to 60 deg. C., and after standing for one to two hours the
dish and its contents are weighed. From the total weight the weight of
the dish is subtracted, which gives the weight of the calcium sulphate
and the calcium carbonate, and the known weight of the wool dust, etc.
This material is then intimately ground, and 2 to 3 grammes of it are
taken for the determination of the nitrogen, which is then calculated
for the original substance.

Although the given quantities of water and sulphuric acid hardly
appear sufficient for such a large quantity of hair or wool, still in
the course of a few minutes to a quarter of an hour, after continual
stirring, there is obtained a liquid which, after the addition of the
calcium carbonate, is readily converted into a pulverized mass.
Frequently a smaller quantity of sulphuric acid will suffice,
especially if the material is moist. The chief merit of this process
is that in a short time a large quantity of material, having a uniform
character, is obtained. Its use is, therefore, recommended for general
employment.

When the coarser stones, etc., are weighed, and the purified portion
decomposed, absolutely correct results are obtained, and in this way
the awkward discrepancies from different analysts may be
avoided.--_Chemiker Zeitung_, v. 7, p. 703.

       *       *       *       *       *




TESTING WHITE BEESWAX FOR CERESINE AND PARAFFINS.

BY A. PELTZ.


The method which is here recommended originated with Dr. M. Buchner,
and consists in preparing a concentrated solution of alcoholic caustic
potash--one part caustic potash to three of 90 per cent. alcohol--and
then boiling one to two grammes of the suspected wax in a small flask
with the above solution. The liquid is poured into a glass cylinder to
prevent solidification of the contents, and it is then placed for
about one half hour in boiling water. With pure wax the solution
remains clear white; when ceresine and paraffine are present, they
will float on the surface of the alkali solution as an oily layer, and
on cooling they will appear lighter in color than the saponified mass,
and thus they may be quantitatively estimated. The author likewise
gives a superficial method for the determination of the purity of
beeswax. It depends on the formation of wax crystals when the fused
wax solidifies. These crystals form on the surface on cooling, and are
still visible after solidification when examining the surface from the
side. The test succeeds best when the liquid wax is poured into a
shallow tin mould After cooling another peculiar property of the wax
becomes apparent. While the beeswax fills a smaller volume, that is,
separates from the sides of the mould, the Japanese wax, without
separating from the sides, becomes covered with cracks on cooling
which have a depth corresponding to the thickness of the wax.--_Neuste
Erfindungen und Erfahrungen_, viii., p. 430.

       *       *       *       *       *




THE PREVENTION OF ALCOHOLIC FERMENTATION BY FUNGI.

BY PROF. E. REICHARD.


The manager of a well directed brewery, which was built according to
the latest improvements and provided with ice-cooling arrangements,
found that the alcoholic fermentation of lager beer did not advance
with proper regularity. The beer did not clarify well, it remained
turbid and had a tendency to assume a disagreeable odor and taste.
Microscopic examination of the yeast, however, showed the same to be
bottom yeast. After some time its action apparently diminished, or
rather, the fermentation, which began well, ceased, and at the same
time a white foam formed in the center of the vat. The manager
observing this, again submitted it to microscopic examination. The
instrument revealed a number of much smaller forms of fungi, similar
