against it were?"

"Was all that actually stated by Doctor Chalmers a month ago?" one of
the trustees asked, incredulously.

"It absolutely was. Look here, Mr. Dacre, gentlemen." Fitch came
forward, unzipping his briefcase and pulling out papers. "Here are the
signed statements of each of Doctor Chalmers' twenty-three Modern
History Four students, all made and dated before the assassination.
You can refer to them as you please; they're in alphabetical order.
And here." He unfolded a sheet of graph paper a yard long and almost
as wide. "Here's a tabulated summary of the boys' statements. All
agreed on the first point, the fact of the assassination. All agreed
that the time was sometime this year. Twenty out of twenty-three
agreed on Basra as the place. Why, seven of them even remembered the
name of the assassin. That in itself is remarkable; Doctor Chalmers
has an extremely intelligent and attentive class."

"They're attentive because they know he's always likely to do
something crazy and make a circus out of himself," Whitburn
interjected.

"And this isn't the only instance of Doctor Chalmers' precognitive
ability," Fitch continued. "There have been a number of other cases...."

Chalmers jumped to his feet; Stanly Weill rose beside him, shoved the
cased sound-recorder into his hands, and pushed him back into his
seat.

"Gentlemen," the lawyer began, quietly but firmly and clearly. "This
is all getting pretty badly out of hand. After all, this isn't an
investigation of the actuality of precognition as a psychic
phenomenon. What I'd like to hear, and what I haven't heard yet, is
Doctor Whitburn's explanation of his contradictory statements that he
knew about my client's alleged remarks on the evening after they were
supposed to have been made and that, at the same time, the whole thing
was a hoax concocted by his students."

"Are you implying that I'm a liar?" Whitburn bristled.

"I'm pointing out that you made a pair of contradictory statements,
and I'm asking how you could do that knowingly and honestly," Weill
retorted.

"What I meant," Whitburn began, with exaggerated slowness, as though
speaking to an idiot, "was that yesterday, when those infernal
reporters were badgering me, I really thought that some of Professor
Chalmers' students had gotten together and given the _Valley Times_ an
exaggerated story about his insane maunderings a month ago. I hadn't
imagined that a member of the faculty had been so lacking in loyalty
to the college...."

"You couldn't imagine anybody with any more intellectual integrity
than you have!" Fitch fairly yelled at him.

"You're as crazy as Chalmers!" Whitburn yelled back. He turned to the
trustees. "You see the position I'm in, here, with this infernal
Higher Education Faculty Tenure Act? I have a madman on my faculty,
and can I get rid of him? No! I demand his resignation, and he laughs
at me and goes running for his lawyer! And he is a madman! Nobody but
a madman would talk the way he does. You think this Khalid ib'n
Hussein business is the only time he's done anything like this? Why, I
have a list of a dozen occasions when he's done something just as bad,
only he didn't have a lucky coincidence to back him up. Trying to get
books that don't exist out of the library, and then insisting that
they're standard textbooks. Talking about the revolt of the colonies
on Mars and Venus. Talking about something he calls the Terran
Federation, some kind of a world empire. Or something he calls
Operation Triple Cross, that saved the country during some fantastic
war he imagined...."

"_What did you say?_"

The question cracked out like a string of pistol shots. Everybody
turned. The quiet man in the brown tweed suit had spoken; now he
looked as though he were very much regretting it.

"Is there such a thing as Operation Triple Cross?" Fitch was asking.

"No, no. I never heard anything about that; that wasn't what I meant.
It was this Terran Federation thing," the major said, a trifle too
quickly and too smoothly. He turned to Chalmers. "You never did any
work for PSPB; did you ever talk to anybody who did?" he asked.

"I don't even know what the letters mean," Chalmers replied.

"Politico-Strategic Planning Board. It's all pretty hush-hush, but
this term Terran Federation is a tentative name for a proposed
organization to take the place of the U. N. if that organization
breaks up. It's nothing particularly important, and it only exists on
paper."

It won't exist only on paper very long, Chalmers thought. He was
wondering what Operation Triple Cross was; he had some notes on it,
but he had forgotten what they were.

"Maybe he did pick that up from somebody who'd talked indiscreetly,"
Whitburn conceded. "But the rest of this tommyrot! Why, he was talking
about how the city of Reno had been destroyed by an explosion and
fire, literally wiped off the map. There's an example for you!"

He'd forgotten about that, too. It had been a relatively minor
incident in the secret struggle of the Subwar; now he remembered
having made a note about it. He was sure that it followed closely
after the assassination of Khalid ib'n Hussein. He turned quickly to
Weill.

"Didn't you say you had to go to Reno in a day or so?" he asked.

Weill hushed him urgently, pointing with his free hand to the
recorder. The exchange prevented him from noticing that Max Pottgeiter
had risen, until the old man was speaking.

"Are you trying to tell these people that Professor Chalmers is
crazy?" he was demanding. "Why, he has one of the best minds on the
campus. I was talking to him only yesterday, in the back room at the
Library. You know," he went on apologetically, "my subject is Medieval
History; I don't pay much attention to what's going on in the
contemporary world, and I didn't understand, really, what all this
excitement was about. But he explained the whole thing to me, and did
it in terms that I could grasp, drawing some excellent parallels with
the Byzantine Empire and the Crusades. All about the revolt at
Damascus, and the sack of Beirut, and the war between Jordan and Saudi
Arabia, and how the Turkish army intervened, and the invasion of
Pakistan...."

"When did all this happen?" one of the trustees demanded.

Pottgeiter started to explain; Chalmers realized, sickly, how much of
his future history he had poured into the trusting ear of the old
medievalist, the day before.

"Good Lord, man; don't you read the papers at all?" another of the
trustees asked.

"No! And I don't read inside-dope magazines, or science fiction. I
read carefully substantiated facts. And I know when I'm talking to a
sane and reasonable man. It isn't a common experience, around here."

Dacre passed a hand over his face. "Doctor Whitburn," he said, "I must
admit that I came to this meeting strongly prejudiced against you, and
I'll further admit that your own behavior here has done very little to
dispel that prejudice. But I'm beginning to get some idea of what you
have to contend with, here at Blanley, and I find that I must make a
lot of allowances. I had no idea.... Simply no idea at all."

"Look, you're getting a completely distorted picture of this, Mr.
Dacre," Fitch broke in. "It's precisely as I believed; Doctor Chalmers
is an unusually gifted precognitive percipient. You've seen,
gentlemen, how his complicated chain of precognitions about the death
of Khalid has been proven veridical; I'd stake my life that every one
of these precognitions will be similarly verified. And I'll stake my
professional reputation that the man is perfectly sane. Of course,
abnormal psychology and psychopathology aren't my subjects, but...."

"They're not my subjects, either," Whitburn retorted, "but I know a
lunatic by his ravings."

"Doctor Fitch is taking an entirely proper attitude," Pottgeiter said,
"in pointing out that abnormal psychology is a specialized branch,
outside his own field. I wouldn't dream, myself, of trying to offer a
decisive opinion on some point of Roman, or Babylonian, history. Well,
if the question of Doctor Chalmers' sanity is at issue here, let's
consult somebody who specializes in insanity. I don't believe that
anybody here is qualified even to express an opinion on that subject,
Doctor Whitburn least of all."

Whitburn turned on him angrily. "Oh, shut up, you doddering old fool!"
he shouted. "Look; there's another of them!" he told the trustees.
"Another deadhead on the faculty that this Tenure Law keeps me from
getting rid of. He's as bad as Chalmers, himself. You just heard that
string of nonsense he was spouting. Why, his courses have been noted
among the students for years as snap courses in which nobody ever has
to do any work...."

Chalmers was on his feet again, thoroughly angry. Abuse of himself he
could take; talking that way about gentle, learned, old Pottgeiter
was something else.

"I think Doctor Pottgeiter's said the most reasonable thing I've heard
since I came in here," he declared. "If my sanity is to be questioned,
I insist that it be questioned by somebody qualified to do so."

[Illustration: Had the sane restrained the insane, or was it the other
way around?]

Weill set his recorder on the floor and jumped up beside him, trying
to haul him back into his seat.

"For God's sake, man! Sit down and shut up!" he hissed.

Chalmers shook off his hand. "No, I won't shut up! This is the only
way to settle this, once and for all. And when my sanity's been
vindicated, I'm going to sue this fellow...."

Whitburn started to make some retort, then stopped short. After a
moment, he smiled nastily.

"Do I understand, Doctor Chalmers, that you would be willing to submit
to psychiatric examination?" he asked.

"Don't agree; you're putting your foot in a trap!" Weill told him
urgently.

"Of course, I agree, as long as the examination is conducted by a
properly qualified psychiatrist."

"How about Doctor Hauserman at Northern State Mental Hospital?"
Whitburn asked quickly. "Would you agree to an examination by him?"

"Excellent!" Fitch exclaimed. "One of the best men in the field. I'd
accept his opinion unreservedly."

Weill started to object again; Chalmers cut him off. "Doctor Hauserman
will be quite satisfactory to me. The only question is, would he be
available?"

"I think he would," Dacre said, glancing at his watch. "I wonder if he
could be reached now." He got to his feet. "Telephone in your outer
office, Doctor Whitburn? Fine. If you gentlemen will excuse me...."

It was a good fifteen minutes before he returned, smiling.

"Well, gentlemen, it's all arranged," he said. "Doctor Hauserman is
quite willing to examine Doctor Chalmers--with the latter's consent,
of course."

"He'll have it. In writing, if he wishes."

"Yes, I assured him on that point. He'll be here about noon
tomorrow--it's a hundred and fifty miles from the hospital, but the
doctor flies his own plane--and the examination can start at two in
the afternoon. He seems familiar with the facilities of the
psychology department, here; I assured him that they were at his
disposal. Will that be satisfactory to you, Doctor Chalmers?"

