
"Died!..." I leaped to my feet. "She ... died...."

"Yes, Gregg. An hour ago. Miko got into her stateroom and tried to
force his love upon her. She repulsed him. He killed her...."

It struck me blank. And then with a rush came the thought, "He says
Miko killed her"....

I heard myself stammering, "Why--why we must get him!" I gathered my
wits; a surge of hate swept me; a wild desire for vengeance.

"Why, by God, where is he? Why don't you go get him? I'll get
him--I'll kill him!"

"Easy, Gregg!" Dr. Frank gripped me.

The Captain said gently. "We know how you feel, Gregg. She told us
before she died."

"I'll bring him in here to you! But I'll kill him, I tell you!"

"No you won't, lad. We don't want him killed, not attacked, even. Not
yet. We'll explain later."

They sat me down, calming me....

Anita dead. The door of the shining garden was closed. A brief glimpse
given to me and to her of what might have been. And now she was
dead....




X


I had not been able at first to understand why Captain Carter wanted
Miko left at liberty. Within me there was that cry of vengeance, as
though to strike Miko down would somehow lessen my own grief. Whatever
Carter's purpose, Snap had not known it. But Balch and Dr. Frank were
in the Captain's confidence--all three of them working on some plan of
action.

It was obvious that at least two of our passengers were plotting with
Miko and George Prince; trying on this voyage to learn what they could
about Grantline's activities on the Moon--scheming doubtless to seize
the treasure when the _Planetara_ stopped at the Moon on the return
voyage. I thought I could name those masquerading passengers. Ob Hahn,
supposedly a Venus mystic. And Rance Rankin, who called himself an
American magician. Those two, Snap and I agreed, seemed most
suspicious. And there was the purser.

I sat for a time on the deck outside the chart room with Snap. Then
Carter summoned us back, and we sat listening while he, Balch and Dr.
Frank went on with their conference. Listening to them, I could not
but agree that our best plan was to secure evidence which would
incriminate all who were concerned in the plot. Miko, we were
convinced, had been the Martian who followed Snap and me from Halsey's
office in Greater New York. George Prince had doubtless been the
invisible eavesdropper outside the radio room. He knew, and had told
the others that Grantline had found that priceless metal on the Moon
and that the _Planetara_ would stop there on the way home.

But we could not incarcerate George Prince for being an eavesdropper.
Nor had we the faintest possible evidence against Ob Hahn or Rankin.
And even the purser would probably be released by the Interplanetary
Court of Ferrok-Shahn when it heard our evidence.

There was only Miko. We could arrest him for the murder of Anita. But
if we did that now, the others would be put on their guard. It was
Carter's idea to let Miko remain at liberty for a time and see if we
could identify and incriminate his fellows. The murder of Anita
obviously had nothing to do with any plot against Grantline Moon
treasure.

"Why," exclaimed Balch, "there might be--probably are--huge Martian
interests concerned in this thing. These men aboard are only
emissaries, making this voyage to learn what they can. When they get
to Ferrok-Shahn, they'll make their report, and then we'll have a real
danger on our hands. Why, an outlaw ship could be launched from
Ferrok-Shahn that would beat us back to the Moon--and Grantline is
entirely without warning of any danger!"

It seemed obvious. Unscrupulous criminals in Ferrok-Shahn would be
dangerous indeed, once these details of Grantline were given them. So
now it was decided that in the remaining nine days of our outward
voyage, we would attempt to secure enough evidence to arrest all these
plotters.

"I'll have them all in the cage when we land," declared Carter grimly.
"They'll make no report to their principals!"

Ah, the futile plans of men!

Yet, at the time, we thought it practical. We were all doubly armed
now. Bullet projectors and heat ray cylinders. And we had several
eavesdropping microphones which we planned to use whenever occasion
offered.

Only twenty-eight hours of this eventful voyage had passed. The
_Planetara_ was some six million miles from the Earth; it blazed
behind us, a tremendous giant.

The body of Anita was being made ready for burial. George Prince was
still in his stateroom. Glutz, effeminate little hairdresser, who
waxed rich acting as beauty doctor for the women passengers, and who,
in his youth, had been an undertaker, had gone with Dr. Frank to
prepare the body.

Gruesome details. I tried not to think of them. I sat, numbed, in the
chart room.

An astronomical burial--there was little precedent for it. I dragged
myself to the stern deck where, at five A.M., the ceremony took place.

We were a solemn little group, gathered there in the checkered
starlight with the great vault of the heavens around us. A dismantled
electronic projector--necessary when a long range gun was mounted--had
been rigged up in one of the deck ports.

They brought out the body. I stood apart, gazing reluctantly at the
small bundle, wrapped like a mummy in a dark metallic screen-cloth. A
patch of black silk rested over her face. Four cabin stewards carried
her; and beside her walked George Prince. A long black robe covered
him, but his head was bare. And suddenly he reminded me of the ancient
play-character of Hamlet. His black, wavy hair; his finely chiseled,
pallid face, set now in a stern patrician cast. And staring, I
realized that however much of the villain this man might be, at this
instant, walking beside the body of his dead sister, he was stricken
with grief. He loved that sister with whom he had lived since
childhood; and to see him now no one could doubt it.

The little procession stopped in a patch of starlight by the port.
They rested the body on a bank of chairs. The black-robed chaplain,
roused from his bed and still trembling from excitement of this
sudden, inexplicable death on board, said a brief, solemn little
prayer. An appeal: That the Almighty Ruler of all these blazing worlds
might guard the soul of this gentle girl whose mortal remains were now
to be returned to Him.

Ah, if ever God seemed hovering close, it was now at this instant, on
this starlit deck floating in the black void of space.

Then Carter for just a moment removed the black shroud from her face.
I saw her brother gaze silently; saw him stoop and implant a
kiss--and turn away. I did not want to look, but I found myself moving
slowly forward.

She lay, so beautiful. Her face, white and calm and peaceful in death.
My sight blurred.

"Easy Gregg," Snap was whispering to me. He had his arm around me.
"Come on away."

They tied the shroud over her face. I did not see them as they put the
body in the tube, sent it through the exhaust chamber and dropped it.

But a moment later I saw it, a small black, oblong bundle hovering
beside us. It was perhaps a hundred feet away, circling us. Held by
the _Planetara's_ bulk, it had momentarily become our satellite. It
swung around us like a moon. Gruesome satellite, by nature's laws
forever to follow us.

Then from another tube at the bow, Blackstone operated a small
zed-co-ray projector. Its dull light caught the floating bundle,
neutralizing its metallic wrappings.

It swung off at a tangent. Speeding. Falling free in the dome of the
heavens. A rotating black oblong. But in a moment distance dwindled it
to a speck. A dull silver dot with the sunlight on it. A speck of
human Earth dust, falling free....

It vanished. Anita--gone.




XI


I turned from the deck. Miko was near me! So he had dared show himself
here among us! But I realized he could not be aware we knew he was the
murderer. George Prince had been asleep, had not seen Miko with Anita.
Miko, with impulsive rage had shot the girl and escaped. No doubt now
he was cursing himself for having done it. And he could very well
assume that Anita had died without regaining consciousness to tell who
had killed her.

He gazed at me now. I thought for an instant he was coming over to
talk with me. Though he probably considered he was not suspected of
the murder of Anita, he realized, of course, that his attack on me was
known. He must have wondered what action would be taken.

But he did not approach me. He moved away and went inside. Moa had
been near him; and as though by prearrangement with him she now
accosted me.

"I want to speak to you, _Set_ Haljan."

"Go ahead."

I felt an instinctive aversion to this Martian girl. Yet she was not
unattractive. Over six feet tall, straight and slim. Sleek blond hair.
Rather a handsome face; not gray, like the burly Miko, but pink and
white; stern lipped, but feminine, too. She was smiling gravely now.
Her blue eyes regarded me keenly. She said gently:

"A sad occurrence, Gregg Haljan. And mysterious. I would not question
you--"

"Is that all you have to say?" I demanded.

"No. You are a handsome man, Gregg--attractive to women--to any
Martian woman."

She said it impulsively. Admiration for me was on her face, in her
eyes--a man cannot miss it.

"Thank you."

"I mean, I would be your friend. My brother Miko is so sorry about
what happened between you and him this morning. He only wanted to talk
to you, and he came to your cubby door--"

"With a torch to break its seal," I interjected.

She waved that away. "He was afraid you would not admit him. He told
you he would not harm you."

"And so he struck me with one of your Martian paralyzing rays!"

"He is sorry...."

She seemed gauging me, trying, no doubt, to find out what reprisal
would be taken against her brother. I felt sure that Moa was as active
as a man in any plan that was under way to capture the Grantline
treasure. Miko, with his ungovernable temper, was doing things that
put their plans in jeopardy.

I demanded, "What did your brother want to talk to me about?"

"Me," she said surprisingly. "I sent him. A Martian girl goes after
what she wants. Did you know that?"

She swung on her heel and left me. I puzzled over it. Was that why
Miko struck me down and was carrying me off? I did not think so. I
could not believe that all these incidents were so unrelated to what I
knew was the main undercurrent They wanted me, had tried to capture me
for something else.

Dr. Frank found me mooning alone. "Go to bed, Gregg. You look awful."

"I don't want to go to bed."

"Where's Snap?"

"I don't know. He was here a little while ago." I had not seen him
since the burial of Anita.

"The Captain wants him," he said.

Within an hour the morning siren would arouse the passengers. I was
seated in a secluded corner of the deck, when George Prince came
along. He went past me, a slight, somber, dark-robed figure. He had on
high, thick boots. A hood was over his head, but as he saw me he
pushed it back and dropped down beside me.

For a moment he did not speak. His face showed pallid in the dim
starlight.

"She said you loved her." His soft voice was throaty with emotion.

"Yes." I said it almost against my will. There seemed a bond springing
between this bereaved brother and me. He added, so softly I could
barely hear him: "That makes you, I think, almost my friend. And you
thought you were my enemy."

I held my answer. An incautious tongue running under emotion is a
dangerous thing. And I was sure of nothing.

He went on, "Almost my friend. Because--we both loved her, and she
loved us both." He was hardly more than whispering. "And there is
aboard one whom we both hate."

"Miko!" It burst from me.

"Yes. But do not say it."

Another silence fell between us. He brushed back the black curls from
his forehead. "Have you an eavesdropping microphone, Haljan?"

I hesitated. "Yes."

"I was thinking...." He leaned closer. "If, in half an hour, you could
use it upon Miko's cabin--I would rather tell you than anyone else.
The cabin will be insulated, but I shall find a way of cutting off
that insulation so that you can hear."

So George Prince had turned with us. The shock of his sister's
death--himself allied with her murderer--had been too much for him. He
was with us!

Yet his help must be given secretly. Miko would kill him instantly if
it became known. He had been watchful of the deck. He stood up now.

"I think that is all."

As he turned away, I murmured, "But I do thank you...."

       *       *       *       *       *

The name _Set_ Miko glowed upon the door. It was in a transverse
corridor similar to A22. The corridor was forward of the lounge: it
opened off the small circular library.

The library was unoccupied and unlighted, dim with only the reflected
lights from the nearby passages. I crouched behind a cylinder case.
The door of Miko's room was in sight.

I waited perhaps five minutes. No one entered. Then I realized that
doubtless the conspirators were already there. I set my tiny
eavesdropper on the library floor beside me; connected its little
battery; focused its projector. Was Miko's room insulated? I could not
tell. There was a small ventilating grid above the door. Across its
opening, if the room was insulated, a blue sheen of radiance would be
showing. And there would be a faint hum. But from this distance I
could not see or hear such details, and I was afraid to approach
closer. Once in the transverse corridor, I would have no place to
hide, no way of escape. If anyone approached Miko's door, I would be
trapped.

I threw the current into my apparatus. I prayed, if it met
interference, that the slight sound would pass unnoticed. George
Prince had said that he would make opportunity to disconnect the
room's insulation. He had evidently done so. I picked up the interior
sounds at once; my headphone vibrated with them. And with trembling
fingers on the little dial between my knees as I crouched in the
darkness behind the cylinder case, I synchronized.

