underlip in vexation. This wasn't the way he wanted it; that fellow
had a negatron pistol, and he was close enough to use it effectively.
And he was sheltered behind the Crown; Raud was afraid to shoot. He
didn't miss what he shot at--often. But no man alive could say that he
never missed.

The other Southron, the one in blue with the autoloading rifle, came
out and advanced slowly, his weapon at the ready. Raud tensed himself
to jump, aimed carefully, and waited. When the man in blue was a
hundred yards from the pit, he shot him dead. The rifle was still
lifting from the recoil when he sprang to his feet, turned, and ran.
Before he was twenty feet away, the place where he had been exploded;
the force of the blast almost knocked him down, and steam blew past
and ahead of him. Ignoring his pack and ice-staff, he ran on, calling
to Brave to follow. The dog obeyed instantly; more negatron-blasts
were thundering and blazing and steaming on the crest of the ridge. He
swerved left, ran up another slope, and slid down the declivity
beyond into the ravine on the other side.

There he paused to eject the empty, make sure that there was no snow
in the rifle bore, and reload. The blasting had stopped by then; after
a moment, he heard the voice of Vahr Farg's son, and guessed that the
two surviving thieves had advanced to the blasted crest of the other
ridge. They'd find the pack, and his tracks and Brave's. He wondered
whether they'd come hunting for him, or turn around and go the other
way. He knew what he'd do, under the circumstances, but he doubted if
Vahr's mind would work that way. The Southron's might; he wouldn't
want to be caught between blaster-range and rifle-range of Raud the
Keeper again.

"Come, Brave," he whispered, looking quickly around and then starting
to run.

Lay a trail down this ravine for them to follow. Then get to the top
of the ridge beside it, double back, and wait for them. Let them pass,
and shoot the Southron first. By now, Vahr would have a negatron
pistol too, taken from the body of the man in blue, but it wasn't a
weapon he was accustomed to, and he'd be more than a little afraid of
it.

The ravine ended against an upthrust face of ice, at right angles to
the ridge he had just crossed; there was a V-shaped notch between
them. He turned into this; it would be a good place to get to the
top....

He found himself face to face, at fifteen feet, with Vahr Farg's son
and the Southron in yellow, coming through from the other side. They
had their packs, the Southron had the bearskin bundle, and they had
drawn negatron pistols in their hands.

Swinging up the rifle, he shot the Southron in the chest, making sure
he hit him low enough to miss the Crown. At the same time, he shouted:

"_Catch, Brave!_"

Brave never jumped for the deer or wild-ox that had been shot; always
for the one still on its feet. He launched himself straight at the
throat of Vahr Farg's son--and into the muzzle of Vahr's blaster. He
died in a blue-white flash.

Raud had reversed the heavy rifle as Brave leaped; he threw it,
butt-on, like a seal-spear, into Vahr's face. As soon as it was out of
his fingers, he was jumping forward, snatching out his knife. His left
hand found Vahr's right wrist, and he knew that he was driving the
knife into Vahr's body, over and over, trying to keep the blaster
pointed away from him and away from the body of the dead Southron. At
last, the negatron-pistol fell from Vahr's fingers, and the arm that
had been trying to fend off his knife relaxed.

He straightened and tried to stand--he had been kneeling on Vahr's
body, he found--and reeled giddily. He got to his feet and stumbled to
the other body, kneeling beside it. He tried for a long time before he
was able to detach the bearskin bundle from the dead man's pack. Then
he got the pack open, and found dried venison. He started to divide
it, and realized that there was no Brave with whom to share it. He had
just sent Brave to his death.

Well, and so? Brave had been the Keeper's dog. He had died for the
Crown, and that had been his duty. If he could have saved the Crown by
giving his own life, Raud would have died too. But he could not--if
Raud died the Crown was lost.

The sky was darkening rapidly, and the snow was whitening the body in
green. Moving slowly, he started to make camp for the night.

It was still snowing when he woke. He started to rise, wondering, at
first, where Brave was, and then he huddled back among the robes--his
own and the dead men's--and tried to go to sleep again. Finally, he
got up and ate some of his pemmican, gathered his gear and broke camp.
For a moment, and only a moment, he stood looking to the east, in the
direction he had come from. Then he turned west and started across the
snow toward the edge of the Ice-Father.

       *       *       *       *       *

The snow stopped before he reached the edge, and the sun was shining
when he found a slanting way down into the valley. Then, out of the
north, a black dot appeared in the sky and grew larger, until he saw
that it was a Government airboat--one of the kind used by the men who
measured the growth of the Ice-Father. It came curving in and down
toward him, and a window slid open and a man put his head out.

"Want us to lift you down?" he asked. "We're going to Long Valley
Town. If that's where you're going, we can take you the whole way."

"Yes. That's where I'm going." He said it as though he were revealing,
for the first time, some discovery he had just made. "For your
kindness and help, I thank you."

In less time than a man could walk two miles with a pack, they were
letting down in front of the Government House in Long Valley Town.

He had never been in the Government House before. The walls were clear
glass. The floors were plastic, clean and white. Strips of bright new
lumicon ran around every room at the tops of all the walls. There were
no fires, but the great rooms were as warm as though it were a
midsummer afternoon.

Still carrying his pack and his rifle, Raud went to a desk where a
Southron in a white shirt sat.

"Has Yorn Nazvik's ship, the _Issa_, been here lately?" he asked.

"About six days ago," the Southron said, without looking up from the
papers on his desk. "She's on a trading voyage to the west now, but
Nazvik's coming back here before he goes south. Be here in about ten
days." He looked up. "You have business with Nazvik?"

Raud shook his head. "Not with Yorn Nazvik, no. My business is with
the two Starfolk who are passengers with him. Dranigo and Salvadro."

The Southron looked displeased. "Aren't you getting just a little
above yourself, old man, calling the Prince Salsavadran and the Lord
Dranigrastan by their familiar names?" he asked.

"I don't know what you're talking about. Those were the names they
gave me; I didn't know they had any others."

The Southron started to laugh, then stopped.

"And if I may ask, what is your name, and what business have you with
them?" he inquired.

