and floated above the surface like a captive balloon. Santos, who had been
standing near by to help if requested, hooked a toe on a ground spike,
caught him, and set him upright on the ground again.

"Get me the radiation detection instruments," he ordered.

Koa sensed the urgency in his voice and got the instruments himself. Rip
switched them on and read the illuminated dial on the alpha counter.
Plenty high, as was natural. But no danger there--alpha particles couldn't
penetrate the space suits. Then, his hand clammy inside the space glove,
he switched on the other meter. The gamma count was far below the alpha,
but there were too many of the rays around for comfort. Inside the helmet,
his face turned pale.

There was no immediate danger. It would take many days to build up a dose
of gamma that could hurt them. But gamma was not the only radiation. They
were in space, fully exposed to equally dangerous cosmic radiation.

The Planeteers had gathered while he read the instruments. Now they stood
watching him. They knew the significance of what he had found.

"I ought to be busted to recruit," he told them. "I knew this asteroid was
thorium, and that thorium is radioactive. If I had used my head, I would
have added nuclite shielding to the list of supplies the _Scorpius_
provided. We could have had enough of it to protect us while around our
base, even if we couldn't be protected while working on the charges. That
would at least have kept our dosage down enough for safety."

"No one else thought of it, either, sir," Koa reminded.

"It was my job to think of it, and I didn't. So I've put us in a time
squeeze. If the _Scorpius_ gets back soon, we can get the shielding before
our radiation dosage has built up very high. If the ship doesn't come
back, the dosage will mount."

He looked at them grimly. "It won't kill us, and it won't even make us
very sick. I'll have the ship take us off before we build up that much
dosage."

Santos started. "But, sir! That means ..."

"I know what it means," Rip stated bitterly. "It means the ship has got to
return in time to give us some nuclite shielding, or we'll be the
laughingstock of the Special Order Squadrons--the detachment that started a
job the spacemen had to finish!"





CHAPTER SEVEN - EARTHBOUND!


There was something else that Rip didn't add, although he knew the
Planeteers would realize it in a few minutes. Probably some of them
already had thought of it.

To move the asteroid into a new orbit, they were going to fire nuclear
bombs. Most of the highly radioactive fission products would be blown into
space, but some would be drawn back by the asteroid's slight gravity. The
craters would be highly radioactive and some radioactive debris would be
scattered around, too. Every particle would add to the problem.

"Is there anything we can do, sir?" Koa asked.

Rip shook his head inside the transparent bubble. "If you have a good luck
charm in your pocket, you might talk to it. That's about all."

Nuclear physics had been part of his training. He read the gamma meter
again and did some quick mental calculations. They would be exposed to
radiation for the entire trip, at a daily dosage of--

Koa interrupted his train of thought. Evidently the sergeant-major had
been doing some calculations of his own. "How long will we be on this
rock, sir? You've never told us how long the trip will take."

Rip said quietly, "With luck, it will take us a little more than three
weeks."

He could see their faces faintly in the dim sunlight. They were shocked.
Space ships blasted through space between the inner planets in a matter of
hours. The nuclear drive cruisers, which could approach almost half the
speed of light, had brought even distant Pluto within easy reach. The
inner planets could be covered in a matter of minutes on a straight speed
run, although to take off from one and land on the other meant
considerable time used in acceleration and deceleration.

The Planeteers were used to such speed. Hearing that it would take over
three weeks to reach earth had jarred them.

"This piece of metal isn't a space ship," Rip reminded them. "At the
moment, our speed around the sun is just slightly more than ten miles a
second. If we just shifted orbits and kept the same speed, it would take
us months to reach Terra. But we'll use two bombs to kick the asteroid
into the orbit, then fire one to increase speed. The estimate is that
we'll push up to about forty miles a second."

Koa spoke up. "That's not bad when you think that Mercury is the fastest
planet and it only makes about thirty miles a second."

"Right," Rip agreed. "And when we really have the sun's gravity pulling
us, we'll increase speed. We'll lose a little after we pass the sun, but
by then we'll be almost home."

It was just space luck that Terra was on the other side of the sun from
the asteroid's present position. By the time they approached, it would be
in a good place, just far enough from the line to the sun to avoid
changing course. Of course Rip's planned orbit was not aiming the asteroid
at earth, but at where earth would be at the end of the trip.

"That means more than three weeks of radiation, then," Corporal Santos
observed. "Can we take it, sir?"

Rip shrugged, but the gesture couldn't be seen inside his space suit. "At
the rate we're getting radiation now, plus what I estimate we'll get from
the nuclear explosions, we'll get the maximum safety limit in just three
weeks. That leaves us no margin, even if we risk getting radiation
sickness. So we have to get shielding pretty soon. If we do, we can last
the trip."

Private Dominico saluted, clumsy in his space suit. "Sir, I ask permission
to speak."

Rip hid a smile at the little Italian's formal manner. In space, formality
was forgotten. "What is it, Dominico?"

"Sir, I think we not worry so much about this radiation, eh? You will
think of some ways to take care of it, sir. What I want to ask, sir, is
when do we let go the bombs? Radiation I do not know much about, but I can
set those bombs like you want them."

Rip was touched by the Italian Planeteer's faith in his ability to solve
the radiation problem. That was why being an officer in the Special Order
Squadrons was so challenging. The men knew the kind of training their
officers had and they expected them to come up with technical solutions as
the situation required.

"You'll have a chance to set the bombs in just a short while," he said
crisply. "Let's get busy. Koa, load all bombs but one ten KT on the
landing boat. Stake the rest of the equipment down. While you're doing
that, I'll find the spots where we plant the charges. I'll need two men
now and more later."

He went back to his instrument, putting the radiation problem out of his
mind--a rather hard thing to do with the colorimeter glowing pink next to
his shoulder. Koa detailed men to load the nuclear bombs into the landing
craft, left Pederson to supervise, and then brought Santos with him to
help Rip.

"The bombs are being put on the boat, sir," Koa reported.

"Fine. There isn't too much chance of the blasts setting them off, but
we'll take no chances at all. Koa, I'm going to shoot a line straight out
toward Alpha Centauri. You walk that way and turn on your belt light. I'll
tell you which way to move."

He adjusted his sighting rings while the sergeant-major glided away.
Moving around on a no-weight world was more like skating than walking. A
regular walk would have lifted Koa into space with every step. Of course
the asteroid had some gravity, but it was so slight that it didn't count.

Rip centered the top of the instrument's vertical hair line on Alpha
Centauri, then waited until Koa was almost out of sight over the
asteroid's horizon, which was only a few hundred yards away.

He turned up the volume on his helmet communicator. "Koa, move about ten
feet to your left."

Koa did so. Rip sighted past the vertical hairline at the belt light.
"That's a little too far. Take a small step to the right. Good ... just a
few inches more ... hold it. You're right in position. Stand where you
are."

"Yessir."

Rip turned to Santos. "Stand here, Corporal. Take a sight at Koa through
the instrument to get your bearings, then hold position."

Santos did so. Now the two lights gave Rip one of the lines he needed. He
called for two more men, and Trudeau and Nunez joined him. "Follow me," he
directed.

Rip picked up the instrument and carried it to a point 90 degrees from the
line represented by Koa and Santos. He put the instrument down and zeroed
it on Messier 44, the Beehive star cluster in the constellation Cancer.
For the second sighting star he chose Beta Pyxis as being closest to the
line he wanted, made the slight adjustments necessary to set the line of
sight since Pyxis wasn't exactly on it, then directed Trudeau into
position as he had Koa. Nunez took position behind the instrument and Rip
had the cross-fix he wanted.

He called for Dowst, then carried the instrument to the center of the
cross formed by the four men. Using the instrument, he rechecked the lines
from the center out. They were within a hair or two of being exactly on,
and a slight error wouldn't hurt anyway. He knew he would have to correct
with rocket blasts once the asteroid was in the new orbit.

"X marks the spot," he told Dowst. He put his toe on the place where the
cross lines met.

Dowst took a spike from his belt and made an X in the metal ground.

"All set," Rip announced. "You four men can move now. Let's have the
cutting equipment over here, Koa."

The Planeteers were all waiting for instructions now. In a few moments the
equipment was ready, fuel and oxygen bottles attached.

"Who's the champion torchman?" Rip asked.

Koa replied, "Kemp is, sir."

Kemp, one of the two American privates, took the torch and waited for
orders. "We need a hole six feet across and twenty feet deep," Rip told
him. "Go to it."

"How about direction, sir?" Kemp asked.

"Straight down. We'll take a bearing on an overhead star when you're in a
few feet."

Dowst inscribed a circle around the X he had made and stood back. Kemp
pushed the striker button and the torch flared. "Watch your eyes," he
warned. The Planeteers reached for belt controls and turned the rheostats
that darkened the clear bubbles electronically. Kemp adjusted his flame
until it was blue-white, a knife of fire brighter by far than the sun.

Koa stepped behind Kemp and leaned against his back, because the flame of
the torch was like an exhaust, driving Kemp backward. Kemp bent down and
the torch sliced into the metal of the asteroid like a hot knife into ice.
The metal splintered a little as the heat raised it instantly from almost
absolute zero to many thousands of degrees.

When the circle was completed, Kemp adjusted his torch again and the flame
lengthened. He moved inside the circle and cut at an angle toward the
perimeter. His control was quick and certain. In a moment he stood aside
and Koa lifted out a perfect ring of thorium. It varied from a knife edge
on the inner side to 18 inches thick on the outer edge.

In the middle of the circle there was now a cone of metal. Kemp cut around
it, the torch angling toward the center. A piece shaped like two cones set
base to base came free. Since the metal cooled in the bitter chill of
space almost as fast as Kemp could cut it, there was no heat to worry
about.

Alternately cutting from the outside and the center of the hole, Kemp
worked his way downward until his head was below ground level. Rip called
a halt. Kemp gave a little jump and floated straight upward. Koa caught
him and swung him to one side. Rip stepped into the hole and Santos gave
him a slight push to send him to the bottom. Rip knelt and sighted upward.
Kemp had done a good job. The star Rip had chosen as an overhead guide was
straight up.

He bounced out of the hole and as Koa caught him he told Kemp to go ahead.
"Dominico, here's your chance. Get tools and wire. Find a timer and
connect up the ten kiloton bomb. Nunez, bring it here while Dominico gets
what he needs."

Kemp was burning his way into the asteroid at a good rate. Every few
moments he pushed another circle or spindle of thorium out of the hole.
Rip directed some of the men to carry them away, to the other side of the
asteroid. He didn't want chunks of thorium flying around from the blast.

The sergeant-major had a sudden thought. He cut off his communicator,
motioned to Rip to do the same, then put his helmet against Rip's for
direct communication. He didn't want the others to hear what he had to
say. His voice came like a roar from, the bottom of a well. "Lieutenant,
do you suppose there's any chance the blast might break up the asteroid?
Maybe split it in two?"

The same thought had occurred to Rip on the _Scorpius_. His calculations
had showed that the metal would do little more than compress, except where
it melted from the terrific heat of the bomb. That would be only in and
around the shaft. He was sure the men at Terra base had figured it out
before they decided that A-bombs would be necessary to throw the asteroid
into a new orbit. He wasn't worried. Cracks in the asteroid would be
dangerous, but he hadn't seen any.

"This rock will take more nuclear blasts than we have," he assured Koa. He
turned his communicator back on and went to the edge of the hole for a
look at Kemp's progress. He was far down, now. Pederson was holding one
end of a measuring tape. The other end was fastened to Kemp's shoulder
strap.

The Swedish corporal showed Rip that he had only about eight feet of tape
left. Kemp was almost down. Rip called, "Kemp. When you reach bottom, cut
toward the center. Leave an inverted cone."

"Got it, sir. Be up in two more cuts."

Dominico had connected cable to the bomb terminals and was attaching a
timer to the other end. Without the wooden case, the bomb was like a fat,
oversized can. It had been shipped without a combat casing.

"Koa, make a final check. You can untie the landing boat, except for one
line. We'll be taking off in a few minutes."

"Right, sir." Koa glided toward the landing boat, which was out of sight
over the horizon.

It was nearly time. Rip had a moment's misgiving. Had his figures or his
sightings been off? His red hair prickled at the thought. But the ship's
computer had done the work, and it was not capable of making a mistake.

Kemp tossed up the last section of thorium and then came out of the hole
himself, carrying his torch.

Rip inspected the hole, saw with satisfaction it was in almost perfect
alignment, and ordered the bomb placed. He bent over the edge of the hole
and watched Trudeau pay out wire while Dominico pushed the bomb to the
bottom. The Italian made a last minute check, then called to Rip. "Ready,
sir."

He dropped into the hole and inspected the connections himself, then
personally pulled the safety lever. The bomb was armed. When the timer
acted, it would go off.

Back at ground level, he turned up his communicator. "Koa, is everything
ready at the boat?"

"Ready, sir."

The Planeteers had already carried away the torch and its fuel and oxygen
supplies. The area was clear of pieces of thorium.

Rip announced, "We're setting the explosion for ten minutes." He leaned
over the timer, which rested near the lip of the hole, took the dial
control in his glove and turned it to position ten. He held it long enough
to glance at his chronometer and say, "Starting now!" Then he let it go.

Wasting no time, but not hurrying, he and Dominico returned to the landing
boat. The Planeteers were already aboard, except for Koa, who stood by to
cast off the remaining tie line. Rip stepped inside and counted the men.
All present. He ordered, "Cast off." As Koa did so and stepped aboard, he
added, "Pilot, take off. Straight up."

The landing boat rose from the asteroid. Rip counted the men again, just
to be sure. The boat seemed a little crowded, but that was because the
rear compartment took up quite a bit of room.

Rip watched his chronometer. They had plenty of time. When the boat
reached a point about ten miles above the asteroid, he ordered, "Stern
tube." The boat moved at an angle. He let it go until a sight at the stars
showed they were about in the right position, 90 degrees from the line of
blast and where they would be behind the asteroid as it moved toward the
new course.

He looked at his chronometer again. "Two minutes. Line up at the side if
you want to watch, but darken your helmets to full protection. This thing
will light up like nothing you've ever seen before."

It was a good thing space cruisers depended on their radar and not on
sight, he thought. Usually spacemen opened up visual ports only when
landing or taking a star sight for an astro-plot. The clear plastic of the
