pressing its way through as though it were a solid body. In a moment it
was through the steel slab, and out on the other side.

"It will pass through any body with equal ease. It seems to answer only
these controls, and these it answers perfectly, and without difficulty.

"One other thing we can do with it. I can increase its rate of energy
discharge."

The Talsonian turned a fourth dial, well off to one side, and the
brilliance of the spot increased enormously. The heat was unbearable.
Almost at once he shut it off.

"That is the principle we use in making it a weapon. Watch the actual
operation."

The ball of fire shot toward an open window, out the window, and
vanished in the sky above. The Talsonian stopped the rotation of the
dials. "It is motionless now, but scarcely visible. I will now release
all the energy." He twirled the fourth dial, and instantly there was a
flash of light, and a moment later a terrific concussion.

"It is gone." He left the controls, and went over to his apparatus. He
set a heavy silver bladed switch, and placed a new tube in the
apparatus. A second switch arced a bit as he drove it home. "Your
generator is recharging the accumulators."

Stel Felso Theu took the backplate of the control cabinet off, and the
terrestrians looked at the control with interest.

"Got it, Morey?" asked Arcot after a time.

"Think so. Want to try making it up? We can do so out of spare junk
about the ship, I think. We won't need the tube if what I believe of it
is true."

Arcot turned to the Talsonian. "We wish you to accompany us to the ship.
We have apparatus there which we wish to set up."

Back to the ship they went. There Arcot, Morey and Wade worked rapidly.

It was about three-quarters of an hour later when Arcot and his friends
called the others to the laboratory. They had a maze of apparatus on the
power bench, and the shining relux conductors ran all over the ship
apparently. One huge bar ran into the power room itself, and plugged
into the huge power-coil power supply.

They were still working at it, but looked up as the others entered.
"Guess it will work," said Arcot with a grin.

There were four dials, and three huge switches. Arcot set all four
dials, and threw one of the switches. Then he started slowly turning the
fourth dial. In the center of the room a dim, shining mist a foot in
diameter began to appear. It condensed, solidified without shrinking, a
solid ball of matter a foot in diameter. It seemed black, but was a
perfectly reflective surface--and luminous!

"Then--then you had already known of this thing? Then why did you not
tell me when I tried to show it?" demanded the Talsonian.

Arcot was sending the globe, now perfectly non-luminous, about the room.
It flattened out suddenly, and was a disc. He tossed a small weight on
it, and it remained fixed, but began to radiate slightly. Arcot
readjusted his dials, and it ceased radiating, held perfectly
motionless. The sphere returned, and the weight dropped to the floor.
Arcot maneuvered it about for a moment more. Then he placed his friends
behind a screen of relux, and increased the radiation of the globe
tremendously. The heat became intense, and he stopped the radiation.

"No, Stel Felso Theu, we do not have this on our world," Arcot said.

"You do not have it! You look at my apparatus fifteen minutes, and then
work for an hour--and you have apparatus far more effective than ours,
which required years of development!" exclaimed the Talsonian.

"Ah, but it was not wholly new to me. This ship is driven by curving
space into peculiar coordinates. Even so, we didn't do such a hot job,
did we, Morey?"

"No, we should have--"

"What--it was not a good job?" interrupted the Talsonian. "You succeeded
in creating it in air--in making it stop radiating, in making a ball a
foot in diameter, made it change to a disc, made it carry a load--what
do you want?"

"We want the full possibilities, the only thing that can save us in this
war," Morey said.

"What you learned how to do was the reverse of the process we learned.
How you did it is a wonder--but you did. Very well--matter is
energy--does your physics know that?" asked Arcot.

"It does; matter contains vast energy," replied the Talsonian.

"Matter has mass, and energy because of that! Mass _is_ energy. Energy
in any known form is a field of force in space. So matter is ordinarily
a combination of magnetic, electrostatic and gravitational fields. Your
apparatus combined the three, and put them together. The result
was--matter!

"You created matter. We can destroy it but we cannot create it.

"What we ordinarily call matter is just a marker, a sign that there are
those energy-fields. Each bit is surrounded by a gravitational field.
The bit is just the marker of that gravitational field.

"But that seems to be wrong. This artificial matter of yours seems also
a sort of knot, for you make all three fields, combine them, and have
the matter, but not, very apparently, like normal matter. Normal matter
also holds the fields that make it. The artificial matter is surrounded
by the right fields, but it is evidently not able to hold the fields, as
normal matter does. That was why your matter continually disintegrated
to ordinary energy. The energy was not bound properly.

"But the reason why it would blow up so was obvious. It did not take
much to destroy the slight hold that the artificial matter had on its
field, and then it instantly proceeded to release all its energy at
once. And as you poured millions of horsepower into it all day to fill
it, it naturally raised merry hell when it let loose."

Arcot was speaking eagerly, excitedly.

"But here is the great fact, the important thing: It is artificially
created in a given place. It is made, and exists at the point determined
by these three coordinated dials. It is not natural, and can exist only
where it is made and nowhere else--obvious, but important. It cannot
exist save at the point designated. Then, if that point moves along a
line, the artificial matter must follow that moving point and be always
at that point. Suppose now that a slab of steel is on that line. The
point moves to it--through it. To exist, that artificial matter _must_
follow it through the steel--if not, it is destroyed. Then the steel is
attempting to destroy the artificial matter. If the matter has
sufficient energy, it will force the steel out of the way, and
penetrate. The same is true of any other matter, lux metal or relux--it
will penetrate. To continue in existence it must. And it has great
energy, and will expend every erg of that energy of existence to
continue existence.

"It is, as long as its energy holds out, absolutely irresistible!

"But similarly, if it is at a given point, it must stay there, and will
expend every erg staying there. It is then immovable! It is either
irresistible in motion, or immovable in static condition. It is the
irresistible and the immovable!

"What happens if the irresistible meets the immovable? It can only fight
with its energy of existence, and the more energetic prevails."




Chapter X

IMPROVEMENTS AND CALCULATIONS


"It is still incredible. But you have done it. It is certainly
successful!" said the Talsonian scientist with conviction.

Arcot shook his head. "Far from it--we have not realized a thousandth
part of the tremendous possibilities of this invention. We must work and
calculate and then invent.

"Think of the possibilities as a shield--naturally if we can make the
matter we should be able to control its properties in any way we like.
We should be able to make it opaque, transparent, or any color." Arcot
was speaking to Morey now. "Do you remember, when we were caught in that
cosmic ray field in space when we first left this universe, that I said
that I had an idea for energy so vast that it would be impossible to
describe its awful power?[1] I mentioned that I would attempt to
liberate it if ever there was need? The need exists. I want to find that
secret."

[Footnote 1: Islands of Space.]

Stel Felso Theu was looking out through the window at a group of men
excitedly beckoning. He called the attention of the others to them, and
himself went out. Arcot and Wade joined him in a moment.

"They tell me that Fellsheh, well to the poleward of here has used four
of its eight shots. They are still being attacked," explained the
Talsonian gravely.

"Well, get in," snapped Arcot as he ran back to the ship. Stel Felso
hastily followed, and the _Ancient Mariner_ shot into the air, and
darted away, poleward, to the Talsonian's directions. The ground fled
behind them at a speed that made the scientist grip the hand-rail with a
tenseness that showed his nervousness.

As they approached, a tremendous concussion and a great gout of light in
the sky informed them of the early demise of several Thessians. But a
real fleet was clustered about the city. Arcot approached low, and was
able to get quite close before detection. His ray screen was up and
Morey had charged the artificial matter apparatus, small as it was, for
operation. He created a ball of substance outside the _Ancient Mariner_,
and thrust it toward the nearest Thessian, just as a molecular hit the
_Ancient Mariner'_s ray screen.

The artificial matter instantly exploded with terrific violence,
slightly denting the tremendously strong lux metal walls. The pressure
of the light was so great that the inner relux walls were dented inward.
The ground below was suddenly, instantaneously fused.

"Lord--they won't pass a ray screen, obviously," Morey muttered, picking
himself from where he had fallen.

"Hey--easy there. You blinked off the ray screen, and our relux is
seriously weakened," called Arcot, a note of worry in his voice.

"No artificial matter with the ray screen up. I'll use the magnet,"
called Morey.

He quickly shut off the apparatus, and went to the huge magnet control.
The power room was crowded, and now that the battle was raging in truth,
with three ships attacking simultaneously, even the enormous power
capacity of the ship's generators was not sufficient, and the storage
coils had been thrown into the operation. Morey looked at the
instruments a moment. They were all up to capacity, save the ammeter
from the coils. That wasn't registering yet. Suddenly it flicked, and
the other instrument dropped to zero. They were in artificial space.

"Come here, will you, Morey," called Arcot. In a moment Morey joined his
much worried friend.

"That artificial matter control won't work through ray screens. The
Thessians never had to protect against moleculars here, and didn't have
them up--hence the destruction wrought. We can't take our screen down,
and we can't use our most deadly weapon with it up. If we had a big
outfit, we might throw a screen around the whole ship, and sail right
in. But we haven't.

"We can't stand ten seconds against that fleet. I'm going to find their
base, and make them yell for help." Arcot snapped a tiny switch one
notch further for the barest instant, then snapped it back. They were
several millions miles from the planet. "Quicker," he explained, "to
simply follow those ships back home--go back in time."

With the telectroscope, he took views at various distances, thus quickly
tracing them back to their base at the pole of the planet. Instantly
Arcot shot down, reaching the pole in less than a second, by carefully
maneuvering of the space device.

A gigantic dome of polished relux rose from rocky, icy plains. The thing
was nearly half a mile high, a mighty rounded roof that covered an area
almost three-quarters of a mile in diameter. Titanic--that was the only
word that described it. About it there was the peculiar shimmer of a
molecular ray screen.

Morey darted to the power room and set his apparatus into operation. He
created a ball of matter outside the ship and hurled it instantly at the
fort. It exploded with a terrific concussion as it hit the wall of the
ray screen. Almost instantly a second one followed. The concussion was
terrifically violent, the ground about was fused, and the ray screen was
opened for a moment. Arcot threw all his moleculars on the screen, as
Morey sent bomb after bomb at it. The coils supplied the energy, cracked
the rock beneath. Each energy release disrupted the ray-screen for a
moment, and the concentrated fury of the molecular beams poured through
the opened screen, and struck the relux behind. It glowed opalescent now
in a spot twenty feet across. But the relux was tremendously thick.
Thirty bombs Morey hurled, while they held their position without
difficulty, pouring their bombs and rays at the fort.

Arcot threw the ship into space, moved, and reappeared suddenly nearly
three hundred yards further on. A snap of the eyes, and he saw that the
fleet was approaching now. He went again into space, and retreated.
Discretion was the better part of valor. But his plan had worked.

He waited half an hour, and returned. From a distance the telectroscope
told him that one lone ship was patrolling outside the fort. He moved
toward it, creeping up behind the icy mountains. His magnetic beam
reached out. The ship lurched and fell. The magnetic beam reached out
toward the fort, from which a molecular ray had flashed already, tearing
up the icy waste which had concealed him. The ray-screen stopped it,
while again Morey turned the magnetic beam on--this time against the
fort. The ray remained on! Arcot retreated hastily.

"They found the secret, all right. No use, Morey, come on up," called
the pilot. "They evidently put magnetic shielding around the apparatus.
That means the magnetic beam is no good to us any more. They will
certainly warn every other base, and have them install similar
protection."

"Why didn't you try the magnetic ray on our first attack?" asked Zezdon
Afthen.

"If it had worked, their sending apparatus would have been destroyed,
and no message could have been sent to call their attackers off
Fellsheh. By forcing them to recall their fleet I got results I couldn't
get by attacking the fleet," Arcot said.

"I think there is little more I can do here, Stel Felso Theu. I will
take you to Shesto, and there make final arrangements till my return,
with apparatus capable of overthrowing your enemies. If you wish to
accompany me--you may." He glanced around at the others of his party.
"And our next move will be to return to Earth with what we have. Then we
will investigate the Sirian planets, and learn anything they may have of
interest, thence--to the real outer space, the utter void of
intergalactic space, and an attempt to learn the secret of that enormous
power."

They returned to Shesto, and there Arcot arranged that the only
generator they could spare, the one already in their possession, might
be used till other terrestrian ships could bring more. They left for
Earth. Hour after hour they fled through the void, till at last old Sol
was growing swiftly ahead of them, and finally Earth itself was large on
the screens. They changed to a straight molecular drive, and dropped to
the Vermont field from which they had taken off.

During the long voyage, Morey and Arcot had both spent much of the time
working on the time-distortion field, which would give them a tremendous
control over time, either speeding or slowing their time rate
enormously. At last, this finished, they had worked on the artificial
matter theory, to the point where they could control the shape of the
matter perfectly, though as yet they could not control its exact nature.
The possibility of such control was, however, definitely proven by the
results the machines had given them. Arcot had been more immediately
interested in the control of form. He could control the nature as to
opacity or transparency to all vibrations that normal matter is opaque
or transparent to. Light would pass, or not as he chose, but cosmics he
could not stop nor would radio or moleculars be stopped by any present
shield he could make.

They had signaled, as soon as they slowed outside the atmosphere, and
when they settled to the field, Arcot's father and a number of very
important scientists had already arrived.

Arcot senior greeted his son very warmly, but he was tremendously
worried, as his son soon saw.

"What's happened, Dad--won't they believe your statements?"

"They doubted when I went to Luna for a session with the Interplanetary
Council, but before they could say much, they had plenty of proof of my
statements," the older man answered. "News came that a fleet of
Planetary Guard ships had been wiped out by a fleet of ships from outer
space. They were huge things--nearly half a mile in length. The Guard
ships went up to them--fifty of them--and tried to signal for a
conference. The white ship was instantly wiped out--we don't know how.
They didn't have ray screens, but that wasn't it. Whatever it
was--slightly luminous ray in space--it simply released the energy of
the lux metal and relux of the ship. Being composed of light energy
simply bound by photonic attraction, it let go with terrible energy.
They can do it almost instantly from a distance. The other Guards at
once let loose with all their moleculars and cosmics. The enemy shunted
off the moleculars, and wiped out the Guard almost instantly.

"Of course, I could explain the screen, but not the detonation ray. I am
inclined to believe from other casualties that the destruction, though
reported as an instantaneous explosion, was not that. Other ships have
been destroyed, and they seemed to catch fire, and burn, but with
terrific speed, more like gun powder than coal. It seems to start a
spreading decomposition, the ship lasts perhaps ten minutes. If it went
instantly, the shock of such a tremendous energy release would disrupt
the planet.

"At any rate, the great fleet separated, twelve went to the North Pole
of Earth, twelve to the south, and similarly twelve to each pole of
Venus. Then one of them turned, and went back to wherever it had come
from, to report. Just turned and vanished. Similarly one from Venus
turned and vanished. That leaves twelve at each of the four poles, for,
as I said, there were an even fifty.

"They all followed the same tactics on landing, so I'll simply tell what
happened in Attica. In the North they had to pick one of the islands a
bit to the south of the pole. They melted about a hundred square miles
of ice to find one.

"The ships arranged themselves in a circle around the place, and
literally hundreds of men poured out of each and fell to work. In a
short time, they had set up a number of machines, the parts coming from
the ships. These machines at once set to work, and they built up a relux
wall. That wall was at least six feet thick; the floor was lined with
thick relux as well as the roof, which is simply a continuation of the
wall in a perfect dome. They had so many machines working on it, that
within twenty-four hours they had it finished.

"We attacked twice, once in practically our entire force, with some
ray-shield machines. The result was disastrous. The second attack was
made with ray shielded machines only, and little damage was done to
either side, though the enemy were somewhat impeded by masses of ice
hurled into their position. Their relux disintegration ray was
conspicuous by its absence.

"Yesterday--and it seems a lot longer than that, son--they started it
again. They'd been unloading it from the ship evidently. We had had
