  the fungus is but little affected. The preparation should now be
  washed and mounted in dilute glycerine.

  The spores (ooespores) are much larger than those first formed, and
  possess an outer coat of a dark brown color (Fig. 33, _H_). Each
  spore is contained in a large cell, which arises as a swelling of
  one of the filaments, and becomes shut off by a wall. At first
  (Fig. 33, _F_) its contents are granular, and fill it completely,
  but later contract to form a globular mass of protoplasm (G.
  _o_), the germ cell or egg cell. The whole is an ooegonium, and
  differs in no essential respect from that of _Vaucheria_.

  Frequently a smaller cell (antheridium), arising from a neighboring
  filament, and in close contact with the ooegonium, may be detected
  (Fig. 33, _F_, _G_, _an._), and in exceptionally favorable cases a
  tube is to be seen connecting it with the germ cell, and by means of
  which fertilization is effected.

  After being fertilized, the germ cell secretes a wall, at first thin
  and colorless, but later becoming thick and dark-colored on the
  outside, and showing a division into several layers, the outermost
  of which is dark brown, and covered with irregular reticulate
  markings. These spores do not germinate at once, but remain over
  winter unchanged.

[Illustration: FIG. 34.--Fragment of a filament of the white rust of
the shepherd's-purse, showing the suckers (_h_), x 300.]

It is by no means impossible that sometimes the germ cell may develop
into a spore without being fertilized, as is the case in many of the
water moulds.

Closely related to the species above described is another one
(_C. candidus_), which attacks shepherd's-purse, radish, and others of
the mustard family, upon which it forms chalky white blotches, and
distorts the diseased parts of the plant very greatly.

  For some reasons this is the best species for study, longitudinal
  sections through the stem showing very beautifully the structure of
  the fungus, and the penetration of the cells of the host[4] by the
  suckers (Fig. 34).

[4] "Host," the plant or animal upon which a parasite lives.

[Illustration: FIG. 35.--Non-sexual spores of the vine mildew
(_Peronospora viticola_), x 150.]

Very similar to the white rusts in most respects, but differing in the
arrangement of the non-sexual spores, are the mildews (_Peronospora_,
_Phytophthora_). These plants form mouldy-looking patches on the
leaves and stems of many plants, and are often very destructive. Among
them are the vine mildew (_Peronospora viticola_) (Fig. 35), the
potato fungus (_Phytophthora infestans_), and many others.


ORDER III.--_Saprolegniaceae_ (WATER MOULDS).

These plants resemble quite closely the white rusts, and are probably
related to them. They grow on decaying organic matter in water, or
sometimes on living water animals, fish, crustaceans, etc. They may
usually be had for study by throwing into water taken from a stagnant
pond or aquarium, a dead fly or some other insect. After a few days it
will probably be found covered with a dense growth of fine, white
filaments, standing out from it in all directions (Fig. 36, _A_).
Somewhat later, if carefully examined with a lens, little round, white
bodies may be seen scattered among the filaments.

[Illustration: FIG. 36.--_A_, an insect that has decayed in water, and
become attacked by a water mould (_Saprolegnia_), natural size. _B_, a
ripe zooesporangium, x 100. _C_, the same discharging the spores. _D_,
active. _E_, germinating zooespores, x 300. _F_, a second sporangium
forming below the empty one. _G_ i-iv, development of the ooegonium,
x 100. _H_, ripe ooegonium filled with resting spores, x 100.]

  On carefully removing a bit of the younger growth and examining it
  microscopically, it is found to consist of long filaments much like
  those of _Vaucheria_, but entirely destitute of chlorophyll. In
  places these filaments are filled with densely granular protoplasm,
  which when highly magnified exhibits streaming movements. The
  protoplasm contains a large amount of oil in the form of small,
  shining drops.

  In the early stages of its growth the plant multiplies by zooespores,
  produced in great numbers in sporangia at the ends of the branches.
  The protoplasm collects here much as we saw in _V. sessilis_, the
  end of the filament becoming club-shaped and ending in a short
  protuberance (Fig. 36, _B_). This end becomes separated by a wall,
  and the contents divide into numerous small cells that sometimes are
  naked, and sometimes have a delicate membrane about them. The first
  sign of division is the appearance in the protoplasm of delicate
  lines dividing it into numerous polygonal areas which soon become
  more distinct, and are seen to be distinct cells whose outlines
  remain more or less angular on account of the mutual pressure. When
  ripe, the end of the sporangium opens, and the contained cells are
  discharged (Fig. 36, _C_). In case they have no membrane, they swim
  away at once, each being provided with two cilia, and resembling
  almost exactly the zooespores of the white rust (Fig. 36, _D_, _E_).
  When the cells are surrounded by a membrane they remain for some
  time at rest, but finally the contents escape as a zooespore, like
  those already described. By killing the zooespores with a little
  iodine the granular nature of the protoplasm is made more evident,
  and the cilia may be seen. They soon come to rest, and germinate in
  the same way as those of the white rusts and mildews.

  As soon as the sporangium is emptied, a new one is formed, either by
  the filament growing up through it (Fig. 36, _F_) and the end being
  again cut off, or else by a branch budding out just below the base
  of the empty sporangium, and growing up by the side of it.

  Besides zooespores there are also resting spores developed. Ooegonia
  like those of _Vaucheria_ or the _Peronosporeae_ are formed usually
  after the formation of zooespores has ceased; but in many cases,
  perhaps all, these develop without being fertilized. Antheridia are
  often wanting, and even when they are present, it is very doubtful
  whether fertilization takes place.[5]

[5] The antheridia, when present, arise as branches just below the
ooegonium, and become closely applied to it, sometimes sending tubes
through its wall, but there has been no satisfactory demonstration of
an actual transfer of the contents of the antheridium to the egg cell.

  The ooegonia (Fig. 36, _G_, _H_) arise at the end of the main
  filaments, or of short side branches, very much as do the sporangia,
  from which they differ at this stage in being of globular form. The
  contents contract to form one or several egg cells, naked at first,
  but later becoming thick-walled resting spores (_H_).




CHAPTER IX.

THE TRUE FUNGI (_Mycomycetes_).


The great majority of the plants ordinarily known as _fungi_ are
embraced under this head. While some of the lower forms show
affinities with the _Phycomycetes_, and through them with the algae,
the greater number differ very strongly from all green plants both in
their habits and in their structure and reproduction. It is a
much-disputed point whether sexual reproduction occurs in any of them,
and it is highly probable that in the great majority, at any rate, the
reproduction is purely non-sexual.

Probably to be reckoned with the _Mycomycetes_, but of doubtful
affinities, are the small unicellular fungi that are the main causes
of alcoholic fermentation; these are the yeast fungi (_Saccharomycetes_).
They cause the fermentation of beer and wine, as well as the incipient
fermentation in bread, causing it to "rise" by the giving off of
bubbles of carbonic acid gas during the process.

If a little common yeast is put into water containing starch or sugar,
and kept in a warm place, in a short time bubbles of gas will make
their appearance, and after a little longer time alcohol may be
detected by proper tests; in short, alcoholic fermentation is taking
place in the solution.

  If a little of the fermenting liquid is examined microscopically, it
  will be found to contain great numbers of very small, oval cells,
  with thin cell walls and colorless contents. A careful examination
  with a strong lens (magnifying from 500-1000 diameters) shows that
  the protoplasm, in which are granules of varying size, does not fill
  the cell completely, but that there are one or more large vacuoles
  or spaces filled with colorless cell sap. No nucleus is visible in
  the living cell, but it has been shown that a nucleus is present.

  If growth is active, many of the cells will be seen dividing. The
  process is somewhat different from ordinary fission and is called
  budding (Fig. 37, _B_). A small protuberance appears at the bud or
  at the side of the cell, and enlarges rapidly, assuming the form of
  the mother cell, from which it becomes completely separated by the
  constriction of the base, and may fall off at once, or, as is more
  frequently the case, may remain attached for a time, giving rise
  itself to other buds, so that not infrequently groups of half a
  dozen or more cells are met with (Fig. 37, _B_, _C_).

[Illustration: FIG. 37.--_A_, single cells of yeast. _B_, _C_, similar
cells, showing the process of budding, x 750.]

That the yeast cells are the principal agents of alcoholic
fermentation may be shown in much the same way that bacteria are shown
to cause ordinary decomposition. Liquids from which they are excluded
will remain unfermented for an indefinite time.

There has been much controversy as to the systematic position of the
yeast fungi, which has not yet been satisfactorily settled, the
question being whether they are to be regarded as independent plants
or only one stage in the life history of some higher fungi (possibly
the _Smuts_), which through cultivation have lost the power of
developing further.


CLASS I.--THE SMUTS (_Ustillagineae_).

The smuts are common and often very destructive parasitic fungi,
living entirely within the tissues of the higher plants. Owing to
this, as well as to the excessively small spores and difficulty in
germinating them, the plants are very difficult of study, except in a
general way, and we will content ourselves with a glance at one of the
common forms, the corn smut (_Ustillago maydis_). This familiar fungus
attacks Indian corn, forming its spores in enormous quantities in
various parts of the diseased plant, but particularly in the flowers
("tassel" and young ear).

  The filaments, which resemble somewhat those of the white rusts,
  penetrate all parts of the plant, and as the time approaches for the
  formation of the spores, these branch extensively, and at the same
  time become soft and mucilaginous (Fig. 38, _B_). The ends of these
  short branches enlarge rapidly and become shut off by partitions,
  and in each a globular spore (Fig. 38, _C_) is produced. The outer
  wall is very dark-colored and provided with short spines. To study
  the filaments and spore formation, very thin sections should be made
  through the young kernels or other parts in the vicinity, before
  they are noticeably distorted by the growth of the spore-bearing
  filaments.

[Illustration: FIG. 38.--_A_, "tassel" of corn attacked by smut
(_Ustillago_). _B_, filaments of the fungus from a thin section of a
diseased grain, showing the beginning of the formation of the spores,
x 300. _C_, ripe spores, x 300.]

As the spores are forming, an abnormal growth is set up in the cells
of the part attacked, which in consequence becomes enormously enlarged
(Fig. 38, _A_), single grains sometimes growing as large as a walnut.
As the spores ripen, the affected parts, which are at first white,
become a livid gray, due to the black spores shining through the
overlying white tissues. Finally the masses of spores burst through
the overlying cells, appearing like masses of soot, whence the popular
name for the plant.

The remaining _Mycomycetes_ are pretty readily divisible into two
great classes, based upon the arrangement of the spores. The first of
these is known as the _Ascomycetes_ (Sac fungi), the other the
_Basidiomycetes_ (mushrooms, puff-balls, etc.).


CLASS II.--_Ascomycetes_ (SAC FUNGI).

This class includes a very great number of common plants, all
resembling each other in producing spores in sacs (_asci_, sing.
_ascus_) that are usually oblong in shape, and each containing eight
spores, although the number is not always the same. Besides the spores
formed in these sacs (ascospores), there are other forms produced in
various ways.

There are two main divisions of the class, the first including only a
few forms, most of which are not likely to be met with by the student.
In these the spore sacs are borne directly upon the filaments without
any protective covering. The only form that is at all common is a
parasitic fungus (_Exoascus_) that attacks peach-trees, causing the
disease of the leaves known as "curl."

All of the common _Ascomycetes_ belong to the second division, and
have the spore sacs contained in special structures called spore
fruits, that may reach a diameter of several centimetres in a few
cases, though ordinarily much smaller.

Among the simpler members of this group are the mildews
(_Perisporiaceae_), mostly parasitic forms, living upon the leaves and
stems of flowering plants, sometimes causing serious injury by their
depredations. They form white or grayish downy films on the surface of
the plant, in certain stages looking like hoar-frost. Being very
common, they may be readily obtained, and are easily studied. One of
the best species for study (_Podosphaera_) grows abundantly on the
leaves of the dandelion, especially when the plants are growing under
unfavorable conditions. The same species is also found on other plants
of the same family. It may be found at almost any time during the
summer; but for studying, the spore fruits material should be
collected in late summer or early autumn. It at first appears as
white, frost-like patches, growing dingier as it becomes older, and
careful scrutiny of the older specimens will show numerous brown or
blackish specks scattered over the patches. These are the spore
fruits.

[Illustration: FIG. 39.--_A_, spore-bearing filaments of the dandelion
mildew (_Podosphaera_), x 150. _B_, a germinating spore, x 150. _C-F_,
development of the spore fruit, x 300. _ar._ archicarp. _G_, a ripe
spore fruit, x 150. _H_, the spore sac removed from the spore fruit,
x 150. _I_, spore-bearing filament attacked by another fungus
(_Cicinnobulus_), causing the enlargement of the basal cell, x 150.
_J_, a more advanced stage, x 300. _K_, spores, x 300.]

  For microscopical study, fresh material may be used, or, if
  necessary, dried specimens. The latter, before mounting, should be
  soaked for a short time in water, to which has been added a few
  drops of caustic-potash solution. This will remove the brittleness,
  and swell up the dried filaments to their original proportions. A
  portion of the plant should be carefully scraped off the leaf on
  which it is growing, thoroughly washed in pure water, and
  transferred to a drop of water or very dilute glycerine, in which it
  should be carefully spread out with needles. If air bubbles
  interfere with the examination, they may be driven off with alcohol,
  and then the cover glass put on. If the specimen is mounted in
  glycerine, it will keep indefinitely, if care is taken to seal it
  up. The plant consists of much-interlaced filaments, divided at
  intervals by cross-walls.[6] They are nearly colorless, and the
  contents are not conspicuous. These filaments send up vertical
  branches (Fig. 39, _A_), that become divided into a series of short
  cells by means of cross-walls. The cells thus formed are at first
  cylindrical, but later bulge out at the sides, becoming broadly
  oval, and finally become detached as spores (_conidia_). It is these
  spores that give the frosty appearance to the early stages of the
  fungus when seen with the naked eye. The spores fall off very easily
  when ripe, and germinate quickly in water, sending out two or more
  tubes that grow into filaments like those of the parent plant
  (Fig. 39, _B_).

[6] The filaments are attached to the surface of the leaf by suckers,
which are not so readily seen in this species as in some others. A
mildew growing abundantly in autumn on the garden chrysanthemum,
however, shows them very satisfactorily if a bit of the epidermis of a
leaf on which the fungus is just beginning to grow is sliced off with
a sharp razor and mounted in dilute glycerine, or water, removing the
air with alcohol. These suckers are then seen to be globular bodies,
penetrating the outer wall of the cell (Fig. 40).

[Illustration: FIG. 40.--Chrysanthemum mildew (_Erysiphe_), showing
the suckers (_h_) by which the filaments are attached to the leaf.
_A_, surface view. _B_, vertical section of the leaf, x 300.]

  The spore fruits, as already observed, are formed toward the end of
  the season, and, in the species under consideration at least, appear
  to be the result of a sexual process. The sexual organs (if they are
  really such) are extremely simple, and, owing to their very small
  size, are not easily found. They arise as short branches at a point
  where two filaments cross; one of them (Fig. 39, _C_, _ar._), the
  female cell, or "archicarp," is somewhat larger than the other and
  nearly oval in form, and soon becomes separated by a partition from
  the filament that bears it. The other branch (antheridium) grows up
  in close contact with the archicarp, and like it is shut off by a
  partition from its filament. It is more slender than the archicarp,
  but otherwise differs little from it. No actual communication can be
  shown to be present between the two cells, and it is therefore still
  doubtful whether fertilization really takes place. Shortly after
  these organs are full-grown, several short branches grow up about
  them, and soon completely envelop them (_D_, _E_). These branches
  soon grow together, and cross-walls are formed in them, so that the
  young spore fruit appears surrounded by a single layer of cells,
  sufficiently transparent, however, to allow a view of the interior.

  The antheridium undergoes no further change, but the archicarp soon
  divides into two cells,--a small basal one and a larger upper cell.
  There next grow from the inner surface of the covering cells, short
  filaments, that almost completely fill the space between the
  archicarp and the wall. An optical section of such a stage (Fig. 39,
  _F_) shows a double wall and the two cells of the archicarp. The
  spore fruit now enlarges rapidly, and the outer cells become first
  yellow and then dark brown, the walls becoming thicker and harder as
  they change color. Sometimes special filaments or appendages grow
  out from their outer surfaces, and these are also dark-colored.
  Shortly before the fruit is ripe, the upper cell of the archicarp,
  which has increased many times in size, shows a division of its
  contents into eight parts, each of which develops a wall and becomes
  an oval spore. By crushing the ripe spore fruit, these spores still
  enclosed in the mother cell (ascus) may be forced out (Fig. 39,
  _H_). These spores do not germinate at once, but remain dormant
  until the next year.

[Illustration: FIG. 41.--Forms of mildews (_Erysiphe_). _A_,
_Microsphaera_, a spore fruit, x 150. _B_, cluster of spore sacs of the
same, x 150. _C_, a single appendage, x 300. _D_, end of an appendage
of _Uncinula_, x 300. _E_, appendage of _Phyllactinia_, x 150.]

  Frequently other structures, resembling somewhat the spore fruits,
  are found associated with them (Fig. 39, _I_, _K_), and were for a
  long time supposed to be a special form of reproductive organ; but
  they are now known to belong to another fungus (_Cicinnobulus_),
  parasitic upon the mildew. They usually appear at the base of the
  chains of conidia, causing the basal cell to enlarge to many times
  its original size, and finally kill the young conidia, which shrivel
  up. A careful examination reveals the presence of very fine
  filaments within those of the mildew, which may be traced up to the
  base of the conidial branch, where the receptacle of the parasite is
  forming. The spores contained in these receptacles are very small
