"And then, when Dr. Dandrik ordered you to drop this experiment, just
when it was becoming interesting, you refused?"

"Your Majesty, I couldn't stop, not then. But Dr. Dandrik ordered the
apparatus dismantled and scrapped, and I'm afraid I lost my head. Told
him I'd punch his silly old face in, for one thing."

"You admit that?" Chancellor Khane cried.

"I think you showed admirable self-restraint in not doing it. Did you
explain to Chancellor Khane the importance of this experiment?"

"I tried to, Your Majesty, but he simply wouldn't listen."

"But, Your Majesty!" Khane expostulated. "Professor Dandrik is head of
the department, and one of the foremost physicists of the Empire, and
this young man is only one of the junior assistant-professors. Isn't
even a full professor, and he got his degree from some school away
off-planet. University of Brannerton on Gimli."

"Were you a pupil of Professor Vann Evaratt?" Prince Travann asked
sharply.

"Why, yes, sir. I----"

"Ha, no wonder!" Dandrik crowed. "Your Majesty, that man's an
out-and-out charlatan! He was kicked out of the University here ten
years ago, and I'm surprised he could even get on the faculty of a
school like Brannerton, on a planet like Gimli."

"Why, you stupid old fool!" Faress yelled at him. "You aren't enough of
a physicist to oil robots in Vann Evaratt's lab!"

"There, Your Majesty," Khane said. "You see how much respect for
authority this hooligan has!"

On Aditya, such would be unthinkable; on Aditya, everybody respects
authority. Whether it's respectable or not.

Count Tammsan laughed, and he realized that he must have spoken aloud.
Nobody else seemed to have gotten the joke.

"Well, how about the riot, now?" he asked. "Who started that?"

"Colonel Handrosan made an investigation on the spot," Prince Travann
said. "May I suggest that we hear his report?"

"Yes indeed. Colonel?"

Handrosan rose and stood with his hands behind his back, looking fixedly
at the wall behind the desk.

[Illustration]

"Your Majesty, the students of Professor Faress' advanced subnuclear
physics class, postgraduate students, all of them, were told of
Professor Faress' dismissal by a faculty member who had taken over the
class this morning. They all got up and walked out in a body, and
gathered outdoors on the campus to discuss the matter. At the next class
break, they were joined by other science students, and they went into
the stadium, where they were joined, half an hour later, by more
students who had learned of the dismissal in the meantime. At no time
was the gathering disorderly. The stadium is covered by a viewscreen
pickup which is fitted with a recording device; there is a complete
audio-visual of the whole thing, including the attack on them by the
campus police.

"This attack was ordered by Chancellor Khane, at about 1100; the chief
of the campus police was told to clear the stadium, and when he asked if
he was to use force, Chancellor Khane told him to use anything he wanted
to."

"I did not! I told him to get the students out of the stadium, but----"

"The chief of campus police carries a personal wire recorder," Handrosan
said, in his flat monotone. "He has a recording of the order, in
Chancellor Khane's own voice. I heard it myself. The police," he
continued, "first tried to use gas, but the wind was against them. They
then tried to use sono-stunners, but the students rushed them and
overwhelmed them. If Your Majesty will permit a personal opinion, while
I do not sympathize with their subsequent attack on the Administration
Center, they were entirely within their rights in defending themselves
in the stadium, and it's hard enough to stop trained and disciplined
troops when they are winning. After defeating the police, they simply
went on by what might be called the momentum of victory."

"Then you'd say that it's positively established that the students were
behaving in a peacable and orderly manner in the stadium when they were
attacked, and that Chancellor Khane ordered the attack personally?"

"I would, emphatically, Your Majesty."

"I think we've done enough here, gentlemen." He turned to Count Tammsan.
"This is, jointly, the affair of Education and Security. I would suggest
that you and Prince Travann join in a formal and public inquiry, and
until all the facts have been established and recorded and action
decided upon, the dismissal of Professor Faress be reversed and he be
restored to his position on the faculty."

"Yes, Your Majesty," Tammsan agreed. "And I think it would be a good
idea for Chancellor Khane to take a vacation till then, too."

"I would further suggest that, as this microposito experiment is crucial
to the whole question, it should be repeated. Under the personal
direction of Professor Faress."

"I agree with that, Your Majesty," Prince Travann said. "If it's as
important as I think it is, Professor Dandrik is greatly to be censured
for ordering it stopped and for failing to report this anticipation
effect."

"We'll consult about the inquiry, including the experiment, tomorrow,
Your Highness," Tammsan told Travann.

Paul rose, and everybody rose with him. "That being the case, you
gentlemen are all excused. The students' procession ought to be
arriving, now, and I want to tell them what's going to be done. Prince
Travann, Count Tammsan; do you care to accompany me?"

       *       *       *       *       *

Going up to the central terrace in front of the Octagon Tower, he turned
to Count Tammsan.

"I notice you laughed at that remark of mine about Aditya," he said.
"Have you met the First Citizen?"

"Only on screen, sir. He was at me for about an hour, this morning. It
seems that they are reforming the educational system on Aditya. On
Aditya, everything gets reformed every ten years, whether it needs it or
not. He came here to find somebody to take charge of the reformation."

He stopped short, bringing the others to a halt beside him, and laughed
heartily.

"Well, we'll send First Citizen Yaggo away happy; we'll make him a
present of the most distinguished educator on Odin."

"Khane?" Tammsan asked.

"Khane. Isn't it wonderful; if you have a few problems, you have
trouble, but if you have a whole lot of problems, they start solving
each other. We get a chance to get rid of Khane and create a vacancy
that can be filled by somebody big enough to fill it; the Ministry of
Education gets out from under a nasty situation; First Citizen Yaggo
gets what he thinks he wants----"

"And if I know Khane and if I know the People's Commonwealth of Aditya,
it won't be a year before Yaggo has Khane shot or stuffs him into jail,
and then the Space Navy will have an excuse to visit Aditya, and
Aditya'll never be the same afterward," Prince Travann added.

The students massed on the front lawns were still cheering as they went
down after addressing them. The Security Guards were conspicuously
absent and it was a detail of red-kilted Thoran riflemen who met them as
they entered the hall to the Session Chamber. Prince Ganzay approached,
attended by two Household Guard officers, a human and a Thoran. Count
Tammsan looked from one to the other of his companions, bewildered. The
bewildering thing was that everything was as it should be.

"Well, gentlemen," Paul said, "I'm sure that both of you will want to
confer for a moment with your colleagues in the Rotunda before the
Session. Please don't feel obliged to attend me further."

Prince Ganzay approached as they went down the hall. "Your Majesty, what
_is_ going on here?" he demanded querulously. "Just who is in control of
the Palace--you or Prince Travann? And where is His Imperial Highness,
and where is General Dorflay?"

"I sent Dorflay to join Prince Rodrik's picnic party. If you're upset
about this, you can imagine what he might have done here."

Prince Ganzay looked at him curiously for a moment. "I thought I
understood what was happening," he said. "Now I---- This business about
the students, sir; how did it come out?"

Paul told him. They talked for a while, and then the Prime Minister
looked at his watch, and suggested that the Session ought to be getting
started. Paul nodded, and they went down the hall and into the Rotunda.

The big semicircular lobby was empty, now, except for a platoon of
Household Guards, and the Empress Marris and her ladies-in-waiting. She
advanced as quickly as her sheath gown would permit, and took his arm;
the ladies-in-waiting fell in behind her, and Prince Ganzay went ahead,
crying: "My Lords, Your Venerable Highnesses, gentlemen; His Imperial
Majesty!"

Marris tightened her grip on his arm as they started forward. "Paul!"
she hissed into his ear. "What is this silly story about Yorn Travann
trying to seize the Throne?"

"Isn't it? Yorn's been too close the Throne for too long not to know
what sort of a seat it is. He'd commit any crime up to and including
genocide to keep off it."

She gave a quick skip to get into step with him. "Then why's he filled
the Palace with these blackcoats? Is Rod all right?"

"Perfectly all right; he's somewhere out in the mountains, keeping Harv
Dorflay out of mischief."

       *       *       *       *       *

They crossed the Session Hall and took their seats on the double throne;
everybody sat down, and the Prime Minister, after some formalities,
declared the Plenary Session in being. Almost at once, one of the
Prince-Counselors was on his feet begging His Majesty's leave to
interrogate the Government.

"I wish to ask His Highness the Minister of Security the meaning of all
this unprecedented disturbance, both here in the Palace and in the
city," he said.

Prince Travann rose at once. "Your Majesty, in reply to the question of
His Venerable Highness," he began, and then launched himself into an
account of the student riot, the march to petition the emperor, and the
clash with the nonworking class hooligans. "As to the affair at the
University, I hesitate to speak on what is really the concern of His
Lordship the Minister of Education, but as to the fighting in the city,
if it is still going on, I can assure His Venerable Highness that the
Gendarmes and Security Guards have it well in hand; the persons
responsible are being rounded up, and, if the Minister of Justice
concurs, an inquiry will be started tomorrow."

The Minister of Justice assured the Minister of Security that his
Ministry would be quite ready to co-operate in the inquiry. Count
Tammsan then got up and began talking about the riot at the University.

"What did happen, Paul?" Marris whispered.

"Chancellor Khane sacked a science professor for being too interested in
science. The students didn't like it. I think Khane's successor will
rectify that. Have a good time at the Flower Festivals?"

She raised her fan to hide a grimace. "I made my schedule," she said.
"Tomorrow, I have fifty more booked."

"Your Imperial Majesty!" The Counselor who had risen paused, to make
