solid in a liquid depends upon several factors.

1. _Nature of the solid._ Other conditions being the same, solids vary
greatly in their solubility in liquids. This is illustrated in the
following table:


_Table of Solubility of Solids at 18 deg._

100 cc. of water will dissolve:

    Calcium chloride        71.0 g.
    Sodium chloride         35.9
    Potassium nitrate       29.1
    Copper sulphate         21.4
    Calcium sulphate         0.207

No solids are absolutely insoluble, but the amount dissolved may be so
small as to be of no significance for most purposes. Thus barium
sulphate, one of the most insoluble of common substances, dissolves in
water to the extent of 1 part in 400,000.

2. _Nature of the solvent._ Liquids vary much in their power to dissolve
solids. Some are said to be good solvents, since they dissolve a great
variety of substances and considerable quantities of them. Others have
small solvent power, dissolving few substances, and those to a slight
extent only. Broadly speaking, water is the most general solvent, and
alcohol is perhaps second in solvent power.

3. _Temperature._ The weight of a solid which a given liquid can
dissolve varies with the temperature. Usually it increases rapidly as
the temperature rises, so that the boiling liquid dissolves several
times the weight which the cold liquid will dissolve. In some instances,
as in the case of common salt dissolved in water, the temperature has
little influence upon the solubility, and a few solids are more soluble
in cold water than in hot. The following examples will serve as
illustrations:


_Table of Solubility at 0 deg. and at 100 deg._

100 cc. of water will dissolve:

                                At 0 deg.           At 100 deg.

    Calcium chloride            49.6 g.        155.0 g.
    Sodium chloride             35.7            39.8
    Potassium nitrate           13.3           247.0
    Copper sulphate             15.5            73.5
    Calcium sulphate             0.205           0.217
    Calcium hydroxide            0.173           0.079

~Saturated solutions.~ A liquid will not dissolve an unlimited quantity of
a solid. On adding the solid to the liquid in small portions at a time,
it will be found that a point is reached at which the liquid will not
dissolve more of the solid at that temperature. The solid and the
solution remain in contact with each other unchanged. This condition may
be described by saying that they are in equilibrium with each other. A
solution is said to be _saturated_ when it remains unchanged in
concentration in contact with some of the solid. The weight of the solid
which will completely saturate a definite volume of a liquid at a given
temperature is called the _solubility_ of the substance at that
temperature.

~Supersaturated solutions.~ When a solution, saturated at a given
temperature, is allowed to cool it sometimes happens that no solid
crystallizes out. This is very likely to occur when the vessel used is
perfectly smooth and the solution is not disturbed in any way. Such a
solution is said to be _supersaturated_. That this condition is unstable
can be shown by adding a crystal of the solid to the solution. All of
the solid in excess of the quantity required to saturate the solution at
this temperature will at once crystallize out, leaving the solution
saturated. Supersaturation may also be overcome in many cases by
vigorously shaking or stirring the solution.

~General physical properties of solutions.~ A few general statements may
be made in reference to the physical properties of solutions.

1. _Distribution of the solid in the liquid._ A solid, when dissolved,
tends to distribute itself uniformly through the liquid, so that every
part of the solution has the same concentration. The process goes on
very slowly unless hastened by stirring or shaking the solution. Thus,
if a few crystals of a highly colored substance such as copper sulphate
are placed in the bottom of a tall vessel full of water, it will take
weeks for the solution to become uniformly colored.

2. _Boiling points of solutions._ The boiling point of a liquid is
raised by the presence of a substance dissolved in it. In general the
extent to which the boiling point of a solvent is raised by a given
substance is proportional to the concentration of the solution, that
is, to the weight of the substance dissolved in a definite weight of the
solvent.

3. _Freezing points of solutions._ A solution freezes at a lower
temperature than the pure solvent. The lowering of the freezing point
obeys the same law which holds for the raising of the boiling point: the
extent of lowering is proportional to the weight of dissolved substance,
that is, to the concentration of the solution.

~Electrolysis of solutions.~ Pure water does not appreciably conduct the
electric current. If, however, certain substances such as common salt
are dissolved in the water, the resulting solutions are found to be
conductors of electricity. Such solutions are called _electrolytes_.
When the current passes through an electrolyte some chemical change
always takes place. This change is called _electrolysis_.

[Illustration: Fig. 31]

The general method used in the electrolysis of a solution is illustrated
in Fig. 31. The vessel D contains the electrolyte. Two plates or rods,
A and B, made of suitable material, are connected with the wires
from a battery (or dynamo) and dipped into the electrolyte, as shown in
the figure. These plates or rods are called _electrodes_. The electrode
connected with the zinc plate of the battery is the negative electrode
or _cathode_, while that connected with the carbon plate is the positive
electrode or _anode_.

~Theory of electrolytic dissociation.~ The facts which have just been
described in connection with solutions, together with many others, have
led chemists to adopt a theory of solutions called _the theory of
electrolytic dissociation_. The main assumptions in this theory are the
following.

1. _Formation of ions._ Many compounds when dissolved in water undergo
an important change. A portion of their molecules fall apart, or
_dissociate_, into two or more parts, called _ions_. Thus sodium nitrate
(NaNO_{3}) dissociates into the ions Na and NO_{3}; sodium chloride,
into the ions Na and Cl. These ions are free to move about in the
solution independently of each other like independent molecules, and for
this reason were given the name ion, which signifies a wanderer.

2. _The electrical charge of ions._ Each ion carries a heavy electrical
charge, and in this respect differs from an atom or molecule. It is
evident that the sodium in the form of an ion must differ in some
important way from ordinary sodium, for sodium ions, formed from sodium
nitrate, give no visible evidence of their presence in water, whereas
metallic sodium at once decomposes the water. The electrical charge,
therefore, greatly modifies the usual chemical properties of the
element.

3. _The positive charges equal the negative charges._ The ions formed by
the dissociation of any molecule are of two kinds. One kind is charged
with positive electricity and the other with negative electricity;
moreover the sum of all the positive charges is always equal to the sum
of all the negative charges. The solution as a whole is therefore
electrically neutral. If we represent dissociation by the usual chemical
equations, with the electrical charges indicated by + and - signs
following the symbols, the dissociation of sodium chloride molecules is
represented thus:

    NaCl --> Na^{+}, Cl^{-}.

The positive charge on each sodium ion exactly equals the negative
charge on each chlorine ion. Sodium sulphate dissociates, as shown in
the equation

    Na_{2}SO_{4} --> 2Na^{+}, SO_{4}^{--}.

Here the positive charge on the two sodium ions equals the double
negative charge on the SO_{4} ion.

4. _Not all compounds dissociate._ Only those compounds dissociate whose
solutions form electrolytes. Thus salt dissociates when dissolved in
water, the resulting solution being an electrolyte. Sugar, on the other
hand, does not dissociate and its solution is not a conductor of the
electric current.

5. _Extent of dissociation differs in different liquids._ While
compounds most readily undergo dissociation in water, yet dissociation
often occurs to a limited extent when solution takes place in liquids
other than water. In the discussion of solutions it will be understood
that the solvent is water unless otherwise noted.

~The theory of electrolytic dissociation and the properties of solutions.~
In order to be of value, this theory must give a reasonable explanation
of the properties of solutions. Let us now see if the theory is in
harmony with certain of these properties.

~The theory of electrolytic dissociation and the boiling and freezing
points of solutions.~ We have seen that the boiling point of a solution
of a substance is raised in proportion to the concentration of the
dissolved substance. This is but another way of saying that the change
in the boiling point of the solution is proportional to the number of
molecules of the dissolved substance present in the solution.

It has been found, however, that in the case of electrolytes the boiling
point is raised more than it should be to conform to this law. If the
solute dissociates into ions, the reason for this becomes clear. Each
ion has the same effect on the boiling point as a molecule, and since
their number is greater than the number of molecules from which they
were formed, the effect on the boiling point is abnormally great.

In a similar way, the theory furnishes an explanation of the abnormal
lowering of the freezing point of electrolytes.

~The theory of electrolytic dissociation and electrolysis.~ The changes
taking place during electrolysis harmonize very completely with the
theory of dissociation. This will become clear from a study of the
following examples.

[Illustration: Fig. 32]

1. _Electrolysis of sodium chloride._ Fig. 32 represents a vessel in
which the electrolyte is a solution of sodium chloride (NaCl). According
to the dissociation theory the molecules of sodium chloride dissociate
into the ions Na^{+} and Cl^{-}. The Na^{+} ions are attracted to the
cathode owing to its large negative charge. On coming into contact with
the cathode, the Na^{+} ions give up their positive charge and are then
ordinary sodium atoms. They immediately decompose the water according to
the equation

    Na + H_{2}O = NaOH + H,

and hydrogen is evolved about the cathode.

The chlorine ions on being discharged at the anode in similar manner may
either be given off as chlorine gas, or may attack the water, as
represented in the equation

    2Cl + H_{2}O = 2HCl + O.

2. _Electrolysis of water._ The reason for the addition of sulphuric
acid to water in the preparation of oxygen and hydrogen by electrolysis
will now be clear. Water itself is not an electrolyte to an appreciable
extent; that is, it does not form enough ions to carry a current.
Sulphuric acid dissolved in water is an electrolyte, and dissociates
into the ions 2 H^{+} and SO_{4}^{--}. In the process of electrolysis of
the solution, the hydrogen ions travel to the cathode, and on being
discharged escape as hydrogen gas. The SO_{4} ions, when discharged at
the anode, act upon water, setting free oxygen and once more forming
sulphuric acid:

    SO_{4} + H_{2}O = H_{2}SO_{4} + O.

The sulphuric acid can again dissociate and the process repeat itself as
long as any water is left. Hence the hydrogen and oxygen set free in the
electrolysis of water really come directly from the acid but indirectly
from the water.

3. _Electrolysis of sodium sulphate._ In a similar way, sodium sulphate
(Na_{2}SO_{4}), when in solution, gives the ions 2 Na^{+} and
SO_{4}^{--}. On being discharged, the sodium atoms decompose water about
the cathode, as in the case of sodium chloride, while the SO_{4} ions
when discharged at the anode decompose the water, as represented in the
equation

    SO_{4} + H_{2}O = H_{2}SO_{4} + O

[Illustration: Fig. 33]

That new substances are formed at the cathode and anode may be shown in
the following way. A U-tube, such as is represented in Fig. 33, is
partially filled with a solution of sodium sulphate, and the liquid in
one arm is colored with red litmus, that in the other with blue litmus.
An electrode placed in the red solution is made to serve as cathode,
while one in the blue solution is made the anode. On allowing the
current to pass, the blue solution turns red, while the red solution
turns blue. These are exactly the changes which would take place if
sodium hydroxide and sulphuric acid were to be set free at the
electrodes, as required by the theory.

~The properties of electrolytes depend upon the ions present.~ When a
substance capable of dissociating into ions is dissolved in water, the
properties of the solution will depend upon two factors: (1) the ions
formed from the substance; (2) the undissociated molecules. Since the
ions are usually more active chemically than the molecules, most of the
chemical properties of an electrolyte are due to the ions rather than to
the molecules.

The solutions of any two substances which give the same ion will have
certain properties in common. Thus all solutions containing the copper
ion (Cu^{++}) are blue, unless the color is modified by the presence of
ions or molecules having some other color.


EXERCISES

1. Distinguish clearly between the following terms: electrolysis,
electrolyte, electrolytic dissociation, ions, solute, solvent, solution,
saturated solution, and supersaturated solution.

2. Why does the water from some natural springs effervesce?

3. (a) Why does not the water of the ocean freeze? (b) Why will ice
and salt produce a lower temperature than ice alone?

4. Why does shaking or stirring make a solid dissolve more rapidly in a
liquid?

5. By experiment it was found that a certain volume of water was
saturated at 100 deg. with 114 g. of potassium nitrate. On cooling to 0 deg. a
portion of the substance crystallized. (a) How many grams of the
substance remained in solution? (b) What was the strength of the
solution at 18 deg.? (c) How much water had been used in the experiment?

6. (a) 10 g. of common salt were dissolved in water and the solution
evaporated to dryness; what weight of solid was left? (b) 10 g. of
zinc were dissolved in hydrochloric acid and the solution evaporated to
dryness; what weight of solid was left?

7. Account for the fact that sugar sometimes deposits from molasses,
even when no evaporation has taken place.

8. (a) From the standpoint of the theory of electrolytic dissociation,
write the simple equation for a dilute solution of copper sulphate
(CuSO_{4}); this solution is blue. (b) In the same manner, write one
for sodium sulphate; this solution is colorless. (c) How would you
account for the color of the copper sulphate solution?

9. (a) As in the preceding exercise, write a simple equation for a
dilute solution of copper chloride (CuCl_{2}); this solution is blue.
(b) In the same manner, write one for sodium chloride; this solution
is colorless. To what is the blue color due?

10. What component is present in concentrated sulphuric acid that is
almost wanting in very dilute sulphuric acid?

11. Why will vegetables cook faster when boiled in strong salt water
than when boiled in pure water?

12. How do you explain the foaming of soda water?




CHAPTER X

ACIDS, BASES, AND SALTS; NEUTRALIZATION


~Acids, bases, and salts.~ The three classes of compounds known
respectively as acids, bases, and salts include the great majority of
the compounds with which we shall have to deal. It is important,
therefore, for us to consider each of these classes in a systematic way.
The individual members belonging to each class will be discussed in
detail in the appropriate places, but a few representatives of each
class will be described in this chapter with special reference to the
common properties in accordance with which they are classified.

~The familiar acids.~ _Hydrochloric acid_ is a gas composed of hydrogen and
chlorine, and has the formula HCl. The substance is very soluble in
water, and it is this solution which is usually called hydrochloric
acid. _Nitric acid_ is a liquid composed of hydrogen, nitrogen, and
oxygen, having the formula HNO_{3}. As sold commercially it is mixed
with about 32% of water. _Sulphuric acid_, whose composition is
represented by the formula H_{2}SO_{4}, is an oily liquid nearly twice
as heavy as water, and is commonly called _oil of vitriol_.

~Characteristics of acids.~ (1) All acids contain hydrogen. (2) When
dissolved in water the molecules of the acid dissociate into two kinds
of ions. One of these is always hydrogen and is the cation (+), while
the other consists of the remainder of the molecule and is the anion
(-). (3) The solution tastes sour. (4) It has the power to change the
color of certain substances called _indicators_. Thus blue litmus is
changed to red, and yellow methyl orange is changed to red. Since all
acids produce hydrogen cations, while the anions of each are different,
the properties which all acids have in common when in solution, such as
taste and action on indicators, must be attributed to the hydrogen ions.

DEFINITION: _An acid is a substance which produces hydrogen ions when
dissolved in water or other dissociating liquids._

~Undissociated acids.~ When acids are perfectly free from water, or are
dissolved in liquids like benzene which do not have the power of
dissociating them into ions, they should have no real acid properties.
This is found to be the case. Under these circumstances they do not
affect the color of indicators or have any of the properties
characteristic of acids.

The familiar bases. The bases most used in the laboratory are sodium
hydroxide (NaOH), potassium hydroxide (KOH), and calcium hydroxide
(Ca(OH)_{2}). These are white solids, soluble in water, the latter
sparingly so. Some bases are very difficultly soluble in water. The very
soluble ones with most pronounced basic properties are sometimes called
the _alkalis_.

~Characteristics of bases.~ (1) All bases contain hydrogen and oxygen. (2)
When dissolved in water the molecules of the base dissociate into two
kinds of ions. One of these is always composed of oxygen and hydrogen
and is the anion. It has the formula OH and is called the _hydroxyl
ion_. The remainder of the molecule, which usually consists of a single
atom, is the cation. (3) The solution of a base has a soapy feel and a
brackish taste. (4) It reverses the color change produced in indicators
by acids, turning red litmus blue, and red methyl orange yellow. Since
all bases produce hydroxyl anions, while the cations of each are
different, the properties which all bases have in common when in
solution must be due to the hydroxyl ions.

DEFINITION: _A base is a substance which produces hydroxyl ions when
dissolved in water or other dissociating liquids._

~Undissociated bases.~ Bases, in the absence of water or when dissolved in
liquids which do not dissociate them, should have none of the properties
characteristic of this class of substances. This has been found to be
the case. For example, they have no effect upon indicators under these
circumstances.

~Neutralization.~ When an acid and a base are brought together in solution
in proper proportion, the characteristic properties of each disappear.
The solution tastes neither sour nor brackish; it has no effect upon
indicators. There can therefore be neither hydrogen nor hydroxyl ions
present in the solution. A study of reactions of this kind has shown
that the hydrogen ions of the acid combine with the hydroxyl ions of the
base to form molecules of water, water being a substance which is not
appreciably dissociated into ions. This action of an acid on a base is
called _neutralization_. The following equations express the
neutralization of the three acids by three bases, water being formed in
each case.

    Na^{+}, OH^{-} + H^{+}, Cl^{-} = Na^{+}, Cl^{-} + H_{2}O.

    K^{+}, OH^{-} + H^{+}, NO_{3}^{-} = K^{+}, NO_{3}^{-} + H_{2}O.

    Ca^{++}, (OH)_{2}^{--} + H_{2}^{++}, SO_{4}^{--}
         = Ca^{++}, SO_{4}^{--} + 2H_{2}O.

DEFINITION: _Neutralization consists in the union of the hydrogen ion of
an acid with the hydroxyl ion of a base to form water._

~Salts.~ It will be noticed that in neutralization the anion of the acid
and the cation of the base are not changed. If, however, the water is
expelled by evaporation, these two ions slowly unite, and when the water
becomes saturated with the substance so produced, it separates in the
form of a solid called a _salt_.

DEFINITION: _A salt is a substance formed by the union of the anion of
an acid with the cation of a base._

~Characteristics of salts.~ (1) From the definition of a salt it will be
seen that there is no element or group of elements which characterize
salts. (2) Salts as a class have no peculiar taste. (3) In the absence
of all other substances they are without action on indicators. (4) When
dissolved in water they form two kinds of ions.

     ~Heat of neutralization.~ If neutralization is due to the union
     of hydrogen ions with hydroxyl ions, and nothing more, it
     follows that when a given weight of water is formed in
     neutralization, the heat set free should always be the same, no
     matter from what acid and base the two kinds of ions have been
     supplied. Careful experiments have shown that this is the case,
     provided no other reactions take place at the same time. When
     18g. of water are formed in neutralization, 13,700 cal. of heat
     are set free. This is represented in the equations

    Na^{+}, OH^{-} + H^{+}, Cl^{-}
         = Na^{+}, Cl^{-} + H_{2}O + 13,700 cal.

    K^{+}, OH^{-} + H^{+}, NO_{3}^{-}
         = K^{+}, NO_{3}^{-} + H_{2}O + 13,700 cal.

    Ca^{++}, (OH)_{2}^{--} + H_{2}^{++}, SO_{4}^{--}
         = Ca^{++}, SO_{4}^{--} + 2H_{2}O + 2 x 13,700 cal.

~Neutralization a quantitative act.~ Since neutralization is a definite
chemical act, each acid will require a perfectly definite weight of each
base for its neutralization. For example, a given weight of sulphuric
acid will always require a definite weight of sodium hydroxide, in
accordance with the equation

    H_{2}, SO_{4} + 2Na, OH = Na_{2}, SO_{4} + 2H_{2}O.

     ~Determination of the ratio in neutralization.~ The quantities of
     acid and base required in neutralization may be determined in
     the following way. Dilute solutions of the two substances are
     prepared, the sulphuric acid being placed in one of the
     burettes (Fig. 34) and the sodium hydroxide in the other. The
     levels of the two liquids are then brought to the zero marks of
     the burettes by means of the stopcocks. A measured volume of
     the acid is drawn off into a beaker, a few drops of litmus
     solution added, and the sodium hydroxide is run in drop by drop
     until the red litmus just turns blue. The volume of the sodium
     hydroxide consumed is then noted. If the concentrations of the
     two solutions are known, it is easy to calculate what weight of
     sodium hydroxide is required to neutralize a given weight of
     sulphuric acid. By evaporating the neutralized solution to
     dryness, the weight of the sodium sulphate formed can be
     determined directly. Experiment shows that the weights are
     always in accordance with the equation in the preceding
     paragraph.

[Illustration: Fig. 34]

~Extent of dissociation.~ The question will naturally arise, When an acid,
base, or salt dissolves in water, do all the molecules dissociate into
ions, or only a part of them? The experiments by which this question can
be answered cannot be described here. It has been found, however, that
only a fraction of the molecules dissociate. The percentage which will
dissociate in a given case depends upon several conditions, the chief of
which are: (1) The concentration of the solution. In concentrated
solutions only a very small percentage of dissociation occurs. As the
solution is diluted the percentage increases, and in very dilute
solutions it may be very large, though it is never complete in any
ordinary solution. (2) The nature of the dissolved compound. At equal
concentrations substances differ much among themselves in the percentage
of dissociation. The great majority of salts are about equally
dissociated. Acids and bases, on the contrary, show great differences.
Some are freely dissociated, while others are dissociated to but a
slight extent.

~Strength of acids and bases.~ Since acid and basic properties are due to
hydrogen and hydroxyl ions respectively, the acid or base which will
produce the greatest percentage of these ions at a given concentration
must be regarded as the strongest representative of its class. The acids
and bases described in the foregoing paragraphs are all quite strong. In
10% solutions they are dissociated to about 50%, and this is also
approximately the extent to which most salts are dissociated at this
same concentration.

     ~Partial neutralization.~ 1. _Basic salts._ The chemical action
     between an acid and a base is not always as complete as has
     been represented in the foregoing paragraphs. For example, if
     the base magnesium hydroxide (Mg(OH)_{2}) and hydrochloric acid
     (HCl) are brought together in the ratio of an equal number of
     molecules of each, there will be only half enough hydrogen ions
     for the hydroxyl ions present.

         Mg, (OH)_{2} + H, Cl = Mg, OH, Cl + H_{2}O.

     Magnesium, hydroxyl, and chlorine ions are left at the close of
     the reaction, and under the proper conditions unite to form
     molecules of the compound Mg(OH)Cl. This compound, when
     dissolved, can form hydroxyl ions and therefore possesses basic
     properties; it can also form the ions of a salt (Mg and Cl),
     and has properties characteristic of salts. Substances of this
     kind are called _basic salts._

     DEFINITION: _A basic salt is a substance which can give the
     ions both of a base and of a salt when dissolved in water._

     2. _Acid salts._ In a similar way, when sulphuric acid and
     sodium hydroxide are brought together in the ratio of equal
     numbers of the molecules of each, it is possible to have a
     reaction expressed by the equation

        Na, OH + H_{2}, SO_{4} = Na, H, SO_{4} + H_{2}O.

     The ions remaining after all the hydroxyl ions have been used
     up are those of an acid (H) and those of a salt (Na and
     SO_{4}). These unite to form the substance NaHSO_{4}, and as
     the solution becomes saturated with this substance through
     evaporation, it separates in the form of crystals. In solution
     this substance can give hydrogen ions, and therefore possesses
     acid properties; it can also give the ions characteristic of a
     salt. It is therefore called an _acid salt_.

     DEFINITION: _An acid salt is one which can give the ions of an
     acid and of a salt when in solution._

     3. _Normal salts._ Salts which are the products of complete
     neutralization, such as Na_{2}SO_{4}, and which in solution can
     give neither hydrogen nor hydroxyl ions, but only the ions of a
     salt, are called _normal salts_ to distinguish them from acid
     and basic salts.

~Methods of expressing reactions between compounds in solution.~ Chemical
equations representing reactions between substances in solution may
represent the details of the reaction, or they may simply indicate the
final products formed. In the latter case the formation of ions is not
indicated. Thus, if we wish to call attention to the details of the
reaction between sodium hydroxide and hydrochloric acid in solution, the
equation is written as follows:

    Na^{+}, OH^{-} + H^{+}, Cl^{-} = Na^{+}, Cl^{-} + H_{2}O.

On the other hand, if we wish simply to represent the final products
formed, the following is used.

    NaOH + HCl = NaCl + H_{2}O.

Both of these methods will therefore be used:

~Radicals.~ It has been emphasized that the hydroxyl group (OH) always
forms the anion of a base, while the group NO_{3} forms the anion of
nitric acid and sodium nitrate; the group SO_{4}, the anion of sulphuric
acid and calcium sulphate. A group of elements which in this way
constitutes a part of a molecule, acting as a unit in a chemical change,
