"If he thinks like a murderer, yes. But he probably doesn't. That's the
trouble. We don't know how he thinks or what he's here for. We're
playing it by ear."

"I think we understand," Frank Corson said.

"Thank you. And I'm sorry if I antagonized you. That wasn't my purpose.
I'm just trying to do my job." He smiled and held out his hand. "This is
all strictly confidential, of course."

"Of course."

"Thanks for coming."

They left, but Brent Taber's frustrations remained with him. Earlier
that day, in Washington, he'd stood on the carpet himself, before higher
authority, and played the part of the reprimanded schoolboy.

"It would appear," Authority said, "that you went out of your way to
antagonize Senator Crane."

"I'm sorry if that's the opinion up above."

"It is not a matter of opinion, one way or another. It's a matter of
expediency. The Administration has to get along with Congress. Senator
Crane is in a powerful position. He is on three committees that can
hamper legislation the Administration is vitally interested in."

"I understand. And I didn't pick the quarrel with Senator Crane. He
picked it with me. In my judgment, he is not the kind of person to be
trusted with information of this vital nature."

"You consider Senator Crane an unreliable demagogue?"

"I didn't say that."

Authority smiled wryly. "I'll concede that the Senator's type is rare in
American politics--at least among those who get elected to high office.
But the fact remains--he is a power."

"If you agree that the information should have been withheld--"

"I didn't agree on that at all," Authority said quickly. "And don't
quote me as having said so. I'll deny it."

Brent Taber smiled also, but inwardly, where it wouldn't show. He should
have expected that denial. After all, Authority had Higher Authority to
account to. Authority could also be put on the carpet. There was always
Someone higher up.

"I'm sorry," Brent Taber said. "I was put in charge of this project and
I used my judgment--"

"We are not questioning your over-all judgment," Authority assured him.

_Then what in the hell are you gabbling about?_ This question was also
asked inwardly as Brent said, "I felt the gravity of the situation
merited extreme care."

"It does. But life must go on. The government must still function."

_That's right, play it from both ends_, Brent Taber thought bitterly.
_Ride the fence. Stay in a position to jump either way._

"What do you wish me to do about Senator Crane?"

"I'd stay out of his way if I were you."

"Whatever damage you say I have done can be corrected with a ten-minute
briefing."

"That's up to you," Authority answered nimbly. "As you say, you've been
put in charge of the project."

"Then I'll leave things as they are."

"Very well. I just wanted to go on record."

"Thank you," Brent Taber said. "Thank you very much."

       *       *       *       *       *

Frank Corson and Les King walked north together after their interview
with Brent Taber.

"I guess we got off lucky," King said. "Those Washington appointees can
be tough."

"He seems to have a pretty tough job."

"They all think they've got tough jobs."

"It's still a murder as far as the New York police are concerned. What
do you think will happen?"

"They turned us over to Taber, didn't they?" King asked. "That shows how
they're playing it. The New York cops have enough murders to worry
about. They like to pass them on to somebody else."

"Then they won't question us any further?"

King shrugged. "Who knows? You've got nothing to worry about, though.
Just sit tight. In fact, you're damned lucky."

"How so?"

"This killing is under wraps. Nobody's talking. That means you won't get
in trouble at the hospital." King grinned. "Your _ethics_ won't come
under scrutiny."

Frank Corson flushed and said nothing. King, after a moment's silence,
said, "I've been thinking about that tenth android."

"Do you think there's as much danger in this thing as Taber says?"

King shrugged. "Those guys always think that way. Remember what they
said about the atom bomb? The world was doomed. We were going to blow
each other up. But nobody's been heaving them around. The
view-with-alarm boys always talk that way."

"I hope you're right."

"But about that android that's supposed to be walking around loose."

"What about him?"

"Those bastards confiscated all my stuff. The shots I made in your
room--everything. But if I could get some shots of the other one--"

"You're actually going to work on your own? In spite of what Taber
said?"

"It's a free country," King retorted hotly. "I've got a right to follow
my profession. What I was going to say was that you're in a position to
help yourself a little, too."

"I am?"

"Only you and I know what we're looking for. If you spot the android,
see him hanging around anywhere, and let me know, I'll--"

"You can go to hell, King. I want no part of any more of your ideas.
I've had it. If I see the creature I'll call Taber and nobody else. I'm
going to do exactly what he told me to do. Mark me off your list."

Frank Corson strode away. Les King stood watching him. King shrugged.
Just another bewildered citizen who thought God lived in Washington.
Afraid to spit if some Washington bureaucrat wagged a finger.

Well, the hell with Corson. The hell with Taber. The hell with all of
them. If Les King stood to make an honest buck, he was going to do his
damnedest until somebody passed a law making it illegal.




6


Brent Taber was drawn to Doctor Entman. He found, in the ugly little
scientist, a rapport that seemed to exist nowhere else. At the moment,
Entman was having a fine, stimulating time dissecting the cadaver of the
android. His ugly little eyes were bright. "It's a miracle, my friend! A
positive miracle. The thing these people have been able to do!"

"People? You've used that word before."

Entman waved an impatient hand. "Oh, don't quibble! Why, the creation of
an artificial digestive system alone is awesome--not to mention the
creation of a synthetic brain."

"The brain is what interests me."

"I can hardly wait to get into that area. Certain aspects are obvious,
though. These creatures must have mental powers far beyond ours--in
certain areas, that is."

"Tell me more."

"That's merely a matter of logic. We know that _homo sapiens_--because
of his free choice, so to speak--uses, on an average, not more than a
tenth of his mental ability. All right. These people have created, to
all intents and purposes, a man. They surely had sense enough to remove
the free-choice element. The creature surely has judgment, even cunning,
but it is no doubt pointed totally and completely toward the objective
of its being."

"Whatever the hell that objective is!"

Entman was mildly surprised by Taber's exclamation. He held up a warning
finger. "Nerves, boy, nerves. You must watch that. As to the
objective--I'm sure it's something pointed at our destruction."

"What powers were you referring to?"

"Hypnotism, I should think. Any of the mental processes through which
one human being strives to assert control over another. We are aware of
several of these. They may have found others."

"You won't be able to define them by cutting up that brain?"

"I doubt it. We could know them only by watching one of the creatures in
action." Entman sighed. "If we only had other facts."

"What facts?"

Entman's smile was almost patronizing. "You're tired, aren't you, son?
You're not thinking very well."

"Goddamn it! Quit treating me like a cretin!"

"Temper, temper! Look at it analytically, son, analytically. Suppose we
knew who these people are. What distances have they covered in arriving
here? What is their method of conveyance?"

"The distance? Light years, I would assume. The conveyance? A spaceship,
or a projectile along basic lines but farther advanced."

"All right. We know they've sent ten creatures to our planet from
infinity--that's as good a word to use as any. The next question is,
why?"

"Damnit, that question is obvious."

"And from my point of view, the answer is obvious."

"Then I wish to hell you'd give it to me."

"Logic, man, logic! A race as far advanced as this one could certainly
move in and occupy us without trouble. Wouldn't you think?"

"Certainly. That's what bothers me. Why all the pussy-footing around
with synthetic men who keep dropping dead?"

"I think it's because they themselves are unable to exist in the
climatic and atmospheric conditions existent on our planet."

Brent Taber's eyes opened as Entman went on. "They plan to occupy us,
certainly--this we must assume--so they're trying to create an entity
through which they can do it. The process is really no different, even
though a little more dramatic, than our science creating a mechanical
unit that functions to the best efficiency under specified conditions."

Taber's finger snapped up. He pointed at Entman's desk. "They'd like to
know why their androids died. Maybe they weren't alike--at least, not
exactly alike. Maybe there were differences you haven't found yet--maybe
they turned out ten models and they want to know which one worked the
best."

"You get the point," Entman beamed.

"They'd like the data you're assembling--those reports you've got in
front of you."

"I imagine they'd find them quite interesting."

"Do you think we can assume the tenth android died also?"

"Perhaps. We have no proof that it killed the one found slain in
Greenwich Village."

"I'm satisfied to assume that. But I'm wondering just what contact those
'people,' as you call them, had with their androids. Could a part of the
brain have been a sending and receiving device?"

"It would be difficult to tell. I delved in far enough to find a
mechanical device, if there had been one. It did not exist in those I
dissected. There is another possibility though, except that we often
make the mistake of assuming that what we humans on earth can't do,
can't be done. Consider telepathy. Who's to say they were not made
capable of communicating in that way--at whatever distance?" He paused
for a moment, deep in thought, before going on. "Has it occurred to you
that the tenth android might be a supervisor, the boss, the captain? If
he is still alive, why haven't you found him? You have the men and
facilities at your command."

Brent Taber sprang to his feet. "Doctor," he answered, scowling, "Did
you ever hear of a project so secret that it couldn't even be given
enough personnel to make it work?"

Entman smiled sympathetically. "Washington is a strange place in some
ways, son. Usually it's the other way around. You get so much help they
get in each other's way. I'm glad I'm not involved in those phases of
it."

Brent paced the floor, occupied with his own thoughts. It was more than
mere frustration. It went deeper. There was his resentment of the
dressing-down he'd taken from Authority; the subtle coolness that had
begun to permeate his relations with those upstairs.

He jerked his mind away from such thoughts. Nerves. That was it. He was
tense. He was imagining things. They were certainly too well aware of
the gravity of this situation to let petty politics interfere.

Or were they?

"Okay, Doc," Brent said crisply. "Thanks for letting me pick your
brain."

"Good luck, son."

Entman went back to his work and Taber left. As he walked down the
corridor, he analyzed the cheerful tone of Entman's voice and told
himself that even Entman didn't really believe it. Entman had the
evidence before his eyes but he still couldn't get the concept of alien
creatures from space really taking us over. It was too unbelievable.

_Am I the only one who really believes it?_ He asked himself this
question as he hailed a cab in the street and watched a fat man in a
bowler hat slip in and take it away from him.

"You're slipping, Taber," he muttered. "You're definitely slipping."

       *       *       *       *       *

The bell rang. Rhoda Kane opened the door. The man standing there was
not extraordinary in any way. He appeared just short of middle age. He
wore a blue suit and a blue necktie. The word for him was _quiet_. He
was a man who did not stand out.

"My name is John Dennis," he said. "I would like to speak to you."

The abrupt demand annoyed Rhoda. She frowned and was about to retort
just as peremptorily, but an odd bemusement tempered her mood. The man
was uncivil enough to be interesting. She said, "I'm busy now," but
instead of closing the door, she stepped back into the room. The man
came in and it was he who closed the door.

"I don't wish to alarm you, Miss Kane."

"I'm not in the least alarmed."

As she spoke, Rhoda wondered if this was true. But the wondering itself
was on such an impersonal basis that it didn't seem to make much
difference.

