
She did so, held contact for almost a minute, then pulled herself loose.

"Ug-gh-gh." She shivered. "I'm glad I haven't got a mind like that."

"And the same from me to you. Of course the real truth may lie somewhere
in between. I may be as far off the beam on one side as you are on the
other."

"I hope so. But it cleared things up no end--it untied a million knots.
Even that other thing--brotherly love? It's a very nice concept--you
see, I never had any brothers."

"That's probably one thing that was the matter with you. Nothing warmer
than that, certainly, and never will be."

"And I suppose you got the thought--it must have jumped up and smacked
you--" Lola's hot blush was visible even through her heavy tan, "how
many times I've felt like running my fingers up and down your ribs and
grabbing a handful of those terrific muscles of yours, just to see if
they're as hard as they look?"

"I'm glad you brought that up; I don't know whether I would have dared
to or not. You've got to stop acting like a Third instead of an
Operator; and you've got to stop acting as though you had never been
within ten feet of me. Now's as good a time as any." He took off his
shirt and struck a strong-man's pose. "Come ahead."

"By golly, I'm _going_ to!" Then, a moment later, "Why, they're even
_harder_! How do you, a scientist, psionicist, and scholar, keep in such
hard shape as that?"

"An hour a day in the gym, three hundred sixty-five days a year. Many
are better--but a hell of a lot are worse."

"I'll say." She finished her ginger ale, sat down in her chair, leaned
back and put her legs up on the bed. "That was a relief of tension if
there ever was one. I haven't felt so good since they picked me as
home-town candidate--and that was a mighty small town and eight months
ago. Bring on your dragons, Clee, and I'll slay 'em far and wide. But I
can't actually _be_ like she is...."

"Thank God for that. Deliver me from _two_ such pretzel-benders aboard
one ship."

"... but I could have been a pretty good actress, I think."

"Correction, please. 'Outstanding' is the word."

"Thank you, kind sir. And women--men, too, of course--do bring up
certain memories, to ... to...."

"To roll 'em around on their tongues and give their taste-buds a treat."

"Exactly. So where I don't have any appropriate actual memories to bring
up, I'll make like an actress. Check?"

"Good girl! Now you're rolling--we're in like Flynn. Well, we've been in
screen long enough, I guess. Fare thee well, little sister Brownie,
until we meet again." He tossed the remains of their refreshments, trays
and all, into the chute, picked up his shirt, and started out.

"Put it _on_, Clee!" she whispered, intensely.

"Why?" He grinned cheerfully. "It'd look still better if I peeled down
to the altogether."

"You're incorrigible," she said, but her answering grin was wide and
perfectly natural. "You know, if I had had a brother something like you
it would have saved me a lot of wear and tear. I'll see you in the
morning before breakfast."

        *           *           *

And she did. They strolled together to breakfast; not holding hands, but
with hip almost touching hip. Relaxed, friendly, on very cordial and
satisfactory terms. Lola punched breakfast orders for them both. Belle
drove a probe, which bounced--Lola's screen was tight, although her
brown eyes were innocent and bland.

But during the meal, in response to a double-edged, wickedly-barbed
remark of Belle's, a memory flashed into being above Lola's shield. It
was the veriest flash, instantly suppressed. Her eyes held clear and
steady; if she blushed at all it did not show.

Belle caught it, of course, and winked triumphantly at Garlock.
She knew, now, what she had wanted to know. And, Prime Operator
though he was, it was all he could do to make no sign; for that
fleetingly-revealed memory was a perfect job. He would not have--_could_
not have--questioned it himself, except for one highly startling fact.
It was of an event that had not happened and never would!

And after breakfast, at some distance from the others, "That is my girl,
Brownie! You're firing on all forty barrels. You're an Operator, all
right; and it takes a damn good one to lie like that with her mind!"

"Thanks to you, Clee. And thanks a million, really. I'm me again--I
think."

Then, since Belle was looking, she took him by both ears, pulled his
head down, and kissed him lightly on the lips. The spontaneity and
tenderness were perfect at that moment. Clee's appreciation was obvious.

"I know I said you'd have to kiss me next time," Lola said, very low,
"but this act needs just this much of an extra touch. Anyway, such
little, tiny, sisterly ones as this, and out in public, don't count."




CHAPTER 3


Lola and Garlock went to town in the same taxi. As they were about to
separate, Garlock said:

"I don't like those hell-divers, yellow, green, or any other color; and
you, Brownie, are very definitely not expendable. Are you any good at
mind-bombing?"

"Why, I never heard of such a thing."

"You isolate a little energy in the Op field, remembering of course,
that you're handling a hundred thousand gunts. Transpose it into
platinum or uranium--anything good and heavy. For one of these monsters
you'd need two or three micrograms. For a battleship, up to maybe a gram
or so. 'Port it to the exact place you want it to detonate. Reconvert
and release instantaneously. One-hundred-percent-conversion atomic bomb,
tailored exactly to fit the job. Very effective."

"It would be. My God, Clee, can _you_ do _that_?"

"Sure--so can you. Any Operator can."

"Well, I _won't_. I _never_ will. Besides, I'd probably kill too many
people, besides the monster. No, I'll 'port back to the Main if anything
attacks me. I'm chain lightning at that."

"Do that, then. And if anything very unusual happens give me a flash."

"I'll do that. 'Bye, Clee." She turned to the left. He walked straight
on, toward the business center, to resume his study at the point where
he had left off the evening before.

For over an hour he wandered aimlessly about the city; receiving,
classifying, and filing away information. He saw several duels between
guardians and yellow and green-bat monsters, to none of which he paid
any more attention than did the people around him. Then a third kind of
enemy appeared--two of them at once, flying wing-and-wing--and Garlock
stopped and watched.

Vivid, clear-cut stripes of red and black, even on the tremendously
long, strong wings. Distinctly feline as to heads, teeth, and claws.
While they did not at all closely resemble flying saber-toothed tigers,
that was the first impression that leaped into Garlock's mind.

Two bow-legged guardians came leaping as usual, but one of them was a
fraction of a second too late. That fraction was enough. While the first
guardian was still high in air, grappling with one tiger, the other
swung on a dime--the blast of air from his right wing blowing people in
the crowd below thither and yon and knocking four of them flat--and took
the guardian's head off his body with one savage swipe of a
frightfully-armed paw. Disregarding the carcass both attackers whirled
sharply at the second guardian, meeting him in such fashion that he
could not come to firm grips with either of them, and that battle was
very brief indeed. More and more guardians were leaping in from all
directions, however, and the two tigers were forced to the ground and
slaughtered.

Since six guardians had been killed, eight guardians marched up the
street, dragging grisly loads. Eight bodies, friend and foe alike, were
dumped into a manhole; eight creatures squatted down and cleaned
themselves meticulously before resuming their various patrols.

        *           *           *

Ten or fifteen minutes later, Garlock felt Lola's half-excited,
half-frightened thought. "Clee, do you read me?"

"Loud and clear."

"There's something coming that's certainly none of my business--maybe
not even yours."

"Coming," and with the thought he was there. "Where?"

She pointed a thought, he followed it. Far away yet, but coming fast,
was an immense flock of flying tigers!

Lola licked her lips. "I'm going home, if you don't mind."

"Beat it."

She disappeared.

"Jim!" Garlock thought. "Where are you?"

"Observatory. Need me?"

"Yes. Bombing. Two point four microgram loads. Focus spot on my
right--teleport in."

"Coming in on your right."

"And I on your left!" Belle's thought drove in as he had never before
felt it driven. Being a Prime, she did not need a focus spot and
appeared the veriest instant later than did James.

"Can you bomb?" Garlock snapped.

"What do _you_ think?" she snapped back.

A moment of flashing thought and the three Tellurians disappeared,
materializing five hundred feet in air, two hundred feet ahead of the
van of that horrible flight of monsters, drifting before it.

Belle got in the first shot. Not only did the victim disappear--a couple
of dozen around it were torn to fragments and the force of the blast
staggered all three Tellurians.

"Damn it, Belle, cut down or get to hell out!" Garlock yelped. "I said
two point four _micrograms_, not milligrams. Just kill 'em, don't
scatter 'em all over hell's half acre--less mess to clean up and I
_don't_ want you to kill people down below. Especially I don't want you
to kill us--not even yourself."

"'Scuse, please, I guess I was a bit enthusiastic in my weighing."

There began a series of muffled explosions along the front; each
followed by the plunge of a tiger-striped body to the ground. Faster and
faster the explosions came as the Operator and the Primes learned the
routine and the rhythm of the job.

Nor were they long alone. The roaring, screaming howl of jets came up
from behind them; four Arpalones appeared at their left, strung out
along the front. Each held an extraordinarily heavy-duty blaster in each
of his four hands; sixteen terrific weapons were hurling death into the
flying horde.

"Slide over, Terrestrials," came a calm thought. "You three take their
left front, we'll take their right and center."

As they obeyed the instructions, "_They_ don't give a damn where the
pieces fly!" Belle protested. "Why should we be fussy about their
street-cleaning department? _I'm_ starting to use fives."

"Okay. We'll have to hit 'em harder, anyway, to keep up. Five or maybe
six--just be damn sure not to knock us or the Arpalones out of the air."

Carnage went on. The battle-front, while inside the city limits, was now
almost stationary.

"Ha! Help--I hear footsteps approaching on jet-back," Garlock announced.
"Give 'em hell, boys--shovel on the coal!"

        *           *           *

A flight of fighter-planes, eight abreast and wing-tips almost touching,
howled close overhead and along the line of invasion. They could not
fire, of course, until they reached the city limits. There they opened
up as one, and the air below became literally filled with falling
monsters. Some had only broken wings; some were dead, but more or less
whole; many were blown to unrecognizable bits and scraps of flesh.

Another flight screamed into place immediately behind the first; then
another and another and another until six flights had passed. Then came
four helicopters, darting and hovering, whose gunners picked off
individually whatever survivors had managed to escape all six waves of
fighters.

"That's better," came a thought from the Arpalone nearest Garlock.
"Situation under control, thanks to you Tellurians. Supposed to be two
squads of us gunners, but the other squad was busy on another job.
Without you, this could have developed into a fairly nasty little
infection. I don't know what you're doing or how you're doing it--we
were told that you weren't like any other humans, and how true _that_
is--but I'm in favor of it. I thought there were four of you?"

"One of us is not a fighter."

"Oh. You can knock off now, if you like. We'll polish off. Thanks much."

"But don't the boys on the ground need some help?"

"The Arpales? Those idiots you have been thinking of as 'guardians'?
Which they are, of course. Uh-uh. Besides, we're air-fighters. Ground
work is none of our business. Also, these guns would raise altogether
too much hell down there. Bound to hit some humans."

"Check. Those Arpales aren't very intelligent, you Arpalones are
extremely so. Any connection?"

"'Way back, they say. Common ancestry, and doing two parts of the same
job. Killing these fumapties and lemarts and sencors and what-have-you.
I don't know what humanity's job is and don't give a damn. Probably
fairly important, some way or other, though, since it's our job to see
that the silly, gutless things keep on living. We have nothing to do
with 'em, ever. The only reason I'm talking to you is you're not really
human at all. You're a fighter, too, and a damn good one."

"I know what you mean," and the three Tellurians turned their attention
downward to the scene on the ground.

        *           *           *

The heaviest fighting had been over a large park at the city's edge,
which was now literally a shambles. Very few people were to be seen, and
those few more moving unconcernedly away from the center of violence.
All over the park thousands of Arpales were fighting furiously and
hundreds of them were dying. For hundreds of the sencors had suffered
only wing injuries, the long fall to ground had not harmed them further,
and their tremendous fighting ability had been lessened very little if
