
Barrent ran down a hill, a street, a rooftop. His pursuers were close
behind him. He entered a dim yellow room, closed and locked the door.
When he turned around, he saw that he had locked himself in with
Therkaler's corpse. Fungus was blossoming in the open wound in the
chest, and the scarred head was crowned with red and purple mold. The
corpse advanced, reached for him, and Barrent dived headfirst through
the window.

"_Come out of it, Barrent. You're overdoing it. Come out of the dream._"

Barrent had no time to listen. The window turned into a chute, and he
slid down its polished sides into an amphitheatre. There, across gray
sand, the corpse crept toward him on the stubs of arms and legs. The
enormous grandstand was empty except for the judge and the informer, who
sat side by side, watching.

"_He's stuck._"

"Well, I warned him...."

"_Come out of the dream, Barrent. This is Doctor Wayn. You're on Omega,
in the Dream Shop. Come out of the dream. There's still time if you pull
yourself out immediately._"

Omega? Dream? There was no time to think about it. Barrent was swimming
across a dark, evil-smelling lake. The judge and the informer were
swimming just behind him, flanking the corpse, whose skin was slowly
peeling away.

"_Barrent!_"

And now the lake was turning into a thick jelly which clung to his arms
and legs and filled his mouth, while the judge and the informer--

"_Barrent!_"

Barrent opened his eyes and found himself on the adjustable bed in the
Dream Shop. Doctor Wayn, looking somewhat shaken, was standing over him.
A nurse was near by with a tray of hypodermics and an oxygen mask.
Behind her was Arkdragen, wiping perspiration from his forehead.

"I didn't think you were going to make it," Doctor Wayn said. "I really
didn't."

"He pulled out just in time," the nurse said.

"I warned him," Arkdragen said, and left the room.

Barrent sat up. "What happened?" he asked.

Doctor Wayn shrugged his shoulders. "It's hard to tell. Perhaps you were
prone to circular reaction; and sometimes the drugs aren't absolutely
pure. But these things usually don't happen more than once. Believe me,
Citizen Barrent, the drug experience is very pleasant. I'm sure you'll
enjoy it the second time."

Still shaken by his experience, Barrent was certain there would be no
second time for him. Whatever the cost, he was not going to risk a
repetition of that nightmare.

"Am I addicted now?" he asked.

"Oh, no," Doctor Wayn said. "Addiction occurs with the third or fourth
visit."

Barrent thanked him and left. He passed Arkdragen's desk and asked how
much he owed.

"Nothing," Arkdragen said. "The first visit is always on the house." He
gave Barrent a knowing smile.

Barrent left the Dream Shop and hurried home to his apartment. He had a
lot to think about. Now, for the first time, he had proof that he was a
willful and premeditated murderer.




Chapter Nine


Being accused of a murder you can't remember is one thing; remembering a
murder you have been accused of is another thing entirely. Such evidence
is hard to disbelieve.

Barrent tried to sort out his feelings on the matter. Before his visit
to the Dream Shop he had never felt himself a murderer, no matter what
the Earth authorities had accused him of. At worst, he had thought that
he might have killed a man in a sudden uncontrollable fit of rage. But
to plan and perform a murder in cold blood....

Why had he done it? Had his lust for revenge been so great as to throw
off all the restraint of Earth's civilization? Apparently so. He had
killed, and someone had informed on him, and a judge had sentenced him
to Omega. He was a murderer on a criminal's planet. To live here
successfully, he simply had to follow his natural bias toward murder.

And yet, Barrent found this extremely difficult to do. He had
surprisingly little taste for bloodshed. On Free Citizen's Day,
although he went into the streets with his needlebeam, he couldn't bring
himself to slaughter any of the lower classes. He didn't want to kill.
It was a ridiculous prejudice, considering where and what he was; but
there it was. No matter how often Tem Rend or Joe lectured him on his
Citizen's duties, Barrent still found murder quite distasteful.

He sought the aid of a psychiatrist, who told him that his rejection of
murder had its roots in an unhappy childhood. The phobia had been
further complicated by the traumatic qualities of his experience in the
Dream Shop. Because of this, murder, the highest social good, had become
repugnant to him. This antimurder neurosis in a man eminently suited for
the art of killing would, the psychiatrist said, inevitably lead to
Barrent's destruction. The only solution was to displace the neurosis.
The psychiatrist suggested immediate treatment in a sanitarium for the
criminally non-murderous.

Barrent visited a sanitarium, and heard the mad inmates screaming about
goodness, fair play, the sanctity of life, and other obscenities. He had
no intention of joining them. Perhaps he was sick, but he wasn't _that_
sick!

His friends told him that his uncooperative attitude was bound to get
him into trouble. Barrent agreed; but he hoped, by killing only when it
became necessary, that he would escape the observation of the highly
placed individuals who administered the law.

For several weeks his plan seemed to work. He ignored the increasingly
peremptory notes from the Dream Shop and did not return to services at
the Wee Coven. Business prospered, and Barrent spent his spare time
studying the effects of the rarer poisons and practicing with his
needlebeam. He often thought about the girl. He still had the gun she
had lent him. He wondered if he would ever see her again.

And he thought about Earth. Since his visit to the Dream Shop, he had
occasional flashes of recall, isolated pictures of a weathered stone
building, a stand of live oaks, the curve of a river seen through
willows. This half-remembered Earth filled him with an almost unbearable
longing. Like most of the citizens of Omega, his only real wish was to
go home.

And that was impossible.

The days passed, and when trouble came, it came unexpectedly. One night
there was a heavy knocking at his door. Half asleep, Barrent answered
it. Four uniformed men pushed their way inside and told him he was under
arrest.

"What for?" Barrent asked.

"Non-drug addiction," one of the men told him. "You have three minutes
to dress."

"What's the penalty?"

"You'll find out in court," the man said. He winked at the other guards
and added, "But the only way to cure a nonaddict is to kill him. Eh?"

Barrent dressed.

       *       *       *       *       *

He was taken to a room in the sprawling Department of Justice. The room
was called the Kangaroo Court, in honor of ancient Anglo-Saxon judicial
proceeding. Across the hall from it, also of antique derivation, was the
Star Chamber. Just past that was the Court of Last Appeal.

The Kangaroo Court was divided in half by a high wooden screen, for it
was fundamental to Omegan justice that the accused should not see his
judge nor any of the witnesses against him.

"Let the prisoner rise," a voice said from behind the screen. The voice,
thin, flat and emotionless, came through a small amplifier. Barrent
could barely understand the words; tone and inflection were lost, as had
been planned for. Even in speaking, the judge remained anonymous.

"Will Barrent," the judge said, "you have been brought before this court
on a major charge of non-drug addiction and a minor charge of religious
impiety. On the minor count we have the sworn statement of a priest. On
the major count we have the testimony of the Dream Shop. Can you refute
either of these charges?"

Barrent thought for a moment, then answered, "No, sir, I can't."

"For the present," the judge said, "your religious impiety can be
waived, since it is a first offense. But non-drug addiction is a major
crime against the state of Omega. The uninterrupted use of drugs is an
enforced privilege of every citizen. It is well known that privileges
must be exercised, otherwise they will be lost. To lose our privileges
would be to lose the very cornerstone of our liberty. Therefore to
reject or otherwise fail to perform a privilege is tantamount to high
treason."

There was a pause. The guards shuffled their feet restlessly. Barrent,
who considered his situation hopeless, stood at attention and waited.

"Drugs serve many purposes," the hidden judge went on. "I need not
enumerate their desirable qualities for the user. But speaking from the
viewpoint of the state, I will tell you that an addicted populace is a
loyal populace; that drugs are a major source of tax revenue; that drugs
exemplify our entire way of life. Furthermore, I say to you that the
nonaddicted minorities have invariably proven hostile to native Omegan
institutions. I give you this lengthy explanation, Will Barrent, in
order that you may better understand the sentence which is to be passed
upon you."

"Sir," Barrent said, "I was wrong in avoiding addiction. I won't plead
ignorance, because I know the law doesn't recognize that excuse. But I
will ask you most humbly for another chance. I ask you to remember, sir,
that addiction and rehabilitation are still possible for me."

"The court recognizes that," the judge said. "For that reason, the court
is pleased to exercise its fullest powers of judicial mercy. Instead of
summary execution, you may choose between two lesser decrees. The first
is punitive; that you shall suffer the loss of your right hand and left
leg in atonement for your crime against the State; but that you shall
not lose your life."

Barrent gulped and asked, "What is the other decree, sir?"

"The other decree, which is nonpunitive, is that you shall undergo a
Trial by Ordeal. And that, if you survive such a trial, you shall be
returned to appropriate rank and position in society."

"I'll take the Trial by Ordeal," Barrent said.

"Very well," said the judge. "Let the case proceed."

Barrent was led from the room. Behind him, he heard a quickly concealed
laugh from one of the guards. Had he chosen wrong? he wondered. Could a
trial by ordeal be worse than outright mutilation?




Chapter Ten


On Omega, so the saying went, you couldn't fit a knife blade between the
trial and the execution of the sentence. Barrent was taken at once to a
large, circular stone room in the basement of the Department of Justice.
White arc lights glared down at him from a high, arched ceiling. Below,
one section of wall had been cut away to provide a reviewing stand for
spectators. The stands were almost filled when Barrent arrived, and
hawkers were selling copies of the day's legal calendar.

For a few moments Barrent was alone on the stone floor. Then a panel
slid away in one curved wall, and a small machine rolled out.

A loudspeaker set high in the reviewing stand announced, "Ladies and
gentlemen, your attention please! You are about to witness Trial
642-BG223, by Ordeal, between Citizen Will Barrent and GME 213. Take
your seats, please. The contest will begin in a few minutes."

Barrent looked over his opponent. It was a glistening black machine
shaped like a half-sphere, standing almost four feet high. It rolled
restlessly back and forth on small wheels. A pattern of red, green, and
amber lights from recessed glass bulbs flashed across its smooth metal
hide. It stirred in Barrent a vague memory of some creature from Earth's
oceans.

"For the benefit of those who are visiting our gallery for the first
time," the loudspeaker said, "a word of explanation is in order. The
prisoner, Will Barrent, has freely chosen the Trial by Ordeal. The
instrument of justice, which in this instance is GME 213, is an example
of the finest creative engineering which Omega has produced. The
machine, or Max, as its many friends and admirers call it, is a murder
weapon of exemplary efficiency, able to utilize no less than
twenty-three killing modes, many of them extremely painful. For trial
purposes, it is set to operate upon a random principle. This means that
Max has no choice over the way in which it kills. The modes are selected
and abandoned by a random arrangement of twenty-three numbers, linked to
an equally random time-selection of one to six seconds."

Max suddenly moved toward the center of the room, and Barrent backed
away from it.

"It is within the prisoner's power," the loudspeaker voice continued,
"to disable the machine; in which case, the prisoner wins the contest
and is set free with full rights and privileges of his station. The
method of disabling varies from machine to machine. It is always
theoretically possible for a prisoner to win. Practically speaking, this
has happened on an average of 3.5 times out of a hundred."

Barrent looked up at the gallery of spectators. To judge by their dress,
they were all men and women of status; high in the ranks of the
Privileged Classes.

Then he saw, sitting in a front row seat, the girl who had lent him her
gun on his first day in Tetrahyde. She was as beautiful as he had
remembered her; but no hint of emotion touched her pale, oval face. She
stared at him with the frank and detached interest of someone watching
an unusual bug under a jar.

"Let the contest begin!" the loudspeaker announced.

Barrent had no more time to think about the girl, for the machine was
rolling toward him.

He circled warily away from it. Max extruded a single slender tentacle
with a white light winking in the end of it The machine rolled toward
Barrent, backing him toward a wall.

Abruptly it stopped. Barrent heard the clank of gears. The tentacle was
withdrawn, and in its place appeared a jointed metal arm which ended in
a knife-edge. Moving more quickly now, the machine cornered him against
the wall. The arm flickered out, but Barrent managed to dodge it. He
heard the knife-edge scrape against stone. When the arm withdrew,
Barrent had a chance to move again into the center of the room.

He knew that his only chance to disable the machine was during the pause
when its selector changed it from one killing mode to another. But how
do you disable a smooth-surfaced turtle-backed machine?

Max came at him again, and now its metal hide glistened with a dull
green substance which Barrent immediately recognized as Contact Poison.
He broke into a spring, circling the room, trying to avoid the fatal
touch.

The machine stopped. Neutralizer washed over its surface, clearing away
the poison. Then the machine was coming toward him again, this time with
no weapons visible, apparently intending to ram.

Barrent was badly winded. He dodged, and the machine dodged with him. He
was standing against the wall, helpless, as the machine picked up speed.

It stopped, inches from him. Its selector clicked. Max was extruding
some sort of a club.

This, Barrent thought, was an exercise in applied sadism. If it went on
much longer, the machine would run him off his feet and kill him at its
leisure. Whatever he was going to do, he had better do it at once, while
he still had the strength.

Even as he thought that, the machine swung a clubbed metal arm. Barrent
couldn't avoid the blow completely. The club struck his left shoulder,
and he felt his arm go numb.
