
Isoprene is a very volatile liquid, boiling at a temperature of about
30 degrees Fahrenheit. Chemical analysis shows it to be composed of
carbon and hydrogen in the proportions of five to eight.

In the course of his experiments Dr. Tilden found that when isoprene
is brought into contact with strong acids, such as aqueous
hydrochloric acid, for example, it is converted into a tough elastic
solid, which is, to all appearances, true India rubber.

Specimens of isoprene were made from several vegetable oils in the
course of Dr. Tilden's work on those compounds. He preserved several
of them and stowed the bottles containing them away upon an unused
shelf in his laboratory.

After some months had elapsed he was surprised at finding the contents
of the bottles containing the substance derived from the turpentine
entirely changed in appearance. In place of a limpid, colorless liquid
the bottles contained a dense sirup, in which were floating several
large masses of a solid of a yellowish color. Upon examination this
turned out to be India rubber.

This is the first instance on record of the spontaneous change of
isoprene into India rubber. According to the doctor's hypothesis, this
spontaneous change can only be accounted for by supposing that a small
quantity of acetic or formic acid had been produced by the oxidizing
action of the air, and that the presence of this compound had been the
means of transforming the rest.

Upon inserting the ordinary chemical test paper, the liquid was found
to be slightly acid. It yielded a small portion of unchanged isoprene.

The artificial India rubber found floating in the liquid upon analysis
showed all the constituents of natural rubber. Like the latter, it
consisted of two substances, one of which was more soluble in benzine
or in carbon bisulphide than the other. A solution of the artificial
rubber in benzine left on evaporation a residue which agreed in all
characteristics with the residuum of the best Para rubber similarly
dissolved and evaporated.

The artificial rubber was found to unite with natural rubber in the
same way as two pieces of ordinary pure rubber, forming a tough,
elastic compound.

Although the discovery is very interesting from a chemical point of
view, it has not as yet any commercial importance. It is from such
beginnings as these, however, that cheap chemical substitutes for many
natural products have been developed. Few persons outside of those
directly connected with rubber industries realize the vast quantities
imported yearly into this country. Last year there were brought into
United States ports, as shown by the reports of the customs officers,
no less than 34,348,000 pounds of India rubber. The industry has been
steadily progressive since the invention of machinery for
manufacturing it into the various articles of everyday use. The
wonderful growth of the India rubber interests in this country will be
seen from the statistics compiled in the tenth census.

In 1870 there were imported 5,132,000 pounds at an average rate of $1
per pound; in 1880 the imports were 17,835,000 pounds, at an average
price of 85 cents per pound; in 1890 31,949,000 pounds were imported,
at an average price of 75 cents per pound. The present price of India
rubber varies from 75 cents per pound for fine Para rubber to 45 cents
per pound for the cheapest grade.

It will be seen that, notwithstanding the increase in importations,
the price of the raw material remains at a comparatively high figure.
Many experiments have been made to find a substance possessing the
same properties as India rubber, but which could be produced at a
cheaper rate.

Many of the compositions which have been invented have been well
adapted for use for certain purposes and have been used to adulterate
the pure rubber, but no substance has been produced which could even
approach India rubber in several of its important characteristics.
There has never been a substance yet recommended as a substitute for
rubber which possessed the extraordinary elasticity which makes it
indispensable in the manufacture of so many articles of common use.

Great hopes were at one time placed in a product prepared from linseed
oil. It was found that a material could be produced from it which
would to a certain extent equal India rubber compositions in
elasticity and toughness.

It was argued that linseed oil varnish, when correctly prepared,
should be clear, and dry in a few hours into a transparent, glossy
mass of great tenacity. By changing the mode of preparing linseed oil
varnish in so far as to boil the oil until it became a very thick
fluid and spun threads, when it was taken from the boiler, a mass was
obtained which in drying assumed a character resembling that of a
thick, congealed solution of glue.

Resin was added to the mass while hot, in a quantity depending upon
the product designed to be made, and requiring a greater or less
degree of elasticity.

Many other recipes have been advocated at different times to make a
product resembling caoutchouc out of linseed oil in combination with
other substances, but all have failed to give satisfaction, save as
adulterants to pure rubber.

Among the best compounds in use in rubber factories at present is one
made by boiling linseed oil to the consistency of thick glue.
Unbleached shellac and a small quantity of lampblack is then stirred
in. The mass is boiled and stirred until thoroughly mixed. It is then
placed in flat vessels exposed to the air to congeal.

While still warm the blocks formed in the flat vessels are passed
between rollers to mix it as closely as possible. This compound was
asserted by its inventor to be a perfect substitute for caoutchouc. It
was also stated that it could be vulcanized. This was found to be an
error, however. The compound, upon the addition of from 15 to 25 per
cent. of pure rubber, may be vulcanized and used as a substitute for
vulcanized rubber.

Compounds of coal tar, asphalt, etc., with caoutchouc have been
frequently tested, but they can only be used for very inferior goods.

The need for a substitute for gutta percha is even more acute than for
artificial India rubber. A compound used in its stead for many
purposes is known as French gutta percha. This possesses nearly all
the properties of gutta percha. It may be frequently used for the same
purposes and has the advantage of not cracking when exposed to the
air.

Its inventors claimed that it was a perfect substitute for India
rubber and gutta percha, fully as elastic and tough and not
susceptible to injury from great pressure or high temperature.

The composition of this ambitious substance is as follows: One part,
by weight, of equal parts of wood tar oil and coal tar oil, or of the
latter alone, is heated for several hours at a temperature of from 252
to 270 degrees Fahrenheit, with two parts, by weight, of hemp oil,
until the mass can be drawn into threads. Then one-half part, by
weight, of linseed oil, thickened by boiling, is added. To each 100
parts of the compound one-twentieth to one-tenth part of ozokerite and
the same quantity of spermaceti are added.

The entire mixture is then again heated to 252 degrees Fahrenheit and
one-fifteenth to one-twelfth part of sulphur is added. The substance
thus obtained upon cooling is worked up in a similar manner to natural
India rubber. It has not been successfully used, however, without the
addition of a quantity of pure rubber to give it the requisite
elasticity.

A substitute for gutta percha is obtained by boiling the bark of the
birch tree, especially the outer part, in water over an open fire.
This produces a black fluid mass, which quickly becomes solid and
compact upon exposure to air.

Each gutta percha and India rubber factory has a formula of its own
for making up substances as nearly identical with the natural product
as possible, which are used to adulterate the rubber and gutta percha
used in the factory. No one has as yet, however, succeeded in
discovering a perfect substitute for either rubber or gutta percha.

The history of chemistry contains many instances where natural
products have been supplanted by artificial compounds possessing the
same properties and characteristics. One of the most notable of these
is the substance known as alizarine, the coloring matter extracted
from the madder root. This, like India rubber, is a hydrocarbon.

Prior to 1869 all calico printing was done with the coloring matter
derived from the madder root, and its cultivation was a leading
industry in the eastern and southern portions of Europe.

In 1869 alizarine was successfully produced from the refuse coal tar
of gas works and the calico printing business was revolutionized.

The essence of vanilla, made from the vanilla bean, and used as a
flavoring extract, has been supplanted by the substance christened
vanilla by chemists, which possesses the same characteristics and is
made from sawdust.

Isoprene, from which Dr. Tilden produced India rubber, is
comparatively a new product, as derived from oil of turpentine. It yet
remains to be seen whether rubber can be synthetically produced
certainly and cheaply. The result of further experiments will be
awaited with interest, as the production of artificial rubber at
moderate cost would be an event of enormous importance.

       *       *       *       *       *




DEEP AND FROSTED ETCHING ON GLASS.


The best means of producing these effects is by printing from a steel
plate or lithographic stone on thin transfer paper, which, in turn, is
made to give up the design to the surface of the glass, the exposed
portions of the latter being then etched with acid.

In preparing the steel plate, a coating of varnish is prepared by
mixing 200 parts by weight of oil of turpentine, 150 of Syrian
asphaltum, 100 of beeswax, 50 of stearin, and 50 of Venice turpentine
in the warm. The design is then copied in outline by tracing from the
original, the shading being reproduced in a less detailed manner, but
with fewer and bolder strokes, in order to adapt the picture to the
process. It is then pricked through the tracing paper on to the
varnish coating of the plate, and, after clearing out the lines with
graving needles, the plate is etched with a mixture of 1 vol. of water
and 4 to 7 vols. of nitric acid, either by application or immersion;
in the latter event the back of the plate must be varnished over. When
the metal is bitten by the acid to about 1-75 of an inch in depth, the
operation is finished.

To transfer the design to the glass it is printed from the steel plate
on to thin silk paper, the ink used being compounded from 500 parts of
oil of turpentine, 1,500 of Syrian asphalt, 500 of beeswax, 400 of
paraffin, and 300 of thick litho varnish. The printing is performed in
the usual manner, and the transfer laid on the warmed surface of the
glass sheet or ware to be decorated, rubbed over uniformly with a
cloth to make the ink adhere to the glass, and then the paper is
moistened and taken off again, leaving the imprinted design behind. It
is well to have the ink fairly thick, and rely on warmth to impart the
necessary fluidity; otherwise the design may come away with the paper
in patches, and be imperfect.

For etching in the design on the glass, the edges of the latter are
coated with the protective varnish, and then hydrofluoric acid is
brushed over the exposed portions, which are thereby corroded, leaving
the parts covered by the ink standing in relief. According as a clear
or frosted etching is desired, the etching liquid is modified, being,
for the latter purpose, composed of 500 parts of ammonium fluoride,
100 of common salt, 300 of fuming hydrofluoric acid and 30 of ammonia.
This is brushed over the glass two or three times, and then rinsed off
with lukewarm water. For deep etching, hydrofluoric acid is diluted
with 11/2 vols. of water and stored for twenty-four hours before use.
The objects are immersed in the baths for thirty to fifty minutes, and
kept quite still the while. If the etching is to be left clear, the
acid is neutralized by boiling the glass in soda, but if to be frosted
afterward it is coated with the first named etching liquid while still
damp. Finally, the ink is washed off with turpentine, the glass rubbed
over with sawdust, washed in hot lye and rinsed with water.

Grained or lined designs can be very suitably printed from a litho
stone, on paper faced with a mixture of 1,500 parts of water, 250 of
wheaten starch, 1,000 of glycerine and 200 of a thick solution of gum
arabic, the ink for printing being prepared by melting and mixing 500
parts of pure tallow, 250 of white beeswax, 250 of liquid mastic, and
150 of pale resin, with 100 parts of lampblack, 5 of minium, and 500
of litho varnish. In transferring the design to the glass, the latter,
if flat, may be passed between India rubber rollers or protected by
layers of gutta percha when the pressure is applied. The impression
produced by this lithographic process has to be strengthened to enable
the thin coating of ink to resist the etching liquid, and this is done
by dusting powdered resin over the printed surface of the glass,
brushing off all that does not adhere, and causing the remainder to
attach itself to the ink by means of warmth, and so form an impervious
covering. The further treatment is the same as that already described.
These methods are particularly suitable for reproducing landscapes,
etc., on thinly flashed glass of various colors.--Diamant.

       *       *       *       *       *




SLATE AND ITS APPLICATIONS.


Slate is, as we know, merely a variety of argillite. Slate quarries
are found in England, Switzerland and Italy, but it is in France
especially that the industry has been most extensively developed by
reason of the large deposits that underlie its surface, particularly
in the province of Anjou, where they extend from Trelaze to Avrille, a
distance of six miles, and in the department of Ardennes, at Remogne,
Fumay, etc.

Normandy, Brittany, Dauphiny and Marne likewise possess quarries,
although they are not so productive.

The exploitation is commonly done in open quarry. After the vegetable
mould (which in this case is called "cover") has been removed, we meet
with a solid slate which it is difficult to split into laminae, and it
is not until a depth of at least fifteen feet is reached that we find
a material that is fit to be exploited. All the best beds of slate, in
fact, improve in quality in proportion as they lie deeper under the
surface, near to which they have little value. Without entering into
details as to the exploitation of this product, let us say that the
blocks have to be divided in the quarry, since, in the open air, they
rapidly lose the property of readily splitting into thin, even laminae.

[Illustration: SLATE STORE-VATS FOR BREWERIES.]

Slate has but slight affinity for water, and, moreover, resists
atmospheric influences, humidity and heat pretty well.

This property renders it valuable for a large number of domestic
purposes.

There is no certain proof, it is true, that it was employed by the
ancients, but it is, nevertheless, extremely probable that it was used
in mass at an early period for stair heads, pillars for buildings and
as a material for fencing.

The exploitation of the material became especially active at the
period when the idea occurred to some one to use slate for the rooting
of houses. It was employed for this purpose along with tiles as far
back as the eleventh century in the majority of schistose districts.
It is well known, for example, that Fumay (Ardennes) at this period
had a brotherhood of slate quarrymen.

A method of getting out the material and cutting it regularly was
found toward the end of the twelfth century, and it was not till then
that it became of general application. Moreover, with the advent of
the Gothic period slate became indispensable for castle roofs, which
have a conical form.

The best slate for roofing purposes is hard, heavy and of a bluish
gray color. A good slate should readily split into even laminae; it
should not be absorbent of water either on its face or endwise, a
property evinced by its not increasing perceptibly in weight after
immersion in water; and it should be sound, compact and not apt to
disintegrate in the air.

For a long time past there have been used in schools slate tablets
upon which the pupils write with a pencil made of soft gray schist.
This application, which is capable of rendering services in a host of
details of domestic economy, has given rise to artificial slates,
which, made by a process of moulding a composition analogous to
cardboard pulp, present the same advantages as ordinary slate, while
being much lighter.

Along about 1834 an Englishman of the name of Magnus utilized the
property that slate possesses of taking a fine polish in the invention
of what are called enameled slates. These products are used especially
in the manufacture of table tops, mantelpieces, altars, etc. They very
closely imitate the most expensive marbles, and their properties,
along with their low price, have been the cause of their introduction
into the houses of all classes of the English population, as well as
into those of entire Europe and America.

The ease with which slate is obtained in slabs of large dimensions has
greatly contributed in recent times toward still further increasing
its applications. One of the first of such applications was the
substitution of it in urinals for cast iron plates, which very rapidly
oxidize and become impregnated with nauseous odors that necessitate a
frequent cleaning and constitute a permanent source of infection.

For a few years past, too, slate has been used, in the manufacture of
vats designed for breweries. These vats, of which we show in the
accompanying figure a model of the installation employed in the Ivry
Brewery, are each 61/2 feet square and 5 feet in depth. For leading the
beer, which, upon coming from the brewing apparatus, must rest for a
few days, they are connected by a system of pipes. A second system of
pipes, which in our figure is seen running along the cellar vault,
serves as a cooling apparatus and maintains a temperature of 5 deg. C.
above zero in the vats arranged in two rows to the right and left.

The details or even a simple enumeration of the new applications of
slate would, in order to be anywhere nearly complete, necessitate a
lengthy article. Let us say in conclusion that slate is substituted
for wood, which is too easily attackable, and for marble, which is
much more costly, in our laboratories and amphitheaters and everywhere
where the manipulation and stay of easily corrupted liquids and solids
require the greatest cleanliness in the material of construction.--La
Science en Famille.

       *       *       *       *       *




BIRTHPLACE OF THE OILCLOTH INDUSTRY.


In Kennebec County, Me., is the quiet borough of East Winthrop, for
more than half a century known wherever oilcloth carpeting was used as
Baileyville.

Were it not for the inventive brain of one of East Winthrop's early
inhabitants, says a contemporary, the village would hardly be known
across the lake, but early in the present century one of the numerous
family of Maine Baileys evolved a scheme to fill his purse faster than
the slow process of nature was likely to do it in growing crops.

Oilcloth carpetings were not known in the long ago, when Ezekiel
Bailey pictured in his mind how they might be made, and it was in the
little hamlet of East Winthrop that the conceit of their manufacture
was hatched and executed. Ezekiel Bailey was, in the days prior to the
war of 1812, looked upon as a very likely boy. He was studious and
industrious, and while other boys of the village were out in the white
oak groves setting box traps for gray squirrels, and spearing pickerel
by torch light in the waters of Cobosseecontee, Ezekiel was busy in
his little workshop fashioning useful things to be used about the
house.

Just how and when and where he was prompted to attempt the making of
oilcloth carpet nobody now living at East Winthrop seems to know. Many
of the burghers thought he was "a-wastin' uv his time," but they
thought different some years later when great factories for the
manufacture of oilcloth floor carpeting were erected in East Winthrop,
Hallowell, New Jersey, and other places.

And Ezekiel? He amassed a considerable fortune and left the path of
life much easier for his kin to pursue. Having met a peddler one day,
he bought a table cover made of a combination of burlap and paint.
Such things were a luxury in the country at that time, and Ezekiel
Bailey was shrewd enough to foresee a big demand for them if the cost
could be moderated a bit. While thinking, an idea came to him, and
following the idea a small voice which whispered: "Make 'em yourself."
He decided to try, and there is a legend to the effect that half the
farmers of the village quit work to see the first table cover.

Procuring a square of burlap, or rather enough burlap from which to
fashion a square of the desired size, Ezekiel Bailey framed up the
fabric as the good old grandmas used to hitch up quilts at a quilting
bee, the only difference being that the burlap was framed or stretched
over a table made of planed boards large enough for the full spread of
the burlap. With paint and brush he began his work. The first coat was
a tiller; the next, a thicker one, gave body to the cloth, and when
this was rubbed down to a smooth surface the last coat was prepared.
This was of a different color and was spread on thick. Then, with a
straight edge, a piece of board with a true, thin edge, reaching
across the whole surface of painted cloth, the finishing touches were
put on. Commencing at one end of the fabric, the straight edge was
moved back and forth, and straight along over the fresh paint once or
twice, and the whole thing left to dry.
