
"Like I said. A lot of junk."

Retief leaned back, looking sardonically at Zorn, "Here's the gimmick,
Zorn," he said. "The Corps is getting a little tired of Petreac and
Rotune carrying on their two-penny war out here. Your privateers have a
nasty habit of picking on innocent bystanders. After studying both
sides, the Corps has decided Petreac would be a little easier to do
business with. So this trade agreement was worked out. The Corps can't
openly sponsor an arms shipment to a belligerent. But personal
appliances are another story."

"So what do we do--plow 'em under with back-yard cultivators?" Zorn
looked at Retief, puzzled. "What's the point?"

"You take the sealed monitor unit from the washer, the repeller field
generator from the lamp, the converter control from the cultivator, et
cetera, et cetera. You fit these together according to some very simple
instructions. Presto! You have one hundred thousand Standard-class Y
hand blasters. Just the thing to turn the tide in a stalemated war
fought with obsolete arms."

"Good lord!" Magnan said. "Retief, are you--"

"I have to tell him," Retief said. "He has to know what he's putting his
neck into."

"Weapons, hey?" Zorn said. "And Rotune knows about it?"

"Sure they know about it. It's not too hard to figure out. And there's
more. They want the CDT delegation included in the massacre for a
reason. It will put Petreac out of the picture; the trade agreement will
go to Rotune; and you and your new regime will find yourselves looking
down the muzzles of your own blasters."

Zorn threw his dope-stick to the floor with a snarl.

"I should have smelled something when that Rotune smoothie made his
pitch." Zorn looked at his watch.

"I've got two hundred armed men in the palace. We've got about forty
minutes to get over there before the rocket goes up."




V


"You'd better stay here on this terrace out of the way until I've spread
the word," Zorn said. "Just in case."

"Let me caution you against any ... ah ... slip-ups, Mr. Zorn," Magnan
said. "The Nenni are not to be molested--"

Zorn looked at Retief.

"Your friend talks too much," he said. "I'll keep my end of it. He'd
better keep his."

"Nothing's happened yet, you're sure?" Magnan said.

"I'm sure," Zorn said. "Ten minutes to go. Plenty of time."

"I'll just step into the salon to assure myself that all is well,"
Magnan said.

"Suit yourself," Zorn said. "Just stay clear of the kitchen, or you'll
get your throat cut." He sniffed at his dope-stick. "What's keeping
Shoke?" he muttered.

Magnan stepped to a tall glass door, eased it open and poked his head
through the heavy draperies. As he moved to draw back, a voice was
faintly audible. Magnan paused, head still through the drapes.

"What's going on there?" Zorn rasped. He and Retief stepped up behind
Magnan.

"--breath of air, ha-ha," Magnan was saying.

"Well, come along, Magnan!" Ambassador Crodfoller's voice snapped.

Magnan shifted from one foot to the other then pushed through the
drapes.

"Where've you been, Mr. Magnan?" The Ambassador's voice was sharp.

"Oh ... ah ... a slight accident, Mr. Ambassador."

"What's happened to your shoes? Where are your insignia and
decorations?"

"I--ah--spilled a drink on them. Sir. Ah--listen...."

The sound of an orchestra came up suddenly, blaring a fanfare.

Zorn shifted restlessly, ear against the glass.

"What's your friend pulling?" he rasped. "I don't like this."

"Keep cool, Zorn," Retief said. "Mr. Magnan is doing a little emergency
salvage on his career."

The music died away with a clatter.

"--My God," Ambassador Crodfoller's voice was faint. "Magnan, you'll be
knighted for this. Thank God you reached me. Thank God it's not too
late. I'll find some excuse. I'll get a gram off at once."

"But you--"

"It's all right, Magnan. You were in time. Another ten minutes and the
agreement would have been signed and transmitted. The wheels would have
been put in motion. My career ruined...."

Retief felt a prod at his back. He turned.

"Doublecrossed," Zorn said softly. "So much for the word of a diplomat."

       *       *       *       *       *

Retief looked at the short-barreled needler in Zorn's hand.

"I see you hedge your bets, Zorn," he said.

"We'll wait here," Zorn said, "until the excitement's over inside. I
wouldn't want to attract any attention right now."

"Your politics are still lousy, Zorn. The picture hasn't changed. Your
coup hasn't got a chance."

"Skip it. I'll take up one problem at a time."

"Magnan's mouth has a habit of falling open at the wrong time--"

"That's my good luck that I heard it. So there'll be no agreement, no
guns, no fat job for Tammany Zorn, hey? Well, I can still play it the
other way, What have I got to lose?"

With a movement too quick to follow, Retief's hand chopped down across
Zorn's wrist. The needler clattered as Zorn reeled, and then Retief's
hand clamped Zorn's arm and whirled him around.

"In answer to your last question," Retief said, "your neck."

"You haven't got a chance, doublecrosser," Zorn gasped.

"Shoke will be here in a minute," Retief said. "Tell him it's all off."

"Twist harder, Mister," Zorn said. "Break it off at the shoulder. I'm
telling him nothing!"

"The kidding's over, Zorn," Retief said. "Call it off or I'll kill you."

"I believe you," Zorn said. "But you won't have long to remember it."

"All the killing will be for nothing," Retief said. "You'll be dead and
the Rotunes will step into the power vacuum."

"So what? When I die, the world ends."

"Suppose I make you another offer, Zorn?"

"Why would it be any better than the last one, chiseler?"

Retief released Zorn's arm, pushed him away, stooped and picked up the
needler.

"I could kill you, Zorn. You know that."

"Go ahead!"
