The engineer sat over his chessboard in deep concentration. The far edge
of the board seemed to be indefinite, lost partially in the mysterious
sable curtain which covered the bulkhead.

"Hoskins."

No answer.

Paresi put his hand on Hoskins' shoulder. Hoskins' head came up slowly.
He did not turn it. His gaze was straight ahead into the darkness. But
at least it was off the board.

"Hoskins," said Paresi, "why are you playing chess?"

"Chess is chess," said Hoskins quietly. "Chess may symbolize any
conflict, but it is chess and it will remain chess."

"Who are you playing with?"

No answer.

"Hoskins--we need you. Help us."

Hoskins let his gaze travel slowly downward again until it was on the
board. "The word is not the thing," he said. "The number is not the
thing. The picture, the ideograph, the symbol--these are not the thing.
Conversely ..."

"Yes, Hoskins."

Paresi waited. Hoskins did not move or speak. Paresi put his hand on the
man's shoulder again, but now there was no response. He cursed suddenly,
bent and brought up his hand with a violent smash and sent board and
pieces flying.


When the clatter had died down Hoskins said pleasantly, "The pieces are
not the game. The symbols are not the thing." He sat still, his eyes
fixed on the empty chair where the board had been. He put out a hand and
moved a piece where there was no piece to a square which was no longer
there. Then he sat and waited.

Paresi, breathing heavily, backed off, whirled, and went back to the
Captain.

Anderson looked up at him, and there was the glimmer of humor in his
eyes. "Better sit down and talk about something different, Doctor."

Paresi made an animal sound, soft and deep, far back in his throat,
plumped down next to the Captain, and kneaded his hands together for a
moment. Then he smiled. "Quite right, skipper. I'd better."

They sat quietly for a moment. Then the Captain prompted, "About the
different breaking point...."

"Yes, Captain?"

"Perhaps you can put your finger on the thing that makes different men
break in different ways, for different reasons. I mean, Johnny's case
seemed pretty clear cut, and what you haven't explained about Hoskins,
Hoskins has demonstrated pretty clearly. About Ives, now--we can skip
that for the time he'll be unconscious. But if you can figure out where
you and I might break, why--we'd know what to look for."

"You think that would help?"

"We'd be prepared."

Paresi looked at him sharply. "Let's hypothesize a child who is afraid
of the dark. Ask him and he might say that there's a _something_ in dark
places that will jump out at him. Then assure him, with great authority,
that not only is he right but that it's about to jump any minute, and
what have you done?"

"Damage," nodded the Captain. "But you wouldn't say that to the child.
You'd tell him there was nothing there. You'd _prove_ there wasn't."

"So I would," agreed the doctor. "But in our case I couldn't do anything
of the kind. Johnny broke over machines that really didn't work. Hoskins
broke over phenomena that couldn't be measured nor understood. Ives
broke over things that scuttled and crawled. Subjectively real
phenomena, all of them. Whatever basic terrors hide in you and in me
will come to face us, no matter how improbable they might be. And you
want me to tell you what they are. No, skipper. Better leave them in
your subconscious, where you've buried them."

"I'm not afraid," said the Captain. "Tell me, Paresi! At least I'll
know. I'd rather know. I'd so _damn_ much rather know!"

"You're sure I can tell you?"

"Yes."

"I haven't psychoanalyzed you, you know. Some of these things are very
hard to--"

"You do know, don't you?"


"Damn you, yes!" Paresi wet his lips. "All right, then. I may be doing a
wrong thing here.... You've cuddled up to the idea that I'm a very
astute character who automatically knows about things like this, and
it's been a comfort to you. Well, I've got news for you. I didn't figure
all these things out. I was told."

"Told?"

"Yes, told," said Paresi angrily. "Look, this is supposed to be
restricted information, but the Exploration Service doesn't rely on
individual aptitude tests alone to make up a crew. There's another
factor--call it an inaptitude factor. In its simplest terms, it comes to
this: that a crew can't work together only if each member is the most
efficient at his job. He has to _need_ the others, each one of the
others. And the word _need_ predicates _lack_. In other words, none of
us is a balanced individual. And the imbalances are chosen to match and
blend, so that we will react as a balanced unit. Sure I know Johnny's
bugaboos, and Hoskins', and yours. They were all in my indoctrination
treatments. I know all your case histories, all your psychic
push-buttons."

"And yours?" demanded the Captain.

"Hoskins, for example," said Paresi. "Happily married, no children.
Physically inferior all his life. Repressed desire for pure science
which produced more than a smattering of a great many sciences and made
him a hell of an engineer. High idealistic quotient; self sacrifice.
Look at him playing chess, making of this very real situation a
theoretical abstraction ... like leaving a marriage for deep space.

"Johnny we know about. Brought up with never failing machines. Still
plays with them as if they were toys, and like any imaginative child,
turns to his toys for reassurance. He needs to be a hero, hence the
stars....

"Ives ... always fat. Learned to be easy-going, learned to laugh _with_
when others were laughing _at_, and bottling up pressures every time it
happened. A large appetite. He's here to satisfy it; he's with us so he
can eat up the galaxies...."

There was a long pause. "Go on," said the Captain. "Who's next? You?"

"You," said the doctor shortly. "You grew up with a burning curiosity
about the nature of things. But it wasn't a scientist's curiosity; it
was an aesthete's. You're one of the few people alive who refused a
subsidized education and worked your way through advanced studies as a
crewman on commercial space-liners. You became one of the youngest
professors of philosophy in recent history. You made a romantic marriage
and your wife died in childbirth. Since then--almost a hundred missions
with E.A.S., refusing numerous offers of advancement. Do I have to tell
you what your bugaboo is now?"

"No," said Anderson hoarsely. "But I'm ... not afraid of it. I had no
idea your ..." He swallowed. "... information was that complete."

"I wish it wasn't. I wish I had some things to--wonder about," said
Paresi with surprising bitterness.


The Captain looked at him shrewdly. "Go on with your case histories."

"I've finished."

"No you haven't." When Paresi did not answer, the Captain nudged him.
"Johnny, Ives, Hoskins, me. Haven't you forgotten someone?"

"No I haven't," snarled Paresi, "and if you expect me to tell you why a
psychologist buries himself in the stars, I'm not going to do it."

"I don't want to be told anything so general," said the Captain. "I just
want to know why _you_ came out here."

Paresi scowled. The Captain looked away from him and hazarded, "Big frog
in a small pond, Nick?"

Paresi snorted.

Anderson asked, "Women don't like you, do they, Nick?"

Almost inaudibly, Paresi said, "Better cut it out, skipper."

Anderson said, "Closest thing to being a mother--is that it?"

Paresi went white.

The Captain closed his eyes, frowned, and at last said, "Or maybe you
just want to play God."

"I'm going to make it tough for you," said Paresi between his teeth.
"There are several ways you can break, just as there are several ways to
break a log--explode it, crush it, saw it, burn it.... One of the ways
is to fight me until you win. Me, because there's no one else left to
fight you. So--I won't fight with you. And you're too rational to attack
me unless I do. _That_ is the thing that will make it tough. If you must
break, it'll have to be some other way."

"Is that what I'm doing?" the Captain asked with sudden mildness. "I
didn't know that. I thought I was trying to get your own case history
out of you, that's all. What are you staring at?"

"Nothing."

There was nothing. Where there had been forward viewports, there was
nothing. Where there had been controls, the communication station, the
forward acceleration panels and storage lockers; the charts and
computers and radar gear--there was nothing. Blackness; featureless,
silent, impenetrable. They sat on one couch by one wall, to which was
fixed one table. Around them was empty floor and a blackness. The
chess-player faced into it, and perhaps he was partly within it; it was
difficult to see.

The Captain and the medical officer stared at one another. There seemed
to be nothing to say.




                    VI

    _For man's sense is falsely asserted to be the standard of
    things: on the contrary, all the perceptions, both of the senses
    and the mind, bear reference to man and not to the universe; and
    the human mind resembles those uneven mirrors which impart their
    own properties to different objects ... and distorts and
    disfigures them ... For every one ... has a cave or den of his
    own which refracts and discolors the light of nature._
        --Sir Francis Bacon
            (1561--1626)


It was the Captain who moved first. He went to the remaining bulkhead,
spun a dog, and opened a cabinet. From it he took a rack of spare radar
parts and three thick coils of wire. Paresi, startled, turned and saw
Hoskins peering owlishly at the Captain.

Anderson withdrew some tools, reached far back in the cabinet, and took
out a large bottle.

"Oh," said Paresi. "That.... I thought you were doing something
constructive."

In the far shadows, Hoskins turned silently back to his game. The
Captain gazed down at the bottle, tossed it, caught it. "I am," he said.
"I am."


He came and sat beside the doctor. He thumbed off the stopper and drank
ferociously. Paresi watched, his eyes as featureless as the imprisoning
dark.

"Well?" said the Captain pugnaciously.

Paresi's hands rose and fell, once. "Just wondering why."

"Why I'm going to get loopin', stoopin' drunk? I'll tell you why,
head-shrinker. Because I want to, that's why. Because I like it. I'm
doing something I like because I like it. I'm not doing it because of
the inversion of this concealed repression as expressed in the involuted
feelings my childhood developed in my attitude toward the sex-life of
beavers, see, couch-catechizer old boy? I like it and that's why."

"I knew a man who went to bed with old shoes because he liked it," said
Paresi coldly.

The Captain drank again and laughed harshly. "Nothing can change you,
can it, Nick?"

Paresi looked around him almost fearfully. "I can change," he whispered.
"Ives is gone. Give me the bottle."

