some of the sacrifices made by Terrestrials for the cause of liberty.
They filled Damis with amazement and moved him to awe to think of the
loyalty and bravery displayed by those whom he had been taught from
childhood to regard as a race of slaves, created solely to minister to
their overlords.

Damis pushed the ship to the greatest acceleration which he dared to
use, and, as they approached the Earth, he cast many an anxious glance
at the diminishing fuel supply. For thirteen days he drove at high speed
until the Earth seemed almost at hand. Using almost the full power of
his bow motors, he checked its speed. For a time he thought he had
overestimated the power of his motors and that it would be necessary to
avoid the atmosphere belt, run past the Earth and return. At the middle
of the fifteenth day, with the Earth less than a thousand miles away, he
threw in his last notch of power.

The deceleration pressed them so tightly to the nose of the ship that
they could hardly breathe. Damis lay with his hand on a side motor to
throw them out of danger. Gradually the forward motion of the ship
ceased and at last Damis rose with an effort and shut off the bow
motors.

"We are falling under the influence of terrestrial gravity," he
announced. "In another three hours, we will land."

                   *       *       *       *       *

He was as good as his word. Three hours later he dropped the space ship
to a landing at a spot half a dozen miles distant from the beleaguered
capital of the Sons of God. As he landed, the sun was just peeping over
the eastern horizon.

Their approach had been seen and the ship was surrounded by hundreds of
Terrestrial swordsmen. As the airlock opened and Damis and Turgan
appeared there was silence for a moment and then a thunderous shout of
joy rose to the heavens. From the forefront of the crowd, a
crimson-robed man ran toward the ship.

"Turgan, my lord," he cried as fell on his knees and strove to kiss the
Kildare's hand. "You are spared to us who had given you up for lost. Our
spies reported that the Sons of God had followed you to Mars and had
slain you all. Havenner reported to Glavour that you had made such a
resistance that it was impossible to follow his orders and bring you
back alive."

"Havenner!" cried Damis. "Havenner is on Venus with Lura."

"The ship of the Sons of God returned last night," replied the Akildare,
"with a loss of two men of its crew and with the Princess Lura a
prisoner."

Tears of joy sprang into Damis' eyes and ran unrestrained down his face.

"And she is safe?" he cried.

"One of our spies saw her and reports that she is well although in poor
spirits. She is confined in the palace and will not be harmed. A Jovian
fleet of a hundred ships is expected hourly with Tubain himself in
command. A message to Glavour has ordered that Lura be held for Tubain's
arrival, when he will dispose of her."

"What is the situation here, Toness?" interrupted Turgan. "I rejoice
with Damis that my daughter is safe, yet, unless we are victorious, her
present safety will avail her little."

                   *       *       *       *       *

"Things have gone neither well nor ill since your departure, Kildare,"
replied Toness. "I have followed out the great conspiracy as it was
planned many years ago. Although we have lost thousands of our bravest
men, we have the Sons of God besieged in the Viceregal palace and we
have tapped and cut the secret source of power which Timour, the
Akildare, found years ago. They have no weapons save some hand tubes
that are not yet exhausted and their axes. Their most powerful weapons
of offense are crippled, yet we cannot storm the palace in the face of
the defenses they have left. Have you brought us any hope from Mars?"

"We have brought weapons against which all the power and science of the
Sons of God are as helpless as is our feeble strength against their
might," replied Turgan. "Send me men to transport these weapons, and in
two hours not a Jovian will remain on the planet."

A wild cheer of joy from the assembled Terrestrials answered the words
of the Kildare. A score of men ran forward and entered the space ship on
the heels of Turgan. They reappeared in a few minutes carrying with the
greatest of care the two terrible weapons which were the gift of the
Grand Mognac. Damis suddenly looked up from a reverie in which he had
been plunged.

"I have just figured it out," he exclaimed. "Despite his report to
Glavour, Havenner knew that Turgan and I lived. He started away from
Mars toward Venus, a destination which he had already informed his crew
that they would make for. He feared the Martian weapons and he strove
to draw us away toward Venus so that he would be safe. Once the Martian
instruments had ceased to watch him, he altered his course and made for
Earth. With his greater supply of fuel and more powerful ship, he was
able to make a higher speed and, despite the additional million or two
of miles, he was able to land before us. The thing that puzzles me is
why we were not seen by the Jovians as we approached."

"You came from a different direction than Havenner, oh Nepthalim,"
replied Toness. "All of their instruments were either watching Havenner
or the Jovian fleet. But for an accident, your approach would not have
been noted by us. I am confident that the Sons of God have no idea that
you have returned, especially since Havenner reported that he had slain
you. We will take them by surprise. Where shall we take the weapons?"

"Take the one with the blue rod to the top of the mountain which
overlooks the palace and set it so that the rod points in the direction
from which Tubain's fleet is approaching. That hill is less than two
miles from the palace, so you had better take them both there. Point the
red rod toward the palace."

                   *       *       *       *       *

At a word from Toness, the Terrestrials started off with the weapons for
the point indicated by Damis. The Nepthalim and Turgan followed them,
relating their adventure on the red planet as they walked along. The
shutting off of the Jovian source of power had effectually crippled all
of the power-driven chariots which certain of the higher officials among
the Earthmen had been allowed to maintain.

On the top of the hill overlooking the palace grounds the two Martian
weapons were placed on the ground, side by side. Damis carefully aligned
the red rod on the Viceregal palace. When he had it set, with a word of
warning, he closed the gravity anchor switch. The instrument settled a
trifle on the solid rock on which it was bedded and then was motionless.
At a word from Damis, as many of the Terrestrials as could find a
hand-rest pushed against it. It was as though they were pressing against
the mountain itself. Damis sighted along the rod and adjusted it until
it pointed at the center of the building.

"So much for that one," he said. "It is the less powerful of the two,
but it will be enough to destroy the Sons of God and the Nepthalim who
are in the palace. The few who are scattered over the Earth, we can
dispose of at our leisure. If the Jovian fleet approaches the Earth from
directly above us, we will be able to destroy it easily. In any event,
this weapon is to be used only when it is approximately normal to the
surface of the Earth. We must have it almost under the point from which
the Jovians are approaching. That may be on the opposite side of the
Earth."

"I think not, Nepthalim," said Toness. "We know that Glavour and Tubain
have been in constant communication since the Jovian fleet passed Mars
and he expects them to land here. There would be no object in their
taking a circuitous route, so they will probably drop directly down in
the palace grounds."

"Let us hope so, Toness. In any event, we might as well anchor the
weapon here as elsewhere."

                   *       *       *       *       *

He set the weapon with the blue rod on another patch of bare rock and
tested the rod to make sure that it revolved freely and could be made to
cover the entire heavens from horizon to horizon. He closed the gravity
anchor switch and again the efforts of a dozen Terrestrials were futile
to move it.

"Now we are ready for their attack," he said to Turgan. "You are as
familiar with these weapons as I am, but I will instruct a dozen of
your followers in using them. It is possible that we may not be able to
operate the weapons ourselves."

"I can operate one weapon while you manipulate the other, Damis,"
replied the Kildare. "However, no harm will be done in instructing
others."

"I may not be here," said Damis briefly.

Without replying to the questions of Turgan and Toness, he proceeded to
instruct a dozen of the Earthmen in the use of the terrible Martian
weapons. When he was certain that he had a half dozen men capable of
attending to each of the weapons, he turned to Turgan.

"I may not be here when the weapons are used," he said. "When I thought
that Lura had gone to Venus, I gave her up and sacrificed both her and
my heart on the altar of our cause, for it is what she would have
chosen. Now I have accomplished the sacrifice and returned with the
Martian weapons to find that she is a captive in the Viceroy's palace.
We can turn on the rays and reduce the building and all in it to a pinch
of dust in a few seconds, but Lura would be immolated with the Sons of
God. The weapons are here; our men know how to use them, and my
usefulness is at an end. Now I stand here with no more responsibility
for our success than the humblest swordsman. Since I am no longer
needed, I will leave the fate of the Earth to you and follow out my
private designs."

"Where are you going, Nepthalim?" cried Toness. The question was echoed
by all within the sound of his voice. Only Turgan smiled as though he
knew Damis' answer.

                   *       *       *       *       *

"Where could I go, Akildare, but to one place?" replied the Nepthalim.
"I go to Glavour's palace. I have two errands there. One is to rescue
Lura and the other is to mete out to Glavour the death which I swore
that I would accomplish. The rays can be turned on and the palace
demolished at any time, but I ask that you wait until I return with Lura
or until you know that we are dead."

"But if the Jovian fleet arrives before that time, Nepthalim?" demanded
Toness.

"Then give the word for the use of the weapons, Akildare, and Lura's
soul and mine will join the thousands of others whose lives are but a
part of the price the race of Earthmen have had to pay to rid their
planet of the Sons of God."

"It grieves me, Damis, to see you go to certain death," said Turgan
sadly to the blond giant, "yet I will say nothing to stop you. Were it
not that my presence would hinder you in your attempt, I would accompany
you."

"Your place, Kildare, is at the head of your men, whom you were born to
rule. I can hope to succeed only by stealth, else a thousand men would
come with me. Now call from the ranks one who is a barber that he may
change the color of my hair and alter my face that I shall not be
known."

At the Kildare's word, three men stepped forward from the ranks of
swordsmen and announced themselves adepts in the art of disguise. Swift
runners were sent to bring supplies and the three labored over Damis.
When they had finished their ministrations, only a close observer would
have known him under the bushy black beard which covered his face.




CHAPTER VI

_In the Seraglio_


With a parting word to Turgan and his followers, Damis made his way
alone down the hill and into the thick tropical jungle which grew up
almost to the gates of the Viceregal palace. He was well acquainted
with a secret entrance into the building. It was a matter of minutes for
him to locate the outer end and open it.

For half a mile he made his way underground until a huge stone door
barred his way. He felt for the hidden catches and the slab of rock rose
before him. As he turned toward the doorway he found himself looking
into the muzzle of a black ray tube in the hands of a gigantic Jovian in
the uniform of the Viceroy's guards.

"Whence came you, Nepthalim?" demanded the guard, a cold note of
suspicion in his voice.

"From far Torna," replied Damis readily. "I am Durmino, Komar of the
province of Capries. The slaves rose on us and all were slain except me.
I have had to travel by night and hide by day to reach here. I knew not
whether the slaves had conquered or not, but when I found them lying by
thousands about Glavour's palace, I knew that the reign of the Sons of
God was safe. What news from Tubain?"

The face of the Jovian guard cleared as Damis spoke. Durmino, a son of
Glavour by one of his Terrestrial concubines, was Komar of Capries, a
fact well known to Damis. There was nothing in the newcomer's story to
excite suspicion.

"The fleet of the Ruler of the Universe is approaching," the guard
replied. "In two hours it will be hovering above us. We would have
needed no aid had not the dogs of Earthmen found our source of power and
managed to destroy it with stolen ray tubes. We have been cooped up here
like rats waiting for Tubain to arrive. When he comes our vengeance will
be heavy."

"The heavier the better," growled Damis with an oath. "The dogs have
been getting surly for a generation. I hope that Tubain will teach them
a lesson that will not be forgotten for ages to come."

"He will, never fear," laughed the guard. "Already Glavour has made his
plans. I am not a member of the council, yet I have heard enough to
realize why Glavour is our ruler. My brain could not conceive of such a
stupendous plan."

"I will go to my father now," said Damis. "What is the word for passing
the inner gate? I wish to surprise my sire for he doubtless mourns me as
dead."

"He thinks you are dead," replied the guard, "yet I never heard of
Glavour mourning for any loss which did not affect his pleasures. He has
plenty of bastards to take your place. The word is 'Tubain.'"

"I thank you, Son of God," said Damis, "and I will inform my sire of the
great respect and high regard which you have for him. Fear not, your
words shall be truthfully reported to him."

                   *       *       *       *       *

Leaving the Jovian guard hastily reviewing the conversation with the
supposed Durmino, Damis made his way toward the palace. Since he knew
that he would not reach another door until after several of the
underground passages with which the foundations of the palace were
honeycombed had joined, he had little doubt of his ability to make his
way unsuspected into the citadel. He debated for a moment on the
advisability of killing the Jovian guard and taking his weapons, but
caution prevailed, and empty-handed, save for a dagger concealed under
his robes, he strode forward.

His knowledge of the password enabled him to pass the various guards he
met without difficulty. There were many of the Nepthalim who held
subordinate positions in the outlying provinces and who were seldom at
court, and the Jovian guards, who in their hearts regarded the Nepthalim
as little better than the Terrestrials, paid small attention to him. He
passed several guarded points before the path rose steeply and he passed
through the final gate into the palace itself. A Nepthalim passed him
hurriedly and Damis plucked at his robe.

"I am just from outpost," he said. "What news of Tubain?"
