
"Oh, you're thirsty. So sorry. Alec, get Dr. Lancaster a glass of water,
will you, please? And by the way, my name is Harris. Let's call this a
friendly conference, eh?"

Lancaster drank avidly. Harris' manner was disarming, and the physicist
felt more at ease. This was--well, it was just a mistake. Or maybe a
simple spot check. Nothing to fear. He wouldn't be sent to camp--not he.
Such things happened to other people, not to Allen Lancaster.

"You've been immunized against neoscop?" asked Harris.

"Yes. It's routine for my rank and over, you know. In case we should
ever be kidnapped--but why am I telling _you_ this?" Lancaster tried to
smile. His face felt stiff.

"Hm. Yes. Too bad."

"Of course, I've no objection at all to your using a lie detector on
me."

"Fine, fine." Harris beamed and gestured to one of the expressionless
policemen. A table was wheeled forth, bearing the instrument. "I'm glad
you're so cooperative, Dr. Lancaster. You've no idea how much trouble
it saves me--and you."

They ran a few harmless calibrating questions. Then Harris said, still
smiling, "And now tell me, Dr. Lancaster. Where were you really this
summer?"

Lancaster felt his heart leap into his throat, and knew in a sudden
terror that the dials were registering his reaction. "Why--I took my
vacation," he stammered. "I was in the Southwest--"

"Mmmm--the machine doesn't quite agree with you." Harris remained
impishly cheerful.

"But it's _true_! You can check back and--"

"There are such things as doubles, you know. Come, come, now, let's not
waste the whole night. We both have many other things to do."

"I--look." Lancaster gulped down his panic and tried to speak calmly.
"Suppose I am lying. The machine should tell you that I'm not doing so
out of disloyalty. There are things I can't tell anyone without
clearance. Like if you asked me about my work on the Project--I can't
tell you that. Why don't you check through regular Security channels?
There was a man named Berg--at least he called himself that. You'll find
that it's all perfectly okay with Security."

"You can tell me anything," said Harris gently.

"I can't tell you this. Not anybody short of the President." Lancaster
caught himself. "Of course, that's assuming that I did really spend the
summer for something other than my vacation. But--"

Harris sighed. "I was afraid of this. I'm sorry, Lancaster." He nodded
to his policemen. "Go ahead, boys."

       *       *       *       *       *

Lancaster kept sliding into unconsciousness. They jolted him back to
life with stimulant injections and vigorous slaps and resumed working on
him. Now and then they would let up and Harris' face would swim out of a
haze of pain, smiling, friendly, sympathetic, offering him a smoke or a
shot of whiskey. Lancaster sobbed and wanted more than anything else in
the world to do as that kindly man asked. But he didn't dare. He knew
what happened to those who revealed state secrets.

Finally he was thrown back into his cell and left to himself. When he
recovered from his faint--that was a very slow process--he had no idea
of how many hours or days had gone by. There was a water tap in the room
and he drank thirstily, vomited the liquid up again, and sat with his
head in his hands.

So far, he thought dully, they hadn't done too much to him. He was short
several teeth, and there were some broken fingers and toes, and maybe a
floating kidney. The other bruises, lacerations, and burns would heal
all right if they got the chance.

Only they wouldn't.

He wondered vaguely how Security had gotten onto his track. Berg's
precautions had been very thorough. So thorough, apparently, that Harris
could find no trace of what had really happened that summer, and was
going only on suspicion. But what had made him suspicious in the first
place? An anonymous tip-off--from whom? Maybe some enemy, some rival on
the Project, had chosen this way of getting rid of his sector chief.

In the end, Lancaster thought wearily, he'd tell. Why not do it now?
Then--probably--he'd only be shot for betraying Berg's confidence. That
would be the easy way out.

No. He'd hang on for awhile yet. There was always a faint chance.

His cell door opened and two guards came in. He was past flinching from
them, but he had to be supported on his way to the questioning room.

Harris sat there, still smiling. "How do you do, Dr. Lancaster," he said
politely.

"Not so well, thank you." The grin hurt his face.

"I'm sorry to hear that. But really, it's your own fault. You know
that."

"I can't tell you anything," said Lancaster. "I'm under Security oath. I
can't speak of this to anyone below the President."

Harris looked annoyed. "Don't you think the President has better things
to do than come running to every enemy of the state that yaps after
him?"

"There's been some mistake, I tell you," pleaded Lancaster.

"I'll say there has. And you're the one that's made it. Go ahead, boys."
Harris picked up a magazine and started reading.

       *       *       *       *       *

After awhile, Lancaster focused his mind on Karen Marek and kept it
there. That helped him bear up. If they knew, out in the station, what
was happening to him, they--well, they wouldn't forget him, try to
pretend they'd never known him, as the little fearful people of Earth
did. They'd speak up, and do their damnedest to save their friend.

The blows seemed to come from very far away. They didn't do things like
this out in the station. Lancaster realized the truth at that moment,
but it held no surprise. The most natural thing in the world. And now,
of course, he'd never talk.

Maybe.

When he woke up, there was a man before him. The face blurred, seemed to
grow to monstrous size and then move out to infinite distances. The
voice of Harris had a ripple in it, wavering up and down, up and down.

"All right, Lancaster, here's the President. Since you insist, here he
is."

"Go ahead, American," said the man. "Tell me. It's your duty."

"No," said Lancaster.

"But I am the President. You wanted to see me."

"Most likely a double. Prove your identity."

The man who looked like the President sighed and turned away.

       *       *       *       *       *

Lancaster woke up again lying on a cot. He must have been brought awake
by a stimulant, for a white-coated figure was beside him, holding a
hypodermic syringe. Harris was there too, looking exasperated.

"Can you talk?" he asked.

"I--yes." Lancaster's voice was a dull croak. He moved his head, feeling
the ache of it.

"Look here, fellow," said Harris. "We've been pretty easy with you so
far. Nothing has happened to you that can't be patched up. But we're
getting impatient now. It's obvious that you're a traitor and hiding
something."

Well, yes, thought Lancaster, he was a traitor, by one definition. Only
it seemed to him that a man had a right to choose his own loyalties.
Having experienced what the police state meant, he would have been
untrue to himself if he had yielded to it.

"If you don't answer my questions in the next session," said Harris,
"we'll have to start getting really rough."

Lancaster remained silent. It was too much effort to try to speak.

"Don't think you're being heroic," said Harris. "There's nothing pretty
or even very human about a man under interrogation. You've been
screaming as loud as anybody."

Lancaster looked away.

He heard the doctor's voice. "I'd advice giving him a few days' rest
before starting again, sir."

"You're new here, aren't you?" asked Harris.

"Yes, sir. I was only assigned to this duty a few weeks ago."

"Well, we don't put on kid gloves for traitors."

