feathers, and the examination convinced Leroy."

"_Oui_," confirmed the biologist. "It is true."

"But anarchy!" grumbled Harrison disgustedly. "It would show up on a
dizzy, half-dead pill like Mars!"

"It'll be a good many centuries before you'll have to worry about it on
earth," grinned Jarvis. He resumed his narrative.

"Well, we wandered through that sepulchral city, taking pictures of
everything. And then--" Jarvis paused and shuddered--"then I took a
notion to have a look at that valley we'd spotted from the rocket. I
don't know why. But when we tried to steer Tweel in that direction, he
set up such a squawking and screeching that I thought he'd gone batty."

"If possible!" jeered Harrison.

"So we started over there without him; he kept wailing and screaming,
'No-no-no! Tick!' but that made us the more curious. He sailed over our
heads and stuck on his beak, and went through a dozen other antics, but
we ploughed on, and finally he gave up and trudged disconsolately along
with us.

"The valley wasn't more than a mile southeast of the city. Tweel could
have covered the distance in twenty jumps, but he lagged and loitered
and kept pointing back at the city and wailing 'No--no--no!' Then he'd
sail up into the air and zip down on his beak directly in front of us,
and we'd have to walk around him. I'd seen him do lots of crazy things
before, of course; I was used to them, but it was as plain as print that
he didn't want us to see that valley."

"Why?" queried Harrison.

"You asked why we came back like tramps," said Jarvis with a faint
shudder. "You'll learn. We plugged along up a low rocky hill that
bounded it, and as we neared the top, Tweel said, 'No breet', Tick! No
breet'!' Well, those were the words he used to describe the silicon
monster; they were also the words he had used to tell me that the image
of Fancy Long, the one that had almost lured me to the dream-beast,
wasn't real. I remembered that, but it meant nothing to me--then!

"Right after that, Tweel said, 'You one-one-two, he one-one-two,' and
then I began to see. That was the phrase he had used to explain the
dream-beast to tell me that what I thought, the creature thought--to
tell me how the thing lured its victims by their own desires. So I
warned Leroy; it seemed to me that even the dream-beast couldn't be
dangerous if we were warned and expecting it. Well, I was wrong!

"As we reached the crest, Tweel spun his head completely around, so his
feet were forward but his eyes looked backward, as if he feared to gaze
into the valley. Leroy and I stared out over it, just a gray waste like
this around us, with the gleam of the south polar cap far beyond its
southern rim. That's what it was one second; the next it was--Paradise!"

"What?" exclaimed the captain.

Jarvis turned to Leroy. "Can you describe it?" he asked.

The biologist waved helpless hands, "_C'est impossible!_" he whispered.
"_Il me rend muet!_"

"It strikes me dumb, too," muttered Jarvis. "I don't know how to tell
it; I'm a chemist, not a poet. Paradise is as good a word as I can think
of, and that's not at all right. It was Paradise and Hell in one!"

"Will you talk sense?" growled Harrison.

"As much of it as makes sense. I tell you, one moment we were looking at
a grey valley covered with blobby plants, and the next--Lord! You can't
imagine that next moment! How would you like to see all your dreams made
real? Every desire you'd ever had gratified? Everything you'd ever
wanted there for the taking?"

"I'd like it fine!" said the captain.

"You're welcome, then!--not only your noble desires, remember! Every
good impulse, yes--but also every nasty little wish, every vicious
thought, everything you'd ever desired, good or bad! The dream-beasts
are marvelous salesmen, but they lack the moral sense!"

"The dream-beasts?"

"Yes. It was a valley of them. Hundreds, I suppose, maybe thousands.
Enough, at any rate, to spread out a complete picture of your desires,
even all the forgotten ones that must have been drawn out of the
subconscious. A Paradise--of sorts! I saw a dozen Fancy Longs, in every
costume I'd ever admired on her, and some I must have imagined. I saw
every beautiful woman I've ever known, and all of them pleading for my
attention. I saw every lovely place I'd ever wanted to be, all packed
queerly into that little valley. And I saw--other things." He shook his
head soberly. "It wasn't all exactly pretty. Lord! How much of the beast
is left in us! I suppose if every man alive could have one look at that
weird valley, and could see just once what nastiness is hidden in
him--well, the world might gain by it. I thanked heaven afterwards that
Leroy--and even Tweel--saw their own pictures and not mine!"

Jarvis paused again, then resumed, "I turned dizzy with a sort of
ecstasy. I closed my eyes--and with eyes closed, I still saw the whole
thing! That beautiful, evil, devilish panorama was in my mind, not my
eyes. That's how those fiends work--through the mind. I knew it was the
dream-beasts; I didn't need Tweel's wail of 'No breet'! No breet'!'
But--_I couldn't keep away!_ I knew it was death beckoning, but it was
worth it for one moment with the vision."

"Which particular vision?" asked Harrison dryly.

Jarvis flushed. "No matter," he said. "But beside me I heard Leroy's cry
of 'Yvonne! Yvonne!' and I knew he was trapped like myself. I fought for
sanity; I kept telling myself to stop, and all the time I was rushing
headlong into the snare!

"Then something tripped me. Tweel! He had come leaping from behind; as I
crashed down I saw him flash over me straight toward--toward what I'd
been running to, with his vicious beak pointed right at her heart!"

"Oh!" nodded the captain. "_Her_ heart!"

"Never mind that. When I scrambled up, that particular image was gone,
and Tweel was in a twist of black ropey arms, just as when I first saw
him. He'd missed a vital point in the beast's anatomy, but was jabbing
away desperately with his beak.

"Somehow, the spell had lifted, or partially lifted. I wasn't five feet
from Tweel, and it took a terrific struggle, but I managed to raise my
revolver and put a Boland shell into the beast. Out came a spurt of
horrible black corruption, drenching Tweel and me--and I guess the
sickening smell of it helped to destroy the illusion of that valley of
beauty. Anyway, we managed to get Leroy away from the devil that had
him, and the three of us staggered to the ridge and over. I had presence
of mind enough to raise my camera over the crest and take a shot of the
valley, but I'll bet it shows nothing but gray waste and writhing
horrors. What we saw was with our minds, not our eyes."

Jarvis paused and shuddered. "The brute half poisoned Leroy," he
continued. "We dragged ourselves back to the auxiliary, called you, and
did what we could to treat ourselves. Leroy took a long dose of the
cognac that we had with us; we didn't dare try anything of Tweel's
because his metabolism is so different from ours that what cured him
might kill us. But the cognac seemed to work, and so, after I'd done one
other thing I wanted to do, we came back here--and that's all."

"All, is it?" queried Harrison. "So you've solved all the mysteries of
Mars, eh?"

"Not by a damned sight!" retorted Jarvis. "Plenty of unanswered
