sounded like a curse.

Malone said, "Well, I--"

"You want to ask me stupid questions," she said. "That is what you
want to do. I'm right?"

"I only--"

"I know nothing," she said. "Nothing of any kind." She closed her
mouth and stood regarding him as if he were a particularly repulsive
statue. Malone looked past her into the living room beyond the door.

It was faded now, but it had once been bright and colorful. There was
an old rug on the floor, and tables were everywhere. The one bright
thing about the room was the assortment of flowers; there were flowers
everywhere, in vases, in pots, and even in window boxes. There was
also a lot of crockery statuary, mostly faded, chipped, or worn in
some way. The room looked to Malone as if its last inhabitant had died
ten years before; only the flowers had been renewed. Everything else
had not only the appearance of age, but the look of having been cast
up as a high-water mark by the sea, which had receded and left only
the tangled wreckage.

The woman cleared her throat, and Malone's gaze came back to her. "I
can tell you nothing," she said.

"I don't want to talk to you," Malone said again. "I want to talk to
Mike."

Her eyes were very cold. "You from the police, and you want to talk to
Mike. You make a joke. Only I don't think the joke is very funny."

"Joke?" Malone said. "You mean Mike's not here?"

Her gaze never wavered. "You know he is not," she said. "Ten minutes
ago the policemen were taking him away to the police station. How then
could he be here?"

"Ten minutes ago?" Malone blinked. Ten minutes ago he had been looking
for this apartment. Probably it hadn't taken Lynch's men ten minutes
to find it; they weren't strangers in New York. "He was arrested?"
Malone said.

"I said so, didn't I?" the woman said. "You must be crazy or else
something." Her eyes were still cold points, but Malone suddenly saw a
glow behind them, the glow of tears. Mike was her son. She did not
seem surprised that the police had taken him away, but she was
determined to protect him. He was her son.

Malone's voice was very gentle. "Why did they arrest him?" he said.

The woman shrugged, a single sharp gesture. "You ask me this?" she
said.

"I'm not a cop," Malone said. "I'm from the FBI. I don't know anything
about why the cops might have arrested Mike."

"FBI?" the woman said.

"It's all right," Malone said, with all the assurance he could muster.
"I only want to talk to him."

"Ah," the woman said. Tears were plain in her eyes now, glittering on
the surface. "Why they take him away, I do not know. My Mike do
nothing. Nothing."

"But didn't they say anything about--"

"They say?" the woman cried. "They say only they have orders from this
Lieutenant Lynch. He is lieutenant at police station."

"I know," Malone said gently.

"Lieutenant Lynch wants to ask Mike questions, so police come, take
him away." Her English was beginning to lose ground as the tears came
closer, as she slowly lost control.

"Lynch asked for him?" Malone said. He frowned. Whatever that meant,
he wanted to be there himself. And perhaps he could help the old woman
in some way. Anyhow, he would try. She stared up at him stonily.
"Look, Mrs. Fueyo," he said. "I'm going down there to talk to Mike
right now. And if he hasn't done anything, I'll see that he gets right
on home to you. Right away."

Her expression changed a trifle. She did not actually soften, but
Malone could feel the gratitude lurking behind her eyes as if it were
afraid to come out. She nodded gravely and said nothing at all. He
stepped away, and she closed the door without a sound.

He stood staring at the door for a few seconds. Then he turned and
punched the elevator button savagely.

There wasn't any time to lose.

He walked back to the precinct station. Knowing the way, it took him
about five minutes instead of the fifteen it had taken him to find the
Fueyo residence. But he still felt as if time were passing much too
fast. He ran up the steps and passed right by the desk sergeant, who
apparently recognized him; he said nothing as Malone charged up the
stairs and around the hall to Lynch's office.

It was empty.

Malone stared at it and started down the hall again without knowing
where he was heading. Halfway to the stairs he met a patrolman.

"Where's Lynch?" he asked.

"The lieutenant?" the patrolman said.

Malone fumed. "Who else?" he said. "Where is he?"

"Got some kid back in the tank, or somewhere," the patrolman said.
"Asking him a couple of questions, that's all." He added, "Hey,
listen, buddy, what do you want to see the lieutenant for? I mean, you
can't just go charging in to--"

Malone was down the stairs before he'd finished. He went, up to the
desk.

The desk sergeant looked down. "What's it this time?" he said. "A
track meet?"

"I'm in a hurry," Malone said. "Where are the cells? I want to see
Lieutenant Lynch."

The desk sergeant nodded. "Okay," he said. "But the lieutenant ain't
in any of the cells. He's back in Interrogation with some kid."

"Take me there," Malone said.

"I'll show you, anyway," the sergeant said. "Can't leave the desk on
duty." He cleared his throat and gave Malone a set of directions that
took him around to the back of the station. He was repeating the
directions when Malone left.

There was a door at the end of a corridor at the back of the station.
It was a plain wooden door with the numeral _1_ stenciled on it.
Malone opened it and looked inside.

He was staring into a rather small, rather plain little room. There
were absolutely no bright beam lights burning, and there didn't seem
to be any rubber hoses around anywhere. There were only four chairs.

Seated in three of the chairs were Lieutenant Lynch and two other
police officers. In the fourth chair, facing them, was a young boy.

He didn't look like a tough kid. He had wavy black hair, brown eyes,
and what Malone thought looked like a generally friendly appearance.
He was slight and wiry, not over five feet five or six. And he wore an
expression that was neither too eager nor hostile. It wasn't just
blank, either; Malone finally pinned it down as receptive.

He had the strangest impression that he had seen the boy somewhere
before. But he couldn't remember when or where.

Lieutenant Lynch was talking.

"...all we want, Mike, is a little information. We thought you'd be
able to help us, if you wanted to. Now, how about it?"

"Sure," Mike Fueyo said. His voice was a little high, but it was well
controlled and responsive. "Sure, Lieutenant. I'll help if I can, but
I just don't dig what you're giving me. It doesn't make sense."

Lynch stirred a little impatiently, and his voice began to carry a new
bite. "I'm talking about Cadillacs," he said. "Red Cadillacs, 1972
models."

"It's a nice car," Mike said.

"What do you know about them?" Lynch said.

"Know about them?" Mike said. "I know they're nice cars. That's about
it. What else am I going to know, Lieutenant? Maybe you think I own
one of these big red 1972 Caddies. Maybe you think I got that kind of
money. Well, listen, Lieutenant. I'd like to help you out, but I'm
just not--"

"The Cadillacs," Lynch said, "were--"

"Just a minute, Lieutenant," Malone said. Dead silence fell with great
suddenness. Lynch and all the others looked around at Malone, who
smiled apologetically. "I don't want to disturb anything," he said.
"But I would like to talk to Mike here for a little while."

"Oh," Lynch said sourly. "Sure. Sure."

"I'd like to ask him a couple of questions," Malone said. "Alone."

"Alone." Lynch said. "Oh." But there was nothing for him to do, Malone
knew, except bow to the inevitable. "Of course," he said. "Go right
ahead."

"You can stand outside the door," Malone said. "He won't get away. And
you'd better hold this." Malone, knowing perfectly well that staying
armed and alone in a room with a suspect was something you just did
not do, unstrapped his .44 Magnum and handed it to the lieutenant.

He left reluctantly with his men. The door closed.

Malone could understand Lynch's attitude. If Malone solved the case,
Lynch would not get any credit. Otherwise, it might go down in his
personal record. And of course the NYPD would rather wrap the case up
themselves; the FBI was treated as a necessary interference.
Unfortunately, Malone thought, Lynch had had absolutely no choice. He
sighed gently, and turned his attention to Mike Fueyo, who was still
sitting in his chair.

"Now, Mike--" he began, and was interrupted.

The door opened. Lieutenant Lynch said, "If you need us, Malone, just
yell."

"You'll hear me," Malone promised. The door shut.

He turned back to the boy. "Now, Mike," he began again. "My name is
Malone, and I'm with the FBI in Washington. I'd like to ask you a
few--"

"Gee, Mr. Malone," Mike broke in eagerly. "I'm glad you're here. I'm
really glad about that."

Malone said, "Well, I--"

"These cops here have been giving me a pretty rough deal, you know?"
Mike said.

"I'm sure they--" Malone began.

"But I've been looking for you," Mike went on. "See, I wanted to say
something to you. Something real important."

Malone leaned forward expectantly. At last he was going to get some
information--perhaps the information that would break the whole case
wide open. He said, "Yes?"

"Well," Mike began, and stopped.

"You don't have to be afraid of me, Mike," Malone said. "Just tell me
whatever's on your mind."

"Sure," Mike said. "It's this."

He took a deep breath. Malone clenched his fists. Now it was coming.
Now he would hear the all-important fact. He waited.

Mike stuck out his tongue and blew the longest, loudest, brassiest,
and juiciest Bronx cheer that Malone had ever heard.

Then, almost instantly, the room was empty except for Malone himself.

Mike was gone.

There wasn't any place to hide, and there hadn't been any time to hide
in. Malone looked around wildly, but he had no doubts at all.

Mike Fueyo had vanished, utterly and instantaneously. He'd gone out
like a light.


                                  5

Thirty seconds passed.

During that time, Malone did nothing at all. He just sat there, while
a confused montage of pictures tumbled through his head. Sometimes he
saw double exposures, and sometimes a couple of pictures overlapped,
but it didn't seem to make any difference, because none of the
pictures meant anything anyhow.

The reason for that was obvious. He was no longer sane. He had cracked
up. At a crucial moment his brain had failed him, and now people would
have to come in and cart him away and put him in a strait jacket. It
was perfectly obvious to Malone that he was no longer capable of
dealing with everyday life. The blow on the head had probably taken
final effect, and it had been more serious than the doctor had
imagined.

He had always distrusted doctors anyhow.

And now he was suffering from a delayed reaction. He wasn't living in
the real world any more. He had gone off to dreamland, where people
disappeared when you looked at them. There was no hope for him any
more.

It was a nice theory, and it was even comforting in a way. There was
only one thing wrong with it.

The room around him didn't look dreamlike at all. It was perfectly
solid and real, and it looked just the way it had looked before Mike
Fueyo had--well, Malone amended, before whatever had happened had
happened. It was a perfectly complete little room, and it had four
chairs in it. Malone was sitting in one of the chairs and all the
others were empty.

There was absolutely nothing else in the room.

With some regret, Malone abandoned the theory that he had gone mad.
This left him with no ideas at all. Because if he hadn't become
insane, then what _had_ happened?

After another second or two, some ideas began to filter through the
daze. Perhaps he'd just blacked out for a minute and the kid had gone
out the door. That was possible, wasn't it?

Sure it was. And maybe he had just not seen the kid go. His eyes had
failed for a second or two. That could certainly happen after a blow
on the head. Malone tried to remember where the sight centers of the
brain were. Maybe whoever had hit him had disturbed them, and he'd had
a sudden blackout.

Come to think of it, that made pretty good sense. He had blacked out,
and Mike had just walked out the door. It had to be the door, of
course--the windows were out of the question, since there weren't any
windows. And six-inch-wide air-conditioner ducts do not provide
reasonable space for an exit, not if you happen to be a human being.

That, Malone told himself, was settled--and a good thing, too. He had
begun to worry about it. But now he knew just what had happened, and
he felt relieved. He got up from his chair, walked over to the door
and opened it.

Lieutenant Lynch nearly fell into the room. He'd obviously had his ear
pressed tightly to the door and hadn't expected it to open. The other
two cops stood behind him, just about filling the hallway with their
broad shoulders.

"Well, well," Malone said.

Lynch recovered his balance and glared at the FBI agent. He said
nothing.

"Where is he?" Malone said.

"Where is he?" Lynch repeated, and blinked. "Where's _who_?"

Malone shook his head impatiently. "Fueyo," he said. "The kid. Where
did he--"

Lynch's expression was the same as that on the faces of the other two
cops: complete and utter bafflement. Malone stopped and stared. It was
suddenly very obvious that the lovely theory he had worked out for
Mike's disappearance wasn't true in the least. If Mike Fueyo had come
out the door, then these cops would know about it. But they obviously
knew nothing at all about it.

Therefore, he hadn't come out through the door.

Malone took a deep breath.

"What are you talking about?" Lynch said. "Isn't the kid in there with
you? What's happened?"

There was only one thing to do and, straight-faced, Malone went ahead
and did it. "Of course not," he snapped, trying to sound impatient and
official. "I released him."

"You _what_?"

"Released him," Malone said. He stepped out into the hall and closed
the door of the interrogation room firmly behind him. "I got all the
information I needed, so I let him go."

"Thanks," Lynch said bitterly. "After all, I was the one who--"

"You called him in for questioning, didn't you, Lieutenant?" Malone
said.

"Yes, I did, and I--"

"Well," Malone said, "I questioned him."

There was a little silence. Then Lynch asked, in a strangled voice,
"What did he say?"

"Sorry," Malone said at once. "That's classified information." He
pushed his way into the corridor, trying to look as if he had fifteen
other jobs to accomplish within the next hour. Being an FBI agent was
going to help a little, but he still had to look good in order to
carry it off.

"But--"

"Thanks for your co-operation, Lieutenant," Malone said. "You've all
been very helpful." He smiled at them in what he hoped was a superior
