But it wasn't over with. Another old lady had stepped up on the
platform.

"Mr. George," she said, in a strangely affected voice, like that of the
first dramatic teacher he had ever had, the one who had almost ruined
his acting career. "Mr. George, I can't tell you how happy you have made
us all, young and old. Hasn't Mr. George made us happy, children?"

"Yes, Miss Burton!" came the shrill scream.

"And we feel that it would be no more than fair to repay you in some
small measure for the pleasure you have given us. First, a 'Thank You'
song by Frances Heller--"

He hadn't expected this, and he repressed a groan. Mercifully, the first
song was short. He grinned the thanks he didn't feel. To think that he
could take this, while sober as a judge! What strength of character,
what will-power!

Next, Miss Burton introduced another kid, who recited. And then, Miss
Burton stood upright and recited herself.

That was the worst of all. He winced once, then bore up. You can get
used even to torture, he told himself. An adult making a fool of herself
is always more painful than a kid. And that affected elocutionist's
voice gave him the horrors. But he thanked her too. His good deed for
the day. Maybe Carol would have him now, he thought.

A voice shrilled, "Miss Burton?"

"Yes, dear?"

"Aren't you going to call on Carolyn to act?"

"Oh, yes, I was forgetting. Come up here, Carolyn, come up, Doris.
Carolyn and Doris, Mr. George, are studying how to act. They act people
_and_ animals. Who knows? Some day they, too, may be in the movies, just
as you are, Mr. George. Wouldn't that be nice, children?"

What the devil do you do in a case like that? You grin, of course--but
what do you say, without handing over your soul to the devil? Agree how
nice it would be to have those sly little brats with faces magnified on
every screen all over the country? Like hell you do.

"Now, what are we going to act, children?"

"Please, Miss Burton," said Doris. "I don't know how to act. I can't
even imitate a puppy. Really I can't, Miss Burton--"

"Come, come, mustn't be shy. Your friend says that you act very nicely
indeed. Can't want to go on the stage and still be shy. Now, do you know
any movie scenes? Shirley Temple used to be a good little actress, I
remember. Can you do any scenes that she does?"

                   *       *       *       *       *

The silence was getting to be embarrassing. And Carol said he didn't
amount to anything, he never did anything useful. Why, if thanks to his
being here this afternoon, those kids lost the ambition to go on the
stage, the whole human race would have cause to be grateful to him. To
him, and to Miss Burton. She'd kill ambition in anybody.

Miss Burton had an idea. "I know what to do, children. If you can act
animals--Mr. George has shown you what the hunter does; you show him
what the lions do. Yes, Carolyn and Doris, you're going to be lions. You
are waiting in your lairs, ready to pounce on the unwary hunter. Crouch
now, behind that chair. Closer and closer he comes--you act it out, Mr.
George, please, that's the way--ever closer, and now your muscles
tighten for the spring, and you open your great, wide, red mouths in a
great, great big roar--"

A deep and tremendous roar, as of thunder, crashed through the
auditorium. A roar--and then, from the audience, an outburst of
terrified screaming such as he had never heard. The bristles rose at the
back of his neck, and his heart froze.

Facing him across the platform were two lions, tensed as if to leap.
Where they had come from he didn't know, but there they were, eyes
glaring, manes ruffled, more terrifying than any he had seen in Africa.
There they were, with the threat of death and destruction in their
fierce eyes, and here he was, terror and helplessness on his handsome,
manly, and bloodless face, heart unfrozen now and pounding fiercely,
knees melting, hands--

Hands clutching an elephant gun. The thought was like a director's
command. With calm efficiency, with all the precision of an actor
playing a scene rehearsed a thousand times, the gun leaped to his
shoulder, and now its own roar thundered out a challenge to the roaring
of the wild beasts, shouted at them in its own accents of barking
thunder.

The shrill screaming continued long after the echoes of the gun's speech
had died away. Across the platform from him were two great bodies, the
bodies of lions, and yet curiously unlike the beasts in some ways, now
that they were dead and dissolving as if corroded by some invisible
acid.

Carol's hand was on his arm, Carol's thin and breathless voice shook as
she said, "A drink--all the drinks you want."

"One will do. And you."

"And me. I guess you're kind of--kind of useful after all."


[Transcriber's Note:

This e-text was produced from Space Science Fiction February 1953.
Extensive research did not uncover any evidence that the U.S. copyright
on this publication was renewed.]





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of The Hunters, by William Morrison

