outcast?"

"Representatives of an outraged society." I almost lost my temper,
thinking of this deviant's crimes. "You were lucky to get banishment
instead of death."

He grinned. "So were you."

"True. I tried to find the proper place, where you'd have some chance."

He laughed openly. "I fixed the ship nicely."

"You don't understand at all--"

"I counted on your being a hero, trying to save us. So, I escaped."

"For three years only."

"What do you mean?"

"One of us won't leave here."

Harry frowned, then tried cunning. "Aren't you being silly? We are
hopelessly marooned. Surely there are overriding considerations to your
childish devotion to duty."

I shook my head. "This is too small a room for us. Even if I trusted
you, I couldn't allow you at this naive young world."

Voices suddenly approached. "The GG?" Harry questioned.

"Didn't know they were coming." Desperately, I looked about, found an
eroded mass. "Hide there; I'll get rid of them."

"You'd better--we have business." Possibly it was the only time I've
agreed with him. Mel and Dex came in. I called, "Over here!"

       *       *       *       *       *

Dex snapped his fingers. "_Knew_ it was Venus."

Mel wrinkled his nose. "Sulfur dioxide, too, like we figured. Soda pop,
when I broke into that tender scene between you and Frank--that gave you
necessary carbon dioxide, right, am I not?"

"Yes ... Why don't you guys leave me alone?" Beginning to falter in the
heat, they dripped perspiration. "You could die in this chilly
climate."

Dex said, "Listen for a second. We don't have to break up. Let's form a
service organization, 'Problems, Inc.' or some equally stupid title.
Very soon we could afford a private bedroom, like this, for you to stay
in all the time--"

"Need only two or three nights in ten." Harry was moving restlessly. He
wouldn't wait much longer. "Combination of oxygen, carbon dioxide, and
sulfur under relatively high temperature is how I eat. Pills can
substitute, but not for protracted periods. That's why I had to build
this room. Couple of weeks, and I'll be in the pink; as pink as you,
anyway."

Abruptly, I lay down, ignoring them. I had to make my friends go. Harry
could literally have shredded them. Footsteps: the door closed; relief
and loneliness joined me, but only for a moment.

His voice sliced the darkness: "I'm a man of honor, and must warn you.
If we fight, you'll lose. I escaped with far more pills than you; you're
weaker."

I said sardonically, "With you stealing parts of my supply, that's
probably the only truthful thing you've said!"

"I've been in here three nights, adjusting my metabolism ..."

He came at me then, not breaking his flow of speech. At home, I'd have
been surprised at the dishonor. Instead, I was expecting it. He ran into
my balled fist.

If we'd been home ... if, if, if, if, if. At full strength, I could have
broken his neck with the blow. Now, he simply rolled back and fell.
Laughing, he attacked again. We were weak as babes, and fought like it.
Clumsily, slowly, we went through the motions.

He'd been right--he was a little stronger, and the relative difference
began to tell. Soon I was falling from his blows.

Hands on my neck, he kneed me hard in the stomach. Violently ill, I felt
the sulfur dioxide rush from my lungs.

I remembered one trick they'd taught at school, and I used it. Unable to
break his hold, I managed to get my hands around his throat. We locked,
each silent.

Silent until I felt my last reserves going, until the crooning of the
Song of Eternity began. This couldn't happen, not to this planet. With
all my strength, I gave one last squeeze--but it failed. From somewhere,
light-years of light-years away, I heard Frank, realized I'd played the
fool: she'd been working for the monster.

A blinding flash inside my head--and the Last Darkness descended.

       *       *       *       *       *

The light hadn't been inside my head: it flooded the room. Dimly, I was
aware of the injection, and immediately felt better. Harry was gone.

The GG, minus one, was gathered around. Mel said, "It was a dilute
solution of cerium nitrate. We figured the percentage on the basis of
the pill Frank swiped. Hope you aren't poisoned."

"No." My voice was weak, "Need it. Oxidizing agent for the sulfur."

"Harry's dead," Hazel frowned. "When we came in, you'd broken his neck,
were crooning to yourself."

So _I_ had been crooning the Song of Eternity? "I'm a"--I felt silly--"a
cop on a mission. I waited until whichever of you it was settled down
here. That one had to be the criminal, to be done away with."

"Dex and I got rid of the body," Mel said. "No need to worry unless ...
unless you've read my stories. Perhaps _you_ are the criminal. I'll be
watching."

"No proof, of course ... Do _you_ believe I'm the criminal?"

Mel smiled. "No, but I'll watch anyway."

"More closely than tonight, I hope," Hazel said acidly. "If it hadn't
been for her...."

       *       *       *       *       *

I saw Frank, and was ashamed of my suspicions. She was silent, looking
concerned. They all did, and I was warmed. Because, despite discomfort,
they worried about me, an alien, a stranger. "Better leave. Heat's
getting you."

Dex asked, "When are you going back?"

I shrugged. "Never. The ship is in the Gulf of California ... Harry did
that."

"What about our company? We can research anti-gravity. You might reach
home yet."

