opened the cage. But once outside, the enlarging drug would give us our
chance to fight our way upward. My trembling fingers sought the black
vial in my belt. It wasn't there! My mind flung back: in that tunnel,
something had dropped and I had kicked it! Accursed chance! My accursed,
heedless stupidity!

I had lost the black vial! We were helpless! Caged! Marooned here in a
size microscopic!




CHAPTER VIII


I lay concealed and Babs stood at the lattice of our cage room. I was
aware that Polter had entered some vast apartment of this giant palace.
The light outside was brighter; I heard voices--Polter's and another
man's. I could see the distant monster shape of one. He was at first so
far away that all his outline was visible. A seated man in a huge white
room. I thought there were great shelves with enormous bottles. The
spread of table tops passed under our cage as Polter walked by them.
They held a litter of apparatus, and there was the smell of chemicals in
the air. This seemed to be a laboratory.

The man stood up to greet Polter. I had a glimpse of his head and
shoulders. He wore a white linen coat, open, soft collar and black tie.
He seemed an old man, queerly old, with snow-white hair.

I had an instant of whirling impressions. Something was familiar about
his face. It was wrinkled and seamed with lines of age and care. There
were gentle blue eyes.

Then all I could see was the vast spread of his white shirt and coat, a
black splotch of his tie outside our bars as Polter faced him.

Babs gave a low cry. "Why--why--dear God--"

And then I knew! And Polter's words were not needed, though I heard
their rumble.

"I am back again, Kent. Are you still rebellious? You haf still
determined to compound no more of our drugs? You would rather I killed
you? Then see what I haf here. This little cage, someone--"

It was Dr. Kent whom he addressed. He must have been here all these
years!

Babs turned her white face toward me. "George, it's father! He's alive!"

"Quiet, Babs! Don't let him know I'm here. Remember!"

The old man recognized her. "Babs!" It was an agonized cry. The blur of
him was gone as he sank down into his chair.

Polter continued standing, I could envisage his sardonic grin.

From over us came Polter's rumble. "She iss glad to see you, Kent. I haf
her here, safe. You always knew I would nefer be satisfied until I had
my little Babs? Well, now I haf her. Can you hear me?"

A sudden desperate calmness fell on Babs. She called evenly. "Yes, I
hear you. Father, don't anger him. Do what he says. Dr. Polter, will you
let me be with my father? After all these years, let me be with him,
just for a little while. In his size--normal."

"Hah! My Babs iss scheming."

"No, I want to talk to him, after all these years when I thought he was
dead."

"Scheming? You think, my little Babs, that he has the drugs? I am not so
much a fool. He makes them. He can do that. And that last secret
reaction, only he can perform. He iss stubborn. Never would he tell me
that one reaction. But he makes no drugs complete, only when I am here."

"No, Dr. Polter! I want only to be with him."

The old man's broken voice floated up to us. "You won't harm her,
Polter?"

"No. Fear nothing. But you no longer rebel?"

"I'll do what you tell me." The tones carried hopeless resignation,
years of being beaten down, rebelling--but now this last blow vanquished
him. Then he spoke again, with a sudden strange fire.

"Even for the life of my daughter, I will not make your drugs, Polter,
if you mean to harm our Earth."

The golden cage room swooped as Polter sat down. "Hah! Now we bargain.
What do you care what I do to your world? You never will see it again. I
can lie to you. My plans--"

"I _do_ care."

"Well, I will tell you, Kent. I am good-natured now. Why should I not
be with my dear little Babs? I tell you, I am done with the Earth world.
It iss much nicer here. My friends, they haf a good time always. We like
this little atom realm. I am going out once more. I must hide the little
piece of golden quartz so no harm will come to it."

Polter was evidently in a high good humor. His voice fell to an intimate
tone of comradeship; but still I could not mistake the irony in it.

"You listen to me, Kent. There was a time, years ago, when we were good
friends. You liked your young assistant, the hunchback Polter. Iss it
not so? Then why should we quarrel now? I am gifing up the Earth world.
I wanted of it only the little Babs.... You look at me so strange! You
do not speak."

"There is nothing to say," retorted Dr. Kent wearily.

"Then you listen. I haf much gold above in Quebec. You know that. So
very simple to take it out of our atom, grow large with it to what we
call up there the size of a hundred feet. I haf a place, a room,
secluded from prying eyes under a dome roof. I become very tall, holding
a piece of gold. It is large when I am a hundred feet tall. So I haf
collected much gold. They think I own a mine. I haf a smelter and my
gold quartz I make into ingots, refined to the standard purity. So
simple, and I am a rich man.

"But gold does not bring happiness, my friend Kent." He chuckled
ironically at his use of the platitude. "There iss more in life than the
ownership of gold. You ask my plans. I haf Babs, now. I am gifing up the
Earth world. The mysterious man they know as Frank Rascor will vanish. I
will hide our little fragment of quartz. No one up there will even try
to find it. Then I come down here, with Babs, and we will haf so nice a
little government and rule this world. No more of the drugs then will be
needed, Kent. When you die, let the secret die with you."

Again Polter's voice became ingratiating, even more so than before. "We
will be friends, Kent. Our little Babs will lof me; why should she not?
You will tell her--advise her--and we will all three be very happy."

Dr. Kent said abruptly, "Then leave her with me now. That was her
request, a moment ago. If you expect to treat her kindly, then why
not--"

"I do! I do! But not now. I cannot spare her now. I am very busy, but I
must take her with me."

Babs had been silent, clinging to the bars of our cage. She called;
"Why? I ask you to put this cage down."

"Not now, little bird."

"Let me be with my father."

It struck a pang through me. Babs was scheming but not the way Polter
thought. She wanted the cage put on the floor, herself out, and a chance
for me to escape. I had not yet told her of my miserable stupidity in
losing the vial.

Polter was repeating, "No, little bird. Presently; not now. I will take
you with me on my last trip out. I want to talk with you in normal size
when I haf time."

Our room swooped as he stood up. "You think over what I haf said, Kent.
You get ready now to make the fresh drugs I will need to bring down all
my men from the outer world. They will all be glad to come, or, if
not--well, we can easily kill those who refuse. You make the drugs. I
need plenty. Will you?"

"Yes."

"That iss good. I come back soon and gif you the catalyst for that last
reaction. Will you be ready?"

"Yes."

The blur outside our bars swung with a dizzying whirl as Polter turned
and left the room, locking its door after him with a reverberating
clank.

       *       *       *       *       *

Left alone in his laboratory, Dr. Kent began his preparations for
making a fresh supply of the drugs. This room, with two smaller ones
adjoining, was at once his workshop and his prison. He stood at his
shelves, selecting the basic chemicals. He could not complete the final
compounds. The catalyst which was necessary for the final reaction would
be brought to him by Polter.

How long he worked there with his thoughts in a whirl at seeing Babs, he
did not know. His movements were automatic; he had done all this so many
times before. His mind was confused, and he was trembling from head to
foot--an old, queerly, unnaturally old man now--unnerved. His fingers
could hardly hold the test tubes.

His thoughts were flying. Babs was here, come down from the world above.
It was disaster--the thing he had feared all these years.

He suddenly heard a voice.

"Father!"

And again: "Father!" A tiny voice, down by his shoe tops. Two small
figures were there on the floor beside him. They were both panting,
winded by running. They were enlarging.

It was Alan and Glora, who had followed Polter from the boat, then
diminished again and had come running through the tiny crack under the
metal door of the laboratory.

They grew to a foot in size, down by Dr. Kent's legs. He was too
unnerved to stand; he sat in a chair while Alan swiftly told him what
had happened. Babs was in the golden cage. Dr. Kent knew that; but none
of them knew what had happened to me.

"We must make you small, Father. We have the drugs, here with us."

"Yes! How much have you? Show me. Oh, my boy, that you are here--and
Babs--"

"Don't you worry. We'll get away from him."

Glora and Alan had almost reached Dr. Kent's size before their excited
fingers could get out the vials. They took some of the diminishing drug
to check their growth. Alan handed his father a black vial.

"Yes, lad--"

"No! Wait, that's the wrong drug. This other--"

Dr. Kent had opened the vial. His trembling hand spilled some of the
pellets, but none of them noticed it.

"Father, this one." Alan held an opalescent vial. "Take this one."

Glora said abruptly, "Listen! Is that someone coming?"

They thought they heard approaching footsteps. A moment passed but no
one came into the room.

"Hurry," urged Glora. "That was nothing. We're waiting too long."

"My boy--Alan, after all these years--"

As they were about to take the diminishing drug a very queer sound came
from across the room. A scuttling, scratching, and the drone of wings.

"God, Father--look!"

Over by the wall, a giant fly was running across the floor. The fly had
eaten some of the sweetish powder.

The enlarging drug was loose!

A few drops of water lay mingled with the drug on the floor. And from
the water nameless hideous things were rising!




CHAPTER IX


To Alan the first moments that followed the escape of the drug were the
most horrible of his life. The discovery struck old Dr. Kent, Glora and
Alan into a numb, blank confusion. They stood transfixed, staring with
cold terror at the fly which was scurrying along the floor close to the
wall. It was already as large as Alan's hand. It ran into the corner,
hit the wall in its confused alarm, and turned back. Its wings were
droning with an audible hum. It reared itself on its hairy legs, lifted
and sailed across the room.

As though drawn by a magnet, Alan turned to watch it. It landed on the
wall. Alan was aware of Dr. Kent rushing with trembling steps to a shelf
where bottles stood. Glora was stricken into immobility, the blood
draining from her face.

The fly flew again. It passed directly over Alan. Its body, with a
membrane sac of eggs, was now as large as his head; its widespread
transparent wings were beating with a reverberating drone.

Alan flung a bottle which was on the table beside him. It missed the
fly, crashed against the ceiling, came down with splintering glass and
spilling liquid. Fumes spread chokingly over the room.

The fly landed again on the floor. Larger now! Expanding with a horribly
rapid growth. Glora flung something--a little wooden rack with a few
empty test tubes in it. The rack struck the monstrous fly, but did not
hurt it. The fly stood with hairy legs braced under its bulging body.
Its multiple eyes were staring at the humans. And with its size must
have come a sense of power, for it seemed to Alan that the monstrous
insect was abnormally alert as it stood measuring its adversaries,
gathering itself to attack them.

Only a few seconds had passed. Confused thoughts swept Alan. This fly
with its growth would soon fill this room. Burst it; burst upward
through a wrecked palace; soar out, and by the power of its size alone
devastate this world.

He heard himself shouting, "Father, get back! It's too large! I've _got_
to kill it!"

Could he wrestle with it and hope to win? Alan edged around the center
table. He was bathed in cold sweat. This thing was horrifying! The fly
was already half the length of his own body. In a moment it might be
twice that! He was aware of Glora pulling at him, and his father rushing
past him with a bottle of liquid, shouting:

"Alan! Run! You and the girl, get out of here! Into the other room--"

Then Alan saw the things on the floor! His foot crushed one with a
slippery squash! Nameless, hideous, noisome things grown monstrous,
risen from their lurking invisibility in the drops of water! Sodden,
gray-black and green-slimed monsters of the deep; palpitating masses of
pulp! One lay rocking, already as large as a football with streamers of
ooze hanging from it, and squirting a black inky fluid. Others were rods
of red jelly-pulp, already as large as lead pencils, quivering,
twitching. Disease germs, these ghastly things, enlarging from the
invisibility of a drop of water!

The fly landed with a thud on the center table. The fumes of the
shattered bottle of chemicals were choking Alan. He flung himself toward
the monster fly, but Glora held him.

"No! Escape to the other room!"

Dr. Kent was stamping the things upon the floor; pouring acids upon
them. Some eluded him. The air in the room was unbreathable....

Alan and Glora reached the bedroom. The laboratory was a hideous chaos.
They were aware of its outer door opening, disclosing the figure of
Polter who, undoubtedly, had been attracted by the noise. He shouted a
startled oath. Alan heard it above the beating wings of the monstrous
fly. Things lurched at the opened door; Polter banged it upon them and
rushed away, shouting the alarm through the palace.

Dr. Kent was stammering, "Not the enlarging drug, Glora, child, the
other! Hurry!"

Alan helped Glora with the opalescent vial. Things were lurching toward
this room, from the laboratory. Alan, with averted face, choked by the
incoming fumes, slammed the door upon the gruesome turmoil.

They took the diminishing drug. The bedroom expanded. The hideous sounds
from the laboratory, and the whole palace now ringing with a wild alarm,
soon faded into blessed remoteness of distance....

"I think this is the way, Alan. Off there--a doorway from my bedroom.
Polter always kept it locked, but it leads into a corridor. We must get
out of here. A crack under the door--is that it, off there?" Dr. Kent
pointed into the gloomy blur of distance. "We're horribly small--it's so
far to run--and I've lost my sense of direction."

The drug had ceased its action. The wooden floor of the room had
expanded to a spread of cellular surface, ridged with broken, tubelike
tunnels; pits and jagged cave-mouths. A knothole yawned like a crater a
hundred feet away.

"We are too small," Glora protested hurriedly. "The door is where you
say, Dr. Kent, but miles away."

With the other drug, the room contracted. The floor surface shrank and
smoothed a little. The door was distinguishable--a square panel several
hundred feet in width and towering into the upper haze. The black line
of the crack was visible along its bottom.

They ran to it. The top of the crack was ten feet above their heads.
They ran under, across the wide intervening darkness toward a glow of
light. Then they came from under the door into a corridor--and shrank
against a cliff wall as with a rush of wind and pounding tread the
blurred shapes of a man's huge feet and legs rushed past. The upper air
was filled with rumbling shouts.

"We must chance it!" exclaimed Dr. Kent. "It's too far in this size. We
must get larger--and if they see us, we'll fight our way out!"

In the turmoil of the doomed palace no one noticed them. They cast aside
all restraint. It was too dangerous to wait. The excessive dose they
took of the drug made the corridor shrink with dizzying speed. They
rushed along its length. Alan hurled a little man aside who was in their
path. They were already larger than Polter's people.

They squeezed out of a shrinking doorway. The dwindling island was a
turmoil. Little figures were pouring from the palace. At the edge of the
water. Alan, Glora and Dr. Kent stood for an instant looking behind
them. The palace was rocking. Its roof heaved upward and then smashed
and fell aside with the clatter of tumbling masonry. The monstrous fly,
its hideous face mashed and oozing, reared itself up and, with broken
torn wings, tried to soar away. But it could not. It slipped back. The
drone and buzz of its fright sounded over the chaos of noise. Other
