I'd anticipated at this stage.

Yes, my interviewer's teacher had quite a large following, and now they
were all at loose ends. If the Swami were willing, she could provide a
large and ready-made audience for him. She would be glad to talk to him
about it.

Annie hurriedly said that she would be glad to talk to him about it,
too; that she could get up a large audience, too. So, even before it got
started, I had my rival factions at work. I egged them both on, and
promised that I'd get Army Intelligence to work with the local boys in
blue to hold off making any raids.

Annie told me again what a kind man I was. My interviewer spoke up
quickly and said how glad she was to find an opportunity for expressing
how grateful she was for the privilege of working right in the same
department with such an understanding, really intellectually developed
adult. She eyed Annie sidelong, as if to gauge the effects of her
attempts to set me up on a pedestal, out of Annie's reach.

I hoped I wouldn't start believing either one of them. I hoped I wasn't
as inaccurate in my estimates of people as was my interviewer. I
wondered if she were really qualified for the job she held. Then I
realized this was a contest between two women and I, a mere male, was
simply being used as the pawn. Well, that worked both ways. In a fair
bargain both sides receive satisfaction. I felt a little easier about my
tactical maneuvers.

But the development of rivalry between factions of the audience gave me
an additional idea. Perhaps that's what the Swami really needed, a
little rivalry. Perhaps he was being a little too hard to crack because
he knew he was the only egg in the basket.

I called Old Stone Face and told him what I planned. He responded that
it was up to me. He'd stepped in and got things under way for me, got
things going, now it was my job to keep them going. It looked as if he
were edging out from under--or maybe he really believed that.

Before I settled into the day's regular routine, I wired General
Sanfordwaithe, and told him that if he had any more prospects ready
would he please ship me one at once, via air mail, special delivery.

       *       *       *       *       *

The recital hall, hired for the Swami's Los Angeles debut, was large
enough to accommodate all the family friends and relatives of any little
Maribel who, having mastered "Daffodils In May," for four fingers, was
being given to the World. It had the usual small stage equipped with
pull-back curtains to give a dramatic flourish, or to shut off from view
the effects of any sudden nervous catastrophe brought about by stage
fright.

I got there, purposely a little late, in hopes the house lights would
already be dimmed and everything in progress; but about a hundred and
fifty people were milling around outside on the walk and in the
corridors. Both factions had really been busy.

Most of them were women, but, to my intense relief, there were a few
men. Some of these were only husbands, but a few of the men wore a look
which said they'd been far away for a long time. Somehow I got the
impression that instead of looking into a crystal ball, they would be
more inclined to look out of one.

It was a little disconcerting to realize that no one noticed me, or
seemed to think I was any different from anybody else. I supposed I
should be thankful that I wasn't attracting any attention. I saw my
interviewer amid a group of Older Girls. She winked at me roguishly, and
patted her heavy handbag significantly. As per instructions, she was
carrying a couple of the Auerbach cylinders.

I found myself staring in perplexity for a full minute at another woman,
before I realized it was Annie. I had never seen her before, except
dressed in factory blue jeans, man's blue shirt, and a bandanna wrapped
around her head. Her companion, probably another of the factory
assemblers, nudged her and pointed, not too subtly, in my direction.
Annie saw me then, and lit up with a big smile. She started toward me,
hesitated when I frowned and shook my head, flushed with the thought
that I didn't want to speak to her in public; then got a flash of better
sense than that. She, too, gave me a conspiratorial wink and patted her
handbag.

My confederates were doing nicely.

Almost immediately thereafter a horse-faced, mustached old gal started
rounding people up in a honey sweet, pear shaped voice; and herded them
into the auditorium. I chose one of the wooden folding chairs in the
back row.

A heavy jowled old gal came out in front of the closed curtains and gave
a little introductory talk about how lucky we all were that the Swami
had consented to visit with us. There was the usual warning to anyone
who was not of the esoteric that we must not expect too much, that
sometimes nothing at all happened, that true believers did not attend
just to see effects. She reminded us kittenishly that the guides were
capricious, and that we must all help by merging ourselves in the great
flowing currents of absolute infinity.

She finally faltered, realized she was probably saying all the things
the Swami would want to say--in the manner of people who introduce
speakers everywhere--and with a girlish little flourish she waved at
someone off stage.

The house lights dimmed. The curtains swirled up and back.

       *       *       *       *       *

The Swami was doing all right for himself. He was seated behind a small
table in the center of the stage. A pale violet light diffused through a
huge crystal ball on the table, and threw his dark features into sharp
relief. It gave an astonishingly remote and inscrutable wisdom to his
features. In the pale light, and at this distance, his turban looked
quite clean.

He began to speak slowly and sonorously. A hush settled over the
audience, and gradually I felt myself merging with the mass reaction of
the rest. As I listened, I got the feeling that what he was saying was
of tremendous importance, that somehow his words contained great and
revealing wonders--or would contain them if I were only sufficiently
advanced to comprehend their true meanings. The man was good, he knew
his trade. All men search for truth at one level or another. I began to
realize why such a proportionate few choose the cold and impersonal
laboratory. Perhaps if there were a way to put science to music--

The Swami talked on for about twenty minutes, and then I noticed his
voice had grown deeper and deeper in tone, and suddenly, without any
apparent transition, we all knew it was not really the Swami's voice we
were hearing. And then he began to tell members of the audience little
intimate things about themselves, things which only they should know.

He was good at this, too. He had mastered the trick of making universals
sound like specifics. I could do the same thing. The patterns of
people's lives have multiple similarities. To a far greater extent than
generally realized the same things happen to everyone. The idea was to
take some of the lesser known ones and word them so they seemed to apply
to one isolated individual.

For instance, I could tell a fellow about when he was a little boy there
was a little girl in a red dress with blond pigtails who used to scrap
with him and tattle things about him to her mother. If he were inclined
to be credulous, this was second sight I had. But it is a universal.
What average boy didn't, at one time or another, know a little girl with
blond pigtails? What blond little girl didn't occasionally wear a red
dress? What little girl didn't tattle to her mother about the naughty
things the boys were doing?

[Illustration]

The Swami did that for a while. The audience was leaning forward in a
rapture of ecstasy. First the organ tones of his voice soothed and
softened. The phrases which should mean something if only you had the
comprehension. The universals applied as specifics. He had his audience
in the palm of his hand. He didn't need his crystal ball to tell him
that.

But he wanted it to be complete. Most of the responses had been from
women. He gave them the generalities which didn't sound like
generalities. They confirmed with specifics. But most were women. He
wanted the men, too. He began to concentrate on the men. He made it
easy.

"I have a message," he said. "From ... now let me get it right ... from
R. S. It is for a man in this audience. Will the man who knew R. S.
acknowledge?"

There was a silence. And that was such an easy one, too. I hadn't
planned to participate, but, on impulse, since none of the other men
were cooperating, I spoke up.

"Robert Smith!" I exclaimed. "Good old Bob!"

Several of the women sitting near me looked at me and beamed their
approval. One of the husbands scowled at me.

"I can tell by your tone," the Swami said, and apparently he hadn't
recognized my tone, "that you have forgiven him. That is the message. He
wants you to know that he is happy. He is much wiser now. He knows now
that he was wrong."

One of the women reached over and patted me on the shoulder, giving me
motherly encouragement.

But the Swami had no more messages for men. He was smart enough to know
where to stop. He'd tried one of the simplest come-ons, and there had
been too much of a pause. It had almost not come off.

I wondered who good old Bob Smith was? Surely, among the thousands of
applicants I'd interviewed, there must have been a number of them. And,
being applicants, of course some of them had been wrong.

The Swami's tones, giving one message after another--faster and faster
now, not waiting for acknowledgment or confirmation--began to sink into
a whisper. His speech became ragged, heavy. The words became
indistinguishable. About his head there began to float a pale,
luminescent sphere. There was a subdued gasp from the audience and then
complete stillness. As though, unbreathing, in the depths of a tomb,
they watched the sphere. It bobbed about, over the Swami's head and
