"You went there to die, didn't you?"

"I ... when you have nothing left--" Then she lifted her head in a proud
gesture and said, "Should it matter to you?"

For a moment Val had the look of a man struck. Then it was gone and he
said in an emotionless voice:

"No. I was asking about something that is only your husband's business.
I won't do it again."

He turned away, back to his cabin.

"Val--" She took a quick step after him, the proud air gone and her arms
outstretched. "I didn't mean--"

He turned back, his tone politely questioning.

"Yes?"

"I only wanted--" Then her arms dropped and the life went out of her
voice. "What does it matter ... what does anything matter?"

She hurried into her cabin and the door closed behind her.

       *       *       *       *       *

Rockford spoke from the doorway behind Hunter:

"Well, my boy, are you ready for your day's duties?"

He followed Rockford inside, where Rockford settled down in the
easy-chair and yawned.

"I had a rather busy night," he said. "Certain events occurred yesterday
afternoon which forced me to change my own plans to some extent. Or to
set them ahead a day, I should say."

He made an effort to put the vision of Lyla from his mind and asked,
"Did you make any progress with Val Boran?"

"No, I'm afraid not. Of course, I didn't expect to." Rockford yawned
again. "There was another message from Supreme Command. The situation
is getting worse. Which reminds me of your Duty For The Day and the fact
that if you can live through it, you will have it made."

_He's my superior_, Hunter thought. _He's supposed to outrank a Space
Patrol General--and he's amused by the situation he's here to remedy._

"Right now," Rockford said, "Lyla faces a grim future and feels like she
doesn't have a friend in the world. She needs a shoulder to cry on. You
will take her for a walk and supply that shoulder."

Somehow, even though the order had nothing to do with the Terran-Verdam
crisis, he did not have the heart to object. She had been crying before
she even reached her door. Later, after he had comforted her, he would
demand that Rockford get down to determined effort on the Verdam
problem. No more than an hour would be lost by that....

"Yes, sir," he said. "But in the interests of Princess Lyla's safety, I
had better talk to her in her cabin. Alonzo saw Narf and Sonig bring
back eight--"

"Professional killers, to dispose of you," Rockford finished. "I know
all about it, and I know that Narf took time last night to spend an hour
with his favorite girl friend and brag even to her that he was going to
marry Lyla today before your dead body had time to get cool.

"But you just take Lyla for another walk and you will cause the
beginning of the end for the Verdam Peoples Worlds. You will go down in
history, my boy, as the man who saved the Terran Republic."

Hunter went out the door, again feeling a feverish sense of unreality.
He was to go forth and get blasted into hamburger and by some mysterious
process known only to Rockford, the Verdam empire would contritely start
collapsing....

He did not knock on her door. He did not think of it as a violation of
her privacy. She would be feeling too alone and unwanted to care.

She was not crying as he had thought she would be. She was standing by
the window, staring down at the gray, distant desert, her eyes as
bleakly empty as it.

"Hello, Lyla," he said.

"Hello, Dale. I was just thinking; this is the day that I, as a woman,
should always have dreamed about"--she tried to smile, and failed, and
the brass came into her voice--"my wedding day!"

"Alonzo told me about it."

It seemed to him he should add something, such as to wish her
happiness--but such words would be meaningless and farcical and they
would both know it.

But there was no reason why he should endanger her by obeying Rockford's
insane order. He would not do it--

"Ah ... good morning, Lyla!" Rockford loomed in the doorway, jovial as a
Santa Claus. "Did you know Dale wants to go for a walk in the woods
with you this bright spring morning--and he's no doubt too bashful to
tell you so? Do you good to get away from camp"--there was the
suggestion of a pause--"while you're still free."

He turned a beaming smile on Hunter. "Don't stand there like a dummy,
boy--take her by the arm and let her have a last walk with someone who
cares what happens to her."

There was one thing about Rockford not compatible with his air of fond
fatherliness: his eyes were hard, gray slate as they looked into
Hunter's and there was no mistaking their expression. Rockford had not
made a fatherly suggestion for his own amusement. He had given an order
that he intended to be obeyed.

       *       *       *       *       *
           *       *       *       *

Hunter and Lyla walked on through the thickets of ghost trees and arrow
brush, each with little to say, Hunter feeling more and more like a
ridiculous fool. They had no destination, no purpose in their walk,
other than to abide by Rockford's desire that a total of ten assassins
get a chance to slaughter a certain expendable second lieutenant.

He did not put his arm around Lyla as they walked. If they killed him,
it would have to be without their having the satisfaction of the
pictures they wanted with which to blackmail her.

They came to a tiny clearing, where a cloud tree log made an inviting
seat in the shade, and Lyla said:

"No matter how far we walk, I'll have to go back to face it. Let's stop
here, and rest a while."

He saw that the clearing was fairly well screened, but certainly not
completely so. It would have to do.

[Illustration]

He sat down on the log several feet away from her, not wanting to take
the chance of her getting hit by accident.

_Not that I'm enthusiastic about getting hit by intent, myself_, he
thought. _What a way for a Space Guard officer to die._

He wondered if Rockford would ever inform Headquarters that Lieutenant
Dale Hunter had died in the line of duty--by whatever twisted logic this
insane episode could be called duty--and he wondered how the
Commemoration Roll would read for him.... _Displaying courage above and
beyond the call of duty, Lieutenant Hunter sat conspicuously on top of a
hill and calmly waited for ten assassins to slaughter him...._

"It's peaceful and quiet here, isn't it?" Lyla said.

He had been trying to watch four different directions at once and he
realized that the constant swiveling of his neck was causing his stiff
blouse collar to slowly cut his throat. And he saw that it was--for the
moment, anyway--peaceful and quiet where they sat. The sun was warm and
golden before them, bright flowers sweetly scented the air, and giant
rainbow moths were fluttering over them, their tiny voices like the
piping of a thousand fairy flutes.

"I wish I had been born a country girl," Lyla said. "I'd like to have a
life like this, and not--what mine will be."

He asked the question to which he had to have the answer:

"Once you were going to marry Val and live on Jardeen, weren't you?"

"I ... so my foolishness is no longer a secret?"

"Foolishness?" he asked.

"We met two years ago when I was attending the Fine Arts university on
Jardeen. I was younger and a lot more naive then than I am now. I
thought we were desperately in love and would get married as soon as I
finished school and would live happily ever after, and all that."

"And it didn't turn out that way?"

"I had to make that promise to Daddy and when I wrote to Val about it,
he seemed to approve. He didn't suggest I renounce the proxy marriage
when the time was up, or anything. He just wrote that I knew what I
wanted to do. He seemed relieved to be free to go ahead with his
political career."

"I see," he said, and then, "you don't feel bad about it, do you, Lyla?"

"Feel bad? I wouldn't marry Val Boran if he was the last man on Vesta!
Even Lord Narf isn't as self-centered as _he_ is!"

"You don't have to marry Narf either," he said. "You know that."

She looked down at the ground and said in a dead voice, "I made a
promise."

"Rockford told me that your father never really knew Narf--that on the
few times they met, Narf put on the act of being a refined gentleman,
very respectful toward the king's daughter."

She did not answer and he said, "Is that the way it was?"

"Yes. That's the way it was. But how could I tell Daddy, as he lay
dying?"

"You couldn't, Lyla. But if your father could be here today and know
what you know about Narf, do you think he would want you to marry him?"

"No ... I guess not. But Lord Narf loves me in his own way, I think--and
that's more than anyone else does."

Then her tone changed and she said, "I'm so glad that you're here today,
Dale--I'm glad that there is someone who cares at least a little about
what happens to me."

On her face was a poignant longing for someone to love and comfort her.
It seemed to him, now beyond any doubt, that there could never be
anything for him in his career but loneliness. How different the warm
love of Lyla would be from the cold austerity of the military and its
endless succession of weapons and killing--

       *       *       *       *       *

He moved, to sit beside her and put his arm around her shoulders.
"Lyla," he said, "I want to tell you--"

