There was respect, there was affection, certainly, but the respect and
affection were those due an older brother rather than a god.

And he was not displeased. Being a god had been a wearying business.
Being a friend might be a great deal more pleasant. Yes, the change was
something to be happy about.

       *       *       *       *       *

But he had little time to be happy. For that same morning, there came
what he had so long dreaded. Out of a clear, shipless sky, Malevski
appeared, strolling toward him as casually as if he had been there all
along, and said, "Nice little ceremony you have here."

"Hello, Malevski. Don't give me the credit. They thought it up."

"Ingenious. Almost as ingenious as the way they've used the help you
gave them. We had this tribe listed long ago as a very capable one, far
behind the rest of its System in development, it's true, but only
because it had started late up the evolutionary ladder. It had been
doing very nicely on its own, and we didn't want to interfere unless we
could give it some real help.

"I'll admit that I had a few qualms at first, when we traced you here
and learned that you had landed among them. But we've been observing you
for the past day and a half--our space ship landed beyond that burned
out stretch of ground, not too close to that volcano--and I'll have to
admit that, judging from your past record, I didn't think you had it in
you."

"I suppose that's over with now," said Bradley.

"Yes, you're finished with being a god. We don't believe in kidding the
natives, Bradley!"

Bradley nodded ruefully. "They don't seem to believe in it, either. I
guess they found out I wasn't a god before I did. But it didn't seem to
matter to them." He sighed, and turned toward the new village. "Do you
mind, if I sort of--well, hold a farewell ceremony before we go? They
won't understand, but they'll feel better than if I just go off...."

Malevski shook his head firmly. "No, no time for that. I'll have to get
out a full report, and we're in a hurry to get off. Any word you'd like
to have sent out to your mother, Bradley, before we blast?"

       *       *       *       *       *

Bradley looked back again, and his shoulders came up more firmly. He'd
taught his people here, and led them; but he'd learned a few things
himself--he'd found he could take what was necessary. He'd found that
the easiest way wasn't always the best, that getting drunk was no way
out, and that real friendship and respect meant more than the words of
big-shots. Maybe he'd learned enough to be able to take regeneration....

He managed to grin, a little lopsidedly, at Malevski. "Yeah. You might
send her a message. Tell her I'm fine, and that I've learned to wipe my
own nose. I think she'll be glad to hear that."

"She will," Malevski told him. "When she hears that you're Provisional
Governor of this planet, she'll even believe it."

"Provisional Governor?" Bradley stood with his mouth open, staring. He
shook his head. "But what about regeneration...?"

Malevski laughed. "You're appointed, on the basis of my first report
about what you're doing here, Bradley," he answered. "As to regeneration
... well, you think about it, while we bring in the supplies we're
supposed to leave for you, before we blast out of here."

He went off, chuckling, towards his ship, leaving Bradley to puzzle over
it.

Then, just as Malevski disappeared, he understood. Damn it, they'd
tricked him! They'd left him here where he had to be a god and assume
the responsibilities of a god. And through that, he'd been
regenerated--completely, thoroughly regenerated!

Suddenly, he was chuckling as hard as Malevski as he swung around and
went back to face his former worshippers. And they were coming forward
to meet him, their friendly smiles matching his own.




Transcriber's Note

This etext was produced from _Space Science Fiction_ 1953. Extensive
research did not uncover any evidence that the U.S. copyright on this
publication was renewed. Minor spelling and typographical errors have
been corrected without note.





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Divinity, by William Morrison

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK DIVINITY ***

***** This file should be named 22623.txt or 22623.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/2/2/6/2/22623/

Produced by Greg Weeks, Stephen Blundell and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
