ammonia. (All reagents employed in molecular proportions.) The author
notes that the so-called hydrocellulose (Girard) (5) is almost insoluble
in cuprammonium, as is starch. It is rendered soluble by alkali
treatment.

GROUP 3. _Lustra-cellulose_ prepared by spinning a solution of cellulose
in concentrated chloride of zinc.

This solution has been known for a long time and used for making
filaments for incandescent lamps. The cellulose threads, however, have
very little tenacity. This is no doubt due to the conditions necessary
for forming the solution, the prolonged digestion causing powerful
hydrolysis (1). Neither the process of Wynne and Powell (2) nor that of
Dreaper and Tompkins (3), who have endeavoured to bring the matter to a
practical issue, are calculated to produce a thread taking a place as a
textile. The author has described in his American patent (4) a method of
effecting the solution in the cold, viz. again by first mercerising the
cellulose and washing away the caustic soda. This product dissolves in
the cold and the solution remains unaltered if kept at low temperature.
Experiments are being continued with these modifications of the process,
and the author anticipates successful results. The modifications having
the effect of maintaining the high molecular weight of the cellulose, it
would appear that these investigations confirm the theory of Cross and
Bevan that the tenacity of a film or thread of structureless regenerated
cellulose is directly proportional to the molecular weight of the
cellulose, i.e. to its degree of molecular aggregation (5).

GROUP 4. 'Viscose' silks obtained by spinning solutions of xanthate of
cellulose.

In 1892, Cross and Bevan patented the preparation of a new and curious
compound of cellulose, the thiocarbonate (1) (2) (3). Great hopes were
based upon this product at the time of its discovery. It was expected
to yield a considerable industrial and financial profit and also to
contribute to the scientific study of cellulose. The later patents of C.
H. Stearn (4) describe the application of viscose to the spinning of
artificial silk. The viscose is projected into solutions of chloride of
ammonium and washed in a succession of saline solutions to remove the
residual sulphur impurities. The author remarks that though it has a
certain interest to have succeeded in making a thread from this compound
and thus adding another to the processes existing for this purpose, he
is not of opinion that it shows any advance on the lustra-cellulose (2)
and (3). He also considers that the bisulphide of carbon, which must be
regarded as a noxious compound, is a serious bar to the industrial use
of the process, and for economic work he considers that the regeneration
of ammonia from the precipitating liquors is necessary and would be as
objectionable as the denitration baths in the collodion process. The
final product not being on the market he does not pronounce a finally
unfavourable opinion.

The author and the Vereinigte Glanzstoff-Fabriken after long
investigation have decided to make nothing but the lustra-cellulose (2)
and (3). A new factory at Niedermorschweiler, near Mulhouse, is
projected for this last production.


BIBLIOGRAPHY

_Introduction_

(1) Bull. de la Soc. industr. de Mulhouse, 1900.

(2) Reaumur, Memoire pour servir a l'histoire des insectes, 1874, 1, p.
154.

(3) English Pat. No. 283, Feb. 6, 1855.

(4) Swinburne, Electrician, 18, 28, 1887, p. 256.

(5) Weston (Swinburne), Electrician, 18, 1887, p. 287. Eng. Pat. No.
22866, Sept. 12, 1882.

(6) German Pat. No. 3029. English Pat. No. 161780, April 28, 1884
(Swan).

(7) Wynne-Powell, English Pat. No. 16805, Dec. 22, 1884.


_Group I_

(1) German Pat No. 38368, Dec. 20, 1885. German Pat. No. 46125, March 4,
1888. German Pat. No. 56331, Feb. 6, 1890. German Pat. No. 81599, Oct.
11, 1893. German Pat. No. 56655, April 23, 1890. French Pat. No. 231230,
June 30, 1893.

(2) Industrie textile, 1899, 1892. Wyss-Noef, Zeitschrift fuer angewandte
Chemie, 1899, 30, 33. La Nature, Jan. 1, 1898, No. 1283. Revue generale
des sciences, June 30, 1898.

(3) German Pat. No. 46125, March 4, 1888. German Pat. No. 56655, April
23, 1890.

(4) Swan, English Pat. 161780, June 28, 1884. See also Bechamp, Dict. de
Chimie de Wurtz.

(5) German Pat. No. 81599, Oct 11, 1893.

(6) Bechamp, art. Cellulose, Dict. de Chimie de Wurtz, p. 781.

(7) Chardonnet, addit. March 3, 1897, to the French Pat. 231230, May 30,
1893.

(8) Knofler, French Pat. 247855, June 1, 1895. German Pat. 88556, March
28, 1894.

(9) Bechamp, art. Cellulose, Dict. de Chimie de Wurtz. Blondeau, Ann.
Chim. et Phys. (3), 1863, 68, p. 462.

(10) Revue industrielle, 1890, p. 194. German Pat. 52977, March 7, 1889.

(11) French Pat. 256854, June 2, 1896.

(12) German Pat. 55949, Nov. 9, 1889. German Pat. 58508, Sept. 16, 1890.
German Pat. 82555, Nov. 15, 1894.

(13) German Pat. 58508, Sept. 16, 1900.

(14) French Pat. 231230, June 30, 1893.

(15) German Pat. 93009, Nov. 19, 1895. French Pat. 254703, March 12,
1896. English Pat. 6858, March 28, 1896.

(16) American Pat. 573132, Dec. 15, 1896.

(17) This proportion is the most advantageous, and furnishes the best
liquid collodions that can be spun.

(18) French Pat. 259422, Sept. 3, 1896.

(19) English Pat. 22540, 1896.

(20) Application for German Pat. not granted, 4933 IV. 296, Mar. 16,
1897.

(21) German Pat. 96208, Feb. 10, 1897. Addit. Pat. 101844 and 102573,
Dec. 10, 1897.

(22) Oberle et Newbold, French Pat. 25828, July 22, 1896. Granquist,
Engl. applic. 2379, Nov. 28, 1899.

(23) German Pat. 72572, June 17, 1891.

(24) Voy. Stern, Ber., 28, ch. 462.


_Group II_

(1) German Pat. 98642, Dec. 1, 1897 (Pauly). French Pat. 286692, March
10, 1899, and addition of October 14, 1899 (Fremery and Urban). French
Pat. 286726, March 11, 1899, and addition of December 4, 1899. German
Pat. 111313, March 16, 1899 (Fremery and Urban). English Pat. 18884,
Sept. 19, 1899 (Bronnert). English Pat. 13331, June 27, 1899 (Consort.
mulhousien).

(2) French Pat. 203741, Feb. 12, 1890.

(3) The actual lapse of this patent is due to the death of Despeissis
shortly after it was taken.

(4) Without questioning the good faith of Pauly, it is nevertheless a
fact that the original patent remains as a document, and therefore that
the value of the Pauly patents is very questionable.

(5) Girard, Ann. Chim. et Phys, 1881 (5), 24, p. 337-384.


_Group III_

(1) Cross and Bevan, Cellulose, 1895, p. 8.

(2) English Pat. 16805, Dec. 22, 1884.

(3) English Pat. 17901, July 30, 1897.

(4) Bronnert, American Pat. 646799, April 3, 1900.

(5) Cross and Bevan, Cellulose, 1895, p. 12.


_Group IV_

(1) English Pat. 8700, 1892. German Pat. 70999, Jan. 13, 1893.

(2) English Pat. 4713, 1896. German Pat. 92590, Nov. 21, 1896.

(3) Comptes rendus (loc. cit.). Berichte, c. 9, 65a.

(4) English Pat. 1020, 1898. German Pat. 108511, Oct. 18, 1898.


~Artificial Silk--Lustra-cellulose.~

C. F. CROSS and E. J. BEVAN (J. Soc. Chem. Ind., 1896, 317).

The object of this paper is mainly to correct current statements as to
the artificial or 'cellulose silks' being explosive or highly
inflammable (ibid., 1895, 720). A specimen of the 'Lehner' silk was
found to retain only 0.19 p.ct. total nitrogen, showing that the
denitration is sufficiently complete to dispose of any suggestion of
high inflammability.

The product yielded traces only of furfural; on boiling with a 1 p.ct.
solution of sodium hydrate, the loss of weight was 9.14 p.ct.; but the
solution had no reducing action on Fehling's solution. The product in
denitration had therefore reverted completely to a cellulose (hydrate),
no oxy-derivative being present.

       *       *       *       *       *

The authors enter a protest against the term 'artificial silk' as
applied to these products, and suggest 'lustra-cellulose.'


DIE KUeNSTLICHE SEIDE-IHRE HERSTELLUNG, EIGENSCHAFTEN UND VERWENDUNG.

CARL SUeVERN, Berlin, 1900, J. Springer.

~ARTIFICIAL SILK--ITS PRODUCTION, PROPERTIES, AND APPLICATIONS.~

This work of some 130 pages is an important monograph on the subject of
the preparation of artificial cellulose threads--so far as the technical
elements of the problems involved are discussed and disclosed in the
patent literature. The first section, in fact, consists almost
exclusively of the several patent specifications in chronological order
and ranged under the sub-sections: (a) The Spinning of Nitrocellulose
(collodion); (b) The Spinning of other Solutions of Cellulose; (c)
The Spinning of Solutions of the Nitrogenous Colloids.

In the second section the author deals with the physical and chemical
proportions of the artificial threads.

_Chardonnet 'silk'_ is stated to have a mean diameter of 35 mu, but with
considerable variations from the mean in the individual fibres; equally
wide variations in form are observed in cross-section. The general form
is elliptical, but the surface is marked by deep striae, and the
cross-section is therefore of irregular outline. This is due to
irregular conditions of evaporation of the solvents, the thread being
'spun' into the air from cylindrical orifices of regulated dimensions.
Chardonnet states that when the collodion is spun into alcohol the
resultant thread is a perfect cylinder (Compt. rend. 1889, 108, 962).
The strength of the fibre is variously stated at from 50-80 p.ct. that
of 'boiled off' China tram; the true elasticity is 4-5 p.ct., the
elongation under the breaking strain 15-17 p.ct. The sp.gr. is 1.49,
i.e. 3-5 p.ct. in excess of boiled off silk.

_Lehner 'silk'_ exhibits the closest similarity to the Chardonnet
product. In cross-section it is seen to be more regular in outline, and
a round, pseudo-tubular form prevails, due to the conditions of
shrinkage and collapse of the fibre in parting with the solvents, and in
then dehydrating. The constants for 'breaking strain,' both in the
original and moistened condition, for elasticity, &c., are closely
approximate to those for the Chardonnet product.

_Pauly 'silk'._--The form of the ultimate fibres is much more regular
and the contour of the cross-section is smooth. The product shows more
resistance to moisture and to alkaline solutions.

_Viscose 'silk'_ is referred to in terms of a communication appearing in
'Papier-Zeitung,' 1898, 2416.

     In the above section the following publications are referred
     to: Chardonnet, 'Compt. rend.,' 1887, 105, 900; and 1889, 108,
     962; Silbermann, 'Die Seide,' 1897, v. 2, 143; Herzog,
     'Farber-Zeitung,' 1894/5, 49-50; Thiele, ibid. 1897, 133; O.
     Schlesinger, 'Papier-Zeitung,' 1895, 1578-81, 1610-12.


_Action of Reagents upon Natural and Artificial Silks._

1. _Potassium hydrate_ in solution of maximum concentration dissolves
the silks proper, (a) China silk on slight warming, (b) Tussah silk
on boiling. The cellulose 'silks' show swelling with discolouration, but
the fibrous character is not destroyed even on boiling.

2. _Potassium hydrate_ 40 p.ct. China silk dissolves completely at
65 deg.-85 deg.; Tussah silk swells considerably at 75 deg. and dissolves at
100 deg.-120 deg.. The cellulose 'silks' are attacked with discolouration; at
140 deg. (boiling-point of the solution) there is progressive solvent
action, but the action is incomplete. The Pauly product is most
resistant.

3. _Zinc chloride_, 40 p.ct. solution. Both the natural silks and
lustra-celluloses are attacked at 100 deg., and on raising the temperature
the further actions are as follows: China silk is completely dissolved
at 110-120 deg.; Tussah silk at 130-135 deg.; the collodion products at
140-145 deg.; the Pauly product was again most resistant, dissolving at
180 deg..

4. _Alkaline cupric oxide_ (glycerin) solution was prepared by
dissolving 10 grs. of the sulphate in 100 c.c. water, adding 5 grs.
glycerin and 10 c.c. of 40 p.ct. KOH. In this solution the China silk
dissolved at the ordinary temperature; Tussah silk and the
lustra-celluloses were not appreciably affected.

5. _Cuprammonium solution_ was prepared by dissolving the precipitated
cupric hydrate in 24 p.ct. ammonia. In this reagent also the China silk
dissolved, and the Tussah silk as well as the lustra-celluloses
underwent no appreciable change.

6. _An ammoniacal solution of nickel oxide_ was prepared by dissolving
the precipitated hydrated oxide in concentrated ammonia. The China silk
was dissolved by this reagent; Tussah silk and the lustra-celluloses
entirely resisted its action.

7. _Fehling's solution_ is a solvent of the natural silks, but is
without action on the lustra-celluloses.

8. _Chromic acid_--20 p.ct. CrO_{3}--solution dissolves both the natural
silks and the lustra-celluloses at the boiling temperature of the
solution.

9. _Millon's reagent_, at the boiling solution, colours the natural
silks violet: the lustra-celluloses give no reaction.

10. _Concentrated nitric acid_ attacks the natural silks powerfully in
the cold; the lustra-celluloses dissolve on heating.

11. _Iodine solution_ (I in KI) colours the China silk a deep brown,
Tussah a pale brown; the celluloses from collodion are coloured at first
brown, then blue. The Pauly product, on the other hand, does not react.

12. _Diphenylamine sulphate._--A solution of the base in concentrated
sulphuric acid colours the natural silks a brown; the collodion 'silks'
give a strong blue reaction due to the presence of residual
nitro-groups. The Pauly product is not affected.

13. _Brucin sulphate_ in presence of concentrated sulphuric acid colours
the natural silks only slightly (brown); the collodion 'silks' give a
strong red colouration. The Pauly product again is without reaction.

14. _Water._--The natural silks do not soften in the mouth as do the
lustra-celluloses.

15. _Water of condition_ was determined by drying at 100 deg.; the following
percentages resulted (a). The percentages of water (b) taken up from
the atmosphere after forty-three hours' exposure were:

                                   (a)        (b)
     China (raw) silk             7.97       2.24
     Tussah silk                  8.26       5.00

     Lustra-celluloses:

     Chardonnet (Besancon)       10.37       5.64
         "    Spreitenbach       11.17       5.77
     Lehner                      10.71       5.97
     Pauly                       10.04       6.94

16. _Behaviour on heating at 200 deg.._--After two hours' heating at this
temperature the following changes were noted:

     China silk      Much discoloured (brown).
     Tussah silk     Scarcely affected.

Lustra-celluloses:

     Chardonnet   Converted into a blue-black charcoal, retaining the
     Lehner       form ofthe fibres.

     Pauly       A bright yellow-brown colouration, without carbonisation.

17. The _losses of weight_ accompanying these changes and calculated per
100 parts of fibre dried at 100 deg. were:

     China silk       3.18
     Tussah silk      2.95

Lustra-celluloses:
