this way we easily get a sort of windlass quite strong enough for our
purpose.

Fig.   35.

Provide a large blow-pipe, such as the blow-pipe of a Fletcher
crucible furnace, Select a length of tubing and clean it.  Lash one
end to the cylinder by means of a bit of wire, and hold the other end
out nearly horizontally.  Then start the blow-pipe to play on the tube
just where it runs on to the asbestos cylinder, and at first right up
to the lashing.  Get an attendant to assist in turning the handle of
the windlass, always keeping his eye on the tube, and never turning so
fast as to tilt the tube upwards.  By means of the blow-pipe, which
may be moved round the tubing, heat the latter continuously as it is
drawn through the flame, and lay it on the cylinder in even spirals.

If the tubing is thin, a good deal of care will have to be exercised
in order to prevent a collapse.  A better arrangement, which, however,
I have not yet tried, would, I think, be to replace the blow-pipe by
two bats-wing burners, permanently fastened to a stand, one of them
playing its flame downwards on to the top of the flame of the other.
The angle between the directions of the jets might be, say, 130 deg., or
whatever is found convenient.  In this way the glass would not be so
likely to get overheated in spots, and better work would doubtless
result.  However, I have made numbers of perfectly satisfactory
spirals as described.  Three or four turns only make a sufficiently
springy connection for nearly all purposes.

Sec. 37.  On Auxiliary Operations on Glass:-

Boring Holes through Glass:-  This is much more easily done than is
generally supposed.  The best mode of procedure depends on the
circumstances.  The following three cases will be considered:-

1.  Boring holes up to one-quarter inch diameter through thick glass
(say over one-eighth inch), or rather larger holes through thin glass.

2.  Boring holes of any size through thick glass.

3.  Boring round holes through ordinary window glass.

Sec. 38.  Boring small Holes.

Take a three-cornered file of appropriate dimensions, and snip the
point off by means of a hammer;  grind out most of the file marks to
get sharp corners.  Dip the file in kerosene, and have plenty of
kerosene at hand in a small pot.  Place the broken end of the file
against the glass, and with considerable pressure begin to rotate it
(the file) backwards and forwards with the fingers, very much as one
would operate a bradawl against a hard piece of wood.  The surface of
the glass will shortly be ground away, and then the file bradawl will
make much quicker progress than might be expected.  Two or three
minutes should suffice to bore a bit of sheet window-glass.

The following points require attention:

(1) Use any quantity of oil.

(2) After getting through the skin  reduce the pressure on the file.

(3) Be sure to turn the file backwards and forwards through a complete
revolution at least.

(4) When the hole is nearly through reduce the pressure.

(5) When the hole is through the glass be exceedingly careful not to
force the file through too rapidly, otherwise it will simply act as a
wedge and cause a complete fracture.

(6) In many cases it is better to harden the file in mercury before
commencing operations; both files and glass differ so much in hardness
that this point can only be decided by a trial.  If it is found
necessary to harden the file, use either a large blow-pipe and a coke
or charcoal bed, or else a small forge.  A small blowpipe, such as is
generally found in laboratories, does more harm than good, either by
burning the end of the file or raising it to an insufficient
temperature.

(7) To sharpen the file, which is often necessary after passing
through the "skin" of the glass, put it in a vice so that the point
just protrudes clear of the jaws.  Then, using a bit of waste iron as
an intermediary anvil or punch, knock off the least bit from the
point, so as to expose a fresh natural surface.  The same result may
be brought about by the use of a pair of pliers.

If several holes have to be bored, it is convenient to mount the file
in the lathe and use a bit of flat hard wood to press up the glass by
means of the back rest.  A drilling machine, if not too heavy, does
very well, and has the advantage of allowing the glass to remain
horizontal so that plenty of oil can be kept in the hole.

Use a very slow speed in either case--much slower than would be used
for drilling wrought iron.  It is essential that the lubricant should
flow on to the end of the file very freely, either from a pipette or
from the regular oil-feed.  If a little chipping where the file
pierces the back surface is inadmissible, it is better, on the whole,
to finish the bore by hand, using a very taper file.  It is not
necessary to use a special file for the lathe, for a well-handled file
can be chucked very conveniently in a three-jaw chuck by means of the
handle.

Mr. Shenstone recommends a lubricant composed of camphor dissolved in
turpentine for general purposes.  With the object of obtaining some
decisive information as to the use of this lubricant, and to settle
other points, I made the following experiments.  Using an old
three-cornered French file, I chipped off the point and adjusted the
handle carefully.  I also ground out the file marks near the point,
without hardening the file in mercury.  Using kerosene and turpentine
and camphor, I began to bore holes in a hard bit of 3/32 inch window
glass.

Each hole was bored to about one-eighth inch in diameter in four
minutes with either lubricant.  After hardening the file in mercury
and using kerosene, I also required four minutes per hole.  After
mounting the file in a lathe which had been speeded to turn up brass
rods of about one-half-inch diameter, and therefore ran too fast, I
required one and a half minutes per hole, and bored them right
through, using kerosene.  On the whole, I think kerosene does as well
as anything, and for filing is, I think, better than the camphor
solution.  However, I ought to say that the camphor-turpentine
compound has probably a good deal to recommend it, for it has survived
from long ago.  My assistant tells me he has seen his grandfather use
it when filing glass.

I beg to acknowledge my indebtedness to Mr. Pye, of the Cambridge
Scientific Instrument Company, for showing me in 1886 (by the courtesy
of the Company) the file method of glass-boring;  it is also described
by Faraday in Chemical Manipulation, 1228.

It is not necessary, however, to use a file at all, for the twist
drills made by the Morse Drill Company are quite hard enough in their
natural state to bore glass.  The circumferential speed of the drill
should not much exceed 10 feet per minute.  In this way the author has
bored holes through glass an inch thick without any trouble except
that of keeping the lubricant sufficiently supplied.  For boring very
small holes watchmaker's drills may be used perfectly well, especially
those tempered for boring hardened steel.  The only difficulty is in
obtaining a sufficient supply of the lubricant, and to secure this the
drill must be frequently withdrawn.

My reason for describing the file method at such length is to be found
in the fact that a Morse drill requires to be sharpened after drilling
glass before it can be used in the ordinary way, and this is often a
difficulty.

I ought to say that I have never succeeded in boring the barrel of a
glass tap by either of these methods.  [Footnote: I have been lately
informed that it is usual to employ a splinter of diamond set in a
steel wire holder both for tap boring and for drilling earthenware for
riveting.  The diamond must, of course, be set so as to give
sufficient clearance for the wire holder.

For methods of using and setting diamond tools see Sec. 55.  It will
suffice to say here that a steel wire is softened and filed at one end
so as to form a fork;  into this the diamond is set by squeezing with
pliers.  The diamond is arranged so as to present a point in the axis
of the wire, and must not project on one side of the wire more than on
the other.  It is not always easy to get a fragment satisfying these
conditions, and at the same time suitable for mounting.  A drop of
solder occasionally assists the process of setting the diamond.

In drilling, the diamond must be held against the work by a constant
force, applied either by means of weight or a spring.  I made many
trials by this method, using a watchmaker's lathe and pressing up the
work by a weight and string, which passed over a pulley.  I used about
40 ounces, and drilled a hole 3/32 in diameter in flint glass at a
speed of 900 revolutions per minute to a depth of one-eighth of an
inch in eight minutes.  I used soap and water as a lubricant, and the
work was satisfactory.

Since this was set up, I have been informed by Mr. Hicks of Hatton
Garden that it is necessary to anneal glass rod by heating it up to
the softening point and allowing it to cool very slowly under red-hot
sand or asbestos before boring.  If this be done, no trouble will be
experienced.  The annealing must be perfect.]

Sec. 39.  For boring large holes through thick glass sheets, or, indeed,
through anything where it is necessary to make sure that
no accident can happen, or where great precision of position and form
of hole is required, I find a boring tube mounted as shown in the
picture (Fig.  36) is of great service.  Brass or iron tube borers do
perfectly well, and the end of the spindle may be provided once for
all with a small tube chuck, or the tubes may be separately mounted as
shown.  A fairly high speed is desirable, and may be obtained either
by foot, or, if power is available, is readily got by connecting to
the speed cone of a lathe, which is presumably permanently belted to
the motor.

Fig.  36.

After trying tubes armed with diamond dust, as will be presently
explained, I find that emery and thin oil or turpentine, if liberally
supplied below the glass, will do very nearly as well.  The tube
should be allowed to rise from the work every few seconds, so as to
allow of fresh emery and oil being carried into the circular grooves.
This is done by lifting the hinged upper bearing, the drill being
lifted by a spiral spring between the pulley and the lower bearing
shown at B.  The glass may be conveniently supported on a few sheets
of paper if flat, or held firm in position by wooden clamps if of any
other shape.  In any case it should be firmly held down and should be
well supported.  Any desired pressure upon the drill is obtained by
weighting the hinged board A.

Sec. 40.  The following method was shown to me by Mr. Wimshurst, but I
have not had occasion to employ it myself.  It is suitable for boring
large holes through such glass as the plates of Mr. Wimshurst's
Influence machines are usually made of.  A diamond is mounted as the
"pencil" of a compass, and with this a circle is drawn on the glass in
the desired position.  The other leg of the compass of course rests on
a suitable washer.

To the best of my recollection the further procedure was as follows.
A piece of steel rod about one-eighth inch in diameter was ground off
flat and mounted in a vice vertically, so as to cause its plane end to
form a small horizontal anvil.  The centre (approximately) of the
diamond-cut circle of the glass was laid on this anvil so as to rest
evenly upon it, and the upper surface (i.e.  that containing the cut)
was then struck smartly with a hammer, completely pulverising the
glass above the anvil.  The hole was gradually extended in a similar
manner right up to the diamond cut, from which, of course, the glass
broke away.

A similar method has long been known to glaziers, differing from the
preceding in that a series of diamond cuts are run across the circle
parallel to two mutually perpendicular diameters.  A smart tap on the
back of the scored disc will generally cause the fragments to tumble
out.  I have never tried this myself, but I have seen it done.

Large discs may easily be cut from sheet glass by drawing a circular
diamond cut, and gradually breaking away the outer parts by the aid of
additional cuts and a pair of pliers or "shanks" (see Fig.  44).

Sec. 41.  Operations depending on Grinding: Ground-in Joints.

The process will be perfectly understood by reference to a simple
case.  Suppose it is desired to grind the end of a tube into the neck
of a bottle.  If a stoppered bottle is available, the stopper must be
taken out and measured as to its diameter at the top and bottom.
Select a bit of tube as nearly as possible of the same diameter as the
stopper at its thickest part.  Draw down the glass in the blow-pipe
flame rather by allowing it to sink than by pulling it out.  After a
few trials no difficulty will be experienced in making its taper
nearly equal to that of the stopper, though there will in all
probability be several ridges and inequalities.  When this stage is
reached anneal the work carefully and see that the glass is not too
thin.  Afterwards use emery and water, and grind the stopper into the
bottle.

There are six special directions to be note

(1 )Turn the stopper through at least one revolution in each
direction.

(2) Lift it out often so as to give the fresh emery a chance of
getting into the joint.

(3) Rotate the bottle as well as the stopper in case there is any
irregularity in the force brought to bear, which might cause one side
of the neck to be more ground than another, or would cause the tube to
set rather to one side or the other.

(4) Use emery passing a 50 sieve, i.e.  a sieve with fifty threads to
the inch run (see Sec. 144) to begin with, and when the stopper nearly
fits, wash this thoroughly away, and finish with flour emery,
previously washed to get rid of particles of excessive size;  the
process of washing will be fully discussed in the chapter on
glass-grinding, which see.

(5) Any degree of fineness of surface may be obtained by using graded
emery, as will be explained, but, in general, it is unnecessary to
attempt a finer surface than can be got with washed flour emery.  A
superficial and imperfect polish may be given by grinding for a short
time with powdered pumice stone.

(6) If the proper taper is not attained by blowing, or if ridges are
left on the tapered part, the process may be both hastened and
improved by giving the taper a preliminary filing with a
three-cornered file and kerosene, just as one would proceed with iron
or brass.  A little filing will often save a good deal of grinding and
make a better job.

If a bottle without a tapered neck is to be employed, it is as well to
do the preliminary grinding by means of a cone turned up from a bit of
cast iron.  This is put in the lathe and pushed into the mouth of the
bottle, the latter being supported by the hands.  Use about the same
surface speed as would be employed for turning cast iron.  In this
case the emery is better used with kerosene.

If a cylindrical bit of cast iron about an inch in diameter is turned
down conically nearly to a point, it will save a good deal of trouble
in making separate cones.  If it gets ground into rings, and it
becomes necessary to turn it up, use a diamond tool until the skin is
thoroughly removed;  the embedded emery merely grinds the edge off any
ordinary steel tool.

For diamond tools see Sec. 55.

Sec. 42.  Use of the Lathe in Glass-working.

If it is necessary to remove a good deal of glass, time may be saved
by actually turning the glass in a lathe.  According to the direction
given above for grinding a tube into the neck of a bottle, very little
glass need be removed if the drawing down is well done, so that for
this purpose turning is often unnecessary.

If the taper of the stopper be small and it is permissible to use a
thick tube, or if a solid stopper only has to be provided, or an old
stopper quickly altered to a new form, turning is very useful.  The
glass may be "chucked" in any suitable manner, and run at a speed not
exceeding 10 feet per minute.  Prepare a three-cornered file by
mercury-hardening and by grinding the end flat so as to form a cutting
angle of about 80 deg., and use a moderate amount of kerosene lubrication,
i.e.  enough to keep the glass damp, but even this is not essential.
Use the file as an ordinary brass turning tool, and press much more
lightly than for metal turning.  The glass will be found to scrape off
quite pleasantly.

By chucking glass tubes on wooden mandrells the ends may be nicely
turned in this manner ready for accurate closing by glass plates.

The process of grinding also is made much more rapid--at all events
in the earlier stages--by chucking either the stopper or the bottle
and holding the other member in the fingers, or in a wooden vice held
in the hands.  The finishing touches are best given by hand.

I ought to say that I think a good deal of glass-grinding, as
practised in laboratories, might be advantageously replaced by glass
turning or filing and certainly will be by any one who will give these
methods a trial.

If one tube is to be ground into another, as in grinding a retort into
a receiver, the latter must be drawn down from a larger piece, few
beginners being able to widen a tube by the method explained with
sufficient ease and certainty.  The other operations are similar to
the operations above described.

Sec. 43.  Funnels often require to be ground to an angle of 60 deg..  For
this purpose it is well to keep a cast-iron cone, tapering from
nothing up to four inches in diameter.  This may be mounted on a
lathe, and will be found of great use for grinding out the inside of
funnels.  Care must be taken to work the funnel backwards and
forwards, or it will tend to grind so as to form rings, which
interfere with filtering.  A rough polish may be given on the lines
explained in the next section.

Sec. 44.  A rough polish may be easily given to a surface which has been
finished by washed flour emery, in the following manner.  Turn up a
disc of soft wood on the lathe, and run it at the highest wood-turning
speed.  Rub into the periphery a paste of sifted powdered pumice stone
and water.

