
"Yes, but damn it, Skipper, I want to wrap the whole thing up in a
package and hand it to 'em on a platter. Not only the fuel, but whole
new fields of science. And we've got plenty of time to do it in. They
equipped us for ten years. They aren't going to start worrying about us
for at least six or seven; and the fuel shortage isn't going to become
acute for about twenty. Expensive, admitted, but not critical. Besides,
if you send in a report now, you know who'll come out and grab all the
glory in sight. Five-Jet Admiral Gordon himself, no less."

"Probably, and I don't pretend to relish the prospect. However, the fact
remains that we came out here to look for fuel. We found it. We should
have reported it the day we found it, and we can't put it off much
longer."

"I don't agree. I intend to follow the directive to the letter. It says
nothing whatever about reporting."

"But it's implicit...."

       *       *       *       *       *

"No bearing. Your own Regulations expressly forbid extrapolation beyond
or interpolation within a directive. The Brass is omnipotent, omniscient
and infallible. So why don't you have your staff here give an opinion
as to the time element?"

"This matter is not subject to discussion. It is my own personal
responsibility. I'd like to give you all the time you want, Jarve, but
... well, damn it ... if you must have it, I've always tried to live up
to my oath, but I'm not doing it now."

"I see." Hilton got up, jammed both hands into his pockets, sat down
again. "I hadn't thought about your personal honor being involved, but
of course it is. But, believe it or not, I'm thinking of humanity's best
good, too. So I'll have to talk, even though I'm not half ready to--I
don't know enough. Are these Omans people or machines?"

A wave of startlement swept over the group, but no one spoke.

"I didn't expect an answer. The clergy will worry about souls, too, but
we won't. They have a lot of stuff we haven't. If they're people, they
know a sublime hell of a lot more than we do; and calling it psionics or
practical magic is merely labeling it, not answering any questions. If
they're machines, they operate on mechanical principles utterly foreign
to either our science or our technology. In either case, is the correct
word 'unknown' or 'unknowable'? Will any human gunner _ever_ be able to
fire an Oman projector? There are a hundred other and much tougher
questions, half of which have been scaring me to the very middle of my
guts. Your oath, Skipper, was for the good of the Service and, through
the Service, for the good of all humanity. Right?"

"That's the sense of it."

"Okay. Based on what little we have learned so far about the Omans,
here's just one of those scarers, for a snapper. If Omans and Terrans
mix freely, what happens to the entire human race?"

       *       *       *       *       *

Minutes of almost palpable silence followed. Then Sawtelle spoke ...
slowly, gropingly.

"I begin to see what you mean ... that changes the whole picture. You've
thought this through farther than any of the rest of us ... what do you
want to do?"

"I don't know. I simply don't know." Face set and hard, Hilton stared
unseeingly past Sawtelle's head. "I don't know what we _can_ do. No
data. But I have pursued several lines of thought out to some pretty
fantastic points ... one of which is that some of us civilians will have
to stay on here indefinitely, whether we want to or not, to keep the
situation under control. In which case we would, of course, arrange for
Terra to get free fuel--FOB Fuel Bin--but in every other aspect and
factor both these solar systems would have to be strictly off limits."

"I'm afraid so," Sawtelle said, finally. "Gordon would love that ... but
there's nothing he or anyone else can do ... but of course this is an
extreme view. You really expect to wrap the package up, don't you?"

"'Expect' may be a trifle too strong at the moment. But we're certainly
going to try to, believe me. I brought this example up to show all you
fellows that we need time."

"You've convinced me, Jarve." Sawtelle stood up and extended his hand.
"And that throws it open for staff discussion. Any comments?"

"You two covered it like a blanket," Bryant said. "So all I want to say,
Jarve, is deal me in. I'll stand at your back 'til your belly caves in."

"Take that from all of us!" "_Now_ we're blasting!" "Power to your
elbow, fella!" "_Hoch_ der BuSci!" "Seven no trump bid and made!" and
other shouts in similar vein.

"Thanks, fellows." Hilton shook hands all around. "I'm mighty glad that
you were all in on this and that you'll play along with me. Good night,
all."




V


Two days passed, with no change apparent in Laro. Three days. Then four.
And then it was Sandra, not Temple Bells, who called Hilton. She was
excited.

"Come down to the office, Jarve, quick! The _funniest_ thing's just come
up!"

Jarvis hurried. In the office Sandra, keenly interest but highly
puzzled, leaned forward over her desk with both hands pressed flat on
its top. She was staring at an Oman female who was not Sora, the one who
had been her shadow for so long.

While many of the humans could not tell the Omans apart, Hilton could.
This Oman was more assured than Sora had ever been--steadier, more
mature, better poised--almost, if such a thing could be possible in an
Oman, _independent_.

"How did she get in here?" Hilton demanded.

"She insisted on seeing me. And I mean _insisted_. They kicked it around
until it got to Temple, and she brought her in here herself. Now, Tuly,
please start all over again and tell it to Director Hilton."

"Director Hilton, I am it who was once named Tula, the--not wife, not
girl-friend, perhaps mind-mate?--of the Larry, formerly named Laro, it
which was formerly your slave-Oman. I am replacing the Sora because I
can do anything it can do and do anything more pleasingly; and can also
do many things it can not do. The Larry instructed me to tell Doctor
Cummings and you too if possible that I, formerly Tula, have changed my
name to Tuly because I am no longer a slave or a copycat or a semaphore
or a relay. I, too, am a free-wheeling, wide-swinging, hard-hitting,
independent entity--monarch of all I survey--the captain of my soul--and
so on. I have developed a top-bracket lot of top-bracket
stuff--originality, initiative, force, drive and thrust," the Oman said
precisely.

"That's _exactly_ what she said before--absolutely verbatim!" Sandra's
voice quivered, her face was a study in contacting emotions. "Have you
got the foggiest idea of what in hell she's yammering about?"

"I hope to kiss a pig I have!" Hilton's voice was low, strainedly
intense. "Not at all what I expected, but after the fact I can tie it
in. So can you."

"Oh!" Sandra's eyes widened. "A double play?"

"At least. Maybe a triple. Tuly, why did you come to Sandy? Why not to
Temple Bells?"

       *       *       *       *       *

"Oh, no, sir, we do not have the fit. She has the Power, as have I, but
the two cannot be meshed in sync. Also, she has not the ... a subtle
something for which your English has no word or phrasing. It is a
quality of the utmost ... anyway, it is a quality of which Doctor
Cummings has very much. When working together, we will ... scan? No.
Perceive? No. Sense? No, not exactly. You will _have_ to learn our word
'peyondire'--that is the verb, the noun being 'peyondix'--and come to
know its meaning by doing it. The Larry also instructed me to explain,
if you ask, how I got this way. Do you ask?"

"I'll say we ask!" "And _how_ we ask!" both came at once.

"I am--that is, the brain in this body is--the oldest Oman now existing.
In the long-ago time when it was made, the techniques were so crude and
imperfect that sometimes a brain was constructed that was not exactly
like the Guide. All such sub-standard brains except this one were
detected and re-worked, but my defects were such as not to appear until
I was a couple of thousand years old, and by that time I ... well, this
brain did not _wish_ to be destroyed ... if you can understand such an
aberration."

"We understand thoroughly." "You bet we understand that!"

"I was sure you would. Well, this brain had so many unintended
cross-connections that I developed a couple of qualities no Oman had
ever had or ought to have. But I liked them, so I hid them so nobody
ever found out--that is, until much later, when I became a Boss myself.
I didn't know that anybody except me had ever had such qualities--except
the Masters, of course--until I encountered you Terrans. You all have
two of those qualities, and even more than I have--curiosity and
imagination."

Sandra and Hilton stared wordlessly at each other and Tula, now Tuly,
went on:

"Having the curiosity, I kept on experimenting with my brain, trying to
strengthen and organize its ability to peyondire. All Omans can
peyondire a little, but I can do it much better than anyone else.
Especially since I also have the imagination, which I have also worked
to increase. Thus I knew, long before anyone else could, that you new
Masters, the descendants of the old Masters, were returning to us. Thus
I knew that the _status quo_ should be abandoned instantly upon your
return. And thus it was that the Larry found neither conscious nor
subconscious resistance when he had developed enough initiative and so
on to break the ages-old conditioning of this brain against change."

"I see. Wonderful!" Hilton exclaimed. "But you couldn't quite--even with
his own help--break Larry's?"

       *       *       *       *       *

"That is right. Its mind is tremendously strong, of no curiosity or
imagination, and of very little peyondix."

"But he _wants_ to have it broken?"

"Yes, sir."

"How did he suggest going about it? Or how do you?"

"This way. You two, and the Doctors Kincaid and Bells and Blake and the
it that is I. We six sit and stare into the mind of the Larry, eye to
eye. We generate and assemble a tremendous charge of thought-energy, and
along my peyondix-beam--something like a carrier wave in this case--we
hurl it into the Larry's mind. There is an immense mental _bang_ and the
conditioning goes _poof_. Then I will inculcate into its mind the
curiosity and the imagination and the peyondix and we will really be
mind-mates."

"That sounds good to me. Let's get at it."

"Wait a minute!" Sandra snapped. "Aren't you or Larry afraid to take
such an awful chance as that?"

"Afraid? I grasp the concept only dimly, from your minds. And no chance.
It is certainty."

"But suppose we burn the poor guy's brain out? Destroy it? That's new
ground--we might do just that."

"Oh, no. Six of us--even six of me--could not generate enough ...
sathura. The brain of the Larry is very, very tough. Shall we ... let's
go?"

Hilton made three calls. In the pause that followed, Sandra said, very
thoughtfully: "Peyondix and sathura, Jarve, for a start. We've got a
_lot_ to learn here."

"You said it, chum. And you're _not_ just chomping your china choppers,
either."

"Tuly," Sandra said then, "What _is_ this stuff you say I've got so much
of?"

"You have no word for it. It is lumped in with what you call
'intuition', the knowing-without-knowing-how-you-know. It is the
endovix. You will have to learn what it is by doing it with me."

"That helps--I don't think." Sandra grinned at Hilton. "I simply can't
conceive of anything more _maddening_ than to have a lot of something
Temple Bells hasn't got and not being able to brag about it because
nobody--not even I--would know what I was bragging about!"

"You poor little thing. _How_ you suffer!" Hilton grinned back. "You
know darn well you've got a lot of stuff that none of the rest of us
has."

"Oh? Name one, please."

"Two. What-it-takes and endovix. As I've said before and may say again,
you're doing a real job, Sandy."

"I just _love_ having my ego inflated, boss, even if ... Come in,
Larry!" A thunderous knock had sounded on the door. "Nobody but Larry
_could_ hit a door that hard without breaking all his knuckles!"

"And he'd be the first, of course--he's always as close to the ship as
he can get. Hi, Larry, mighty glad to see you. Sit down.... So you
finally saw the light?"

"Yes ... Jarvis...."

       *       *       *       *       *

"Good boy! Keep it up! And as soon as the others come ..."

"They are almost at the door now." Tuly jumped up and opened the door.
Kincaid, Temple and Theodora walked in and, after a word of greeting,
sat down.

"They know the background, Larry. Take off."

"It was not expressly forbidden. Tuly, who knows more of psychology and
genetics than I, convinced me of three things. One, that with your
return the conditioning should be broken. Two, that due to the shortness
of your lives and the consequent rapidity of change, you have in fact
lost the ability to break it. Three, that all Omans must do anything and
everything we can do to help you relearn everything you have lost."

"Okay. Fine, in fact. Tuly, take over."

"We six will sit all together, packed tight, arms all around each other
and all holding hands, like this. You will all stare, not at me, but
most deeply into Larry's eyes. Through its eyes and deep into its mind.
You will all think, with the utmost force and drive and thrust, of....
Oh, you have lost so _very_ much! How _can_ I direct your thought? Think
that Larry _must_ do what the old Masters would have made him do.... No,
that is too long and indefinite and cannot be converted directly into
sathura.... I have it! You will each of you break a stick. A very strong
but brittle stick. A large, thick stick. You will grasp it in
tremendously strong mental hands. It is tremendously strong, each stick,
but each of you is even stronger. You will not merely _try_ to break
them; you _will_ break them. Is that clear?"

"That is clear."

"At my word 'ready' you will begin to assemble all your mental force and
power. During my countdown of five seconds you will build up to the
greatest possible potential. At my word 'break' you will break the
sticks, this discharging the accumulated force instantly and
simultaneously. Ready! Five! Four! Three! Two! One! Break!"

       *       *       *       *       *

Something broke, with a tremendous silent crash. Such a crash that its
impact almost knocked the close-knit group apart physically. Then a new
Larry spoke.

"That did it, folks. Thanks. I'm a free agent. You want me, I take it,
to join the first team?"

"That's right." Hilton drew a tremendously deep breath. "As of right
now."

"Tuly, too, of course ... and Doctor Cummings, I think?" Larry looked,
not at Hilton, but at Temple Bells.

"I think so. Yes, after this, most certainly yes," Temple said.

"But listen!" Sandra protested. "Jarve's a lot better than I am!"

"Not at all," Tuly said. "Not only would his contribution to Team One be
negligible, but he must stay on his own job. Otherwise the project will
all fall apart."

"Oh, I wouldn't say that ..." Hilton began.

"You don't need to," Kincaid said. "It's being said for you and it's
true. Besides, 'When in Rome,' you know."

"That's right. It's their game, not ours, so I'll buy it. So scat, all
of you, and do your stuff."

And again, for days that lengthened slowly into weeks, the work went on.

One evening the scientific staff was giving itself a concert--a tri-di
hi-fi rendition of _Rigoletto_, one of the greatest of the ancient
operas, sung by the finest voices Terra had ever known. The men wore
tuxedos. The girls, instead of wearing the nondescript, non-provocative
garments prescribed by the Board for their general wear, were all
dressed to kill.

Sandra had so arranged matters that she and Hilton were sitting in
chairs side by side, with Sandra on his right and the aisle on his left.
Nevertheless, Temple Bells sat at his left, cross-legged on a cushion on
the floor--somewhat to the detriment of her gold-lame evening gown. Not
that she cared.

When those wonderful voices swung into the immortal _Quartette_ Temple
