time reading, you don't take in the action shows on TV. Now what you're
thinking is that even if we were going to twist your arm a little, you'd
stick to your guns. But suppose, like, it was Pat we was working on,
while you had to sit and watch."

The elderly man's brave front collapsed and his thin shoulders slumped.

Crowley barked a laugh.

Patricia by now, was bent over the unconscious Ross crying even as she
tried to help him.

Crowley said to the silent, all but disinterested Larry, "Have these
three put in separate rooms in that section they used for the violent
wing when the place was a nuthouse. Have a good guard and see they don't
talk back and forth."

"You're the boss," Larry said languidly.

       *       *       *       *       *

Crowley was thorough. For that they had to give him credit. They were
kept divided, each in a different room-cell and with at least two burly,
efficient guards on constant watch. They were fed on army-type trays and
their utensils checked carefully. There was no communication
allowed--even with the guard.

The second day, Crowley took measures to see their disappearance raised
no alarm at either their place of employment or at their residences.
This raised few problems since all were single and all had already
taken off both from the job and from their homes in order to carry out
their experiment. Crowley forced them to write further notes and letters
finding excuses for extending their supposed vacations. He also had
Larry return to the hotel suite, pay their bill, pack their things and
bring them to the Catskill estate which had become their prison.

He had them make up lists of materials and equipment they would need for
further manufacture of the serum upon which they had stumbled, and sent
off men to acquire the things.

And on three occasions during the following weeks he had them brought
from their cells and spent an hour or so with them at lunch or dinner.
Crowley evidently needed an audience beyond that of his henchmen. The
release of his basic character, formerly repressed, was progressing
geometrically and there seemed to be an urgency to crow, to brag, to
boast.

[Illustration]

On the third of these occasions he was already seated at the table when
they were ushered into the dining room. Crowley dismissed the guards
with a wave of his hand as though they were liveried servants.

All had eaten but there were liqueurs and coffee, cigars and cigarettes
on the broad table.

Ross sank into a chair and growled, "Well, what hath the great man
wrought by now?"

Crowley grinned at him, poured coffee and then a dollop of Napoleon
brandy into it. He gestured with a hand. "Help yourselves, folks. How
you feeling? You been getting all the books you wanted? You look kind of
peaked, Pat."

"Miss O'Gara to you, you ape with delusions of grandeur," she snapped.
"When are you going to let us out of those prison cells?"

Crowley wasn't provoked. The strong can afford to laugh at the
malcontented weak. "That's one of the things you never know," he said
easily. "You sure you want out? Something the Doc said the other day had
a lotta fact in it. The fewer people know about this secret of mine, the
better off I'll be and the better off I am, the better off the whole
country is going to be and I gotta think about that. I got
responsibilities."

"A combination of Engine Charley and Louis XIV, eh?" Ross muttered,
running his beefy hand back over his crew cut. It was a relief to get
out of his room and talk with the others, but he didn't want Crowley to
see that.

"What's that?" the other was impatient of conversation that went above
his head.

Dr. Braun explained gently. "One said, _I am the State_, and the other,
_anything that's good for my corporation is good for the United
States_--or something quite similar."

Crowley sipped at his coffee royal. "Well, anyway, Pat, the day you're
ready to leave that cell, you'd better start worrying cause that'll mean
I don't need you any more."

Ross growled, "You didn't answer my question. Robbed any banks lately,
great man?"

The other eyed him coldly. "Take it easy, Buster. Maybe in the early
stages of the Common Man Movement we hafta take some strong-arm
measures, but that stage's about finished."

Patricia O'Gara was interested in spite of herself. She said. "You mean
you already have all the money you need?"

He was expansive. Obviously there was nothing to lose with these three
and he liked a sounding board. In spite of his alleged contempt for
eggheads there was an element in Crowley which wished to impress them,
to grant him equal status in their own estimations.

"There's a devil of a lot to know about big finance. You need a starter,
but once you get it, the stuff just rolls in automatic." He grinned
suddenly, almost boyishly. "Especially when you got a certain little
advantage, like me."

Braun said, interestedly, "How do you put your advantage to work?"

"Well, now, I gotta admit we aren't quite out of the woods. We need more
capital to work with, but after tonight we'll have it. Remember that
Brinks job up in New England a long time ago? Well, we got something
lined up even bigger. I work with Larry and his boys to pull it. Then
there's another thing cooking that Whitely's been keeping tabs on. It
looks like IBM is going to split its stock, three for one. I gotta
attend their next secret executive meeting and find out. If they do, we
buy in just before, see? We buy on margin, buy options, all that sort of
jazz. Whitely knows all about it. Then we got another big deal in
Washington. Looks like the government might devaluate the dollar.
Whitely explained it to me, kind of. Anyway, I got to sit in on a
conference the President's gonna have. If they really decide to devalue,
then Whitely and me, we go ahead and put every cent we got into Swiss
gold. Then the day after devaluation, we switch it all back into dollars
again. Double our money. Oh, we got all sorts of angles, Doc."

"By Caesar," Braun ejaculated. "You seem to have."

       *       *       *

Patricia had poured herself some coffee and was sipping it, black, even
as she stared at him. "But, Don, what do you need all this money for?
You already have more than plenty. Why not call it all off. Get out from
under."

Ross grunted, "Too late, Pat. Can't you see? He's got the power urge
already."

Crowley ignored him and turned to her, pouring more coffee and cognac
for himself. "I'm not running up all this dough just for me. You think
you're the only one's got ideals, like? Let me tell you, I might just be
a country boy but I got ambitions to put some things right in this
world."

"Such as...." Patricia prodded, bitterness in her voice.

"Aw, we went through all that the other day. The thing is, now it's
really under way. If you was seeing the newspapers these days, you'd
know about the Common Man Party."

"Oh, oh," Ross muttered unhappily.

"It's just getting under way," Crowley said modestly, "but we're hiring
two of the top Madison Avenue outfits to handle publicity and we're
recruiting some of the best practical politicians in the field."

"Practical politicians!" Ross snorted. "Types like Huey Long, McCarthy,
Pendergast, I suppose."

The other misunderstood him. "Yeah, and even better. We're going in big
for TV time, full-page ads in the newspapers and magazines. That sort of
thing. The average man's getting tired of the same old talk from the
Republicans and Democrats. Paul Teeter thinks we might have a chance in
the next election, given enough dough to plow into it."

Ross leaned back disdainfully. "What a combination. Whitely, the broker
who has been barred from activity on Wall Street; Teeter, the crooked
politician, but with connections from top to bottom; and Larry, whatever
his name is...."

"Morazzoni," Crowley supplied. "You know where I first ran into his
name? In one of them true crime magazines. He's a big operator."

"I'll bet he is," the redhead growled. "Probably with good Mafia
connections. I'm surprised you haven't attempted to take over that
outfit."

Crowley laughed abruptly. "We're working on that, pal. Just take it easy
and all these things will work their way out. But meanwhile I didn't
bring you jokers here to make snide remarks. I got work for you. I'm
fresh out of that serum and you three are going to brew me up another
batch."

They looked at him, Dr. Braun, Ross Wooley, Patricia O'Gara, their faces
registering stubbornness, revolt and dismay.

He shook his head. "Larry and some of his boys have experience. I gotta
admit, I wouldn't even want to watch."

"I'm for standing firm," Braun said stiffly. "There are but three of us.
The most they can do is kill us. But if this man's insanity is released
on the world...."

Crowley was shaking his head in deprecation. "Like when you say the
worst we can do is kill you. Man, haven't you heard about the Nazis and
commies and all? You oughta read some of the men's adventure magazines.
How do you think Joe Stalin got all them early Bolsheviks to confess?
You think they weren't tough buzzards? Why make us go to all the
trouble, when you'd just cave in eventually anyway? Save yourself the
grief."

Patricia said impatiently, "He's right, I'm afraid. I would collapse
rather quickly under physical coercion. You might last a bit longer,
Ross possibly longer still. But in the end we would concede."

Crowley said, as though in amazement, "You know, eggheads aren't as
stupid as some would reckon. O.K., folks, I got a laboratory all fixed
up with your things. Let's go. Ah, Ross, old pal, I'm carrying heat, as
Larry would say, so let's don't have any trouble, eh?"

He had been as good as his word in regards to the laboratory. It was
obviously one of the rooms used by the staff when the place had been a
sanitarium. Now, each of the three had all the equipment and supplies
they required.

Crowley took a seat at the far end of the room, facing them. There had
been a guard outside the door when they entered and a call would bring
him in seconds. Even so, Crowley sat in such wise that his right hand
was ready to plunge inside his coat to the gun that evidently was
holstered there. He said, "O.K., folks, let's get about it."

       *       *       *

It took them half an hour or so to sort out those materials each needed
in his own contribution to the end product.

Their captor looked at his watch impatiently. "Let's get a move on,
here. I thought this was going to take a few minutes."

Patricia said testily, "What's the hurry, Don?"

He grinned at her. "Tonight's the big night. This evening, just before
closing, I walk into.... Well, you don't have to know the name. Like I
