
Tracy said curtly, "Frank Tracy, Bureau of Economic Subversion."

"Bureau of Economic Subversion!" Moncure said indignantly. "What in the
name of all that's holy is the Bureau of Economic Subversion?"

Tracy pointed at him with the pipe stem. "I'll ask a few questions
first, please. How many branches of your nefarious outfit are presently
under operation?"

The other glared at him, but Tracy merely returned the pipe to his mouth
and glowered back.

Finally Moncure snapped, "There is no purpose in hiding any of our
affairs. We have opened preliminary offices only in Chicago and New
York. Freer Enterprises is but in its infancy."

"Praise Allah for that," Tracy muttered sarcastically.

"And thus far we have dealt only in soap. However, as our organization
gets under way we plan to branch out into a score, and ultimately
hundreds of products."

Tracy said, "You can forget about that, Moncure. Freer Enterprises comes
to a halt as of today. Do you realize that your business tactics would
lead to a complete collapse of gainful employment and eventually to a
depression such as this nation has never seen before?"

"Exactly!" Moncure snapped in return.

       *       *       *

It was Tracy's turn to react. His eyes widened, then narrowed. "Do you
mean that you are deliberately attempting to undermine the economy of
the United States of the Americas? Remember, Mr. Moncure, you are under
arrest and anything you say may be held against you."

"Undermine it!" Moncure said heatedly. "Bring it crashing to the ground
is the better term. There has never been such an abortion developed in
the history of political economy."

He came to his feet again and began storming up and down the room. "A
full three quarters of our employed working at nothing jobs,
gobbledygook jobs, non-producing jobs, make-work jobs, red-tape
bureaucracy jobs. At a time when the nation is supposedly in a breakneck
economic competition with the Soviet Complex, we put our best brains
into advertising, entertainment and sales, while they put theirs into
science and industry."

He stopped long enough to shake an indignant finger at the surprised
Tracy. "But that isn't the worst of it. Have you ever heard of planned
obsolescence?"

Tracy acted as though on the defensive. "Well ... sure ..."

"In the Soviet Complex, and, for that matter, in Common Europe and other
economic competitors of ours, they simply don't believe in planned
obsolescence and all its related nonsense. Razor blades, everywhere
except in this country, don't go dull after two or three shaves. Cars
don't fall apart after two or three years, or even become so out of
style that the owner feels that he's losing status by being seen in it,
the owners expect to keep them half a lifetime. Automobile batteries
don't go to pieces after eighteen months, they last for a decade. And on
and on!"

The old boy was really unwinding now. "Nor is even that the nadir of
this socio-economic hodge-podge we've allowed to develop, this economy
of production for sale, rather than production for use." He stabbed with
his finger. "I think one of the best examples of what was to come was to
be witnessed way back at the end of the Second War. The idea of the
ball-bearing pen was in the air. The first one to hurry into production
gave his pen a tremendous build-up. It had ink enough to last three
years, it would make many carbon copies, you could use it under water.
And so on and so forth. It cost fifteen dollars, and there was only one
difficulty with it. It wouldn't write. Not that that made any difference
because it sold like hotcakes what with all the promotion. He wasn't
interested in whether or not it would write, but only in whether or not
it would sell." Moncure threw up his hands dramatically. "I ask you, can
such an economic system be taken seriously?"

"What's your point?" Tracy growled dangerously. He'd never met one this
far out, before.

"Isn't it obvious? Continue this ridiculous economy and we'll lose the
battle for men's minds. You can't have an economic system that allows
such nonsense as large scale unemployment of trained employees, planned
obsolescence, union featherbedding, and an overwhelming majority of
those who are employed wasting their labor on unproductive employment."

Tracy said, "Then if I understand you correctly, Freer Enterprises was
deliberately organized for the purpose of undermining the economy so
that it will collapse and have to be reorganized on a different basis."

"That is _exactly_ correct," Moncure said defiantly. "I am devoting my
whole fortune to this cause. And there is nothing in American law that
prevents me from following through with my plans."

"You're right there," Tracy said wryly. "There's nothing in American law
that prevents you. However, you see, I have no connection whatsoever
with the American government." He slipped the gun from its holster.

       *       *       *       *       *

Frank Tracy made his way wearily into LaVerne's domain. She looked up
from the desk. "Everything go all right, Mr. Tracy?"

"I suppose so. Tell Comrade Zotov that I'm back from Chicago, please."

She clicked switches, said something into an inner-office communicator,
then looked up again. "He'll see you immediately, Mr. Tracy."

Pavel Zotov looked up from his endless paperwork and wheezed the sigh of
a fat man. He correctly interpreted the expression of his field
operative. "Pour us a couple of drinks, Frank, or would you rather have
it _Frol_, today?"

His best field man grunted as he walked over to the bar. "Vodka, eh?
_Chort vesmiot_ how tired one can become of this everlasting bourbon."
He reached into the refrigerator compartment and brought forth a bottle
of iced Stolichnaya. He poured two three-ounce charges and brought them
back to his bureau chief's desk.

They toasted silently, knocked back the colorless spirit. Pavel Zotov
said, "Well, Frol?"

The man usually called Frank Tracy said, "The worst case yet. This one
had quite a clear picture of the true situation. He saw the
necessity--given _their_ viewpoint, of course--of getting out of the
fantastic rut their economy has fallen into." He ran his hand over his
mouth in a gesture of weariness. "Chief, do you have any idea of how
