went under once, and came up choking and sputtering. He decided his end
had come--and he didn't even know the identity of the enemy who had done
him in. It was ironic. He should have asked Dor to tell him more about
Garf--was he a traitor, or a Tamdivarian gangster, or what? John Andrew
gasped and started sinking again....

To find himself hauled out of the water unceremoniously by the scruff of
his neck. As he rose, ropy tentacles twined about him, and he saw what
had saved him. He was being cradled, gently but firmly, by the nonapus,
which had Judge Ray in another set of tentacles. And the nonapus, it
became apparent, was not only a water-creature.

It could also fly.

       *       *       *       *       *

Garf paddled idly around Dor's apartment, pretending interest in the
shell-paintings that decorated the walls. He had presented her a bouquet
in which rare blossoms hid slimy, smelly weeds, and she was sore at
him--again. As she finished her conversation and switched off the
two-way radio, he turned to her. "Dor," he said softly.

She looked at him haughtily. "Don't speak to me!" she said. "I told you
you'd have to stop your irresponsible practical joking and settle down.
Some hard work wouldn't hurt you even if you did inherit a fortune. I
don't mind so much when you pull these stunts on me, but when I think of
how you practically drowned those poor, defenseless Earth-creatures...."

His mouth twisted. "Poor, defenseless Earth-creatures! How was I to know
they couldn't swim? Just imagine--beings that live on a world with
almost as much water as ours, who can't use their natural abilities any
more than that! It's ridiculous. I never saw such morons--the big, ugly
one especially!"

He had intended that to sting, and it did. Dor raised her nose another
notch. "I think he's cute, and I'm learning he's pretty intelligent,
too. He catches on fast to everything I tell him. He and his little
friend will have their spaceship finished soon now, and...."

"That's another thing!" Garf snapped, keeping her on the defensive.
"Maybe I violated Security by going to Earth when they accidentally
opened the gate, but what are you doing? What would the Fed say if they
knew you were giving out information the Earthmen hadn't acquired by
themselves--helping them get into space? What about that?"

Dor shrugged. "I'm not telling them anything, really. Just dropping a
few hints of the most elementary sort. Things they'd have figured out
soon anyway--and things they still have to work hard to make
practicable. Even if some of the inventions they've worked out so far
have enabled them to make enough money to live on nicely--after all,
those things are the merest toys to us--what could it possibly matter?"

Garf considered. This bickering was, as usual, getting them exactly
nowhere. He gave up. "All right, dear," he said. "You win; you're right,
of course, and I'm wrong. I only hope you won't bother so much with
talking to that Earth-slug on the radio after we're married."

Dor laughed a tinkly laugh and came into his waiting arms. "Darling,"
she cooed. "What a thing to say. I actually believe you're jealous--and
you know I only love you."

Which wasn't strictly true. The big Earthman _was_ cute, she thought,
and it was quaint of him to be in love with her, and to tell her so
every day over the radio built into the robot-nonapus. Of course, he was
inferior to her in every way, and she wouldn't think of marrying him or
anything like that. But even his inferiority was interesting, in a way.

Yes, it was nice to know he loved her.

And she loved him, too--like an amusing baby brother.

  +--------------------------------------------------------------+
  |                     Transcriber's Note                       |
  |                                                              |
  | This etext was produced from "Future combined with Science   |
  | Fiction stories" September 1951. Extensive research did not  |
  | uncover any evidence that the U.S. copyright on this         |
  | publication was renewed.                                     |
  |                                                              |
  |                                                              |
  |                           Errata                             |
  |                                                              |
  | The following typographical errors have been corrected:      |
  |                                                              |
  |                   |Error    |Correction |                    |
  |                   |effected |affected   |                    |
  |                   |to to    |to         |                    |
  |                                                              |
  +--------------------------------------------------------------+





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Stairway to the Stars, by Larry Shaw

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK STAIRWAY TO THE STARS ***

***** This file should be named 23159.txt or 23159.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/2/3/1/5/23159/

Produced by Greg Weeks, LN Yaddanapudi and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
