
"The race that built this village. The race that built the factories and
developed the encompassing farms. A year ago, according to the records
they left behind them, they migrated to the Greater Magellanic Cloud."

Philip was indignant. "Why didn't they take their dogs with them?"

"They couldn't. After all, they had to leave their cars and their
furniture behind them too, not to mention almost unbelievable
stockpiles of every metal imaginable that will last us for centuries.
The logistics of space travel make taking even an extra handkerchief
along a calculated risk. Anyway, when their dogs 'found' us, they were
overjoyed, and as for us, we fell in love with them at first sight. Our
own dogs, though, didn't take to them at all, and every one of them ran
away."

"This can't be the only village," Philip said. "There must be others
somewhere."

"Undoubtedly there are. All we know is that the people who built this
one were the last to leave."

The park was behind them now, and they were walking down a pleasant
street. "And when you and your neighbors discovered the village, did you
decide to become expatriates right then and there?" Philip asked.

She nodded. "Do you blame us? You've seen for yourself what a lovely
place it is. But it's far more than that. In Valleyview, we had
unemployment. Here, there is work for everyone, and a corresponding
feeling of wantedness and togetherness. True, most of the work is
farmwork, but what of that? We have every conceivable kind of machine to
help us in our tasks. Indeed, I think that the only machine the Sirians
lacked was one that could manufacture food out of whole cloth. But
consider the most important advantage of all: when we go to bed at night
we can do so without being afraid that sometime during our sleep a
thermonuclear missile will descend out of the sky and devour us in one
huge incandescent bite. If we've made a culture hero out of our village
idiot, it's no more than right, for unwittingly or not, he opened up the
gates of paradise."

"And you immediately saw to it that no one besides yourselves and a
chosen few would pass through them."

Judith paused beside a white gate. "Yes, that's true," she said. "To
keep our secret, we lived in our old houses while we were settling our
affairs, closing down our few industries and setting up a new monetary
system. In fact, we even kept our ... the children in the dark for fear
that they would talk at school. Suppose, however, we _had_ publicized
our utopia. Can't you imagine the mockery opportunists would have made
out of it? The village we found was large enough to accommodate
ourselves and the few friends, relatives and specialists we asked to
join us, but no larger; and we did, after all, find it in our own back
yard." She placed her hand on the white gate. "This is where I live."

He looked at the house, and it was enchanting. Slightly less enchanting,
but delightful in its own right, was the much smaller house beside it.
Judith pointed toward the latter dwelling and looked at Zarathustra.
"It's almost morning, Zarathustra," she said sternly. "Go to bed this
minute!" She opened the gate so that the little dog could pass through
and raised her eyes to Philip. "Our time is different here," she
explained. And then, "I'm afraid you'll have to hurry if you expect to
make it to my back door before the field dies out."

[Illustration]

He felt suddenly empty. "Dies out?" he repeated numbly.

"Yes. We don't know why, but it's been diminishing in strength ever
since it first came into being, and our 'Moebius-strip scientist' has
predicted that it will cease to exist during the next twenty-four hours.
I guess I don't need to remind you that you have important business on
Earth."

"No," he said, "I guess you don't." His emptiness bowed out before a
wave of bitterness. He had rested his hand on the gate, as close to hers
as he had dared. Now he saw that while it was inches away from hers in
one sense, it was light years away in another. He removed it angrily.
"Business always comes first with you, doesn't it?"

"Yes. Business never lets you down."

"Do you know what I think?" Philip said. "I think that you were the one
who did the selling out, not your husband. I think you sold him out for
a law practice."

Her face turned white as though he had slapped it, and in a sense, he
had. "Good-by," she said, and this time he was certain that if he were
to reach out and touch her, she would shatter into a million pieces.
"Give my love to the planet Earth," she added icily.

"Good-by," Philip said, his anger gone now, and the emptiness rushing
back. "Don't sell us short, though--we'll make a big splash in your sky
one of these days when we blow ourselves up."

[Illustration]

He turned and walked away. Walked out of the enchanting village and down
the highway and across the flower-pulsing plain to Judith's back
doorway. It was unlighted now, and he had trouble distinguishing it from
the others. Its shimmering blue framework was flickering. Judith had not
lied then: the field was dying out.

He locked the back door behind him, walked sadly through the dark and
empty house and let himself out the front door. He locked the front door
behind him, too, and went down the walk and climbed into his car. He had
thought he had locked it, but apparently he hadn't. He drove out of town
and down the road to the highway, and down the highway toward the big
bright bonfire of the city.

Dawn was exploring the eastern sky with pale pink fingers when at last
he parked his car in the garage behind his apartment building. He
reached into the back seat for his brief case and the manila envelopes.
His brief case had hair on it. It was soft and warm. "Ruf," it barked.
"Ruf-ruf!"

He knew then that everything was all right. Just because no one had
invited him to the party didn't mean that he couldn't invite himself. He
would have to hurry, though--he had a lot of things to do, and time was
running out.

Noon found him on the highway again, his business transacted, his
affairs settled, Zarathustra sitting beside him on the seat. One o'clock
found him driving into Valleyview; two-five found him turning down a
familiar street. He would have to leave his car behind him, but that was
all right. Leaving it to rust away in a ghost town was better than
selling it to some opportunistic dealer for a sum he would have no use
for anyway. He parked it by the curb, and after getting his suitcase out
of the trunk, walked up to the front door of Number 23. He unlocked and
opened the door, and after Zarathustra followed him inside, closed and
locked it behind him. He strode through the house to the kitchen. He
unlocked and opened the back door. He stepped eagerly across the
threshold--and stopped dead still.

There were boards beneath his feet instead of grass. Instead of a
flower-pied plain, he saw a series of unkempt back yards. Beside him on
an unpainted trellis, Virginia creeper rattled in an October wind.

Zarathustra came out behind him, descended the back-porch steps and ran
around the side of the house. Looking for the green-rose bush probably.

"Ruf!"

Zarathustra had returned and was looking up at him from the bottom step.
On the top step he had placed an offering.

The offering was a green rose.

Philip bent down and picked it up. It was fresh, and its fragrance
epitomized the very essence of Sirius XXI. "Zarathustra," he gasped,
"where did you get it?"

"Ruf!" said Zarathustra, and ran around the side of the house.

Philip followed, rounded the corner just in time to see the white-tipped
tail disappear into the ancient dog house. Disappointment numbed him.
That was where the rose had been then--stored away for safe-keeping like
an old and worthless bone.

But the rose was fresh, he reminded himself.

