
"We picked up what we could on the culture, but we didn't get the full
story on them. And we've probably left a thousand legends behind us,
including that beautiful mess at your station." He grinned.

"Right now, their folklore is loaded with sorcerers, warlocks, wizards,
and what not. After all, whatever their past is, they're primitive now.
So those stories are going to grow and continue. Eventually, long before
they really develop a stabilized ethic, someone's going to collate that
whole mess. And do you know what he'll come up with?"

"Us?"

"Us, yes. Us, in a distorted form." Kweiros nodded emphatically. "They
will come to a full realization that there are advanced entities running
around the cosmos, entities that have all kinds of mysterious powers.
And they'll invent still more powers and characteristics--mostly bad."
He spread his hands, then laid them on the desk in front of him.

       *       *       *

"That way, they could develop a hopeless, planet-wide trauma--a sort of
super inferiority complex--and they could contract on themselves, devote
their time to an intensive study of demonology, and very possibly come
apart at the seams.

"Or, they could do something else. I was watching Elwar while I was
checking that tape. Did you notice anything peculiar?"

"He seemed disturbed."

"As though he were sensing my thoughts?"

"Something like that. But--"

Kweiros nodded. "But I had a shield up. You could detect no trace of
mental action. Right?"

"Yes, sir."

"That's what I thought." Kweiros shook his head and looked closely at
Jaeger.

"Can you imagine," he added, "a primitive race with the power to detect
a galactic by his thoughts? And can you imagine that power developing
until that detection is possible at interstellar ranges, with members
of that race being able to pick up faint impressions from received
thoughts--distorted impressions? And can you imagine that same race,
ignorant of the humanic equations, devoid of a stable ethic,
superstitious, distrustful and fearful of advanced entities? They would
be undetectable by normal telepathic means, you know. And suppose they
were disposed to destroy what they could not understand." He frowned.

Jaeger looked back at him, his eyes becoming wide. Suddenly, his gaze
defocused and he looked aside, to stare unseeingly at the floor.

"Something's got to be done, sir," he said reluctantly.

Kweiros nodded. "Something's got to be done," he agreed. "Of course,
there's another side to the picture. If this race develops and learns,
they'll be just as valuable to the galaxy as they would otherwise be
dangerous." He looked toward the door.

"And our boy out there is one of the few who can help in this situation.
He's going to have to work out counter stories--amusing stories--about
all those magical creatures his people tell about. He's going to have to
hint at the possibilities of close co-ordination and co-operation
between members of his own species. And he's going to have to suggest
the possibility of friendly co-operation between his species and
others." He drew a deep breath.

"And he's going to have to do all this without taking any risk of
exposing the existence of other, more advanced species in the galaxy."
He brushed a hand across his head, then pressed the back of his neck,
kneading the skin.

"These stories of his, he'll have to publish. He'll have to get them
circulated all over his planet, if he can. Possibly we can give him some
indirect help, but he's going to have to carry a good share of the load.

"He knows his own people as we could never hope to. And he'll have to be
thoroughly educated, so he can say what he wants to. And he'll have to
be fully aware of the humanic equations and all their connotations. If
he's to have any direct help, he'll have to choose his helpers from
among his own people, and he'll have to choose carefully." Kweiros
thrust at his temple with the heel of a hand, then shook his head
violently.

"Somehow, he's going to have to accentuate any legends he may be able to
find which present a favorable light on co-ordination and co-operation,
and he'll have to invent more. And all those other legends--the ones
which treat of superstition and destructive force--will have to be
reduced to the realm of the storybook, submerged under a layer of amused
condemnation, and kept there. All these things, that youngster is going
to have to do.

"It's your job to help teach him."

       *       *       *       *       *

Forell watched his friend closely as the critic laid aside the last
page.

Andorra sat for a moment, his head cocked in thought. Then, he picked up
the last page and looked at it again. Finally, he laid the sheet aside.
He looked at his friend with a wry smile, then picked up his wineglass,
looking at it quizzically.

"Do you always give your own name to one of your characters?"

Forell's grip tightened on the small object in his hand.

"Oh, sure," he said. "Gives me a better identification. If I can get
into the story, it's easier to draw the reader in." He forced a casual
smile. "I'll change that name later, of course."

"I see what you mean." Andorra sipped from his glass.

"You know," he added, "a couple of hours ago, I was almost ready to get
excited about the idea of a cosmos full of super beings. And I even
might have dreamed up something like this myself--and more than half
believed it." He shook his head.

"But when a fantasist like yourself comes up with it, and makes it look
so nicely possible, the idea almost looks foolish. After all, Elwar, if
you actually were the guy in that little sketch of yours, you'd hardly
be asking me to read it, now would you?" He looked down at the papers,
then raised his head again, frowning.

"'He'll have to choose his helpers from among his own people,'" he
quoted. "'All these things, that youngster is going to have to do.'" He
sipped again from his glass, keeping a searching gaze on his friend.

"And on the other hand, if your story here should be true, you just
