But there were cottonmouths down there too, with death behind their
fangs, and no love for the life that was crawling upward. When Jimmy
looked up into the sky he could see all the blazing stars of space, with
cottonmouths on every planet of every sun.

Uncle Al was like a bright caddis fly building a fine new nest, thatched
with kindness, denying himself bright little Mardi Gras pleasures so
that Jimmy could go to school and grow wiser than Uncle Al.

"That's right, Jimmy. You're growing up--we can see that! Uncle Al says
he told you to bide from the cottonmouths. But you were ready to give
your life for your sister and Uncle Al."

"Shucks, it was nothing!" Jimmy heard himself protesting.

"Uncle Al doesn't think so. And neither do we!"

       *       *       *       *       *

A long silence while the river mists seemed to weave a bright cocoon of
radiance about Jimmy clinging to the bank, and the great circular disk
that had swallowed up Uncle Al.

Then the voices began again. "No reason why Uncle Al shouldn't have a
little fun out of life, Jimmy. Gold's easy to make and we'll make some
right now. A big lump of gold in Uncle Al's hand won't hurt him in any
way."

"Whenever he gets any spending money he gives it away!" Jimmy gulped.

"I know, Jimmy. But he'll listen to you. Tell him you want to go to New
Orleans, too!"

Jimmy looked up quickly then. In his heart was something of the wonder
he'd felt when he'd seen his first riverboat and waited for he knew not
what. Something of the wonder that must have come to men seeking magic
in the sky, the rainmakers of ancient tribes and of days long vanished.

Only to Jimmy the wonder came now with a white burst of remembrance and
recognition.

It was as though he could sense something of himself in the two towering
spheres that rose straight up out of the water behind the disk. Still
and white and beautiful they were, like bubbles floating on a rainbow
sea with all the stars of space behind them.

Staring at them, Jimmy saw himself as he would be, and knew himself for
what he was. It was not a glory to be long endured.

"Now you must forget again, Jimmy! Forget as Uncle Al will forget--until
we come for you. Be a little shantyboat boy! You are safe on the wide
bosom of the Father of Waters. Your parents planted you in a rich and
kindly loam, and in all the finite universes you will find no cosier
nook, for life flows here with a diversity that is infinite
and--_Pigtail_! She gets on your nerves at times, doesn't she, Jimmy?"

"She sure does," Jimmy admitted.

"Be patient with her, Jimmy. She's the only human sister you'll ever
have on Earth."

"I--I'll try!" Jimmy muttered.

       *       *       *       *       *

Uncle Al and Pigtail came out of the disk in an amazingly simple way.
They just seemed to float out, in the glimmering web. Then, suddenly,
there wasn't any disk on the river at all--just a dull flickering where
the sky had opened like a great, blazing furnace to swallow it up.

"I was just swimmin' along with Pigtail, not worryin' too much, 'cause
there's no sense in worryin' when death is starin' you in the face,"
Uncle Al muttered, a few minutes later.

Uncle Al sat on the riverbank beside Jimmy, staring down at his palm,
his vision misted a little by a furious blinking.

"It's gold, Uncle Al!" Pigtail shrilled. "A big lump of solid gold--"

"I just felt my hand get heavy and there it was, young fella, nestling
there in my palm!"

Jimmy didn't seem to be able to say anything.

"High school books don't cost no more than grammar school books, young
fella," Uncle Al said, his face a sudden shining. "Next winter you'll be
a-goin' to high school, sure as I'm a-sittin' here!"

For a moment the sunlight seemed to blaze so brightly about Uncle Al
that Jimmy couldn't even see the holes in his socks.

Then Uncle Al made a wry face. "Someday, young fella, when your books
are all paid for, I'm gonna buy myself a brand new store suit, and hie
myself off to the Mardi Gras. Ain't too old thataway to git a little fun
out of life, young fella!"

       *       *       *       *       *

Transcriber's Note: The following typographical errors in the original
text have been corrected in this eBook:

Page 31: "sunilght" changed to "sunlight"

Page 32: "tie" changed to "tide"





End of Project Gutenberg's The Mississippi Saucer, by Frank Belknap Long

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE MISSISSIPPI SAUCER ***

***** This file should be named 23568.txt or 23568.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/2/3/5/6/23568/

