amongst ironstone in river-beds, which gives them a slight metallic
appearance; in each case the cause is suggested by the fact that these
tinted stones are usually found in such places, and that the tinting is
very thin and on the surface only, so that the cutting and shaping of
the stone gets below it to the perfectly clear diamond.

From Pliny and other historians we gather that at various periods
considerable superstition has existed with regard to diamonds, such as
that if one is powdered it becomes poisonous to a remarkable degree;
that gifts of diamonds between lovers--married and unmarried--produce
and seal affection; hence the popularity of diamonds in betrothal
rings. Pretty as is this conceit, there is no doubt about the fact that
the gift of diamonds to the object of one's affections does usually
produce a feeling of pleasure to both parties, from which it would
appear that there is some ground for the belief.


_Corundum._

This mineral is a species of crystal, or crystalline alumina--an almost
pure anhydrous alumina, Al_{2}O_{3}--in many varieties, both of shape
and colour. The chief stone is the ruby, considered, when large, to be
of even more importance and value than the diamond. There are many other
red stones in this group; sapphires, also, are a species of corundum,
both the blue and the colourless varieties, as are also the aquamarine,
the emerald, the amethyst, the topaz, and others, all of widely
differing colour, as well as the star-shaped, or "aster" ruby, called
the "ruby" cat's-eye. All these vary more in colour than in their
chemical properties. Still another variety, greyish-black and generally
associated with haematite iron ore, is called emery, and, when ground in
different degrees of fineness, is so well known by its general use as a
polishing medium as to need no description. It should, however, be
mentioned that amongst the more coarsely ground emery it is no uncommon
thing to find minute sapphires, taking sapphires in their broad,
commercial meaning, as signifying any variety of corundum, except the
red and the emery. The surfaces of crystals of corundum are often
clouded or dull, whilst its classification of lustre is vitreous. It is
double refracting and has no cleavage. It is found in China, India,
Burma, Ceylon, South Africa, America, and in many other places, having a
wide distribution.


_The Ruby._

In the dichroscope the ruby shows two images, one square of a violet
red, the second square being a truer and a paler red. It may be
subjected to strong heat, when it changes its colour to a sooty or dirty
slate, this varying with the locality in which the stone is found, and
the manner in which the heat is applied. But as it cools it becomes
paler and greener, till it slowly enrichens; the green first becomes
broken, then warmer, redder, and finally assumes its original beautiful
blood red. This method of heating is sometimes used as a test, but it is
a test which often means the complete ruin of a stone which is not
genuine. Another characteristic which, in the eyes of the expert,
invariably isolates a real from an artificial ruby is its curious mild
brilliance, which as yet has not been reproduced by any scientific
method in paste or any other material, but perhaps the safest test of
all is the crystalline structure, which identical structure appears in
no other stone, though it is possible, by heating alumina coloured with
oxide of iron and perhaps also a trace of oxide of chromium to a very
high temperature for a considerable time, and then cooling very slowly,
to obtain a ruby which is nearly the same in its structure as the real
gem; its specific gravity and hardness may perhaps be to standard, and
when properly cut, its brilliance would deceive all but an expert. And
as in some real rubies there are found slight hollows corresponding or
analogous to the bubbles found in melted glass, it becomes a matter of
great difficulty to distinguish the real from the imitation by such
tests as hardness, specific gravity, dichroism, and the like, so that in
such a case, short of risking the ruin of the stone, ordinary persons
are unable to apply any convincing tests. Therefore, only the expert can
decide, by his appreciation of the delicate shade of difference in the
light of a true ruby and that of an excellent imitation, and by the
distribution of the colour, which--however experienced the chemist may
be, or with what care the colouring matter may have been incorporated in
the mass--has been found impossible of distribution throughout the body
of an artificial stone so perfectly and in the same manner and direction
as nature herself distributes it in the genuine. This alone, even in the
closest imitations, is clear to the eye of the expert, though not to the
untrained eye, unless the stone is palpably spurious. To one who is
accustomed to the examination of precious stones, however perfect the
imitation, it is but necessary to place it beside or amongst one or more
real ones for the false to be almost instantly identified, and that with
certainty.


_The Sapphire._

The Sapphire is not so easy to imitate, as its hardness exceeds that of
the ruby, and imitations containing its known constituents, or of glass,
are invariably softer than the natural stone. As before remarked, almost
any form of corundum other than red is, broadly, called sapphire, but
giving them their strictly correct designations, we have the olivine
corundum, called "chrysolite" (oriental), which is harder than the
ordinary or "noble" chrysolite, sometimes called the "peridot." The
various yellow varieties of corundum take the name of the "oriental
topaz," which, like most, if not all, the corundum varieties, is harder
than the gem which bears the same name, minus the prefix "oriental."
Then we have the "amethyst" sapphire, which varies from a red to a blue
purple, being richer in colour than the ordinary amethyst, which is a
form of violet-coloured quartz, but the corundum variety, which, like
its companions, is called the "oriental" amethyst, is both rarer and
more precious. A very rare and extremely beautiful green variety is
called the oriental emerald. The oriental jacinth, or hyacinth, is a
brown-red corundum, which is more stable than the ordinary hyacinth,
this latter being a form of zircon; it changes colour on exposure to
light, which colour is not restored by subsequent retention in darkness.

The blue sapphire is of all shades of blue, from cornflower blue to the
very palest tints of this colour, all the gradations from light to dark
purple blues, and, in fact, so many shades of tone and colour that they
become almost as numerous as the stones. These stones are usually found
in similar situations to those which produce the ruby, and often along
with them. The lighter colours are usually called females, or feminine
stones, whilst the darker ones are called masculine stones. Some of
these dark ones are so deep as to be almost black, when they are called
"ink" sapphires, and if inclining to blue, "indigo" sapphires, in
contradistinction to which the palest of the stones are called "water"
sapphires. The colouring matter is not always even, but is often spread
over the substance of the stone in scabs or "splotches," which rather
favours imitation, and, where this unevenness occurs, it may be
necessary to cut or divide the stone, or so to arrange the form of it
that the finished stone shall be equally blue throughout.

In some cases, however, the sapphire may owe its beauty to the presence
of two, three or more colours in separate strata appearing in one stone;
such as a portion being a green-blue, another a cornflower blue, another
perfectly colourless, another a pale sky blue, another yellow, each
perfectly distinct, the stone being cut so as to show each colour in its
full perfection.

This stone, the sapphire, is hardness No. 9 (see "Hardness" table), and
therefore ranks next to the diamond, which makes it a matter of great
difficulty to obtain an imitation which is of the same specific gravity
and of the same degree of hardness, though this has been done. Such
stones are purchasable, but though sold as imitations at comparatively
low price, and the buyer may consider them just as good as the real gem,
to the experienced eye they are readily detectable.

By heating a sapphire its blue colour slowly fades, to complete
transparency in many cases, or at any rate to so pale a tint as to pass
for a transparent stone. Valuable as is the sapphire, the diamond is
more so, and it follows that if one of these clear or "cleared"
sapphires is cut in the "rose" or "brilliant" form--which forms are
reserved almost exclusively for the diamond--such a stone would pass
very well as a diamond, and many so cut are sold by unscrupulous people
as the more valuable stone, which fraud an expert would, of course,
detect.

Sapphires are mentioned by Pliny, and figure largely in the ancient
history of China, Egypt, Rome, etc. The Greeks dedicated the sapphire
specially to Jupiter, and many of the stones were cut to represent the
god; it also figured as one of the chief stones worn by the Jewish High
Priest on the breast-plate. Some stones have curious rays of variegated
colour, due to their crystalline formation, taking the shape of a star;
these are called "asteriated," or "cat's eye" sapphires. Others have
curious flashes of light, technically called a "play" of light (as
described in Chapter VI. on "Colour"), together with a curious blue
opalescence; these are the "girasol." Another interesting variety of
this blue sapphire is one known as "chatoyant"; this has a rapidly
changing lustre, which seems to undulate between a green-yellow and a
luminous blue, with a phosphorescent glow, or fire, something like that
seen in the eyes of a cat in the dark, or the steady, burning glow
observed when the cat is fascinating a bird--hence its name. This is not
the same variety as the "asteriated," or "cat's eye" or "lynx eye"
mentioned above.




CHAPTER XIV.

VARIOUS PRECIOUS STONES--_continued._


_The Chrysoberyl._

There are certain stones and other minerals which, owing to their
possession of numerous microscopically fine cavities, of a globular or
tubular shape, have the appearance of "rays" or "stars," and these are
called "asteriated." Several of such stones have been discussed already
in the last chapter, and in addition to these star-like rays, some of
the stones have, running through their substance, one or more streaks,
perhaps of asbestos or calcite, some being perfectly clear, whilst
others are opalescent. When these streaks pass across the star-like
radiations they give the stone the appearance of an eye, the rays
forming the iris, the clear, opalescent, or black streak closely
resembling the slit in a cat's eye, and when these stones are cut _en
cabochon_, that is, dome-shaped (see Chapter XI. on "Cutting"), there is
nothing to deflect the light beams back and forth from facet to facet,
as in a diamond, so that the light, acting directly on these radiations
or masses of globular cavities and on the streak, causes the former to
glow like living fire, and the streak appears to vibrate, palpitate,
expand, and contract, exactly like the slit in the eye of a cat.

There are a considerable number of superstitions in connection with
these cat's-eye stones, many people regarding them as mascots, or with
disfavour, according to their colour. When possessing the favourite hue
or "fire" of the wearer, such as the fire of the opal for those born in
October, of the ruby for those born in July, etc., these stones are
considered to bring nothing but good luck; to ward off accident, danger,
and sudden death; to be a charm against being bitten by animals, and to
be a protection from poison, the "evil eye," etc. They figured largely,
along with other valuable jewels, in the worship of the ancient
Egyptians, and have been found in some of the tombs in Egypt. They also
appeared on the "systrum," which was a sacred instrument used by the
ancient Egyptians in the performance of their religious rites,
particularly in their sacrifices to the goddess Isis. This, therefore,
may be considered one of their sacred stones, whilst there is some
analogy between the cat's-eye stones and the sacred cat of the Egyptians
which recurs so often in their hieroglyphics; it is well known that our
domestic cat is not descended from the wild cat, but from the celebrated
cat of Egypt, where history records its being "domesticated" at least
thirteen centuries B.C. From there it was taken throughout Europe, where
it appeared at least a century B.C., and was kept as a pet in the homes
of the wealthy, though certain writers, speaking of the "mouse-hunters"
of the old Romans and Greeks, state that these creatures were not the
Egyptian cat, but a carniverous, long-bodied animal, after the shape of
a weasel, called "marten," of the species the "beech" or "common" marten
(_mustela foina_), found also in Britain to-day. It is also interesting
to note that the various superstitions existing with regard to the
different varieties and colours of cats also exist in an identical
manner with the corresponding colours of the minerals known as "cat's
eye."

Several varieties of cat's-eye have already been described. Another
important variety is that of the chrysoberyl called "cymophane." This is
composed of glucina, which is glucinum oxide, or beryllia, BeO, of which
there is 19.8 per cent., and alumina, or aluminium oxide, Al_{2}O_{3},
of which there is 80.2 per cent. It has, therefore, the chemical
formula, BeO,Al_{2}O_{3}. This stone shows positive electricity when
rubbed, and, unlike the sapphires described in the last chapter, which
lose their colour when heated, this variety of chrysoberyl shows no
change in colour, and any electricity given to it, either by friction or
heat, is retained for a long time. When heated in the blowpipe alone it
remains unaltered, that is, it is not fusible, and even with microcosmic
salt it requires a considerably long and fierce heat before it yields
and fuses, and acids do not act upon it. It crystallises in the 4th
(rhombic) system, and its lustre is vitreous.

The cymophane shows a number of varieties, quite as many as the
chrysoberyl, of which it is itself a variety, and these go through the
gamut of greens, from a pale white green to the stronger green of
asparagus, and through both the grey and yellow greens to dark. It is
found in Ceylon, Moravia, the Ural Mountains, Brazil, North America,
and elsewhere. The cat's-eye of this is very similar to the quartz
cat's-eye, but a comparison will make the difference so clear that they
could never be mistaken, apart from the fact that the quartz has a
specific gravity considerably lower than the chrysoberyl cat's-eye,
which latter is the true cat's-eye, and the one usually understood when
allusion is made to the stone without any distinguishing prefix, such as
the ruby, sapphire, quartz, etc., cat's eye. It should, however, be
mentioned that this stone is referred to when the names Ceylonese and
Oriental cat's-eye are given, which names are used in the trade as well
as the simple appellation, "cat's eye." One peculiarity of some of these
stones is that the "fire" or "glow" is usually altered in colour by the
colour of the light under which it is seen, the change of colour being
generally the complementary. Thus, a stone which in one light shows red,
in another will be green; the "eye" showing blue in one light will
become orange in another; whilst the yellow of another stone may show a
decided purple or amethyst in a different light.

A good test for this, and indeed most precious stones, is that they
conduct heat more quickly than does glass, and with such rapidity that
on breathing upon a stone the warmth is conducted instantly, so that,
though the stone is dimmed the dimness vanishes at once, whereas with
glass the film of moisture fades but slowly in comparison.


_The Topaz._

The name topaz is derived from the Greek _topazos_, which is the name of
a small island situated in the Gulf of Arabia, from whence the Romans
obtained a mineral which they called topazos and topazion, which mineral
to-day is termed chrysolite. The mineral topaz is found in Cornwall and
in the British Isles generally; also in Siberia, India, South America
and many other localities, some of the finest stones coming from Saxony,
Bohemia, and Brazil, especially the last-named. The cleavage is perfect
and parallel to the basal plane. It crystallises in the 4th (rhombic)
system; in lustre it is vitreous; it is transparent, or ranging from
that to translucent; the streak is white or colourless. Its colour
varies very much--some stones are straw-colour, some are grey, white,
blue, green, and orange. A very favourite colour is the pink, but in
most cases this colour is not natural to the stone, but is the result of
"burning," or "pinking" as the process is called technically, which
process is to raise the temperature of a yellow stone till the yellow
tint turns to a pink of the colour desired. The topaz is harder than
quartz, as will be seen on reference to the "Hardness" table, and is
composed of a silicate of aluminium, fluorine taking the place of some
of the oxygen. Its composition averages 16.25 per cent. of silica, 55.75
per cent. of alumina, or oxide of aluminium, and fluoride of silicium,
28 per cent. Its formula is [Al(F,OH)]_{2} SiO_{4}, or (AlF)_{2}SiO_{4}.
From this it will be understood that the fluorine will be evolved when
the stone is fused. It is, however, very difficult to fuse, and alone it
is infusible under the blowpipe, but with microcosmic salt it fuses and
evolves fluorine, and the glass of the tube in the open end of which the
stone is fixed is bitten with the gas.

Such experiments with the topaz are highly interesting, and if we take a
little of the powdered stone and mix with it a small portion of the
microcosmic salt, we may apply the usual test for analysing and proving
aluminium, thus: a strongly brilliant mass is seen when hot, and if we
moisten the powder with nitrate of cobalt and heat again, this time in
the inner flame, the mass becomes blue. Other phenomena are seen during
the influence of heat. Some stones, as stated, become pink on heating,
but if the heating is continued too long, or too strongly, the stone is
decoloured. Others, again, suffer no change, and this has led to a
slight difference of opinion amongst chemists as to whether the colour
is due to inorganic or organic matter. Heating also produces
electricity, and the stone, and even splinters of it, will give out a
curious phosphorescent light, which is sometimes yellow, sometimes blue,
or green. Friction or pressure produces strong electrification; thus the
stones may be electrified by shaking a few together in a bag, or by the
tumbling of the powdered stone-grains over each other as they roll down
a short inclined plane. The stones are usually found in the primitive
rocks, varying somewhat in different localities in their colour; many of
the Brazilian stones, when cut as diamonds, are not unlike them.

In testing, besides those qualities already enumerated, the crystalline
structure is specially perfect and unmistakable. It is doubly
refractive, whereas spinel and the diamond, which two it closely
resembles, are singly refractive. Topaz is readily electrified, and, if
perfect at terminals, becomes polarised; also the commercial solution
of violets, of which a drop only need be taken for test, is turned green
by adding to it a few grains of topaz dust, or of a little splinter
crushed to fine powder.


_The Beryl._

The beryl is a compound of silicates of beryllia and alumina, with the
formula 3BeOSiO_{2} + Al_{2}O_{3},3SiO_{2}, or
3BeO,Al_{2}O_{3},6SiO_{2}. It differs very little indeed from the
emerald, with the exception of its colour. In the ordinary varieties
this is somewhat poor, being mostly blue, or a dirty or a greenish
yellow; the better kinds, however, possess magnificent colour and
variety, such as in the aquamarine, emerald, etc. The cleavage is
parallel to the basal plane. Its lustre is sometimes resinous, sometimes
vitreous, and it crystallises in the 2nd (hexagonal) system. It occurs
in somewhat long, hexagonal prisms, with smooth, truncated planes, and
is often found in granite and the silt brought down by rivers from
granite, gneiss, and similar rocks. It is found in Great Britain and in
many parts of Europe, Asia, and America, in crystals of all sizes, from
small to the weight of several tons. The common kinds are too opaque and
colourless to be used as gems and are somewhat difficult of fusion under
the blowpipe, on the application of which heat some stones lose their
colour altogether, others partly; others, which before heating were
somewhat transparent, become clouded and opaque; others suffer no change
in colour, whilst some are improved. In almost every case a slight
fusion is seen on the sharp edges of fractures, which become smooth,
lose their sharpness, and have the appearance of partly fused glass.
The hardness varies from 7-1/4 to 8, the crystals being very brittle,
breaking with a fracture of great unevenness. The better varieties are
transparent, varying from that to translucent, and are called the
"noble" beryls. Transparent beryl crystals are used by fortune-tellers
as "gazing stones," in which they claim to see visions of future events.


_The Emerald._

Considering the particular emerald which is a variety of beryl--although
the name emerald in the trade is applied somewhat loosely to any stone
which is of the same colour, or approaching the colour of the beryl
variety--this emerald only differs chemically from the beryl, just
described, in possessing an addition of oxide of chromium. In shape,
crystallisation, fracture and hardness, it is the same, and often
contains, in addition to the chromium, the further addition of traces of
carbonate of lime, magnesia, and occasionally faint traces of hornblende
and mica, which evidently result from its intimate association with the
granite rock and gneiss, amongst which it is mostly found, the latter
rocks being of a slaty nature, in layers or plates, and, like granite,
containing mica, pyrites, felspar, quartz, etc.

Emeralds have been known from very early times, and are supposed to have
been found first in the mines of ancient Egypt. They were considered
amongst the rarest and the most costly of gems, and it was the custom,
when conferring lavish honour, to engrave or model emeralds for
presentation purposes. Thus we find Pliny describes Ptolemy giving
Lucullus, on his landing at Alexandria, an emerald on which was
engraved his portrait. Pliny also relates how the short-sighted Nero
watched the fights of gladiators through an eye-glass made of an
emerald, and in ancient times, in Rome, Greece, and Egypt, eye-glasses
made of emeralds were much valued. Many of these, as well as engraved
and carved emeralds, have been discovered in ruins and tombs of those
periods.

The copper emerald is rare; it is a hydrous form of copper silicate,
CuOSiO_{2} + H_{2}O, of a beautiful emerald green, varying from
transparent to translucent. It exhibits double refraction, and is a
crystallised mineral, brittle, and showing a green streak. This is less
hard than the real emerald, is heavier, deeper in colour, and is usually
found in crystals, in cavities of a particular kind of limestone which
exists at Altyn-Tuebe, a hill in the Altai Mountains, in the Urals, and
in North and Central America.
