never crossed our minds down in Washington that anything could have been
out of line in any manner whatsoever."

The assembled group smiled, and I smiled back, and we all felt friendly
with one another. Dr. Rude cleared his throat and said, "Well, is there
anything you can tell us about this tearpr ... about a paper having some
of these very interesting properties?"

I said, "There is a great deal I can tell you about the paper we have,
but suppose I let you see some specimens before I say anything. There's
nothing like the actual goods themselves to do most of the talking."

We all laughed as I took half a dozen twelve-by-twelve hand sheets out
of my briefcase and passed them around the table. I watched the chemists
finger the sheets, savoring their soft coolness, and I heard the
whispered comments, "good hand," "excellent softness," "fine color," and
a few others. Dr. Rude said, "Are these 'breaking samples', Mr. Saddle?
Do you mind if we tear them?"

Well, you can see that this was the question I was waiting for. I sat
back and allowed a slight smile to play over my face. I said, "Oh no,
gentlemen. Go ahead and tear them."

I saw several of the people take the sheets between their thumbs and
forefingers, and gently pull. I saw the sheets tighten momentarily, and
then--as if the sheets were no more than ordinary cleansing tissue--I
saw the fibers pull apart as each man easily tore the sheet in half.

I felt the blood drain from my face, and it seemed to me that my
pounding heart must have been visible right through my clothes. I
swallowed and tried to say something, although I had no clear idea of
what I was going to say. Words would not come. I leaned over and took
another sheet from my briefcase and tugged at it. It tore in half with
practically no effort. I took another, same results, and still another.
I dimly realized that all the people at the meeting were staring at me,
but I wasn't concerned. I knew something must be wrong with all the
specimens; possibly I had placed regular cleaning tissues in my
briefcase, or maybe Susan ... but even as I thought it I knew such a
mistake was impossible.

I reached over and tried tearing one of the sheets I had passed out to
the others. It tore into quarters as easily as it had torn into halves.
That finished me. I leaned back and looked around at the silent group
and wondered what Mr. Spardleton would have said at a time like that. I
started to smile and discovered that my original smile was still frozen
on my face. I stood up and began retrieving the torn papers; they passed
them back to me without saying anything. I replaced them in my
briefcase, closed it, said, "Gentlemen, Christmas falls on Friday this
year," and walked out.

       *       *       *

It was raining outside, but I scarcely noticed. I hailed a cab to the
Logan Airport, changed my reservations to an earlier plane, and returned
to Washington. It was a slow trip. The planes were stacked up in the
rain at the Washington International Airport, but I did not notice the
passage of time. I was too stunned to think clearly, but I kept trying.
I got quite wet in Washington, but I was in a hurry to see Mr.
Spardleton and I did not bother to change my clothes.

I burst into his office. He looked up and said, "Well, I didn't expect
to see you until tomorrow. How did...?" He saw my face.

I plopped my briefcase on his desk and pulled out all the specimens and
dumped them in front of him. I said, "Just look at these. This
'Tearproof Paper' has deteriorated. These specimens are useless. Right
in front of all the Rude chemists, they go bad. Most of them are new
ones, too. How can this be possible? Just look at them."

Mr. Spardleton picked up one of the sheets, rubbed it, and then tugged
at it gently to tear it. It did not tear. He pulled harder, and then
harder, and it did not tear. I stared at him in disbelief and said, "Oh,
Mr. Spardleton, this is no time to play games with me."

I took one of the sheets and yanked it, and almost cut my fingers. I
bent over and put my hands on my knees to get better leverage just as I
had the very first time, but the sheet would not tear. I threw it on the
desk and tried another with the same results. One after another I ran
through them all while Mr. Spardleton sat back and watched me. I was
wild-eyed when I finished.

Mr. Spardleton said, "Mr. Saddle, would you mind telling me what has
happened?"

I pulled up a chair, groped for my voice, and finally got the story out.
He looked at me strangely, tried to tear another of those miserable
little sheets, and said, "Mr. Saddle, do you feel all right?"

In Boston I had been completely deflated and bewildered, but now I was
mad. I grabbed up the phone and called Callahan. I had barely started to
pour out the story when he said, "I'm glad you called, Carl. We seem to
have run into something on this paper thing. Looks bad. Can you come
out?"

"Be right there." I hung up.

Mr. Spardleton went out with me; he didn't want me to go anywhere alone.
Callahan was holding two sheets up to the light when we went into his
lab. He said, "Two identical sheets, except for the moisture content.
Moisture is the devil. One of these is dry, the other contains three per
cent moisture. Here's the dry one." He tore it in half effortlessly.
"Here's the moist one." And he strained at it, but it would not tear.
"We just ran across this effect last night, and finished checking it out
an hour ago. Have you been to Rude Associates yet?"

I nodded.

"Too bad. We'll have to show them what can happen."

Mr. Spardleton said, "They already know."

Callahan said, "This kicks the whole thing in the head. The paper can
never be more than a laboratory curiosity, as far as we can see. The
sun, a dry climate, heat, any of these things will drive off the
moisture, and the paper will lose its strength. There's no way we can
market a product like that when it might lose its strength at any time.
I'm afraid the 'Tearproof Paper' must join the huge list of fine
products that can't be sold because of one small flaw."

It was Mr. Spardleton who steered me out of the labs. He slipped an arm
through mine and said, "You can refile the patent application and add
this information about the moisture content. You ought to get the patent
without too much trouble even if the product is of no commercial value."

I nodded as we stood in the rain waiting for a cab.

