was ebbing fast, and vitality with it. Very well, then, the most
desperate, the most questionable resource of all remained. The unused,
unrecognized prime center, true seat of the intellect, must be activated
the way nature presumably had intended that it should be, had not
something gone wrong in the dawn years of the planet.

There could be no moral objection to this measure if successful, since
it amounted to giving sight to a blind man. The element of grave doubt
lay in the relative chances of success or failure. The strange,
interlocking structure of the unconscious mind of the embryo was not
something that could be unraveled and examined in a hurry. Honesty
compelled him to evaluate himself as young and inexperienced, not
especially noted among his own kind for brilliantly incisive judgment.
It was not the sort of thing that he should even attempt without long
study. It was too risky, too indecisive, too--

Time made the decision. There was no time left. The chill of death told
its own story. In an agony of haste he summoned all that remained of
vitality and fought off Death while he entered the embryo mind.

The fast-shriveling body in the spaceship retained life long enough to
recognize the blunder, but not long enough to correct it. The wrong was
done, and could not be undone.

       *       *       *       *       *

The memories that mercifully blurred became clear again. He knew that
in due course the mishandled embryo experienced birth, entering the
world normally as a helpless, feebly squirming, pathetically vulnerable
mite, and in no way drew unusual attention to itself. No one knew, or
cared, that intellectual awakening was phenomenally quick, the first
tentative questionings occurring in only the fourth week of life. He
recalled how the stirring of objective awareness brought with it a
half-remembered pang of death, and how the stirring of innocent wonder
brought--memories. The memory banks flooded open at the touch of wonder,
poured out their contents, and the fledgling ego went down before the
surge, overwhelmed forever.

Inexperienced in such delicate maneuvers and overtaken at the crises by
the climactic unseating of Death, he had poured into the empty memory
banks the whole contents of his own mind. All his knowledge, all his
experiences, all his memories on every level of incidents great and
small. Everything. Including the complex and ineradicable concept of
his own identity.




VIII


The involuntary start that shook the pine cone from his hand freed
Phil's nostrils of the anaesthetic. Rapidly clearing eyes watched the
cone fall near his feet and roll a few inches. A hawk that had been
wheeling in the sky at the edge of his vision was still wheeling. Only
seconds had elapsed, but this time there remained a clear recall of all
that had transpired in those few seconds of lost time--seconds in which
he had lived another's memories as though they were his own.

Reluctantly, impelled more by fascination than intent, he raised his
head and faced his companion. The compassionate eyes that met his did
hold certain childlike qualities of freedom from suspicion or hardness,
but the gaze was not that of a simple child, nor was the bearing.
Incongruity sparked a scarcely-controllable impulse to hysterical
laughter. A small boy seated on a log, regarding his elder with gentle
kindliness and understanding! Phil made a sound deep in his throat and
swung his head away, afraid he was going to be sick. "Timmy" made no
move. The silence endured, as it had to endure until one reaction or
another prevailed. Gradually Phil worked to a conclusion.

"You call it a 'blunder,'" Phil said thickly. "You made a freak of an
unborn baby for your own ends, and you call it a blunder. Anyone else
might be content with a little innocent butchery, but not you ... you
take over children, body and soul!"

"No."

"What we've been calling Timmy is a secondhand suit of clothes for
_you_! And you claim you're not a monster!"

"Nor am I."

Phil struggled for violent words to match his feelings, then sighed
heavily. "No," he agreed, despite himself. "You are not. I know that.
Maybe you've controlled me just as you tricked me into entering your
mind and living your memories but, sickened as I am, I still can't help
believing you more implicitly than I've ever believed anyone. Nor do I
see any reason to."

[Illustration]

"You've never known anyone as surely as you know me, now that our minds
have been in phase. Emotional reactions stemming from a dozen hidden
causes may mislead you, but at the back of your mind you _know_ me."

"And you know--me."

"I know only what I need to know about you. Your private memories are
your own and will always remain so unless you invite me to share them."

"Yet you opened all yours to me?"

"Far from it. At this point it would give you too much to digest all at
once. The major part of my concentration was required to maintain mental
contact without any help from you, and to blanket the interference set
up by the analytical part of your ego through its fixed, deep-rooted
conviction equating the individual with mental isolation. Faced with
absolute proof to the contrary, your analytical mind still tries to
insist that what it has always believed to be true must still be true,
otherwise everything is suspect and, therefore, anti-survival. In other
words, on a survival level your mind tries to reject free telepathy
as it would reject any other upsetting of the basic tenets of your
existence. That and the disharmony existing in your mind is a large part
of the 'protecting' aura of discordance that seals you off from me.
The memories I shared with you I selected and edited for expediency.
Unfortunately, your physical reaction to a startling thought caused you
to break away before you had the full truth and left you with a false
impression."

"Either the memories you fed me were truth, or they were lies. Which
is it?"

"The data was true, but your interpretation of it is false because you
are still in a state of shock, still fighting for survival on a moronic
level. What do you take me to be?"

"You name it. By your own admission, at best 'you' are a false
personality forcibly impressed on a helpless mind that never had a ghost
of a chance. In effect, you are a parasite living on a host, the
reincarnation of an ego that should be eleven years dead."

"Not eleven years dead--only eight."

"What difference does ... _eight_?"

"Eight years dead."

Prickles crawled over Phil's scalp and his mind raced. A series of
memories snapped into place.

"Eight. And I laughed at Clancey!"

"I know--I heard. You were getting too close for comfort so I distracted
you by giving you a headache."

"Stop--let me get my breath!" His voice rose until it threatened to
crack. What am I talking to! A _dog_?"

"Yes."

"_Homer_? I don't believe it!"

"Watch." The boy slipped from the log and sat beside it on the ground,
his back braced. "Timmy would simply fall on his face," he explained,
and with the words the face became empty and the mouth hung foolishly
open. Control had been relinquished. The corner of Phil's eye caught
an answering movement that his senses wanted to reject, but he turned.
Homer had raised his head painfully and was looking directly at him,
unmistakable intelligence in the exhaustion-glazed eyes. The fringed
lips curled back, the throat worked. Strange sounds were forced out,
growling but not doglike.

"Ar-ro ... ar-rik." It was a barely recognizable distortion of
"Hello-Warwick." "Ok-all ... orr ... ron." Vocal-cords-wrong?
"Im ... ork." Tim-talk?

The gray-muzzled head sank back wearily. A scuffling sound drew Phil's
dazed eyes and he turned back in time to see Tim sit up again briskly,
ignoring the old dog.

       *       *       *       *       *

"I hate that mangled speech, don't you, Uncle Phil? I'll still call you
that, if you don't mind. You're still as much my uncle as you ever were,
and I'm the only Tim you've known." He watched Phil anxiously. "Knocks
the wind out of you, doesn't it? But ordinary speech is painfully
limited to begin with, without trying to force it from poor old Homer."
He chattered on nervously, giving Phil time to collect himself. "You
see, Timmy is as mindless now as when he was born, three years before
'my' ship crashed in the swamp over there. Look back through your
newspaper files and you'll find a brief mention of a mysterious
explosion reported during a night of heavy rain. That was us." He wet
his lips, watching the silent white face. "Look, I had nothing at all to
do with Timmy being born an imbecile. He's like a car that functions
well enough if a driver takes over the physical controls that Timmy is
incapable of handling for himself. Lacking a driver, the controls and
the car stand idle. It is only the body that I manipulate, not the
dormant, disconnected mind. For myself, although I can't help
identifying myself emotionally and subjectively as the Challon,
Objective reason assures me that I am Homer, with a complete but false
set of memories and an artificially stimulated intelligence.

"As the Challon, I realized that the embryo Homer was of low actual
intelligence, but high potential intelligence. The dangerous peculiarity
of this planet is that several of the higher species have no known or
recognized function for the most important portion of their brain. It
lies fallow, unused, blocked off much as Timmy's whole mind is blocked
off from his service. In eight years I have done no more than form the
mere skeleton of a theory to account for that, but the means of
correction was obvious from the start. Like the appendix that floats
free at one end and serves no known purpose, the brain has an incomplete
neural path of an unusual nature that has effectively camouflaged its
true purpose. The intended function of the connection was the energizing
of that prime center which you have not yet discovered and without which
you differ from Timmy only in degree, for you cannot realize more than a
fragment of your incredible potential.

"The same condition exists among the higher mammals. Releasing Homer's
blocked potential placed at his service the intellectual capacity of a
very clever human--according to your false standards--but not of a human
genius. If I had not imposed my ego on him ... you see, I cannot help
thinking of myself as the Challon, although I know I am Homer ... if
I had not robbed Homer of his identity and self-will, of his right
to possess and control himself, he would have developed personality,
characteristics and aptitudes of his own, appropriate to a canine of
high intelligence. As it is, there are false memories of aptitudes Homer
never had nor could have. Physical limitations alone make some of them
impossible. How could a dog tinker with machinery, for example? Yet I
'remember' working on machines of my own design. Homer's mind, in other
words, remembers as first-person data experiences it never had.

"In actual fact, 'I' who speak to you now am no more than the record
contained in a book. In terms of personality, Homer is the hidden
structure giving strength and substance to a false facade. 'I' am the
false facade, faithfully copied from another structure. 'I' am a
superimposure of ephemeral data, governing its own employment by a mind
that has been restricted from developing its own data. The 'I' that
speaks to you has no real existence, though its pattern is being subtly
and continuously altered by that which it cloaks. If you put a drop of
intense stain and a drop of powerful scent into a large tank of
distilled water, you change the superficial character of the water, make
it seem to be other than what it is. But it remains essentially a tank
full of water, now containing an obtrusive trifle of alien matter in
addition to the hydrogen and oxygen that decide its most significant
properties. That is what the Challon did to Homer--he released the
potential, then accidentally but indelibly stained it with his own
personality.

"To me, now, it merely _seems_ as though I first suffered death and then
an unwelcome resurrection, awakening in despair to find myself usurping
the helpless body of an almost new-born animal. Nothing physical or
spiritual of the Challon survived, but the embryo mind had been fed a
ready-made identity and so believed that it had already existed as a
Challon before re-birth as a dog. Its brain received instantly all 'my'
training, so that it became at once 'mature.' What I have endured in
these eight years--the isolation of mind and inadequacy of body--have
been a blunderer's reward visited upon his victim as a further injury.
Now that Homer lies near death--and 'I' with him, of course--I welcome
'our' approaching release from an unhappy situation.

       *       *       *       *       *

"Wait--let me finish. Your main concern is what will happen to Timmy
when 'we' die, but it will be simpler to understand if I explain as much
as I can first. Finding myself to be a rational mind in the helpless,
immature body of an animal, I thought I was isolated forever. In
choosing the embryo to begin with, I was driven by the need for haste
and had not understood the limitations of a canine in a human world, nor
would I have had any alternative if I had fully understood. When it was
too late, it was not difficult to predict my future. I had no means of
communicating with the dominant species, Man. In time, if I survived
the hazards a puppy is exposed to, I could reveal my unusual
intelligence--could even learn to communicate in some hopelessly labored
manner. By using my store of inherited knowledge I could, if anyone
would take a dog seriously, advance your science. But I could do nothing
toward my main goals without exposing myself as an imitation Challon,
and that I must never do lest I loose terrible consequences.

"I knew that the life span of my new body was pitifully short. The
female had suffered repeated convulsions that affected the formation of
the embryos and we were an ugly litter of little mongrels, doomed by our
physical imperfections to a shorter-than-normal life if we were allowed
to live and exposed to early drowning if we could not quickly charm
ourselves into a home.

"The remainder of the litter--my brothers and sisters, if I could think
of them as such--were callously placed in a weighted sack and tossed
in the swamp, but by that time I had found a home. The Douglas home.
Their child, Timmy, was an imbecile whose short-circuited mind lay
open to me. I found by hasty experiments that Homer's mind was capable
of controlling and manipulating the imbecile, like a puppeteer. The
difficulties of controlling two bodies at once are tremendous, which is
why Homer always struck you as clumsy and almost half-witted--he had to
receive the absolute minimum of concentration so that his exhaustion at
climbing the bluff this afternoon, for example, was not recognized in
time. Well, there it is. I took over Timmy's helpless body eight years
ago--too abruptly and with many errors--but it insured my survival for
a short time at least. Now that time is at an end and the greater part
of what I must do is still to be done--"

       *       *       *       *       *
