underground, have no desire to take over and don't think that we could
even if we wished. When the Soviets are overthrown by our organisation,
the new government will assume power. We disappear as an organization.
Our job is done. Leonid? I don't know, perhaps his fellow employees at
the Mikoyan Camera works will vote him into some office in the plant, if
they think him capable enough."

"Well," Paul sighed, "it's your country. I'll stick to the American
system." He couldn't take his eyes from the way her lips tucked in at
the sides.

Ana said, "How long have you been in love with me, Paul?"

"What?"

She laughed. "Don't be so blank. It would be rather odd, wouldn't it, if
two people were in love, and neither of them realized what had
happened?"

"_Two_ people in love," he said blankly, unbelievingly.

       *       *       *       *       *

Leonid Shvernik and Paul Koslov were bent over a map of the U.S.S.R. The
former pointed out the approximate location of the radio transmitters.
"We're not going to use them until the last moment," he said. "Not until
the fat is in the fire. Then they will all begin at once. The KGB and
MVD won't have time to knock them out."

Paul said, "Things are moving fast. Faster than I had expected. We're
putting it over, Leonid."

Shvernik said, "Only because the situation is ripe. It's the way
revolutions work."

"How do you mean?" Paul said absently, studying the map.

"Individuals don't put over revolutions. The times do, the conditions
apply. Did you know that six months before the Bolshevik revolution took
place Lenin wrote that he never expected to live to see the Communist
take over in Russia? The thing was that the conditions were there. The
Bolsheviks, as few as they were, were practically thrown into power."

"However," Paul said dryly, "it was mighty helpful to have such men as
Lenin and Trotsky handy."

Shvernik shrugged. "The times make the men. Your own American Revolution
is probably better known to you. Look at the men those times produced.
Jefferson, Paine, Madison, Hamilton, Franklin, Adams. And once again, if
you had told any of those men, a year before the Declaration of
Independence, that a complete revolution was the only solution to the
problems that confronted them, they would probably have thought you
insane."

It was a new line of thought for Paul Koslov. "Then what does cause a
revolution?"

"The need for it. It's not just our few tens of thousands of members of
the underground who see the need for overthrowing the Soviet
bureaucracy. It's millions of average Russians in every walk of life and
every strata, from top to bottom. What does the scientist think when
some bureaucrat knowing nothing of his speciality comes into the
laboratory and directs his work? What does the engineer in an automobile
plant think when some silly politician decides that since cars in
capitalist countries have four wheels, that Russia should surpass them
by producing a car with five? What does your scholar think when he is
told what to study, how to interpret it, and then what to write? What
does your worker think when he sees the bureaucrat living in luxury
while his wage is a comparatively meager one? What do your young people
think in their continual striving for a greater degree of freedom than
was possessed by their parents? What does your painter think? Your poet?
Your philosopher?"

Shvernik shook his head. "When a nation is ready for revolution, it's
the _people_ who put it over. Often, the so-called leaders are hard put
to run fast enough to say out in front."

       *       *       *       *       *

Paul said, "After it's all over, we'll go back to the States. I know a
town up in the Sierras called Grass Valley. Hunting, fishing, mountains,
clean air, but still available to cities such as San Francisco where you
can go for shopping and for restaurants and entertainment."

She kissed him again.

Paul said, "You know, I've done this sort of work--never on this scale
before, of course--ever since I was nineteen. Nineteen, mind you! And
this is the first time I've realized I'm tired of it. Fed up to here.
I'm nearly thirty-five, Ana, and for the first time I want what a man is
expected to want out of life. A woman, a home, children. You've never
seen America. You'll love it. You'll like Americans too, especially the
kind that live in places like Grass Valley."

Ana laughed softly. "But we're Russians, Paul."

"Eh?"

"Our home and our life should be here. In Russia. The New Russia that
we'll have shortly."

He scoffed at her. "Live here when there's California? Ana, Ana, you
don't know what living is. Why--"

"But, Paul, I'm a Russian. If the United States is a more pleasant place
to live than Russia will be, when we have ended the police state, then
it is part of my duty to improve Russia."

It suddenly came to him that she meant it. "But I was thinking, all
along, that after this was over we'd be married. I'd be able to show you
_my_ country."

"And, I don't know why, I was thinking we both expected to be making a
life for ourselves here."

They were silent for a long time in mutual misery.

Paul said finally, "This is no time to make detailed plans. We love each
other, that should be enough. When it's all over, we'll have the chance
to look over each other's way of life. You can visit the States with
me."

"And I'll take you on a visit to Armenia. I know a little town in the
mountains there which is the most beautiful in the world. We'll spend a
week there. A month! Perhaps one day we can build a summer dacha there."
She laughed happily. "Why practically everyone lives to be a hundred
years old in Armenia."

"Yeah, we'll have to go there sometime," Paul said quietly.

       *       *       *       *       *

He'd been scheduled to see Leonid that night but at the last moment the
other sent Ana to report that an important meeting was to take place. A
meeting of underground delegates from all over the country. They were
making basic decisions on when to move--but Paul's presence wasn't
needed.

He had no feeling of being excluded from something that concerned him.
Long ago it had been decided that the less details known by the average
man in the movement about Paul's activities, the better it would be.
There is always betrayal and there are always counter-revolutionary
agents within the ranks of an organization such as this. What was the
old Russian proverb? When four men sit down to discuss revolution, three
are police spies and the third a fool.

Actually, this had been astonishingly well handled. He had operated for
over a year with no signs that the KGB was aware of his activities.
Leonid and his fellows were efficient. They had to be. The Commies had
been slaughtering anyone who opposed them for forty years now. To
survive as a Russian underground you had to be good.

No, it wasn't a feeling of exclusion. Paul Koslov was stretched out on
the bed of his king-size Astoria Hotel room, his hands behind his head
and staring up at the ceiling. He recapitulated the events of the past
months from the time he'd entered the Chief's office in Washington until
last night at the dacha with Leonid and Ana.

The whole thing.

And over and over again.

There was a line of worry on his forehead.

[Illustration]

He swung his feet to the floor and approached the closet. He selected
his most poorly pressed pair of pants, and a coat that mismatched it. He
checked the charge in his .38 Noiseless, and replaced the weapon under
his left arm. He removed his partial bridge, remembering as he did so
how he had lost the teeth in a street fight with some Commie union
organizers in Panama, and replaced the porcelain bridge with a typically
Russian gleaming steel one. He stuffed a cap into his back pocket, a
pair of steel rimmed glasses into an inner pocket, and left the room.

He hurried through the lobby, past the Intourist desk, thankful that it
was a slow time of day for tourist activity.

Outside, he walked several blocks to 25th of October Avenue and made a
point of losing himself in the crowd. When he was sure that there could
be no one behind him, he entered a _pivnaya_, had a glass of beer, and
then disappeared into the toilet. There he took off the coat, wrinkled
it a bit more, put it back on and also donned the cap and glasses. He
removed his tie and thrust it into a side pocket.

He left, in appearance a more or less average workingman of Leningrad,
walked to the bus station on Nashimson Volodarski and waited for the
next bus to Petrodvorets. He would have preferred the subway, but the
line didn't run that far as yet.

The bus took him to within a mile and a half of the dacha, and he walked
from there.

By this time Paul was familiar with the security measures taken by
Leonid Shvernik and the others. None at all when the dacha wasn't in use
