during the ages which have passed; it will serve as an illustration of
the future which is reserved for our earth in ages yet to come, when
our globe shall have also succumbed to tidal influence.

It is owing to the smallness of the moon relatively to the earth that
the tidal process has reached a much more advanced stage in the moon
than it has on the earth; but the moon is incessant in its efforts to
bring the earth into the same condition which it has itself been
forced to assume. Thus again we look forward to an epoch in the
inconceivably remote future when tidal thraldom shall be supreme, and
when the earth shall turn the same face to the moon, as the moon now
turns the same face to the earth.

In the critical state of things thus looming in the dim future, the
earth and the moon will continue to perform this adjusted revolution
in a period of about fourteen hundred hours, the two bodies being
held, as it were, by invisible bands. Such an arrangement might be
eternal if there were no intrusion of tidal influence from any other
body; but of course in our system as we actually find it the sun
produces tides as well as the moon; and the solar tides being at
present much less than those originated by the moon, we have neglected
them in the general outlines of the theory. The solar tides, however,
must necessarily have an increasing significance. I do not mean that
they will intrinsically increase, for there seems no reason to
apprehend any growth in their actual amount; it is their relative
importance to the lunar tides that is the augmenting quantity. As the
final state is being approached, and as the velocity of the earth's
rotation is approximating to the angular velocity with which the moon
revolves around it, the ebbing and the flowing of the lunar tides must
become of evanescent importance; and this indeed for a double reason,
partly on account of the moon's greatly augmented distance, and
partly on account of the increasing length of the lunar day, and the
extremely tardy movements of ebb and flow that the lunar tides will
then have. Thus the lunar tides, so far as their dynamical importance
is concerned, will ultimately become zero, while the solar tides
retain all their pristine efficiency.

We have therefore to examine the dynamical effects of solar tides on
the earth and moon in the critical stage to which the present course
of things tends. The earth will then rotate in a period of about
fifty-seven of its present days; and considering that the length of
the day, though so much greater than our present day, is still much
less than the year, it follows that the solar tides must still
continue so as to bring the earth's velocity of rotation to a point
even lower than it has yet attained. In fact, if we could venture to
project our glance sufficiently far into the future, it would seem
that the earth must ultimately have its velocity checked by the
sun-raised tides, until the day itself had become equal to the year.
The dynamical considerations become, however, too complex for us to
follow them, so that I shall be content with merely pointing out that
the influence of the solar tides will prevent the earth and moon from
eternally preserving the relations of bending the same face towards
each other; the earth's motion will, in fact, be so far checked, that
the day will become _longer_ than the month.

Thus the doctrine of tidal evolution has conducted us to a prospect of
a condition of things which will some time be reached, when the moon
will have receded to a distance in which the month shall have become
about fifty-seven days, and when the earth around which this moon
revolves shall actually require a still longer period to accomplish
its rotation on its axis. Here is an odd condition for a planet with
its satellite; indeed, until a dozen years ago it would have been
pronounced inconceivable that a moon should whirl round a planet so
quickly that its journey was accomplished in less than one of the
planet's own days. Arguments might be found to show that this was
impossible, or at least unprecedented. There is our own moon, which
now takes twenty-seven days to go round the earth; there is Jupiter,
with four moons, and the nearest of these to the primary goes round
in forty-two and a half hours. No doubt this is a very rapid motion;
but all those matters are much more lively with Jupiter than they are
here. The giant planet himself does not need ten hours for a single
rotation, so that you see his nearest moon still takes between two and
three Jovian days to accomplish a single revolution. The example of
Saturn might have been cited to show that the quickest revolution that
any satellite could perform must still require at least twice as long
as the day in which the planet performed its rotation. Nor could the
rotation of the planets around the sun afford a case which could be
cited. For even Mercury, the nearest of all the planets to the sun of
which the existence is certainly known, and therefore the most rapid
in its revolution, requires eighty-eight days to get round once; and
in the mean time the sun has had time to accomplish between three and
four rotations. Indeed, the analogies would seem to have shown so
great an improbability in the conclusion towards which tidal evolution
points, that they would have contributed a serious obstacle to the
general acceptance of that theory.

But in 1877 an event took place so interesting in astronomical
history, that we have to look back to the memorable discovery of
Uranus in 1781 before we can find a parallel to it in importance. Mars
had always been looked upon as one of the moonless planets, though
grounds were not wanting for the surmise that probably moons to Mars
really existed. It was under the influence of this belief that an
attempt was made by Professor Asaph Hall at Washington to make a
determined search, and see if Mars might not be attended by satellites
large enough to be discoverable. The circumstances under which this
memorable inquiry was undertaken were eminently favourable for its
success. The orbit of Mars is one which possesses an exceptionally
high eccentricity; it consequently happens that the oppositions during
which the planet is to be observed vary very greatly in the facilities
they afford for a search like that contemplated by Professor Hall. It
is obviously advantageous that the planet should be situated as near
as possible to the earth, and in the opposition in 1877 the distance
was almost at the lowest point it is capable of attaining; but this
was not the only point in which Professor Hall was favoured; he had
the use of a telescope of magnificent proportions and of consummate
optical perfection. His observatory was also placed in Washington, so
that he had the advantage of a pure sky and of a much lower latitude
than any observatory in Great Britain is placed at. But the most
conspicuous advantage of all was the practised skill of the astronomer
himself, without which all these other advantages would have been but
of little avail. Great success rewarded his well-designed efforts; not
alone was one satellite discovered which revolved around the planet in
a period conformable with that of other similar cases, but a second
little satellite was found, which accomplished its revolution in a
wholly unexpected and unprecedented manner. The day of Mars himself,
that is, the period in which he can accomplish a rotation around his
axis, very closely approximates to our own day, being in fact half an
hour longer. This little satellite, the inner and more rapid of the
pair, requires for a single revolution a period of only seven hours
thirty-nine minutes, that is to say, the little body scampers more
than three times round its primary before the primary itself has
finished one of its leisurely rotations. Here was indeed a striking
fact, a unique fact in our system, which riveted the attention of
astronomers on this most beautiful discovery.

You will now see the bearing which the movement of the inner satellite
of Mars has on the doctrine of tidal evolution. As a legitimate
consequence of that doctrine, we came to the conclusion that our
earth-moon system must ultimately attain a condition in which the day
is longer than the month. But this conclusion stood unsupported by any
analogous facts in the more anciently-known truths of astronomy. The
movement of the satellite of Mars, however, affords the precise
illustration we want; and this fact, I think, adds an additional
significance to the interest and the beauty of Professor Hall's
discovery.

It is of particular interest to investigate the possible connection
which the phenomena of tidal evolution may have had in connection with
the geological phenomena of the earth. We have already pointed out the
greater closeness of the moon to us in times past. The tides raised by
the moon on the earth must therefore have been greater in past ages
than they are now, for of course the nearer the moon the bigger the
tide. As soon as the earth and the moon had separated to a
considerable distance we may say that the height of the tide will vary
inversely as the cube of the moon's distance; it will therefore
happen, that when the moon was at half its present distance from us,
his tide-producing capacity was not alone twice as much or four times
as much, but even eight times as much as it is at present; and a much
greater rate of tidal rise and fall indicates, of course, a
preponderance in every other manifestation of tidal activity. The
tidal currents, for instance, must have been much greater in volume
and in speed; even now there are places in which the tidal currents
flow at four or more miles per hour. We can imagine, therefore, the
vehemence of the tidal currents which must have flowed in those days
when the moon was a much smaller distance from us. It is interesting
to view these considerations in their possible bearings on geological
phenomena. It is true that we have here many elements of uncertainty,
but there is, however, a certain general outline of facts which may
be laid down, and which appears to be instructive, with reference to
the past history of our earth.

I have all through these lectures indicated a mighty system of
chronology for the earth-moon system. It is true that we cannot give
our chronology any accurate expression in years. The various stages of
this history are to be represented by the successive distances between
the earth and the moon. Each successive epoch, for instance, may be
marked by the number of thousands of miles which separate the moon
from the earth.

But we have another system of chronology derived from a wholly
different system of ideas; it too relates to periods of vast duration,
and, like our great tidal periods, extends to times anterior to human
history, or even to the duration of human life on this globe. The
facts of geology open up to us a majestic chronology, the epochs of
which are familiar to us by the succession of strata forming the crust
of the earth, and by the succession of living beings whose remains
these strata have preserved. From the present or recent age our
retrospect over geological chronology leads us to look through a
vista embracing periods of time overwhelming in their duration, until
at last our view becomes lost, and our imagination is baffled in the
effort to comprehend the formation of those vast stratified rocks, a
dozen miles or more in thickness, which seem to lie at the very base
of the stratified system on the earth, and in which it would appear
that the dawnings of life on this globe may be almost discerned. We
have thus the two systems of chronology to compare--one, the
astronomical chronology measured by the successive stages in the
gradual retreat of the moon; the other, the geological chronology
measured by the successive strata constituting the earth's crust.
Never was a more noble problem proposed in the physical history of our
earth than that which is implied in the attempt to correlate these two
systems of chronology. What we would especially desire to know is the
moon's distance which corresponds to each of the successive strata on
the earth. How far off, for instance, was that moon which looked down
on the coal forests in the time of their greatest luxuriance? or what
was the apparent size of the full moon at which the ichthyosaurus
could have peeped when he turned that wonderful eye of his to the sky
on a fine evening? But interesting as this great problem is, it lies,
alas! outside the possibility of exact solution. Indeed we shall not
make any attempt which must necessarily be futile to correlate these
chronologies; all we can do is to state the one fact which is
absolutely undeniable in the matter.

Let us fix our attention on that specially interesting epoch at the
dawn of geological time, when those mighty Laurentian rocks were
deposited of which the thickness is so astounding, and let us consider
what the distance of the moon must have been at this initial epoch of
the earth's history. All we know for certain is, that the moon must
have been nearer, but what proportion that distance bore to the
present distance is necessarily quite uncertain. Some years ago I
delivered a lecture at Birmingham, entitled "A Glimpse through the
Corridors of Time," and in that lecture I threw out the suggestion
that the moon at this primeval epoch may have only been at a small
fraction of its present distance from us, and that consequently
terrific tides may in these days have ravaged the coast. There was a
good deal of discussion on the subject, and while it was universally
admitted that the tides must have been larger in palaeozoic times than
they are at present, yet there was a considerable body of opinion to
the effect that the tides even then may have been only about twice, or
possibly not so much, greater than those tides we have at the present.
What the actual fact may be we have no way of knowing; but it is
interesting to note that even the smallest accession to the tides
would be a valuable factor in the performance of geological work.

For let me recall to your minds a few of the fundamental phenomena of
geology. Those stratified rocks with which we are now concerned have
been chiefly manufactured by deposition of sediment in the ocean.
Rivers, swollen, it may be, by floods, and turbid with a quantity of
material held in suspension, discharge their waters into the sea.
Granting time and quiet, this sediment falls to the bottom; successive
additions are made to its thickness during centuries and thousands of
years, and thus beds are formed which in the course of ages
consolidate into actual rock. In the formation of such beds the tides
will play a part. Into the estuaries at the mouths of rivers the tides
hurry in and hurry out, and especially during spring tides there are
currents which flow with tremendous power; then too, as the waves
batter against the coast they gradually wear away and crumble down the
mightiest cliffs, and waft the sand and mud thus produced to augment
that which has been brought down by the rivers. In this operation also
the tides play a part of conspicuous importance, and where the ebb and
flow is greatest it is obvious that an additional impetus will be
given to the manufacture of stratified rocks. In fact, we may regard
the waters of the globe as a mighty mill, incessantly occupied in
grinding up materials for future strata. The main operating power of
this mill is of course derived from the sun, for it is the sun which
brings up the rains to nourish the rivers, it is the sun which raises
the wind which lashes the waves against the shore. But there is an
auxiliary power to keep the mill in motion, and that auxiliary power
is afforded by the tides. If then we find that by any cause the
efficiency of the tides is increased we shall find that the mill for
the manufacture of strata obtains a corresponding accession to its
capacity. Assuming the estimate of Professor Darwin, that the tide may
have had twice as great a vertical range of ebb and flow within
geological times as it has at present, we find a considerable addition
to the efficiency of the ocean in the manufacture of the ancient
stratified rocks. It must be remembered that the extent of the area
through which the tides will submerge and lay bare the country, will
often be increased more than twofold by a twofold increase of height.
A little illustration may show what I mean. Suppose a cone to be
filled with water up to a certain height, and that the quantity of
water in it be measured; now let the cone be filled until the water is
at double the depth; then the surfaces of the water in the two cases
will be in the ratio of the circles, one of which has double the
diameter of the other. The areas of the two surfaces are thus as four
to one; the volumes of the waters in the two cases will be in the
proportion of two similar solids, the ratios of their dimensions being
as two to one. Of course this means that the water in the one case
would be eight times as much as in the other. This particular
illustration will not often apply exactly to tidal phenomena, but I
may mention one place that I happen to know of, in the vicinity of
Dublin, in which the effect of the rise and fall of the tide would be
somewhat of this description. At Malahide there is a wide shallow
estuary cut off from the sea by a railway embankment, and there is a
viaduct in the embankment through which a great tidal current flows in
and out alternately. At low tide there is but little water in this
estuary, but at high tide it extends for miles inland. We may regard
this inlet with sufficient approximation to the truth as half of a
cone with a very large angle, the railway embankment of course forming
the diameter; hence it follows that if the tide was to be raised to
double its height, so large an area of additional land would be
submerged, and so vast an increase of water would be necessary for the
purpose, that the flow under the railway bridge would have to be much
more considerable than it is at present. In some degree the same
phenomena will be repeated elsewhere around the coast. Simply
multiplying the height of the tide by two would often mean that the
border of land between high and low water would be increased more than
twofold, and that the volume of water alternately poured on the land
and drawn off it would be increased in a still larger proportion. The
velocity of all tidal currents would also be greater than at present,
and as the power of a current of water for transporting solid material
held in suspension increases rapidly with the velocity, so we may
infer that the efficiency of tidal currents as a vehicle for the
transport of comminuted rocks would be greatly increased. It is thus
obvious that tides with a rise and fall double in vertical height of
those which we know at present would add a large increase to their
efficiency as geological agents. Indeed, even were the tides only half
or one-third greater than those we know now, we might reasonably
expect that the manufacture of stratified rocks must have proceeded
more rapidly than at present.

The question then will assume this form. We know that the tides must
have been greater in Cambrian or Laurentian days than they are at
present; so that they were available as a means of assisting other
agents in the stupendous operations of strata manufacture which were
then conducted. This certainly helps us to understand how these
tremendous beds of strata, a dozen miles or more in solid thickness,
were deposited. It seems imperative that for the accomplishment of a
task so mighty, some agents more potent than those with which we are
familiar should be required. The doctrine of tidal evolution has shown
us what those agents were. It only leaves us uninformed as to the
degree in which their mighty capabilities were drawn upon.

It is the property of science as it grows to find its branches more
and more interwoven, and this seems especially true of the two
greatest of all natural sciences--geology and astronomy. With the
beginnings of our earth as a globe in the shape in which we find it
both these sciences are directly concerned. I have here touched upon
another branch in which they illustrate and confirm each other.

As the theory of tidal evolution has shed such a flood of light into
the previously dark history of our earth-moon system, it becomes of
interest to see whether the tidal phenomena may not have a wider
scope; whether they may not, for instance, have determined the
formation of the planets by birth from the sun, just as the moon seems
to have originated by birth from the earth. Our first presumption,
that the cases are analogous, is not however justified when the facts
are carefully inquired into. A principle which I have not hitherto
discussed here assumes prominence, and therefore we shall devote our
attention to it for a few minutes.

Let us understand what we mean by the solar system. There is first the
sun at the centre, which preponderates over all the other bodies so
enormously, as shown in Fig. 4, in which the earth and the sun are
placed side by side for comparison. There is then the retinue of
planets, among the smaller of which our earth takes its place, a view
of the comparative sizes of the planets being shown in Fig. 5.

[Illustration: Fig. 4.--Comparative sizes of Earth and Sun.]

Not to embarrass ourselves with the perplexities of a problem so
complicated as our solar system is in its entirety, we shall for the
sake of clear reasoning assume an ideal system, consisting of a sun
and a large planet--in fact, such as our own system would be if we
could withdraw from it all other bodies, leaving the sun and Jupiter
only remaining. We shall suppose, of course, that the sun is much
larger than the planet, in fact, it will be convenient to keep in mind
the relative masses of the sun and Jupiter, the weight of the planet
being less than one-thousandth part of the sun. We know, of course,
that both of those bodies are rotating upon their axes, and the one
is revolving around the other; and for simplicity we may further
suppose that the axes of rotation are perpendicular to the plane of
revolution. In bodies so constituted tides will be manifested.
Jupiter will raise tides in the sun, the sun will raise tides in
Jupiter. If the rotation of each body be performed in a less period
than that of the revolution (the case which alone concerns us), then
the tides will immediately operate in their habitual manner as a brake
for the checking of rotation. The tides raised by the sun on Jupiter
will tend therefore to lengthen Jupiter's day; the tides raised on the
sun by Jupiter will tend to augment the sun's period of rotation. Both
Jupiter and the sun will therefore lose some moment of momentum. We
cannot, however, repeat too often the dynamical truth that the total
moment of momentum must remain constant, therefore what is lost by the
rotation must be made up in the revolution; the orbit of Jupiter
around the sun must accordingly be swelling. So far the reasoning
appears similar to that which led to such startling consequences in
regard to the moon.

[Illustration: Fig. 5.--Comparative sizes of Planets.]

But now for the fundamental difference between the two cases. The
moon, it will be remembered, always revolves with the same face
towards the earth. The tides have ceased to operate there, and
consequently the moon is not able to contribute any moment of
momentum, to be applied to the enlargement of its distance from the
earth; all the moment of momentum necessary for this purpose is of
course drawn from the single supply in the rotation of the earth on
its axis. But in the case of the system consisting of the sun and
Jupiter the circumstances are quite different--Jupiter does not always
bend the same face to the sun; so far, indeed, is this from being
true, that Jupiter is eminently remarkable for the rapidity of his
rotation, and for the incessantly varying aspect in which he would be
seen from the sun. Jupiter has therefore a store of available moment
of momentum, as has also of course the sun. Thus in the sun and planet
system we have in the rotations two available stores of moment of
momentum on which the tides can make draughts for application to the
enlargement of the revolution. The proportions in which these two
available sources can be drawn upon for contributions is not left
arbitrary. The laws of dynamics provide the shares in which each of
the bodies is to contribute for the joint purpose of driving them
further apart.

Let us see if we cannot form an estimate by elementary considerations
as to the division of the labour. The tides raised on Jupiter by the
sun will be practically proportional to the sun's mass and to the
radius of Jupiter. Owing to the enormous size of the sun, the
efficiency of these tides and the moment of the friction-brake they
produce will be far greater on the planet than will the converse
operation of the planet be on the sun. Hence it follows that the
efficiency of the tides in depriving Jupiter of moment of momentum
will be greatly superior to the efficiency of the tides in depriving
the sun of moment of momentum. Without following the matter into any
close numerical calculation, we may assert that for every one part the
sun contributes to the common object, Jupiter will contribute at least
a thousand parts; and this inequality appears all the more striking,
not to say unjust, when it is remembered that the sun is more
abundantly provided with moment of momentum than is Jupiter--the sun
has, in fact, about twenty thousand times as much.
