"Are you _sure_ you're all right?"

I was propped on my elbows on the bunk in my cubicle, nursing the jangle
in my leg. Maybe it was that--but I was as confused as a mouse in a
psych maze.

"Why wouldn't I be?" Moya said.

"And you wore the suits all the time?"

"Affirmative. If you'd done the same--"

The medic showed with lab analyses.

"There wasn't much of that stuff in you," he said. "And I can't break it
down. Too complex. You used the cobra venom analogy--Well, this makes
that look as simple as mother's milk."

He held up the stained pieces of uniform. Moya had kept his wits about
him.

"A combination of weather, soil, et cetera," the medic said. "Completely
innocuous."

"About the toxin," I said. "Given time, could you work up an antivenin?"

"Probably. But I'd need plenty. Both time and toxin." He looked at me.
"Oh, I see what you're getting at." He became professionally parochial.

"In other words--" I said.

He snapped his fingers.

"You know how it hit you."

The confusion persisted, so I allowed the medic to use a pressure hypo.

Hours later, I felt better--physically.

On the vid screen, the magnified surface of the insular mass seemed
almost to beckon. _Sireni_, I thought.

Little remained of the weather front. Over the area of the plain and the
rolling hills were meager wisps of clouds. Darkness again was creeping
across the face of E-T.

"That storm didn't amount to much," Moya said.

_Storm_, I thought. _Rain._

"I know what I'd do," Moya continued. "I'd radiate and have done with
it."

The medic dissented on clinical-curiosity grounds.

"I can't reconcile things yet," I said. "But let's assume that it was a
tragedy of errors. Let's say that what hit me, killed them. But what was
it? Where did it come from? And why? No, I'll have to go down again.
It's my burden to find _all_ the answers."

Moya growled: "There's a time for stubbornness."

I caught the rest of the crew staring at me; their expressions were a
motley.

       *       *       *       *       *

Back at the same old stand, open for business, looking at the pitiful
alteration, feeling lonely, feeling vulnerable, too, despite the bug
suit, Moya's parting blast still burning in my mind.

He'd ferried me down to the hilltop in the long shadows of early
morning. I'd had to order him to return to the star ship. I stood now
beside the communal mound. Moya had said, pointing down the hill, anger
making him illogical: "These are the people you sold out when you
transferred to Interstel. They could have used your kind of brains.
Post-mortems aren't going to help them, now."

It was simple, wasn't it?

Something on E-T was a killer: quick and deadly.

If it got any sort of clean shot at you--

Something visible. Something big enough to make a mark. And not static,
like a thorn. A ground crawler? My pant's legs had been tucked securely
into my boot tops. A flier? It would have to be strong enough to pierce
a GS uniform and make an entrance into flesh. Or to leave a scratch from
a glancing blow. And I hadn't seen anything.

But only a recent problem.

And restricted to the area beyond the stream.

And random.

And terribly innocent. Innocent enough to be overlooked until it was
too late.

_Think._

I thought and came up with a brainful of nothing.

_Think again._

Strong enough to pierce two thicknesses of cloth--It must have gone
entirely through, although the overzealousness of the crew had removed
any possibility of proof.

How about the bug suit?

Assume the plastic was protection enough--

Wouldn't the wearer notice a blow? Or hear something?

I'd felt but not heard.

But then the rain had been falling.

No insect had hit me forcibly before--

Moya and his helper had noticed nothing after--

A few meager drops of rain, sibilantly soaking into the eager soil of
Epsilon-Terra.

Whoever first mouthed that bit about cursing being the audible
manifestation of a mediocre mind completely missed the point.

There's something infinitely comforting in the crackle and sweep and
roll of heartfelt invective.

I left the site of the common grave and made it back to the hillside and
shuttler IV as fast as discretion and terrain and my game leg would
allow.

       *       *       *       *       *

"I _am_ thinking," Moya grumbled over the comm. "If these details are so
important, why--?"

"Don't blame Interstel," I said. "The tapes were put together by GS
headquarters."

"Well, whoever. They should have included more information."

"Thompson," I prodded.

"Sure, sure, I remember him. Big, awkward, slow-moving--always babbling
about plants."

"What kind?"

"_All_ kinds."

"But anything particular? Something that he wanted to extract something
from."

"Well, let's see--He brought back lots of sample specimens, but there
_was_ one that he played with all the way home. It was an insectivorous
or carnivorous species, as I recall--"

"Yes? Yes?"

"That produced a chemical he thought might prove useful if it could be
extracted and concentrated or synthesized--Now, hold on. Are you
trying--?"

"Why not? And why didn't you mention this sooner?"

"For the simple reason--What got you off on this tangent?"

"_Rain._ The kid's diary said '_rain_ potential.' The captain's log
mentioned a _surface weather front_. And it _rained_ just before I was
hit."

"I fail to see the connection. But think about this: It rained on the
survey team I ferried here, too--not often, but more than once or
twice--and nothing happened to them."

That was the trouble with firing off at half thrust.

But there was still this nagging conviction: rain plus vegetation equals
