
"Gefty?" Kerim's voice asked.

"Uh-huh?"

He could hear her swallow over the intercom. "Those lights are back
now."

"How many?"

"Two," Kerim said. "I _think_ they're only two. They keep crossing back
and forth in front of us." She laughed nervously. "It's idiotic, of
course, but I do get the feeling they're looking at us."

Gefty said hesitantly, "Everything's set but I need another minute or
two to get this last connection whittled down a little more. If I blow
the charge too soon, it mightn't take the gadget clean out of the ship."

Kerim said, "I know. I'll just watch ... they just disappeared again."
Her voice changed. "Now there's something else."

"What's that?"

"You know you said to watch the cargo lock lights on the emergency
panel."

"Yes."

"The outer lock door has just been opened."

"What!"

"It must have been. The light started blinking red just now as I was
looking at it."

Gefty was silent a moment, his mind racing. Why would the janandra open
the lock? From what Maulbow had said, it could live for a while without
air, but it still could gain nothing but eventual death from leaving the
ship--

Unless, Gefty thought, the janandra had become aware in some way that he
was about to blow their machine out of the _Queen_. There were grappling
lines in the cargo lock, and if four or five of those lines were slapped
to the circular section of the hull he'd loosened ...

"Kerim," he said.

"Yes?"

"I'm going to blow the deal right now. Got your suit snapped to the wall
braces like I showed you?"

"Yes, Gefty." Her voice was faint but clear.

He turned the cutter away from the line it had dug, sent it rolling off
towards the far wall. He hurried around the circle, checking the four
charges, lumbered over to the vault passage, stopped just around the
corner. He took the firing box from his suit.

"Ready, Kerim?" He opened the box.

"Ready...."

"Here goes!" Gefty reached into the box, twisted the firing handle.
Light flared in the vault. The deck shook below him. He came stumbling
out from behind the wall.

Maulbow's machine and its stand of instruments had vanished. Where it
had stood was a dark circular hole. Nothing else seemed to have
happened. Gefty clumped hurriedly over to the mining cutter, swung it
around, started more cautiously back towards the hole. He didn't have
the faintest idea what would come next, but a definite possibility was
that he would see the janandra's dark form flowing up over the rim of
the hole. Letting it run into the cutter beam might be the best way to
discourage it from re-entering the _Queen_.

[Illustration]

Instead, a dazzling brilliance suddenly blotted out everything. The
cutter was plucked from Gefty's grasp; then he was picked up, suit and
all, and slammed up towards the vault ceiling. He had a feeling that
inaudible thunders were shaking the ship. He seemed to be rolling over
and over along the ceiling. At last, the suit crashed into something
which showed a total disinclination to yield, and Gefty blacked out.

       *       *       *       *       *

The left side of his face felt pushed out of shape; his left eye wasn't
functioning too well, and there was a severe pulsing ache throughout the
top of his head. But Gefty felt happy.

There were a few qualifying considerations.

"Of course," he pointed out to Kerim, "all we can really say immediately
is that we're back in normspace and somewhere in the galaxy."

She smiled shakily. "Isn't that saying quite a lot, Gefty?"

"It's something." Gefty glanced around the instrument room. He had
placed an emergency light on the console, but except for that, the
control compartment was in darkness. The renewed battering the _Queen_
had absorbed had knocked out the power in the forward section. The
viewscreens were black, every instrument dead. But he'd seen the stars
of normspace through the torn vault floor. It was something....

"We might have the light that slugged us to thank for that," he said.
"I'm not sure just what did happen there, but it could have been
Maulbow's control unit it was attacking rather than the ship. Maulbow
said the lights were sensitive to the unit. At any rate, we're here, and
we're rid of the gadget--and of the janandra." He hesitated. "I just
don't feel you should get your hopes too high. We may find out we're a
very long way from the Hub."

Kerim's large eyes showed a degree of confidence which made him almost
uncomfortable. "If we are," she said serenely, "you'll get us back
somehow."

Gefty cleared his throat. "Well, we'll see. If the power shutoff is
something the _Queen's_ repair scanners can handle, the instruments will
come back on any minute. Give the scanners ten minutes. If they haven't
done it by that time, they can't do it and I'll have to play repairman.
Then, with the instruments working, we can determine exactly where we
are."

Unless, he told himself silently, they'd wound up in a distant cluster
never penetrated by the Federation's mapping teams. And there was the
other little question of where they now were in time. But Kerim looked
rosy with relief, and those details could wait.

He took up another emergency light, switched it on and said, "I'll see
how Maulbow is doing while we're waiting for power. If the first aid
treatment has pulled him through so far, the autosurgeon probably can
fix him up."

Kerim's face suddenly took on a guilty expression. "I forgot all about
Mr. Maulbow!" She hesitated. "Should I come along?"

Gefty shook his head. "I won't need help. And if it's a case for the
surgeon, you wouldn't like it. Those things work painlessly, but it gets
to be a mess for a while."

He shut off the light again when he reached the sick bay which was
running on its independent power system. As he opened the cabin door
from the dispensary, carrying the autosurgeon, it became evident that
Maulbow was still alive but that he might be in delirium. Gefty placed
the surgeon on the table, went over to the bed and looked at Maulbow.

To the extent that the emergency treatment instruments' cautious
restraints permitted, Maulbow was twisting slowly about on the bed. He
was speaking in a low, rapid voice, his face distorted by emotion. The
words were not slurred, but they were in a language Gefty didn't know.
It seemed clear that Maulbow had reverted mentally to his own time, and
for some seconds he remained unaware that Gefty had entered the room.
Then, surprisingly, the slitted blue eyes opened wider and focused on
Gefty's face. And Maulbow screamed with rage.

Gefty felt somewhat disconcerted. For the reason alone that he was under
anesthetic, Maulbow should not have been conscious. But he was. The
words were now ones Gefty could understand, and Maulbow was telling him
things which would have been interesting enough under different
circumstances. Gefty broke in as soon as he could.

"Look," he said quietly, "I'm trying to help you. I ..."

Maulbow interrupted him in turn, not at all quietly. Gefty listened a
moment longer, then shrugged. So Maulbow didn't like him. He couldn't
say honestly that he'd ever liked Maulbow much, and what he was hearing
made him like Maulbow considerably less. But he would keep the man from
the future alive if he could.

He positioned the autosurgeon behind the head of the bed to allow the
device to begin its analysis, stood back at its controls where he could
both follow the progress it made and watch Maulbow without exciting him
further by remaining within his range of vision. After a moment, the
surgeon shut off the first-aid instruments and made unobtrusive use of a
heavy tranquilizing drug. Then it waited.

Maulbow should have lapsed into passive somnolence thirty seconds
afterwards. But the drug seemed to produce no more effect on him
mentally than the preceding anesthetic. He raged and screeched on. Gefty
watched him uneasily, knowing now that he was looking at insanity. There
was nothing more he could do at the moment--the autosurgeon's decisions
were safer than any nonprofessional's guesswork. And the surgeon
continued to wait.
