man couldn't be too clever, they were clever, so he had to be clever. He
began to shave.

       *       *       *       *       *

The Captain was on an audio circuit, talking to an Assistant
Commissioner. "Yes, Sir, I know that--Yes, Sir, it could be, but it
might be something else--Yes, Sir, I know Squirrel Hill has problems,
but we need help--Yes, Commissioner, it's over ninety now (The Captain
signaled wildly to Matesic; Matesic held up four fingers, then two) 94.2
and still going up--No, Sir, we don't know. Some guy gonna quit his job
... or kill his boss. Maybe he found out his wife is cheating on him. We
can't tell until we pick him up--Yes, Sir--Yes, Sir--Thank you, Sir."

The Captain hung up. "I hate politicians," he snarled.

"Watch it, Captain," said Matesic, "I'll get you on my board."

"Get me on it, Hell," the Captain said, "I've never been off."

       *       *       *       *       *

The old man finished dressing. He knotted his tie and brushed off the
front of his suit with his hand. He looked fine. He'd fool them, he
looked just like anybody else. He crossed to the bureau and picked up
the knife. It was still in the scabbard. He didn't take it out, he just
put it in his pocket. Good. It didn't show.

He walked out on the street. The sun was shining brightly and heat waves
were coming up from the sidewalk. Good. Good. This was the best time.
People, the real people, would be working or lying down asleep. But
they'd be out. They were always out. Out all sweet and innocent in the
hot sun.

He turned down the street and ambled toward the drug store. He didn't
want to hurry. He had lots of time. He had to get some candy first. That
was the ticket, candy. Candy worked, candy always worked. Candy was good
but candy was wicked. He was good but they were wicked. Oh, you had to
be smart.

       *       *       *       *       *

"That has to be him," Matesic said. The screen was blotched and milky,
but a large splash of light in the lower left hand corner outshone
everything else. "He's somewhere around Negley Avenue." He turned to the
Captain. "Where do you have your men placed?"

"In a box," the Captain said. "Fifth and Negley, Aiken and Negley,
Center and Aiken, and Center and Negley. And three scout cars overhead."

       *       *       *       *       *

The old man walked up Ellsworth to the Liberty School. There were always
lots of young ones around Liberty School. The young ones were the worst.

       *       *       *       *       *

"I'm losing him."

"Where are you?"

"Center and Aiken."

"Anybody getting him stronger?"

"Yeah. Me. Negley and Fifth."

"Never mind. Never mind, we got him. We see him now."

"Where?"

"Bellefonte and Ivy. Liberty School."

       *       *       *       *       *

She was a friendly little thing, and pretty. Maybe five, maybe six, and
her Mommy had told her not to talk to strangers. But the funny old man
wasn't talking, he was sitting on the curb, and he was eating candy, and
he was offering some to her. He smiled at the little girl and she smiled
back.

       *       *       *       *       *

The scout car settled to earth on automatic. Two officers climbed out of
the car and walked quietly over to the old man, one on either side. They
each took an arm and lifted him gently to his feet.

"Hello there, Old Timer."

"Hi, little girl."

The old man looked around bewildered. He dropped his candy and tried to
reach his knife. They mustn't interfere. It was no use. The officers
were very kind and gentle, and they were very, very firm. They led him
off as though he were an old, old friend.

One of the officers called back over his shoulder, "Bye, bye, little
girl."

The little girl dutifully waved 'bye.

She looked at the paper sack on the sidewalk. She didn't know what to
do, but the nice old man was gone. She looked around, but no one was
paying any attention, they were all watching the softball game. Suddenly
she made a grab and clutched the paper bag to her body. Then she turned
and ran back up the street to tell her Mommy how wonderful, wonderful
lucky she was.




Transcriber's Note:

    This etext was produced from _Analog_ April 1962. Extensive research
    did not uncover any evidence that the U.S. copyright on this
    publication was renewed. Minor spelling and typographical errors
    have been corrected without note.


