strong to the taste, that I could not have distinguished it from
ordinary lime-water. And when I threw some salt ammoniac into the lime
which remained, the vapour of the volatile alkali immediately arose from
the mixture.

In this experiment therefore the air is first driven out of the chalk by
an acid, and then, in order to separate this acid from it, we add an
alkali which has been previously deprived of its air; by which means,
the chalk itself is also obtained free of air, and in an acrid form, or
in the form of slaked lime.

We have also several processes for obtaining the volatile alkali in a
caustic form, which seem to be only so many methods of obtaining it in
its pure state, and free of fixed air. The first of these is the
separation of the alkali from an acid, merely by heat; an instance of
which we have from Mr. _Margraaf_.[9] He prepared from urine an
ammoniacal salt, the acid of which is the basis of the phosphorus, and
is of such a peculiar nature, that it endures a red heat without being
dissipated. Sixteen ounces of the neutral salt were subjected by him to
distillation. The acid remained in the retort, and he found in the
receiver eight ounces of an alkaline spirit, which, he tells us, was
extremely volatile, very much resembling the spirit of salt ammoniac
distilled with quick-lime; and no crystals were formed in it, when
exposed to the cold air.

A caustic volatile alkali may also be obtained, by mixing salt ammoniac
with half its weight of a caustic fixed alkali, or of magnesia which has
been previously deprived of its air by fire; and then submitting these
mixtures to distillation: Or merely by adding any ordinary volatile
alkali to a proper quantity of a caustic ley; for in this case the air
passes from the volatile to the fixed alkali, by a superior attraction
for the last, and, by a gentle heat, the compound yields a spirit
similar to that prepared from salt ammoniac and quick-lime.

It is therefore probable, that, had we also a method of separating the
fixed alkali from an acid, without, at the same time, saturating it with
air, we should then obtain it in a caustic form; but I am not acquainted
with an instance of this separation in chemistry. There are two indeed
which, at first sight, appear to be of this kind; these are the
separation of the fixed alkali from the nitrous acid by means of
inflamed charcoal, in the process for making _nitrum fixatum_, and of
the same alkali, from vegetable acids merely by heat; but, upon
examining the product of each process, we find the alkali either fully
or nearly saturated with air. In the first, either the charcoal or the
acid, or both together, are almost wholly converted into air; a part of
which is probably joined to the alkali. In the second, the acid is not
properly separated, but rather destroyed by the fire: a considerable
portion of it is converted into an inflammable substance and we learn
from Dr. _Hales_, that the bodies of this class contain a large quantity
of fixed air.

When we consider that the attraction of alkalis for fixed air is weaker
than that of the calcarious earths, and reflect upon the effects of heat
in chemistry, we are led to imagine, that alkalis might be entirely
deprived of their air, or rendered perfectly caustic, by a fire somewhat
weaker than that which is sufficient to produce the same change upon
lime; but this opinion does not seem agreeable to experience.

The alkalis do, however, acquire some degree of causticity in a strong
fire, as appears from their being more easily united with spirit of wine
after having been kept in fusion for some time. For that fluid, which
cannot be tinctured by a mild salt of tartar, will soon take a very deep
colour from a few drops of a strong caustic ley. The circumstances which
hinder us from rendering these salts perfectly caustic by heat, are
their propensity to dissipation in the utmost violence of the fire,
their extreme acrimony, and the imperfection of our common vessels. For
before the heat becomes very intense, the alkalis either evaporate, or
dissolve a part of the crucibles in which they are contained, and often
escape thro' their pores; which happens, especially as soon as they have
already acquired some degree of additional acrimony, by the loss of part
of their air.

The fusion also, which they so readily undergo, is well known by
Chemists, as a strong obstacle to the separation of the volatile from
the fixed parts of a compound by fire; accordingly, in several
processes, we are directed to add to the fusible compound some porous
substance which is incapable of fusion, and will retain the whole in a
spongy form, thereby to facilitate the dissipation of the volatile
parts.

In order to know whether an alkali would lose a part of its air, and
acquire a degree of causticity, when exposed, with this precaution, to
the action of a strong fire, I mixed an ounce and a half of salt of
tartar with three ounces of black-lead, a substance of any the most
unchangeable by chemical operations. This mixture I exposed, for several
hours, in a covered crucible, to a fire somewhat stronger than what is
necessary to keep salt of tartar in fusion. When allowed to cool, I
found it still in the form of a loose powder; and taking out one half, I
diluted it with water, and by filtration obtained a ley, which, when
poured into a solution of white marble in _aqua fortis_, precipitated
the marble under the form of a weak quick-lime: for the turbid mixture
gave a green colour to the juice of violets, and threw up a crust like
that of lime-water; and the precipitated powder collected and mixed with
salt ammoniac immediately yielded the scent of the volatile alkali.

Lest it should here be suspected, that the alkaline qualities of this
mixture, and of the precipitated marble, were not owing to a lime into
which the marble was converted, but to the alkali itself which was
added, it is proper to observe, that I mixed so small a proportion of
the ley with the solution of marble as made me sure, from certain
experiments, that the whole of the alkali was spent in performing the
precipitation, and was consequently converted into a neutral salt by
attracting the acid. The properties therefore of the mixture can only be
referred to a lime, as is indeed sufficiently evident from the crust
which is peculiar to lime-water.

I was therefore assured by this experiment, that an alkali does really
lose a part of its air, and acquire a degree of causticity, by the
proper application of heat; but finding by several trials, that the
degree of causticity which it had thus acquired was but weak, and that
the quick-lime produced in this experiment was exhausted and rendered
mild by a small quantity of water, I exposed the crucible together with
that half of the alkali which remained in it to a stronger fire, in
order to expel a larger quantity of air, and render it more remarkably
caustic; but the whole of it was dissipated by the force of the heat,
and the black lead, which still retained the form of a loose and subtile
powder, yielded little or nothing to water.

We learn then from the above experiment the reason why the alkali newly
obtained from the ashes of vegetables is generally of the more acrid
kinds of that salt. It never appears until the subject be converted into
ashes, and is supposed to be formed by the fire, and to be the result of
a particular combination of some of the principles of the vegetable; one
of which principles is air, which is contained in large quantity in all
vegetable matters whatever. But as soon as the smallest part of a
vegetable is converted into ashes, and an alkali is thus formed, this
salt necessarily suffers a calcination, during which it is kept in a
spongy form by the ashes, and shews a very considerable degree of
acrimony if immediately applied to the body of an animal but if the
ashes are for any time exposed to the air, or if we separate the alkali
from them by the addition of a large quantity of water and subsequent
evaporation, the salt imbibes fixed air from the atmosphere, and becomes
nearly saturated with it: tho' even in this condition it is generally
more acrid than salt of tartar, when this is prepared with a gentle
heat.

Borax has sometimes been referred to the class of alkalis, on account of
some resemblance it bears to those salts: but it has been demonstrated
by accurate experiments, that we should rather consider it as a neutral
salt; that it is composed of an alkali and of a particular saline
substance called the sedative salt, which adheres to the alkali in the
same manner as an acid, but can be separated by the addition of any acid
whatever, the added acid joining itself to the alkali in the place of
the sedative salt. As this conjunction of an acid with the alkali of
borax happens without the least effervescence, our principles lay us
under a necessity of allowing that alkali to be perfectly free of air,
which must proceed from its being incapable of union with fixed air and
with the sedative salt at the same time: whence it follows, that, were
we to mix the sedative salt with an alkali saturated with air, the air
would immediately be expelled, or the two salts in joining would produce
an effervescence. This I found to be really the case upon making the
trial, by mixing a small quantity of the sedative salt with an equal
quantity of each of the three alkalis, rubbing the mixtures well in a
mortar, and adding a little water. It is however proper in this place
to observe, that, if the experiments be made in a different manner, they
are attended with a singular circumstance. If a small quantity of the
sedative salt be thrown into a large proportion of a dissolved fixed
alkali, the sedative salt gradually disappears, and is united to the
alkali without any effervescence; but if the addition be repeated
several times, it will at last be accompanied with a brisk
effervescence, which will become more and more remarkable, until the
alkali be entirely saturated with the sedative salt.

This _phaenomenon_ may be explained by considering the fixed alkalis as
not perfectly saturated with air: and the supposition will appear very
reasonable, when we recollect, that those salts are never produced
without a considerable degree of heat, which may easily be imagined to
dissipate a small portion of so volatile a body as air. Now, if a small
quantity of the sedative salt be thrown into an alkaline liquor, as it
is very slowly dissolved by water, its particles are very gradually
mixed with the atoms of the alkali. They are most strongly attracted by
such of these atoms as are destitute of air, and therefore join with
them without producing an effervescence; or, if they expel a small
quantity of air from some of the salt, this air is at the same time
absorbed by such of the contiguous particles as are destitute of it, and
no effervescence appears until that part of the alkali, which was in a
caustic form or destitute of air, be nearly saturated with the sedative
salt. But if, on the other hand, a large proportion of the sedative salt
be perfectly and suddenly mixed with the alkali, the whole, or a large
part, of the air is as suddenly expelled.

In the same manner may we also explain a similar _phaenomenon_, which
often presents itself in saturating an alkali with the different acids:
the effervescence is less considerable in the first additions of acid,
and becomes more violent as the mixture approaches the point of
saturation. This appears most evidently in making the _sal diureticus_
or regenerated tartar: The particles of the vegetable acid here employed
