commanding. "Mr. Senesin, let me explain something to you."

Jon Senesin's head jerked around. There was a confused mixture of fear
and determination on his face.

"Mr. Senesin, I no more want war than you do. I am trying to avoid it
with every power at my command. I have that duty to my people. But I
have another duty, too. A duty, not just to the Empire, but to the human
race as a whole. And that duty is to establish, not a Terran Empire, but
a Galactic Empire--a single, consolidated government for every planet in
the galaxy. Man can't go on this way, divided, split up, warring with
himself. Man can't live in isolation, cut off from other worlds, other
types of societies.

"We can't have a part of the human race living in constant fear of
another part. We can't allow the conditions that exist at this moment in
the Gehan Federation. To paraphrase Lincoln, 'The galaxy cannot exist
half slave and half free.'

"Right now, there is evidence that the Gehan Federation will collapse
internally within less than five years. The only way for the President
of the Federation to avert that collapse will be to declare war on the
Empire. We have had to take certain risks in order to insure that when
and if war does come, we will win it.

"Bairnvell was one of those risks. Not too great a one, as it turns out;
evidently the Federation government doesn't see that our possession of
that base is a vital factor in our own defense. Strategy in three
dimensions isn't easy to reason out.

"Mr. Senesin, I have no desire for power in a personal way. Any power I
have is used for the good of my people. I have no police system for
terrorizing the people; I don't suppress the freedom of every man to say
or print what he wants. To call your Sovereign a fatheaded slob in a
newsfac might be considered bad taste, but it isn't illegal. I can't
even bring a civil suit against you, the way an ordinary citizen could.

"Now, I'll grant that I sometimes use illegal means to control the
Empire. But there are reasons for that. I--"

He was interrupted by a soft chime. He pressed a button on his armchair.
"Yes?"

"You go on the interstellar hookup in twenty minutes, Sire. The File has
assembled," said a voice from a speaker.

"I'll be right there." He stood up and glanced apologetically at the
other three men. "Sorry. Political announcement, you know. You two go
ahead and explain to Mr. Senesin." Then he looked directly at the Prime
Portfolio. "I'll tell them you're slightly ill." He reached out, took
Lord Senesin's hand, and grasped it firmly. "I'll make it look good, old
friend, don't worry. I'll need your help with Lord Evondering when he
gets the Primacy."

       *       *       *       *       *

The other men were on their feet already. They watched in silence as he
walked out the door, then eased themselves back into their chairs.

"I still don't understand," Jon said softly. The bitterness and anger
seemed to have left him, leaving only puzzlement in their wake. "If you
take orders from him, Dad, then this isn't a democracy any more. It's
become another Imperial dictatorship."

"Son," said his father, "the Empire never has been a democracy in the
sense you're thinking about. Ever since Jerris the First, it has been
ruled solely by the Emperors. Always.

"The Imperial Family is a special breed, son. It's a genetic strain in
which the quality of wise leadership is dominant. It's a quality that's
more than just intelligence; wisdom is the ability to make correct
judgments, not only for one's self, but for others."

"But, Dad!" There was almost a wail in the boy's voice. "That makes the
whole democratic system in the Empire a farce! It's totally unnecessary!
_You're_ unnecessary! He could run everything by himself!"

Lord Senesin started to say something, but Colonel Sorban interrupted.

"No, you young fool, he is _not_ unnecessary! He is, in a very real
sense, the Emperor's shield. Our Emperors have always given the people
of the Empire the kind of government they _need_, not the kind of
government they _want_. There are certain things that _must_ be done,
whether the people like those things or not.

"How long do you think the Empire would last without the Imperial Line
to guide it? Not ten years! The thing is too big, too vast, for any
ordinary man to handle the job. The voters are perfectly capable of
electing a man to the Primacy on the strength of his likable personality
alone--look at Lord Evondering. A hell of a pleasant guy, without a
glimmering of real wisdom.

"When the people don't like the things the Government does, they throw
it out--even if the thing done was actually for the best. The people
demand a new Government. We can't allow them to throw the Emperor out,
so we need a scapegoat. This time, it happened to be your father, here.
He happened to be Prime at a crucial time, and he had to give orders
that made him unpopular. So he'll have to get out, and let the Loyal
Opposition take over. But the Emperor will go right on running things.

"Your father is far from unnecessary, son. He's a hero, dammit, and
you'd better remember that! He's taking the rap for another man because
he knows that he is expendable and the other man isn't.

"Oh, your father could probably ride this thing out and stay in the
Primacy for a couple more years. But this mess with the Federation is
going to get a lot stickier than it is now. The Emperor is going to have
to do things that the people will hate even worse, and we might as well
let that fool Evondering take the rap. He'll look so bad by the time he
leaves the Primacy that everyone will be screaming for your father back
again, to clean up the mess."

Jon Senesin still looked dazed. "But, if that's the case, why allow the
people to vote at all?"

"Because that's the only way you can keep an Empire stable! As long as
the average man feels he has a voice in his Government, he's forced to
admit that any failures are partly his own fault. Nobody rebels against
a government he can vote against. As long as he has ballots, he won't
use bullets."

Lord Senesin said: "I know it's a shock, coming this way. But look at it
right, son."

       *       *       *       *       *

"I am," said Jon slowly. "At least, I think I am. But it doesn't really
seem right. Not yet." He looked at the colonel. "One thing I don't
understand, my lord. Why did you let me take all that evidence around to
the newsies? And why are you telling me all this now? I'm still not
fully convinced. Aren't you afraid I'll tell the whole story?"

But it was his father who answered. "You tried that, son. It didn't
work, did it?"

"No. But _why_? Why wouldn't they believe me, even when I had all that
evidence?"

"Because they don't _want_ to believe you," said the colonel. "Ever hear
of a father-image? The Emperor is a symbol, Jon. He's not a human being
in the eyes of the average man. He's the kind All-Father, the godlike
