
Anita started to follow him. I stopped her and waited until the door had
closed behind Fred and Mother.

"You were right about Fred, Anita," I said. "Thank you for saving my
life."

"Oh, Gyp," she said, tears trying to brim over her eyelids. "He's such a
cutthroat!"

"Sure," I said. "But now we know it. Get me an appointment with George
Kelly, will you, Anita?"

She compressed her lips. "That's more like it!" she said angrily. "Get
Fred kicked clear out of the Bureau. George Kelly is a great Director,
Gyp, and he'll do it if you insist."

"Maybe," I said. I stewed over what to tell the boss until Anita came
back in.

"Mr. Kelly can see you now, Mr. Tinker," she said, all calmed down
again.

I got up and came around the desk and took her by the elbow, standing at
my door. "Just in case," I said, leaning down to kiss her lightly on the
lips. "I love you, too."

"Too?" she said.

I froze. It was the kind of slip that sooner or later trips up every
snake. My grin was a sick one. I walked out without another word.

       *       *       *       *       *

The Director's office is on the fourth floor, I climbed the single
flight, and his girl let me in. George affects long slim cigars. I say
affects. He seldom lights them, but he waves them like batons,
conducting some kind of a symphony of words and ideas all day.

"Welcome, stranger," he said, calling on the fiddles for a little
pizzicato. "What's up, Gyp?"

I sat down across from him at his desk and tried to put a smile on my
face. "I want to submit my resignation, George," I said. "Effective
immediately."

"Not accepted," he said, without a second thought. Then his face grew
solemn. "What's this about?" he demanded. "I can't lose _you_, Gyp. My
right bower!"

"One favor," I said, not answering him. "Don't move Fred Plaice up to my
old spot. Any of the other Section Chiefs, but not Fred."

"Well, well," George said, whipping up the brasses with his cigar.
"This begins to sound like cause and effect." He hushed the whole
orchestra to a whisper. "I thought Fred was your fair-haired boy, Gyp.
You two get in a hassle?"

I shook my head. "Not directly, George," I told him. "I want you to know
two things. They'll explain why I'm quitting. My mother is a telepath.
We arrested her early this morning, here in the District. I just
sentenced her to transportation and detention in Oklahoma."

"Good heavens," he gasped. "Your own mother! Gyp, no wonder you're
upset. Didn't you know she was a snake?"

My smile was a little tired. "Of course I knew," I told him. "I ran away
from home at thirteen to get away from having her inside my head all the
time. That's how I learned to close my mind--closing her out as much as
I could. The power got stronger as I grew older."

"It's embarrassing," George said, turning away from me to look out the
window. "To have you, of all people, Gyp, with telepathic heredity.
Still, if no one knows, and since you've never had the slightest
manifestation of psi powers yourself, there may be some way we can
preserve your usefulness."

"Today, within the last half hour, George, my latent telepathic ability
became manifest. George, I'm a snake."

His face froze. Then the batonlike cigar stopped its movement. He was
like a statue. The pose broke, and he pressed a button.

"Send Carol Lundgren in," he ordered. I knew Carol, another short-range
telepath that George used as his private lie-detector.

Carol was at my elbow in a moment or so. George wasted no words. "Carol,
is there a telepath in this room?" he asked.

Carol grinned. "Yep," he said to the enforced silence. "There is."
George Kelly's face fell. "His name is Carol Lundgren," the kid went on.
"Next question?"

George looked as though he could have brained him. "All right, you
Philadelphia lawyer," he grumbled. "Besides yourself, Carol, is there a
telepath in this room?"

"No, Mr. Kelly, there is not."

"Get out, and don't scare me like that again." George told him.

I didn't get it. I said so: "George, I don't get it. I read my mother's
thoughts, and for that matter, Fred Plaice's thoughts, too. That's why I
asked you not to give him my job. I swear to you I can read thoughts."

"So?"

"If I _know_ I'm a telepath, Carol should be able to read the thought
that I know it," I protested.

"You're like me," George Kelly said. "You automatically close your mind
in the presence of a telepath. It's pure reflex now. Carol couldn't read
a thing because you clammed your thoughts the instant he walked in."

"That was _then_!" I yelled at him. "_Before_ my psi powers became
manifest. You know that a telepath can't close his mind! Why couldn't
Carol read my thoughts?"

_Well_, George thought, _he couldn't read mine either, could he?_

_No_, I thought. _He couldn't. He ... George!_ my mind shrieked at him.

Somebody kicked the props out from under my world. _George Kelly was a
snake!_

_Don't be silly_, he thought. _I'm no more a snake than you are, Gyp._

_But you're a telepath!_

_So are you, Gyp_, he thought. _The only kind of telepath that really
counts. You can read minds, but others can't read yours._

I fell back on words, closing my mind--it was rattling so I didn't want
George to read my thoughts: "But a telepath _can't_ close his mind!" I
protested.

"I hope the Russians are as sure of that as you are, Gyp," George
grinned. "The only agents we have in Russia are closed-mind
telepaths--telepaths who don't automatically give themselves away. Now
_that_ kind of a telepath really _is_ a usable espionage agent or a safe
