"It's up to you," the reporter said. "I'd like to see it."

"Come along," said Malcom Porter.

       *       *       *       *       *

Elshawe followed Porter out to the field, feeling rather grateful that
he was getting something to work on. They walked across the field, past
the two gun-toting men in Levis that Porter had guarding the ship.
Overhead, the stars were shining brightly through the thin mountain air.
Elshawe glanced at his wrist watch. It was a little after ten p.m.

He helped Porter wheel the ramp up to the door of the ship and then
followed him up the steps. Porter unlocked the door and went inside. The
Grumman had been built to cruise in the high stratosphere, so it was as
air-tight as a submarine.

Porter switched on the lights. "Go on in."

The reporter stepped into the cabin of the ship and looked around. It
had been rebuilt, all right; it didn't look anything like the inside of
a normal stratojet.

"Elshawe."

"Yeah?" The reporter turned to look at Porter, who was standing a little
behind him. He didn't even see the fist that arced upward and smashed
into his jaw. All he saw was a blaze of light, followed by darkness.

The next thing he knew, something was stinging in his nostrils. He
jerked his head aside, coughing. The smell came again. Ammonia.

"Wake up, Elshawe," Porter was saying. "Have another whiff of these
smelling salts and you'll feel better."

Elshawe opened his eyes and looked at the bigger man. "I'm awake. Take
that stuff away. What's the idea of slugging me?"

"I was afraid you might not come willingly," Porter said apologetically.
"I needed a witness, and I figured you'd do better than anyone else."

Elshawe tried to move and found that he was tied to the seat and
strapped in with a safety belt. "What's this for?" he asked angrily. His
jaw still hurt.

"I'll take that stuff off in a few minutes. I know I can trust you, but
I want you to remember that I'm the only one who can pilot this ship. If
you try anything funny, neither one of us will get back alive. I'll let
you go as soon as we get up to three hundred miles."

Elshawe stared at him. "Where are we?"

"Heading out toward mid-Pacific. I headed south, to Mexico, first. We're
over open water now, headed toward Baja California, so I put on the
autopilot. As soon as we get out over the ocean, we can really make
time. You can watch the sun come up in the west."

"And then?" Elshawe felt dazed.

"And then we head straight up. For empty space."

Elshawe closed his eyes again. He didn't even want to think about it.

       *       *       *       *       *

"... As you no doubt heard," Terrence Elshawe dictated into the phone,
"Malcom Porter made good his threat to take a spaceship of his own
devising to the Moon. Ham radios all over North America picked up his
speech, which was made by spreading the beam from an eighty-foot
diameter parabolic reflector and aiming it at Earth from a hundred
thousand miles out. It was a collapsible reflector, made of thin foil,
like the ones used on space stations. Paragraph.

"He announced that the trip was made with the co-operation of the United
States Space Force, and that it represented a major breakthrough in the
conquest of space. He--"

"Just a sec," Winstein's voice broke in. "Is that the truth? Was he
really working with the Space Force?"

"Hell, no," said Elshawe. "But they'll have to claim he was now. Let me
go on."

"Shoot."

"... He also beamed a message to the men on Moon Base One, telling them
that from now on they would be able to commute back and forth from Luna
to Earth, just as simply as flying from New York to Detroit. Paragraph.

"What followed was even more astounding. At tremendous acceleration,
Malcom Porter and Terrence Elshawe, your reporter, headed for Mars.
Inside Porter's ship, there is no feeling of acceleration except for a
steady, one-gee pull which makes the passenger feel as though he is on
an ordinary airplane, even though the spaceship may be accelerating at
more than a hundred gravities. Paragraph.

"Porter's ship circled Mars, taking photographs of the Red Planet--the
first close-ups of Mars to be seen by the human race. Then, at the same
tremendous rate of speed, Porter's ship returned to Earth. The entire
trip took less than thirty-six hours. According to Porter, improved
ships should be able to cut that time down considerably. Paragraph."

[Illustration]

"Have you got those pics?" Winstein cut in.

"Sure. Porter gave me an exclusive in return for socking me. It was
worth it. Remember back in the Twenties, when the newspapermen talked
about a scoop? Well, we've got the biggest scoop of the century."

"Maybe," said Winstein. "The Government hasn't made any announcement
yet. Where's Porter?"

"Under arrest, where'd you think? After announcing that he would land on
his New Mexico ranch, he did just that. As soon as he stepped out, a
couple of dozen Government agents grabbed him. Violation of parole--he
left the state without notifying his parole officer. But they couldn't
touch me, and they knew it.

"Here's another bit of news for your personal information. A bomb went
off inside the ship after it landed and blew the drive to smithereens.
The only information is inside Porter's head. He's got the Government
where the short hair grows."

"Looks like it. See here, Terry; you get all the information you can and
be back here by Saturday. You're going to go on the Weekend Report."

"Me? I'm no actor. Let Maxon handle it."

"No. This is hot. You're an eye-witness. Maxon will interview you.
Understand?"

"O.K.; you're the boss, Ole. Anything else?"

"Not right now, but if anything more comes up, call in."

"Right. 'Bye." He hung up and leaned back in his chair, cocking his feet
up on the desk. It was Malcom Porter's desk and Malcom Porter's chair.
He was sitting in the Big Man's office, just as though he owned it. His
jaw still hurt a little, but he loved every ache of it. It was hard to
remember that he had ever been angry with Porter.

Just before they had landed, Porter had said: "They'll arrest me, of
course. I knew that when I left. But I think I can get out of it. There
will be various kinds of Government agents all over the place, but they
won't find anything. I've burned all my notebooks.

"I'll instruct my attorney that you're to have free run of the place so
that you can call in your story."

       *       *       *       *       *

The phone rang. Elshawe grabbed up the receiver and said: "Malcom
Porter's residence." He wished that they had visiphones out in the
country; he missed seeing the face of the person he was talking to.

"Let me talk to Mr. Terrence Elshawe, please," said the voice at the
other end. "This is Detective Lieutenant Martin of the Los Angeles
Police Department."

"This is me, Marty."

"Good! Boy, have I had trouble getting to you! I had to make it an
official call before the phone company would put the call through. How
does it feel to be notorious?"

"Great. What's new?"

"I got the dope on that Skinner fellow. I suppose you still want it? Or
has success gone to your head?"

Elshawe had almost forgotten about Skinner. "Shoot," he said.

The police officer rattled off Samuel Skinner's vital statistics--age,
sex, date and place of birth, and so on. Then: "He lived in New York
until 1977. Taught science for fifteen years at a prep school there.
He--"

"Wait a second," Elshawe interrupted. "When was he born? Repeat that."

"March fourth, nineteen-thirty."

"Fifty-three," Elshawe said, musingly. "Older than he looks. O.K.; go
on."

"He retired in '77 and came to L.A. to live. He--"

"Retired at the age of forty-seven?" Elshawe asked incredulously.

"That's right. Not on a teacher's pension, though. He's got some kind of
annuity from a New York life insurance company. Pays pretty good, too.
He gets a check for two thousand dollars on the third of every month. I
checked with his bank on that. Nice, huh?"

"Very nice. Go on."

"He lives comfortably. No police record. Quiet type. One servant, a
Chinese, lives with him. Sort of combination of valet and secretary.

"As far as we can tell, he has made four trips in the past three years.
One in June of '79, one in June of '80, one in June of '81, and this
year he made the fourth one. In '79, he went to Silver City, New Mexico.
In '80 and '81, he went to Hawaii. This year, he went to Silver City
again. Mean anything to you?"

"Not yet," Elshawe said. "Are you paying for this call, or is the City
of Los Angeles footing the bill?"

"Neither. You are."

"Then shut up and let me think for a minute." After less than a minute,
he said: "Martin, I want some more data on that guy. I'm willing to pay
for it. Should I hire a private detective?"

"That's up to you. I can't take any money for it, naturally--but I'm
willing to nose around a little more for you if I can. On the other
