Inside the shining pleasure dome, six thousand Jed Carters lay dying on
an afternoon hillside. The war was gone to another hill and he was alone
now with the grass wind and the small summer sounds of the earth. His
pain was a soft ache like a child's secret tears and his life was
slipping reluctantly from him in a trickling red ribbon. He heard the
sweet sound of a bird and the song of it wrung his heart. There were so
many songs yet unheard, so much soft laughter unborn, so many caresses
yet to be shared; a lifetime of summers, waiting, now never to be
filled. His heart cried at the thought of them.

The sun warmed him like a great golden lover and filled him with an
ineffable sadness for the bright days to come that would never be his.

And now at the last he thought of her. His heart ached for her, craving
one more of those lost mornings when he had awakened in the dawn at her
sleeping side and with his eyes happily loved her sweet slumbering face,
haloed by the marvel of her wheat hair catching the first glints of the
new sun.

In a last languid movement he turned on his back and opened his eyes to
the bright sky. He felt her stir. Her arm brushed him and the vibrancy
of her being sang through him. She opened her eyes and her love smiled
out at him. The smile brightened her face until it spread across the sky
and grew brilliant like the sun. She reached out for him. He sighed with
a great breath of quiet happiness because she was the sun smiling down
at him and at last he rose up and went to meet her.

       *       *       *       *       *

"It's time they were coming out," Herschell said. "Let's get back."

They entered the lobby, deserted except for a scattering of ushers, and
waited.

"Why aren't they coming out?" Lemson asked, more of the emptiness than
of his companion. "It's ten minutes since the scheduled ending. Do you
suppose the projection's broken down or maybe--"

"Relax, Cy, you know these preems. Always a bag full of delays, starting
with late VIP arrivals."

"There've been no delays. They started on time--"

The sound of sirens spiralled out of the night and whirled the two men
around to face the entrance. Lights raced frantically across the plaza
as a dozen turbine vehicles whined to a stop in front. More were
arriving. Medical teams and squads of policemen burst through the doors.
They ran past the slow float shafts to the elevators.

"What's happened?" Lemson screamed. "What's going on?" He tugged at a
uniformed sleeve but was thrust aside by the running man.

Herschell and Lemson followed, half running, to the elevators. Herschell
shouted an inquiry at a cluster of policemen surging into one of the
cars but the nearest grim-visaged man almost angrily waved them away
from the door as it closed in their faces.

"The manager's office!" Herschell cried and they ran for a private
elevator. Seconds later they dashed into the manager's office.

"He's not here," Lemson wailed.

Herschell snapped a switch on the desk and a harried, shocked face
appeared on the viphone screen. "Mr. Herschell! Mr. Lemson!"

"Pete!" Herschell exclaimed, "why've we got the police and medicos? An
accident?"

The man's lips quivered as he spoke. "A lot of the patrons are dead."

"WHAT?!! How many?"

"Don't know ... yet ... maybe all," Pete said brokenly.

"What in heaven's name happened?"

"The death scene ... Rowe killed them ..."

"You're crazy!" Herschell shouted. "It's impossible! The projector's
triggered to shut off if the patron's in danger."

"What everybody thought," Pete said, "but the house doc said something
about the projectors being keyed to extreme agitation; racing pulse,
increased blood pressure. That didn't happen here. The people weren't
alarmed. Nothing to trigger a shutoff. Doc said the death was ...
was ..." Pete turned away, trying to hold back tears.

Herschell kept himself from shouting. "Was what?"

"... was ... sweet ... beautiful ..." Pete's shoulders shook with a spasm
of sobs that muffled some of his words, "... should be ... here ... see
it ... kids too ... rows and rows of ... people ... all smiling ..."


THE END




Transcriber's Note:

    This etext was produced from _Amazing Science Fiction Stories_
    September 1959. Extensive research did not uncover any evidence that
    the U.S. copyright on this publication was renewed. Minor spelling
    and typographical errors have been corrected without note.





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of The Premiere, by Richard Sabia

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE PREMIERE ***

***** This file should be named 24865.txt or 24865.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
