warehouse with a thermite grenade. Pulling the pin, he tossed the
sputtering bomb through a window of the burning building. "Stop him!"
the white-helmeted fire-chief shouted.

"Stop him, hell!" a consumer replied. "Man, we got a rebellion going.
Don't you guys try to throw cold water on it unless you'd like to be
squirted solid ice with your own hose."

       *       *       *       *       *

The fire-chief, his hands raised in despair, turned to his colleagues.
"Stand by, boys," he said. "Nothing we can do till the cops get here to
quell this bunch."

"Pretty, isn't it?" one of the firemen remarked, dropping the canvas
hose. "We never get to see a building burn all the way. Think of all the
papers in there, file-cabinets full of government regulations, lists of
all our birthdays, quota-forms; all curling up and turning brown and
reaching the kindling point. Nice fire, Chief."

The fire-chief faced Headquarters, a new look replacing his anxiety. "It
is kind of pretty," he admitted. He turned to the consumer ringleader.
"OK with you if we throw a little water on the fireworks warehouse?" he
asked.

"Sure," the man said. "We don't want to blow up the old home-town; we
only want to put the BSG out of business." His band of consumers stepped
back from the yellow fireplug to let the firemen hook up their hoses,
toggle on the pressure, and begin playing water over the blank face of
the fireworks warehouse.

Captain Winfree was buried in hard-fisted civilians, all seemingly
intent on erasing him as the most familiar symbol of the Bureau of
Seasonal Gratuities. Winfree bobbed to the surface of the maelstrom for
a moment, waving his saber, and shouted, "MacHenery! Get these jokers
off my back before I'm knee-deep in cold meat." He thwacked another of
his assailants across the pate with the flat of his blade.

MacHenery, using his saber as a lever, pried himself a path through the
crowd. As he reached Captain Winfree, he raised his saber. The crowd
about the two men retreated. "These folks have suffered a lot from you,
Captain," MacHenery said. "Think maybe they're due to see a little
bloodshed?"

"OK by me," Winfree said, panting, "if you don't mind shedding it." He
raised his saber in salute--the only fencing-movement he'd become
proficient in--and jumped into a crouch. MacHenery closed, and the two
blades met in a clanging opening. Peggy's father, for all his handicap
of twenty years, was a fencer; Winfree, in his maiden effort as a
sabreur, used his weapon like a club. He allemanded about MacHenery, now
and then dashing in with clumsy deliveries that were always met by the
older man's blade.

Those firemen not immediately concerned with spraying the warehouse
wall mounted the racks of their truck to watch the duel. BSG-men and
-women, huddled close to the warmth of the burning building, watched
unhappily as their champion was forced to retreat before MacHenery's
technique. "He'll kill him!" Peggy shouted. She was restrained from
trying to break up the fight by two burly consumers.

       *       *       *       *       *

Winfree, trying a gambit he'd seen in one of MacHenery's books but had
never before attempted, extended his saber and flew forward toward
MacHenery in a fleche. MacHenery caught Winfree's blade on his own and
tossed it aside. He brought back his own weapon to sketch a line down
the Captain's right cheek. The scratch was pink for a moment, then it
started to bleed heavily. The crowd shouted encouragement, the
BSG-troops groaned. "Keep cool, Wes," MacHenery whispered to his
opponent as they dos-a-doed back into position. "I have to make this
look fierce or they'll insist on lynching you."

"Don't make it look too good," Winfree panted. "Cover yourself--I might
hurt you out of sheer clumsiness." His chin and throat were covered with
blood, now; blood enough to satisfy the most indignant consumer. The
moment the measure was set again, Winfree lunged, trying to slip his
blade beneath MacHenery's guard to strike his arm. His foible met the
flash of the other man's forte, and his blade bounced aside like a
sprung bow.

MacHenery slammed his saber into Winfree's, spinning the weapon out of
his hand into the crowd. He lunged then, delivering his point against
Winfree's chest. Peggy, released from her captors, burst from the crowd
to throw herself against her father. "Stop it, Daddy!" she pleaded,
"please stop!"

MacHenery raised his saber in salute. "All right, Pocahontas," he said.
"Take your John Smith home and patch up that cut. It's no worse than
what he gets shaving." He turned to the crowd, his saber still raised in
salute. "Potlatch is over forever!" he shouted.

Urged by a delegation of music-loving consumers, the tubist raised his
ravaged horn. The other members of the BSG Band-and-Glee-Club gathered
round him, all ragged, some with one eye closed by a purple fist-mark;
and they began, on the tubist's signal, "God Rest Ye Merry, Gentlemen."
The District Headquarters building, gutted, was glowing like an
abandoned fireplace. The firemen joined the singing as they coiled their
hoses. The Potlatch Riot was over.

Winfree led his wife to their car. The _Just Married_ sign was still in
place, but the car's train of shoes and milk-cans had been ripped off to
furnish ammunition in the fight. "Let's go home, Peggy," Winfree said.
"I yearn for a fireside and some privacy."

Kevin MacHenery spoke from the back seat. "You deserve them, Wes," he
said.

"What are you doing here?" Peggy demanded, twisting to face her father.
"After you cut up my Wes you should be ashamed to show us your face."

"I want to apologize for that unfortunate necessity," MacHenery said.
"But if I hadn't scratched him, Peggy-my-heart, the mob might have done
more radical surgery. I saw one consumer with a rope, trying different
knots."

"Apology accepted," Winfree said. "Now, if you don't mind, Mr.
MacHenery, Peggy and I'd like to be alone."

"Of course," MacHenery said. "First, though, I'd like to present you a
decoration to commemorate your part in this skirmish, Wes." He took the
little white feather from his hatbrim and attached it to Winfree's
tattered, blood-stained tunic.

"What's this for?" Winfree asked.

"For services rendered the Rebellion," MacHenery said. "I've often
wondered why it's only the Tom Paines and the Jeffersons who get honored
by successful rebels. There's many a revolution, Wesley, that would have
