door.

It was locked.

He pressed the bell then and heard its clarion sound inside the house.
But other than that there was nothing to be heard. A deep, ominous
silence that somehow brought a feeling of panic to him. Was he too late?

And then suddenly the panel in the front of the door opened and a face
peered out at him.

Fred Trent felt the blood drain from his lips. A paralysis seemed to
grip his body at what he saw framed in the opening.

For it was not the face of a human being. And yet, it was not the face
of an animal. It was a horrible, twisted, cat-like visage that peered
out at him, furred and ugly, with bared teeth and glowing, feline eyes.

And as he looked, a sound came from the twisted lips. It was the same
sound he had heard over the telephone. The sound of a growling rage.

And as the sound hit his ears, a terrible realization swept over him.
For his eyes, riveted on that monstrous countenance, had registered an
impossible fact upon his mind.

_As twisted as it was, as horribly changed into an animal grimace, it
was the face of someone he knew--the English scientist, Blair Gaddon!_

And then suddenly the face vanished from the opening. And Fred Trent
felt his paralysis leave him. He knew now that he should never have come
alone. That he should have called the police first. That he--

The door swung open then and Trent found himself facing the thing that
had been Gaddon.

He took a backward step and started to turn and run for his car and
help, but he was too slow.

An arm shot out and a claw-like hand suddenly gripped his shoulder in a
swift, steel-like movement. He felt himself being pulled forward and
into the house, as another growl snarled from the lips of the creature.

Trent tried to break the grip of that vise-like hand. He tried to smash
his fist into the ugly visage of a face that confronted him. But he was
like a child in that grip. And like a child, he was hurled across the
hall, and he heard the door slam shut behind him.

As he got slowly to his feet and turned to face the creature, he heard a
sobbing sound from the open door of the consultation room. It was the
voice of Joan Drake.

And then the monster had reached him and the clawed hand reached out
and spun him through the doorway, into the consultation room. And he
heard a growling voice utter harshly: "You will regret this
interference, Trent!"

And he knew that it was the voice of Blair Gaddon. And yet he also knew
that it was not the same voice. It was changed. It had a bestial quality
to it.

Then Trent looked around him. He saw Joan Drake, huddled in a corner of
the room, beside Dr. Stanley Fenwick. The specialist was sitting in a
chair, holding his right hand to his mouth. Fred could see blood oozing
from a gash in the surgeon's lips.

       *       *       *       *       *

And then he heard another sound. A sound from without the house, coming
from the rear. It was the baying of Brutus. The big dog must have sensed
the presence of the monster. And it was protesting in its animal voice,
a mournful dirge.

Then his attention was drawn once again to the animal body of Blair
Gaddon. And now that the first shock had left him, Trent stared at the
man. He heard the girl sob.

"Fred! I told you to bring help--"

"Be quiet!" the voice of Gaddon issued from the twisted lips. And the
girl's sob stifled itself in a look of dread.

Then the face that had been Gaddon turned to Trent. There was a twisted
leer to it, and Fred sensed that there was a struggle going on in that
warped mind.

"You are Gaddon? The Blair Gaddon who went up with the experimental
rocket?" Trent's voice came incredulously.

The face of the creature twisted in a grimace of acknowledgment.

"Yes, Trent. I am Blair Gaddon. I am not a pretty sight to look at, am
I?" Words left the twisted lips, and there was a bestial pain in them.

"But--you're supposed to be dead! Mathieson--"

A strange sound of irony came from Gaddon.

"Mathieson was right about the cosmic rays--I know that now. Look at me!
You see what has happened to me? I sought immortality through the life
energy of space--and look at me!"

Horror reflected in Fred's eyes in that moment. For he felt the pained
terror in the voice of the animal shape before him. And he saw the
claw-like hands clench spasmodically.

"My glands!" the voice screamed. "The cosmic rays reacted on them--fed
the essence of the cat into them--changed me into this monstrous being!"

Trent stared at the rage-filled face. Felt the emotion that was sweeping
through the creature. Felt a sudden compassion that was erased by the
bestial look that came into the monster's eyes.

And then it turned toward the chair where Fenwick sat. The doctor was
looking at the creature, his eyes wide and terrified.

"But what do you expect me to do for you, Gaddon? Why do you stand here
threatening--" Fenwick's voice came hoarsely.

"Why? You fool! Because there is so little time! I am changing! Even now
my human instincts are nearly gone!... You're a gland specialist! There
is something you can do--stop this change--stop it!"

Fenwick shook his head slowly. "You're raving like a madman, Gaddon. I'm
not a God--do you think I can change something that is beyond human
understanding? If you'll only let me call in the authorities ..."

A growl of rage left Gaddon's animal lips. "Authorities! So you can have
me put in cage like a wild beast? So you and your medical experts can
stand and watch me as you would a freak? You're a fool! You'll help me
now! You'll do something--before it's too late! Do you hear me?"

The creature advanced slowly upon the doctor, and the girl backed away
to the far wall, fear mirrored in her eyes.

Then Fred Trent stepped forward, his voice tense.

"Hold on, Gaddon--of course the doctor will help you--_won't_ you,
Fenwick?"

There was an urgent emphasis in Trent's last words, and his eyes caught
those of the surgeon's, and held them in a meaningful look. He couldn't
say what he wanted to, but the message in his eyes was imparted to
Fenwick, and the doctor suddenly nodded.

"Yes--yes, of course ... But you'll have to remain quiet, Gaddon, and be
patient a moment...."

The creature stopped its advance upon Fenwick then. And a growl rumbled
in Gaddon's animal throat.

Then Fred watched as the doctor stepped swiftly to a table with
instruments and hurriedly began to prepare a hypodermic.

"I'll give you a special extract injection to start...." Fenwick
explained as he worked.

And Trent knew that the doctor was preparing an injection that would
subdue the monster. That would enable them to call the police....

And the eyes of Gaddon watched the fingers of the surgeon prepare the
hypodermic. And for a single moment the human part of Gaddon's monster
mind relaxed its tenacious hold.

       *       *       *       *       *

There was a rumble of raging thought deep within his twisted brain. It
swept up, gripped the human element, and enveloped it. A hoarse mewing
sound left the twisted lips as the mind became a single, bestial thing.

And now it thought with a viciousness. It knew now that it was finally
in control. That the full change had been completed. And it knew
suddenly what it wanted.

Its animal eyes stared at the three humans. And it felt a hatred for the
men who did not understand it. And it felt a desire for the woman who
feared it. A desire that crept out of the primeval jungles. That swept
through it to find one of its kind. And there was the vague instinct
that was Gaddon, who told it how to fulfill that desire. Gaddon, who
knew where the secret lay.

And then there was the driving urge that swept up from the animal ages.
The urge to kill, to destroy what was hated. And the eyes of the monster
fastened on the figure of Fenwick as the doctor turned from the table,
the hypodermic in his hand.

"All right, Gaddon ..."

The voice of Fenwick trailed off. And Fred Trent stared at the face of
the monster. What he saw there brought a chill to his being. And he
heard the girl gasp from the far corner of the room, as her eyes too saw
the change that had spread over the face of the creature.

For there was no longer any vestige of human recognition in that face.
There was no longer any trace of the man who had been Gaddon. There was
only the monster now. The twisted, leering lips of an animal mind.

A harsh growl left those lips then and the creature moved forward toward
the surgeon.

Trent knew what was happening, and he knew what he must do. There was
death on that bestial face. Death that was reaching out ...

He heard the dim baying of the Great Dane from the rear of the house as
he leaped forward.

Then his fist lashed out and caught the animal face in a lashing blow.
His knuckles felt numb as he screamed:

"The hypodermic--doctor--quick!"

Then the creature turned on him and a long arm shot out. Trent felt a
claw rake across his face and felt the burning bite of that claw sink
into his flesh. Then, as he tried to dodge away from the beast and bring
his fist up again, the monster leaped at him and Trent felt a powerful
blow crash against his chin.

He spun back, falling to the floor, his head hitting the edge of an
examining table. His senses reeled and he felt the blood running down
his cheek, a warm, sticky stream that dripped to the floor.

He fought to keep his consciousness as he saw the beast turn away from
him, satisfied that he was out of the way. Then he saw it leap at the
stunned figure of Fenwick.

He heard the girl scream in terror and he saw Fenwick's arm come up with
the hypodermic. He saw the doctor try to bring the needle down in a jab,
but the monster's arm swept the needle aside and then a claw-like hand
gripped Fenwick's throat.

There was a gasp of terror from Fenwick's lips as those fingers closed
around his neck. Then the hypodermic fell from his nerveless hand and he
