of thought, a lot of things can happen in a half second.

Houston realized almost instantaneously that he had made a vast mistake.
He had badly underestimated the enemy.

There was no need to worry, now, about which one of the men was a
Controller--_all three of them were!_

As soon as Sager and Pederson realized what had happened, they
leaped--mentally--into the battle. Lasser, already weakened by the
unexpected mental blow from Houston, lost consciousness when the others
let loose their blasts because his mind was still linked with Houston's,
and he absorbed a great deal of the mental energy meant for Houston's
brain.

Houston, fully warned by now, held up a denial wall which screened his
mind from the worst that Sager and Pederson could put out, but he knew
he couldn't hold out for long.

"Come in--_now!_" he said hoarsely into the microphone.

"Stupid swine!" Sager susurrated sibilantly.

Pederson said nothing aloud, but his brain was blazing with fear and
hatred. His gun hand jerked towards a holster under his arm. Lasser was
still crumpling towards the floor.

The entire action had taken less than a second.

Houston tried to fire again with his stun gun, but it required every bit
of concentration he could sum up to hold off the combined mental
assaults of Sager and Pederson.

But they, too, were at somewhat of a disadvantage. In order to keep all
their efforts concentrated on the PD policeman, both Controllers had to
refrain from putting too much attention on their bodily motions.
Pederson was still fumbling for his gun, and Sager hadn't yet started
for his.

Lasser barely touched the floor before his consciousness began to
return. The resulting fraction of a second of mental static afforded
Houston a brief respite; it disturbed Pederson just as he was getting
his fingers on the butt of his weapon.

Both Controllers were focusing their mental energies on Houston's brain,
and during the brief respite, Houston made one vital mental adjustment.
He allowed both thought-probes to fuse in a small part of his
consciousness. They went _through_ him and lashed back at the two
Controllers.

Both of them had had their minds tuned to Houston's, and in that instant
they found they, were also attuned to each other.

The resultant of the energy was shocking to Houston, but it was
infinitely worse for Sager and Pederson, since neither of them had been
expecting it. Pederson, who had already been slightly distracted, got
the major brunt of the force. He managed to jerk his gun free, but his
brain was already lapsing into unconsciousness.

       *       *       *       *       *

Houston's fingers tightened on his own weapon. It fired once at Lasser,
who was trying to lift himself from the floor. Then it swept up and
coughed again, dropping Pederson. His pistol barked once, sending a
singing ricochet along the hall.

Sager, who had staggered to one side when he and Pederson had
short-circuited each other, had time to get behind the protection of
the office door. He couldn't close it because Lasser's and Pederson's
inert forms blocked the doorway, but at least it afforded protection
against Houston's stun gun.

His thought came through to Houston: _So the stupid Normals have a
Controller working for them! Traitor!_

_You're the traitor_, Houston thought coldly. _You and your megalomaniac
friends. It's madmen like you who have made telepaths hated and feared
by the Normals._

_And so they should hate and fear us_, came the snarling mental answer.
_Within a few generations, we will have supplanted them. We will control
Earth--not they._

       *       *       *       *       *

The exchange had only taken a fraction of a second. Houston was already
charging toward the open door, hoping to get inside before Sager could
reach a weapon.

_You call me a traitor_, Houston thought, _but you have been framing
innocent Controllers, putting them into the hands of the PD Police_.

_That's a lie!_ the reply came hotly. _We would never betray another
telepath to the stupid Normals! If a telepath were so bullheaded as to
get in our way, we'd dispose of him. But it would be Controller
justice; we wouldn't turn him over to animals!_

In one blazing moment, Houston realized that the Controller was telling
the truth!

No mental communication can be expressed properly in words. In, behind,
and around each statement, other, dimmer nuances of thought gleam
through. Each thought tells the receiver much more than can be put down
in crude verbal symbols.

Thus, Houston already knew that Lasser, Sager, and Pederson were the
three top men in a world-wide clique of megalomaniac Controllers. This
was the top of the madmen's organization; these three were the _creme de
la creme_ of the Normal human's real enemies.

He knew that there were twelve others scattered over Earth, and he knew
where and who they were. That brief exchange had brought all the
information into Houston's own mind as it leaked from the minds of the
others. He knew it without thinking about how he knew it.

And they were _not_ the ones who had been turning the sane Controllers
over to the Psychodeviant Police!

Then who was? And why?

Houston was right back where he had started.

But that brief instant of confusion was Houston's downfall. Sager
instantly realized that he had delivered, inadvertently, a telling blow
to Houston's mind.

Physically, Houston had been propelling himself toward the open door. At
the instant of the revelation, he had been part way through it. And at
that moment, Sager acted.

He slammed all his weight violently against his side of the door,
knocking Houston off balance as the door swung and struck him. He went
down, and Sager was on top of him before he struck the floor.

It was the weirdest battle ever fought, but its true worth could only
have been detected by another telepath. It was intense and brutal.

The men fought both physically and mentally. They struggled for
possession of the stun gun, at the same time hurling emotion-charged
shafts of mental energy at each other's brains.

The struggle lasted less than a minute. Somehow, Sager managed to get
one hand on the gun, twisting it. Houston, trying to keep it out of
Sager's hand, jerked it up between them.

It coughed once, sending a beam of supersonic energy into the bodies of
both men.

The effect was the same as if they had both been crowned with baseball
bats.

       *       *       *       *       *

Little pinpoints of light against a sea of darkness.

_I'm cold_, Houston thought. _And I'm sick._

He couldn't tell whether his eyes were open or closed--and he didn't
much care.

He tried to move his arms and legs, found he couldn't, and gave it up.

He blinked.

_My eyes must be open_, he thought, _if I can blink_.

Well, then, if his eyes were open, why couldn't he see anything? All he
could see were the little pinpoints of light against a background of
utter blackness.

_Like stars_, he thought.

_Stars? STARS!_

With a sudden rush, total awareness came back to him, and he realized
with awful clarity where he was.

He was chained, spread-eagled, on an asteroid in the Penal Cluster,
nearly a hundred million miles from Earth.

It was easy to piece together what had happened. He dimly remembered
that he had started to wake up once before. It was a vague, confused
recollection, but he knew what had taken place.

The PD Police, coming in response to his call, had found all four men
unconscious from the effects of the stun beam. Naturally, all of them
had been taken into custody; the PD Police had to find out which one of
the men was the Controller and which the controlled. That could easily
be tested by waiting until they began to wake up; the resulting mental
disturbances would easily identify the telepath.

Houston could imagine the consternation that must have resulted when the
PD men found that all three suspects--_and_ their brother officer--were
Controllers.

And now here he was--tried, convicted, and sentenced while he was
unconscious--doomed to spend the rest of his life chained to a rock
floating in space.

A sudden chill of terror came over him. Why wasn't he asleep? Why wasn't
he under hibernene?

_It's their way of being funny_, came a bitter thought. _We're supposed
to be under hibernene, but we're left to die, instead._

For a moment, Houston did not realize that the thought was not his own,
so well did it reflect his own bitterness. It was bad enough to have to
live out one's life under the influence of the hibernation drug, but it
was infinitely worse to be conscious. Under hibernene, he would have
known nothing; his sleeping mind in his comatose body would never have
realized what had happened to him. But this way, he would remain fully
awake while his body used up the air too fast and his stomach became
twisted with hunger pangs which no amount of intravenous feeding could
quell. Oh, he'd live, all right--for a few months--but it would be
absolute hell while he lasted. Insanity and catatonia would come long
before death.

       *       *       *       *       *

_That's a nasty thought; I wish you hadn't brought it up._

That wasn't his own thought! There was someone else out here!

_Hell, yes, my friend; we're all out here._

"Where are you?" Houston asked aloud, just to hear his own voice. He
knew the other couldn't hear the words which echoed so hollowly inside
the bubble of the spacesuit helmet, but the thought behind them would
carry.

"You mean with relation to yourself?" came the answer. "I don't know. I
can see several rocks around me, but I can't tell which one you're on."

Houston could tell now that the other person was talking aloud, too. So
great was the illusion carried to his own brain that it almost seemed as
though he could hear the voice with his ears.

"Then there are others around us?" Houston asked.

"Sure. There were three of us: a Hawaiian named Jerry Matsukuo; a girl
from Bombay, Sonali Siddhartha; and myself, Juan Pedro de Cadiz. Jerry
and Sonali are taking a little nap. You're the first of your group to
wake up."

"My group?"

"Certainly, my friend. There are five of you; the other four must still
be unconscious."

Four? That would be Lasser, Sager, Pederson, and--_and Dorrine!_

Juan Pedro de Cadiz picked up the whole thought-process easily.

"The girl--I'm sorry," he said. "But the other three--of us all, I
think, they deserve this."

"Juan!" came another thought-voice. "Have our newcomers awakened?"

"Just one of them, my sweet," replied the Spaniard. "Sonali, may I
present Mr. David Houston. Mr. Houston, the lovely Sonali Siddhartha."

"Juano has a habit of jumping to conclusions, David," said the girl.
"He's never even seen me, and I'm sure that after three weeks of being
locked in this prison whatever beauty I may have had has disappeared."

"Your thoughts are beautiful, Sonali," said Juan Pedro, "and with us,
that is all that counts."

"It is written," said a third voice, "that he who disturbs the slumber
of his betters will wake somebody up. You people are giving me dreams,
with your ceaseless mental chatter."

"Ah!" the Spaniard said. "Mr. Matsukuo, may I--"

"I heard, Romeo, I heard," said the Hawaiian. "An ex-cop, eh? I wonder
if I like you? I'll take a few thousand years to think it over; in the
meantime, you may treat me as a friend."

"I'll try to live down my reputation," said Houston.

       *       *       *       *       *

It was an odd feeling. Physically, he was alone. Around him, he could
see nothing but the blackness of space and the glitter of the stars. He
