
"A psychologist," Ch'ien repeated in a monotone. "I see."

"Yes. Now, will you stand, or do I have to ask the guards to lift you to
your feet?"

James Ch'ien recognized the inevitable, so he stood. But there was a
wary expression in his black eyes. He was not a tall man; he stood
nearly an inch shorter than Candron himself.

"You have nothing to fear, Dr. Ch'ien," Candron said smoothly. "I merely
wish to test a few of your reactions. We do not wish to hurt you." He
put his hands on the other man's shoulders, and positioned him. "There,"
he said. "Now. Look to the left."

"Hypnosis, eh?" Ch'ien said with a grim smile. "All right. Go ahead." He
looked to his left.

"Not with your head," Candron said calmly. "Face me and look to the left
with your eyes."

Ch'ien did so, saying: "I'm afraid you'll have to use drugs after all,
Dr. Wan. I will not be hypnotized."

"I have no intention of hypnotizing you. Now look to the right."

Ch'ien obeyed.

Candron's right hand was at his side, and his left hand was toying with
a button on his coat. "Now up," he said.

Dr. James Ch'ien rolled his eyeballs upward.

Candron had already taken a deep breath. Now he acted. His right hand
balled into a fist and arced upwards in a crashing uppercut to Ch'ien's
jaw. At almost the same time, he jerked the button off his coat, cracked
it with his fingers along the special fissure line, and threw it to the
floor.

As the little bomb spewed forth unbelievable amounts of ultra-finely
divided carbon in a dense black cloud of smoke, Candron threw both arms
around the collapsing physicist, ignoring the pain in the knuckles of
his right hand. The smoke cloud billowed around them, darkening the room
and obscuring the view from the monitor screens that were watching them.
Candron knew that the guards were acting now; he knew that the big
Mongols outside were already inserting the key in the door and inserting
their nose plugs; he knew that the men in the monitor room had hit an
alarm button and had already begun to flood the room with sleep gas. But
he paid no attention to these things.

Instead, he became homesick.

Home. It was a little place he knew and loved. He could no longer stand
the alien environment around him; it was repugnant, repelling. All he
could think of was a little room, a familiar room, a beloved room. He
knew the cracks in its ceiling, the feel of the varnish on the homely
little desk, the touch of the worn carpet against his feet, the very
smell of the air itself. And he loved them and longed for them with all
the emotional power that was in him.

And suddenly the darkness of the smoke-filled prison apartment was gone.

Spencer Candron stood in the middle of the little hotel room he had
rented early that morning. In his arms, he held the unconscious figure
of Dr. James Ch'ien.

He gasped for breath, then, with an effort, he stooped, allowed the limp
body of the physicist to collapse over his shoulder, and stood straight
again, carrying the man like a sack of potatoes. He went to the door of
the room and opened it carefully. The hall was empty. Quickly, he moved
outside, closing the door behind him, and headed toward the stair. This
time, he dared not trust the elevator shaft. The hotel only boasted one
elevator, and it might be used at any time. Instead, he allowed his
dislike for the stair treads to adjust his weight to a few pounds, and
then ran up them two at a time.

On the roof of the hotel, he adjusted his emotional state once more, and
he and his sleeping burden drifted off into the night, toward the sea.

       *       *       *       *       *

No mind is infinitely flexible, infinitely malleable, infinitely capable
of taking punishment, just as no material substance, however
constructed, is capable of absorbing the energies brought to bear
against it indefinitely.

A man can hate with a virulent hatred, but unless time is allowed to
dull and soothe that hatred, the mind holding it will become corroded
and cease to function properly, just as a machine of the finest steel
will become corroded and begin to fail if it is drenched with acid or
exposed to the violence of an oxidizing atmosphere.

The human mind can insulate itself, for a time, against the destructive
effects of any emotion, be it hatred, greed, despondency, contentment,
happiness, pleasure, anger, fear, lust, boredom, euphoria,
determination, or any other of the myriads of "ills" that man's
mind--and thus his flesh--is heir to. As long as a mind is capable of
changing from one to another, to rotate its crops, so to speak, the
insulation will remain effective, and the mind will remain undamaged.
But any single emotional element, held for too long, will break down the
resistance of the natural insulation and begin to damage the mind.

Even that least virulent of emotions, love, can destroy. The hot,
passionate love between new lovers must be modified or it will kill.
Only when its many facets can be shifted around, now one and now the
other coming into play, can love be endured for any great length of
time.

Possibly the greatest difference between the sane and the unsane is that
the sane know when to release a destructive force before it does more
than minimal damage; to modify or eliminate an emotional condition
before it becomes a deadly compulsion; to replace one set of concepts
with another when it becomes necessary to do so; to recognize that point
when the mind must change its outlook or die. To stop the erosion, in
other words, before it becomes so great that it cannot be repaired.

For the human mind cannot contain any emotion, no matter how weak or how
fleeting, without change. And the point at which that change ceases to
be _con_structive and becomes, instead, _de_structive--_that_ is the
ultimate point beyond which no human mind can go without forcing a
change--_any_ change--in itself.

Spencer Candron knew that. To overuse the psionic powers of the human
mind is as dangerous as overusing morphine or alcohol. There are limits
to mental powers, even as there are limits to physical powers.

_Psychokinesis_ is defined as the ability of a human mind to move, no
matter how slightly, a physical object by means of psionic application
alone. In theory, then, one could move planets, stars, even whole
galaxies by thought alone. But, in physical terms, the limit is easily
seen. Physically, it would be theoretically possible to destroy the sun
if one had enough atomic energy available, but that would require the
energy of another sun--or more. And, at that point, the Law of
Diminishing Returns comes into operation. If you don't want a bomb to
explode, but the only way to destroy that bomb is by blowing it up with
another bomb of equal power, where is the gain?

And if the total mental power required to move a planet is greater than
any single human mind can endure--or even greater than the total mental
endurance of a thousand planetsfull of minds, is there any gain?

There is not, and can never be, a system without limits, and the human
mind is a system which obeys that law.

None the less, Spencer Candron kept his mind on flight, on repulsion, on
movement, as long as he could. He was perfectly willing to destroy his
own mind for a purpose, but he had no intention of destroying it
uselessly. He didn't know how long he kept moving eastward; he had no
way of knowing how much distance he had covered nor how long it had
taken him. But, somewhere out over the smoothly undulating surface of
the Pacific, he realized that he was approaching his limit. And, a few
seconds later, he detected the presence of men beneath the sea.

He knew they were due to rise an hour before dawn, but he had no idea
how long that would be. He had lost all track of time. He had been
keeping his mind on controlling his altitude and motion, and, at the
same time, been careful to see whether Dr. Ch'ien came out of his
unconscious state. Twice more he had had to strike the physicist to keep
him out cold, and he didn't want to do it again.

So, when he sensed the presence of the American submarine beneath the
waves, he sank gratefully into the water, changing the erosive power of
