first million miles, the entire projectile, with its two occupants and
all its dead weight, would weigh considerably less than an ounce. That
was a mere start on the enormous trip ahead of us; but when that
distance was reached, we could no longer count upon terrestrial gravity
for accelerating our speed. We must travel with our accumulated
momentum, unless by that time the Sun should have taken the place of the
Earth, and with his vaster forces continue to repel us Marsward.

As we sat talking the doctor grew weary, and soon unconsciously dropped
asleep. I left him to enjoy his rest, and, tossing a scrap of ham bone
to Two-spot, I went up to take my place at the telescope.

Mars seemed to be exactly in the right part of the field. I surveyed the
starry stretches ahead with a feeling a little akin to fear. I was
queerly affected by the vast expanse of loneliness outside, and by the
deathly quiet prevailing both without and within. There was not the
slightest whizzing or whistling now. We might be hanging perfectly
motionless in space for all I knew. The batteries made no sound either.
I could hear only the low, regular breathing of the doctor as he slept,
and the slight crunching of Two-spot on his bone. Presently I thought of
looking for the danger lights, but I looked through the telescope
instead, and saw the little red planet in his proper place.

What a vast distance we were from any planet! If anything were to happen
to us, no one on Earth or in the heavens would ever know of it. I had
never been homesick, but a very little would have made me Earthsick just
then. I did not like the upper end of the projectile because I could not
look back at the home planet. I wondered if it was all dark back that
way, or if those warning lights had begun to appear. That idea seemed to
haunt me. I touched the steering wheel just a little while I kept my
eyes on Mars. He moved slightly in the field at once. Then I turned the
wheel back until he took his former place. It was reassuring to know how
easily the projectile minded her great rudder, which was now fully
extended like an enormous wing. This made me feel that we were masters
of the situation, that all this vast space was as nothing to us, that
any planet in the heavens must mind us, and that though Earth was
driving us away, she must draw us back if we willed it. More than that,
she would warn us of all dangers. Perhaps she was sending that warning
now. I had promised to look out for it. I felt that I must go down. I
crept softly past the doctor and stooped over the port-hole. My eyes had
scarcely found the Earth in the darkness when I drew back quickly and
clapped my hand over my mouth to prevent a cry escaping me. Then I
looked again more closely. There was no small illuminated portion of the
surface this time, but a great smear of light just outside the edge of
the Earth. It was of a dull red colour, with rainbow tints around the
edges, and was much the shape of a great umbrella held just above one
quarter of her surface to westward.

I gave the steering wheel in my compartment a sharp turn in the
direction which should cause the light to disappear. Then I crouched and
looked again, but instead of being reduced in size the light broadened
and swelled. It was as if one edge of the umbrella were left against the
Earth's surface, and then the umbrella was being turned gradually around
until it faced me and formed an enormous disc, apparently a third as big
as the Earth. Then, as it slowly moved outward, its edge seemed to
cleave to the Earth's, as two drops of water do when about to separate.
Finally, it detached itself entirely, and stood as a great muddy red orb
a little to the west of and above the Earth. It filled me with dismay to
see all this happen after I had turned the rudder in the direction which
should have corrected our course. In desperation I gave the wheel an
additional hard turn and looked again. At last the great red patch was
shrinking; slowly it diminished, and finally disappeared. But just as I
was breathing a sigh of relief, I noticed the white sickle of light on
the east side that I had seen before; only it was increasing most
threateningly now. Yes, it was assuming the same umbrella shape and
detaching itself a little from the eastern edge of the Earth. There was
still a narrow rim of bright white light on the Earth, and this dimmer
umbrella shape was faintly separated from its edge. Its outlines were
marked by flashes of rainbow colours, as had been the case on the other
side. I sprang to the wheel and gave it several frantic turns back the
other way. Then I ran up to the telescope for a hurried view, and Mars
was nowhere to be seen! I hastened back to the wheel and gave it a
vicious additional turn. I was determined to prevent this umbrella from
opening at me! And true enough it ceased enlarging, and gradually shrank
and settled back upon the surface of the Earth. Then slowly it faded and
disappeared, as it had done before when the doctor had corrected the
course. I eased back the wheel and went to look for Mars again, but he
was not in the field. As I returned I brushed unconsciously against the
doctor in my excitement. He roused himself, sat up, and watched me
peering out of the port-hole. I was gazing at a new appearance.

"There it is again!" I cried, for below the Earth and to westward a pale
white disc came into view all at once, not gradually, as if emerging
from behind the Earth, but springing out complete and detached.

"Doctor!" I said, catching him by the arm and pulling him down to the
port-hole, "what is that?"

"That? That is the Moon, my boy. Has it excited you so much?"

"Yes; I have been trying to dodge it. But you had better look to the
wheel," I cried.

He ran up to the telescope, and I heard him exclaim, "_Donnerwetter!_"
half under his breath. But with a few careful turns of the wheel he
found the planet again, and moved him to the right part of the field.
Meanwhile the Full Moon shone on us with its pale glimmer. But a thin
rim of it next to the Earth gleamed brightly with rich silver light.

"I thought you said we had started in the dark of the Moon. I thought it
was behind the Earth," I interposed.

"That is the New Moon just emerging. It will probably not be seen on the
Earth until to-morrow night, but as we are at a greater distance we see
it first," replied the doctor.

"But that is not a New Moon, it is a Full Moon, which should not be seen
for fourteen days yet," I objected.

"Pardon me, it _is_ a New Moon," he insisted. "That inner rim of
brightness is all the sunlight she reflects. The paler glimmer is
Earth-light, which she reflects. When she is really a Full Moon, she
will be perfectly dark to us."

Then I explained to him the first umbrella appearance, and its gradual
swelling and final disappearance.

"Rainbow colours around the edge and a gradual changing of the shape,
you say? That means refraction. The Earth's atmosphere has been playing
tricks on you. The umbrella of dull red light was a refracted view of
the Moon before she really came into sight. Rays of light from the
hidden Moon were bent around to you. Then, as she gradually moved from
behind the Earth, her appearance was magnified by the convex lens formed
by the atmosphere, bent over that planet. Presently it diminished and
went out altogether, you say?"

"Yes, but that was because I steered away from her," I replied.

"No; you could hardly lose her so easily," he answered. "Did you ever
try holding an object behind a water-bottle or a gold-fish jar? There is
a place near the edge of the jar where a thing cannot be seen, though
the glass and water are perfectly transparent. The rays of light from
the object are bent around, through the glass and water, away from the
eyes of the observer. It was like that with the Moon when she
disappeared. She was really drawing out from the Earth all the time.
Finally, when her light passed beyond the atmosphere altogether, she
became suddenly visible in a different place and shining with another
colour. What we see now is the real Moon in her true place. The other
appearances were all tricks of refraction."

"But when I had turned away," I explained, "there came a thin rim of
bright light on the other side of the Earth, and a gradually appearing
umbrella shape there too."

"Ah, then you steered far enough out of your course to see part of the
illuminated surface of the Earth. That was the real danger light. And if
it began to assume the umbrella shape, detached from the Earth, that was
due to atmospheric refraction of sunlight. This great shadow we are
travelling in has an illuminated core, which we shall encounter when we
have proceeded a little further. I tell you of it now, so it may not
give you another shock. Have you ever noticed the small bright spot
which illuminates the centre of the shadow cast by a glass of water?
That is partly the same as the core of light which exists in the heart
of this shadow. Rays from the sun, passing on all sides of the Earth,
are refracted through the atmosphere and bent inward. You must have
steered over into some of these rays just now, and then turned back from
them. Somewhat farther on all these refracted rays will meet at a common
centre, which they will illuminate, and we shall have an oasis of
rainbow-tinged sunlight in this great desert of shadow. The sun will
then appear to us to be an enormous circle of dull light entirely
surrounding the Earth."

"I don't fancy running into that at all," said I. "Can't we avoid it by
steering out?"

"Avoid it!" exclaimed the doctor. "We must investigate it, and
photograph the peculiar appearance of the sun. Light seems to have more
terrors for you than anything else just now. You must get over your
rush-and-do tendency; you must stifle your emotions and impulses, and
learn to think of things in a more calm and scientific manner."

"But that is not so easy for me, Doctor. Whenever I am left alone, a
feeling of dread possesses me. I am used to having many people, bustling
noises, and confused movement all about me. The silence of Space stifles
me, and the loneliness of the ether oppresses and overcomes me
strangely."

"I prescribe a change of air for you," answered the doctor. "You will do
better in a rarer atmosphere. Let us send what we have been breathing
back to Whiting, and make a new one to suit ourselves."




CHAPTER X

The Twilight of Space


"Shall I come up into your compartment for the operation?" I asked.

"No; for this first time we will pump out my compartment, as I wish to
observe from the rear port-hole the action of the air which we set
free."

The bulkhead, with its bevelled edge, was therefore fitted into the
opening between the compartments, and I took the first turn at the lever
handle of the air-pump, while the doctor observed from the window. I had
given the handle less than a dozen vigorous strokes when the doctor
suddenly exclaimed,--

"Stop! Wait a moment;" and he began pulling at the bulkhead, which was
already rather tightly wedged in by the air pressure. "I have left the
rabbit inside," he said, when he found breath to speak. And poor little
bunny's heart was beginning to beat fast when he was rescued.

Then we began again. The doctor watched the escaping air for some time,
evidently forgetting that I was at all interested in it.

"All quite as I expected," he said at last. "Only I had forgotten about
the snow."

"Nothing will ever be very new or interesting to you," I put in; "but
pray remember I am here, and rapidly getting empty of breath and full of
curiosity."

Then he relieved me at the pump handle, and this is what I saw from the
port-hole: The air escaping from the discharge pipe of the air-pump was
visible, and looked like dull, grey steam. Immediately on being set free
it swelled and expanded greatly, and sank away from us slowly. But at
the instant of its expansion the cold thus produced froze the moisture
of the air into a fine fleecy snow, which lasted but a second as it sank
away from us and melted in the heat, which the thermometer showed to be
close upon ninety-five degrees. This miniature snowstorm was seen for an
instant only after each down motion of the pump handle.

"Where is this air going?" I inquired. "The little clouds of it seem to
drop away from us like lead; but that must be because of our speed."

"It is falling back to the Earth, to join the outer layer of rare
atmosphere there. If we had a positive current instead of a negative
one, the air would not leave us, but we should gradually be surrounded
by an atmosphere of our own, which we should retain until some planet,
whose gravitational attraction is vastly stronger than ours, stole it
from us. When we begin to fall into Mars, we shall acquire such an
enveloping atmosphere; and we can draw upon it and re-compress it if our
inner supply should become exhausted."

"If this air is falling home to earth," said I, "we could send messages
back in that manner."

"We can drop them back at any time, regardless of the air," he answered,
and then added suddenly, "but it will make a beautiful experiment to
drop out a bottle now."

He ceased pumping, and opening a bottle of asparagus tips, he placed
them in a bowl, and prepared to drop out the bottle. I took my pencil
and wrote this message to go inside,--"Behold, I have decreed a judgment
upon the Earth; for it shall rain pickle bottles and biscuit tins for
the period of forty days, because of the wickedness of the world, unless
she repent!" And I pictured to myself the perplexity of the poor devil
who should see this message come straight down from heaven!

In order to make his experiment more successful, the doctor put in half
a dozen bullets from one of the rifles, to make the weight more
perceptible. Then he put the bottle into the discharging cylinder, and
preparing to push it out he stooped over the port-hole. At a signal from
him I gave the pump handle several quick, successive motions, and at the
same instant he let drop the bottle. At once he cried out,--

"Beautiful! and just as I thought."

"But I didn't see it!" I protested. "What was it?"

"The instant the bottle was released the discharged air was immediately
attracted toward it, and gradually surrounded it entirely. It was like a
little planet with an atmosphere of its own, as they fell back to the
Earth together."

"But I couldn't see it; I had to pump," I complained. "We must do it
again."

"We shall soon have our bottled things all emptied out on plates to dry
up and spoil," he objected. So I emptied a biscuit tin this time, and
delaying for no message, I put it in the discharging cylinder. Then I
bent over the port-hole and gave the signal for the pumping. As I thrust
out the tin I was astonished to see the lid pop off the first thing. The
quick expansion of the air inside it did that. This air, as well as the
air from the discharge pipe, seemed to flee from it instead of
surrounding it, as the doctor had said. I continued watching so long
that he finally said,--

"Hasn't it fallen out of sight yet?"

"No; it is not falling away swiftly as the air does. It is following the
projectile! It is not gathering any air about it as you said it would.
It does not quite keep up with us; but considering our speed, it is
doing remarkably well!"

The doctor was not inclined to believe me until he had looked for
himself. He watched and pondered for a minute or two. Then his surprise
ceased, and he spoke in that assured way which always irritated me.

"Quite natural, after all," he said. "That biscuit can is made of thin
sheet-iron with a surface coating of tin. The iron has become magnetized
by induction, and the Earth repels the can just as it repels us. It will
follow us to the dead-line, and probably on to Mars, unless the
sheet-iron loses its polarization. If we had cast out a thing of solid
iron, it would rush ahead of us, instead of falling a little behind, as
this does, for it would have no dead weight to carry. But we could not
put such a thing out of the rear end, for no force would make it fall
that way. If we put it out of the forward port-hole, it would beat us in
the race toward Mars."

I remarked to the doctor that the air-pump seemed to be incorrectly
built, for its action was strangely difficult in the reverse manner that
it should have been. The down strokes went by themselves with a quick
snap, but the up strokes were as if against pressure, and the moment the
handle was released it flew down again. He had not tested the pump at
the surface, as it was of a well-known make, but it certainly seemed to
work backwards. Moreover, the more nearly we had a compartment emptied
of air, the more difficult the pumping should become, but here again the
reverse seemed to be the case, for the longer we worked the easier the
up strokes became.

The temperature of the projectile was still fairly comfortable, and the
doctor allowed the condensed air to issue very slowly into the partial
vacuum in his compartment until it produced a barometric pressure of
twenty-seven. Then we pulled back the bulkhead, and when the new
atmosphere had mixed with the old in my compartment, a pressure of
twenty-eight resulted.

"That is about the way the barometer stands during tempests at sea,"
remarked the doctor. I could not notice much difference from the air we
had previously had. Possibly it was fresher and slightly more
exhilarating.

The effort at the pump had made us both hungry again, and I prepared
from meat extracts a warm and rather thick gravy to put over the
asparagus tips. I attempted to pour it, but it was so light that its
sticky consistency prevented it from running. We had a hundred such
examples daily of the changes which lack of weight caused in the
simplest operations. With sandwiches made of biscuits and condensed
meat, we eked out a luncheon. This must have been about noon, for when
it was over I remember noticing that we no longer needed the gas in the
compartment, for there was a gradually increasing mellow light outside.

"Are we already emerging from the shadow?" I inquired eagerly.

"No, not yet," replied the doctor. "But we are now entering its
illuminated core. I must prepare to photograph the strange appearance of
the Sun that we shall see presently."

I hastened to the port-hole, and did not leave until it was all over.
What I then saw was one of the most beautiful things of the whole trip.
The light outside was not bright, but soft and dreamy, like the first
twilight after a rich day of summer. The great corona all around the
outer edge of the Earth was the most magnificent appearance I have ever
seen. It was not at all dazzling, but had the melting shades, first of a
sunrise and then of a gorgeous sunset. We had missed the gradual
appearance of the phenomenon, but we had a good view of its highest
splendour. The colours were continually but slowly changing, and finally
the darker hues gradually suffused and dyed the pinks and crimsons.

The Earth was now about three times the diameter of a rising Full Moon,
and the corona was about a quarter her width, and looked as if twenty
shell-pink suns were set one against the other and overlapping all about
the edge of the dark orb.

"How do you know that is not really the extending edge of the Sun?" I
asked the doctor. "Perhaps we are already far enough away to see it all
about the Earth like that."

"If that were really the Sun, the light from his extending edge would
illuminate the surface of the Earth towards us. The planet's outline
would be irregular and partly glowing, but you see it is quite dull and
dark, and the outline is most plainly visible."

In rapt attention I watched the delicate shell-pink change to a deeper
hue of orange, and then our twilight waned a little and turned a sombre
grey. Presently the corona glowed a rich maroon, gradually dying to a
luminous purple, which slowly deepened and darkened, and finally melted
into the general blackness. And lo! we were in the shadow again, and the
dreamily beautiful panorama was over.

"It must have lasted nearly an hour," said the doctor. "I am sorry we
did not notice the beginning, but it must have commenced with the same
dull shades we saw at the end, and gradually changed to brighter
colours. I secured three negatives when the glow was most intense."

"Then we have had a waxing and a waning twilight coming together in the
middle of our night. And the corona was like a sunrise, followed
immediately by a sunset," I exclaimed.

"And why shouldn't it appear so?" said the matter-of-fact doctor.
"Twilight is the commonest phenomenon of refraction with which we are
acquainted, and sunrise and sunset are merely a mixture of refraction
