only from the relation of others, or from a bare inspection of your
works, but I have seen then before my own eyes, and have heard them with
my own ears, in your residence at Uraniburg, and have drawn them from
the various learned and agreeable conversations which I there held with
you, and which even now affect my mind to such a degree, that it is
difficult to determine whether I recollect them with greater pleasure or
admiration; as I now willingly testify, by this license, to present and
to future generations," &c.

At the request of Tycho, the King also composed and wrote in his own
hand some Latin verses, which were more complimentary than classical.
His Chancellor had also composed some verses of a similar character
during his visit to Tycho. A short specimen of these will be deemed
sufficient by the classical reader:--

    "Vidit et obstupuit Rex Huennum Scoticus almam;
    Miratus clari tot monumenta viri."

In the year 1591, when Christian IV. had reached his 14th year, he
expressed a desire to pay a visit to Uraniburg. He accordingly set out
with a large party, consisting of his three principal senators, and
other councillors and noblemen; and having examined the various
instruments in the observatories and laboratory, he proposed to Tycho
various questions on mechanics and mathematics, but particularly on the
principles of fortification and ship building. Having observed that he
particularly admired a brass globe, which, by means of internal
wheelwork, imitated the diurnal motion of the heavens, the rising and
setting of the sun, and the phases of the moon, Tycho made him a present
of it, and received in return an elegant gold chain, with his Majesty's
picture, with an assurance of his unalterable attachment and protection.

Notwithstanding this assurance, Tycho had already, as we have stated,
begun to suspect the designs of his enemies; and in a letter addressed
to the Landgrave of Hesse, early in 1591, he throws out some hints which
indicated the anxieties that agitated his mind. The Landgrave of Hesse,
as if he had heard some rumours unfavourable to the prospects of Tycho,
requested him to write him respecting the state of the Kingdom, and
concerning his own private affairs. To this letter, which was dated
early in February, Tycho replied about the beginning of April. He
informed the Landgrave that he led a private life in his own island,
exempt from all official functions, and never willingly taking a part in
public affairs. He was desirous of leaving the ambition of public
honours to others, and of devoting himself wholly to the study of
philosophy and astronomy; and he expressed a hope that if he should be
involved in the tumults and troubles of life, either by his own destiny
or by evil counsels, he might be able, by the blessing of God, to
extricate himself by the force of his mind and the integrity of his
life. He comforted himself with the idea that every soil was the country
of a great man, and that wherever he went the blue sky would still be
over his head;[40] and he distinctly states at the close of his letter,
that he had thought of transferring his residence to some other place,
as there were some of the King's councillors who had already begun to
calumniate his studies, and to grudge him his pension from the treasury.

     [40] Omne solum forti patria, et coelum undique supra est.

The causes which led to this change of feeling on the part of Christian
IV.'s advisers have not been explained by the biographers of Tycho. It
has been stated, in general terms, that he had made many enemies, by the
keenness of his temper and the severity of his satire; but I have not
been able to discover any distinct examples of these peculiarities of
his mind. In an event, indeed, which occurred about this time, he
slightly resented a piece of marked incivility on the part of Henry
Julius, Duke of Brunswick, who had married the Princess Eliza of
Denmark; but it is not likely that so trivial an affair, if it were
known at court, could have called down upon him the hostility of the
King's advisers.

The Duke of Brunswick had, in 1590, paid a visit to Uraniburg, and had
particularly admired an antique brass statue of Mercury, about a cubit
long, which Tycho had placed in the roof of the hypocaust or central
crypt of the Stiern-berg observatory. By means of a concealed mechanism,
it moved round in a circular orbit. The Duke requested the statue and
its machinery, which Tycho gave him, on the condition that he should
obtain a model of it, for the purpose of having another executed by a
skilful workman. The Duke not only forgot his promise, but paid no
attention to the letters which were addressed to him. Tycho was justly
irritated at this unprincely conduct, and ordered this anecdote to be
inserted in the description of Uraniburg which he was now preparing for
publication.

In the year 1592, Tycho lost his distinguished friend and correspondent
the Prince of Hesse, and astronomy one of its most active and
intelligent cultivators. His grief on this occasion was deep and
sincere, and he gave utterance to his feelings in an impassioned elegy,
in which he recorded the virtues and talents of his friend. Prince
Maurice, the son and successor of the Landgrave, continued, with the
assistance of able observers, to keep up the reputation of the
observatory of Hesse-Cassel; and the observations which were there made
were afterwards published by Snellius. The extensive and valuable
correspondence between Tycho and the Landgrave was prepared for
publication about the beginning of 1593, and contains also the letters
of Rothman and Rantzau.

For several years the studies of Tycho had been treated with an
unwilling toleration by the Danish Court. Many of the nobles envied the
munificent establishment which he had received from Frederick, and the
liberal pension which he drew from his treasury. But among his most
active enemies were some physicians, who envied his reputation as a
successful and a gratuitous practitioner of the healing art. Numbers of
invalids flocked to Huen, and diseases, which resisted all other methods
of cure, are said to have yielded to the panaceal prescription of the
astrologer. Under the influence of such motives, these individuals
succeeded in exciting against Tycho the hostility of the court. They
drew the public attention to the exhausted state of the treasury. They
maintained that he had possessed too long the estate in Norway, which
might be given to men who laboured more usefully for the commonwealth;
and they accused him of allowing the chapel at Rothschild to fall into
decay. The President of the Council, Christopher Walchendorp, and the
King's Chancellor, were the most active of the enemies of Tycho; and,
having poisoned the mind of their sovereign against the most meritorious
of his subjects, Tycho was deprived of his canonry, his estate in
Norway, and his pension.

Being no longer able to bear the expenses of his establishment in Huen,
and dreading that the feelings which had been excited against him might
be still further roused, so as to deprive him of the Island of Huen
itself, he resolved to transfer his instruments to some other
situation. Notwithstanding this resolution, he remained with his family
in the island, and continued his observations till the spring of 1597,
when he took a house in Copenhagen, and removed to it all his smaller
and more portable instruments, leaving those which were large or fixed
in the crypts of Stiern-berg. His first plan was to remove every thing
from Huen as a measure of security; but the public feeling began to turn
in his favour, and there were many good men in Copenhagen who did not
scruple to reprobate the conduct of the government. The President of the
Council, Walchendorp--a name which, while the heavens revolve, will be
pronounced with horror by astronomers--saw the change of sentiment which
his injustice had produced, and adopted an artful method of sheltering
himself from public odium. In consequence of a quarrel with Tycho, the
recollection of which had rankled in his breast, he dreaded to be the
prime mover in his persecution. He therefore appointed a committee of
two persons, one of whom was Thomas Feuchius, to report to the
government on the nature and utility of the studies of Tycho. These two
individuals were entirely ignorant of astronomy and the use of
instruments; and even if they had not, they would have been equally
subservient to the views of the minister. They reported that the studies
of Tycho were of no value, and that they were not only useless, but
noxious. Armed with this report, Walchendorp prohibited Tycho, in the
King's name, from continuing his chemical experiments; and instigated,
no doubt, by this wicked minister, an attack was made upon himself, and
his shepherd or his steward was injured in the affray. Tycho was
provoked to revenge himself upon his enemies, and the judge was
commanded not to interfere in the matter.

Thus persecuted by his enemies, Tycho resolved to remain no longer in an
ungrateful country. He carried from Huen every thing that was moveable,
and having packed up his instruments, his crucibles, and his books, he
hired a ship to convey them to some foreign land. His wife, his five
sons and four daughters, his male and his female servants, and many of
his pupils and assistants, among whom were Tengnagel, his future
son-in-law, and the celebrated Longomontanus, embarked at Copenhagen,
to seek the hospitality of some better country than their own.

Freighted with the glory of Denmark, this interesting bark made the best
of its way across the Baltic, and arrived safely at Rostoch. Here the
exiled patriarch found many of his early friends, particularly Henry
Bruce, an able astronomer, to whom he had formerly presented one of his
brass quadrants. The approach of the plague, however, prevented Tycho
from making any arrangements for a permanent residence; and, having
received a warm invitation from Count Henry Rantzau, who lived in
Holstein at the Castle of Wandesberg, near Hamburg, he went with all his
family, about the end of 1597, to enjoy the hospitality of his friend.

Though Tycho derived the highest pleasure from the kindness and
conversation of Count Rantzau, yet a cloud overshadowed the future, and
he had yet to seek for a patron and a home. His hopes were fixed on the
Emperor Rudolph, who was not only fond of science, but who was
especially addicted to alchemy and astrology, and his friend Rantzau
promised to have him introduced to the Emperor by proper letters. When
Tycho learned that Rudolph was particularly fond of mechanical
instruments and of chemistry, he resolved to complete and to dedicate to
him his work on the mechanics of astronomy, and to add to it an account
of his chemical labours. This task he soon performed, and his work
appeared in 1598 under the title of _Tychonis Brahe, Astronomiae
instauratae Mechanica_. Along with this work he transmitted to the
Emperor a copy of his MS. catalogue of 1000 fixed stars.

With these proofs of his services to science, and instigated by various
letters in his favour, the Emperor Rudolph desired his Vice-Chancellor
to send for Tycho, and to assure him that he would be received according
to his great merits, and that nothing should be wanting to promote his
scientific studies. Leaving his wife and daughters at Wandesberg, and
taking with him his sons and his pupils, Tycho went to Wittemberg; but
having learned that the plague had broken out at Prague, and that the
Emperor had gone to Pilsen, he deferred for a while his journey into
Bohemia.

Early in the spring of 1599, when the pestilence had ceased at Prague,
and the Emperor had returned to his capital, Tycho set out for Bohemia.
On his arrival at Prague, he found a splendid house ready for his
reception, and a kind message from the Emperor, prohibiting him from
paying his respects to him till he had recovered from the fatigues of
his journey. On his presentation to Rudolph, the generous Emperor
received him with the most distinguished kindness. He announced to him
that he was to receive an annual pension of 3000 crowns; that an estate
would as soon as possible be settled upon him and his family and their
successors; that a town house would be provided for him; and that he
might have his choice of various castles and houses in the country as
the site of his observatory and laboratory. The Emperor had also taken
care to provide every thing that was necessary for Tycho's immediate
wants; and so overwhelmed was he with such unexpected kindness, that he
remarked that, as he could not find words to express his gratitude, the
whole heavens would speak for him, and posterity should know what a
refuge his great and good Sovereign had been to the Queen of the Arts.

Among the numerous friends whom Tycho found at Prague, were his
correspondents Coroducius and Hagecius, and his benefactor Barrovitius,
the Emperor's secretary. He was congratulated by them all on his
distinguished reception at court, and was regarded as the AEneas of
science, who had been driven from his peaceful home, and who had carried
with him to the Latium of Germany his wife, his children, and his
household gods. If external circumstances could remove the sorrows of
the past, Tycho must now have been supremely happy. In his spacious
mansion, which had belonged to his friend Curtius, he found a position
for one of his best instruments, and having covered with poetical
inscriptions the four sides of the pedestal on which it stood, in honour
of his benefactors, as well as of former astronomers, he resumed with
diligence his examination of the stars.

When Rudolph saw the magnificent instruments which Tycho had brought
along with him, and had acquired some knowledge of their use, he pressed
him to send to Denmark for the still larger ones which he had left at
Stiern-berg. In the meantime, he gave him the choice of the castles of
Brandisium, Lyssa, and Benach as his country residence; and after
visiting them about the end of May, Tycho gave the preference to Benach,
which was situated upon a rising ground, and commanded an extensive
horizon. It contained splendid and commodious buildings, and was almost,
as he calls it, a small city, situated on the stream Lisor, near its
confluence with the Albis. It stood a little to the east and north of
Prague, and was distant from that city only five German miles, or about
six hours' journey.

On the 20th of August, the Prefect of Brandisium gave Tycho possession
of his new residence. His gratitude to his royal patron was copiously
displayed, not only in a Latin poem written on the occasion, but in
Latin inscriptions which he placed above the doors of his observatory
and his laboratory. In order that he might establish an astronomical
school at Prague, he wrote to Longomontanus, Kepler, Muller, David
Fabricius, and two students at Wittemberg, who were good calculators,
requesting them to reside with him at Benach, as his assistants and
pupils: He at the same time dispatched his destined son-in-law,
Tengnagel, accompanied by Pascal Muleus, to bring home his wife and
daughters from Wandesberg, and his instruments from Huen; and he begged
that Longomontanus would accompany them to Denmark, and return in the
same carriage with them to Bohemia.

Kepler arrived at Prague in January 1600, and, after spending three or
four months at Benach, in carrying on his inquiries and in making
astronomical observations, he returned to Gratz. Tycho had undertaken to
obtain for him the appointment of his assistant. It was arranged that
the Emperor should allow him a hundred florins, on the condition that
the states of Styria would permit him to retain his salary for two
years. This scheme, however, failed, and Kepler was about to study
medicine, and offer himself for a professorship of medicine at Tubingen,
when Tycho undertook to obtain him a permanent appointment from the
Emperor. Kepler, accordingly, returned in September 1601, and, on the
recommendation of his friend, he was named imperial mathematician, on
the condition of assisting Tycho in his observations.

Tycho had experienced much inconvenience in his residence at Benach,
from his ignorance of the language and customs of the country, as well
as from other causes. He was therefore anxious to transfer his
instruments to Prague; and no sooner were his wishes conveyed to the
Emperor than he gave him leave to send them to the royal gardens and the
adjacent buildings. His family and his larger instruments having now
arrived from Huen, the astronomer with his family and his property were
safely lodged in the royal edifice. Having found that there was no house
in Prague more suited for his purposes than that of his late friend
Curtius, the Emperor purchased it from his widow, and Tycho removed into
it on the 25th February 1601.




CHAPTER IV.


     _Tycho resumes his Astronomical Observations--Is attacked with a
     Painful Disease--His Sufferings and Death in 1601--His Funeral--His
     Temper--His Turn for Satire and Raillery--His Piety--Account of his
     Astronomical Discoveries--His Love of Astrology and
     Alchymy--Observations on the Character of the Alchymists--Tycho's
     Elixir--His Fondness for the Marvellous--His Automata and Invisible
     Bells--Account of the Idiot, called Lep, whom he kept as a
     Prophet--History of Tycho's Instruments--His great Brass Globe
     preserved at Copenhagen--Present state of the Island of Huen._


Although Tycho continued in this new position to observe the planets
with his usual assiduity, yet the recollection of his sufferings, and
the inconveniences and disappointments which he had experienced, began
to prey upon his mind, and to affect his health. Notwithstanding the
continued liberality of the Emperor, and the kindness of his friends and
pupils, he was yet a stranger in a distant land. Misfortune was unable
to subdue that love of country which was one of the most powerful of his
affections; and, though its ingratitude might have broken the chain
which bound him to the land of his nativity, it seems only to have
rivetted it more firmly. His imagination, thus influenced, acquired an
undue predominance over his judgment. He viewed the most trifling
occurrences as supernatural indications; and in those azure moments when
the clouds broke from his mind, and when he displayed his usual wit and
pleasantry, he frequently turned the conversation to the subject of his
latter end.

This state of mind was the forerunner, though probably the effect, of a
painful disease, which had, doubtless, its origin in the severity and
continuity of his studies. On the 13th October, when he was supping at
the house of a nobleman called Rosenberg, he was seized with a retention
of urine, which forced him to leave the party.

This attack continued with little intermission for more than a week,
and, during this period, he suffered great pain, attended with want of
sleep and temporary delirium, during which, he frequently exclaimed, _Ne
frustra vixisse videor_. On the 24th he recovered from this painful
situation, and became perfectly tranquil. His strength, however, was
gone, and he saw that he had not many hours to live. He expressed an
anxious wish that his labours would redound to the glory of his Maker,
to whom he offered up the most ardent prayers. He enjoined his sons and
his son-in-law not to allow them to be lost. He encouraged his pupils
not to abandon their pursuits, he requested Kepler to complete the
Rudolphine Tables, and to his family he recommended piety and
resignation to the Divine will. Among those who never quitted Tycho in
his illness, was Erick Brahe, Count Wittehorn, a Swede, and a relation
of his own, and Counsellor to the King of Poland. This amiable
individual never left the bedside of his friend, and administered to him
all those attentions which his situation required. Tycho, turning to
him, thanked him for his affectionate kindness, and requested him to
maintain the relationship with his family. He then expired without pain,
amid the consolations, the prayers, and the tears of his friends. This
event took place on the 24th of October 1601, when he was only
fifty-four years and ten months old.

The Emperor Rudolph evinced the greatest sorrow when he was informed of
the death of his friend, and he gave orders that he should be buried in
the most honourable manner, in the principal church of the ancient
city.[41] The funeral took place on the 4th November, and he was
interred in the dress of a nobleman, and with the ceremonies of his
order. The funeral oration was pronounced by Jessenius, before a
distinguished assemblage, and many elegies were written on his death.

     [41] The church of Tiers, where a monument has been erected to his
     memory.

Tycho was a little above the middle size, and in the last years of his
life he was slightly corpulent. He had reddish yellow hair and a ruddy
complexion. He was of a sanguine temperament, and is said to have been
sometimes irritable, and even obstinate. This failing, however, if he
did possess it, was not exhibited towards his pupils or his scientific
friends, who ever entertained for him the warmest affection and esteem.
Some of his pupils had remained in his house more than twenty years;
and in the quarrel which arose between him and Kepler,[42] and which is
allowed to have originated entirely in the temper of the latter, he
conducted himself with the greatest patience and forbearance. There is
reason to think that the irritability with which he has been charged was
less an affection of his mind than the effect of that noble independence
of character which belonged to him, and that it has been inferred
chiefly from his conduct to some of those high personages with whom he
was brought in contact. When Walchendorp, the President of the Council,
kicked his favourite hound, it was no proof of irritability of character
that Tycho expressed in strong terms his disapprobation of the deed.

     [42] See the Life of Kepler.

It was, doubtless, a greater weakness in his character that he indulged
his turn for satire, without being able to bear retaliation. His jocular
habits, too, sometimes led him into disagreeable positions. When the
Duke of Brunswick was dining with him at Uraniburg, the Duke said,
towards the end of the dinner, that, as it was late, he must be going.
Tycho jocularly remarked that this could not be done without his
permission; upon which the Duke rose and left the party, without taking
leave of his host. Tycho became indignant in his turn, and continued to
sit at table; but, as if repenting of what he had done, he followed the
Duke, who was on his way to the ship, and, calling upon him, displayed
the cup in his hand, as if he had washed out his offence by a draught of
wine.

Tycho was a man of true piety, and cherished the deepest veneration for
the Sacred Scriptures, and for the great truths which they reveal. Their
principles regulated his conduct, and their promises animated his hopes.
His familiarity with the wonders of the heavens increased, instead of
diminishing, his admiration of Divine wisdom, and his daily conversation
was elevated by a constant reference to a superintending Providence.

As a practical astronomer, Tycho has not been surpassed by any observer
of ancient or of modern times. The splendour and number of his
instruments, the ingenuity which he exhibited in inventing new ones and
in improving and adding to those which were formerly known, and his
skill and assiduity as an observer, have given a character to his
labours, and a value to his observations, which will be appreciated to
the latest posterity. The appearance of the new star in 1572 led him to
form a catalogue of 777 stars, vastly superior in accuracy to those of
Hipparchus and Ulugh Beig. His improvements on the lunar theory were
still more valuable. He discovered the important inequality called the
_variation_, and also the annual inequality which depends on the
position of the earth in its orbit. He discovered, also, the inequality
in the inclination of the moon's orbit, and in the motion of her nodes.
He determined with new accuracy the astronomical refractions from an
altitude of 45 deg. down to the horizon, where he found it to be 34'; and he
made a vast collection of observations on the planets, which formed the
groundwork of Kepler's discoveries and the basis of the Rudolphine
Tables. Tycho's powers of observation were not equalled by his capacity
for general views. It was, perhaps, owing more to his veneration for the
Scriptures than to the vanity of giving his name to a new system that he
rejected the Copernican hypothesis. Hence he was led to propose a new
system, called the Tychonic, in which the earth is stationary in the
centre of the universe, while the sun, with all the other planets and
comets revolving round him, performs his daily revolution about the
earth. This arrangement of the planets afforded a sufficient explanation
of the various phenomena of the heavens; and as it was consistent with
the language of Scripture, and conformable to the indications of the
senses, it found many supporters, notwithstanding the physical absurdity
of making the whole system revolve round one of the smallest of the
planets.

It is a painful transition to pass from the astronomical labours of
Tycho to his astrological and chemical pursuits. That Tycho studied and
practised astrology has been universally admitted. He calculated the
nativity of the Emperor Rudolph, and foretold that his relations would
make some attempts upon his life. The credulous Emperor confided in the
prediction, and when the conduct of his brother seemed to justify his
belief, he confined himself to his palace, and fell a prey to the fear
which it inspired. Tycho, however, seems to have entirely renounced his
astrological faith in his latter days; and Kepler states,[43] in the
most pointed manner, that Tycho carried on his astronomical labours with
his mind entirely free from the superstitions of astrology; that he
derided and detested the vanity and knavery of astrologers, and was
convinced that the stars exercised no influence on the destinies of men.

     [43] In his Preface to the Rudolphine Tables.

Although Tycho informed Rothman that he devoted as much labour and
expense to the study of terrestrial (chemistry) as he did to that of
celestial astronomy, yet it is a singular fact that he never published
any account of his experiments, nor has he left among his writings any
trace of his chemical inquiries. He pretended, however, to have made
discoveries in the science, and we should have been disposed to
reprobate the apology which he makes for not publishing them, did we not
know that it had been frequently given by the other alchemists of the
age--"On consideration," says he, "and by the advice of the most learned
men, I thought it improper to unfold the secrets of the art (of alchemy)
to the vulgar, as few persons were capable of using its mysteries to
advantage and without detriment."

Admitting then, as we must do, that Tycho was not only a professed
alchemist, but that he was practically occupied with its pursuits, and
continually misled by its delusions, it may not be uninteresting to the
reader to consider how far a belief in alchemy, and a practice of its
arts, have a foundation in the weakness of human nature; and to what
extent they are compatible with the piety and elevated moral feeling by
which our author was distinguished.

In the history of human errors two classes of impostors, of very
different characters, present themselves to our notice--those who
wilfully deluded their species, and those who permitted their species to
delude themselves. The first of those classes consisted of the selfish
tyrants who upheld an unjust supremacy by systematic delusions, and of
grovelling mountebanks who quenched their avaricious thirst at the
fountains of credulity and ignorance. The second class comprehended
spirits of a nobler mould: It embraced the speculative enthusiasts, whom
the love of fame and of truth urged onward, in a fruitless research,
and those great lights of knowledge and of virtue, who, while they stood
forward as the landmarks of the age which they adorned, had neither the
intellectual nor the moral courage to divest themselves of the
supernatural radiance with which the ignorance of the vulgar had
encircled them.

The thrones and shrines, which delusion once sustained even in the
civilized quarter of the globe, are for ever fallen, and that civil and
religious liberty, which in past ages was kept down by the marvellous
exhibitions of science to the senses, is now maintained by its
application to the reason of man. The charlatans, whether they deal in
moral or in physical wonders, form a race which is never extinct. They
migrate to the different zones of the social system, and though they
change their place, and their purposes, and their victims, yet their
character and motives remain the same. The philosophical mind,
therefore, is not disposed to study either of these varieties of
impostors; but the other two families which compose the second class are
objects of paramount interest. The eccentricities and even the
obliquities of great minds merit the scrutiny of the metaphysician and
the moralist, and they derive a peculiar interest from the state of
society in which they are exhibited. Had Cardan and Cornelius Agrippa
lived in modern times, their vanity and self-importance would have been
checked by the forms of society, and even if their harmless pretensions
had been displayed, they would have disappeared in the blaze of their
genius and knowledge. But nursed in superstition, and educated in dark
and turbulent times, when every thing intellectual was in a state of
restless transition, the genius and character of great men necessarily
reflected the peculiarities of the age in which they lived.

Had history transmitted to us correct details of the leading alchemists
and scientific magicians of the dark ages, we should have been able to
analyse their actions and their opinions, and trace them, probably, to
the ordinary principles by which the human mind is in every age
influenced and directed. But when a great man has once become an object
either of interest or of wonder, and still more when he is considered as
the possessor of knowledge and skill which transcend the capacity of the
age, he is soon transformed into the hero of romance. His powers are
overrated, his deeds exaggerated, and he becomes the subject of idle
legends, which acquire a firmer hold on credulity from the slight
sprinkling of truth with which they are seasoned. To disclaim the
possession of lofty attributes thus ascribed to great men is a degree of
humility which is not often exercised. But even when this species of
modesty is displayed, it never fails to defeat its object. It but calls
forth a deeper homage, and fixes the demigod more firmly in his shrine.

The history of learning furnishes us with many examples of that species
of delusion in which a great mind submits itself to vulgar adulation,
and renounces unwillingly, if it renounces at all, the unenviable
reputation of supernatural agency. In cases where self-interest and
ambition are the basis of this peculiarity of temperament, and in an age
when the conjuror and the alchemist were the companions and even the
idols of princes, it is easy to trace the steps by which a gifted sage
retains his ascendancy among the ignorant. The hecatomb which is
sacrificed to the magician, he receives as an oblation to his science,
and conscious of possessing real endowments, the idol devours the meats
that are offered to him without analysing the motives and expectations
under which he is fed. But even when the idolater and his god are not
placed in this transverse relation, the love of power or of notoriety is
sufficient to induce good men to lend a too willing ear to vulgar
testimony in favour of themselves; and in our own times it is not common
to repudiate the unmerited cheers of a popular assembly, or to offer a
contradiction to fictitious tales which record our talents or our
courage, our charity or our piety.

The conduct of the scientific alchemists of the thirteenth, fourteenth,
and fifteenth centuries presents a problem of very difficult solution.
When we consider that a gas, a fluid, and a solid may consist of the
very same ingredients in different proportions; that a virulent poison
may differ from the most wholesome food only in the difference of
quantity of the very same elements; that gold and silver, and lead and
mercury, and indeed all the metals, may be extracted from transparent
crystals, which scarcely differ in their appearance from a piece of
common salt or a bit of sugarcandy; and that diamond is nothing more
than charcoal,--we need not greatly wonder at the extravagant
expectation that the precious metals and the noblest gems might be
procured from the basest materials. These expectations, too, must have
been often excited by the startling results of their daily experiments.
The most ignorant compounder of simples could not fail to witness the
magical transformations of chemical action; and every new product must
have added to the probability that the tempting doublets of gold and
silver might be thrown from the dice-box with which he was gambling.

But when the precious metals were found in lead and copper by the action
of powerful re-agents, it was natural to suppose that they had been
actually formed during the process; and men of well-regulated minds even
might have thus been led to embark in new adventures to procure a more
copious supply, without any insult being offered to sober reason, or any
injury inflicted on sound morality.

When an ardent and ambitious mind is once dazzled with the fascination
of some lofty pursuit, where gold is the object, or fame the impulse, it
is difficult to pause in a doubtful career, and to make a voluntary
shipwreck of the reputation which has been staked. Hope still cheers
the aspirant from failure to failure, till the loss of fortune and the
decay of credit disturb the serenity of his mind, and hurry him on to
the last resource of baffled ingenuity and disappointed ambition. The
philosopher thus becomes an impostor; and by the pretended transmutation
of the baser metals into gold, or the discovery of the philosopher's
stone, he attempts to sustain his sinking reputation, and recover the
fortune he has lost. The communication of the great secret is now the
