in, but in order to keep some of the more violent rays of the sun from
getting through to the face.

I buffed for a while, and then I put the fishbowl on my head and looked
through it. The spot was gone, so I went over and reattached it to the
rest of the suit, and then settled back in my chair again and lit a
cigarette.

Karpin spoke up. "Wish you wouldn't smoke. Makes it tough on the
conditioner."

"Oh," I said. "Sorry." So I just sat, thinking morosely about non-forged
cash-return forms, and coincidences, and likely spots to hide a body in
the Asteroid Belt.

       *       *       *

Where would one dispose of a body in the asteroids? I went back through
my thinking on that topic, and I found holes big enough to drive
Karpin's claim through. This idea of leaving the body on some worthless
chunk of rock, for instance. If Karpin had killed his partner--and I was
dead sure he had--he'd planned it carefully and he wouldn't be leaving
anything to chance. Now, an asteroid isn't worthless to a prospector
until that prospector has landed on it and tested it. _Karpin_ might
know that such-and-such an asteroid was nothing but worthless stone, but
the guy who stops there and finds McCann's body might _not_ know it.

No, Karpin wouldn't leave that to chance. He would get rid of that body,
and he would do it in such a way that nobody would _ever_ find it.

How? Not by leaving it on a worthless asteroid, and not by just pushing
it off into space. The distance between asteroids is large, but so's the
travel. McCann's body, floating around in the blackness, might just be
found by somebody.

And that, so far as I could see, eliminated the possibilities. McCann's
body was in the Belt. I'd eliminated both the asteroids themselves and
the space around the asteroids as hiding places. What was left?

The sun, of course.

I thought that over for a while, rather surprised at myself for having
noticed the possibility. Now, let's say Karpin attaches a small rocket
to McCann's body, stuffed into its atmosphere suit. He sets the rocket
going, and off goes McCann. Not that he aims it toward the sun, that
wouldn't work well at all. Instead of falling into the sun, the body
would simply take up a long elliptical orbit _around_ the sun, and would
come back to the asteroids every few hundred years. No, he would aim
McCann _back_, in the direction opposite to the direction or rotation of
the asteroids. He would, in essence, slow McCann's body down, make it
practically stop in relation to the motion of the asteroids. And then it
would simply _fall_ into the sun.

None of my ideas, it seemed, were happy ones. If McCann's body were even
at this moment falling toward the sun, it was just as useful to me as if
it were on some other asteroid.

But, wait a second. Karpin and McCann had worked with the minimum of
equipment, I'd already noticed that. They didn't have extras of
anything, and they certainly wouldn't have extra rockets. Except for one
fast trip to Chemisant City--when he had neither the time nor the excuse
to buy a jato rocket--Karpin had spent all of his time since McCann's
death right here on this planetoid.

So that killed that idea.

While I was hunting around for some other idea, Karpin spoke up again,
for the first time in maybe twenty minutes. "You think I killed him,
don't you?" he said, not looking around from his cleaning job.

I considered my answer. There was no reason at all to be overly polite
to this sour old buzzard, but at the same time I am naturally the
soft-spoken type. "We aren't sure," I said. "We just think there are
some odd items to be explained."

"Such as what?" he demanded.

"Such as the timing of McCann's cash-return form."

"I already explained that," he said.

"I know. You've explained everything."

"He wrote it out himself," the old man insisted. He put down his
cleaning cloth, and turned to face me. "I suppose your company checked
the handwriting already, and Jafe McCann is the one who wrote that
form."

He was so blasted sure of himself. "It would seem that way," I said.

"What other odd items you worried about?" he asked me, in a rusty
attempt at sarcasm.

"Well," I said, "there's this business of going to Chemisant City. It
would have made more sense for you to go to Atronics City, where you
were known."

"Chemisant was closer," he said. He shook a finger at me. "That company
of yours thinks it can cheat me out of my money," he said. "Well, it
can't. I know my rights. That money belongs to me."

"I guess you're doing pretty well without McCann," I said.

His angry expression was replaced by one of bewilderment. "What do you
mean?"

"They told me back at Atronics City," I explained, "that McCann was the
money expert and you were the metals expert, and that's why McCann
handled all your buying on credit and stuff like that. Looks as though
you've got a pretty keen eye for money yourself."

"I know what's mine," he mumbled, and turned away. He went back to
scrubbing the stove coils again.

I stared at his back. Something had happened just then, and I wasn't
sure what. He'd just been starting to warm up to a tirade against the
dirty insurance company, and all of a sudden he'd folded up and shut up
like a clam.

And then I saw it. Or at least I saw part of it. I saw how that
cash-return form fit in, and how it made perfect sense.

Now, all I needed was proof of murder. Preferably a body. I had the rest
of it. Then I could pack the old geezer back to Atronics City and get
proof for the part I'd already figured out.

I'd like that. I'd like getting back to Atronics City, and having this
all straightened out, and then taking the very next liner straight back
to Earth. More immediately, I'd like getting out of this heat and back
into the cool sixty-eight degrees of--

And then it hit me. The whole thing hit me, and I just sat there and
stared. They did not carry extras, Karpin and McCann, they did not carry
one item of equipment more than they needed.

I sat there and looked at the place where the dead body was hidden, and
I said, "Well, I'll be a son of a gun!"

He turned and looked at me, and then he followed the direction of my
gaze, and he saw what I was staring at, and he made a jump across the
room at the revolver lying on the cot.

       *       *       *

That's what saved me. He moved too fast, jerked his muscles too hard,
and went sailing up and over the cot and ricocheted off the dome wall.
And that gave me plenty of time to get up from the chair, moving more
cautiously than he had, and get my hands on the revolver before he could
get himself squared away again.

I straightened with the gun in my hand and looked into a face white with
frustration and rage. "Okay, Mister McCann," I said. "It's all over."

He knew I had him, but he tried not to show it. "What are you talking
about? McCann's dead."

"Sure he is," I said. "Jafe McCann was the money-minded part of the
team. He was the one who signed for all the loans and all the equipment
bought on credit. With this big strike in, Jafe McCann was the one who'd
have to pay all that money."

"You're babbling," he snapped, but the words were hollow.

"You weren't satisfied with half a loaf," I said. "You should have been.
Half a loaf is better than none. But you wanted every penny you could
get your hands on, and you wanted to pay out just as little money as you
possibly could. So when you killed Ab Karpin, you saw a way to kill your
debts as well. You'd _become_ Ab Karpin, and it would be Jafe McCann who
was dead, and the debts dead with him."
