
"Indeed there are. But no one will find it. It will be just another
rusted piece of large junk to them."

It was then Muldoon made his move. He lashed out with a fist. The blow
staggered Robert. And Muldoon was crashing his shoulder against the
inner door. It burst inward, but before he could get through Robert
grabbed him. The whole side of Muldoon's face went numb as Robert
crashed his fist against his jaw. Muldoon knew he didn't stand a chance
in a straight-up fight, not with these two. Robert's hands were reaching
for him, now.

Muldoon grabbed one of the hands with both of his, twisted outward as
he grasped two fingers in each hand. Robert's face went putty-grey as
the bones snapped. Muldoon no longer cared about fair play. His knee
came up where it could do most damage, and Robert sank grovelling to the
floor.

Muldoon whirled. Too late. The world exploded in a thousand flashes of
pain-filled lights. He went crashing backward into the wall. Evin hit
him again before he stumbled blindly away from the terrible fist.

"Let me kill him," Robert groaned.

Muldoon pulled himself up from the pain-filled world he had been sent
into. There seemed to be two Evins facing him. Then there was only one.
A twisted grin came to Muldoon's lips. "Come ahead, you rat," he
mumbled.

Evin came forward. And swift as an adder Muldoon kicked him just below
the knee cap. Evin screamed, and collapsed. Muldoon staggered out of the
way of the falling body, only to fall into the clutches of Robert's
sudden reaching fingers.

He fell to the floor.

Robert tried to get his good hand up to Muldoon's throat. Muldoon beat
at the thick face with both hands. But the other seemed not to feel the
pounding fists. Slowly the fingers managed to reach their goal. Muldoon
felt the darkness of death closing over him as his breath became a
tortured dying gasp. His hand found Robert's face, came gently over it
until his thumb pressed on one eyeball. And Robert screamed as the thumb
became a hooked instrument to blind him.

Muldoon rolled away from the other, staggered somehow erect, but knew
his strength was gone. He couldn't make it to the door. And now Evin had
him....

And the door burst open and men poured into the room. Muldoon recognized
only one, the head of the Treasury's investigation department, before he
blacked out.

       *       *       *       *       *

Deena Savory stroked his forehead gently. "Does it hurt much, baby?"

The nurse had left them alone when Deena came into the hospital room.

"Not now," Muldoon said.

"What are they going to do to those men?" she asked.

"Oh, twenty years, according to Phillips. Counterfeiting, you know,
carries heavy penalties."

"But I thought the money was good? After all, they had paid rent with
C-notes."

"A slip-up on the bank's part. You see they made one mistake. The
machine they had, turned out perfect bills. Every one with the same
serial number...."

Deena's eyes widened.

"And the junk shop or whatever it was?" she said.

"I thought I'd let well enough alone. You see I took care of that during
the day. The twins, being criminals, had automatically broken their
lease. They also made it possible for me to change clients. Well,
there's going to be a huge tank covering that dump and shack, a tank
holding an awful lot of natural gas. I got together with the owner of
the property and the utility people yesterday afternoon and worked out a
deal. They're going to dump all that junk into the ocean."

"I'm sorry about the other night," she said suddenly.

"Is that how you say you're sorry?" he asked.

"Uh-uh," she said, as he reached for her. "There's a time and place for
that."

"Promise."

Her lips agreed.


THE END




Transcriber's Note:

    This etext was produced from _Amazing Stories_ September 1956.
    Extensive research did not uncover any evidence that the U.S.
    copyright on this publication was renewed. Minor spelling and
    typographical errors have been corrected without note. Variant
    spellings have been retained.





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Lease to Doomsday, by Lee Archer

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK LEASE TO DOOMSDAY ***

***** This file should be named 27392.txt or 27392.zip *****
