there, and even as that beam reached out, an enormously greater beam of
dull red reached out from the great power plant. The sphere leaped
forward--the beam caught it, and it seemed to strain, while terrific
flashing energies sprayed from it. It was shrinking swiftly. Its
resistance fell, the arcing decreased; the beam became orange and
finally green. Then the sphere had vanished.

F-2 returned, and again, the wind whined and howled, and the lightnings
crashed, while titanic forces worked and played. C-R-U-1 joined him,
floated beside him, and now red glory of the sun was rising behind them,
and the ruddy light drove through the clouds.

The forces died, and the howling wind decreased, and now, from the black
curtain, Roal and Trest appeared. Above the giant machine floated an
irregular globe of golden light, a faint halo about it of deep violet.
It floated motionless, a mere pool of pure force.

Into the thought-apparatus of each, man and machine alike, came the
impulses, deep in tone, seeming of infinite power, held gently in check.

"Once you failed, F-2; once you came near destroying all things. Now you
have planted the seed. I grow now."

The sphere of golden light seemed to pulse, and a tiny ruby flame
appeared within it, that waxed and waned, and as it waxed, there shot
through each of those watching beings a feeling of rushing, exhilarating
power, the very vital force of well-being.

Then it was over, and the golden sphere was twice its former
size--easily three feet in diameter, and still that irregular, hazy aura
of deep violet floated about it.

"Yes, I can deal with the Outsiders--they who have killed and destroyed,
that they might possess. But it is not necessary that we destroy. They
shall return to their planet."

And the golden sphere was gone, fast as light it vanished.

Far in space, headed now for Mars, that they might destroy all life
there, the golden sphere found the Outsiders, a clustered fleet, that
swung slowly about its own center of gravity as it drove on.

Within its ring was the golden sphere. Instantly, they swung their
weapons upon it, showering it with all the rays and all the forces they
knew. Unmoved, the golden sphere hung steady, then its mighty
intelligence spoke.

"Life-form of greed, from another star you came, destroying forever the
great race that created us, the Beings of Force and the Beings of Metal.
Pure force am I. My Intelligence is beyond your comprehension, my memory
is engraved in the very space, the fabric of space of which I am a part,
mine is energy drawn from that same fabric.

"We, the heirs of man, alone are left; no man did you leave. Go now to
your home planet, for see, your greatest ship, your flagship, is
helpless before me."

Forces gripped the mighty ship, and as some fragile toy it twisted and
bent, and yet was not hurt. In awful wonder those Outsiders saw the ship
turned inside out, and yet it was whole, and no part damaged. They saw
the ship restored, and its great screen of blankness out, protecting it
from all known rays. The ship twisted, and what they knew were curves,
yet were lines, and angles that were acute, were somehow straight lines.
Half mad with horror, they saw the sphere send out a beam of blue-white
radiance, and it passed easily through that screen, and through the
ship, and all energies within it were instantly locked. They could not
be changed; it could be neither warmed nor cooled; what was open could
not be shut, and what was shut could not be opened. All things were
immovable and unchangeable for all time.

"Go, and do not return."

       *       *       *       *       *

The Outsiders left, going out across the void, and they have not
returned, though five Great Years have passed, being a period of
approximately one hundred and twenty-five thousand of the lesser
years--a measure no longer used, for it is very brief. And now I can say
that that statement I made to Roal and Trest so very long ago is true,
and what he said was true, for the Last Evolution has taken place, and
things of pure force and pure intelligence in their countless millions
are on those planets and in this System, and I, first of machines to use
the Ultimate Energy of annihilating matter, am also the last, and this
record being finished, it is to be given unto the forces of one of those
force-intelligences, and carried back through the past, and returned to
the Earth of long ago.

And so my task being done, I, F-2, like Roal and Trest, shall follow the
others of my kind into eternal oblivion, for my kind is now, and theirs
was, poor and inefficient. Time has worn me, and oxidation attacked me,
but they of Force are eternal, and omniscient.

This I have treated as fictitious. Better so--for man is an animal to
whom hope is as necessary as food and air. Yet this which is made of
excerpts from certain records on thin sheets of metal is no fiction, and
it seems I must so say.

It seems now, when I know this that is to be, that it must be so, for
machines are indeed better than man, whether being of Metal, or being of
Force.

So, you who have read, believe as you will. Then think--and maybe, you
will change your belief.


THE END


FOOTNOTES:

[1] Kilad--unit introduced by the machines. Based on the duodecimal
system, similarly introduced, as more logical, and more readily used.
Thus we would have said 1728 kilads, about 1/2 mile.

[2] One unit was equal to one earth-gravity.




Transcriber's Note:

    This etext was produced from _Amazing Stories_ March 1961 and was
