horribly at the splintering bite of bone into brain. _But who can say he
did not reach a point-of-prescience, that his neuro-thalamics did not
leap to span the eons, and gape in horror, in that precise and endless
time just before his brains spewed in a gush of gray and gore, to
cerebrate no more?_

       *       *       *       *       *

A matter of minutes, now. Both Kurho and Mai-ak knew it. The latter had
glimpsed Otah's destruction, and with wild abandon sought to rally his
men into the area.

There was no longer an area. There was clash and groan and rush and
retreat, there was dark endless rock and a darker sky, from which the
very stars seemed to recoil in darkest wonderment at man's senseless
assault. The valley-rim yawned, and there Mai-ak made his stand and made
it well.

He was unaware that Kurho was no more--that the man of boast was at this
very moment a quivering, protoplasmic lump splattered across a dark
crevice. A random weapon in a frantic hand had proved to be no respecter
of person. Nor did it matter! Decimated as they were, enough of the
enemy got through. Once propelled in the insane purpose there could be
no stopping, as they descended upon Otah's people who huddled in the
caves....

For weeks, they had been told that when it came it would be from above,
sudden and savage without defense or recourse. Few had believed, or
bothered to plot the route to safety. Would not these issues be
resolved? Had not their caves been always safe and secure?

Now there was no time for belief or wonder. Within minutes none of
Otah's tribe were alive, neither women nor children. Gor-wah the Old One
remained, having failed in his exhortations; now he stood quite still,
erect and waiting, with arms outflung as the weapons came swarming, and
when that final blow fell the expression upon his mouth might have been
a grimace or might have been a smile....

Nor did the others escape, those at Far End who also huddled and waited
and would not believe. Their caves at the valley-floor were even less
secure. Whether it was blinding hate or the bitter dregs of expediency,
for Mai-ak and his remnants there was only one recourse now. It had been
deeply ingrained!

Grimly they pursued the way, automaton-like, unresponsive now to horror
or any emotive. And once again, within the hour the weapons fell.

It was swift and it was thorough.

Methodical. Merciless. Complete.

       *       *       *       *       *

It will not be said here when emotive-response returned. Does one return
from a horror all-encompassing, or seek to requite the unrequited? Does
one yearn for a Way that is no more when deadening shock has wiped it
out?

The season of thaw came, and again the great cold and once more the
thaw. Both Obe the Bear and the great saber-cats were at large across
the valley, and for those few who remained the bring was not easy now.
There was more dangerous prey!

Lone clansman encountered clansman across his path, and there was
furtive slinking. Each went silently alone and returned alone to his
place of hiding. Bellies growled, but none dared use his weapon except
in secret.

Perhaps a few, some isolate few remembered that time of chaos a season
ago--but it was fleeting recall at best, as somatic responses rose to
blot it out.

It was not to be forever! One thing remained, unasked and unbeknownst,
grooved with synaptic permanence in their burgeoning brains. _This was
neither beginning nor end: for though Otah's Tribe was gone, bellies
still growled. Kurho's Tribe was no more, but the weapons yet remained._

_There could be no beginning or end--for would not new things come,
means and methods and ways of devising so long as man remained? Was not
this The Way?_

Such were Mai-ak's thoughts at the time of the next thaw; when he felt
the thing-that-prodded that would not let him be, and his anger became
stubborn resolve; when day after day he bent the young saplings, and
found a way at last to fasten the sinew.

When he pulled, finally, pulled with all his strength, and with great
gloating saw his shaft go outward to a distance never yet conceived....


THE END




Transcriber's Note:

    This etext was first published in _Amazing Stories_ May 1961.
    Extensive research did not uncover any evidence that the U.S.
    copyright on this publication was renewed. Minor spelling and
    typographical errors have been corrected without note. The
    tribal names Lok, Lak and Dak, although possible typesetting
    errors, remain as printed.





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of The Beginning, by Henry Hasse

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE BEGINNING ***

***** This file should be named 27645.txt or 27645.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/2/7/6/4/27645/

