advantage to give exit to air contained in the strangulated bowel? Or to
stimulate it into action? It is not uncommon for bashful men to conceal
their being afflicted with a small hernia, which is the cause of their
death; this circumstance should therefore always be enquired into. Is the
seat or cause of the ileus always below the valve of the colon, and that of
the cholera above it? See Class II. 1. 2. 11.

7. _Globus hystericus._ Hysteric suffocation is the perception of a globe
rolling round in the abdomen, and ascending to the stomach and throat, and
there inducing strangulation. It consists of an ineffectual inversion of
the motions of the oesophagus, and other parts of the alimentary canal;
nothing being rejected from the stomach.

M. M. Tincture of castor. Tinct. of opium of each 15 drops. See Hysteria,
Class I. 3. 1. 10.

8. _Vomendi conamen inane._ An ineffectual effort to vomit. It frequently
occurs, when the stomach is empty, and in some cases continues many hours;
but as the lymphatics of the stomach are not inverted at the same time,
there is no supply of materials to be ejected; it is sometimes a symptom of
hysteria, but more frequently attends irregular epilepsies or reveries;
which however may be distinguished by their violence of exertion, for the
exertions of hysteric motions are feeble, as they are caused by debility;
but those of epilepsies, as they are used to relieve pain, are of the most
violent kind; insomuch that those who have once seen these ineffectual
efforts to vomit in some epilepsies, can never again mistake them for
symptoms of hysteria. See a case in Sect. XIX. 2.

M. M. Blister. Opium. Crude mercury.

9. _Borborigmus._ A gurgling of the bowels proceeds from a partial
invertion of the peristaltic motions of them, by which the gas is brought
into a superior part of the bowel, and bubbles through the descending
fluid, like air rushing into a bottle as the water is poured out of it.
This is sometimes a distressing symptom of the debility of the bowels
joined with a partial inversion of their motions. I attended a young lady
about sixteen, who was in other respects feeble, whose bowels almost
incessantly made a gurgling noise so loud as to be heard at a considerable
distance, and to attract the notice of all who were near her. As this noise
never ceased a minute together for many hours in a day, it could not be
produced by the uniform descent of water, and ascent of air through it, but
there must have been alternately a retrograde movement of a part of the
bowel, which must again have pushed up the water above the air; or which
might raise a part of the bowel, in which the fluid was lodged, alternately
above and below another portion of it; which might readily happen in some
of the curvatures of the smaller intestines, the air in which might be
moved backward and forward like the air-bubble in a glass-level.

M. M. Essential oil. Ten corns of black pepper swallowed whole after
dinner, that its effect might be slower and more permanent; a small pipe
occasionally introduced into the rectum to facilitate the escape of the
air. Crude mercury. See Class I. 2. 4. 9.

10. _Hysteria._ The three last articles, together with the lymphatic
diabaetes, are the most common symptoms of the hysteric disease; to which
sometimes is added the lymphatic salivation, and fits of syncope, or
convulsion, with palpitation of the heart (which probably consists of
retrograde motions of it), and a great fear of dying. Which last
circumstance distinguishes these convulsions from the epileptic ones with
greater certainty than any other single symptom. The pale copious urine,
cold skin, palpitation, and trembling, are the symptoms excited by great
fear. Hence in hysteric diseases, when these symptoms occur, the fear,
which has been usually associated with them, recurs at the same time, as in
hypochondriasis, Class I. 2. 4. 10. See Sect. XVI. 8. 1.

The convulsions which sometimes attend the hysteric disease, are exertions
to relieve pain, either of some torpid, or of some retrograde organ; and in
this respect they resemble epileptic convulsions, except that they are
seldom so violent as entirely to produce insensibility to external stimuli;
for these weaker pains cease before the total exhaustion of sensorial power
is produced, and the patient sinks into imperfect syncope; whereas the true
epilepsy generally terminates in temporary apoplexy, with perfect
insensibility to external objects. These convulsions are less to be dreaded
than the epileptic ones, as they do not originate from so permanent a
cause.

The great discharge of pale urine in this disease is owing to the inverted
motions of the lymphatics, which arise about the neck of the bladder, as
described in Sect. XXIX. 4. 5. And the lymphatic salivation arises from the
inverted motions of the salivary lymphatics.

Hysteria is distinguished from hypochondriasis, as in the latter there are
no retrograde motions of the alimentary canal, but simply a debility or
inirritability of it, with distention and flatulency. It is distinguished
from apepsia and cardialgia by there being nothing ejected from the stomach
by the retrograde motions of it, or of the oesophagus.

M. M. Opium. Camphor. Assafoetida. Castor, with sinapisms externally; to
which must be added a clyster of cold water, or iced water; which,
according to Mons. Pomme, relieves these hysteric symptoms instantaneously
like a charm; which it may effect by checking the inverted motions of the
intestinal canal by the torpor occasioned by cold; or one end of the
intestinal canal may become strengthened, and regain its peristaltic motion
by reverse sympathy, when the other end is rendered torpid by ice-water.
(Pomme des Affections Vaporeuses, p. 25.) These remove the present
symptoms; and bark, steel, exercise, coldish bath, prevent their returns.
See Art. VI. 2. 1.

11. _Hydrophobia._ Dread of water occasioned by the bite of a mad dog, is a
violent inversion of the motions of the oesophagus on the contact or even
approach of water or other fluids. The pharinx seems to have acquired the
sensibility of the larinx in this disease, and is as impatient to reject
any fluid, which gets into it. Is not the cardia ventriculi the seat of
this disease? As in cardialgia the pain is often felt in the pharinx, when
the acid material stimulates the other end of the canal, which terminates
in the stomach. As this fatal disease resembles tetanus, or locked jaw, in
its tendency to convulsion from a distant wound, and affects some other
parts by association, it is treated of in Class III. 1. 1. 15. and IV. 1.
2. 7.

       *       *       *       *       *

ORDO III.

_Retrograde Irritative Motions._

GENUS II.

_Of the Absorbent System._

SPECIES.

1. _Catarrhus lymphaticus._ Lymphatic catarrh. A periodical defluxion of a
thin fluid from the nostrils, for a few hours, occasioned by the retrograde
motions of their lymphatics; which may probably be supplied with fluid by
the increased absorption of some other lymphatic branches in their
vicinity. It is distinguished from that mucous discharge, which happens in
frosty weather from decreased absorption, because it is less salt to the
taste; and from an increased secretion of mucus, because it is neither so
viscid, nor is attended with heat of the part. This complaint is liable to
recur at diurnal periods, like an intermittent fever, for weeks and months
together, with great sneezing and very copious discharge for an hour or
two.

I have seen two of these cases, both of which occurred in delicate women,
and seemed an appendage to other hysteric symptoms; whence I concluded,
that the discharge was occasioned by the inverted motions of the lymphatics
of the nostrils, like the pale urine in hysteric cases; and that they might
receive this fluid from some other branches of lymphatic vessels opening
into the frontal or maxillary cavities in their vicinity.

Could such a discharge be produced by strong errhines, and excite an
absorption of the congestion of lymph in the dropsy of the brain?

2. _Salivatio lymphatica._ Lymphatic salivation. A copious expuition of a
pellucid insipid fluid, occasioned by the retrograde motions of the
lymphatics of the mouth. It is sometimes periodical, and often attends the
hysteric disease, and nervous fevers; but is not accompanied with a saline
taste, or with heat of the mouth, or nausea.

3. _Nausea humida._ Moist nausea consists in a discharge of fluid, owing to
the retrograde motions of the lymphatics about the fauces, without increase
of heat, or saline taste, together with some retrograde motions of the
fauces or pharinx; along with this nausea a sickness generally precedes the
act of vomiting; which may consist of a similar discharge of mucus or chyle
into the stomach by the retrograde motions of the lymphatics or lacteals,
which open into it. See Class I. 2. 4. 3. and I. 2. 4. 4.

M. M. Subacid liquids. Wine. Opium. A blister.

4. _Diarrhoea lymphatica._ Lymphatic diarrhoea. A quantity of mucus and
lymph are poured into the intestines by the inverted motions of the
intestinal lymphatics. The feces are less fetid and more liquid; and it
sometimes portends the commencement of a diabaetes, or dropsy, or their
temporary relief. This lymphatic diarrhoea sometimes becomes chronical, in
which the atmospheric moisture, absorbed by the cutaneous and pulmonary
lymphatics, is poured into the intestines by the retrograde motions of the
lacteals. See Section XXIX. 4. 6. where some cases of this kind are
related.

5. _Diarrhoea chylifera, coeliaca._ Chyliferous diarrhoea. The chyle drank
up by the lacteals of the upper intestines is poured into the lower ones by
the retrograde motions of their lacteals, and appears in the dejections.
This circumstance occurs at the beginning of diarrhoea crapulosa, where the
patient has taken and digested more aliment than the system can
conveniently receive, and thus eliminates a part of it; as appears when
there is curdled chyle in some of the dejections. See Sect. XXIX. 4. 7. It
differs from the lymphatic diarrhoea, as the chyliferous diabaetes differs
from the aqueous and mucaginous diabaetes.

6. _Diabaetes._ By the retrograde motions of the urinary lymphatics, an
immense quantity of fluid is poured into the bladder. It is either termed
chyliferous, or aqueous, or mucaginous, from the nature of the fluid
brought into the bladder; and is either a temporary disease, as in hysteric
women, in the beginning of intoxication, in worm cases, or in those exposed
to cold damp air, or to great fear, or anxiety, or in the commencement of
some dropsies; or it becomes chronical.

When the urinary lymphatics invert their motions, and pour their refluent
contents into the bladder, some other branch of the absorbent system acts
with greater energy to supply this fluid. If it is the intestinal branch,
the chyliferous diabaetes is produced: if it is the cutaneous or pulmonary
branch, the aqueous diabaetes is produced: and if the cellular or cystic
branches, the mucaginous diabaetes. In the two last the urine is pellucid,
and contains no sugar.

In dropsies the fluid is sometimes absorbed, and poured into the bladder by
the retrograde motions of the urinary lymphatics, as during the exhibition
of digitalis. In the beginning of the dropsies of infirm gouty patients, I
have frequently observed, that they make a large quantity of water for one
night, which relieves them for several days. In these cases the patient
previously feels a fulness about the precordia, with difficult respiration,
and symptoms similar to those of hysteria. Perhaps a previous defect of
absorption takes place in some part of the body in those hysteric cases,
which are relieved by a copious discharge of pale urine. See Diabaetes
explained at large, Section XXIX. 4.

A discharge of blood sometimes attends the diabaetes, which was
occasionally a symptom of that disease in Mr. Brindley, the great navigable
canal maker in this country. Which may be accounted for by the
communication of a lymphatic branch with the gastric branch of the vena
portarum, as discovered by J. F. Meckel. See Section XXVII. 2.

M. M. Alum. Earth of Alum. Cantharides. Calomel. Bark. Steel. Rosin. Opium.
See Sect. XXIX. 4.

7. _Sudor lymphaticus._ Profuse sweats from the inverted motions of the
cutaneous lymphatics, as in some fainting fits, and at the approach of
death; and as perhaps in the sudor anglicanus. See Sect. XXIX. 5. These
sweats are glutinous to the touch, and without increased heat of the skin;
if the part is not covered, the skin becomes cold from the evaporation of
the fluid. These sweats without heat sometimes occur in the act of
vomiting, as in Sect. XXV. 9. and are probably the cause of the cold sweaty
hands of some people. As mentioned in Sect. XXIX. 4. 9. in the case of R.
Davis, which he cured by frequent application of lime. Though it is
possible, that cold sweaty hands may also arise from the want of due
absorption of the perspirable matter effused on them, and that the coldness
may be owing to the greater evaporation in consequence.

The acid sweats described by Dr. Dobson, which he observed in a diabaetic
patient, and ascribes to the chyle effused on the skin, must be ascribed to
the retrograde action of the cutaneous lymphatics. See Sect. XXIX. 6.

8. _Sudor asthmaticus._ The cold sweats in this disease only cover the
head, arms, and breast, and are frequently exceedingly profuse. These
sweats are owing to the inverted motions of the cutaneous lymphatics of the
upper part of the body, and at the same time the increased absorption of
the pulmonary absorbents: hence these sweats when profuse relieve the
present fit of asthma. There is no other way to account for sweats
appearing on the upper parts of the body only, but by the fluid having been
absorbed by the lymphatic branch of the lungs, and effused on the skin by
the retrograde movements of the cutaneous lymphatics; which join those of
the lungs before they enter into the venous circulation. For if they were
occasioned, as generally supposed, by the difficulty of the circulation of
the blood through the lungs, the whole skin must be equally affected, both
of the upper and lower parts of the body; for whatever could obstruct the
circulation in the upper part of the venous system, must equally obstruct
it in the lower part of it. See Sect. XXIX. 6. In the convulsive asthma
these sweats do not occur; hence they may be distinguished; and might be
called the hydropic asthma, and the epileptic asthma.

9. _Translatio puris._ Translation of matter from one part of the system to
another can only be explained from its being absorbed by one branch of the
lymphatic system, and deposited in a distant part by the retrograde motions
of another branch; as mentioned Sect. XXIX. 7. 1. It is curious, that these
translations of matter are attended generally, I believe, with cold fits;
for less heat is produced during the retrograde action of this part of the
system, as no secretion in the lymphatic glands of the affected branches
can exist at the same time. Do any ineffectual retrograde motions occasion
the cold fits of agues? The time when the gout of the liver ceases, and the
gout in the foot commences, is attended with a cold fit, as I have observed
in two instances, which is difficult to explain, without supposing the new
vessels, or the matter produced on the inflamed liver, to be absorbed, and
either eliminated by some retrograde motion, or carried to the newly
inflamed part? See Class IV. 1. 2. 15.

10. _Translatio lactis._ Translation of milk to the bowels in puerperal
fevers can only be explained by the milk being absorbed by the pectoral
branch of lymphatics, and carried to the bowels by the retrograde motions
of the intestinal lymphatics or lacteals. See many instances of this in
Sect. XXIX. 7. 4.

11. _Translatio urinae._ Translation of urine. There is a curious case
related in the Transaction of the College of Physicians at Philadelphia,
Vol. I. p. 96. of a girl, who labouring under an iscuria vomited her urine
for many months; which could not be distinguished from that which was at
other times drawn off by the catheter. After having taken much opium, she
seems at length to have formed gravel, some of which was frequently brought
up by vomiting. Dr. Senter ascribes this to the retrograde motions of the
lymphatics of the stomach, and the increased ones of those of the bladder,
and refers to those of Sect. XXIX. of this work; which section was first
published in 1780; and to Macquire's Dictionary of Chemistry, Art. Urine.

The patient above described sometimes had a discharge of urine by the
navel, and at other times by the rectum, and sometimes by urinous sweats.

       *       *       *       *       *

ORDO III.

_Retrograde Irritative Motions._

GENUS III.

_Of the Sanguiferous System._

SPECIES.

1. _Capillarium motus retrogressus._ In microscopic experiments it is usual
to see globules of blood regurgitate from the capillary vessels again and
again, before they pass through them; and not only the mouths of the veins,
which arise from these capillaries, are frequently seen by microscopes to
regurgitate some particles of blood during the struggles of the animal; but
a retrograde motion of the blood in the veins of these animals, from the
very heart to the extremities of the limbs, is observable by intervals
during the distresses of the dying creature. Haller, Elem. Phys. T. i. p.
216. See Section XXIX. 3. 8.

2. _Palpitatio cordis._ May not the ineffectual and weak unequal motions of
the heart in hysteric cases be ascribed to the retrograde motions of it,
which continue for a short time, or terminate in syncope? See Class IV. 3.
1. 6.

3. _Anhelatio spasmodica._ In some asthmas may not the difficulty of
respiration arise from the inverted action of the finer branches of the
bronchia, or of the pulmonary artery or vein, like those of the capillaries
above described in No. 1. of this genus?

       *       *       *       *       *


_The Orders and Genera of the Second Class of Diseases._

       *       *       *       *       *

CLASS II.

DISEASES OF SENSATION.

ORDO I.

_Increased Sensation._

GENERA.

  1. With increased action of the muscles.
  2. With the production of new vessels by internal membranes or glands
      with fever.
  3. With the production of new vessels by external membranes or glands
      with fever.
  4. With the production of new vessels by internal membranes or glands
      without fever.
  5. With the production of new vessels by external membranes or glands
      without fever.
  6. With fever consequent to the production of new vessels or fluids.
  7. With increased action of the organs of sense.

ORDO II.

_Decreased Sensation._

GENERA.

  1. With decreased actions of the general system.
  2. With decreased actions of particular organs.

ORDO III.

_Retrograde Sensitive Motions._

GENERA.

  1. Of the excretory ducts.

       *       *       *       *       *

_The Orders, Genera, and Species, of the Second Class Of Diseases._

       *       *       *       *       *

CLASS II.

DISEASES OF SENSATION.

ORDO I.

_Increased Sensation._

GENUS I.

_With Increased Action of the Muscles._

SPECIES.

   1. _Deglutitio._                     Deglutition.
   2. _Respiratio._                     Respiration.
   3. _Sternutatio._                    Sneezing.
   4. _Anhelitus._                      Panting.
   5. _Tussis ebriorum._                Cough of inebriates.
   6. _Syngultus._                      Hiccough.
   7. _Asthma humorale._                Humoral asthma.
   8. _Nictitatio sensitiva._           Winking from pain.
   9. _Oscitatio et pandiculatio._      Yawning and stretching.
  10. _Tenesmus._                       Tenesmus.
  11. _Stranguria._                     Strangury.
  12. _Parturitio._                     Parturition.

GENUS II.

_With the Production of new Vessels by internal Membranes or Glands, with
Fever._

SPECIES.

   1. _Febris sensitiva irritata._  Sensitive irritated fever.
   2. _Ophthalmia interna._         Inflammation of the eye.
   3. _Phrenitis._                  ---- of the brain.
   4. _Peripneumonia._              ---- of the lungs.
      ---- _trachealis._            ---- the croup.
   5. _Pleuritis._                  ---- of the pleura.
   6. _Diaphragmitis._              ---- of the diaphragm.
   7. _Carditis._                   ---- of the heart.
   8. _Peritonitis._                ---- of the peritoneum.
   9. _Mesenteritis._               ---- of the mesentery.
  10. _Gastritis._                  ---- of the stomach.
  11. _Enteritis._                  ---- of the bowels.
  12. _Hepatitis._                  ---- of the liver.
  13. _Splenitis._                  ---- of the spleen.
  14. _Nephritis._                  ---- of the kidney.
  15. _Cystitis._                   ---- of the bladder.
  16. _Hysteritis._                 ---- of the womb.
  17. _Lumbago sensitiva._          ---- of the loins.
  18. _Ischias._                    ---- of the pelvis.
  19. _Paronychia interna._         ---- beneath the nails.

GENUS III.

_With the Production of new Vessels by external Membranes or Glands, with
Fever._

SPECIES.

   1. _Febris sensitiva inirritata._    Sensitive inirritated fever.
   2. _Erysipelas irritatum._           Erysipelas irritated.
      _----inirritatum._                ---- inirritated.
      ---- _sensitivum._                ---- sensitive.
   3. _Tonsillitis interna._            Angina internal.
      ---- _superficialis._             ---- superficial.
      ---- _inirritata._                ---- inirritated.
   4. _Parotitis suppurans._            Mumps suppurative.
      ---- _mutabilis._                 ---- mutable.
      ---- _felina._                    ---- of cats.
   5. _Catarrhus sensitivus._           Catarrh inflammatory.
   6. ---- _contagiosus._               ---- contagious.
      ---- _equinus et caninus._        ---- among horses and dogs.
   7. _Peripneumonia superficialis._    Superficial peripneumony.
   8. _Pertussis._                      Chin-cough.
   9. _Variola discreta._               Small-pox distinct.
      ---- _confluens._                 ---- confluent.
      ---- _inoculata._                 ---- inoculated.
  10. _Rubeola irritata._               Measles irritated.
      ---- _inirritata._                ---- inirritated.
  11. _Scarlatina mitis._               Scarlet fever mild.
      ---- _maligna._                   ---- malignant.
  12. _Miliaria sudatoria._             Miliary fever sudatory.
      ---- _irritata._                  ---- irritated.
      ---- _inirritata._                ---- inirritated.
  13. _Pestis._                         Plague.
      ---- _vaccina._                   ---- of horned cattle.
  14. _Pemphigus._                      Bladdery fever.
  15. _Varicella._                      Chicken-pox.
  16. _Urticaria._                      Nettle rash.
  17. _Aptha sensitiva._                Thrush sensitive.
      ---- _irritata._                  ---- irritated.
      ---- _inirritata._                ---- inirritated.
  18. _Dysenteria._                     Bloody flux.
  19. _Gastritis superficialis._        Superficial inflam. of the stomach.
  20. _Enteritis superficialis._        ---- of the bowels.

GENUS IV.

_With the Production of new Vessels by internal Membranes or Glands,
without Fever._

SPECIES.

   1. _Ophthalmia superficialis._     Ophthalmy superficial.
      ---- _lymphatica._              ---- lymphatic.
      ---- _equina._                  ---- of horses.
   2. _Pterigion._                    Eye-wing.
   3. _Tarsitis palpebrarum._         Red eyelids.
   4. _Hordeolum._                    Stye.
   5. _Paronychia superficialis._     Whitlow.
   6. _Gutta rosea hepatica._         Pimpled face hepatic.
      ---- _stomatica._               ---- stomatic.
      ---- _hereditaria._             ---- hereditary.
   7. _Odontitis._                    Inflamed tooth.
   8. _Otitis._                       ---- ear.
   9. _Fistula lacrymalis._           Fistula lacrymalis.
  10. _Fistula in ano._               Fistula in ano.
  11. _Fistula urethrae._             Fistula urethrae.
  12. _Hepatitis chronica._           Chronical hepatitis.
  13. _Scrophula suppurans._          Suppurating scrophula.
  14. _Scorbutus suppurans._          Suppurating scurvy.
  15. _Schirrus suppurans._           Suppurating schirrus.
  16. _Carcinoma._                    Cancer.
  17. _Arthrocele._                   Swelling of the joints.
  18. _Arthropuosis._                 Suppuration of the joints.
  19. _Caries ossium._                Caries of the bones.

GENUS V.

_With the Production of new Vessels by external Membranes or Glands,
without Fever._

SPECIES.

   1. _Gonorrhoea venerea._       Clap.
   2. _Syphilis._                 Venereal disease.
   3. _Lepra._                    Leprosy.
   4. _Elephantiasis._            Elephantiasis.
   5. _Framboesia._               Framboesia.
   6. _Psora._                    Itch.
   7. _Psora ebriorum._           Itch of drunkards.
   8. _Herpes._                   Herpes.
   9. _Zona ignea._               Shingles.
  10. _Annulus repens._           Ring-worm.
  11. _Tinea capitis._            Scald-head.
  12. _Crusta lactea._            Milk-crust.
  13. _Trichoma._                 Plica polonica.

GENUS VI.

_With Fever consequent to the Production of new Vessels or Fluids._

SPECIES.

   1. _Febris sensitiva._               Sensitive fever.
   2. ---- _a pure clauso._             Fever from concealed matter.
   3. ---- _a vomica._                  ---- from vomica.
   4. ---- _ab empyemate._              ---- from empyema.
   5. ---- _mesenterica._               ---- mesenteric.
   6. ---- _a pure aerato._             ---- from aerated matter.
   7. ---- _a phthisi._                 ---- from consumption.
   8. ---- _scrophulosa._               ---- scrophulous.
   9. ---- _ischiadica._                ---- from ischias.
  10. ---- _arthropuodica._             ---- from joint-evil.
  11. ---- _a pure contagioso._         ---- from contagious matter.
  12. ---- _variolosa secundaria._      ---- secondary of small-pox.
  13. ---- _carcinomatosa._             ---- cancarous.
  14. ---- _venerea._                   ---- venereal.
  15. ---- _a sanie contagiosa._        ---- from contagious sanies.
  16. ---- _puerpera._                  ---- puerperal.
  17. ---- _a sphacelo._                ---- from sphacelus.

GENUS VII.

_With increased Action of the Organs of Sense._

SPECIES.

   1. _Delirium febrile._        Delirium of fevers.
   2. ---- _maniacale._          ---- maniacal.
   3. ---- _ebrietatis._         ---- of drunkenness.
   4. _Somnium._                 Dreams.
   5. _Hallucinatio visus._      Deception of sight.
   6. ---- _auditus._            ---- of hearing.
   7. _Rubor a calore._          Blush from heat.
   8. ---- _jucunditatis._       ---- from joy.
   9. _Priapismus amatorius._    Amorous priapism.
  10. _Distentio mamularum._     Distention of the nipples.

ORDO II.

_Decreased Sensation._

GENUS I.

_With decreased Action of the general System._

SPECIES.

  1. _Stultitia insensibilis._    Folly from insensibility.
  2. _Taedium vitae._             Irksomeness of life.
  3. _Paresis sensitiva._         Sensitive debility.

GENUS II.

_With decreased Actions of particular Organs._

SPECIES.

  1. _Anorexia._                  Want of appetite.
  2. _Adipsia._                   Want of thirst.
  3. _Impotentia._                Impotence.
  4. _Sterilitas._                Barrenness.
  5. _Insensibilitas artuum._     Insensibility of the limbs.
  6. _Dysuria insensitiva._       Insensibility of the bladder.
  7. _Accumulatio alvina._        Accumulation of feces.

ORDO III.

_Retrograde Sensitive Motions._

GENUS I.

_Of Excretory Ducts._

SPECIES.

     _Motus retrogressus_        Retrograde motion.
  1. ---- _ureterum._            ---- of the ureters.
  2. ---- _urethrae._            ---- of the urethra.
  3. ---- _ductus choledoci._    ---- of the bile-duct.

       *       *       *       *       *

CLASS II.

DISEASES OF SENSATION.

ORDO I.

_Increased Sensation._

GENUS I.

_With Increased Action of the Muscles._

The actions belonging to this genus are those which are immediately excited
by the sensations of pain or pleasure, but which are neither followed by
inflammation, nor by convulsion. The former of which belong to the
subsequent genera of this order, and the latter to the class of voluntary
motions.

The criterion between the actions, which are the immediate consequence of
painful sensation, and convulsive actions properly so called, consists in
the former having a tendency to dislodge the stimulating cause, which
induces the painful sensation; and the latter being exerted for the purpose
of expending the sensorial power, and thus dulling or destroying the
general sensation of the system. See Class III. 1.

There is a degree of heat produced in the affected part by these sensitive
actions without inflammation, but in much less quantity than when attended
by inflammation; as in the latter there is a production of new vessels. See
Sect. XXXIII. 2. 3.

Some of the species of this genus cannot properly be termed diseases in
their natural state, but become so by their defect or excess, and are here
inserted to facilitate the explanation of the others.

SPECIES.

1. _Deglutitio._ Swallowing our food is immediately caused by the
pleasureable sensation occasioned by its stimulus on the palate or fauces
and is acquired long before the nativity of the animal. Afterwards the pain
of hunger previously produces the various voluntary exertions to procure
the proper material, but the actions of masticating and of swallowing it
are effected by the sensorial power of sensation; which appears by their
not being always controulable by the will, as when children in vain attempt
to swallow nauseous drugs. See Class IV. 1. 3. 1. The masticated food
stimulates the palate, which is an organ of sense, into so much action, as
to produce agreeable sensation; and the muscles subservient to deglutition
are brought into action by the sensation thus produced. The pleasureable
sensation is the proximate cause; the action of the fibres of the
extremities of the nerves of taste is the remote cause; the sensorial power
of irritation exciting these fibres of the nerves of taste into increased
action is the pre-remote cause; the action of the muscles of deglutition is
the proximate effect; the pushing the food into the stomach is the remote
effect; and the nutrition of the body is the post-remote effect.

Though the muscles subservient to deglutition have their actions previously
associated, so as to be excited into synchronous tribes or successive
trains, either by volition, as when we swallow a disagreeable drug; or by
sensation, as when we swallow agreeable food; or by irritation, as when we
inattentively swallow our saliva; yet do all those three kinds of
deglutition belong to the respective classes of volition, sensation, and
irritation; because the first links of these tribes or trains of muscular
action are excited by those sensorial powers, and the associated links,
which accompany or succeed them, are excited by the combined powers either
of volition, or of sensation, or of irritation, along with that of
association.

2. _Respiratio._ Respiration is immediately caused by the sensorial power
of sensation in consequence of the baneful want of vital air; and not from
the accumulation of blood in the lungs, as that might be carried on by
inhaling azote alone, without the oxygenous part of the atmosphere. The
action of respiration is thus similar to that of swallowing our food to
appease the pain of hunger; but the lungs being surrounded with air, their
proper pabulum, no intermediate voluntary exertions are required, as in
hunger, to obtain and prepare the wanted material.

Respiration is similar to slow combustion; the oxygenous part of the
atmosphere is received through the moist membranes, which line the
air-cells of the lungs, and uniting with the inflammable part of the blood
generates an acid, probably the phosphoric acid; a portion of carbonic acid
is likewise produced in this process; as appears by repeatedly breathing
over lime-water, which then becomes turbid. See Botanic Garden, P. I. Canto
I. l. 401. note.

3. _Sternutatio._ Sneezing consists of muscular actions produced by the
sensorial faculty of sensation; and is an effort to dislodge, by means of
air forcibly impelled through the nostrils, some material; which stimulates
the membrane, which lines them, into too great action, and might thence
injure the sense of smell which is diffused on it.

In this operation the too great action of the vessels of the membrane of
the nostrils is the remote cause; the sensation thence induced is the
proximate cause; and the muscular actions are the proximate effect.

This action of sneezing frequently precedes common respiration in new-born
children, but I believe not always; as like the latter it cannot have been
previously acquired in the uterus.

It is produced in some people by sudden light, as by looking up at the sky
in a morning, when they come out of a gloomy bed-chamber. It then becomes
an associate action, and belongs to Class IV. 1. 2. 2.

M. M. When it is exerted to excess it may be cured by snuffing starch up
the nostrils. See Class I. 1. 2. 13.

4. _Anhelitus._ Panting. The quick and laborious breathing of running
people, who are not accustomed to violent exercise, is occasioned by the
too great conflux of blood to the lungs. As the sanguiferous system, as
well as the absorbent system, is furnished in many parts of its course with
valves, which in general prevent the retrograde movement of their contained
fluids; and as all these vessels, in some part of their course, lie in
contact with the muscles, which are brought into action in running, it
follows that the blood must be accelerated by the intermitted swelling of
the bellies of the muscles moving over them.

The difficulty of breathing, with which, very fat people are immediately
affected on exercise, is owing to the pressure of the accumulated fat on
the veins, arteries, and lymphatics; and which, by distending the skin,
occasions it to act as a tight bandage on the whole surface of the body.
Hence when the muscles are excited into quicker action, the progress of the
blood in the veins, and of the lymph and chyle in the absorbent system, is
urged on with much greater force, as under an artificial bandage on a limb,
explained in Art. IV. 2. 10. and in Sect. XXXIII. 3. 2. Hence the
circulation is instantly quickened to a great degree, and the difficulty of
breathing is the consequence of a more rapid circulation through the lungs.
The increased secretion of the perspirable matter is another consequence of
this rapid circulation; fat people, when at rest, are believed to perspire
less than others, which may be gathered from their generally having more
liquid stools, more and paler urine, and to their frequently taking less
food than many thin people; and lastly, from the perspiration of fat people
being generally more inodorous than that of lean ones; but when corpulent
people are put in motion, the sweat stands in drops on their skins, and
they "lard the ground" as they run. The increase of heat of corpulent
people on exercise, is another consequence of their more rapid circulation,
and greater secretion. See Class I. 2. 3. 17.

Other causes of difficult or quick respiration will be treated of under
Asthma, Pertussis, Peripneumony, Tonsillitis.

5. _Tussis ebriorum._ Sensitive cough is an exertion of the muscles used in
expiration excited into more violent action by the sensorial power of
sensation, in consequence of something which too powerfully stimulates the
lungs. As the saline part of the secreted mucus, when the absorption of it
is impeded; or the too great viscidity of it, when the absorption is
increased; or the too great quantity of the mucus, when the secretion is
increased; or the inflammation of the membranes of the lungs; it is an
effort to dislodge any of these extraneous materials.

Of this kind is the cough which attends free-drinkers after a debauch; it
consists of many short efforts to cough, with a frequent expuition of half
a tea-spoonful of frothy mucus, and is attended with considerable thirst.
The thirst is occasioned by the previous dissipation of the aqueous parts
of the blood by sensible or insensible perspiration; which was produced by
the increased action of the cutaneous and pulmonary capillaries during the
stimulus of the wine. In consequence of this an increased absorption
commences to replace this moisture, and the skin and mouth become dry, and
the pulmonary mucus becomes inspissated; which stimulates the bronchia, and
is raised into froth by the successive currents of air in evacuating it.
This production of froth is called by some free-drinkers "spitting
sixpences" after a debauch. This subsequent thirst, dry mouth, and viscid
expectoration in some people succeeds the slightest degree of intoxication,
of which it may be esteemed a criterion. See Class IV. 2. 1. 8.

As coughs are not always attended with pain, the muscular actions, which
produce them, are sometimes excited by the sensorial faculty of irritation,
as in Class I. 1. 2. 8. I. 1. 3. 4. I. 1. 4. 3. I. 2. 3. 4. Coughs are also
sometimes convulsive, as in Class III. 1. 1. 10. and sometimes sympathetic,
as Class IV. 2. 1. 7.

M. M. Venesection, when the cough is attended with inflammation. Mucilages.
Opium. Torpentia. Blister.

6. _Singultus._ Hiccough is an exertion of the muscles used in inspiration
excited into more violent action by the sensorial power of sensation, in
consequence of something which too powerfully stimulates the cardia
ventriculi, or upper orifice of the stomach. As when solid food is too
hastily taken without sufficient dilution. And is an effort to dislodge
that offensive material, and push it to some less sensible part of the
stomach, or into the middle of the contained aliment.

At the end of fatal fevers it may arise from the acrimony of the undigested
aliment, or from a part of the stomach being already dead, and by its
weight or coldness affecting the surviving part with disagreeable
sensation. The pain about the upper orifice of the stomach is the proximate
cause, the too great or too little action of the fibres of this part of the
stomach is the remote cause, the action of the muscles used in inspiration
is the proximate effect, and the repercussion of the offending material is
the remote effect.

Hiccough is sometimes sympathetic, occasioned by the pain of gravel in the
kidney or ureter, as in Class IV. 1. 1. 7. and is sometimes a symptom of
epilepsy or reverie, as in Sect. XIX. 2.

M. M. Oil of cinnamon from one drop gradually increased to ten, on sugar,
or on chalk. Opium. Blister. Emetic.

7. _Asthma humorale._ The humoral asthma probably consists in a temporary
anasarca of the lungs, which may be owing to a temporary defect of
lymphatic absorption. Its cause is nevertheless at present very obscure,
since a temporary deficiency of venous absorption, at the extremities of
the pulmonary or bronchial veins, might occasion a similar difficulty of
respiration. See Abortio, Class I. 2. 1. 14. Or it might be supposed, that
the lymph effused into the cavity of the chest might, by some additional
heat during sleep, acquire an aerial form, and thus compress the lungs; and
on this circumstance the relief, which these patients receive from cold
air, would be readily accounted for.

The paroxysms attack the patient in his first sleep, when the circulation
through the lungs in weak people wants the assistance of the voluntary
power. Class I. 2. 1. 3. And hence the absorbents of the lungs are less
able to fulfil the whole of their duty. And part of the thin mucus, which
is secreted into the air-cells, remains there unabsorbed, and occasions the
difficult respiration, which awakes the patient. And the violent exertions
of the muscles of respiration, which succeed, are excited by the pain of
suffocation, for the purpose of pushing forwards the blood through the
compressed capillaries, and to promote the absorption of the effused lymph.

In this the humoral differs from the convulsive asthma, treated of in Class
III. 1. 1. 10. as in that there is probably no accumulated fluid to be
absorbed; and the violent respiration is only an exertion for the purpose
of relieving pain, either in the lungs or in some distant part, as in other
convulsions, or epilepsy; and in this respect the fits of humoral and
convulsive asthma essentially differ from each other, contrary to the
opinion expressed without sufficient consideration in Sect. XVIII. 15.

The patients in the paroxysms both of humoral and convulsive asthma find
relief from cold air, as they generally rise out of bed, and open the
window, and put out their heads; for the lungs are not sensible to cold,
and the sense of suffocation is somewhat relieved by there being more
oxygen contained in a given quantity of cold fresh air, than in the warm
confined air of a close bed-chamber.

I have seen humoral asthma terminate in confirmed anasarca, and destroy the
patient, who had been an excessive drinker of spirituous potation. And M.
Savage asserts, that this disease frequently terminates in diabetes; which
seems to shew, that it is a temporary dropsy relieved by a great flow of
urine. Add to this, that these paroxysms of the asthma are themselves
relieved by profuse sweats of the upper parts of the body, as explained in
Class I. 3. 2. 8. which would countenance the idea of their being
occasioned by congestions of lymph in the lungs.

The congestion of lymph in the lungs from the defective absorption of it is
probably the remote cause of humoral asthma; but the pain of suffocation is
