instances of the vanishing of a star behind a comet. Wartmann of Geneva
observed the first, November 28, 1828;[302] but his instrument was
defective, and the eclipsing body, Encke's comet, has shown itself
otherwise perfectly translucent. The second case of occultation occurred
September 13, 1890, when an eleventh magnitude star was stated to have
completely disappeared during the transit over it of Denning's
comet.[303]

From the failure to detect any effects of refraction in the light of
stars occulted by comets, it was inferred (though, as we know now,
erroneously) that their composition is rather that of dust than that of
vapour; that they consist not of any continuous substance, but of
discrete solid particles, very finely divided and widely scattered. In
conformity with this view was the known smallness of their masses.
Laplace had shown that if the amount of matter forming Lexell's comet
had been as much as 1/5000 of that contained in our globe, the effect of
its attraction, on the occasion of its approach within 1,438,000 miles
of the earth, July 1, 1770, must have been apparent in the lengthening
of the year. And that some comets, at any rate, possess masses
immeasurably below this maximum value was clearly proved by the
undisturbed parallel march of the two fragments of Biela's in 1846.

But the discovery in this branch most distinctive of the period under
review is that of "short period" comets, of which four[304] were known
in 1850. These, by the character of their movements, serve as a link
between the planetary and cometary worlds, and by the nature of their
construction, seem to mark a stage in cometary decay. For that comets
are rather transitory agglomerations, than permanent products of
cosmical manufacture, appeared to be demonstrated by the division and
disappearance of one amongst their number, as well as by the singular
and rapid changes in appearance undergone by many, and the seemingly
irrevocable diffusion of their substance visible in nearly all. They
might then be defined, according to the ideas respecting them prevalent
fifty years ago, as bodies unconnected by origin with the solar system,
but encountered, and to some extent appropriated, by it in its progress
through space, owing their visibility in great part, if not altogether,
to light reflected from the sun, and their singular and striking forms
to the action of repulsive forces emanating from him, the penalty of
their evanescent splendour being paid in gradual waste and final
dissipation and extinction.


FOOTNOTES:

[Footnote 241: _Allgemeine Geographische Ephemeriden_, vol. iv., p.
287.]

[Footnote 242: _Astr. Jahrbuch_, 1823, p. 217. The period (1,208 days)
of this body is considerably shorter than that of any other known
comet.]

[Footnote 243: "Sicut bombyces filo fundendo, sic cometas cauda
exspiranda consumi et denique mori."--_De Cometis_, Op., vol. vii., p.
110.]

[Footnote 244: Considerable uncertainty, however, still prevails on the
point. The inverse relation assumed by Lagrange to exist between
distance from the sun and density brought out the Mercurian mass
1/2025810 that of the sun (Laplace, _Exposition du Syst. du Monde_, t.
ii., p. 50, ed. 1824). Von Asten deduced from the movements of Encke's
comet, 1818-48, a value of 1/7636440; while Backlund from its seven
returns, 1871-1891, derived 1/9647000 (_Comptes Rendus_, Oct. 1, 1894).]

[Footnote 245: Arago, _Annuaire_ (1832), p. 218.]

[Footnote 246: Hind, _The Comets_, p. 20.]

[Footnote 247: _Phil. Trans._, vol. xlvi., p. 204.]

[Footnote 248: _Astr. Nach._, No. 2,134.]

[Footnote 249: _Comptes Rendus_, t. cvii., p. 588.]

[Footnote 250: _Mem. de St. Petersbourg_, t. xxxii., No. 3, 1884; _Astr.
Nach._, No. 2,727.]

[Footnote 251: _Month. Not._, vol. xix., p. 72.]

[Footnote 252: _Mecanique Celeste_, t. ii., p. 197.]

[Footnote 253: See Berberich, _Astr. Nach._, Nos. 2,836-7, 3,125;
Deichmueller, _Ibid._, No. 3,123.]

[Footnote 254: _Month. Not._, vol. ii., p. 117.]

[Footnote 255: _Astr. Nach._, No. 128.]

[Footnote 256: _Annuaire_, 1832, p. 186.]

[Footnote 257: _Am. Journ. of Science_, vol. i. (2nd series), p. 293.
Prof. Hubbard's calculations indicated a probability that the definitive
separation of the two nuclei occurred as early as September 30, 1884.
_Astronomical Journal_ (Gould's), vol. iv., p. 5. See also, on the
subject of this comet, W. T. Lynn, _Intellectual Observer_, vol. xi., p.
208; E. Ledger, _Observatory_, August, 1883, p. 244; and H. A. Newton,
_Am. Journ. of Science_, vol. xxxi., p. 81, February, 1886.]

[Footnote 258: _Month. Not._, vol. vii., p. 73.]

[Footnote 259: _Bulletin Ac. Imp. de St. Petersbourg_, t. vi., col. 77.
The latest observation of the parent nucleus was that of Argelander,
April 27, at Bonn.]

[Footnote 260: D'Arrest, _Astr. Nach._, No. 1,624.]

[Footnote 261: _Der Brorsen'sche Comet._ Von Dr. E. Lamp, Kiel, 1892;
Plummer, _Knowledge_, vol. xix., p. 41.]

[Footnote 262: Schulhof, _Astr. Nach._, No. 3,267; _Observatory_, vol.
xviii., p. 64; F. H. Seares, _Astr. Nach._, Nos. 3,606-7; Plummer,
_Knowledge_, vol. xix., p. 156.]

[Footnote 263: _Comptes Rendus_, t. xxv., p. 570.]

[Footnote 264: _Month. Not._, vol. xii., p. 248.]

[Footnote 265: _Bull. Astr._, t. vi., pp. 241, 289.]

[Footnote 266: _Etude sur la Theorie des Cometes periodiques. Annales de
l'Observatoire_, t. xx., Paris, 1891.]

[Footnote 267: _Amer. Journ. of Science_, vol. xlii., pp. 183, 482,
1891.]

[Footnote 268: _Observatory_, vol. xiv., p. 194.]

[Footnote 269: _Phil. Trans._, vol. cii., pp. 118-124.]

[Footnote 270: _Ueber den Schweif des grossen Cometen von 1811, Monat.
Corr._, vol. xxv., pp. 3-22. Reprinted by Zoellner. _Ueber die Natur der
Cometen_, pp. 3-15.]

[Footnote 271: _Natur der Cometen_, p. 148.]

[Footnote 272: The subject of a classical memoir by Bessel, published in
1810.]

[Footnote 273: A fresh investigation of its orbit has been published by
N. Herz of Vienna. See _Bull. Astr._, t. ix., p. 427.]

[Footnote 274: _Astr. Jahrbuch_ (Bode's), 1823, p. 134.]

[Footnote 275: Reproduced in Webb's _Celestial Objects_, 4th ed.]

[Footnote 276: _Month. Not._, vol. xxxvi., p. 309.]

[Footnote 277: _Celestial Objects_, p. 40, note.]

[Footnote 278: See Airy's Address, _Mem. R. A. S._, vol. x., p. 376.
Rosenberger calculated no more, though he lived until 1890. W. T. Lynn,
_Observatory_, vol. xiii., p. 125.]

[Footnote 279: Hind, _The Comets_, p. 47.]

[Footnote 280: Arago, _Annuaire_, 1836, p. 228.]

[Footnote 281: _Astr. Nach._, No. 300.]

[Footnote 282: It deserves to be recorded that Robert Hooke drew a very
similar inference from his observations of the comets of 1680 and 1682.
_Month. Not._, vol. xiv., pp. 77-83.]

[Footnote 283: _Briefwechsel zwischen Olbers und Bessel_, Bd. ii., p.
390.]

[Footnote 284: Herschel, _Results_, p. 405.]

[Footnote 285: _Mem. R. A. S._, vol. x., p. 92,]

[Footnote 286: _Results_, p. 401.]

[Footnote 287: Pontecoulant, _Comptes Rendus_, t. lviii., p. 825.]

[Footnote 288: _Annuaire_, 1836, p. 233.]

[Footnote 289: _Cosmos_, vol. i., p. 90, _note_ (Otte's trans.).]

[Footnote 290: Herschel, _Outlines of Astronomy_, p. 399, 9th ed.]

[Footnote 291: _Outlines_, p. 398.]

[Footnote 292: Boguslawski calculated that it extended on the 21st of
March to 581 millions.--_Report. Brit. Ass._, 1845, p. 89.]

[Footnote 293: _Comptes Rendus_, t. xvi., p. 919.]

[Footnote 294: _Observatory_, vol. xxiv., p. 167; Astr. Nach., No.
3,320.]

[Footnote 295: Piazzi noticed a considerable increase of lustre in a
very faint star of the twelfth magnitude viewed through a comet. Maedler,
_Reden_, etc., p. 248, _note_.]

[Footnote 296: _Astr. Jahrbuch_, 1828, p. 151.]

[Footnote 297: Maedler, _Gesch. d. Astr._, Bd. ii., p. 412.]

[Footnote 298: _Recueil de l'Ac. Imp. de St. Petersbourg_, 1835, p.
143.]

[Footnote 299: Guillemin's _World of Comets_, trans, by J. Glaisher, p.
294, _note_.]

[Footnote 300: _Month. Not._, vol. viii., p. 9.]

[Footnote 301: A real, though only partial stoppage of light seems
indicated by Herschel's observations on the comet of 1807. Stars seen
through the tail, October 18, lost much of their lustre. One near the
head was only faintly visible by glimpses. _Phil. Trans._, vol. xcvii.,
p. 153.]

[Footnote 302: Arago, _Annuaire_, 1832, p. 205.]

[Footnote 303: _Ibid._, 1891, p. 290.]

[Footnote 304: Viz., Encke's, Biela's, Faye's, and Brorsen's.]




                                CHAPTER VI

                         _INSTRUMENTAL ADVANCES_


It is impossible to follow with intelligent interest the course of
astronomical discovery without feeling some curiosity as to the means by
which such surpassing results have been secured. Indeed, the bare
acquaintance with _what_ has been achieved, without any corresponding
knowledge of _how_ it has been achieved, supplies food for barren wonder
rather than for fruitful and profitable thought. Ideas advance most
readily along the solid ground of practical reality, and often find true
sublimity while laying aside empty marvels. Progress is the result, not
so much of sudden flights of genius, as of sustained, patient, often
commonplace endeavour; and the true lesson of scientific history lies in
the close connection which it discloses between the most brilliant
developments of knowledge and the faithful accomplishment of his daily
task by each individual thinker and worker.

It would be easy to fill a volume with the detailed account of the long
succession of optical and mechanical improvements by means of which the
observation of the heavens has been brought to its present degree of
perfection; but we must here content ourselves with a summary sketch of
the chief amongst them. The first place in our consideration is
naturally claimed by the telescope.

This marvellous instrument, we need hardly remind our readers, is of two
distinct kinds--that in which light is gathered together into a focus by
_refraction_, and that in which the same end is attained by
_reflection_. The image formed is in each case viewed through a
magnifying lens, or combination of lenses, called the eye-piece. Not for
above a century after the "optic glasses" invented or stumbled upon by
the spectacle-maker of Middelburg (1608) had become diffused over
Europe, did the reflecting telescope come, even in England, the place of
its birth, into general use. Its principle (a sufficiently obvious one)
had indeed been suggested by Mersenne as early as 1639;[305] James
Gregory in 1663[306] described in detail a mode of embodying that
principle in a practical shape; and Newton, adopting an original system
of construction, actually produced in 1668 a tiny speculum, one inch
across, by means of which the apparent distance of objects was reduced
thirty-nine times. Nevertheless, the exorbitantly long tubeless
refractors, introduced by Huygens, maintained their reputation until
Hadley exhibited to the Royal Society, January 12, 1721,[307] a
reflector of six inches aperture, and sixty-two in focal length, which
rivalled in performance, and of course indefinitely surpassed in
manageability, one of the "aerial" kind of 123 feet.

The concave-mirror system now gained a decided ascendant, and was
brought to unexampled perfection by James Short of Edinburgh during the
years 1732-68. Its resources were, however, first fully developed by
William Herschel. The energy and inventiveness of this extraordinary man
marked an epoch wherever they were applied. His ardent desire to measure
and gauge the stupendous array of worlds which his specula revealed to
him, made him continually intent upon adding to their "space-penetrating
power" by increasing their light-gathering surface. These, as he was the
first to explain,[308] are in a constant proportion one to the other.
For a telescope with twice the linear aperture of another will collect
four times as much light, and will consequently disclose an object four
times as faint as could be seen with the first, or, what comes to the
same, an object equally bright at twice the distance. In other words, it
will possess double the space-penetrating power of the smaller
instrument. Herschel's great mirrors--the first examples of the giant
telescopes of modern times--were then primarily engines for extending
the bounds of the visible universe; and from the sublimity of this
"final cause" was derived the vivid enthusiasm which animated his
efforts to success.

It seems probable that the seven-foot telescope constructed by him in
1775--that is within little more than a year after his experiments in
shaping and polishing metal had begun--already exceeded in effective
power any work by an earlier optician; and both his skill and his
ambition rapidly developed. His efforts culminated, after mirrors of
ten, twenty, and thirty feet focal length had successively left his
hands, in the gigantic forty-foot, completed August 28, 1789. It was the
first reflector in which only a single mirror was employed. In the
"Gregorian" form, the focussed rays are, by a second reflection from a
small concave[309] mirror, thrown _straight back_ through a central
aperture in the larger one, behind which the eye-piece is fixed. The
object under examination is thus seen in the natural direction. The
"Newtonian," on the other hand, shows the object in a line of sight at
right angles to the true one, the light collected by the speculum being
diverted to one side of the tube by the interposition of a small plane
mirror, situated at an angle of 45 deg. to the axis of the instrument.
Upon these two systems Herschel worked until 1787, when, becoming
convinced of the supreme importance of economising light (necessarily
wasted by the second reflection), he laid aside the small mirror of
his forty-foot then in course of construction, and turned it into a
"front-view" reflector. This was done--according to the plan proposed
by Lemaire in 1732--by slightly inclining the speculum so as to enable
the image formed by it to be viewed with an eye-glass fixed at the upper
margin of the tube. The observer thus stood with his back turned to the
object he was engaged in scrutinising.

The advantages of the increased brilliancy afforded by this modification
were strikingly illustrated by the discovery, August 28 and September
17, 1789, of the two Saturnian satellites nearest the ring.
Nevertheless, the monster telescope of Slough cannot be said to have
realised the sanguine expectations of its constructor. The occasions on
which it could be usefully employed were found to be extremely rare. It
was injuriously affected by every change of temperature. The great
weight (25 cwt.) of a speculum four feet in diameter rendered it
peculiarly liable to distortion. With all imaginable care, the delicate
lustre of its surface could not be preserved longer than two years,[310]
when the difficult process of repolishing had to be undertaken. It was
accordingly never used after 1811, when, having _gone blind_ from damp,
it lapsed by degrees into the condition of a museum inmate.

The exceedingly high magnifying powers employed by Herschel constituted
a novelty in optical astronomy, to which he attached great importance.
The work of ordinary observation would, however, be hindered rather than
helped by them. The attempt to increase in this manner the efficacy of
the telescope is speedily checked by atmospheric, to say nothing of
other difficulties. Precisely in the same proportion as an object is
magnified, the disturbances of the medium through which it is seen are
magnified also. Even on the clearest and most tranquil nights, the air
is never for a moment really still. The rays of light traversing it are
continually broken by minute fluctuations of refractive power caused by
changes of temperature and pressure, and the currents which these
engender. With such luminous quiverings and waverings the astronomer has
always more or less to reckon; their absence is simply a question of
degree; if sufficiently magnified, they are at all times capable of
rendering observation impossible.

Thus, such powers as 3,000, 4,000, 5,000, even 6,652,[311] which
Herschel now and again applied to his great telescopes, must, save on
the rarest occasions, prove an impediment rather than an aid to vision.
They were, however, used by him only for special purposes,
experimentally, not systematically, and with the clearest discrimination
of their advantages and drawbacks. It is obvious that perfectly
different ends are subserved by increasing the _aperture_ and by
increasing the _power_ of a telescope. In the one case, a larger
quantity of light is captured and concentrated; in the other, the same
amount is distributed over a wider area. A diminution of brilliancy in
the image accordingly attends, _coeteris paribus_, upon each
augmentation of its apparent size. For this reason, such faint objects
as nebulae are most successfully observed with moderate powers applied to
instruments of a great capacity for light, the details of their
structure actually disappearing when highly magnified. With stellar
groups the reverse is the case. Stars cannot be magnified, simply
because they are too remote to have any sensible dimensions; but the
space between them can. It was thus for the purpose of dividing very
close double stars that Herschel increased to such an unprecedented
extent the magnifying capabilities of his instruments; and to this
improvement incidentally the discovery of Uranus, March 13, 1781,[312]
was due. For by the examination with strong lenses of an object which,
even with a power of 227, presented a suspicious appearance, he was able
at once to pronounce its disc to be real, not merely "spurious," and so
to distinguish it unerringly from the crowd of stars amidst which it was
moving.

While the reflecting telescope was astonishing the world by its rapid
development in the hands of Herschel, its unpretending rival was slowly
making its way towards the position which the future had in store for
it. The great obstacle which long stood in the way of the improvement of
refractors was the defect known as "chromatic aberration." This is due
to no other cause than that which produces the rainbow and the
spectrum--the separation, or "dispersion" in their passage through a
refracting medium, of the variously coloured rays composing a beam of
white light. In an ordinary lens there is no common point of
concentration; each colour has its own separate focus; and the resulting
image, formed by the superposition of as many images as there are hues
in the spectrum, is indefinitely terminated with a tinted border,
eminently baffling to exactness of observation.

The extravagantly long telescopes of the seventeenth century were
designed to _avoid_ this evil (as well as another source of indistinct
vision in the spherical shape of lenses); but no attempt to _remedy_ it
was made until an Essex gentleman succeeded, in 1733, in so combining
lenses of flint and crown glass as to produce refraction without
colour.[313] Mr. Chester More Hall was, however, equally indifferent to
fame and profit, and took no pains to make his invention public. The
_effective_ discovery of the achromatic telescope was, accordingly,
reserved for John Dollond, whose method of correcting at the same time
chromatic and spherical aberration was laid before the Royal Society in
1758. Modern astronomy may be said to have been thereby rendered
possible. Refractors have always been found better suited than
reflectors to the ordinary work of observatories. They are, so to speak,
of a more robust, as well as of a more plastic nature. They suffer less
from vicissitudes of temperature and climate. They retain their
efficiency with fewer precautions and under more trying circumstances.
Above all, they co-operate more readily with mechanical appliances, and
lend themselves with far greater facility to purposes of exact
measurement.

A practical difficulty, however, impeded the realisation of the
brilliant prospects held out by Dollond's invention. It was found
impossible to procure flint-glass, such as was needed for optical
use--that is, of perfectly homogeneous quality--except in fragments of
insignificant size. Discs of more than two or three inches in diameter
were of extreme rarity; and the crushing excise duty imposed upon the
article by the financial unwisdom of the Government, both limited its
production, and, by rendering experiments too costly for repetition,
barred its improvement.

Up to this time, Great Britain had left foreign competitors far behind
in the instrumental department of astronomy. The quadrants and circles
of Bird, Cary and Ramsden were unapproached abroad. The reflecting
telescope came into existence and reached maturity on British soil. The
refracting telescope was cured of its inherent vices by British
ingenuity. But with the opening of the nineteenth century, the almost
unbroken monopoly of skill and contrivance which our countrymen had
succeeded in establishing was invaded, and British workmen had to be
content to exchange a position of supremacy for one of at least partial
temporary inferiority.

Somewhat about the time that Herschel set about polishing his first
speculum, Pierre Louis Guinand, a Swiss artisan, living near
Chaux-de-Fonds, in the canton of Neuchatel, began to grind spectacles
for his own use, and was thence led on to the rude construction of
telescopes by fixing lenses in pasteboard tubes. The sight of an England
achromatic stirred a higher ambition, and he took the first opportunity
of procuring some flint glass from England (then the only source of
supply), with the design of imitating an instrument the full
capabilities of which he was destined to be the humble means of
developing. The English glass proving of inferior quality, he conceived
the possibility, unaided and ignorant of the art as he was, of himself
making better, and spent seven years (1784-90) in fruitless experiments
directed to that end. Failure only stimulated him to enlarge their
scale. He bought some land near Les Brenets, constructed upon it a
furnace capable of melting two quintals of glass, and reducing himself
and his family to the barest necessaries of life, he poured his earnings
(he at this time made bells for repeaters) unstintingly into his
crucibles.[314] His undaunted resolution triumphed. In 1799 he carried
to Paris and there showed to Lalande several discs of flawless crystal
four to six inches in diameter. Lalande advised him to keep his secret,
but in 1805 he was induced to remove to Munich, where he became the
instructor of the immortal Fraunhofer. His return to Les Brenets in 1814
was signalised by the discovery of an ingenious mode of removing
striated portions of glass by breaking and re-soldering the product of
each melting, and he eventually attained to the manufacture of perfect
discs up to 18 inches in diameter. An object-glass for which he had
furnished the material to Cauchoix, procured him, in 1823, a royal
invitation to settle in Paris; but he was no longer equal to the change,
and died at the scene of his labours, February 13 following.

This same lens (12 inches across) was afterwards purchased by Sir James
South, and the first observation made with it, February 13, 1830,
disclosed to Sir John Herschel the sixth minute star in the central
group of the Orion nebula, known as the "trapezium."[315] Bequeathed by
South to Trinity College, Dublin, it was employed at the Dunsink
Observatory by Bruennow and Ball in their investigations of stellar
parallax. A still larger objective (of nearly 14 inches) made of
Guinand's glass was secured in Paris, about the same time, by Mr. Edward
Cooper of Markree Castle, Ireland. The peculiarity of the method
discovered at Les Brenets resided in the manipulation, not in the
quality of the ingredients; the secret, that is to say, was not
chemical, but mechanical.[316] It was communicated by Henry Guinand (a
son of the inventor) to Bontemps, one of the directors of the glassworks
at Choisy-le-Roi, and by him transmitted to Messrs. Chance of
Birmingham, with whom he entered into partnership when the revolutionary
troubles of 1848 obliged him to quit his native country. The celebrated
American opticians, Alvan Clark & Sons, derived from the Birmingham firm
the materials for some of their early telescopes, notably the 19-inch
Chicago and 26-inch Washington equatoreals; but the discs for the great
Lick refractor, and others shaped by them in recent years, have been
supplied by Feil of Paris.

Two distinguished amateurs, meanwhile, were preparing to reassert on
behalf of reflecting instruments their claim to the place of honour in
the van of astronomical discovery. Of Mr. Lassell's specula something
has already been said.[317] They were composed of an alloy of copper and
tin, with a minute proportion of arsenic (after the example of
Newton[318]), and were remarkable for perfection of figure and
brilliancy of surface.

The capabilities of the Newtonian plan were developed still more
fully--it might almost be said to the uttermost--by the enterprise of an
Irish nobleman. William Parsons, known as Lord Oxmantown until 1841,
when, on his father's death, he succeeded to the title of Earl of Rosse,
was born at York, June 17, 1800. His public duties began before his
education was completed. He was returned to Parliament as member for
King's County while still an undergraduate at Oxford, and continued to
represent the same constituency for thirteen years (1821-34). From 1845
until his death, which took place, October 31, 1867, he sat, silent but
assiduous, in the House of Lords as an Irish representative peer; he
held the not unlaborious post of President of the Royal Society from
1849 to 1854; presided over the meeting of the British Association at
Cork in 1843, and was elected Vice-Chancellor of Dublin University in
1862. In addition to these extensive demands upon his time and thoughts,
were those derived from his position as practically the feudal chief of
a large body of tenantry in times of great and anxious responsibility,
to say nothing of the more genial claims of an unstinted hospitality.
Yet, while neglecting no public or private duty, this model nobleman
found leisure to render to science services so conspicuous as to entitle
his name to a lasting place in its annals.

He early formed the design of reaching the limits of the attainable in
enlarging the powers of the telescope, and the qualities of his mind
conspired with the circumstances of his fortune to render the design a
feasible one. From refractors it was obvious that no such vast and rapid
advance could be expected. English glass-manufacture was still in a
backward state. So late as 1839, Simms (successor to the distinguished
instrumentalist Edward Troughton) reported a specimen of crystal
scarcely 7-1/2 inches in diameter, and perfect only over six, to be
unique in the history of English glass-making.[319] Yet at that time the
fifteen-inch achromatic of Pulkowa had already left the workshop of
Fraunhofer's successors at Munich. It was not indeed until 1845, when
the impost which had so long hampered their efforts was removed, that
the optical artists of these islands were able to compete on equal terms
with their rivals on the Continent. In the case of reflectors, however,
there seemed no insurmountable obstacle to an almost unlimited increase
of light-gathering capacity; and it was here, after some unproductive
experiments with fluid lenses, that Lord Oxmantown concentrated his
energies.

He had to rely entirely on his own invention, and to earn his own
experience. James Short had solved the problem of giving to metallic
surfaces a perfect parabolic figure (the only one by which parallel
incident rays can be brought to an exact focus); but so jealous was he
of his secret, that he caused all his tools to be burnt before his
death;[320] nor was anything known of the processes by which Herschel
had achieved his astonishing results. Moreover, Lord Oxmantown had no
skilled workmen to assist him. His implements, both animate and
inanimate, had to be formed by himself. Peasants taken from the plough
were educated by him into efficient mechanics and engineers. The
delicate and complex machinery needed in operations of such hairbreadth
nicety as his enterprise involved, the steam-engine which was to set it
in motion, at times the very crucibles in which his specula were cast,
issued from his own workshops.

In 1827 experiments on the composition of speculum-metal were set on
foot, and the first polishing-machine ever driven by steam-power was
contrived in 1828. But twelve arduous years of struggle with recurring
difficulties passed before success began to dawn. A material less
tractable than the alloy selected, of four chemical equivalents of
copper to one of tin,[321] can scarcely be conceived. It is harder than
steel, yet brittle as glass, crumbling into fragments with the slightest
inadvertence of handling or treatment;[322] and the precision of figure
requisite to secure good definition is almost beyond the power of
language to convey. The quantities involved are so small as not alone to
elude sight, but to confound imagination. Sir John Herschel tells us
that "the _total_ thickness to be abraded from the edge of a spherical
speculum 48 inches in diameter and 40 feet focus, to convert it into a
paraboloid, is only 1/21333 of an inch;"[323] yet upon this minute
difference of form depends the clearness of the image, and, as a
consequence, the entire efficiency of the instrument. "Almost infinite,"
indeed (in the phrase of the late Dr. Robinson), must be the exactitude
of the operation adapted to bring about so delicate a result.

At length, in 1839, two specula, each three feet in diameter, were
turned out in such perfection as to prompt a still bolder experiment.
The various processes needed to insure success were now ascertained and
under control; all that was necessary was to repeat them on a larger
scale. A gigantic mirror, six feet across and fifty-four in focal
length, was accordingly cast on the 13th of April, 1842; in two months
it was ground down to figure by abrasion with emery and water, and
daintily polished with rouge; and by the month of February, 1845, the
"leviathan of Parsonstown" was available for the examination of the
heavens.

The suitable mounting of this vast machine was a problem scarcely less
difficult than its construction. The shape of a speculum needs to be
maintained with an elaborate care equal to that used in imparting it. In
fact, one of the most formidable obstacles to increasing the size of
such reflecting surfaces consists in their liability to bend under their
own weight. That of the great Rosse speculum was no less than four tons.
Yet, although six inches in thickness, and composed of a material only a
degree inferior in rigidity to wrought iron, the strong pressure of a
man's hand at its back produced sufficient flexure to distort
perceptibly the image of a star reflected in it.[324] Thus the delicacy
of its form was perishable equally by the stress of its own gravity, and
by the slightest irregularity in the means taken to counteract that
stress. The problem of affording a perfectly equable support in all
possible positions was solved by resting the speculum upon twenty-seven
platforms of cast iron, felt-covered, and carefully fitted to the shape
of the areas they were to carry, which platforms were themselves borne
by a complex system of triangles and levers, ingeniously adapted to
distribute the weight with complete uniformity.[325]

A tube which resembled, when erect, one of the ancient round towers of
Ireland,[326] served as the habitation of the great mirror. It was
constructed of deal staves bound together with iron hoops, was
fifty-eight feet long (including the speculum-box), and seven in
diameter. A reasonably tall man may walk through it (as Dean Peacock
once did) with umbrella uplifted. Two piers of solid masonry, about
fifty feet high, seventy long, and twenty-three apart, flanked the huge
engine on either side. Its lower extremity rested on a universal joint
of cast iron; above, it was slung in chains, and even in a gale of wind
remained perfectly steady. The weight of the entire, although amounting
to fifteen tons, was so skilfully counterpoised, that the tube could
with ease be raised or depressed by two men working a windlass. Its
horizontal range was limited by the lofty walls erected for its support
to about ten degrees on each side of the meridian; but it moved
vertically from near the horizon through the zenith as far as the pole.
Its construction was of the Newtonian kind, the observer looking into
the side of the tube near its upper end, which a series of galleries and
sliding stages enabled him to reach in any position. It has also, though
rarely, been used without a second mirror, as a "Herschelian" reflector.

The splendour of the celestial objects as viewed with this vast
"light-grasper" surpassed all expectation. "Never in my life," exclaimed
Sir James South, "did I see such glorious sidereal pictures."[327] The
orb of Jupiter produced an effect compared to that of the introduction
of a coach-lamp into the telescope;[328] and certain star-clusters
exhibited an appearance (we again quote Sir James South) "such as man
before had never seen, and which for its magnificence baffles all
description." But it was in the examination of the nebulae that the
superiority of the new instrument was most strikingly displayed. A large
number of these misty objects, which the utmost powers of Herschel's
specula had failed to resolve into stars, yielded at once to the
Parsonstown reflector; while many others showed under entirely changed
forms through the disclosure of previously unseen details of structure.

One extremely curious result of the increase of light was the abolition
of any sharp distinction between the two classes of "annular" and
"planetary" nebulae. Up to that time, only four ring-shaped systems--two
in the northern and two in the southern hemisphere--were known to
astronomers; they were now reinforced by five of the planetary kind, the
discs of which were observed to be centrally perforated; while the
definite margins visible in weaker instruments were replaced by ragged
edges or filamentous fringes.

Still more striking was the discovery of an entirely new and most
remarkable species of nebulae. These were termed "spiral," from the more
or less regular convolutions, resembling the whorls of a shell, in which
the matter composing them appeared to be distributed. The first and most
conspicuous specimen of this class was met with in April, 1845; it is
situated in Canes Venatici, close to the tail of the Great Bear, and
wore, in Sir J. Herschel's instruments, the aspect of a split ring
encompassing a bright nucleus, thus presenting, as he supposed, a
complete analogue to the system of the Milky Way. In the Rosse mirror it
shone out as a vast whirlpool of light--a stupendous witness to the
presence of cosmical activities on the grandest scale, yet regulated by
laws as to the nature of which we are profoundly ignorant. Professor
Stephen Alexander of New Jersey, however, concluded, from an
investigation (necessarily founded on highly precarious data) of the
mechanical condition of these extraordinary agglomerations, that we see
in them "the partially scattered fragments of enormous masses once
rotating in a state of dynamical equilibrium." He further suggested
"that the separation of these fragments may still be in progress,"[329]
and traced back their origin to the disruption, through its own
continually accelerated rotation, of a "primitive spheroid" of
inconceivably vast dimensions. Such also, it was added (the curvilinear
form of certain outliers of the Milky Way giving evidence of a spiral
structure), is probably the history of our own cluster; the stars
composing which, no longer held together in a delicately adjusted system
like that of the sun and planets, are advancing through a period of
seeming confusion towards an appointed goal of higher order and more
perfect and harmonious adaptation.[330]

The class of spiral nebulae included, in 1850, fourteen members, besides
several in which the characteristic arrangement seemed partial or
dubious.[331] A tendency in the exterior stars of other clusters to
gather into curved branches (as in our Galaxy) was likewise noted; and
the existence of unsuspected analogies was proclaimed by the significant
combination in the "Owl" nebula (a large planetary in Ursa Major)[332]
of the twisted forms of a spiral with the perforated effect distinctive
of an annular nebula.

Once more, by the achievements of the Parsonstown reflector, the
supposition of a "shining fluid" filling vast regions of space was
brought into (as it has since proved) undeserved discredit. Although
Lord Rosse himself rejected the inference, that because many nebulae had
been resolved, all were resolvable, very few imitated his truly
scientific caution; and the results of Bond's investigations[333] with
the Harvard College refractor quickened and strengthened the current of
prevalent opinion. It is now certain that the evidence furnished on both
sides of the Atlantic as to the stellar composition of some conspicuous
objects of this class (notably the Orion and "Dumb-bell" nebulae) was
delusive; but the spectroscope alone was capable of meeting it with a
categorical denial. Meanwhile there seemed good ground for the
persuasion, which now, for the last time, gained the upper hand, that
nebulae are, without exception, true "island-universes," or assemblages
of distant suns.

Lord Rosse's telescope possesses a nominal power of 6,000--that is, it
shows the moon as if viewed with the naked eye at a distance of forty
miles. But this seeming advantage is neutralised by the weakening of the
available light through excessive diffusion, as well as by the troubles
of the surging sea of air through which the observation must necessarily
be made. Professor Newcomb, in fact, doubts whether with _any_ telescope
our satellite has ever been seen to such advantage as it would be if
brought within 500 miles of the unarmed eye.[334]

The French opticians' rule of doubling the number of millimetres
contained in the aperture of an instrument to find the highest
magnifying power usually applicable to it, would give 3,600 as the
maximum for the leviathan of Birr Castle; but in a climate like that of
Ireland the occasions must be rare when even that limit can be reached.
Indeed, the experience acquired by its use plainly shows that
atmospheric rather than mechanical difficulties impede a still further
increase of telescopic power. Its construction may accordingly be said
to mark the _ne plus ultra_ of effort in one direction, and the
beginning of its conversion towards another. It became thenceforward
more and more obvious that the conditions of observation must be
ameliorated before any added efficacy could be given to it. The full
effect of an uncertain climate in nullifying optical improvements was
recognised, and the attention of astronomers began to be turned towards
the advantages offered by more tranquil and more translucent skies.

Scarcely less important for the practical uses of astronomy than the
optical qualities of the telescope is the manner of its mounting. The
most admirable performance of the optician can render but unsatisfactory
service if its mechanical accessories are ill-arranged or inconvenient.
Thus the astronomer is ultimately dependent upon the mechanician; and so
excellently have his needs been served, that the history of the
ingenious contrivances by which discoveries have been prepared would
supply a subject (here barely glanced at) not far inferior in extent and
instruction to the history of those discoveries themselves.

There are two chief modes of using the telescope, to which all others
may be considered subordinate.[335] Either it may be invariably directed
towards the south, with no motion save in the plane of the meridian, so
as to intercept the heavenly bodies at the moment of transit across that
plain; or it may be arranged so as to follow the daily revolution of the
sky, thus keeping the object viewed permanently in sight instead of
simply noting the instant of its flitting across the telescopic field.
The first plan is that of the "transit instrument," the second that of
the "equatoreal." Both were, by a remarkable coincidence, introduced
about 1690[336] by Olaus Roemer, the brilliant Danish astronomer who
first measured the velocity of light.

The uses of each are entirely different. With the transit, the really
fundamental task of astronomy--the determination of the movements of the
heavenly bodies--is mainly accomplished; while the investigation of
their nature and peculiarities is best conducted with the equatoreal.
One is the instrument of mathematical, the other of descriptive
astronomy. One furnishes the materials with which theories are
constructed and the tests by which they are corrected; the other
registers new facts, takes note of new appearances, sounds the depths
and peers into every nook of the heavens.

The great improvement of giving to a telescope equatoreally mounted an
automatic movement by connecting it with clockwork, was proposed in 1674
by Robert Hooke. Bradley in 1721 actually observed Mars with a telescope
"moved by a machine that made it keep pace with the stars;"[337] and Von
Zach relates[338] that he had once followed Sirius for twelve hours with
a "heliostat" of Ramsden's construction. But these eighteenth-century
attempts were of no practical effect. Movement by clockwork was
virtually a complete novelty when it was adopted by Fraunhofer in 1824
to the Dorpat refractor. By simply giving to an axis unvaryingly
directed towards the celestial pole an equable rotation with a period of
twenty-four hours, a telescope attached to it, and pointed in _any_
direction, will trace out on the sky a parallel of declination, thus
necessarily accompanying the movement of any star upon which it may be
fixed. It accordingly forms part of the large sum of Fraunhofer's merits
to have secured this inestimable advantage to observers.

Sir John Herschel considered that Lassell's application of equatoreal
mounting to a nine-inch Newtonian in 1840 made an epoch in the history
of "that eminently British instrument, the reflecting telescope."[339]
Nearly a century earlier,[340] it is true, Short had fitted one of his
Gregorians to a complicated system of circles in such a manner that, by
moving a handle, it could be made to follow the revolution of the sky;
but the arrangement did not obtain, nor did it deserve, general
adoption. Lassell's plan was a totally different one; he employed the
crossed axes of the true equatoreal, and his success removed, to a great
extent, the fatal objection of inconvenience in use, until then
unanswerably urged against reflectors. The very largest of these can now
be mounted equatoreally; even the Rosse, within its limited range, has
been for some years provided with a movement by clockwork along
declination-parallels.

The art of accurately dividing circular arcs into the minute equal parts
which serve as the units of astronomical measurement, remained, during
the whole of the eighteenth century, almost exclusively in English
hands. It was brought to a high degree of perfection by Graham, Bird and
Ramsden, all of whom, however, gave the preference to the old-fashioned
mural quadrant and zenith-sector over the entire circle, which Roemer had
already found the advantage of employing. The five-foot vertical circle,
which Piazzi with some difficulty induced Ramsden to complete for him in
1789, was the first divided instrument constructed in what may be called
the modern style. It was provided with magnifiers for reading off the
divisions (one of the neglected improvements of Roemer), and was set up
above a smaller horizontal circle, forming an "altitude and azimuth"
combination (again Roemer's invention), by which both the elevation of a
celestial object above the horizon and its position as referred to the
horizon could be measured. In the same year, Borda invented the
"repeating circle" (the principle of which had been suggested by Tobias
Mayer in 1756[341]), a device for exterminating, so far as possible,
errors of graduation by _repeating_ an observation with different parts
of the limb. This was perhaps the earliest systematic effort to correct
the imperfections of instruments by the manner of their use.

The manufacture of astronomical circles was brought to a very refined
state of excellence early in the nineteenth century by Reichenbach at
Munich, and after 1818 by Repsold at Hamburg. Bessel states[342] that
the "reading-off" on an instrument of the kind by the latter artist was
accurate to about 1/80th of a human hair. Meanwhile the traditional
reputation of the English school was fully sustained; and Sir George
Airy did not hesitate to express his opinion that the new method of
graduating circles, published by Troughton in 1809,[343] was the
"greatest improvement ever made in the art of instrument-making."[344]
But a more secure road to improvement than that of mere mechanical
exactness was pointed out by Bessel. His introduction of a regular
theory of instrumental errors might almost be said to have created a new
art of observation. Every instrument, he declared in memorable
words,[345] must be twice made--once by the artist, and again by the
observer. Knowledge is power. Defects that are ascertained and can be
allowed for are as good as non-existent. Thus the truism that the best
instrument is worthless in the hands of a careless or clumsy observer,
became supplemented by the converse maxim, that defective appliances
may, through skilful use, be made to yield valuable results. The
Koenigsberg observations--of which the first instalment was published in
1815--set the example of regular "reduction" for instrumental errors.
Since then, it has become an elementary part of an astronomer's duty to
study the _idiosyncrasy_ of each one of the mechanical contrivances at
his disposal, in order that its inevitable, but now certified deviations
from ideal accuracy may be included amongst the numerous corrections by
which the pure essence of even approximate truth is distilled from the
rude impressions of sense.

Nor is this enough; for the casual circumstances attending each
observation have to be taken into account with no less care than the
inherent or _constitutional_ peculiarities of the instrument with which
it is made. There is no "once for all" in astronomy. Vigilance can never
sleep; patience can never tire. Variable as well as constant sources of
error must be anxiously heeded; one infinitesimal inaccuracy must be
weighed against another; all the forces and vicissitudes of
nature--frosts, dews, winds, the interchanges of heat, the disturbing
effects of gravity, the shiverings of the air, the tremors of the earth,
the weight and vital warmth of the observer's own body, nay, the rate at
which his brain receives and transmits its impressions, must all enter
into his calculations, and be sifted out from his results.

It was in 1823 that Bessel drew attention to discrepancies in the times
of transits given by different astronomers.[346] The quantities involved
were far from insignificant. He was himself nearly a second in advance
of all his contemporaries, Argelander lagging behind him as much as a
second and a quarter. Each individual, in fact, was found to have a
certain definite _rate of perception_, which, under the name of
"personal equation," now forms so important an element in the correction
of observations that a special instrument for accurately determining its
amount in each case is in actual use at Greenwich.

Such are the refinements upon which modern astronomy depends for its
progress. It is a science of hairbreadths and fractions of a second. It
exists only by the rigid enforcement of arduous accuracy and unwearying
diligence. Whatever secrets the universe still has in store for man will
only be communicated on these terms. They are, it must be acknowledged,
difficult to comply with. They involve an unceasing struggle against the
infirmities of his nature and the instabilities of his position. But the
end is not unworthy the sacrifices demanded. One additional ray of light
thrown on the marvels of creation--a single, minutest encroachment upon
the strongholds of ignorance--is recompense enough for a lifetime of
toil. Or rather, the toil is its own reward, if pursued in the lofty
spirit which alone becomes it. For it leads through the abysses of space
and the unending vistas of time to the very threshold of that infinity
and eternity of which the disclosure is reserved for a life to come.


FOOTNOTES:

[Footnote 305: Grant, _Hist. Astr._, p. 527.]

[Footnote 306: _Optica Promota_, p. 93.]

[Footnote 307: _Phil. Trans._, vol. xxxii., p. 383.]

[Footnote 308: _Ibid._, vol. xc., p. 65.]

[Footnote 309: Cassegrain, a Frenchman, substituted in 1672 a _convex_
for a _concave_ secondary speculum. The tube was thereby enabled to be
shortened by twice the focal length of the mirror in question. The great
Melbourne reflector (four feet aperture, by Grubb) is constructed upon
this plan.]

[Footnote 310: _Phil. Trans._, vol. civ., p. 275, _note_.]

[Footnote 311: _Phil. Trans._, vol. xc., p. 70. With the forty-foot,
however, only very moderate powers seemed to have been employed, whence
Dr. Robinson argued a deficiency of defining power. _Proc. Roy. Irish
Ac._, vol. ii., p. 11.]

[Footnote 312: _Phil. Trans._, vol. lxxi., p. 492.]

[Footnote 313: It is remarkable that, as early as 1695, the possibility
of an achromatic combination was inferred by David Gregory from the
structure of the human eye. See his _Catoptricae et Dioptricae Sphericae
Elementa_, p. 98.]

[Footnote 314: Wolf, _Biographien_, Bd. ii., p. 301.]

[Footnote 315: _Month. Not._, vol. i., p. 153. _note_.]
