and curiosity."

Kerk was following his own train of thoughts, and puzzled where they
were leading him. "You came here to prove that you were as good as any
native-born Pyrran. Yet now you admit that any eight-year-old can
outdraw you. That just doesn't stack up with what I know about you. If
you give with one hand, you must be taking back with the other. In what
way do you still feel your natural superiority?"

Jason thought a long time before answering.

"I'll tell you," he finally said. "But don't snap my neck for it. I'm
gambling that your civilized mind can control your reflexes. Because I
have to talk about things that are strictly taboo on Pyrrus.

"In your people's eyes I'm a weakling because I come from off-world.
Realize though, that this is also my strength. I can see things that are
hidden from you by long association. You know, the old business of not
being able to see the forest for the trees in the way." Kerk nodded
agreement and Jason went on.

"To continue the analogy further, I landed from an airship, and at
first all I _could_ see was the forest. To me certain facts are
obvious. I think that you people know them too, only you keep your
thoughts carefully repressed. They are hidden thoughts that are
completely taboo. I am going to say one of them out loud now and hope
you can control yourself well enough to not kill me."

Kerk's great hands tightened on the arms of his chair, the only sign
that he had heard. Jason talked quietly, as smoothly and easily as a
lancet probing into a brain.

"Human beings are losing the war on Pyrrus. There is no chance they can
win. They could leave for another planet, but that wouldn't be victory.
Yet, if they stay and continue this war, they only prolong a
particularly bloody form of racial suicide. With each generation the
population drops. Until eventually the planet will win."

One arm of Kerk's plastic and steel chair tore loose under the crushing
grasp of his fingers. He didn't notice it. The rest of his body was
rock-still and his eyes fixed on Jason.

Looking away from the fractured chair, Jason sought for the right words.

"This is not a real war, but a disastrous treating of symptoms. Like
cutting off cancerous fingers one by one. The only result can be
ultimate death. None of you seem to realize that. All you see are the
trees. It has never occurred to you that you could treat the _causes_ of
this war and end it forever."

Kerk dropped the arm of the chair clattering to the floor. He sat up,
astonished. "What the devil do you mean? You sound like a grubber."

Jason didn't ask what a grubber was--but he filed the name.

"Call me a Pyrran by adoption. I want this planet to survive as much as
you do. I think this war can be ended by finding the _causes_--and
changing them, whatever they are."

"You're talking nonsense," Kerk said. "This is just an alien world that
must be battled. The causes are self-obvious facts of existence."

"No, they're not," Jason insisted. "Consider for a second. When you are
away for any length of time from this planet, you must take a refresher
course. To see how things have changed for the worse while you were
gone. Well, that's a linear progression. If things get worse when you
extend into the future, then they have to get better if you extend into
the past. It is also good theory--though I don't know if the facts will
bear me out--to say that if you extend it far enough into the past you
will reach a time when mankind and Pyrrus were not at war with each
other."

Kerk was beyond speech now, only capable of sitting and listening while
Jason drove home the blows of inescapable logic.

"There is evidence to support this theory. Even you will admit that I,
if I am no match for Pyrran life, am surely well versed in it. And all
Pyrran flora and fauna I've seen have one thing in common. They're not
functional. _None_ of their immense armory of weapons is used against
each other. Their toxins don't seem to operate against Pyrran life. They
are good only for dispensing death to Homo sapiens. And _that_ is a
physical impossibility. In the three hundred years that men have been on
this planet, the life forms couldn't have naturally adapted in this
manner."

"But they _have_ done it!" Kerk bellowed.

"You are so right," Jason told him calmly. "And if they have done it
there must be some agency at work. Operating how--I have no idea. But
something has caused the life on Pyrrus to declare war, and I'd like to
find out what that something is. What was the dominant life form here
when your ancestors landed?"

[Illustration]

"I'm sure I wouldn't know," Kerk said. "You're not suggesting, are you,
that there are sentient beings on Pyrrus other than those of human
descent? Creatures who are organizing the planet to battle us?"

"I'm not suggesting it--you are. That means you're getting the idea. I
have no idea what caused this change, but I would sure like to find out.
Then see if it can be changed back. Nothing promised, of course. You'll
agree, though, that it is worth investigating."

       *       *       *       *       *

Fist smacking into his palm, his heavy footsteps shaking the building,
Kerk paced back and forth the length of the room. He was at war with
himself. New ideas fought old beliefs. It was so sudden--and so hard not
to believe.

Without asking permission Jason helped himself to some chilled water
from the bottle, and sank back into the chair, exhausted. Something
whizzed in through the open window, tearing a hole in the protective
screen. Kerk blasted it without changing stride, without even knowing he
had done it.

The decision didn't take long. Geared to swift activity, the big Pyrran
found it impossible not to decide quickly. The pacing stopped and a
finger stabbed at Jason.

"I don't say you have convinced me, but I find it impossible to find a
ready answer to your arguments. So until I do, we will have to operate
as if they are true. Now what do you plan to do, what _can_ you do?"

Jason ticked the points off on his fingers. "One, I'll need a place to
live and work that is well protected. So instead of spending my energies
on just remaining alive I can devote some study to this project. Two, I
want someone to help me--and act as a bodyguard at the same time. And
someone, please, with a little more scope of interest than my present
watchdog. I would suggest Meta for the job."

"Meta?" Kerk was surprised. "She is a space pilot and defense-screen
operator, what good could she possibly be on a project like this?"

"The most good possible. She has had experience on other worlds and can
shift her point of view--at least a bit. And she must know as much about
this planet as any other educated adult and can answer any questions I
ask." Jason smiled. "In addition to which she is an attractive girl,
whose company I enjoy."

Kerk grunted. "I was wondering if you would get around to mentioning
that last reason. The others make sense though, so I'm not going to
argue. I'll round up a replacement for her and have Meta sent here.
There are plenty of sealed buildings you can use."

After talking to one of the assistants from the outer office, Kerk made
some calls on the screen. The correct orders were quickly issued. Jason
watched it all with interest.

"Pardon me for asking," he finally said. "But are you the dictator of
this planet? You just snap your fingers and they all jump."

"I suppose it looks that way," Kerk admitted. "But that is just an
illusion. No one is in complete charge on Pyrrus, neither is there
anything resembling a democratic system. After all, our total population
is about the size of an army division. Everyone does the job they are
best qualified for. Various activities are separated into departments
with the most qualified person in charge. I run Co-ordination and
Supply, which is about the loosest category. We fill in the gaps between
departments and handle procuring from off-planet."

       *       *       *       *       *

Meta came in then and talked to Kerk. She completely ignored Jason's
presence. "I was relieved and sent here," she said. "What is it? Change
in flight schedule?"

"You might call it that," Kerk said. "As of now you are dismissed from
all your old assignments and assigned to a new department: Investigation
and Research. That tired-looking fellow there is your department head."

"A sense of humor," Jason said. "The only native-born one on Pyrrus.
Congratulations, there's hope for the planet yet."

Meta glanced back and forth between them. "I don't understand. I can't
believe it. I mean a new department--why?"

"I'm sorry," Kerk said. "I didn't mean to be cruel. I thought perhaps
you might feel more at ease. What I said was true. Jason has a way--or
may have a way--to be of immense value to Pyrrus. Will you help him?"

Meta had her composure back. And a little anger. "Do I have to? Is that
an order? You know I have work to do. I'm sure you will realize it is
more important than something a person from _off-planet_ might imagine.
He can't really understand--"

"Yes. It's an order." The snap was back in Kerk's voice. Meta flushed at
the tone.

"Perhaps I can explain," Jason broke in. "After all the whole thing is
my idea. But first I would like your co-operation. Will you take the
clip out of your gun and give it to Kerk?"

Meta looked frightened, but Kerk nodded in solemn agreement. "Just for a
few minutes, Meta. I have my gun so you will be safe here. I think I
know what Jason has in mind, and from personal experience I'm afraid he
is right."

Reluctantly Meta passed over the clip and cleared the charge in the
gun's chamber. Only then did Jason explain.

"I have a theory about life on Pyrrus, and I'm afraid I'll have to
shatter some illusions when I explain. To begin with, the fact must be
admitted that your people are slowly losing the war here and will
eventually be destroyed--"

Before he was half through the sentence, Meta's gun was directed between
his eyes and she was wildly snapping the trigger. There was only hatred
and revulsion in her expression. Kerk took her by the shoulders and sat
her in his chair, before anything worse happened. It took a while before
she could calm down enough to listen to Jason's words. It is not easy to
have the carefully built-up falsehoods of a lifetime shattered. Only the
fact that she had seen something of other worlds enabled her to listen
at all.

The light of unreason was still in her eyes when he had finished,
telling her the things he and Kerk had discussed. She sat tensely,
pushed forward against Kerk's hands, as if they were the only things
that stopped her from leaping at Jason.

"Maybe that is too much to assimilate at one sitting," Jason said. "So
let's put it in simpler terms. I believe we can find a reason for this
unrelenting hatred of humans. Perhaps we don't smell right. Maybe I'll
find an essence of crushed Pyrran bugs that will render us immune when
we rub it in. I don't know yet. But whatever the results, we _must_ make
the investigation. Kerk agrees with me on that."

Meta looked at Kerk and he nodded agreement. Her shoulders slumped in
sudden defeat. She whispered the words.

"I ... can't say I agree, or even understand all that you said. But I'll
help you. If Kerk thinks that it is the right thing."

"I do," he said. "Now, do you want the clip back for your gun? Not
planning to take any more shots at Jason?"

"That was foolish of me," she said coldly while she reloaded the gun. "I
don't need a gun. If I had to kill him, I could do it with my bare
hands."

"I love you, too," Jason smiled at her. "Are you ready to go now?"

"Of course." She brushed a fluffy curl of hair into place. "First we'll
find a place where you can stay. I'll take care of that. After that the
work of the new department is up to you."




X.


There were empty rooms in one of the computer buildings. These were
completely sealed to keep stray animal life out of the delicate
machinery. While Meta checked a bed-roll out of stores, Jason painfully
dragged a desk, table and chairs in from a nearby empty office. When she
returned with a pneumatic bed he instantly dropped on it with a grateful
sigh. Her lip curled a bit at his obvious weakness.

"Get used to the sight," he said. "I intend to do as much of my work as
I can, while maintaining a horizontal position. You will be my strong
right arm. And right now, Right Arm, I wish you could scare me up
something to eat. I also intend to do most of my eating in the
previously mentioned prone condition."

Snorting with disgust, Meta stamped out. While she was gone, Jason
chewed the end of a stylus thoughtfully, then made some careful notes.

After they had finished the almost-tasteless meal he began the search.

"Meta, where can I find historical records of Pyrrus?"

"I've never heard of any ... I really don't know."

"But there has to be something--_somewhere_," he insisted. "Even if your
present-day culture devotes all of its time and energies to survival,
you can be sure it wasn't always that way. All the time it was
developing, people were keeping records, making notes. Now where do we
look? Do you have a library here?"

"Of course," she said. "We have an excellent technical library. But I'm
sure there wouldn't be any of _that_ sort of thing there."

Trying not to groan, Jason stood up. "Let me be the judge of that. Just
lead the way."

       *       *       *       *       *

Operation of the library was completely automatic. A projected index
gave the call number for any text that had to be consulted. The tape
was delivered to the charge desk thirty seconds after the number had
been punched. Returned tapes were dropped through a hopper and refiled
automatically. The mechanism worked smoothly.

"Wonderful," Jason said, pushing away from the index. "A tribute to
technological ingenuity. Only it contains nothing of any value to us.
Just reams of textbooks."

"What _else_ should be in a library?" Meta sounded sincerely puzzled.

Jason started to explain, then changed his mind. "Later we will go into
that," he said. "Much later. Now we have to find a lead. Is it possible
that there are any tapes--or even printed books--that aren't filed
through this machine?"

"It seems unlikely, but we could ask Poli. He lives here somewhere and
is in charge of the library--filing new books and tending the
machinery."

The single door into the rear of the building was locked, and no amount
of pounding could rouse the caretaker.

"If he's alive, this should do it," Jason said. He pressed the
out-of-order button on the control panel. It had the desired affect.
Within five minutes the door opened and Poli dragged himself through it.

Death usually came swiftly on Pyrrus. If wounds slowed a man down, the
ever-ready forces of destruction quickly finished the job. Poli was the
exception to this rule. Whatever had attacked him originally had done an
efficient job. Most of the lower part of his face was gone. His left arm
was curled and useless. The damage to his body and legs had left him
with the bare capability to stumble from one spot to the next.

Yet he still had one good arm as well as his eyesight. He could work in
the library and relieve a fully fit man. How long he had been dragging
the useless husk of a body around the building, no one knew. In spite of
the pain that filled his red-rimmed, moist eyes, he had stayed alive.
Growing old, older than any other Pyrran as far as Jason had seen. He
tottered forward and turned off the alarm that had called him.

When Jason started to explain the old man took no notice. Only after the
librarian had rummaged a hearing aid out of his clothes, did Jason
realize he was deaf as well. Jason explained again what he searched for.
Poli nodded and printed his answer on a tablet.

_there are many old books--in the storerooms below_

Most of the building was taken up by the robot filing and sorting
apparatus. They moved slowly through the banks of machinery, following
the crippled librarian to a barred door in the rear. He pointed to it.
While Jason and Meta fought to open the age-incrusted bars, he wrote
another note on his tablet.

_not opened for many years, rats_

Jason's and Meta's guns appeared reflexively in their hands as they read
the message. Jason finished opening the door by himself. The two native
Pyrrans stood facing the opening gap. It was well they did. Jason could
never have handled what came through that door.

He didn't even open it for himself. Their sounds at the door must have
attracted all the vermin in the lower part of the building. Jason had
thrown the last bolt and started to pull on the handle--when the door
was _pushed_ open from the other side.

       *       *       *       *       *
