Horrox, who by a series of calculations, displaying a wonderfully
accurate knowledge of mathematics, was enabled to predict the occurrence
of the phenomenon on the very day, and almost at the hour it appeared,
and of which he and his friend Crabtree were the only observers.

Having thought it desirable to write an account of the transit, Horrox
prepared an elegant Latin treatise, entitled 'Venus in Sole
Visa'--'Venus seen in the Sun;' but not knowing what steps to take with
regard to its publication, he requested Crabtree to communicate with his
bookseller and obtain his advice on the matter.

In the meantime Horrox returned to Toxteth, and arranged to fulfil a
long-promised visit to Crabtree, which he looked forward to with much
pleasure, as it would afford him an opportunity of discussing with his
friend many matters of interest to both. This visit was frustrated in a
manner altogether unexpected. For we read that Horrox was seized with a
sudden and severe illness, the nature of which is not known, and that
his death occurred on the day previous to that of his intended visit to
his friend at Broughton. He expired on January 3, 1641, when in the 23rd
year of his age.

His death was a great grief to Crabtree, who, in one of his letters,
describes it as 'an irreparable loss:' and it is believed that he only
survived him a few years.[5] Of the papers left by Horrox, only a few
have been preserved, and these were discovered in Crabtree's house after
his death. Among them was his treatise on the transit of Venus which,
with other papers, was purchased by Dr. Worthington, Fellow of Emmanuel
College, Cambridge, a man of learning, who was capable of appreciating
their value. Ultimately, the treatise fell into the possession of
Hevelius, a celebrated German astronomer, who published it along with a
dissertation of his own, describing a transit of Mercury.

Horrox did not live to see any of his writings published, nor was any
monument erected to his memory until nearly two hundred years after his
death. But his name, though long forgotten except by astronomers, is now
engraved on marble in Westminster Abbey. Had his life been spared, it
would have been difficult to foretell to what eminence and fame he might
have risen, or what further discoveries his genius might have enabled
him to make. Few among English astronomers will hesitate to rank him
next with the illustrious Newton, and all will agree with Herschel, who
called him 'the pride and the boast of British Astronomy.'

WILLIAM GASCOIGNE was born in 1612, in the parish of Rothwell, in the
county of York, and afterwards resided at Middleton, near Leeds.

He was a man of an inventive turn of mind, and possessed good abilities,
which he devoted to improving the methods of telescopic observation.

At an early age he was occupied in observing celestial objects, making
researches in optics, and acquiring a proficient knowledge of astronomy.

Among his acquaintances were Crabtree and Horrox, with whom he carried
on a correspondence on matters appertaining to their favourite study.

The measurement of small angles was found at all times to be one of the
greatest difficulties which astronomers had to contend with. Tycho Brahe
was so misled by his measurements of the apparent diameters of the Sun
and Moon, that he concluded a total eclipse of the Sun was impossible.

Gascoigne overcame this difficulty by his invention of the micrometer.
This instrument, when applied to a telescope, was found to be of great
service in the correct measurement of minute angles and distances, and
was the means of greatly advancing the progress of practical astronomy
in the seventeenth century. A micrometer consists of a short tube,
across the opening of which are stretched two parallel wires; these
being intersected at right angles by a third. The wires are moved to or
from each other by delicately constructed screws, to which they are
attached. Each revolution, or part of a revolution, of a screw indicates
the distance by which the wires are moved.

This apparatus, when placed in the focus of a lens, gives very accurate
measurements of the diameters of celestial objects. It was successfully
used by Gascoigne in determining the apparent diameters of the Sun,
Moon, and several of the planets, and the mutual distances of the stars
which form the Pleiades.

Crabtree, after having paid Gascoigne a visit in 1639, describes in a
letter to Horrox the impression created on his mind by the micrometer.
He writes: 'The first thing Mr. Gascoigne showed me was a large
telescope, amplified and adorned with new inventions of his own, whereby
he can take the diameters of the Sun or Moon, or any small angle in the
heavens or upon the earth, most exactly through the glass to a second.'

The micrometer is now regarded as an indispensable appliance in the
observatory; the use of a spider web reticule instead of wire having
improved its efficiency. Gascoigne was one of the earliest astronomers
who recognised the value of the Keplerian telescope for observational
purposes, and Sherburn affirms that he was the first to construct an
instrument of this description having two convex lenses. Whether this be
true or not, it is certain that he applied the micrometer to the
telescope, and was the first to use telescopic sights, by means of which
he was able to fix the optical axis of his telescope, and ascertain by
observation the apparent positions of the heavenly bodies.

Crabtree, in a letter to Gascoigne, says: 'Could I purchase it with
travel, or procure it with gold, I would not be without a telescope for
observing small angles in the heavens; or want the use of your device of
a glass in a cane upon the movable ruler of your sextant, as I remember
for helping to the exact point of the Sun's rays.'

It was not known until the beginning of the eighteenth century that
Gascoigne had invented and used telescopic sights for the purpose of
making accurate astronomical observations. The accidental discovery of
some documents which contained a description of his appliances was the
means by which this became known.

Townley states that Gascoigne had completed a treatise on optics, which
was ready for publication, but that no trace of the manuscript could be
discovered after his death. Having embraced the Royalist cause, William
Gascoigne joined the forces of Charles I., and fell in the battle of
Marston Moor on July 2, 1644.

The early death of this young and remarkably clever man was a severe
blow to the science of astronomy in England.

The invention of logarithms, by Baron Napier, of Merchistoun, was found
to be of inestimable value to astronomers in facilitating and
abbreviating the methods of astronomical calculation.

By the use of logarithms, arithmetical computations which necessitated
laborious application for several months could with ease be completed in
as many days. It was remarked by Laplace that this invention was the
means of doubling the life of an astronomer, besides enabling him to
avoid errors and the tediousness associated with long and abstruse
calculations.

THOMAS HARRIOT, an eminent mathematician, and an assiduous astronomer,
made some valuable observations of the comet of 1607. He was one of the
earliest observers who made use of the telescope, and it was claimed on
his behalf that he discovered Jupiter's satellites, and the spots on the
Sun, independently of Galileo. Other astronomers have been desirous of
sharing this honour, but it has been conclusively proved that Galileo
was the first who made those discoveries.

The investigations of Norwood and Gilbert, the mechanical genius of
Hooke, and the patient researches of Flamsteed--the first Astronomer
Royal--were of much value in perfecting many details associated with the
study of astronomy.

The Royal Observatory at Greenwich was founded in 1675. The building was
erected under a warrant from Charles II. It announces the desire of the
Sovereign to build a small observatory in the park at Greenwich, 'in
order to the finding out of the longitude for perfecting the art of
navigation and astronomy.' This action on the part of the King may be
regarded as the first public acknowledgment of the usefulness of
astronomy for national purposes.

Since its erection, the observatory has been presided over by a
succession of talented men, who have raised it to a position of eminence
and usefulness unsurpassed by any similar institution in this or any
other country. The well-known names of Flamsteed, Halley, Bradley, and
Airy, testify to the valuable services rendered by those past directors
of the Greenwich Observatory in the cause of astronomical science.

If we take a general survey of the science of astronomy as it existed
from 1608 to 1674--a period that embraced the time in which Milton
lived--we shall find that it was still compassed by ignorance,
superstition, and mystery. Astrology was zealously cultivated; most
persons of rank and position had their nativity or horoscope cast, and
the belief in the ruling of the planets, and their influence on human
and terrestrial affairs, was through long usage firmly established in
the public mind. Indeed, at this time, astronomy was regarded as a
handmaid to astrology; for, with the aid of astronomical calculation,
the professors of this occult science were enabled to predict the
positions of the planets, and by this means practised their art with an
apparent degree of truthfulness.

Although over one hundred years had elapsed since the death of
Copernicus, his theory of the solar system did not find many supporters,
and the old forms of astronomical belief still retained their hold on
the minds of the majority of philosophic thinkers. This can be partly
accounted for, as many of the Ptolemaic doctrines were at first
associated with the Copernican theory, nor was it until a later period
that they were eliminated from the system.

Though Copernicus deserved the credit of having transferred the centre
of our system from the Earth to the Sun, yet his theory was imperfect in
its details, and contained many inaccuracies. He believed that the
planets could only move round the Sun in circular paths, nor was he
capable of conceiving of any other form of orbit in which they could
perform their revolutions. He was therefore compelled to retain the use
of cycles and epicycles, in order to account for irregularities in the
uniformly circular motions of those bodies.

We are indebted to the genius of Kepler for having placed the Copernican
system upon a sure and irremovable basis, and for having raised
astronomy to the position of a true physical science. By his discovery
that the planets travel round the Sun in elliptical orbits, he was
enabled to abolish cycles and epicycles, which created such confusion
and entanglement in the system, and to explain many apparent
irregularities of motion by ascribing to the Sun his true position with
regard to the motions of the planets.

After the death of Kepler, which occurred in 1630, the most eminent
supporter of the Copernican theory was the illustrious Galileo, whose
belief in its accuracy and truthfulness was confirmed by his own
discoveries.

Five of the planets were known at this time--viz. Mercury, Venus, Mars,
Jupiter, and Saturn; the latter, which revolves in its orbit at a
profound distance from the Sun, formed what at that time was believed to
be the boundary of the planetary system. The distance of the Earth from
the Sun was approximately known, and the orb was observed to rotate on
his axis.

It was also ascertained that the Moon shone by reflected light, and that
her surface was varied by inequalities resembling those of our Earth.
The elliptical form of her orbit had been discovered by Horrox, and her
elements were computed with a certain degree of accuracy.

The cloudy luminosity of the Milky Way had been resolved into a
multitude of separate stars, disclosing the immensity of the stellar
universe.

The crescent form of the planet Venus, the satellites of Jupiter and of
Saturn, and the progressive motion and measurement of light, had also
been discovered. Observations were made of transits of Mercury and
Venus, and refracting and reflecting telescopes were invented.

The law of universal gravitation, a power which retains the Earth and
planets in their orbits, causing them year after year to describe with
unerring regularity their oval paths round the Sun, was not known at
this time. Though Newton was born in 1642, he did not disclose the
results of his philosophic investigations until 1687--thirteen years
after the death of Milton--when, in the 'Principia,' he announced his
discovery of the great law of universal gravitation.

Kepler, though he discovered the laws of planetary motion, was unable to
determine the motive force which guided and retained those bodies in
their orbits. It was reserved for the genius of Newton to solve this
wonderful problem. This great philosopher was able to prove 'that every
particle of matter in the universe attracts every other particle with a
force proportioned to the mass of the attracting body, and inversely as
the square of the distance between them.' Newton was capable of
demonstrating that the force which guides and retains the Earth and
planets in their orbits resides in the Sun, and by the application of
this law of gravitation he was able to explain the motions of all
celestial bodies entering into the structure of the solar system.

This discovery may be regarded as the crowning point of the science of
astronomy, for, upon the unfailing energy of this mysterious power
depend the order and stability of the universe, extending as it does to
all material bodies existing in space, guiding, controlling, and
retaining them in their several paths and orbits, whether it be a tiny
meteor, a circling planet, or a mighty sun.

The nature of cometary bodies and the laws which govern their motions
were at this time still enshrouded in mystery, and when one of those
erratic wanderers made its appearance in the sky it was beheld by the
majority of mankind with feelings of awe and superstitious dread, and
regarded as a harbinger of evil and disaster, the precursor of war, of
famine, or the overthrow of an empire.

Newton, however, was able to divest those bodies of the mystery with
which they were surrounded by proving that any conic section may be
described about the Sun, consistent with the law of gravitation, and
that comets, notwithstanding the eccentricity of their orbits, obey the
laws of planetary motion.

Beyond the confines of our solar system, little was known of the
magnitude and extent of the sidereal universe which occupies the
infinitude of space by which we are surrounded. The stars were
recognised as self-luminous bodies, inconceivably remote, and although
they excited the curiosity of observers, and conjectures were made as to
their origin, yet no conclusive opinions were arrived at with regard to
their nature and constitution, and except that they were regarded as
glittering points of light which illumine the firmament, all else
appertaining to them remained an unravelled mystery. Even Copernicus had
no notion of a universe of stars.

Galileo, by his discovery that the galaxy consists of a multitude of
separate stars too remote to be defined by ordinary vision, demonstrated
how vast are the dimensions of the starry heavens, and on what a
stupendous scale the universe is constructed. But at this time it had
not occurred to astronomers, nor was it known until many years after,
that the stars are suns which shine with a splendour resembling that of
our Sun, and in many instances surpassing it. It was not until this
truth became known that the glories of the sidereal heavens were fully
comprehended, and their magnificence revealed. It was then ascertained
that the minute points of light which crowd the fields of our largest
telescopes, in their aggregations forming systems, clusters, galaxies,
and universes of stars, are shining orbs of light, among the countless
multitudes of which our Sun may be numbered as one.




CHAPTER III

MILTON'S ASTRONOMICAL KNOWLEDGE


It would be reasonable to imagine that Milton's knowledge of astronomy
was comprehensive and accurate, and superior to that possessed by most
scientific men of his age. His scholarly attainments, his familiarity
with ancient history and philosophy, his profound learning, and the
universality of his general knowledge, would lead one to conclude that
the science which treats of the mechanism of the heavens, and especially
the observational part of it--which at all times has been a source of
inspiration to poets of every degree of excellence--was to him a study
of absorbing interest, and one calculated to make a deep impression upon
his devoutly poetical mind. The serious character of Milton's verse, and
the reverent manner in which celestial incidents and objects are
described in it, impress one with the belief that his contemplation of
the heavens, and of the orbs that roll and shine in the firmament
