
_God, make me strong in the face of my enemies._




LI


"Many think I have little power in this city," said Frescobaldo
d'Ucello. He sat in a dark window recess with one foot up on the ledge
and the other dangling, his fingers tapping the raised knee. Lashed to a
chair in the center of the long, narrow chamber, Daoud had to turn his
head to look at him. Daoud's back ached from being held rigid by the
back of the chair, and the ropes bit into the muscles of his arms and
legs.

At the end of the room, a clerk with scalp shaved in the clerical
tonsure sat in the podesta's high-back chair behind a heavy black table,
writing down what was said on a scroll with a feather pen. Four tall
candles set in brass stands formed a square around Daoud, casting a
bright light on him. A row of candles burned in a wrought-iron
candelabrum beside the clerk, lighting a wall hanging behind him that
depicted some idolatrous Christian religious scene. D'Ucello sat in the
shadows that lay upon the rest of the chamber.

Daoud sensed that d'Ucello meant what he had just said as a sort of
challenge.

"All I know is that for my part I have very little power in this city,
Signore," Daoud said with a smile. "I depend altogether on those who
have befriended me." That was the way David of Trebizond should respond.
Not very frightened, because not guilty of anything. Humble,
ingratiating, but retaining some scrap of dignity.

D'Ucello stood up suddenly, strode briskly across the room to Daoud, and
stood over him.

"Do you think your friends will save you from this?" he said tonelessly.
His eyes had an unfocused look, as though they were made of glass.

"Save me from what, Signore?" Daoud put bewilderment and a shade of
anger into his voice.

D'Ucello swung his hand. Daoud felt the sting of a hard palm against his
jaw, and the crack of flesh slapping flesh made his ear ring. The blow
jolted his head to one side.

It was not very painful. It was meant to insult more than to hurt. To
test. And rage did erupt in Daoud like a fountain of fire. His muscles
tensed, the bindings cutting deeper, and the chair creaked.

D'Ucello was trying to break through the Mask of Clay. But the mask held
firm, because the Face of Steel, Daoud's spiritual armor, was beneath
it. The fury of Daoud the Mameluke, who yearned to tear d'Ucello apart,
remained hidden. It was David of Trebizond who blustered at the
indignity of being slapped without cause.

"How dare you strike me, Signore!" he protested. "I have done nothing to
deserve that, nothing to deserve being dragged here in the night and
tied up. I demand to know--what do you want of me?"

D'Ucello sighed like a chess player whose opponent had escaped check,
and went back to his seat in the window recess. Daoud saw the flickering
glow of heat lightning through the thick leaded-glass window behind the
podesta.

"I dislike intensely being made to waste time," said d'Ucello, drumming
his fingers on his knee. "Listen carefully: Every time you force me to
tell you something we both already know, I will prolong your suffering
another hour."

Daoud allowed a note of fear to creep into his voice. "Suffering? I beg
you, Signore, believe me. Even if you torture me, I still cannot tell
you anything different from what I will freely tell you. Ask me whatever
you want."

The Mask of Clay was useless with this man, Daoud saw. The podesta's
mind had pierced it. How had he been able to do that? Because he was a
man who observed much and thought much, unlike most men Daoud had met in
Orvieto, who let their passions rule them.

Yet d'Ucello had passions. He was a proud man, who must hate standing by
helplessly, holding the supreme office in Orvieto, watching the two
great families bespatter his city with blood. If he could not stop the
Filippeschi and the Monaldeschi from murdering each other, at least he
could do _something_.

D'Ucello had seen enough of Daoud's comings and goings to make him
suspicious. Like a hawk soaring above a plain, the podesta might be too
high up to know exactly what he saw below, but he knew when he sighted
prey. And perhaps d'Ucello saw that this prey, if hunted rightly, would
lead him to others.

D'Ucello leaned forward, out of the shadow of the window recess.

"There was a man in black who tried to kill the Tartars the night of the
Filippeschi uprising. What do you know about him?"

"I know little about the uprising, Signore, since I was not here. I was
in Perugia."

"Why Perugia?"

"To speak with several silk merchants."

"Are there those in Perugia who will vouch for you?"

"Certainly," said Daoud, feeling uneasily that d'Ucello was not
deceived.

"I will write to the podesta of Perugia and ask that your witnesses be
examined," said d'Ucello. "Give me their names."

Daoud had a struggle to remember the names of the witnesses. Lorenzo had
given them to him months before, members of the Ghibellino network who
were willing to perform this service for Manfred. The clerk's pen
scratched rapidly as he haltingly brought out the names of five men.

"When did you return from Perugia?"

The clerks, Daoud recalled, had been removed from the town gates at the
end of May.

"Sometime in June," Daoud said. "Forgive me, I did not think to bring my
journal with me, and I cannot tell you the exact date." He tried a weak
smile.

"Where is your man Giancarlo?"

_On his way here from Siena with an army, Insh'Allah._

"I sent him on from Perugia," Daoud said. "He travels to Rimini, then
Ravenna, eventually to Venice, looking for those who would be interested
in receiving shipments of silks and spices from Trebizond. He had not
been punctilious about writing to me, or perhaps his letters have been
lost, so I do not know exactly where he is now."

"I thought you were in competition with the Venetians."

Daoud essayed another smile. "That is why I sent Giancarlo."

"And where were you the night the French cavaliere was murdered?"
d'Ucello asked.

"I was with a woman."

"What was her name?"

"I do not think I ever knew it." He tried a flash of sarcasm. "If I had
known there was to be a murder that night, I would have asked her
name."

"Everyone was with a nameless woman that night," d'Ucello sighed. "Yes,
you should have taken more care to arrange for proof of your innocence,
Messere."

He gestured to the clerk, who picked up a small bell on the table beside
his ink pot and shook it, a silvery clangor.

Two broad, leather-faced men in the yellow and blue tunics of the watch
came into the room. They took a few steps toward d'Ucello and stood
awaiting orders like a pair of mastiffs.

"Take him down," said d'Ucello.

"Wait! Will you torture me? I have tried to tell you the truth. Do not
do this, I beg you."

D'Ucello slid off the window ledge. "I am the sort of man who would
rather spend hours picking a lock than break it open." The smile that
stretched his thin mustache was genuine. "But, as we both know, the
Ghibellini of Siena may be upon us at any moment, and I must break you
open quickly. So now I will sleep. And while I am restoring my strength,
my men will prepare you for our next talk."

Daoud tried to keep the Face of Steel firmly in place while with the
Mask of Clay he feigned helpless terror. But his defense against feeling
seemed to have flaws. Genuine terror of what he was about to suffer kept
seeping through. When d'Ucello's guards untied him and forced him to
stand, his knees nearly buckled under him.

The steps Daoud descended must have been hollowed out by the feet of
hundreds of hapless prisoners and their guards. The wall of the circular
stairwell, which Daoud brushed with his fingertips to steady himself,
was of rough-hewn black stone.

His heart was thudding heavily as he descended the stairs, preceded by
one guard, followed by the other and by d'Ucello's clerk. The thought of
hours, perhaps days, of pain he must undergo made every muscle in his
body tremble. The stairwell, lit at long intervals by torches held by
wrought iron cressets, went down so far it seemed to have no bottom.
Many a prisoner must have felt the temptation to throw himself down from
the stairs and escape suffering.

The chamber he entered through a door of thick oak planks had been
carved from the yellow-gray rock of Orvieto's mesa. The room smelled of
fire, blood, rot, and excrement.

A man slid down from a chair when Daoud entered with his guards.
Standing, his head would have come to Daoud's waist. But he was bent
double and held his arms out from his sides to keep his fingers from
touching the ground, so his head was not even as high as Daoud's knees.

Memories flashed through Daoud's mind: The woodcutter who had blessed
himself when Daoud was arrested at Lucera. The executioner who had
tossed the heretic's cod into the air to the delight of the crowd before
Orvieto's cathedral. Daoud had always wondered how the little man had
come to appear in two such different places. The skin crawled on the
back of Daoud's neck. This creature was uncanny.

"You are to keep him awake all night, Erculio," said the guard who had
followed Daoud into the room.

"Did I not sleep all day today, so that I would be able to properly
entertain our guest tonight?" The little man bustled forward to Daoud,
rubbing his hands. His head was as big as that of a full-grown man, but
his hands and feet were small. His mustache bristled in spikes of black
hair, like a portcullis over his mouth.

"Please, in the name of the mercy of God," Daoud pleaded. "I am a
merchant. I am rich. Do not hurt me. I will pay you well."

"We want to hear nothing from you except frequent screams and answers to
the questions the podesta wants me to put to you," said Erculio in a
cold voice. "What do we want to know, Vincenzo?"

D'Ucello's clerk said, "The podesta believes he is a Ghibellino spy sent
here by the bastard King Manfred. He thinks he incited the Filippeschi
uprising. Also he may have killed the French cavaliere."

Erculio nodded vigorously. "Well, then, Messere. Are you prepared to
admit your guilt, now that you see where you are and realize what is
about to happen to you?"

"These accusations are false!" Daoud cried. "I swear it!"

The tonsured clerk, carrying a handful of quills, a bundle of scrolls,
and his ink pot, seated himself at a table in one corner of the room and
began to write.

To gain time, Daoud looked around Erculio's domain, remembering the
similar room in Tilia's brothel where he had subjected Sordello to the
Hashishiyya initiation. This place was starker and more frightful. It
was large, perhaps fifty paces on a side, divided by two rows of thick
columns holding up the weight of the great stone building above it.
Despite its size, the chamber was well lit. The candle sconces were
lined with sheets of tin to throw extra light.

Daoud recognized most of the implements of torment around the room. A
rack, a tilted wooden table with chains and winches. A sharp-pointed
wooden pyramid over which a victim could be suspended. A chair with
spikes protruding at the joints. A coffin lined with spikes. A brazier
full of pokers and branding irons of various sizes. Weights and pulleys.
Whips and cudgels, hung neatly from pegs that lined the walls. A cage
full of rats. A number of smaller devices to crush fingers or limbs--or
even skulls--laid out neatly on tables beside rows of long needles.

Daoud visualized himself drinking from a bowl of liquid light and felt
the mind-created drug Soma pouring down into his stomach and spreading
to his heart and lungs, through all his veins.

But still he must keep up the Mask of Clay.

"I can say no other than what is true," he cried. "I am David of
Trebizond. I came here to sell silk. I have harmed no one. Please be
merciful."

Erculio grunted. "Strip him and string him up."

Daoud protested weakly, letting his voice tremble as the guards pulled
the clothes from his body. He felt the cool, dank air of the cellar on
his bare skin.

"Be careful," Erculio said. "That is a good embroidered tunic. The hose
and boots are new. Those clothes are my property now." Fussily, he
folded the garments as they fell away from Daoud and laid them on a
chair.

"Will you not return them to me--afterward?" Daoud quavered.

"Afterward?" Erculio laughed.

"What is this?" said one guard as he used his dagger to cut the thong
that held the leather capsule around Daoud's neck. The tawidh, that
healed his wounds and protected him from death.

Daoud said nothing.

_Now they can truly destroy my body._

The guard handed the tawidh to Erculio, who glanced at it and threw it
on his low chair. He frowned at Daoud.

"Put a loincloth on him, fools," he growled. "Did I say to strip him
stark naked? Are we not decent fellows here?" He fumbled about in a pile
of rags and threw one to a guard.

"That's the first time you've complained about a prisoner being naked,
Erculio," the guard grumbled as he wrapped the cloth around Daoud's hips
and passed it between his legs. "Don't you need to be able to get at his
cock?"

"Do not try to teach me my craft," Erculio said snappishly. "Up with him
now."

The guards grabbed Daoud by the arms and pushed him under dangling
chains. They lifted his arms over his head and bound his wrists with
thick leather cuffs. Then they went to a winch with a crank on each
side, next to the wall, and began to turn in unison.

Daoud cried out in pain as his body was jerked into the air. The leather
cuffs cut into his wrists. His shoulders felt as if his arms were being
torn out of their sockets.

He pictured the Soma cascading through his body, and the pain receded.
But he continued to cry out as if in unbearable agony until the two
guards stopped raising him. He hung there, the Mask of Clay sobbing and
whimpering.

Erculio scuttled over to stand under him, holding a thick stick as long
as a man's arm. Daoud's feet were just level with Erculio's head.
Leaning on the stick, Erculio looked up at Daoud, appraising his body,
and a pink tongue tip flickered under the bristling mustache.

"You have a beautiful body, Messere. Well-proportioned, with powerful
muscles. You are un bello pezzo di carne, a fine piece of meat." Erculio
walked around behind him and stopped there for a moment, where Daoud
could not see him.

"Scars from old wounds, too, I see," the little man said.

_Perhaps in this light the scar left by the Tartar's arrow looks old._

Erculio stood before him again. "You look able to endure much, so you
will last longer. You may think when a guest comes down here I just pick
the first instrument that comes to mind. Not so. I follow a strict
order. You will get to know every instrument here, if you live long
enough. This will be very educational for you."

"I have been telling you the truth," Daoud moaned. "Will you not believe
me?"

"Bugiardo! Liar!" Erculio struck him hard on the shin with the stick.
Pain blazed through his leg. Daoud could have remained silent, but he
shrieked loudly, knowing that fear, as much as pain, would make the man
he was pretending to be cry out.

Turning to the others, Erculio said, "What will you wager against these
handsome clothes of his that I get this pezzo di carne to speak the
words our honorable podesta wants to hear? A bet makes this game more
interesting. What say you, any takers?"

"The man is quivering like a frumenty now," said one guard. "He would
have been talking long ago if he had anything to say."

"You think so?" Erculio snapped his fingers. "Good. Bet with me, then."

The guard fumbled in a purse at his belt and drew out a glittering coin.
"There you are. A gold florin, not ten years old and barely worn. I won
it dicing last night."

Erculio examined the coin. "Twenty years old, and the lilies are a bit
wilted. But it's heavy enough, I suppose. Done! Now, Messer
Pezzo-di-Carne--I call you that because I do not know your real
name--you had better tell us what we want to know, or I will _really_
make you suffer." He dropped the coin on top of Daoud's clothing.

Erculio brought the stick against Daoud's shin, in the spot he had
struck a moment ago. The pain shot through Daoud. But Soma turned the
pain to a tingling, and Daoud visualized it as a glow that spread from
toe to hip. He screamed, as he knew he should, but behind the Face of
Steel he felt at peace.

Erculio let out a laugh that sounded more like the clucking of a
chicken. "You see, we do not need elaborate instruments. We can inflict
unbearable pain with the simplest means--like this!" And he swung the
stick to hit precisely the same spot on Daoud's shin he had struck twice
before.

Daoud bellowed and felt the tingling and saw the glow in his leg, and
the Soma, the drug created by his spirit, preserved his sanity.

How small Erculio looked, crouched down on the stone floor. So man must
look to God. God was so infinitely far above man, the miracle was that
God was mindful of man at all. But God was inside of man--inside of each
human being--as well as above him.

_It is blasphemy to liken myself to God._

He called to mind the Koran's admonition, _There is none like unto Him_.

His mind occupied with God, he barely noticed the activities of the
spiderlike creature that crawled about on the floor below him as he hung
like a trapped fly. Erculio worked on his legs for a long time, bruising
the shins with his heavy stick until Daoud thought both legs must be
broken. Then the torturer pressed a red-hot poker against the soles of
his feet.

Erculio had the guards let Daoud down and force him to walk on his
burned feet to the rack table, where they chained him facedown and
stretched him till the ligaments that held his bones together were ready
to snap.

The Mask of Clay screamed and pleaded for mercy and insisted he had
already told them everything. But the pain lay as far from his
consciousness as the sea lies from the desert tent of a Bedouin.

Erculio applied more instruments to Daoud's body, inflicting many kinds
of pain--burning, stabbing, bruising, crushing. He kept Daoud awake, and
Daoud knew that hours must have gone by, perhaps the whole night.

Daoud's outcries grew hoarser and weaker, and at last Erculio's efforts
brought forth nothing from him but soft groans and whimpers.

Daoud saw the clerk, Vincenzo, rise yawning and leave as another clerk,
also shaven-headed, but with a short brown beard, came in to replace
him. He saw the two guards in yellow and blue sit down on the floor,
their backs to the wall, and doze off. He saw after a time the second
clerk lower his head on his folded arms. He saw all this while Erculio
pranced about him, hurting him and hurting him.

Erculio looked around at the others in the chamber. He left off pushing
a needle into Daoud's ankle and rushed over to the guards and shouted at
them to wake up. He poked them with his stick. They cursed him and
kicked at him and went back to sleep. He scurried to the sleeping clerk.

"You are supposed to be writing down everything the prisoner says. Come
now, wake up! Indolento! The podesta will hear of this, I promise you."

The clerk mumbled something without raising his head from his arms.
Erculio nodded with satisfaction and hurried across the chamber to
Daoud. He stood by Daoud's head.

"As-salaam aleikem, Daoud ibn Abdallah," the torturer whispered.

For a moment Daoud could not believe he had really heard it. The drug
that he had brewed in his mind had taken control of his ears. Or else
this was their way of tricking him into talking freely.

_But if they knew my Muslim name and that I speak Arabic, they would not
waste time accusing me of being a Ghibellino._

"Wa aleikem salaam," he replied. The uprush of joy he felt at finding a
friend here in this terrible cellar momentarily shattered the Face of
Steel. What madness this was, that the friend should be the source of
all his torment? He bit back hysterical laughter.

"Like you, I serve El Malik Dahir," Erculio said in Arabic. Hearing that
title, Daoud thought it even less likely that the little man was trying
to trick him.

"I have been watching you since Lucera, My Lord," Erculio went on. "You
have done well, even if it has been God's will that you should not
succeed. You have been clever. But you should have taken the tawidh off
before you surrendered. Do you think there are no Christians who can
recognize Arabic numerals?"

Now Daoud was sure the little man was an ally of some sort.

In Arabic he said, "Does the scar on the back of my leg look fresh?"

"It has healed so completely that no one would believe you got it a few
months ago. They know nothing of our Islamic medicine. You bear another
wound, though, that would have much to say to the observant--your
circumcision. That was why I had them put a loincloth on you and lay you
facedown on this rack."

"Lucky for me you were here," Daoud said.

"Not luck," said Erculio. "El Malik deemed it wise that, should you be
made a prisoner, one of his men ought to be among your captors."

_Even here, Baibars's hand reaches out to me_, thought Daoud, feeling a
rush of gratitude.

"Help me to escape," said Daoud. "The guards and the clerk are asleep."

Erculio brought his small hand downward in a gesture of flat rejection.
"There are a hundred men-at-arms on duty up above. The podesta himself
will be down here in an hour. Why can you not make up a story that will
satisfy him? Say you are a Ghibellino. That is what he believes, and
since it is not true, it will not help him. In a thousand years he would
never guess the truth."

"No. The only way I can protect those close to me is to admit nothing."

Erculio shook his head, and his black eyes were liquid with sadness.
"What a pity. Your case is hopeless, then. Ever since I saw you in
Lucera I have felt sorry for you. How can El Malik expect one man to
change the course of nations? You are like a man trying to hold apart
two ships about to collide." He sighed. "I have done all I can for you.
I have hurt you as much as I can without doing you permanent injury--so
far. There is only one other service I can perform for you."

"What is that?" said Daoud, though he felt sure he already knew the
answer.

"You would not want to reveal under torture that you are an agent of the
Sultan of El Kahira, and provoke the very crusade you were sent here to
prevent. You would not want to give your friends away. If you break, I
will see to it that you die before you might speak."

"I will not break," said Daoud. "And when it is all over, and d'Ucello
has killed me, he will at last come to believe that I was telling the
truth. Because he believes that no one can hold out against torture to
the very end. But promise me one thing."

"Insh'Allah, anything."

"If you must cripple me, see that I do not leave this dungeon alive."

Understanding and respect glowed in the black eyes peering at Daoud over
the edge of the rack. "As you wish, My Lord."

He knew he should be grateful that he had this man here to guarantee him
a decent death. But a great sadness came over him at the thought that
his life must end miserably in this dungeon. He had always hoped that he
would meet his fate amid the glory of jihad, holy war.

_Well, this is jihad of a kind._

       *       *       *       *       *

The respite was over. Erculio fell upon Daoud with renewed vigor,
driving needles under his toenails and fingernails and beating him with
a whip of knotted rawhide cords that tore open his back. Daoud felt the
blood running down his sides and pooling underneath him. The little man
took a red-hot poker and pressed it, hissing, against the scar made by
the Tartar's arrow and Lorenzo's knife. That, Daoud realized, would make
it impossible to tell what sort of wound it had been.

The pain seemed to be happening to someone miles away as Daoud converted
it to ripples of light passing through his body. He understood that
Erculio was applying tortures whose effects could be seen. The podesta
would be satisfied that Erculio had done his work well.

Daoud did his part too. The rest had restored his strength, and now
Daoud screamed so loudly he woke the guards and the clerk. Erculio set
the guards to work replacing the burned-down candles in the sconces
around the dungeon. When Daoud turned his throbbing head to look at the
candles, he saw hazy rings around them and rays radiating from them.
Sweat stung his eyes.

The thick wooden door of the cellar swung inward, and d'Ucello entered.
He walked over to where Daoud lay on the rack, and stood staring at him
with his peculiar, glazed expression. D'Ucello's face was more sour than
usual, and his eyelids were puffed. He looked just awakened from a sleep
that had given him little refreshment. His mouth twitched under the thin
mustache.

Daoud noticed that in one hand d'Ucello held a small silver flask with a
narrow neck and a glass stopper. D'Ucello clenched his hand around it
tightly, as if he feared to drop it.

"What has he said?" he demanded, turning to Erculio.

"Just much screaming, Signore." Erculio looked across the room at the
bearded clerk, who nodded vigorously.

"You have not hurt him enough, then, Erculio," said the podesta. "He
should be offering us _something_ by now. To withstand torture for so
long almost smacks of sorcery."

"Perhaps he really has nothing to tell," Erculio ventured.

"Nonsense!" D'Ucello glared at the dwarf. "Even an innocent man would
make the torture stop, if he had to lie to do it. And this man is not
innocent."

_By that one remark Erculio risks much for me_, thought Daoud, praying
the little man would not again endanger himself.

"Attenzione," said d'Ucello, coming close to Daoud's head and holding
the flask so Daoud could see it. He withdrew the stopper, a long icicle
of glass. He held the flask low over the rack table and tilted it
momentarily. A few drops of dark brown liquid splashed onto the wood. At
once d'Ucello righted and stopped the flask.

A white flash, bright as lightning, burst before Daoud's face, blinding
him.

He jerked his head back and squeezed his eyes shut. He heard Erculio
curse in Italian and the clerk and the guards cry out.

Smoke burned Daoud's nostrils and throat. As he coughed, he opened his
eyes and saw a small fire burning its way into the wood a hand's breadth
from his face. He felt a wave of heat. D'Ucello and his men watched in
silence as the fire ate through the thick planking of the rack table.
Gradually the blaze lost its intensity as the liquid that started it was
used up. It ended in a hole a man could pass his fist through, with
glowing, smoking edges.

"What _is_ that?" said the clerk, tugging nervously at his brown beard.

"Witchcraft," said d'Ucello with a grim chuckle. The clerk and the
guards stared at him. Erculio was expressionless.

In spite of Soma, in spite of his years of training, Daoud felt a scream
of horror rising inside him at the thought of what d'Ucello was
threatening.

"Not witchcraft, but just as evil," d'Ucello went on. "It is a weapon
devised by the Byzantines."

"Ah!" said the clerk. "This must be that Greek Fire I have heard
crusaders tell of. I always thought it another of their lies about the
East."

"It is real," said d'Ucello. "Perhaps our guest, being from the East,
has seen it before. The Turks stole the secret from the Byzantines and
have been using it against the crusaders. It starts burning the moment
it is exposed to air. It clings to whatever it touches, and its flames
cannot be put out. Maligno."

The podesta turned to Daoud. "But in this case we will be using it for a
good purpose. Messer David, do you love your organs of manhood?"

"What are you saying to me?" Daoud cried, determined that he would be
David of Trebizond to the very end. His real terror now matched his
pretended terror, but he managed to keep them two separate feelings. The
scream trying to escape him battered itself like a trapped animal
against the inner wall of the Face of Steel.

D'Ucello bent closer to Daoud, and from his painful position, belly
down, arms and legs stretched taut, Daoud lifted his head to look at the
podesta. D'Ucello glowered at him, his lips tight under his thin
mustache.

"I mean that if you do not tell me who you really are and what you are
doing in Orvieto, I will apply this healing potion to your male member.
