He wasn't the botany professor, if you please; that dry-as-dust
gentleman told me, when I inquired as to what I might find in early
bloom, or see with the eyes of an ignorant plant-lover, that there was
"nothing blooming, and nothing of interest." He added that he had a
fine herbarium where I might see all the plants I wanted, nicely dried
and spread out with pins and pasters, their roots and all!

Look at _dead_ plants, their roots indecently exposed to mere curiosity,
on a bright, living early April day? Not much! I told my trouble to the
professor of agriculture, whose eyes brightened, as he informed me he
had no classes for that morning, and--"We would see!" We _did_ see a
whole host of living things outdoors,--flowers peeping out; leaves of
the willows, just breaking; buds ready to burst; all nature waiting for
the sun's call of the "grand entree." It was a good day; but I pitied
that poor old dull-eyed herbarium specimen of a botanical professor, in
whose veins the blood was congealing, when everything about called on
him to get out under the rays of God's sun, and study, book in hand if
he wanted, the bursting, hurrying facts of the imminent spring.

But a word more about the liquidambar--the name by which I hope the tree
we are discussing may be talked of and thought of. Old Linnaeus gave it
that name, because it described euphoniously as well as scientifically
the fact that the sap which exudes from this fine American tree _is_
liquid amber. Now isn't that better than "gum" tree?

With trees in general as objects of interest, I have always felt a
special leaning toward tropical trees, probably because they were rare,
and indeed not to be seen outside of the conservatory in our Middle
States. My first visit to Florida was made particularly enjoyable by
reason of the palms and bananas there to be seen, and I have by no means
lost the feeling of admiration for the latter especially. In Yucatan
there were to be seen other and stranger growths and fruits, and the
novelty of a great cocoanut grove is yet a memory not eclipsed by the
present-day Floridian and Bahamian productions of the same sort.

It was, therefore, with some astonishment that I came to know, a few
years ago, more of a little tree bearing a fruit that had been familiar
from my boyhood, but which I was then informed was the sole northern
representative of a great family of tropical fruits, and which was
fairly called the American banana. The papaw it was; a fruit all too
luscious and sweet, when fully ripe in the fall, for most tastes, but
appealing strongly to the omnivorous small boy. I suppose most of my
readers know its banana-like fruits, four or five inches long, green
outside, but filled with soft and sweet aromatic yellow pulp, punctuated
by several fat bean-like seeds.

[Illustration: The papaw in bloom]

But it is the very handsome and distinct little tree, with its decidedly
odd flowers, I would celebrate, rather than the fruits. This tree,
rather common to shady places in eastern America as far north as New
York, is worth much attention, and worth planting for its spreading
richness of foliage. The leaves are large, and seem to carry into the
cold North a hint of warmth and of luxuriant growth not common, by any
means--I know of only one other hardy tree, the cucumber magnolia, with
an approaching character. The arrangement of these handsome papaw leaves
on the branches, too, makes the complete mass of regularly shaped
greenery that is the special characteristic of this escape from the
tropics; and, since I have seen the real papaw of the West Indies in
full glory, I am more than ever glad for the handsomer tree that belongs
to the regions of cold and vigor.

[Illustration: Flowers of the papaw]

The form of our papaw, or _Asimina triloba_--the botanical name is
rather pleasing--is noticeable, and as characteristic as its leafage.
See these side branches, leaving the slender central stem with a
graceful up-curve, but almost at once swinging down, only to again curve
upward at the ends! Are they not graceful? Such branches as these point
nature's marvelous engineering, to appreciate which one needs only to
try to imagine a structure of equal grace and efficiency, made with any
material of the arts. How awkward and clumsy steel would be, or other
metal!

Along these swinging curved branches, as we see them in the April winds,
there appear hints of the leaf richness that is to come--but something
else as well. These darkest purple-red petals, almost black, as they
change from the green of their opening hue, make up the peculiar flowers
of the papaw. There is gold in the heart of the flower, not hid from the
bees, and there is much of interest for the seeker for spring knowledge
as well; though I advise him not to smell the flowers. Almost the exact
antithesis of the dogwood is the bloom of this tree; for, both starting
green when first unfolded from the buds, the papaw's flowers advance
through browns and yellows, dully mingled, to the deep vinous red of
maturity. The dogwood's final banner of white is unfolded through its
progress of greens, about the same time or a little later.

A pleasant and peculiar small tree is this papaw, not nearly so well
known or so highly esteemed as it ought to be.

Another tree with edible fruits--but here there will be a dispute,
perhaps!--is the persimmon. I mean the American persimmon, indissolubly
associated in our own Southland with the darky and the 'possum, but also
well distributed over Eastern North America as far north as Connecticut.
The botanical name of the genus is Diospyros, liberally translated as
"fruit of the gods," or "Jove's fruit." If his highness of Olympus was,
by any chance, well acquainted with our 'simmon just before frost, he
must have had a copper-lined mouth, to choose it as his peculiar fruit!

Making a moderate-sized tree of peculiar and pleasing form, its branches
twisting regardless of symmetry, the persimmon in Pennsylvania likes
the country roadsides, especially along loamy banks. Here it has
unequaled opportunity for hanging out its attractively colored fruits.
As one drives along in early fall, just before hard frost, these
fine-looking little tomato-like globes of orange and red are advertised
in the wind by the absence of the early dropping foliage. They look
luscious and tempting; indeed, they _are_ tempting! Past experience--you
need but one--had prepared me for this "bunko" fruit; but my friend
would not believe me, one day in early October--he must taste for
himself. Taste he did, and generously, for the first bite is pleasing,
and does not alarm, wherefore he had time, before his insulted nerves of
mouth and tongue gave full warning, to absorb two of the 'simmons. Whew!
What a face he made when the puckering juice got to work, and convinced
him that he had been sucking a disguised lump of alum. Choking and
gasping, he called for the water we were far from; and _he_ won't try an
unfrosted persimmon again!

My clerical friend who brought home the fairy tale about the red-bud,
or Judas-tree, might well have based his story on the American
persimmon, but for the fact that this puckery little globe, so brilliant
and so deceptive before frost, loses both its beauty and its astringency
when slightly frozen. Then its tender flesh is suave and delicious, and
old Jove might well choose it for his own.

[Illustration: The persimmon tree in fruiting time]

But the tree--that is a beauty all summer, with its shining leaves,
oblong, pointed and almost of the magnolia shape. It will grace any
situation, and is particularly one of the trees worth planting along
highways, to relieve the monotony of too many maples, ashes,
horse-chestnuts and the like, and to offer to the passer-by a tempting
fruit of which he will surely not partake too freely when it is most
attractive. I read that toward the Western limit of its range the
persimmon, in Louisiana, Eastern Kansas and the Indian Territory,
becomes another tree of the first magnitude, towering above a hundred
feet. This would be well worth seeing!

There is another persimmon in the South, introduced from Japan, the
fruits of which are sold on the fruit-stands of Philadelphia, Boston
and New York. This, the "kaki" of Japan, is a small but business-like
tree, not substantially hardy north of Georgia, which provides great
quantities of its beautiful fruits, rich in coloring and sweet to the
taste, and varying greatly in size and form in its different varieties.
These 'simmons do not need the touch of frost, nor do they ever attain
the fine, wild, high flavor of the frost-bitten Virginian fruits; the
tree that bears them has none of the irregular beauty of our native
persimmon, nor does it approach in size to that ornament of the
countryside.

       *       *       *       *       *

And now, in closing these sketches, I become most keenly sensible of
their deficiencies. Purely random bits they are, coming from a busy man,
and possessing the one merit of frankness. Deeply interested in trees,
but lacking the time for continuous study, I have been turning my camera
and my eyes upon the growths about me, asking questions, mentally
recording what I could see, and, while thankful for the rest and the
pleasure of the pursuit, always sorry not to go more fully into proper
and scientific tree knowledge. At times my lack in this respect has made
me ashamed to have written at all upon trees; but with full gratitude to
the botanical explorers whose labors have made such superficial
observations as mine possible, I venture to send forth these sketches,
without pretension as to the statement of any new facts or features.

[Illustration: Berries of the spice-bush]

If anything I have here set down shall induce among those who have
looked and read with me from nature's open book the desire to go more
deeply into the fascinating tree lore that always awaits and inevitably
rewards the effort, I shall cry heartily, "God-speed!"




Index


Illustrations are indicated by a prefixed asterisk (*). For botanical
names, see page 239.

  Acorn, beginning of, 27.

  Alligator tree, 221.

  Amelanchier, 205.

  American trees in Europe, 133.

  Apple blossoms, 75, 80.

  Apple, beauty of fruiting branch, 91

  Apple, Chinese flowering, 90.

  Apple, Crab, 80.

  Apple trees, fruiting, 93; in blossom, *81.

  Apples, 73.

  Apples, Ben Davis, Bellefleur, Baldwin, Early Harvest, Red Astrachan, 93;
    Rhode Island Greening, 76;
    Winesap, fruit, *75.

  Apple orchard in winter, *78.

  Apples, Crab, fruit-cluster, *73.

  Apples, propagation of, 88.

  Arnold Arboretum, 57, 89.

  Aspen, American, 121.

  Aspen, Large-toothed, 121.

  Aspen, Trembling (poplar), 121.


  Bailey, Prof. L. H., quoted, 125.

  Balm of Gilead, 118.

  Beech, American, *177, 178.

  Beech, birth of leaves, 179.

  Bill-boards, 179.

  Birch-bark for fuel, 190.

  Birch, Paper, 190.

  Birch, Sweet, 188, *185, *191.

  Birch, White, 193.

  Birch, Yellow, 189, *192.

  Butternut, 164.

  Buttonball, *215.

  Buttonwood, 214.


  Cathedral Woods (pines), 68.

  Cedar, White, 71.

  Cherry, Wild, 176.

  Chestnut, American Sweet, 166, *165.

  Chestnut burs, *157.

  Chestnut grove in fall, 168.

  Chestnut, Sweet, blossoms, *167.

  Chinquapin, 169, *170.

  Cocoanut, 182.

  Common names, 146.

  Cones of the pines, 64.

  Cornus sericea, 200.

  Cottonwood (poplar), 125.

  Crab-apple, 80; Floribunda, 92;
    Parkman's, 88;
    Siberian, 89;
    Spectabilis, *84.

  Crab-apple, Wild, 85.

  Crab-apples, Chinese and Japanese, 88;
    Ringo, Kaido, Toringo, 93.

  Crab, Wild, 83.

  Crab, Soulard, 86.

  Crab, Wild, fruit, *87.

  Cypress, 72.


  Diospyros, 229.

  Dogwood berries, *187.

  Dogwood, Blue-berried, 200.

  Dogwood, White, 197, *199.


  Elkwood, 20.

  Elm and the Tulip, 131.

  Elm, American, *ix, 134, *136, 137, 139.

  Elm at Capitol Park, 141.

  Elm, English, 142; *143.

  Elm lawn, 138.

  Elm, Slippery, 142; seed-pods, *131.

  Elm, Wahoo or Winged, 144.

  Elms, Paul and Virginia, 141.


  Fence-post tree (locust), 210.

  Fernow, Dr., on pines, 52.

  Filbert, 181.

  Fir, Balsam, 70.

  Fir, Nordmann's, 65.

  Firs, 65.

  Fruit trees for beauty, 82.


  Goat Island, plants on, 113.


  Habenaria, Round-leaved, 54.

  Hazelnut, 181.

  Hemlock, 55.

  Hemlock Hill, *56.

  Hickory, False Shagbark, 176.

  Hickory, Mockernut, 176.

  Hickory, Pignut, 176.

  Hickory, Shagbark, 171, *173.

  Hollies, Japanese, English, Himalayan, 195.

  Holly, American, 194, *196.

  Holly, leaves and berries, *195.


  Johnny Appleseed, 87.

  Judas-tree, 201.

  Judas-tree, Eastern, 202.

  June-berry, 205.

  Juniper, Common, 71.


  Kaki, 233.

  Keeler, Miss, quoted, 117.


  Linden, American, 206; flowers, *207, *209.

  Linden, European, 208.

  Liquidambar, 219, *220; fruits, *222.

  Liriodendron, 145;
    candlesticks, 147;
    buds opening, 149;
    flowers of, *150, 153.

  Liriodendrons in Washington, 152.

  Locust, Black, 210; flowers, *211.

  Locust, young trees, *212.

  Maple, Ash-leaved, Box-elder, or Negundo, 17;
    flowers, *17;
    in bloom, *19.

  Maple, Black, 22.

  Maple, Japanese, 23.

  Maple, Large-leaved, 22.

  Maple, Mountain, 21.

  Maple, Norway, 8; bloom, *9;
    samaras, *1.

  Maple, Red, Scarlet or Swamp, 6;
    young leaves, *7.

  Maple, Silver, 4; flowers, *4;
    samaras, *3.

  Maple, Striped, 20, *21.

  Maple, Sugar, 10;
    samaras, *11.

  Maple, Sycamore, *13, 15;
    blossoms, *15.

  Maples, A Story of Some, 1.

  Moosewood, 20.


  Niagara, plants and trees, 111.

  Nut-bearing Trees, 157.


  Oak, Chestnut, 42;
    flowers, *25.

  Oak, English, 33, 46;
    acorns, *47.

  Oak, The Growth of the, 25.

  Oak, Laurel, 43.

  Oak, Live, 45.

  Oak, Mossy Cup or Bur, 38.

  Oak, Pin, 30; acorns, *27;
    flowers, *31.

  Oak, Post, *39, 40.

  Oak, Swamp White, 38;
    flowers, *41;
    in early spring, *36;
    in winter, *29.

  Oak, White, 33.

  Oak, Willow, 42.

  Oaks, blooming of, 28.

  Oaks in Georgia, 44.

  Oaks, Red, Black, Scarlet, 46.

  Orchard, apple, 77.


  Papaw, 225; flowers, *227;
    in bloom, *226.

  Paxtang walnut, 160.

  Pecan, 176; nuts, *159.

  Persimmons, American, 229.

  Persimmon, Japanese, *v, 232.

  Persimmon tree in fruit, *231.

  Pine, Austrian, 64.

  Pine, Jack, 64.

  Pine, Long-leaved or Southern, 63;
    forest, *61;
    young trees, *62.

  Pine on Indian River, *53.

  Pine, Pitch, 64.

  Pine, Red, 59.

  Pine, Scrub, 64.

  Pine, White, *vii, 59; cone, *51.

  Pines of America, 58.

  Pines, The, 49.

  Pines, White, avenue of, *67.

  Plane, Oriental, 213.

  Plane-tree, 213.

  Poplar, Aspen, 121.

  Poplar, Balsam, or Balm of Gilead, 118.

  Poplar, Carolina, 122;
    as street tree, *123;
