Crain's face was sad. "I'm afraid this is the end, Kent. Without
helmets, the space between the _Martian Queen_ and the _Pallas_ is a
greater barrier to us than a mile-thick wall of steel. In this ship
we'll stay, until the air and food give out, and death releases us."

"Damn it, I'm not thinking of myself!" Kent cried. "I'm thinking of
Marta! The _Pallas_ will sail out of here with her in Jandron's power!"

"The girl!" Liggett exclaimed. "If she could bring us over space-helmets
from the _Pallas_ we could get out of here!"

Kent was thoughtful. "If we could talk to her--she must still have that
suit-phone I gave her. Where's another?"

      *      *      *      *      *

Crain quickly detached the compact suit-phone from inside the neck of
his own space-suit, and Kent rapidly tuned it to the one he had given
Marta Mallen. His heart leapt as her voice came instantly from it:

"Rance! Rance Kent--"

"Marta--this is Rance!" he cried.

He heard a sob of relief. "I've been calling you for minutes! I was
hoping that you'd remember to listen!

"Jandron and ten of the others have gone to that wreck in which you
found the fuel," she added swiftly. "They unreeled a tube-line behind
them as they went, and I can hear them pumping in the fuel now."

"Are the others guarding you?" Kent asked quickly.

"They're down in the lower deck at the tanks and airlocks. They won't
allow me down on that deck. I'm up here in the middle-deck, absolutely
alone.

"Jandron told me that we'd start out of here as soon as the fuel was
in," she added, "and he and the men were laughing about Krell."

"Marta, could you in any way get space-helmets and get out to bring them
over here to us?" Kent asked eagerly.

"There's a lot of space-suits and helmets here," she answered, "but I
couldn't get out with them, Rance! I couldn't get to the airlocks with
Jandron's seven or eight men down there guarding them!"

Kent felt despair; then as an idea suddenly flamed in him, he almost
shouted into the instrument:

"Marta, unless you can get over here with helmets for us, we're all
lost. I want you to put on a space-suit and helmet at once!"

      *      *      *      *      *

There was a short silence, and then her voice came, a little muffled.
"I've got the suit and helmet on, Rance. I'm wearing the suit-phone
inside it."

"Good! Now, can you get up to the pilot-house? There's no one guarding
it or the upper-deck? Hurry up there, then, at once."

Crain and the rest were staring at Kent. "Kent, what are you going to
have her do?" Crain exclaimed. "It'll do no good for her to start the
_Pallas_: those guards will be up there in a minute!"

"I'm not going to have her start the _Pallas_," said Kent grimly.
"Marta, you're in the pilot-house? Do you see the heavy little steel
door in the wall beside the instrument-panel?"

"I'm at it, but it's locked with a combination-lock," she said.

"The combination is 6-34-77-81," Kent told her swiftly. "Open it as
quickly as you can."

"Good God, Kent!" cried Crain. "You're going to have her--?"

"Get out of there the only way she can!" Kent finished fiercely. "You
have the door open, Marta?"

"Yes; there are six or seven control-wheels inside."

"Those wheels control the _Pallas'_ exhaust-valves," Kent told her.
"Each wheel opens the valves of one of the ship's decks or compartments
and allows its air to escape into space. They're used for testing leaks
in the different deck and compartment divisions. Marta, you must turn
all those wheels as far as you can to the right."

"But all the ship's air will rush out; the guards below have no suits
on, and they'll be--" she was exclaiming. Kent interrupted.

"It's the only chance for you, for all of us. Turn them!"

There was a moment of silence, and Kent was going to repeat the order
when her voice came, lower in tone, a little strange:

"I understand, Rance. I'm going to turn them."

      *      *      *      *      *

There was silence again, and Kent and the men grouped round him were
tense. All were envisioning the same thing--the air rushing out of the
_Pallas'_ valves, and the unsuspecting guards in its lower deck smitten
suddenly by an instantaneous death.

Then Marta's voice, almost a sob: "I turned them, Rance. The air puffed
out all around me."

"Your space-suit is working all right?"

"Perfectly," she said.

"Then go down and tie together as many space-helmets as you can manage,
get out of the airlock, and try to get over here to the _Martian Queen_
with them. Do you think you can do that, Marta?"

"I'm going to try," she said steadily. "But I'll have to pass those men
in the lower-deck I just--killed. Don't be anxious if I don't talk for a
little."

Yet her voice came again almost immediately. "Rance, the pumping has
stopped! They must have pumped all the fuel into the _Pallas_!"

"Then Jandron and the rest will be coming back to the _Pallas_ at once!"
Kent cried. "Hurry, Marta!"

The suit-phone was silent; and Kent and the rest, their faces closely
pressed against the deck-windows, peered intently along the wreck-pack's
edge. The _Pallas_ was hidden from their view by the wrecks between, and
there was no sign as yet of the girl.

Kent felt his heart beating rapidly. Crain and Liggett pressed beside
him, the men around them; Krell's face was a mask as he too gazed. Kent
was rapidly becoming convinced that some mischance had overtaken the
girl when an exclamation came from Liggett. He pointed excitedly.

      *      *      *      *      *

She was in sight, unrecognizable in space-suit and helmet, floating
along the wreck-pack's edge toward them. A mass of the glassite
space-helmets tied together was in her grasp. She climbed bravely over
the stern of a projecting wreck and shot on toward the _Martian Queen_.

The airlock's door was open for her, and, when she was inside it, the
outer door closed and air hissed into the lock. In a moment she was in
among them, still clinging to the helmets. Kent grasped her swaying
figure and removed her helmet.

"Marta, you're all right?" he cried. She nodded a little weakly.

"I'm all right. It was just that I had to go over those guards that were
all frozen.... Terrible!"

"Get these helmets on!" Crain was crying. "There's a dozen of them, and
twelve of us can stop Jandron's men if we get back in time!"

Kent and Liggett and the nearer of their men were swiftly donning the
helmets. Krell grasped one and Crain sought to snatch it.

