"What is the matter? You are as tense as a--"

"Ah!" cried Ione, springing up. "Tense! Tensors! I have it!"

Phil gazed at her in alarm. She laughed; at first it was a strained
laugh, but gradually it melted into her sunny one.

"No, I'm not crazy. I knew there was a way out, and I've been trying
to reason it out. How simple. You remember the little jolts when you
pulled at the vines and when you kicked the funny animal? Tensors.
Matter and space are so closely interrelated that you can't move
matter in or out of space without causing disturbance, recoils, and
tremors in space. Those bits of matter were small, and produced only a
slight disturbance. It takes about a hundred pounds of lead to swing
this segment--"

"Oho! Got you!" exclaimed Phil. "Not so dumb! The safe!"

"Yes. The safe!" Ione cried.

"Throw it off and watch us swing, eh? What would happen?"

"I might calculate it if I knew the weight of the safe."

"No calculating when I'm around," Phil said. "It couldn't make things
any worse. Try it first and calculate afterwards."

       *       *       *       *       *

They got behind the safe and pushed, and their combined strength
against it was about as effective as it would have been in moving the
Peoples' Gas Building. They sat down again in despair.

"Suppose we _could_ budge it," Ione said. "All we could do would be to
push it around, this piece of matter we are on. That wouldn't help.
We've got to get it out of space. We can't push it hard enough to do
that. It's got to be shot out suddenly--"

"And we haven't got a gun handy," Phil remarked droopingly.

"Not exactly a gun. A sort of sling--"

Phil leaped to his feet.

"A sling. Why! To be sure! The vines!"

Without another word, both of them got up and ran. They hastened in a
direction opposite to the one they had at first taken on their trip of
exploration, and this brought them first past the "space" of the
Tinkertoy-like animals. As they went by, several of these beasts
darted at them, one of them snapping at Ione's heels. She uttered a
scream, causing Phil to turn about and kick right and left among them.
He drove them back and escaped from them, rejoining Ione.

"Wait," he said, when they reached the vines. "Remember those wooden
balls. If I could get a few to throw at those critters--"

In a moment they were off, and finally arrived at the point from which
they first saw the balls. Odd it seemed, how they hung suspended in
space, thousands of them, all sizes. Phil reached out and grasped one
about the size of a baseball and drew it toward himself. He felt a
dizzy lurch and heard Ione scream.

"Let go!" she screamed again.

When he suddenly realized what was going on, he found himself
prostrate on the ground, with Ione across him, her arms about his
knees.

"Do you realize," she panted, disentangling herself, "that you were
pulling yourself out of this space into that one?"

"Thanks!" said Phil. "Never say die. More careful this time, and a
smaller one."

       *       *       *       *       *

He reached out and grasped a ball smaller than a golf-ball, and pulled
carefully, keeping an eye upon Ione. There was resistance to his pull,
but gradually the ball came. It seemed heavy. There was a crack as of
breaking wood, and he fell backward, with a wave of nausea sweeping
strongly over him. He gazed in amazement at a heavy wooden stick that
he held in his hands. The only thing about it that suggested the ball
for which he had reached was its diameter.

"Can't understand it, but appreciate it just the same," he said. He
broke the stick in two, and had two excellent clubs.

"Simple," Ione replied. "The balls are cross-sections of these trees
or sticks which grow in a 'space' at right angles to our own; and we
only see their three-dimensional cross-sections."

"Yes," said Phil. "Cabbages and kings. I'm for you and the party."

A short walk brought them to the "space" of the vines. After testing
the matter out carefully, they found that they could each pull two of
them at a time. The vines stretched amazingly when they found those
whose far ends were fixed firmly in the tangle, permitting them to
carry their own ends along with them toward the safe. Phil wound his
vines around his left arm and stuck one club through his belt. The
other he got ready for the wooden animals.

He needed it. The size of the pack was doubled, and he rapped them
till his hand was numb before he and Ione got by. Their vines drew out
thin, but held until they were firmly tied about the safe. They went
back after four more.

"I should judge," said Phil, "that by the time we get thirty or forty,
the elastic pull will be strong enough to drag the safe back with
them as they snap back home."

       *       *       *       *       *

Trip after trip they made, fighting the wooden animals with their
clubs each time. Their clothes were torn, and their legs bleeding;
their throats were dry and lips cracked. The hard animals seemed to
have a persistent, mechanical ferocity that was undismayed by
hammering with the clubs and by repeated repulses. Phil could not seem
to hurt them; he merely knocked them away. Finally, on the ninth trip,
Ione collapsed when she reached the safe. As she fell, the elasticity
of the vines began slowly to drag her back with them. Phil was forced
to sit across her knees while he tied his own vines about the safe.
Then he released her and added her vines to the great cable about the
safe.

An overbold hard animal rattled up and snapped at her. Goaded to fury,
Phil swung at it with his club and hurled it through the air. He could
feel the lurch as it left his space and entered another. Then he
pushed with his mightiest effort against the safe. It budged, and slid
a few inches. He used his stick as a lever. It moved again, a little
faster. Ione struggled to her feet and tried to help, but her efforts
were ineffectual.

With one arm about her, Phil pried again under the safe, knowing that
another trip after vines was out of question. Another animal snapped
at their heels. For a while, it was kick backwards, then a shove at
the safe. Each time the safe moved. The sight of its movement revived
Ione, so that she was able to push also. Gradually it acquired a
steady motion, pulled by the contraction of the vines; its progress
soon became faster and faster. Phil was about to follow it and give it
another push, when Ione drew him back.

Suddenly they experienced a sinking sensation and a fearful vertigo.
The snapping animals faded. Ahead of them was the forest of vines, and
they saw the safe hurled into it, crashing, plunging into the tangled
mass. The whole view crumpled and moved upwards like a swirl of leaves
in a wind, and then vanished with a snap.

       *       *       *       *       *

They were sick and dizzy, but tremendously curious to see everything.
