and power? Could they compensate for one hour of life and love as
humanity lived it? So I brooded. Then one day in the temple I looked
into the face of a girl about to be bled and recognized Ah-eeda. In
that moment, hatred of the fiends posing as gods and draining the
vitality of deluded worshippers, crystallized and drove me to action.
So it was I who denounced the Heads, aroused the people!" Spiro's
voice broke; died. Miles and Ward stared at him, horrified; and after
a while Miles exclaimed, "We never suspected! We would never have
fought to maintain such a thing had we known!"

"Nonetheless," said Spiro inflexibly, "you fought for it, and many
people died and more are afraid. Superstition is a hard thing to kill.
Already there are those who murmur that truly the Heads are gods and
have called up demons from the underworld, as they threatened they
would, to smite them with thunder until once more they yield blood in
the temple. But I know that without blood the Heads must die
miserably and the people be freed from their vampire existence. It is
true that I too shall die, but that is nothing. I die gladly.
Therefore, to keep the people from sacrificing blood, to show them
that you are mortal and the Heads powerless to save the demons they
have raised, you must be slain in front of the great palace.

"Yes; you, too, must die for the people!"

       *       *       *       *       *

Bound and helpless, lying on their backs and staring into the gloom of
the small chamber into which they had been thrown, Miles and Ward had
time to ponder their desperate situation. Spiro was delaying their
death until the workers of Apex would have time to gather and witness
it. At first they had struggled to loosen their bonds, but such
efforts served only to tighten them. Then they had tried the trick of
rolling together so that the fingers of one might endeavor to undo the
knots securing the other. On a memorable occasion in Turkey they had
freed themselves in this manner. But the attempts proved fruitless
now. The floor of the chamber was smooth, nor could they find any
rough projection on which to saw the cords.

Exhausted, they finally desisted. The same thought was in both minds:
Were they doomed to die in this strange world, fated never to see
Earth again? Well, a soldier of fortune must expect to meet with
reverses. Still, it was a tough break. After a long silence Ward said,
"How were we to know that the heads lived on the blood of the people?"

"Would it have made any difference if we had known?" asked Miles.

"Perhaps not." Ward tried to shrug his shoulders. "After all, we have
fought to maintain systems not much better. There is little
difference, save in degree, between draining the life-blood of a race
and robbing it of the fruits of its labor."

"But sometimes we fought to liberate people," protested Miles.

"Yes, I like to think of that. It's good to have something to our
credit when we cash in. And it looks," he said pessimistically, "as if
our time to do so has come."

       *       *       *       *       *

They ceased talking. Time passed cheerlessly. Finally both of them
fell into a heavy slumber from which they were aroused by the sudden
flashing in their eyes of a bright light, bright only in comparison
with the former intense darkness. "What's that!" cried Ward, startled.

"S-sh," said a soft voice warningly, and when their eyes became
accustomed to the illumination, they were amazed to perceive the
slender form of a young girl carrying a torch. She was marvelously
lovely to look at, with her blue-black hair brushed straight back from
a low, broad forehead and her smooth skin as dark as that of an
Egyptian. Nor was she dressed unlike pictures Miles had seen of people
of ancient Egypt. The embroidered plates covering the small breasts
shone and glittered; bracelets and bangles flashed on bare arms and
shapely ankles; while from the waist to below the knees was a skirt of
rich material. On the small feet were sandals of intricate design.
Besides the torch, the girl carried a slim, gleaming knife, and for a
moment the adventurers were guilty of imagining she had come to slay
them where they lay. But her manner quickly dispelled their fear.
Sinking on her knees beside them, she said, "Do not be afraid; Ah-eeda
will not harm you."

       *       *       *       *       *

So this was Ah-eeda, the girl of whom Spiro had spoken. Miles and Ward
devoured her loveliness with their eyes; her coming flooded their
bosoms with renewed hope. She continued speaking. Her English was not
at all fluent, and she was often compelled to make it clear with
expressions in her own tongue and with explanatory gestures. But to
Miles and Ward, who knew nothing of temple training, her speaking
English at all was a miracle.

"Is it true that you are men from another world?"

"Yes."

"And you came to make the people give their blood to the Heads?"

"No, that is not true. We were in ignorance of what it was we fought
for. Had we known the truth we would have refused to fight for the
Heads."

"Then, if I were to set you free, you would go back to your own world
and not fight my people any more?"

They nodded vigorously.

"Oh, I am so glad," exclaimed the girl; "I did not want to see you
die!" She looked at Miles as she spoke. "I saw you before Spiro this
afternoon. Poor Spiro!" she murmured as she cut their bonds. It was
some time before circulation was restored to their limbs. Miles asked
anxiously, "How many guards are there at the door?"

"Twelve," said the girl; "but they are playing wong-wo in the room
outside and drinking soola." She pantomimed her meaning. "I came here
through a secret passage beyond," she indicated by a wave of her hand.
"Now that you can walk, let us hurry." Shyly she took Miles' hand. The
warm clasp of her fingers made the blood course faster in his veins.

Through a long passage they glided to another room. There were several
confusing turns and dark hallways, and twice they had to cower in
shadowy corners while Ah-eeda boldly advanced and held converse with
occasional persons encountered, though for the most part the way was
silent and deserted. At last they came to a low door opening on a
narrow street and the girl put out her torch.

"To return to our own world we must first reach the Palace of the
Heads," said Ward. The girl nodded. "I will guide you there. But we
must hurry: the workers will soon be gathered."

       *       *       *       *       *

Never were Miles and Ward to forget that breathless flight. The girl
led them through narrow and devious byways over which dark buildings
leaned, evidently avoiding the more direct and open thoroughfares. It
seemed as if they were to escape without hindrance when, suddenly, out
of a dimly lighted doorway, lurched the gigantic figure of a green man
carrying a flare. This flare threw the figures of the fugitives into
relief.

"Ho!" roared the green man, and came at them like a furious bull. It
seemed characteristic of his kind to attack without parley. The torch
dropped as he came. There was no resisting that mighty bulk. Unarmed,
and with scant room to move backward, the two Americans went down; and
that would have been the end of the battle if Ah-eeda, who had shrunk
to one side out of the way of the combatants, had not snatched up the
still flaming torch and held it against the naked back of the greenish
giant. With a scream of anguish the latter ceased throttling the
Americans, clapped his hands to his scorched back and rolled clear of
them.

Instantly they staggered to their feet and fled down the roadway after
