him quickly toward the rear bulkhead as the ship seemed to go into a
smooth glide which could be felt within it. Vardin stood alongside
Ramsey, a hand to her mouth in horror. Ramsey got up slowly.

"Stay where you are!" Margot cried, pointing the m.g. gun at him. "I'll
kill you if I have to. I'll kill you, Ramsey, I mean it."

Ramsey did not move.

       *       *       *       *       *

"So you knew about my father," Margot challenged him.

"Yeah. So what?"

"And this shoal in hyper-space is a world, isn't it?"

Ramsey nodded. "I think so."

"O.K. Sit down at the controls, Ramsey. That's right. Don't try
anything."

Ramsey was seated in the pilot chair again. His head was still whirling
but his strength had returned. He wondered if he could chance rushing
her but told himself she meant what she said. She would kill him in cold
blood if she had to.

"Bring the _Enterprise_ down on that world, Ramsey."

He sat there and stubbornly shook his head. "Margot, you'll be meddling
with a power beyond human understanding."

"Rubbish! You read my father's letter, didn't you? That fear's been
implanted in your genes. It's part of the heredity of our people. It's
rubbish. Bring the ship down."

Still Ramsey did not move. Vardin looked from him to Margot Dennison and
back again with horror in her eyes.

"I'll count three," Margot said. "Then I'll shoot the Vegan girl. Do you
understand?"

Ramsey's face went white.

"One," Margot said.

Vardin stared at him beseechingly.

Ramsey said: "All right, Margot. All right."

Five minutes later, subjective time, the _Enterprise_ landed with a
lurch.

That they had reached a world in hyper-space there could be no doubt.
But outside the portholes of the little freighter was only the murky
grayness of the timeless hyper-space continuum.

       *       *       *       *       *

"They've gone down, sir!" Ramar Chind cried.

Garr Symm nodded. For the first time he was really nervous. He wondered
about the Dennison letter. Could his fear be attributed to ancestral
memory, as Dennison had indicated? Was it really baseless--this
crawling, cold-fingered hand of fear on his spine?

There was no physical barrier. The _Enterprise_ had established that
fact. Then was there a barrier which Garr Symm, along with all
humanoids, had somehow inherited?

A barrier of stark terror, subjective and unfounded on fact?

And beyond it--what?

Power to chain the universe....

Think, Garr Symm told himself. You've got to be rational. You're a
scientist. You've been trained as a scientist. This is their barrier,
erected against you, against all humanoids, a million years ago. It
isn't real. It's all in your mind.

"Do you want me to follow them down?" Ramar Chind asked.

Garr Symm envied the policeman. Naturally, Ramar Chind did not share his
terror. You didn't know the terror until you learned about proto-man;
then the response seemed to be triggered in your brain, as if it had
been passed to you through the genes of your ancestors, waiting a
million years for release....

Fear, a guardian.

Of what? Garr Symm asked himself. Think of that, fool. Think of what it
guards.

Power--

Teleportation or its equivalent.

Gone the subjective passage of hours in hyper-space.

Earned--if you were strong enough or brave enough to earn it--the
ability to travel instantly from one humanoid world to another.
Instantly. Perhaps from any one point on any humanoid world to any one
point, precise, specific, exact, on another world.

To plunder.

Or assassinate.

Or control the lives of men, everywhere.

_Sans_ ship.

_Sans_ fear.

_Sans_ the possibility of being caught or stopped.

Sweating, Garr Symm said: "Bring the _Dog Star_ down after them, Ramar
Chind."

       *       *       *       *       *

Ramsey smiled without humor. "What now, little lady?" he said mockingly.

"Shut up. Oh, shut up!"

"What are you going to do now?"

"I told you to shut up. I have to think."

"I didn't know a gorgeous tri-di actress ever had to think."

"Let me see those figures again," Margot said.

Ramsey handed her the tapes from the _Enterprise's_ environment-checker.

Temperature: minus two hundred and twenty degrees Fahrenheit.

Atmosphere: none.

Gravity: eight-tenths Earth-norm.

"And we don't have a spacesuit aboard," Ramsey said.

"But it can't be. It can't. This is the home of proto-man. I know it is.
But if I went out there I'd perish from cold in seconds and lack of air
in minutes."

"That's right," Ramsey said almost cheerfully. "So do I take the ship
back up?"

"I hate you, Jason Ramsey. Oh, I hate you!" Margot cried. Then suddenly:
"Wait! Wait a minute! What was that you were thinking? Tell me! You must
tell me--"

Ramsey shook his head and tried to force the thoughts from his mind with
doggerel. Ben Adam, he thought. Abou Ben Adam, Humpty Dumpty, hurry,
hurry, hurry, the only two headed get yours here the sum of the square
of the sides is equal to the square of the hyper-space, no, mustn't
think that mimsy were the borogroves and the momraths now what the heck
did the momraths do anyhow absolute zero is the temperature at which
all molecular activity....

"What were you thinking, Ramsey?"

His mind was a labyrinth. There were thousands of discrete thoughts, of
course. Millions of them, collected over a lifetime. But all at once he
did not know his way through that labyrinth and his thoughts kept
whirling back to the one Margot Dennison wanted as if, somehow, she
could pluck it from his mind.

She stood before him, her brow furrowed, sweat beading her pretty face.

And she was winning, forcing the thought to take shape in Ramsey's
mind--

_But if I went out there I'd perish from cold in seconds and lack of air
in minutes._

_Cold_, came the known and unbidden thoughts to Ramsey's struggling
mind. _And lack of air. Attributes of extension, of space_, but measured
by duration, by time. _And since time does not exist in hyper-space, the
vacuum out there and the terrible, killing cold, could have no effect on
you. You could go out there perfectly protected from the lethal
environment by the absence of the time dimension._

Margot smiled at him. "Thank you," she said. "Thank you, Ramsey."

He was about to speak, but she added: "And don't give me that stuff
about a power we shouldn't tamper with. I'm going out there. Now."

Ramsey nodded slowly. "I won't stop you."

"But just so you don't get any ideas of stranding me here--Vardin.
Vardin's going with me."

The Vegan girl looked at Ramsey mutely.

       *       *       *       *       *

Ramsey said: "What makes you think I'll let you take her?"

Margot smiled again. "The m.g. gun makes me think so."

"The heck of it is, you're not really bad, Margot. This thing's got you,
is all. You're not essentially evil."

"Thank you for the thrilling compliment. I'm delighted," Margot said
sarcastically.

"Vardin stays with me."

Margot reminded him of the lethal m.g. gun by showing it to him,
muzzle-first.

He laughed in her face. "Go ahead and shoot."

She stared at him.

"There isn't a lethal weapon'd do you any good here in a timeless
continuum. Take an m.g. gun. It induces an artificial breakdown of
radioactive fuel in its chamber, firing an instantly lethal dose of
radiation. But in order for radioactive breakdown to occur, time must
pass. Even if it's only milliseconds, as in the case of an m.g. gun.
There aren't any milliseconds on this world, Margot. There isn't any
time. So go ahead and pull the trigger."

Margot frowned and pointed the gun to one side and fired.

Nothing happened. Margot almost looked as if her hard shell had been
sundered by the impotence of the m.g. gun. She pouted. Her eyes gleamed
moistly.

Then Ramsey said: "O.K. Let's go."

"What--what do you mean?"

"Out there. All of us."

"But I thought you said--"

"Sure, I'm scared stiff. A normal man would be. It's in our genes,
according to your father. But I'm also a man. What the devil d'you think
