calculations on the eternal question of his Aurora--_la belle Aurore_,
whom I begin to hate. Instead of anchoring--I had set out the
guide-light above our roof, so he had but to descend and fasten the
plane--he wandered, profoundly distracted, above the town with his
anchor down! Figure to yourself, dear mother, it is the roof of the
mayor's house that the grapnel first engages! That I do not regret, for
the mayor's wife and I are not sympathetic; but when Xavier uproots my
pet araucaria and bears it across the garden into the conservatory I
protest at the top of my voice. Little Victor in his night-clothes runs
to the window, enormously amused at the parabolic flight without reason,
for it is too dark to see the grapnel, of my prized tree. The Mayor of
Meudon thunders at our door in the name of the Law, demanding, I
suppose, my husband's head. Here is the conversation through the
megaphone--Xavier is two hundred feet above us.

"'Mons. Lavalle, descend and make reparation for outrage of domicile.
Descend, Mons. Lavalle!'

"No one answers.

"'Xavier Lavalle, in the name of the Law, descend and submit to process
for outrage of domicile.'

"Xavier, roused from his calculations, only comprehending the last
words: 'Outrage of domicile? My dear mayor, who is the man that has
corrupted thy Julie?'

"The mayor, furious, 'Xavier Lavalle----'

"Xavier, interrupting: 'I have not that felicity. I am only a dealer in
cyclones!'

"My faith, he raised one then! All Meudon attended in the streets, and
my Xavier, after a long time comprehending what he had done, excused
himself in a thousand apologies. At last the reconciliation was effected
in our house over a supper at two in the morning--Julie in a wonderful
costume of compromises, and I have her and the mayor pacified in beds in
the blue room."

And on the next day, while the mayor rebuilds his roof, her Xavier
departs anew for the Aurora Borealis, there to commence his life's
work. M. Victor Lavalle tells us of that historic collision (_en plane_)
on the flank of Hecla between Herrera, then a pillar of the Spanish
school, and the man destined to confute his theories and lead him
intellectually captive. Even through the years, the immense laugh of
Lavalle as he sustains the Spaniard's wrecked plane, and cries:
"Courage! _I_ shall not fall till I have found Truth, and I hold _you_
fast!" rings like the call of trumpets. This is that Lavalle whom the
world, immersed in speculations of immediate gain, did not know nor
suspect--the Lavalle whom they adjudged to the last a pedant and a
theorist.

The human, as apart from the scientific, side (developed in his own
volumes) of his epoch-making discoveries is marked with a simplicity,
clarity, and good sense beyond praise. I would specially refer such as
doubt the sustaining influence of ancestral faith upon character and
will to the eleventh and nineteenth chapters, in which are contained the
opening and consummation of the Tellurionical Records extending over
nine years. Of their tremendous significance be sure that the modest
house at Meudon knew as little as that the Records would one day be the
world's standard in all official meteorology. It was enough for them
that their Xavier--this son, this father, this husband--ascended
periodically to commune with powers, it might be angelic, beyond their
comprehension, and that they united daily in prayers for his safety.

"Pray for me," he says upon the eve of each of his excursions, and
returning, with an equal simplicity, he renders thanks "after supper in
the little room where he kept his barometers."

To the last Lavalle was a Catholic of the old school, accepting--he who
had looked into the very heart of the lightnings--the dogmas of papal
infallibility, of absolution, of confession--of relics great and small.
Marvellous--enviable contradiction!

The completion of the Tellurionical Records closed what Lavalle himself
was pleased to call the theoretical side of his labours--labours from
which the youngest and least impressionable planeur might well have
shrunk. He had traced through cold and heat, across the deeps of the
oceans, with instruments of his own invention, over the inhospitable
heart of the polar ice and the sterile visage of the deserts, league by
league, patiently, unweariedly, remorselessly, from their ever-shifting
cradle under the magnetic pole to their exalted death-bed in the utmost
ether of the upper atmosphere--each one of the Isoconical
Tellurions--Lavalle's Curves, as we call them to-day. He had
disentangled the nodes of their intersections, assigning to each its
regulated period of flux and reflux. Thus equipped, he summons Herrera
and Tinsley, his pupils, to the final demonstration as calmly as though
he were ordering his flighter for some midday journey to Marseilles.

"I have proved my thesis," he writes. "It remains now only that you
should witness the proof. We go to Manila to-morrow. A cyclone will form
off the Pescadores S. 17 E. in four days, and will reach its maximum
intensity in twenty-seven hours after inception. It is there I will show
you the Truth."

A letter heretofore unpublished from Herrera to Madame Lavalle tells us
how the Master's prophecy was verified.

   (_To be continued_.)




ADVERTISING SECTION




MISCELLANEOUS


WANTS

Required immediately, for East Africa, a thoroughly competent Plane and
Dirigible Driver, acquainted with Petrol Radium and Helium motors and
generators. Low-level work only, but must understand heavy-weight digs.

   MOSSAMEDES TRANSPORT ASSOC.
   84 Palestine Buildings, E. C.

       *       *       *       *       *

Man wanted--Dig driver for Southern Alps with Saharan summer trips. High
levels, high speed, high wages.

   Apply M. SIDNEY
   Hotel San Stefano. Monte Carlo

       *       *       *       *       *

Family dirigible. A competent, steady man wanted for slow speed, low
level Tangye dirigible. No night work, no sea trips. Must be member of
the Church of England, and make himself useful in the garden.

   M. R.,
   The Rectory, Gray's Barton, Wilts.

       *       *       *       *       *

Commercial dig, central and Southern Europe. A smart, active man for a
L. M. T. Dig. Night work only. Headquarters London and Cairo. A linguist
preferred.

   BAGMAN
   Charing Cross Hotel, W. C. (urgent.)

       *       *       *       *       *

For sale--A bargain--Single Plane, narrow-gauge vans, Pinke motor.
Restayed this autumn. Hansen air-kit. 38 in. chest, 15-1/2 collar. Can
be seen by appointment.

   N. 2650. This office.


=The Bee-Line Bookshop=

BELT'S WAY-BOOKS, giving town lights for all towns over 4,000 pop. as
laid down by A. B. C.

THE WORLD. Complete 2 vols. Thin Oxford, limp back. 12s. 6d.

BELT'S COASTAL ITINERARY. Shore Lights of the World. 7s. 6d.

THE TRANSATLANTIC AND MEDITERRANEAN TRAFFIC LINES. (By authority of the
A. B. C.) Paper, 1s. 6d.; cloth, 2s. 6d. Ready Jan. 15.

ARCTIC AEROPLANING. Siemens and Galt. Cloth, bds. 3s. 6d.

LAVALLE'S HEART OF THE CYCLONE, with supplementary charts. 4s. 6d.

RIMINGTON'S PITFALLS IN THE AIR, and Table of Comparative Densities. 3s.
6d.

ANGELO'S DESERT IN A DIRIGIBLE. New edition, revised. 5s. 9d.

VAUGHAN'S PLANE RACING IN CALM AND STORM. 2s. 6d.

VAUGHAN'S HINTS TO THE AIR-MATEUR. 1s.

HOFMAN'S LAWS OF LIFT AND VELOCITY. With diagrams, 3s. 6d.

DE VITRE'S THEORY OF SHIFTING BALLAST IN DIRIGIBLES. 2s. 6d.

SANGER'S WEATHERS OF THE WORLD. 4s.

SANGER'S TEMPERATURES AT HIGH ALTITUDES. 4s.

HAWKIN'S FOG AND HOW TO AVOID IT. 3s.

VAN ZUYLAN'S SECONDARY EFFECTS OF THUNDERSTORMS. 4s. 6d.

DAHLGREN'S AIR CURRENTS AND EPIDEMIC DISEASES. 5s. 6d.

REDMAYNE'S DISEASE AND THE BAROMETER. 7s. 6d.

WALTON'S HEALTH RESORTS OF THE GOBI AND SHAMO. 3s. 6d.

WALTON'S THE POLE AND PULMONARY COMPLAINTS. 7s. 6d.

MUTLOW'S HIGH LEVEL BACTERIOLOGY 7s. 6d.

HALLIWELL'S ILLUMINATED STAR MAP, with clockwork attachment, giving
apparent motion of heavens, boxed, complete with clamps for binnacle. 36
inch size, only L2. 2. 0. (Invaluable for night work.) With A. B. C.
certificate, L3. 10s. 0d.

Zalinski's Standard Works.

     PASSES OF THE HIMALAYAS. 5s.

     PASSES OF THE SIERRAS. 5s.

     PASSES OF THE ROCKIES. 5s.

     PASSES OF THE URALS. 5s.

     The four boxed, limp cloth, with charts, 15s.

GRAY'S AIR CURRENTS IN MOUNTAIN GORGES. 7s. 6d.

=A. C. BELT & SON, READING=




SAFETY WEAR FOR AERONAUTS


   Flickers!    Flickers!    Flickers!

   =High Level Flickers=

   "_He that is down need fear no fall_"
   _Fear not! You will fall lightly as down!_

Hansen's air-kits are down in all respects. Tremendous reductions in
prices previous to winter stocking. Pure para kit with cellulose seat
and shoulder-pads, weighted to balance. Unequalled for all drop-work.
