blocks from which the steel framework sprang were hidden in a black
pall. Fighters, these three, true ITA men who had left memories of
their battle-prowess on more than one wild planet! Gaunt-bodied
demi-gods of war, they hurled crackling bolts of destruction from
their perch at the Dome top. By hundreds, by thousands, the Mercurian
pigmies vanished in dark vapor, or plunged, blackened corpses, into
the fog that billowed below.

One by one the tubes were discharged and tossed down at the seething
mob. The heaped weapons dwindled, and still the climbing hordes
renewed themselves, came on in endless mounting streams to sure
destruction. The open tunnel vomited forth a torrent of gibbering
dwarfs. From the uttermost burrows of the planet the pigmies were
flooding in at the call of the Martian who stood scatheless beneath
and lashed them on with the strange dominance he held over them. The
Earthmen fought on, endlessly, till they were sick of killing,
nauseated with slaughter. And still the snouted, red-eyed imps came
on.

       *       *       *       *       *

Jim snatched up his last two ray-guns. Out of the corner of his eye he
noted that Darl was using but one, the other, his last, was thrust
into the chief's belt. He wondered at this, but a new spurt of yellow
above the oily fog wiped the question from his lips. "Swallow that,
you filthy lice! Hope you like the way it tastes!" His guns spouted
death.

"I'm through!" The call came at last from McDermott. "Me too!" Jim
Holcomb hurled his final, futile tubes down at the blue figure of the
Mars man. A moment's hush held the trio. Then Jim flexed his great
hands. "Well, these'll take care of a couple more o' them before I
check in."

"No you don't," Darl barked, his face a graven image. "Inside with
you. The lock will hold 'em off."

"Yeah? Look."

Thomas swung in the direction Jim was pointing. Rising above the murk,
something glinted in the pale light. On the furthest upright a clumped
group of climbing savages were struggling to drag up one of the
welding machines, a long black hose snaking from its cylindrical bulk.

"They'll cut through the steel in fifteen minutes with that. The
bloody bugger ain't missin' a trick."

"Inside, I tell you." Darl's crisp tone of command brooked no denial.
The three crowded into the cool recesses of the manmade aerie. Angus
slammed the steel door shut. Even if by some miracle the Dome wall
should be pierced and the air in the main vault dissipated into outer
space, this air-tight compartment hung from the hemisphere's roof
would remain, a last refuge, till the atmosphere within had become
poisonous through the Earthmen's slow breathing. But the Martian had
anticipated Darl's final move. The oxy-hydrogen jet of the welding
machine the dwarfs were hoisting would make short work of their final
defense.

       *       *       *       *       *

From the conning-tower above Ran-los called excitedly. Through all the
long battle the Venusian had remained steadfast at the peri-telescope,
scanning the vacant terrain outside, and the heavens. As Darl and Jim
dashed for the stairs Mac ran after them, crying out, "What did he say,
mon?"

"Space ship in sight," Darl flung over his shoulder as he reached the
upper landing.

"Praise be! Noo the haythan weel get his desairts!"

"Yeah, maybe--if it's an Earth ship. But we won't be here to see it."

Jim's red head was bending over the peri-telescope view-screen. "She's
still thirty thousand miles away. Give her a speed of fifteen per
second--she'll have to slow up to land, can't make it under forty-five
minutes. By then we'll be in little pieces. It took me ten minutes to
burn through the barrier when I rescued Darl, and it won't take the
Mercs any longer to get at us."

Darl was very sober as he looked on with narrowed eyes. Against a
background of velvet black, gold spangled, the slim space-traveler
showed. The sun's rays caught her, and she was a tiny silver fish in
the boundless void.

"Luik ye, mon, luik ye!" Angus, fairly dancing with excitement,
elbowed Darl aside. "She's from Airth, richt enow!" At the nose of the
oncoming flier a rapid succession of colored lights had flashed, the
recognition signal that should give her safe access to the Dome. Again
there was a coruscation of coded flashes. "She's a battle cruiser,
what's mair!" the Scot exclaimed.

       *       *       *       *       *

Darl sprang to the keyboard that manipulated the signal lights from
the Dome's roof. "No use," he said, after a short while. "The Martian
has cut off the current from the dynamos. I can't warn the ship." He
made a hopeless gesture.

Jim looked at him wonderingly. "Warn 'em? What for? Even if we are all
dead when she reaches here, at least she'll clean up the Mercs, and
retake the Dome for Earth."

"Don't you see it? When the Mars man has once blasted his way in here
and disposed of us, he'll be ready for the space ship. Her captain
can't suspect anything wrong. He must have left Earth at the time of
the ultimatum, and would easily get here before any ship could be sent
out from Mars. He'll come on till he's within range of the
beam-thrower, and the Martian will aim, press the trigger and the
Earth ship and her crew of a half a thousand brave lads will be
star-dust."

"Oh God!" Jim was white-faced. "Isn't there anything we can do? Maybe
if he doesn't get our all-clear signal he'll sheer off." This was
clutching at straws.

"Why should he? He must know how short-handed we are, and will simply
think we're not on watch, or that our signal lights are out of order.
Matter of fact, if he were at all suspicious he should be alternating
his course right now--and he hasn't. Look."

Seemingly motionless, but really splitting the ether with terrific
speed, the warship was coming straight on to garrison the beleaguered
post. She had never wavered from her straight course for the Dome. The
little group was silent, watching the help that was coming at last,
coming too late.

       *       *       *       *       *

From below there came a thunder of sound. Jim slid down the stairs. An
irregular disk on the wall was glowing cherry-red from the heat of the
blow-torch without, and the metal was quivering under the Mercurian's
sledge-hammer blows. "Darl's right," he almost sobbed as he gazed
helplessly. "They'll be through in no time. The Dome's gone, we're
gone, the space ship's gone!"

"Let me pass, Jim." Thomas' quiet voice sounded behind him. Holcomb
turned. His leader was in a space suit, the helmet still unfastened.

"Blazes! Where the devil are you going?"

"Here, cover me with this till I reach the gyrocopter, then get back
quick, and seal the air-lock." Darl thrust into Jim's hand the ray-gun
