doc fixed the side of my head, everyone cleared out. Ned mopped up the
floor. I ate ten aspirin and waited for the hammering to stop so I could
think what to do next.

       *       *       *       *       *

When I pulled my thoughts together the answer was obvious. Too obvious.
I made as long a job as I could of reloading my gun.

"Refill your handcuff box, Ned. We are going out."

Like a good cop he asked no questions. I locked the outside door when we
left and gave him the key.

"Here. There's a good chance you will be the only one left to use this
before the day is over."

I stretched the drive over to China Joe's place just as much as I could.
Trying to figure if there was another way of doing it. There wasn't.
Murder had been done and Joe was the boy I was going to pin it on. So I
had to get him.

The best I could do was stop around the corner and give Ned a briefing.

"This combination bar and dice-room is the sole property of he whom we
will still call China Joe until there is time for you to give me a
rundown on him. Right now I got enough distractions. What we have to do
is go in there, find Joe and bring him to justice. Simple?"

"Simple," Ned answered in his sharp Joe-college voice. "But wouldn't it
be simpler to make the arrest now, when he is leaving in that car,
instead of waiting until he returns?"

The car in mention was doing sixty as it came out of the alley ahead of
us. I only had a glimpse of Joe in the back seat as it tore by us.

"Stop them!" I shouted, mostly for my own benefit since I was driving. I
tried to shift gears and start the engine at the same time, and
succeeded in doing exactly nothing.

So Ned stopped them. It had been phrased as an order. He leaned his head
out of the window and I saw at once why most of his equipment was
located in his torso. Probably his brain as well. There sure wasn't much
room left in his head when that cannon was tucked away in there.

A .75 recoilless. A plate swiveled back right where his nose should have
been if he had one, and the big muzzle pointed out. It's a neat idea
when you think about it. Right between the eyes for good aiming, up
high, always ready.

The BOOM BOOM almost took my head off. Of course Ned was a perfect
shot--so would I be with a computer for a brain. He had holed one rear
tire with each slug and the car flap-flapped to a stop a little ways
down the road. I climbed out slowly while Ned sprinted there in seconds
flat. They didn't even try to run this time. What little nerve they had
left must have been shattered by the smoking muzzle of that .75 poking
out from between Ned's eyes. Robots are neat about things like that so
he must have left it sticking out deliberate. Probably had a course in
psychology back in robot school.

Three of them in the car, all waving their hands in the air like the
last reel of a western. And the rear floor covered with interesting
little suitcases.

Everyone came along quietly.

China Joe only snarled while Ned told me that his name really was
Stantin and the Elmira hot seat was kept warm all the time in hopes he
would be back. I promised Joe-Stantin I would be happy to arrange it
that same day. Thereby not worrying about any slip-ups with the local
authorities. The rest of the mob would stand trial in Canal City.

It was a very busy day.

Things have quieted down a good deal since then. Billy is out of the
hospital and wearing my old sergeant's stripes. Even Fats is back,
though he is sober once in a while now and has trouble looking me in the
eye. We don't have much to do because in addition to being a quiet town
this is now an honest one.

Ned is on foot patrol nights and in charge of the lab and files days.
Maybe the Policeman's Benevolent wouldn't like that, but Ned doesn't
seem to mind. He touched up all the bullet scratches and keeps his badge
polished. I know a robot can't be happy or sad--but Ned _seems_ to be
happy.

Sometimes I would swear I can hear him humming to himself. But, of
course, that is only the motors and things going around.

When you start thinking about it, I suppose we set some kind of
precedent here. What with putting on a robot as a full-fledged police
officer. No one ever came around from the factory yet, so I have never
found out if we're the first or not.

And I'll tell you something else. I'm not going to stay in this
broken-down town forever. I have some letters out now, looking for a new
job.

So some people are going to be _very_ surprised when they see who their
new Chief of Police is after _I_ leave.




Transcriber's Note:

    This etext was produced from _Fantastic Universe_ August 1958.
    Extensive research did not uncover any evidence that the U.S.
    copyright on this publication was renewed. Minor spelling and
    typographical errors have been corrected without note.





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Arm of the Law, by Harry Harrison

