on the matter after the summer has passed. The intent of this chapter is
to give a brief account of something he saw at Dr. Brinkley's hospital
during the week of his treatment.

Two weeks before his arrival a man suffering from locomotor ataxia had
been carried in, unable to help himself at all. When the writer saw this
man and talked with him he was up and dressed and walking about, without
a cane, and he left for home after a total stay of something less than
three weeks. In parting from him the doctor said, "You are on the
high-road to complete recovery. I expect to hear that you are getting
stronger every day. Practice in walking will bring back to you the old
confidence and banish the helpless feeling that you are sure to fall.
You see that you can control the motions of your feet and legs now as
you could not before. Sensation has returned to the soles of your feet,
and you can now turn yourself over in bed, which you could not do before
without assistance. This means that the brain, spinal cord, muscles and
will are co-ordinating again. This means that the goat-glands are
actively working, dissolving scar-tissue, and bringing you back to
health. But it is asking a good deal of a pair of goat-glands to do as
much as they must do in your case to bring about complete recovery.
I would rather give them some extra assistance. If you will come back to
me, therefore, next Fall, to this hospital, I will put two new
goat-glands into you; and I believe that with this extra help you will
go right through to a complete cure without any trouble. The operation
will not cost you a cent. I am anxious only to complete the good work.
I may be wrong at that, and it is possible that the glands you have now
will be enough to do the work, but if they do not, come back here for
two more next Fall. Don't forget."

This man had been everywhere for relief, and had taken every treatment
known for his disease, with no results whatever, as he told the writer.
"This is the first time for twelve years," he said, "that I have had any
feeling in my feet. I am surely going to get well at last."

In another case of the same disease the patient, when he came to the
hospital, was taking morphine daily to relieve the lightning-pains. He
could not stand upright with his eyes shut without falling, and if
spoken to suddenly was likely to lose his balance and fall. He had not
walked without a cane for several years. Twenty-four hours after the
goat-gland operation he said that the pains had left him, and
voluntarily stopped the morphine. In two weeks he was walking five miles
before breakfast, without a cane to help him. He left the hospital a
cured man. There has never been a case of true locomotor ataxia cured by
any means whatever, in the history of man, until this Kansas surgeon,
Dr. Brinkley, found the cure for it in this transplantation of
goat-glands. Ataxia is an after-math of syphilis, in ninety-nine cases
out of a hundred, and it is a question, which no layman can solve,
whether the cause of the ataxia is in the disease, or in the mercurial
treatment used to combat the disease. Another age, following this, may
decide that the disease, syphilis, is less destructive of human tissue
than the cure, Mercury. However that may be, the fact remains that
goat-glands will cure Locomotor Ataxia, and they are apparently the only
means of cure hitherto discovered.

The writer talked with some of the townspeople of Milford regarding Dr.
Brinkley's work. Their attitude was detached, but on the whole
affirmative. They could not, as they put it, doubt their own eyesight,
implying that they would do so if they could. They had seen case after
case carried into the hospital, and they had seen those same people walk
out and go their way to their homes. It was queer, they said, and wagged
a critical head. So true is it in all parts of the earth that a prophet
hath honor save in his own country! Here and there, however, the writer
found a townsman who had nothing but words of praise and admiration for
Dr. Brinkley's work. These always proved to be people who had had some
relative under Dr. Brinkley's care at the hospital, and they were
intelligent men who could give their reasons for their conclusions. They
were proud of the lustre which Dr. Brinkley's Goat-Gland work was
shedding upon the name of their village. Most of the townspeople,
however, seemed to think that Dr. Brinkley should be proud of the town.
Their engaging surliness of demeanor with regard to the miracles being
performed in their village was a fascinating study to a city man, who
saw here at its best the typical small-town attitude towards the big
local thing. It is not peculiar to Milford. It is universal. It is as
true in England and France and Belgium and Germany as in any little town
in the United States. What do you suppose the country villagers thought
of Fabre, the great French naturalist, probably to be hailed by the next
generation as the greatest figure since Darwin? Without doubt they
thought him mad, and if kindly, pitied him, or if savage, despised him.
Meanwhile it is quite certain that the work of Dr. Brinkley has put the
town of Milford, Kansas, on the map, and, if you do not find it on the
railroad map you may some day consult, it will help a little to say here
that you go from Kansas City, Missouri, by the Union Pacific Railroad to
Junction City, Kansas, and from that point change to a little branch
line which carries you to Milford. The depot at Milford is about a mile
from the village itself. You will find an auto at the depot which will
carry you to the hospital, where you will be met by Dr. or Mrs.
Brinkley, or Miss Lewis, the Head Nurse, and where you will be very
comfortable if you decide to make a stay of a week or so for personal
reasons. The food is good, and the Kansas air fresh and bracing and
plentiful. Winds are indeed common, but the village is safely out of the
track of the Kansas cyclones, and the storm cellar is unknown. The
hospital is spotlessly clean and a marvel of completeness in equipment.
The preparations for the gland transplantation are simple but thorough;
a test of spermatic fluid, a blood test, a test for blood pressure,
a blood count, and a purgative the night before the operation, with no
breakfast on the morning of the operation. You will eat a good lunch in
bed, however, on that day, and miss no meals afterwards. Briefly, the
writer can say honestly that the pain of the operation is no more than
the twinge of a toothache.




CHAPTER IX

SUMMARY


Dr. Brinkley's employment of the goat-glands for the past three years of
continuous operating, therefore, has proved to his satisfaction and to
that of his patients that the testes in men and the ovaries in women
furnish a secretion which has the property of a revivifying fluid when
restored to the system by the currents of blood and lymph. In that
commonly fatal condition of the arteries which follows rapidly upon the
state of blood pressure known as hardening of the arteries, or
arterio-sclerosis, a practically incurable condition hitherto, the
results obtained by the goat-gland transplantation are miraculously
swift. When the arteries are, as the doctor puts it, "as hard as
pipe-stems," they grow in a few weeks, sometimes in a week, soft and
pliable. The change, according to Dr. Brinkley, is brought about in the
walls of the arteries themselves, and is not a process of dissolving the
accumulations or deposits of calcareous material within the arteries.
The change is in the material of the walls of the arteries, producing a
return of the condition of elasticity, permitting expansion and
contraction as in youth.

It is a favorite theory with some modern writers that the physical
change from youth to age is accompanied in the body, and in a sense
caused by, the deterioration in the quality of the cells of the body,
and they call this change a breaking-down process by which the finer and
more highly differentiated cells, such, for example, as the nerve-cells,
and others which have high and complicated duties to perform, are
displaced by cells of an inferior type, which they name conjunctive
cells, much as the common sparrow drives away the songbirds from the
home garden and, usurping the place of the songbird, substitutes a
wretched twitter for the golden notes of the warblers which once
delighted our ears. The common cells, also, on usurping the place of the
nobler cells, are unable to perform the difficult duties of the latter,
and the result upon human organism is disorder, decay, disease, etc.,
contributing to, if not causing, the condition of old age. This is an
ingenious but not convincing theory. Our knowledge of histological
processes is too incomplete at this stage to permit its acceptance as
fact. It assumes too much to be known which is quite unknown. Moreover,
it refutes itself upon examination in this particular, and in several
others, that if it were true that these inferior cells are on the
lookout to invade instantly any part of the human organism in which
there was a breaking down of nerve-tissue, for example, then it would be
impossible to build new nerve-tissue to take the place of that which was
destroyed, because its place, according to this theory, has been already
taken by an intruder who cannot be dislodged. But new nerve-cells are
constantly being rebuilt, and constantly being put to use in the
organism. If this theory were true, then a brain in middle age would be
unable to function because of the impossibility of renewing its cells.

A much more reasonable and probably true explanation of the cause of old
age is the gradual disappearance of animal matter in the bones and
tissues, and the corresponding increase of the mineral matter in the
bones and tissues, amounting to ossification of cartilage, whereby the
supple cartilage, losing its animal content, becomes practically bone by
deposit of lime particles. This would also account in a common-sense
manner for the fragility of the bones of the aged, the brittleness being
due to calcareous deposits in the substance of the bone itself, in
excess of the normal mineral contents of the bones in youth. The
function of the seminal fluids, therefore, appears to be to restore to
the aging tissues this property, this animal matter, which when in its
right ratio and proportion in the cells of the organism produces the
condition of youth. The action of these seminal fluids, therefore, seems
to be two-fold, a dissolving and a nourishing. The distinction should be
clearly made that the action is NOT merely stimulating. The stimulation
of a nerve-cell is a temporary excitement. We speak of the stimulation
of alcohol, and this illustration gives a clearer view of the difference
between the nourishing action of the seminal fluids and a stimulating
action than we could obtain by the employment of many words. It is
interesting to remember that while it is possible to increase the
mineral particles of soda, potash, lime, iron, silica and magnesia in
the blood and lymph, it is practically impossible for us to increase the
animal contents of the cells by any method of medication or dieting
known to us. Only Life can produce this change in the cells, and only
this method of gland-transplantation has furnished a means of impressing
Life into service to work for us in this matter. To produce the effects
which are needed to rejuvenate a body that has increased its mineral
matter at the expense of its animal matter we require the co-operation
of glands made active, because only the glands, in the marvelous
chemistry of the body, are able to compound the animal substances
required to nourish the cells, tissues and organs of the body, and to
dissolve and remove those injurious substances of a mineral nature which
have accumulated in excess in cells and tissues, usurping the place of
the animal matter in the cells because of the inactivity of function
generally, and the poor elimination of waste matter, as the years pass.
This is the re-creative and rejuvenating work of the gland secretions.
It is beyond us to say exactly what these secretions consist of. We know
the importance of their presence in blood and lymph only by the
disasters that follow their absence. The thyroid gland and parathyroids,
for instance, seem to be connected by some close sympathy with the
activity or non-activity of the interstitial glands, and the atrophy of
one is often accompanied by the atrophy of the other. The subject is
still hidden in darkness to the extent of insufficient knowledge on our
part of the exact constituents of the active agents in the secretions of
the testes, thyroids, suprarenals, pituitary and other glands. Time and
further opportunity for experiment are needed to show to what extent the
goat-gland transplantation can be used to remedy goitre, epilepsy and
the graver lesions of paralysis. The use of the goat-glands is too
recent to admit of anything but speculation on these points. There would
seem to be no good reason to doubt that if the male organs of a young
goat do rejuvenate the atrophied testes of a man, which Dr. Brinkley has
abundantly proved they do, the thyroid gland of a young goat might be
expected to restore the atrophied thyroid of a human being. This again
is only conjecture, Dr. Brinkley's work up to the present having been
confined to the transplantation of testes and ovaries. But he expects to
find time during the present year to satisfy himself of the results of
such important experimental work as is here indicated. It is possible
that his visit to Europe this summer may be the means of enlarging his
field considerably, although it would appear that if he had six pairs of
hands and could keep all employed in continuous service he could
scarcely cope with the demands upon his time which any and all countries
of the earth may be expected to make when his work is known. In ten
years, no doubt, gland-transplantation, particularly goat-gland
transplantation, for the renewal of youth in man and woman will be so
usual as to occasion neither wonder nor hilarity. But we are not living
ten years from now, but at this present moment, and Dr. Brinkley's
operation to-day is a marvel, a wonder and a joy. There is a
satisfaction in being in the van. It is fine to be the first to do a big
thing, especially if that big thing is something of the most practical
value to humanity. Mankind has always crowned its great generals, its
great destroyers of life. Here is a man who comes forward to preserve
life. That is his mission, if you like. Certainly it is his life work.
It is a noble work. The question in the writer's mind is, What will they
do to him? How will they take him in England? Will they applaud, or
crucify, or neglect? Probably they will show him something of the
generous hospitality of England, and leaven this with a plentiful
sprinkling of ridicule, because the subject of the goat lends itself to
humor of the obvious kind. But it is our belief that the hard, practical
common sense of the Anglo-Saxon will lead them to make the utmost use of
this opportunity of his visit, and, having got him, it is to be expected
that they will know enough to keep him. This is quite as much their
opportunity as his. While they sharpen their wit upon the sacrificial
goat and make merry, they are pretty sure to make full use of his
knowledge and skill while they have him with them, and might make things
so pleasant for him that he might say, when the summer is over and he
looks back upon the white cliffs of Dover, returning to his own country,
"This is a good land. I have enjoyed the trip. I like the people. I will
return next summer, and for many summers thereafter."




CHAPTER X

THE SPARK OF LIFE

  +By J. R. Brinkley, M.D., C.M., Ph.D., Sc.D.+

  Chief Surgeon, Brinkley-Jones Hospital and Training School
  for Nurses, Milford, Kansas


  (Written October, 1920)

For many years scientists have believed that a part, or all of the
glands of the human body influenced longevity. They believed our glands
contained the "life spark." Men for hundreds of years have been seeking
the "fountain of youth." Ponce de Leon when he landed in Florida and saw
the beautiful springs and flowers thought he had found it, and so
announced to the world. Long ago we learned that the pituitary gland
influenced growth and development. For instance if the pituitary gland
over-functioned we had Giantism. If it under-functioned the opposite was
the result--a dwarf. If the thyroid gland was at fault we would have
either the low mentality commonly spoken of as cretinism, or myxedema.
We found that by feeding children the fresh gland substance a marked
improvement would be obtained and sometimes a cure. Some years ago there
was a surgical craze which called for the removal of the women's
ovaries. It was thought that many nervous troubles, including epilepsy,
etc., were due to diseased ovaries, so the surgeons removed ovaries just
about as promiscuously as tonsils and teeth are now taken out. After a
while they found a woman without ovaries was about ruined, so something
had to be done, and ovarian extracts and substances were fed to the
unfortunates. Good results were obtained so long as the feeding process
kept up, but if the feeding was stopped, the miserable symptoms
returned. One factor was always in evidence, that a woman who had no
