
22. SENSATION DEPENDS UPON MATTER.

However great the mystery of the relation of body to mind, it is quite
true that the nervous system is the mechanism by and through which all
sensation comes, and that in our experience in the absence of nerves
there is neither sensation nor consciousness. The nerves themselves are
but complex chemical structures; their molecular constitution is said to
embrace as many as 20,000 atoms, chiefly carbon, hydrogen, oxygen, and
nitrogen. There must be continuity of this structure too, for to sever a
nerve is to paralyze all beyond. If all knowledge comes through
experience, and all experience comes through the nervous system, the
possibilities depend upon the mechanism each one is provided with for
absorbing from his environment, what energies there are that can act
upon the nerves. Touch, taste, and smell imply contact, sound has
greater range, and sight has the immensity of the universe for its
field. The most distant but visible star acts through the optic nerve to
present itself to consciousness. It is not the ego that looks out
through the eyes, but it is the universe that pours in upon the ego.

Again, all the known agencies that act upon the nerves, whether for
touch or sound or sight, imply matter in some of its forms and
activities, to adapt the energy to the nervous system. The mechanism
for the perception of light is complicated. The light acts upon a
sensitive surface where molecular structure is broken up, and this
disturbance is in the presence of nerve terminals, and the sensation is
not in the eye but in the sensorium. In like manner for all the rest; so
one may fairly say that matter is the condition for sensation, and in
its absence there would be nothing we call sensation.


THE ETHER IS INSENSIBLE TO NERVES.

The ether is in great contrast with matter in this particular. There is
no evidence that in any direct way it acts upon any part of the nervous
system, or upon the mind. It is probable that this lack of relation
between the ether and the nervous system was the chief reason why its
discovery was so long delayed, as the mechanical necessities for it even
now are felt only by such as recognize continuity as a condition for the
transmission of energy of whatever kind it may be. Action at a distance
contradicts all experience, is philosophically incredible, and is
repudiated by every one who once perceives that energy has two
factors--substance and motion.

The table given below presents a list of twenty-two of the known
properties of matter contrasted with those exhibited by the ether. In
none of them are the properties of the two identical, and in most of
them what is true for one is not true for the other. They are not simply
different, they are incomparable.

From the necessities of the case, as knowledge has been acquired and
terminology became essential for making distinctions, the ether has been
described in terms applicable to matter, hence such terms as mass,
solidity, elasticity, density, rigidity, etc., which have a definite
meaning and convey definite mechanical conceptions when applied to
matter, but have no corresponding meaning and convey no such mechanical
conceptions when applied to the ether. It is certain that they are
inappropriate, and that the ether and its properties cannot be described
in terms applicable to matter. Mathematical considerations derived from
the study of matter have no advantage, and are not likely to lead us to
a knowledge of the ether.

Only a few have perceived the inconsistency of thinking of the two in
the same terms. In his _Grammar of Science_, Prof. Karl Pearson says,
"We find that our sense-impressions of hardness, weight, colour,
temperature, cohesion, and chemical constitution, may all be described
by the aid of the motions of a single medium, which itself is conceived
to have no hardness, weight, colour, temperature, nor indeed elasticity
of the ordinary conceptual type."

None of the properties of the ether are such as one would or could have
predicted if he had had all the knowledge possessed by mankind. Every
phenomenon in it is a surprise to us, because it does not follow the
laws which experience has enabled us to formulate for matter. A
substance which has none of the phenomenal properties of matter, and is
not subject to the known laws of matter, ought not to be called matter.
Ether phenomena and matter phenomena belong to different categories, and
the ends of science will not be conserved by confusing them, as is done
when the same terminology is employed for both.

There are other properties belonging to the ether more wonderful, if
possible, than those already mentioned. Its ability to maintain enormous
stresses of various kinds without the slightest evidence of
interference. There is the gravitational stress, a direct pull between
two masses of matter. Between two molecules it is immeasurably small
even when close together, but the prodigious number of them in a bullet
brings the action into the field of observation, while between such
bodies as the earth and moon or sun, the quantity reaches an astonishing
figure. Thus if the gravitative tension due to the gravitative
attraction of the earth and moon were to be replaced by steel wires
connecting the two bodies to prevent the moon from leaving its orbit,
there would be needed four number ten steel wires to every square inch
upon the earth, and these would be strained nearly to the breaking
point. Yet this stress is not only endured continually by this pliant,
impalpable, transparent medium, but other bodies can move through the
same space apparently as freely as if it were entirely free. In addition
to this, the stress from the sun and the more variable stresses from the
planets are all endured by the same medium in the same space and
apparently a thousand or a million times more would not make the
slightest difference. Rupture is impossible.

Electric and magnetic stresses, acting parallel or at right angles to
the other, exist in the same space and to indefinite degrees, neither
modifying the direction nor amount of either of the others.

These various stresses have been computed to represent energy, which if
it could be utilized, each cubic inch of space would yield five hundred
horse-power. It shows what a store-house of energy the ether is. If
every particle of matter were to be instantly annihilated, the universe
of ether would still have an inexpressible amount of energy left. To
draw at will directly from this inexhaustible supply, and utilize it for
the needs of mankind, is not a forlorn hope.

The accompanying table presents these contrasting properties for
convenient inspection.


CONTRASTED PROPERTIES OF MATTER AND THE ETHER.

         MATTER.                         ETHER.

 1. Discontinuous               Continuous
 2. Limited                     Unlimited
 3. Heterogeneous               Homogeneous
 4. Atomic                      Non-atomic
 5. Definite structure          Structureless
 6. Gravitative                 Gravitationless
 7. Frictionable                Frictionless
 8. AEolotropic                  Isotropic
 9. Chemically selective          ----
10. Harmonically related          ----
11. Energy embodied             Energy endowed
12. Energy transformer          Non-transformer
13. Elastic                     Elastic?
14. Density                     Density?
15. Heatable                    Unheatable
16. Indestructible?             Indestructible
17. Inertiative                 Inertiative conditionally
18. Magnetic                      ----
19. Variable states               ----
20. Subject to shearing stress
     in solid                   Shearing stress maintained
21. Has Secondary qualities       ----
22. Sensation depends upon      Insensible to nerves




CHAPTER III

Antecedents of Electricity--Nature of what is
    transformed--Series of transformations for the
    production of light--Positive and negative
    Electricity--Positive and negative twists--Rotations
    about a wire--Rotation of an arc--Ether a
    non-conductor--Electro-magnetic waves--Induction
    and inductive action--Ether stress and atomic
    position--Nature of an electric current--Electricity
    a condition, not an entity.


So far as we have knowledge to-day, the only factors we have to consider
in explaining physical phenomena are: (1) Ordinary matter, such as
constitutes the substance of the earth, and the heavenly bodies; (2) the
ether, which is omnipresent; and (3) the various forms of motion, which
are mutually transformable in matter, and some of which, but not all,
are transformable into ether forms. For instance, the translatory motion
of a mass of matter can be imparted to another mass by simple impact,
but translatory motion cannot be imparted to the ether, and, for that
reason, a body moving in it is not subject to friction, and continues
to move on with velocity undiminished for an indefinite time; but the
vibratory motion which constitutes heat is transformable into
wave-motion in the ether, and is transmitted away with the speed of
light. The kind of motion which is thus transformed is not even a
to-and-fro swing of an atom, or molecule, like the swing of a pendulum
bob, but that due to a change of form of the atoms within the molecule,
otherwise there could be no such thing as spectrum analysis. Vibratory
motion of the matter becomes undulatory motion in the ether. The
vibratory motion we call heat; the wave-motion we call sometimes radiant
energy, sometimes light. Neither of these terms is a good one, but we
now have no others.

It is conceded that it is not proper to speak of the wave-motion in the
ether as _heat_; it is also admitted that the ether is not heated by the
presence of the wave--or, in other words, the temperature of the ether
is absolute zero. Matter only can be heated. But the ether waves can
heat other matter they may fall on; so there are three steps in the
process and two transformations--(1) vibrating matter; (2) waves in the
ether; (3) vibration in other matter. Energy has been transferred
indirectly. What is important to bear in mind is, that when a form of
energy in matter is transformed in any manner so as to lose its
characteristics, it is not proper to call it by the same name after as
before, and this we do in all cases when the transformation is from one
kind in matter to another kind in matter. Thus, when a bullet is shot
against a target, before it strikes it has what we call mechanical
energy, and we measure that in foot-pounds; after it has struck the
target, the transformation is into heat, and this has its mechanical
equivalent, but is not called mechanical energy, nor are the motions
which embody it similar. The mechanical ideas in these phenomena are
easy to grasp. They apply to the phenomena of the mechanics of large and
small bodies, to sound, to heat, and to light, as ordinarily considered,
but they have not been applied to electric phenomena, as they evidently
should be, unless it be held that such phenomena are not related to
ordinary phenomena, as the latter are to one another.

When we would give a complete explanation of the phenomena exhibited by,
say, a heated body, we need to inquire as to the antecedents of the
manifestation, and also its consequents. Where and how did it get its
heat? Where and how did it lose it? When we know every step of those
processes, we know all there is to learn about them. Let us undertake
the same thing for some electrical phenomena.

First, under what circumstances do electrical phenomena arise?

(1) _Mechanical_, as when two different kinds of matter are subject to
friction.

(2) _Thermal_, as when two substances in molecular contact are heated at
the junction.

(3) _Magnetic_, as when any conductor is in a changing magnetic field.

(4) _Chemical_, as when a metal is being dissolved in any solution.

(5) _Physiological_, as when a muscle contracts.

[Illustration: FIG. 5.--Frictional electrical machine.]

Each of these has several varieties, and changes may be rung on
combinations of them, as when mechanical and magnetic conditions
interact.

(1) In the first case, ordinary mechanical or translational energy is
spent as friction, an amount measurable in foot-pounds, and the factors
we know, a pressure into a distance. If the surface be of the same kind
of molecules, the whole energy is spent as heat, and is presently
radiated away. If the surfaces are of unlike molecules, the product is a
compound one, part heat, part electrical. What we have turned into the
machine we know to be a particular mode of motion. We have not changed
the amount of matter involved; indeed, we assume, without specifying and
without controversy, that matter is itself indestructible, and the
product, whether it be of one kind or another, can only be some form of
motion. Whether we can describe it or not is immaterial; but if we agree
that heat is vibratory molecular motion, and there be any other kind of
a product than heat, it too must also be some other form of motion. So
if one is to form a conception of the mechanical origin of electricity,
this is the only one he can have--transformed motion.

[Illustration: FIG. 6.--Thermo-pile.]

[Illustration: FIG. 7.--Dynamo.]

(2) When heat is the antecedent of electricity, as in the thermo-pile,
that which is turned into the pile we know to be molecular motion of a
definite kind. That which comes out of it must be some equivalent
motion, and if all that went in were transformed, then all that came out
would be transformed, call it by what name we will and let its amount be
what it may.

(3) When a conductor is moved in a magnetic field, the energy spent is
measurable in foot-pounds, as before, a pressure into a distance. The
energy appears in a new form, but the quantity of matter being
unchanged, the only changeable factor is the kind of motion, and that
the motion is molecular is evident, for the molecules are heated.
Mechanical or mass motion is the antecedent, molecular heat motion is
the consequent, and the way we know there has been some intermediate
form is, that heat is not conducted at the rate which is observed in
such a case. Call it by what name one will, some form of motion has been
intermediate between the antecedent and the consequent, else we have
some other factor of energy to reckon with than ether, matter and
motion.

(4) In a galvanic battery, the source of electricity is chemical action;
but what is chemical action? Simply an exchange of the constituents of
molecules--a change which involves exchange of energy. Molecules capable
of doing chemical work are loaded with energy. The chemical products of
battery action are molecules of different constitution, with smaller
amounts of energy as measured in calorics or heat units. If the results
of the chemical reaction be prevented from escaping, by confining them
to the cell itself, the whole energy appears as heat and raises the
temperature of the cell. If a so-called circuit be provided, the energy
is distributed through it, and less heat is spent in the cell, but
whether it be in one place or another, the mass of matter involved is
not changed, and the variable factor is the motion, the same as in the
other cases. The mechanical conceptions appropriate are the
transformation of one kind of motion into another kind by the mechanical
conditions provided.

[Illustration: FIG. 8.--Galvanic Battery.]

(5) Physiological antecedents of electricity are exemplified by the
structure and mode of operation of certain muscles (Fig. 9, _a_) in the
torpedo and other electrical animals. The mechanical contraction of them
results in an electrical excitation, and, if a proper circuit be
provided, in an electric current. The energy of a muscle is derived from
food, which is itself but a molecular compound loaded with energy of a
kind available for muscular transformation. Bread-and-butter has more
available energy, pound for pound, than has coal, and can be substituted
for coal for running an engine. It is not used, because it costs so much
more. There is nothing different, so far as the factors of energy go,
between the food of an animal and the food of an engine. What becomes of
the energy depends upon the kind of structure it acts on. It may be
changed into translatory, and the whole body moves in one direction; or
into molecular, and then appears as heat or electrical energy.

If one confines his attention to the only variable factor in the energy
in all these cases, and traces out in each just what happens, he will
have only motions of one sort or another, at one rate or another, and
there is nothing mysterious which enters into the processes.

We will turn now to the mode in which electricity manifests itself, and
what it can do. It may be well to point out at the outset what has
occasionally been stated, but which has not received the philosophical
attention it deserves--namely, that electrical phenomena are reversible;
that is, any kind of a physical process which is capable of producing
electricity, electricity is itself able to produce. Thus to name a few:
If mechanical motion develops electricity, electricity will produce
mechanical motion; the movement of a pith ball and an electric motor are
examples. If chemical action can produce it, it will produce chemical
action, as in the decomposition of water and electro-plating. As heat
may be its antecedent, so will it produce heat. If magnetism be an
antecedent factor, magnetism may be its product. What is called
induction may give rise to it in an adjacent conductor, and, likewise,
induction may be its effect.

