obviously put the elevating machinery of the _Osprey_ out of
commission. Helgers and his men are doomed to the Living Death as
surely as though they were already lying in the silken hammocks. If
the monsters choose, they could do the same thing to our sphere and
doom us to the same fate. I believe they are waiting for something.
While they wait we have a chance to get the treasure and escape. Shall
we risk it, or shall we go while we know we are safe?"

She looked up at him evenly.

"If you think we have a fair chance to get the treasure and escape, I
say let's risk it," she said firmly.

"Good!" he exclaimed. "Here we go!"

The little sphere slipped out of its cleft in the peak and dropped
swiftly into the valley on the side opposite the Trap-Door City and
its mysterious menace. Day was swiftly dying, and the lower passes of
the mountains were already hazy with rapidly forming storm-clouds.

"Look!" cried Irma excitedly. "What are those things?"

Far in the distance a long line of wavering red lights snaked swiftly
through the dusky valley toward them. Penrun picked up his binoculars.

"Spiders," he announced. "Scores of them. Each is carrying a sort of
red torch. I have a feeling that those are what the monsters of the
Trap-Door City have been waiting for."

He urged the sphere to swifter flight along the range. Miles from the
Caves, he swept up over the peaks, and dropped down on the lowlands
side. Dusk was deepening rapidly as he raced back toward the White
River cataract under the pall of the gathering storm.

       *       *       *       *       *

Among the boulders on the rough mountainside near the mouth of the
Caves he eased the craft down to a gentle landing.

"Wait here," he told Irma. "I'll investigate and see if it is safe to
enter the Caves."

They had seen the three men return to the ship, but others might have
gone to the Caves after that. Penrun made his way down the slope to
the lip of the cataract and the yawning blackness of the abysmal gorge
below it.

Overhead the storm was gathering swiftly, and the saffron light of the
dying day illuminated the plateau eerily. Half a mile away the
Trap-Door City shimmered fantastically in the uncertain light. Penrun
repressed a shudder. The Devil's own playground! Thank God, he and
Irma would be out of it soon!

He crept down the narrow path that led under the ledge of the
trickling cataract. Outside, a bolt of lightning stabbed down from the
darkened heavens. Its lurid flash revealed the huge figure of a man,
pistol in hand, beside the entrance to the Caves.

Too late to retreat now, even had he wished to. Penrun's weapon
flashed first. A scream of pain and fury answered the flash, and the
man's pistol clattered down on the rock. The next instant Penrun was
helpless in the clutch of a mighty pair of arms that tried to squeeze
the life out of him.

"Burn, me, will ye, ye dirty scum!" roared the giant of a man
tightening his grip. "I'll break your damned back for ye and heave ye
into the gorge!"

Penrun writhed frenziedly, trying to twist his pistol around against
his enemy's back, while they struggled desperately about the ledge
above the dizzy blackness of the gorge. But the pistol struck the wall
beside the entrance and fell under their trampling feet.

Penrun was gasping in agony at the intolerable pain in his spine.
Darting points of light danced before his eyes. Then from the opening
in the rock showed a beam of white light and a man slowly emerged from
the Caves. The grip on Penrun relaxed slightly as the man came toward
the two combatants. Penrun could distinguish him closely now. A heavy,
pasty face with liquid black eyes and a crown of thinning hair.
Helgers! He was staggering and grunting under the weight of a heavy
metal box.

       *       *       *       *       *

"What's the matter, Borgain?" he asked.

"Got this bird, Penrun, we been waitin' for!"

"We don't need him, now that we already have the treasure. Still, it's
a good thing we found him. Just as well to have no tales circulating
about the Universe about our find. Toss him into the gorge, and go
down and watch the other three chests until I get--"

"Dick, Dick!" Irma's excited voice floated down from up among the
boulders. "The spiders with those red cylinder torches have arrived!
They are attacking the _Osprey_!"

Helgers jerked up his head.

"Why, if it isn't the little spitfire!" he exclaimed in pleased
astonishment. "I thought the damned spiders had eaten her long before
this. Rather changes things, Borgain. I'll just go on up and let my
little playmate know I am here. Toss our friend over the edge there,
and bring up another treasure chest."

"What was that she was sayin' about the spiders attackin' the
_Osprey_?" Borgain's voice was anxious.

"Oh, that's nothing the boys can't handle," said Helgers confidently.
"In case they don't, we'll have to feel sorry for them and take our
friend's sphere. Only have to split the treasure two ways, in that
case," he added, moving up the slope.

Borgain's answer was a grunt of surprise, for his captive had squirmed
suddenly out of his clutch. The big man plunged forward recklessly
with arms outstretched in the groping darkness. Penrun, desperately
remembering the sickening drop at their feet to the pool three
thousand feet below, backed against the rock.

A flash of lightning. Borgain's ape-like arms were nearing him. Penrun
lashed out at the darkened features. His knuckles bit deep into the
flesh. He slipped aside as Borgain, mouthing fearful curses, rammed
into the rock wall and rebounded.

       *       *       *       *       *

Again the fumbling search. Another lightning flash. Penrun struck with
frenzied desperation. Borgain took the blow behind the ear and
staggered. He whirled, wild with fury, and charged vainly along the
narrow ledge.

"I'll get ye this time, damn your dirty carcass--ugh!"

Guided by the sound of his voice, Penrun struck with all his strength.
Borgain's nose flattened under the blow. He whirled half around.

"I'll kill ye! I'll kill--help, help--a-ah!"

Lost in the blackness he had plunged over the lip of the rock,
thinking he was charging Penrun. Down into the yawning gorge his body
hurtled, the sound of his frenzied, dwindling screams floating up
eerily out of the black, ominous depths.

Penrun crouched against the wall, sick and trembling. Irma, Helgers!
He must hurry! He fumbled again for the pistols. They were gone.
Crawling forward now, still shaken by his narrow escape from death, he
