
Even as this happened, as he knew vaguely that his muscles were locking
into the posture of a beggar, hands out, pleading, face twisted into an
agony of asking, lips repeating his croon-chant, he saw what had
occurred.

The realization was like the sudden, blinding, and at the same time
clarifying light that sometimes comes to epileptics just as they are
going into a seizure. It was the thought that he had kept away on the
horizon of his mind, the thought that now charged in on him with long
leaps and bounds and then stopped and sat on its haunches and grinned at
him while its long tongue lolled.

Of course, he should have known all these years what it was. He should
have known that Mr. Eumenes was the worst thing in the world for him. He
had known it, but, like a drug addict, he had refused to admit it. He
had searched for the man. Yet he had known it would be fatal to find
him. The rose-colored spectacles would swing gates that should never be
fully open. And he should have guessed _what_ and _who_ Mr. Eumenes was
when that encyclopedic fellow in the truck had singsonged those names.

How could he have been so stupid? Stupid? It was easy! He had _wanted_
to be stupid! And how could the Mr. Eumenes-or-otherwise have used such
obvious giveaway names? It was a measure of their contempt for the
humans around them and of their own grim wit. Look at all the double
entendres the salesman had given his father, and his father had never
suspected. Even the head of the Bureau of Health and Sanity had been
terrifyingly blase about it.

Dr. Vespa. He had thrown his name like a gauntlet to humanity, and
humanity had stared idiotically at it and never guessed its meaning.
Vespa was a good Italian name. Jack didn't know what it meant, but he
supposed that it had the same meaning as the Latin. He remembered it
from his high school class.

As for his not encountering the salesman until now, he had been lucky.
If he had run across him during his search, he would have been denied
the glasses, as now. And the shock would have made him unable to cry out
and betray the man. He would have done what he was so helplessly doing
at this moment, and he would have been carted off to an institution.

How many other transies had seen that unforgettable face on the streets,
the end of their search, and gone at once into that state that made them
legal prey of the Bohas?

That was almost his last rational thought. He could no longer feel his
flesh. A thin red curtain was falling between him and his senses.
Everywhere it billowed out beneath him and eased his fall. Everywhere it
swirled and softened the outlines of things that were streaking by--a
large tree that he remembered seeing in his living room, a naked giant,
his father, leaning against it and eating an apple, and a delicate
little white creature cropping flowers.

Yet all this while he lived in two worlds. One was the passage downwards
towards the Garden of Eden. The other was that hemisphere in which he
had dwelt so reluctantly, the one he now perceived through the
thickening red veil of his sight and other senses.

They were not yet gone. He could feel the hands of the black-clad
officers lifting him up and laying him upon some hard substance that
rocked and dumped. Every lurch and thud was only dimly felt. Then he was
placed upon something softer and carried into what he vaguely sensed was
the interior of one of the barracks.

Some time later--he didn't know or care when, for he had lost all
conception or even definition of time--he looked up the deep
everlengthening shaft of himself into the eyes of another Mr. Eumenes or
Mr. Sphex or Dr. Vespa or whatever he called himself. He was in white
and wore a stethoscope around his neck.

Beside him stood another of his own kind. This one wore lipstick and a
nurse's cap. She carried a tray on which were several containers. One
container held a large and sharp scalpel. The other held an egg. It was
about twice the size of a hen's egg.

Jack saw all this just before the veil took on another shade of red and
blurred completely his vision of the outside. But the final thickening
did not keep him from seeing that Doctor Eumenes was staring down at him
as if he were peering into a dusky burrow. And Jack could make out the
eyes. They were large, much larger than they should have been at the
speed with which Jack was receding. They were not the pale pink of an
albino's. They were black from corner to corner and built of a dozen or
so hexagons whose edges caught the light.

They twinkled.

Like jewels.

Or the eyes of an enormous and evolved wasp.




Transcriber's Note:

    This etext was produced from _Fantastic Universe_ January 1954.
    Extensive research did not uncover any evidence that the U.S.
    copyright on this publication was renewed. Minor spelling and
    typographical errors have been corrected without note.





End of Project Gutenberg's They Twinkled Like Jewels, by Philip Jose Farmer

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THEY TWINKLED LIKE JEWELS ***

***** This file should be named 29559.txt or 29559.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/2/9/5/5/29559/

Produced by Greg Weeks, Stephen Blundell and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net

