falteringly, "When we were together earlier, you didn't act as if ..."

"When we were together earlier, I wanted what I wanted," he snarled at
her. "You don't suppose I'm a bloody saint, do you?"

"And all the beautiful things you told me?"

"That," he said cruelly, "is just a line I've found that women fall for.
They're all so bored and so starved for beauty--as _they_ generally put
it."

"Even the garden?" Her question was barely audible through the sobs that
threatened to suffocate her.

He looked at her and perhaps his expression softened just a trifle.

"What's outside," he said flatly, "is just a little worse than either of
you can imagine." He tapped his temple. "The garden's all here."

"You've killed it," she wept. "You've killed it in me. You've both
killed everything that's beautiful. But you're worse," she screamed at
Patrick, "because he only killed beauty once, but you brought it to life
just so you could kill it again. Oh, I can't stand it! I won't stand
it!" And she began to scream.

Patrick started toward her, but she broke off and whirled away from him
to the window, her eyes crazy.

"You've been lying to us," she cried. "The garden's there. I know it is.
But you don't want to share it with anyone."

[Illustration]

"No, no, Euphemia," Patrick protested anxiously. "It's hell out there,
believe me. I wouldn't lie to you about it."

"Wouldn't lie to me!" she mocked. "Are you afraid, too?"

With a sudden pull, she jerked open the window and stood before the
blank green-tinged oblong of darkness that seemed to press into the room
like a menacing, heavy, wind-urged curtain.

At that Hank cried out a shocked, pleading, "Effie!"

She ignored him. "I can't be cooped up here any longer," she said. "And
I won't, now that I know. I'm going to the garden."

Both men sprang at her, but they were too late. She leaped lightly to
the sill, and by the time they had flung themselves against it, her
footsteps were already hurrying off into the darkness.

"Effie, come back! Come back!" Hank shouted after her desperately, no
longer thinking to cringe from the man beside him, or how the gun was
pointed. "I love you, Effie. Come back!"

Patrick added his voice. "Come back, Euphemia. You'll be safe if you
come back right away. Come back to your home."

No answer to that at all.

They both strained their eyes through the greenish murk. They could
barely make out a shadowy figure about half a block down the near-black
canyon of the dismal, dust-blown street, into which the greenish
moonlight hardly reached. It seemed to them that the figure was scooping
something up from the pavement and letting it sift down along its arms
and over its bosom.

"Go out and get her, man," Patrick urged the other. "For if I go out for
her, I warn you I won't bring her back. She said something about having
stood the dust better than most, and that's enough for me."

But Hank, chained by his painfully learned habits and by something else,
could not move.

And then a ghostly voice came whispering down the street, chanting,
"Fire can hurt me, or water, or the weight of Earth. But the dust is my
friend."

Patrick spared the other man one more look. Then, without a word, he
vaulted up and ran off.

Hank stood there. After perhaps a half minute he remembered to close his
mouth when he inhaled. Finally he was sure the street was empty. As he
started to close the window, there was a little _mew_.

He picked up the cat and gently put it outside. Then he did close the
window, and the shutters, and bolted them, and took up the Geiger
counter, and mechanically began to count himself.

                                                        --FRITZ LEIBER




Transcriber's Note:

    This etext was produced from _Galaxy Science Fiction_ April 1952.
    Extensive research did not uncover any evidence that the U.S.
    copyright on this publication was renewed. Minor spelling and
    typographical errors have been corrected without note.





End of Project Gutenberg's The Moon is Green, by Fritz Reuter Leiber

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE MOON IS GREEN ***

***** This file should be named 29662.txt or 29662.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/2/9/6/6/29662/

Produced by Greg Weeks, Stephen Blundell and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net

