       *       *       *       *       *

Captain Al-Amin nodded slowly. "That's right. The test showed that the
oxyhydrogen section worked fine. It showed that the starter worked
fine. It showed that the radiowave broadcaster worked fine. But it
didn't show that they'd work together."

Smith said a short, five-letter word. It was French; the Anglo-Saxon
equivalent has only four letters. "What good does all this theorizing
do us?" he added. "The question is: How do we fix the thing?"

"Well, can't you put another turn on the thread?" Hull asked.

"Oh, sure," Smith said sarcastically. "You give me a lathe and the
proper tools, and I'll make you all the connections you want. Hell, if
I had the proper tools, I could turn us out a new spaceship, and we
could all go home in comfort."

"Couldn't you drill out the metal with that drill?" Hull asked
plaintively.

"No!" Smith said harshly. "How do you expect me to get a quarter-inch
bit into a space less than a sixteenth of an inch in diameter?"

Hull wasn't used to machinist's terms. "How big is an inch?"

"Two point five four oh oh oh five centimeters," Smith said in a nasty
tone of voice. "Does that help you any?"

"I'm just trying to help!" Hull snapped. "You've got no call to get
sarcastic with me!"

Smith said the French word again.

"Enough!" the captain barked. "Smith, control your tongue! That sort
of thing won't help us." He jerked his head around. "Mr. Kelvin, do
you have any suggestions?"

Jayjay played another card. "No. Not yet. I'm thinking."

"Smith? Any ideas?" The tone of the Arab's voice left no doubt that he
meant business.

"No, sir. Without a properly equipped machine shop, there's nothing we
can do."

"How so?"

"Because that's a precision job, sir. The threads are tapered so that
the fit will be gas-tight. That's why the threads have a
ten-thousandth of an inch of soft polyethylene covering the hard
steel, so that when the threads are tight, the polyethylene will act
as a seal. Everything in that connection is a precision fitted job.
The ends of the tubes are made to be slightly mashed together, so that
the seals will be tight--they're coated with polyethylene, too. If the
oxygen and hydrogen mix, the efficiency of the fuel cell goes down to
zero, and you run the chance of an explosion."

"Show me," Al-Amin said.

Smith took a pencil out of his pocket and began drawing a cross
section of the connection on the top of the nearby table.

"Look here, captain, this is the way the two are supposed to fit. But
they don't, because the male plug can't get far enough into the female
socket to make the connection. Like this, see?"

The captain nodded.

"Well," Smith continued, "there's a thirty-second of an inch clearance
there. If the female had one more turn of thread, the fit would be
prefect. As it is, we get no connection. So the screamer doesn't
function."

Al-Amin looked at the drawing. "Odd that there's never been any
complaint about this error before."

Jayjay turned another ace. "Not so odd, really."

All heads turned toward Jayjay.

"What does that mean?" Smith asked.

"Just what I said." Jayjay turned another card. "A screamer is
supposed to call for help, isn't it? It's only used in a dire
emergency. Then the only test of the whole unit comes when the
occupants of the spaceship are in danger--as we are. If the things
don't work, how could there be any complaint? If we can't get ours to
work, will we complain? To whom?

"How many ships have been reported missing in the past year or so? All
of them presumed lost because of meteor strikes, eh? If a ship is lost
and doesn't signal, we presume that it was totally destroyed. If it
wasn't, they'd have signaled. As _Mister_ Smith says: See?"

There was a long silence.

Jayjay Kelvin turned the last card, saw that he had lost, and began
shuffling the deck.

       *       *       *       *       *

"I think I've got it," Smith said excitedly, several hours later.

Captain Al-Amin glanced around. Hull was dozing fitfully a few inches
above the couch. Jayjay Kelvin was still methodically playing
solitaire.

"Keep your voice down," the captain ordered. "No use giving our
passengers false hopes. What do you mean, you've got it?"

"Simple. Real simple. All we have to do is file off the last thread of
the male plug. Then it will fit into the female." Smith's voice was a
hoarse whisper.

"Won't work," said Jayjay Kelvin from across the room.

Smith blew up. "How do you know?" he roared. "You sit over there
making wiseacre remarks and do nothing! Play cards, that's all! What
do you know about things like this, _Mister_ Joseph Kelvin? What does
a businessman know about mechanical equipment?"

"Enough," Jayjay said quietly. "Enough to know that, if you try to
file off the final thread of the male plug, you'll do an uneven job.
And that will mean leakage."

"What do you mean, an uneven job?" Smith was still furious.

"Trimming off the end of the male plug would have to be done on a
lathe," Jayjay said, without looking up from his cards. "Otherwise,
the fit would be wrong, and the gases would mix. And we would all go
_phfft!_ when the mixture blew."

Smith started to say something, but Jayjay went right on talking.
"Even if we had a lathe, the male plug doesn't turn, so you'd be out
of luck all the way. You can't take the screamers apart without
wrecking them--not without a machine shop. You're going to have to
work on that female connection. She's got a sleeve on her that will
turn. Now, if--" Jayjay's voice faded off into silence, and his
manipulations of the cards became purely mechanical.

"Huh!" Smith said softly. "Just because he's related to Kelvin
Associates, he thinks he's hot--" He said the French word again.

"Is he right?" Captain Al-Amin asked sharply.

"Well--" Smith rubbed his nose with a forefinger. "Well, yes. I was
wrong. We can't do it with a file. It would have to be turned on a
lathe, and we don't have a lathe. And we don't have any measuring
instruments, either. This is a precision job, as I said. And we don't
have a common ruler aboard, much less a micrometer. Any makeshift job
will be a failure."

Captain Al-Amin brooded over that for a moment. Then he looked at
Jayjay again. "Mr. Kelvin."

"Yes, captain?" Jayjay didn't look up from the cards in his hands.

"_Are_ you related to Kelvin Associates?"

"In a way."

Al-Amin bit at his lower lip. "Mr. Kelvin, you registered aboard this
ship as Joseph Kelvin. May I ask if your middle name is James?"

After a short pause, Jayjay said: "Yes. It is."

