
"Ohl Cantrall was regarded as a great man in his time, and his
identification pattern is on record. That was the detail which first
revealed the plot. When three duplicates of that particular
pattern--and a considerable number of approximate duplicates--turned up
simultaneously in identification banks at widely separated points in the
Federation, it aroused more than scientific curiosity. Our security
system has learned to look with suspicion on apparent miracles. The
unsuspecting 'Cantralls' were located and apprehended at once; the
threat to the Federation was disclosed; and an intensive though
unpublicized search for the scattered group of Kalechi agents began
immediately...."

The voice paused again.

The Satog image above the pit vanished. A clear light sprang up in the
big room. Simultaneously, Halder felt the nightmare immobility draining
from him and the sensation of dreamlike unreality fade from his mind. He
turned to the right, found Kilby's eyes already on him, saw the Rellis
couple sitting beyond her ... Rane, no longer disguised, looking like a
mirror image of Halder.

They were still fastened to their chairs. Halder's gaze shifted back
quickly to the center of the room. Where the pit had been, the flooring
was now level, carrying a massive, polished table. Behind the table sat
a heavily built, white-haired man with a strong face, harsh mouth, in
the formal black and gold robes of a Councilman of the Federation.

"I am Councilman Mavig." The voice was the one that had spoken in the
dark; it came now from the man at the table. "I am in charge of the
operation against the Kalechi agents, and it is my duty to inform them,
after their arrest and examination, of the disposition that must be made
of them."

He hesitated, twisting his mouth thoughtfully, almost as if unwilling to
continue. "You four have been thoroughly examined," he stated at last.
"Most of the work has been done while you were still unconscious. A
final check of your emotional reactions was being made throughout the
stress situation just ended, in which you listened to a replay of a
report on the Kalechi matter. That part is now concluded."

Mavig paused, scowled, cleared his throat. "I find," he went on, "that
some aspects of this affair still strain my credulity! More than half of
your group have been captured by now; the remainder are at large but
under observation. The danger is past. The activities of the Great
Satogs of Kalechi will receive our very close scrutiny for generations
to come. They shall be given no opportunity to repeat such a trick;
nor--after they have been made aware of the measures we are preparing
against them--will they feel the slightest inclination to try it.

"Now, as to yourselves. After we had tracked down the first dozen or so
of you, a startling pattern began to emerge. You were not following
Kalechi's careful instructions. In one way and another--in often very
ingenious ways--you were attempting primarily to establish contact with
one another. When captured and examined while unconscious by the
various interrogation instruments of our psychologists you told us your
reasons for doing this."

Councilman Mavig shook his head. "The interrogation machines are
supposed to be infallible," he remarked. "Possibly they are. But I am
not a psychologist, and for a long time I refused to accept the reports
they returned. But still ..."

He sighed. "Well, as to what is to happen with you. You will be sent to
join the previously arrested members of your group, and will remain with
them until the last of you is in our hands, has been examined, and ..."

Mavig paused again.

"You see, we can accuse you of no crime!" he said irritably. "As
individuals and as a group, your intention from the beginning has been
to prevent the crime against the Federation from being committed. The
Great Satogs simply did too good a job. You have been given the most
searching physical examinations possible. They show uniformly that your
genetic pattern is stable, and that in no detail can it be distinguished
from a wholly human one of high order.

"You appreciate, I imagine, where that leaves the Federation! When
imitation is carried to the point of identity ..." Federation Councilman
Mavig shook his head once more, concluded, "It is utterly absurd, in
direct contradiction to everything we have understood to date! You've
regarded yourselves as human beings, and believed that your place was
among us. And we can only agree."




Transcriber's Note:

    This etext was produced from _Analog Science Fact & Fiction_ July
    1962. Extensive research did not uncover any evidence that the U.S.
    copyright on this publication was renewed. Minor spelling and
    typographical errors have been corrected without note.





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of The Other Likeness, by James H. Schmitz

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE OTHER LIKENESS ***

***** This file should be named 30398.txt or 30398.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/3/0/3/9/30398/

Produced by Greg Weeks, Stephen Blundell and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
