
  -=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=

246. The JEJUNUM is continuous with the duodenum. It is thicker than
the rest of the small intestine, and has a pinkish tinge.

247. The ILEUM is smaller, and thinner in texture, and somewhat paler,
than the jejunum. There is no mark to distinguish the termination of
the one or the commencement of the other. The ileum terminates near
the right haunch-bone, by a valvular opening into the colon at an
obtuse angle. This arrangement prevents the passing of substances from
the colon into the ileum. The jejunum and ileum are surrounded above
and at the sides by the colon.

248. The small intestine, like the stomach, has three coats. The
inner, or mucous coat is thrown into folds, or valves. In consequence
of this valvular arrangement, the mucous membrane is more extensive
than the other tissues, and gives a greater extent of surface with
which the aliment comes in contact. There are imbedded under this
membrane an immense number of minute glands, and it has a great number
of piles, like those upon velvet. For this reason, this membrane is
sometimes called the _vil'lous_ coat.

249. The CAECUM is the blind pouch, or cul-de-sac, at the commencement
of the large intestine. Attached to its extremity is the _ap-pend'ix
verm-i-form'is_, (a long, worm-shaped tube.) It is from one to six
inches in length, and of the size of a goose-quill.

  -=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=

What important ducts open into it? 246. Describe the jejunum. 247. The
ileum. 248. What is said of the coats of the intestines? Why is the
mucous membrane sometimes called the villous coat? 249. Describe the
caecum.

  -=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=

250. The COLON is divided into three parts--the _ascending_,
_transverse_, and _descending_. The ascending colon passes upward from
the right haunch-bone to the under surface of the liver. It then bends
inward, and crosses the upper part of the abdomen, below the liver and
stomach, to the left side under the name of the transverse colon. At
the left side, it turns, and descends to the left haunch-bone, and is
called the descending colon. Here it makes a peculiar curve upon
itself, which is called the _sig'moid flex'ure_.

[Illustration: Fig. 61. 1, 1, The duodenum. 2, 2, The small intestine. 3,
The junction of the small intestine with the colon. 4, The appendix
vermiformis. 5, The caecum. 6, The ascending colon. 7, The transverse
colon. 8, The descending colon. 9, The sigmoid flexure of the colon. 10,
The rectum.]

  -=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=

250. Describe the course of the divisions of the colon. Explain fig.
61.

  -=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=

251. The RECTUM is the termination of the large intestine. The large
intestine has three coats, like the stomach and small intestine. The
longitudinal fibres of the muscular coat are collected into three
bands. These bands are nearly one half shorter than the intestine, and
give it a sacculated appearance, which is characteristic of the caecum
and colon.

252. The LACTEALS are minute vessels, which commence in the villi,
upon the mucous surface of the small intestine. From the intestine
they pass between the membranes of the _mes'en-ter-y_ to small glands,
which they enter. The first range of glands collects many small
vessels, and transmits a few larger branches to a second range of
glands; and, finally, after passing through several successive ranges
of these glandular bodies, the lacteals, diminished in number and
increased in size, proceed to the enlarged portion of the thoracic
duct, into which they open. They are most numerous in the upper
portion of the small intestine.

253. The THORACIC DUCT commences in the abdomen, by a considerable
dilatation, which is situated in front of the lower portion of the
spinal column. From this point, it passes through the diaphragm, and
ascends to the lower part of the neck. In its ascent, it lies anterior
to the spine, and by the side of the aorta and oesophagus. At the
lower part of the neck, it makes a sudden turn downward and forward,
and terminates by opening into a large vein which passes to the heart.
The thoracic duct is equal in diameter to a goose-quill, and, at its
termination, is provided with a pair of semilunar valves, which
prevent the admission of venous blood into its cylinder.

  -=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=

251. What is said of the arrangement of the fibres of the muscular
coat of the large intestine? 252. What are the lacteals? Give their
course from the mucous coat of the intestine to the thoracic duct.
253. Describe the course of the thoracic duct. How is the venous blood
prevented from passing into this duct?

  -=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=

[Illustration: Fig. 62. A portion of the small intestine, lacteal
vessels, mesenteric glands, and thoracic duct. 1, The intestine. 2, 3, 4,
Mesenteric glands, through which the lacteals pass to the thoracic duct.
5, 6, The thoracic duct. 7, The point in the neck where it turns down to
enter the vein at 8. 9, 10, The aorta. 11, 12, Vessels of the neck. 13,
14, 15, The large veins that convey the blood and chyle to the heart. 16,
17, The spinal column. 18, The diaphragm, (midriff.)]

  -=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=

Explain fig. 62. What is said respecting the mesenteric glands?

  -=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=

_Observation._ The mesenteric glands, which are situated between two
layers of serous membrane (mesentery) that connects the small
intestine with the spinal column, occasionally become diseased in
childhood, and prevent the chyle from passing to the thoracic duct.
Children thus affected have a voracious appetite, and at the same time
are becoming more and more emaciated. The disease is called mesenteric
consumption.

254. The LIVER, a gland appended to the alimentary canal, is the
largest organ in the system, and weighs about four pounds. It is
situated in the right side, below the diaphragm, and is composed of
several lobes. Its upper surface is convex; its under, concave. This
organ is retained in its place by several ligaments. It performs the
double office of separating impurities from the venous blood, and of
secreting a fluid (bile) necessary to chylification. On the under
surface of the liver is a membranous sac, called the _gall-cyst_,
which is generally considered as a reservoir for the bile.

[Illustration: Fig. 63. The under surface of the liver. 1, The right
lobe. 2, The left. 3, 4, Smaller lobes. 10, The gall-bladder, or cyst,
lodged in its depression. 17, The notch on the posterior border, for the
spinal column.]

_Observation._ A good idea of the liver and intestines can be obtained
by examining these parts of a pig. In this animal, the sacs, or
pouches, of the large intestine are well defined.

255. The PANCREAS is a long, flattened gland, analogous to the
salivary glands. It is about six inches in length, weighs three or
four ounces, and is situated transversely across the posterior wall of
the abdomen, behind the stomach. A duct from this organ opens into the
duodenum.

  -=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=

254. Describe the liver. 255. What is said of the pancreas?

  -=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=

256. The SPLEEN, (milt,) so called because the ancients supposed it to
be the seat of melancholy, is an oblong, flattened organ, situated in
the left side, in contact with the diaphragm, stomach, and the
pancreas. It is of a dark, bluish color, and is abundantly supplied
with blood, but has no duct which serves as an outlet for any
secretion. Its use is not well determined.

[Illustration: Fig. 64. The pancreas with its duct, through which the
pancreatic secretion passes into the duodenum.]

257. The OMENTUM (caul) consists of four layers of the serous
membrane, which descends from the stomach and transverse colon. A
quantity of adipose matter is deposited around its vessels, which
ramify through its structure. Its function is twofold in the animal
economy. 1st. It protects the intestines from cold. 2d. It facilitates
the movements of the intestines upon each other during their
vermicular, or worm-like action.

258. Every part of the digestive apparatus is supplied with arteries,
veins, lymphatics, and nervous filaments, from the ganglionic system
of nerves.

  -=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=

256. Why is the spleen so called? What is peculiar to this organ? 257.
Of what is the omentum composed? What is its use? 258. With what is
every part of the digestive apparatus supplied?

  -=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=




CHAPTER XIV.

PHYSIOLOGY OF THE DIGESTIVE ORGANS.


259. Substances received into the stomach as food, must necessarily
undergo many changes before they are fitted to form part of the animal
body. The solid portions are reduced to a fluid state, and those parts
that will nourish the body are separated from the waste material.

260. The first preparation of food for admission into the system,
consists in its proper mastication. The lips in front, the cheeks upon
the side, the soft palate, by closing down upon the base of the
tongue, retain the food in the mouth, while it is subjected to the;
process of _mas-ti-ca'tion_, (chewing.) The tongue rolls the mass
around, and keeps it between the teeth, while they divide the food to
a fineness suitable for the stomach.

261. While the food is in process of mastication, there is incorporated
with it a considerable amount of _sa-li'va_, (spittle.) This fluid is
furnished by the salivary glands, situated in the vicinity of the
mouth. The saliva moistens and softens the food, so that, when carried
into the pharynx. it is passed, with ease, through the oesophagus into the
stomach.

262. When the food has been properly masticated, (and in rapid eaters
when it is not,) the soft palate is raised from the base of the tongue
backward, so as to close the posterior opening through the nostrils.
By a movement of the muscles of the tongue, cheeks, and floor of the
mouth, simultaneous with that of the soft palate, the food is pressed
into the upper part of the pharynx.

  -=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=

259-272. _Give the physiology of the digestive organs._ 259. What is
necessary before food can nourish the body? 260. Describe how
mastication is performed. 261. Of what use is the saliva in the
process of mastication? 262. How is the food pressed into the
pharynx?

  -=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=

263. When in the pharynx, the food and drink are prevented from
passing into the trachea by a simple valve-like arrangement, called
the _ep-i-glot'tis_. The ordinary position of this little organ is
perpendicular, so as not to obstruct the passage of air into the
lungs; but in the act of swallowing, it is brought directly over the
opening of the trachea, called the _glot'tis_. The food, being forced
backward, passes rapidly over the epiglottis into the oesophagus,
where the circular band of muscular fibres above, contracts and forces
the food to the next lower band. Each band relaxes and contracts
successively, and thus presses the alimentary ball downward and onward
to the stomach.[8]

   [8] The process of deglutition may be comprehended by analyzing the
       operation of swallowing food or saliva.

_Observation._ If air is inhaled when the food or drink is passing
over the glottis, some portions of it may be carried into the larynx
or trachea. This produces violent spasmodic coughing, and most
generally occurs when an attempt is made to speak while masticating
food; therefore, never talk when the mouth contains food.

  -=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=

263. When the food is in the pharynx, how is it prevented from passing
into the trachea, or windpipe? Describe how it is passed into the
stomach? Give the observation. 264. Describe how the food in the
stomach is converted into chyme.

  -=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=

264. When the food reaches the stomach, the gastric glands are excited
to action, and they secrete a powerful solvent, called gastric juice.
The presence of food in the stomach also increases a contractile
action of the muscular coat, by which the position of the food is
changed from one part of this cavity to another. Thus the aliment is
brought in contact with the mucous membrane, and each portion of it
becomes saturated with gastric juice, by which it is softened, or
dissolved into a pulpy homogeneous mass, of a creamy consistence,
called _Chyme_. The food is not all converted into chyme at the same
time; but as fast as it is changed, it passes through the pyloric
orifice into the duodenum.

_Observation._ The gastric juice has the property of coagulating
liquid albuminous matter when mixed with it. It is this property of
rennet, which is an infusion of the fourth stomach of the calf, by
which milk is coagulated, or formed into "curd."

265. The CHYME is conveyed through the pyloric orifice of the stomach
into the duodenum. The chyme not only excites an action in the
duodenum, but also in the liver and pancreas. _Mucus_ is then secreted
by the duodenum, _bile_ by the liver, and _pancreatic fluid_ by the
pancreas. The bile and pancreatic fluid are conveyed into the
duodenum, and mixed with the chyme. By the action of these different
fluids, the chyme is converted into a fluid of a whitish color, called
_Chyle_, and into residuum.

_Observation._ The bile has no agency in the change through which
the food passes in the stomach. In a healthy condition of this
organ, no bile is found in it. The common belief, that the stomach
has a redundancy of this secretion, is erroneous. If bile is ejected
in vomiting, it merely shows, not only that the action of the
stomach is inverted, but also that of the duodenum. A powerful
emetic will, in this way, generally bring this fluid from the most
healthy stomach. A knowledge of this fact might save many a stomach
from the evils of emetics, administered on false impressions of
their necessity, and continued from the corroboration of these by
the appearance of bile, till derangement, and perhaps permanent
disease, are the consequences.

266. The CHYLE and residual matter are moved over the mucous surface
of the small intestine, by the action of its muscular coat. As the
chyle is carried along the tract of the intestine, it comes in contact
with the villi, where the lacteal vessels commence. These imbibe, or
take up, the chyle, and transfer it through the mesenteric glands into
the thoracic duct, through which it is conveyed into a large vein at
the lower part of the neck. In this vein the chyle is mixed with the
venous fluid. The residual matter is conveyed into the large
intestine, through which it is carried and excreted from the system.
(Appendix E.)

  -=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=

What peculiar property has gastric juice? 265. Where and how is chyme
converted into chyle? What is said in regard to the bile? 266. What
becomes of the chyle? Of the residuum?

  -=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=

267. In the process of digestion, the food is subjected to five
different changes. 1st. The chewing and admixture of the saliva with
the food; this process is called _mastication_.

268. 2d. The change through which the food passes in the stomach by
its muscular contraction, and the secretion from the gastric glands;
this is called _chymification_.

269. 3d. The conversion of the homogeneous chyme, by the agency of the
bile and pancreatic secretions, into a fluid of milk-like appearance;
this is _chylification_.

270. 4th. The absorption of the chyle by the lacteals, and its
transfer through them and the thoracic duct, into the subclavian vein
at the lower part of the neck.[9]

   [9] The chyle is changed by the lacteals and mesenteric glands, but
       the nature of this change is not, as yet, well defined or
       understood.

271. 5th. The separation and excretion of the residuum.

272. Perfection of the second process of digestion requires thorough
and slow mastication. The formation of proper chyle demands
appropriate mastication and chymification; while a healthy action of
the lacteals requires that all the anterior stages of the digestive
process be as perfect as possible. (Appendix F.)

  -=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=

267. Recapitulate the five changes in the digestive process.

  -=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=

_Note._ Let the pupil review the anatomy and physiology of the
digestive organs from figs. 62 and 65, or from anatomical outline
plate No. 5.

[Illustration: Fig. 65. An ideal view of the organs of digestion, opened
nearly the whole length. 1, The upper jaw. 2, The lower jaw. 3, The
tongue. 4, The roof of the mouth. 5, The oesophagus. 6, The trachea. 7,
The parotid gland. 8, The sublingual gland. 9, The stomach. 10, 10, The
liver. 11, The gall-cyst. 12, The duct that conveys the bile to the
duodenum, (13, 13.) 14, The pancreas. 15, 15, 15, 15, The small
intestine. 16, The opening of the small intestine into the large
intestine. 17, 18, 19, 20, The large intestine. 21, The spleen. 22, The
upper part of the spinal column.]




CHAPTER XV.

HYGIENE OF THE DIGESTIVE ORGANS.


273. It is a law of the system, that each organ is excited to healthy
and efficient action, when influenced by its appropriate stimulus.
Accordingly, nutrient food, that is adapted to the wants of the
system, imparts a healthy stimulation to the salivary glands during
the process of mastication. The food that is well masticated, and has
blended with it a proper amount of saliva, will induce a healthy
action in the stomach. Well-prepared chyme is the natural stimulus of
the duodenum, liver, and pancreas; pure chyle is the appropriate
excitant of the lacteal vessels.

274. The perfection of the digestive process, as well as the health of
the general system, requires the observance of certain conditions.
These will be considered under four heads:--1st. The _Quantity_ of
food that should be taken. 2d. Its _Quality_. 3d. The _Manner_ in
which it should be taken. 4th. The _Condition_ of the system when food
is taken.

275. The QUANTITY of food necessary for the system varies. Age,
occupation, temperament, temperature, habits, amount of clothing,
health and disease are among the circumstances which produce the
variation.

  -=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=

273-330. _Give the hygiene of the digestive organs._ 273. Give a law
of the system. What is the appropriate stimulus of the salivary glands
during mastication? Of the stomach? Of the duodenum? Of the lacteal
vessels? 274. What does the perfection of the digestive organs
require? 275. What exert an influence on the quantity of food
necessary for the system?

  -=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=

276. _The child and youth require food to promote the growth of the
different parts of the body._ The more rapid the growth of the child,
the greater the demand for food. This accounts for the keen appetite
and vigorous digestion in childhood. When the youth has attained his
full growth, this necessity for nutriment ceases; after this period of
life, if the same amount of food is taken, and there is no increase of
labor or exertion, the digestive apparatus will become diseased, and
the vigor of the whole system diminished.

_Observation._ When the body has become emaciated from want of
nutriment, either from famine or disease, there is an increased demand
for food. This may be gratified with impunity until the individual has
regained the usual size, but repletion should be avoided.

277. _Food is required to repair the waste, or loss of substance
that attends action._ In every department of nature, waste, or loss of
substance, attends and follows action. When an individual increases
his exercise,--changes from light to severe labor,--or the inactive
and sedentary undertake journeys for pleasure, the fluids of the
system circulate with increased energy. The old and exhausted
particles of matter are more rapidly removed through the action of
the vessels of the skin, lungs, kidneys, and other organs, and
their places are filled with new atoms, deposited by the small
blood-vessels.

278. As the chyle supplies the blood with the newly vitalized
particles of matter, there is, consequently, an increased demand for
food. This want of the system induces, in general, a sensation of
hunger or appetite, which may be regarded as an indication of the
general state of the body. The sympathy that exists throughout the
system accords to the stomach the power of making known this state to
the nervous system, and, if the functions of this faithful monitor
have not been impaired by disease, abuse, or habit, the call is
imperious, and should be regarded.

  -=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=

276. At what age is the appetite keen and the digestion vigorous? Why?
What is said in regard to the quantity of food when the youth has
attained his growth? What exception, as given in the observation? 277.
Give another demand for food. What effect has increased exercise upon
the system? 278. How are the new particles of matter supplied? What
does this induce?

  -=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=

279. _When exercise or labor is lessened, the quantity of food should
be diminished._ When a person who has been accustomed to active
exercise, or even hard manual labor, suddenly changes to an employment
that demands less activity, the waste attendant on action will be
diminished in a corresponding degree; hence the quantity of food
should be lessened in nearly the same proportion as the amount of
exercise is diminished. If this principle be disregarded, the tone of
the digestive organs will be impaired, and the health of the system
enfeebled.

280. This remark is applicable to those students who have left
laborious employments to attend school. Although the health is firm,
and the appetite keen from habit, yet every pupil should practise some
self-denial, and not eat as much as the appetite craves, the first
week of the session. After some days, the real wants of the system
will generally be manifested by a corresponding sensation of hunger.

_Observation._ It is a common observation that in academies and
colleges, the older students from the country, who have been
accustomed to hard manual labor, suffer more frequently from defective
digestion and impaired health than the younger and feebler students
from the larger towns and cities.

281. _Food is essential in maintaining a proper temperature of the
system._ The heat of the system, at least in part, is produced in the
minute vessels of the several organs, by the union of oxygen with
carbon and hydrogen, which the food and drink contain. The amount of
heat generated, is greatest when it is most rapidly removed from the
system, which occurs in cold weather. This is the cause of the system
requiring more food in winter than summer.

  -=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=

279. Why should the quantity of food be diminished when the exercise
is lessened? What effect if this principle be disregarded? 280. To
what class is this remark applicable? What is often observed among
students in academies and colleges? 281. State another demand for
food. What is one source of heat in the body?

  -=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=

_Observation._ Persons that do not have food sufficient for the
natural wants of the system, require more clothing than those who are
well fed.

282. The last-mentioned principle plainly indicates the propriety and
necessity of lessening the quantity of food as the warm season
approaches. Were this practised, the tone of the stomach and the vigor
of the system would continue unimpaired, the "season complaints" would
be avoided, and the "strengthening bitters" would not be sought to
create an appetite.

_Observation._ Stable-keepers and herdsmen are aware of the fact, that
as the warm season commences, then animals require less food. Instinct
teaches these animals more truly, in this particular, than man allows
reason to guide him.

283. _The quantity of food should have reference to the present
condition of the digestive organs._ If they are weakened or diseased,
so that but a small quantity of food can be properly digested or
changed, that amount only should be taken. Food does not invigorate
the system, except it is changed, as has been described in previous
paragraphs.

_Observation._ When taking care of a sick child, the anxiety of the
mother and the sufferings of the child may induce her to give food
when it would be highly injurious. The attending physician is the only
proper person to direct what quantity should be given.

  -=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=

Why do we eat more in the winter than in the summer? What practical
observation is given? 282. Why should the quantity of food be lessened
as warm weather commences? What would be avoided if this principle
were obeyed? 283. Why should the present condition of the digestive
organs be regarded in reference to the quantity of food? Mention an
instance in which it would be injudicious to give food.

  -=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=

284. _The quantity of food is modified, in some degree, by habit._ A
healthy person, whose exercise is in pure air, may be accustomed to
take more food than is necessary. The useless excess is removed from
the system by the waste outlets, as the skin, lungs, liver, kidneys,
&c. In such cases, if food is not taken in the usual quantity, there
will be a feeling of emptiness, if not of hunger, from the want of the
usual distention of the stomach. This condition of the digestive
organs may be the result of disease, but it is more frequently
produced by inordinate daily indulgence in eating, amounting almost to
gluttony.

285. _Large quantities of food oppress the stomach, and cause general
languor of the whole body._ This is produced by the extra demands made
on the system for an increased supply of blood and nervous fluid to
enable the stomach to free itself of its burden. Thus, when we intend
to make any extraordinary effort, mental or physical, at least for one
meal, we should eat less food than usual, rather than a greater
quantity.

286. _No more food should be eaten than is barely sufficient to
satisfy the appetite._ Nor should appetite be confounded with taste.
The one is a natural desire for food to supply the wants of the
system; the other is an artificial desire merely to gratify the
palate.

287. Although many things may aid us in determining the quantity of
food proper for an individual, yet there is no certain guide in all
cases. It is maintained by some, that the sensation of hunger or
appetite is always an indication of the want of food, while the
absence of this peculiar sensation is regarded as conclusive evidence
that aliment is not demanded. This assertion is not correct, as an
appetite may be created for food by condiments and gormandizing, which
is as artificial and as morbid as that which craves tobacco or ardent
spirits. On the other hand, a structural or functional disease of the
brain may prevent that organ from taking cognizance of the sensations
of the stomach, when the system actually requires nourishment.
Observation shows, that disease, habit, the state of the mind, and
other circumstances, exert an influence on the appetite.

  -=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=

284. Show the effect of habit upon the quantity of food that is eaten.
What is said in regard to inordinate eating? 285. What is the effect
of eating large quantities of food? What suggestion when an
extraordinary effort, either mental or physical, is to be made? 286.
How much food should generally be eaten? 287. What is the assertion of
some persons relative to the quantity of food necessary for the
system?

  -=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=

_Observation._ Dr. Beaumont noticed, in the experiments upon Alexis
St. Martin, that after a certain amount of food was converted into
chyme, the gastric juice ceased to ooze from the coats of the stomach.
Consequently, it has been inferred by some writers on physiology, that
the glands which supply the gastric fluid, by a species of instinctive
intelligence, would only secrete enough fluid to convert into chyme
the aliment needed to supply the real wants of the system. What are
the reasons for this inference? There is no evidence that the gastric
glands possess instinctive intelligence, and can there be a reason
adduced, why they may not be stimulated to extra functional action as
well as other organs, and why they may not also be influenced by
habit?

288. While all agree that the remote or predisposing cause of hunger
is, usually, a demand of the system for nutrient material, the
proximate or immediate cause of the sensation of hunger is not clearly
understood. Some physiologists suppose that it is produced by an
engorged condition of the glands of the stomach which supply the
gastric juice; while others maintain that it depends on a peculiar
condition of the nervous system.

289. The QUALITY of the food best adapted to the wants of the system
is modified by many circumstances. There are many varieties of food,
and these are much modified by the different methods of preparation.
The same kind of food is not equally well adapted to different
individuals, or to the same individual in all conditions; as vocation,
health, exposure, habits of life, season, climate, &c., influence the
condition of the system.

  -=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=

What does observation show? 288. What is said of the causes of
hunger? 289. Why is not the same kind of food adapted to different
individuals?

  -=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=

290. All articles of food may be considered in two relations: 1st, As
nutritive. 2d, As digestible. Substances are nutritious in proportion
to their capacity to yield the elements of chyle, of which carbon,
oxygen, hydrogen, and nitrogen are the most essential; they are
digestible in proportion to the facility with which they are acted
upon by the gastric juice. These properties should not be confounded
in the various articles used for food.

291. As a "living body has no power of forming elements, or of
converting one elementary substance into another, it therefore follows
that the elements of which the body of an animal is composed must be
in the food." (Chap. III.) Of the essential constituents of the human
body, carbon, hydrogen, oxygen, and nitrogen are the most important,
because they compose the principal part of the animal body; while the
other elements are found in very small proportions, and many of them
only in a few organs of the system. (Appendix G.)

_Observation._ Nitrogen renders food more stimulating, particularly if
combined with a large quantity of carbon, as beef. Those articles that
contain the greatest amount of the constituent elements of the system
are most nutritious. As milk and eggs contain all the essential
elements of the human system, so they are adapted to almost universal
use, and are highly nutritious.

  -=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=

290. In what proportion are substances nutritious? Digestible? Why
does beef stimulate the system? What is said of milk and eggs?

  -=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=

292. The following table, by Pereira, in his treatise on Food and
Diet may aid the student in approximating to correct conclusions of
the quantity of nutriment in different kinds of food, and its
adaptation to the wants of the system.

TABLE,

SHOWING THE AVERAGE QUANTITY OF DRY, OR SOLID MATTER, CARBON,
NITROGEN, AND MOISTURE, IN DIFFERENT ARTICLES OF DIET.
