converts sulphur into a volatile gasseous acid, which only mixes in
small proportions with water, whilst a higher oxygenation forms an acid
possessing much stronger acid properties, which is very fixed and cannot
remain in the state of gas but in a very high temperature, which has no
smell, and which mixes in large proportion with water. With muriatic
acid, the direct reverse takes place; an additional saturation with
oxygen renders it more volatile, of a more penetrating odour, less
miscible with water, and diminishes its acid properties. We were at
first inclined to have denominated these two degrees of saturation in
the same manner as we had done with the acid of sulphur, calling the
less oxygenated _muriatous acid_, and that which is more saturated with
oxygen _muriatic acid_: But, as this latter gives very particular
results in its combinations, and as nothing analogous to it is yet known
in chemistry, we have left the name of muriatic acid to the less
saturated, and give the latter the more compounded appellation of
_oxygenated muriatic acid_.

Although the base or radical of the acid which is extracted from nitre
or saltpetre be better known, we have judged proper only to modify its
name in the same manner with that of the muriatic acid. It is drawn from
nitre, by the intervention of sulphuric acid, by a process similar to
that described for extracting the muriatic acid, and by means of the
same apparatus (Pl. IV. Fig. 1.). In proportion as the acid passes over,
it is in part condensed in the baloon or recipient, and the rest is
absorbed by the water contained in the bottles L,L,L,L; the water
becomes first green, then blue, and at last yellow, in proportion to
the concentration of the acid. During this operation, a large quantity
of oxygen gas, mixed with a small proportion of azotic gas, is
disengaged.

This acid, like all others, is composed of oxygen, united to an
acidifiable base, and is even the first acid in which the existence of
oxygen was well ascertained. Its two constituent elements are but weakly
united, and are easily separated, by presenting any substance with which
oxygen has a stronger affinity than with the acidifiable base peculiar
to this acid. By some experiments of this kind, it was first discovered
that azote, or the base of mephitis or azotic gas, constituted its
acidifiable base or radical; and consequently that the acid of nitre was
really an azotic acid, having azote for its base, combined with oxygen.
For these reasons, that we might be consistent with our principles, it
appeared necessary, either to call the acid by the name of _azotic_, or
to name the base _nitric radical_; but from either of these we were
dissuaded, by the following considerations. In the _first_ place, it
seemed difficult to change the name of nitre or saltpetre, which has
been universally adopted in society, in manufactures, and in chemistry;
and, on the other hand, azote having been discovered by Mr Berthollet to
be the base of volatile alkali, or ammoniac, as well as of this acid,
we thought it improper to call it nitric radical. We have therefore
continued the term of azote to the base of that part of atmospheric air
which is likewise the nitric and ammoniacal radical; and we have named
the acid of nitre, in its lower and higher degrees of oxygenation,
_nitrous acid_ in the former, and _nitric acid_ in the latter state;
thus preserving its former appellation properly modified.

Several very respectable chemists have disapproved of this deference for
the old terms, and wished us to have persevered in perfecting a new
chemical language, without paying any respect for ancient usage; so
that, by thus steering a kind of middle course, we have exposed
ourselves to the censures of one sect of chemists, and to the
expostulations of the opposite party.

The acid of nitre is susceptible of assuming a great number of separate
states, depending upon its degree of oxygenation, or upon the
proportions in which azote and oxygen enter into its composition. By a
first or lowest degree of oxygenation, it forms a particular species of
gas, which we shall continue to name _nitrous gas_; this is composed
nearly of two parts, by weight, of oxygen combined with one part of
azote; and in this state it is not miscible with water. In this gas, the
azote is by no means saturated with oxygen, but, on the contrary, has
still a very great affinity for that element, and even attracts it from
atmospheric air, immediately upon getting into contact with it. This
combination of nitrous gas with atmospheric air has even become one of
the methods for determining the quantity of oxygen contained in air, and
consequently for ascertaining its degree of salubrity.

This addition of oxygen converts the nitrous gas into a powerful acid,
which has a strong affinity with water, and which is itself susceptible
of various additional degrees of oxygenation. When the proportions of
oxygen and azote is below three parts, by weight, of the former, to one
of the latter, the acid is red coloured, and emits copious fumes. In
this state, by the application of a gentle heat, it gives out nitrous
gas; and we term it, in this degree of oxygenation, _nitrous acid_. When
four parts, by weight, of oxygen, are combined with one part of azote,
the acid is clear and colourless, more fixed in the fire than the
nitrous acid, has less odour, and its constituent elements are more
firmly united. This species of acid, in conformity with our principles
of nomenclature, is called _nitric acid_.

Thus, nitric acid is the acid of nitre, surcharged with oxygen; nitrous
acid is the acid of nitre surcharged with azote; or, what is the same
thing, with nitrous gas; and this latter is azote not sufficiently
saturated with oxygen to possess the properties of an acid. To this
degree of oxygenation, we have afterwards, in the course of this work,
given the generical name of _oxyd_[14].

FOOTNOTES:

[12] The term formerly used by the English chemists for this acid was
written _sulphureous_; but we have thought proper to spell it as above,
that it may better conform with the similar terminations of nitrous,
carbonous, &c. to be used hereafter. In general, we have used the
English terminations _ic_ and _ous_ to translate the terms of the Author
which end with _ique_ and _cux_, with hardly any other alterations.--E.

[13] For this purpose, the operation called _decrepitation_ is used,
which consists in subjecting it to nearly a red heat, in a proper
vessel, so as to evaporate all its water of crystallization.--E.

[14] In strict conformity with the principles of the new nomenclature,
but which the Author has given his reasons for deviating from in this
instance, the following ought to have been the terms for azote, in its
several degrees of oxygenation: Azote, azotic gas, (azote combined with
caloric), azotic oxyd gas, nitrous acid, and nitric acid.--E.




CHAP. VII.

_Of the Decomposition of Oxygen Gas by means of Metals, and the
Formation of Metallic Oxyds._


Oxygen has a stronger affinity with metals heated to a certain degree
than with caloric; in consequence of which, all metallic bodies,
excepting gold, silver, and platina, have the property of decomposing
oxygen gas, by attracting its base from the caloric with which it was
combined. We have already shown in what manner this decomposition takes
place, by means of mercury and iron; having observed, that, in the case
of the first, it must be considered as a kind of gradual combustion,
whilst, in the latter, the combustion is extremely rapid, and attended
with a brilliant flame. The use of the heat employed in these operations
is to separate the particles of the metal from each other, and to
diminish their attraction of cohesion or aggregation, or, what is the
same thing, their mutual attraction for each other.

The absolute weight of metallic substances is augmented in proportion to
the quantity of oxygen they absorb; they, at the same time, lose their
metallic splendour, and are reduced into an earthy pulverulent matter.
In this state metals must not be considered as entirely saturated with
oxygen, because their action upon this element is counterbalanced by the
power of affinity between it and caloric. During the calcination of
metals, the oxygen is therefore acted upon by two separate and opposite
powers, that of its attraction for caloric, and that exerted by the
metal, and only tends to unite with the latter in consequence of the
excess of the latter over the former, which is, in general, very
inconsiderable. Wherefore, when metallic substances are oxygenated in
atmospheric air, or in oxygen gas, they are not converted into acids
like sulphur, phosphorus, and charcoal, but are only changed into
intermediate substances, which, though approaching to the nature of
salts, have not acquired all the saline properties. The old chemists
have affixed the name of _calx_ not only to metals in this state, but to
every body which has been long exposed to the action of fire without
being melted. They have converted this word _calx_ into a generical
term, under which they confound calcareous earth, which, from a neutral
salt, which it really was before calcination, has been changed by fire
into an earthy alkali, by _losing_ half of its weight, with metals
which, by the same means, have joined themselves to a new substance,
whose quantity often _exceeds_ half their weight, and by which they
have been changed almost into the nature of acids. This mode of
classifying substances of so very opposite natures, under the same
generic name, would have been quite contrary to our principles of
nomenclature, especially as, by retaining the above term for this state
of metallic substances, we must have conveyed very false ideas of its
nature. We have, therefore, laid aside the expression _metallic calx_
altogether, and have substituted in its place the term _oxyd_, from the
Greek word [Greek: oxys].

By this may be seen, that the language we have adopted is both copious
and expressive. The first or lowest degree of oxygenation in bodies,
converts them into _oxyds_; a second degree of additional oxygenation
constitutes the class of acids, of which the specific names, drawn from
their particular bases, terminate in _ous_, as the _nitrous_ and
_sulphurous_ acids; the third degree of oxygenation changes these into
the species of acids distinguished by the termination in ic, as the
_nitric_ and _sulphuric_ acids; and, lastly, we can express a fourth, or
highest degree of oxygenation, by adding the word _oxygenated_ to the
name of the acid, as has been already done with the _oxygenated
muriatic_ acid.

We have not confined the term _oxyd_ to expressing the combinations of
metals with oxygen, but have extended it to signify that first degree of
oxygenation in all bodies, which, without converting them into acids,
causes them to approach to the nature of salts. Thus, we give the name
of _oxyd of sulphur_ to that soft substance into which sulphur is
converted by incipient combustion; and we call the yellow matter left by
phosphorus, after combustion, by the name of _oxyd of phosphorus_. In
the same manner, nitrous gas, which is azote in its first degree of
oxygenation, is the _oxyd of azote_. We have likewise oxyds in great
numbers from the vegetable and animal kingdoms; and I shall show, in the
sequel, that this new language throws great light upon all the
operations of art and nature.

We have already observed, that almost all the metallic oxyds have
peculiar and permanent colours. These vary not only in the different
species of metals, but even according to the various degrees of
oxygenation in the same metal. Hence we are under the necessity of
adding two epithets to each oxyd, one of which indicates the metal
_oxydated_[15], while the other indicates the peculiar colour of the
oxyd. Thus, we have the black oxyd of iron, the red oxyd of iron, and
the yellow oxyd of iron; which expressions respectively answer to the
old unmeaning terms of martial ethiops, colcothar, and rust of iron, or
ochre. We have likewise the gray, yellow, and red oxyds of lead, which
answer to the equally false or insignificant terms, ashes of lead,
massicot, and minium.

These denominations sometimes become rather long, especially when we
mean to indicate whether the metal has been oxydated in the air, by
detonation with nitre, or by means of acids; but then they always convey
just and accurate ideas of the corresponding object which we wish to
express by their use. All this will be rendered perfectly clear and
distinct by means of the tables which are added to this work.

FOOTNOTES:

[15] Here we see the word oxyd converted into the verb _to oxydate_,
_oxydated_, _oxydating_, after the same manner with the derivation of
the verb _to oxygenate_, _oxygenated_, _oxygenating_, from the word
_oxygen_. I am not clear of the absolute necessity of this second verb
here first introduced, but think, in a work of this nature, that it is
the duty of the translator to neglect every other consideration for the
sake of strict fidelity to the ideas of his author.--E.




CHAP. VIII.

_Of the Radical Principle of Water, and of its Decomposition by Charcoal
and Iron._


Until very lately, water has always been thought a simple substance,
insomuch that the older chemists considered it as an element. Such it
undoubtedly was to them, as they were unable to decompose it; or, at
least, since the decomposition which took place daily before their eyes
was entirely unnoticed. But we mean to prove, that water is by no means
a simple or elementary substance. I shall not here pretend to give the
history of this recent, and hitherto contested discovery, which is
detailed in the Memoirs of the Academy for 1781, but shall only bring
forwards the principal proofs of the decomposition and composition of
water; and, I may venture to say, that these will be convincing to such
as consider them impartially.


_Experiment First._

Having fixed the glass tube EF, (Pl. vii. fig. 11.) of from 8 to 12
lines diameter, across a furnace, with a small inclination from E to F,
lute the superior extremity E to the glass retort A, containing a
determinate quantity of distilled water, and to the inferior extremity
F, the worm SS fixed into the neck of the doubly tubulated bottle H,
which has the bent tube KK adapted to one of its openings, in such a
manner as to convey such aeriform fluids or gasses as may be disengaged,
during the experiment, into a proper apparatus for determining their
quantity and nature.

To render the success of this experiment certain, it is necessary that
the tube EF be made of well annealed and difficultly fusible glass, and
that it be coated with a lute composed of clay mixed with powdered
stone-ware; besides which, it must be supported about its middle by
means of an iron bar passed through the furnace, lest it should soften
and bend during the experiment. A tube of China-ware, or porcellain,
would answer better than one of glass for this experiment, were it not
difficult to procure one so entirely free from pores as to prevent the
passage of air or of vapours.

When things are thus arranged, a fire is lighted in the furnace EFCD,
which is supported of such a strength as to keep the tube EF red hot,
but not to make it melt; and, at the same time, such a fire is kept up
in the furnace VVXX, as to keep the water in the retort A continually
boiling.

In proportion as the water in the retort A is evaporated, it fills the
tube EF, and drives out the air it contained by the tube KK; the aqueous
gas formed by evaporation is condensed by cooling in the worm SS, and
falls, drop by drop, into the tubulated bottle H. Having continued this
operation until all the water be evaporated from the retort, and having
carefully emptied all the vessels employed, we find that a quantity of
water has passed over into the bottle H, exactly equal to what was
before contained in the retort A, without any disengagement of gas
whatsoever: So that this experiment turns out to be a simple
distillation; and the result would have been exactly the same, if the
water had been run from one vessel into the other, through the tube EF,
without having undergone the intermediate incandescence.


_Experiment Second._

The apparatus being disposed, as in the former experiment, 28 grs. of
charcoal, broken into moderately small parts, and which has previously
been exposed for a long time to a red heat in close vessels, are
introduced into the tube EF. Every thing else is managed as in the
preceding experiment.

The water contained in the retort A is distilled, as in the former
experiment, and, being condensed in the worm, falls into the bottle H;
but, at the same time, a considerable quantity of gas is disengaged,
which, escaping by the tube KK, is received in a convenient apparatus
for that purpose. After the operation is finished, we find nothing but a
few atoms of ashes remaining in the tube EF; the 28 grs. of charcoal
having entirely disappeared.

When the disengaged gasses are carefully examined, they are sound to
weigh 113.7 grs.[16]; these are of two kinds, viz. 144 cubical inches
of carbonic acid gas, weighing 100 grs. and 380 cubical inches of a
very light gas, weighing only 13.7 grs. which takes fire when in
contact with air, by the approach of a lighted body; and, when the water
which has passed over into the bottle H is carefully examined, it is
found to have lost 85.7 grs. of its weight. Thus, in this experiment,
85.7 grs. of water, joined to 28 grs. of charcoal, have combined in
such a way as to form 100 grs. of carbonic acid, and 13.7 grs. of a
particular gas capable of being burnt.

I have already shown, that 100 grs. of carbonic acid gas consists of
72 grs. of oxygen, combined with 28 grs. of charcoal; hence the 28
grs. of charcoal placed in the glass tube have acquired 72 grs. of
oxygen from the water; and it follows, that 85.7 grs. of water are
composed of 72 grs. of oxygen, combined with 13.7 grs. of a gas
susceptible of combustion. We shall see presently that this gas cannot
possibly have been disengaged from the charcoal, and must, consequently,
have been produced from the water.

I have suppressed some circumstances in the above account of this
experiment, which would only have complicated and obscured its results
in the minds of the reader. For instance, the inflammable gas dissolves
a very small part of the charcoal, by which means its weight is somewhat
augmented, and that of the carbonic gas proportionally diminished.
Altho' the alteration produced by this circumstance is very
inconsiderable; yet I have thought it necessary to determine its effects
by rigid calculation, and to report, as above, the results of the
experiment in its simplified state, as if this circumstance had not
happened. At any rate, should any doubts remain respecting the
consequences I have drawn from this experiment, they will be fully
dissipated by the following experiments, which I am going to adduce in
support of my opinion.


_Experiment Third._

The apparatus being disposed exactly as in the former experiment, with
this difference, that instead of the 28 grs. of charcoal, the tube EF
is filled with 274 grs. of soft iron in thin plates, rolled up
spirally. The tube is made red hot by means of its furnace, and the
water in the retort A is kept constantly boiling till it be all
evaporated, and has passed through the tube EF, so as to be condensed in
the bottle H.

No carbonic acid gas is disengaged in this experiment, instead of which
we obtain 416 cubical inches, or 15 grs. of inflammable gas, thirteen
times lighter than atmospheric air. By examining the water which has
been distilled, it is found to have lost 100 grs. and the 274 grs.
of iron confined in the tube are found to have acquired 85 grs.
additional weight, and its magnitude is considerably augmented. The iron
is now hardly at all attractable by the magnet; it dissolves in acids
without effervescence; and, in short, it is converted into a black oxyd,
precisely similar to that which has been burnt in oxygen gas.

In this experiment we have a true _oxydation_ of iron, by means of
water, exactly similar to that produced in air by the assistance of
heat. One hundred grains of water having been decomposed, 85 grs. of
oxygen have combined with the iron, so as to convert it into the state
of black oxyd, and 15 grs. of a peculiar inflammable gas are
disengaged: From all this it clearly follows, that water is composed of
oxygen combined with the base of an inflammable gas, in the respective
proportions of 85 parts, by weight of the former, to 15 parts of the
latter.

Thus water, besides the oxygen, which is one of its elements in common
with many other substances, contains another element as its constituent
base or radical, and for which we must find an appropriate term. None
that we could think of seemed better adapted than the word _hydrogen_,
which signifies the _generative principle of water_, from [Greek: ydor]
_aqua_, and [Greek: geinomas] _gignor_[17]. We call the combination of
this element with caloric _hydrogen gas_; and the term hydrogen
expresses the base of that gas, or the radical of water.

This experiment furnishes us with a new combustible body, or, in other
words, a body which has so much affinity with oxygen as to draw it from
its connection with caloric, and to decompose air or oxygen gas. This
combustible body has itself so great affinity with caloric, that, unless
when engaged in a combination with some other body, it always subsists
in the aeriform or gasseous state, in the usual temperature and pressure
of our atmosphere. In this state of gas it is about 1/13 of the weight
of an equal bulk of atmospheric air; it is not absorbed by water, though
it is capable of holding a small quantity of that fluid in solution, and
it is incapable of being used for respiration.

As the property this gas possesses, in common with all other combustible
bodies, is nothing more than the power of decomposing air, and carrying
off its oxygen from the caloric with which it was combined, it is easily
understood that it cannot burn, unless in contact with air or oxygen
gas. Hence, when we set fire to a bottle full of this gas, it burns
gently, first at the neck of the bottle, and then in the inside of it,
in proportion as the external air gets in: This combustion is slow and
successive, and only takes place at the surface of contact between the
two gasses. It is quite different when the two gasses are mixed before
they are set on fire: If, for instance, after having introduced one part
of oxygen gas into a narrow mouthed bottle, we fill it up with two
parts of hydrogen gas, and bring a lighted taper, or other burning body,
to the mouth of the bottle, the combustion of the two gasses takes place
instantaneously with a violent explosion. This experiment ought only to
be made in a bottle of very strong green glass, holding not more than a
pint, and wrapped round with twine, otherwise the operator will be
exposed to great danger from the rupture of the bottle, of which the
fragments will be thrown about with great force.

If all that has been related above, concerning the decomposition of
water, be exactly conformable to truth;--if, as I have endeavoured to
prove, that substance be really composed of hydrogen, as its proper
constituent element, combined with oxygen, it ought to follow, that, by
reuniting these two elements together, we should recompose water; and
that this actually happens may be judged of by the following experiment.


_Experiment Fourth._

I took a large cristal baloon, A, Pl. iv. fig. 5. holding about 30
pints, having a large opening, to which was cemented the plate of copper
BC, pierced with four holes, in which four tubes terminate. The first
tube, H h, is intended to be adapted to an air pump, by which the
baloon is to be exhausted of its air. The second tube gg, communicates,
by its extremity MM, with a reservoir of oxygen gas, with which the
baloon is to be filled. The third tube d D d', communicates, by its
extremity d NN, with a reservoir of hydrogen gas. The extremity d' of
this tube terminates in a capillary opening, through which the hydrogen
gas contained in the reservoir is forced, with a moderate degree of
quickness, by the pressure of one or two inches of water. The fourth
tube contains a metallic wire GL, having a knob at its extremity L,
intended for giving an electrical spark from L to d', on purpose to set
fire to the hydrogen gas: This wire is moveable in the tube, that we may
be able to separate the knob L from the extremity d' of the tube D d'.
The three tubes d D d', gg, and H h, are all provided with stop-cocks.

That the hydrogen gas and oxygen gas may be as much as possible deprived
of water, they are made to pass, in their way to the baloon A, through
the tubes MM, NN, of about an inch diameter, and filled with salts,
which, from their deliquescent nature, greedily attract the moisture of
the air: Such are the acetite of potash, and the muriat or nitrat of
lime[18]. These salts must only be reduced to a coarse powder, lest
they run into lumps, and prevent the gasses from geting through their
interstices.

We must be provided before hand with a sufficient quantity of oxygen
gas, carefully purified from all admixture of carbonic acid, by long
contact with a solution of potash[19].

We must likewise have a double quantity of hydrogen gas, carefully
purified in the same manner by long contact with a solution of potash in
water. The best way of obtaining this gas free from mixture is, by
decomposing water with very pure soft iron, as directed in Exp. 3. of
