"A duty--to destroy a North American business?"

       *       *       *       *       *

Chung finished at the intercom in time to answer: "Not permanent
physical destruction, Miss Ziska. As Mike suggested, some corporation
will doubtless inherit the Sword and repair the damage. But a private,
purely asterite business ... yes, I'm afraid Mike's right. We are the
target."

"In mercy's name, why?"

"From the highest motives, of course," Chung sneered bitterly. "You
know what the Social Justice Party thinks of private capitalism.
What's more important, though, is that the Sword is the first Belt
undertaking not tied to Mother Earth's apron strings. We have no
commitments to anybody back there. We can sell our output wherever we
like. It's notorious that the asterites are itching to build up their
own self-sufficient industries. Quite apart from sentiment, we can
make bigger profits in the Belt than back home, especially when you
figure the cost of sending stuff in and out of Earth's gravitational
well. So certainly we'd be doing most of our business out here.

"Our charter can't simply be revoked. First a good many laws would
have to be revised, and that's politically impossible. There is still
a lot of individualist sentiment in North America, as witness the
fact that businesses do get launched and that the Essjays did have a
hard campaign to get elected. What the new government wants is
something like the Eighteenth Century English policy toward America.
Keep the colonies as a source of raw materials and as a market for
manufactured goods, but don't let them develop a domestic industry.
You can't come right out and say that, but you can let the situation
develop naturally.

"Only ... here the Sword is, obviously bound to grow rich and expand
in every direction. If we're allowed to develop, to reinvest our
profits, we'll become the nucleus of independent asterite enterprise.
If, on the other hand, we're wiped out by an unfortunate accident,
there's no nucleus; and a small change in the banking laws is all
that's needed to prevent others from getting started. Q.E.D."

"I daresay Hulse does think he's doing his patriotic duty," said
Blades. "He wants to guarantee North America our natural resources--in
the long run, maybe, our allegiance. If he has to commit sabotage, too
bad, but it won't cost him any sleep."

"No!" Ellen almost screamed.

Chung sagged in his chair. "We're very neatly trapped," he said like
an old man. "I don't see any way out. Think you can get to work now,
Mike? You can assign group leaders for the evacuation--"

Blades jumped erect. "I can fight!" he growled.

"With what? Can openers?"

"You mean you're going to lie down and let them break us?"

Avis came back. She thrust the bottle into Blades' hands as he paced
the room. "Here you are," she said in a distant voice.

He held it out toward Ellen. "Have some," he invited.

"Not with you ... you subversive!"

Avis brightened noticeably, took the bottle and raised it. "Then
here's to victory," she said, drank, and passed it to Blades.

He started to gulp; but the wine was too noble, and he found himself
savoring its course down his throat. _Why,_ he thought vaguely, _do
people always speak with scorn about Dutch courage? The Dutch have
real guts. They fought themselves free of Spain and free of the ocean
itself; when the French or Germans came, they made the enemy sea their
ally_--

The bottle fell from his grasp. In the weak acceleration, it hadn't
hit the floor when Avis rescued it. "Gimme that, you big
butterfingers," she exclaimed. Her free hand clasped his arm.
"Whatever happens, Mike," she said to him, "we're not quitting."

Still Blades stared beyond her. His fists clenched and unclenched. The
noise of his breathing filled the room. Chung looked around in
bewilderment; Ellen watched with waxing horror; Avis' eyes kindled.

"Holy smoking seegars," Blades whispered at last. "I really think we
can swing it."

Captain Janichevski recoiled. "You're out of your skull!"

"Probably," said Blades. "Fun, huh?"

"You can't do this."

"We can try."

"Do you know what you're talking about? Insurrection, that's what.
Quite likely piracy. Even if your scheme worked, you'd spend the next
ten years in Rehab--at least."

"Maybe, provided the matter ever came to trial. But it won't."

"That's what you think. You're asking me to compound the felony, and
misappropriate the property of my owners to boot." Janichevski shook
his head. "Sorry, Mike. I'm sorry as hell about this mess. But I won't
be party to making it worse."

"In other words," Blades replied, "you'd rather be party to sabotage.
I'm proposing an act of legitimate self-defense."

"_If_ there actually is a conspiracy to destroy the Station."

"Adam, you're a spaceman. You know how the Navy operates. Can you
swallow that story about a missile getting loose by accident?"

Janichevski bit his lip. The sounds from outside filled the captain's
cabin, voices, footfalls, whirr of machines and clash of doors, as the
_Pallas Castle_ readied for departure. Blades waited.

"You may be right," said Janichevski at length, wretchedly. "Though
why Hulse should jeopardize his career--"

"He's not. There's a scapegoat groomed back home, you can be sure.
Like some company that'll be debarred from military contracts for a
while ... and get nice fat orders in other fields. I've kicked around
the System enough to know how that works."

"If you're wrong, though ... if this is an honest blunder ... then you
risk committing treason."

"Yeah. I'll take the chance."

"Not I. No. I've got a family to support," Janichevski said.

Blades regarded him bleakly. "If the Essjays get away with this stunt,
what kind of life will your family be leading, ten years from now?
It's not simply that we'll be high-class peons in the Belt. But tied
hand and foot to a shortsighted government, how much progress will we
be able to make? Other countries have colonies out here too, remember,
and some of them are already giving their people a freer hand than
we've got. Do you want the Asians, or the Russians, or even the
Europeans, to take over the asteroids?"

"I can't make policy."

"In other words, mama knows best. Believe, obey, anything put out by
some bureaucrat who never set foot beyond Luna. Is that your idea of
citizenship?"

"You're putting a mighty fine gloss on bailing yourself out!"
Janichevski flared.

"Sure, I'm no idealist. But neither am I a slave," Blades hesitated.
"We've been friends too long, Adam, for me to try bribing you. But if
worst comes to worst, we'll cover for you ... somehow ... and if
contrariwise we win, then we'll soon be hiring captains for our own
ships and you'll get the best offer any spaceman ever got."

"No. Scram. I've work to do."

Blades braced himself. "I didn't want to say this. But I've already
informed a number of my men. They're as mad as I am. They're waiting
in the terminal. A monkey wrench or a laser torch makes a pretty fair
weapon. We can take over by force. That'll leave you legally in the
clear. But with so many witnesses around, you'll have to prefer
charges against us later on."

Janichevski began to sweat.

"We'll be sent up," said Blades. "But it will still have been worth
it."

"Is it really that important to you?"

"Yes. I admit I'm no crusader. But this is a matter of principle."

Janichevski stared at the big red-haired man for a long while.
Suddenly he stiffened. "O.K. On that account, and no other, I'll go
along with you."

Blades wobbled on his feet, near collapse with relief. "Good man!" he
croaked.

"But I will not have any of my officers or crew involved."

Blades rallied and answered briskly, "You needn't. Just issue orders
that my boys are to have access to the scoopships. They can install
the equipment, jockey the boats over to the full balloons, and even
couple them on."

Janichevski's fears had vanished once he made his decision, but now a
certain doubt registered. "That's a pretty skilled job."

"These are pretty skilled men. It isn't much of a maneuver, not like
making a Jovian sky dive."

"Well, O.K., I'll take your word for their ability. But suppose the
_Altair_ spots those boats moving around?"

"She's already several hundred kilometers off, and getting farther
away, running a search curve which I'm betting my liberty--and my
honor; I certainly don't want to hurt my own country's Navy--I'm
betting that search curve is guaranteed not to find the missile in
time. They'll spot the _Pallas_ as you depart--oh, yes, our people
will be aboard as per orders--but no finer detail will show in so
casual an observation."

"Again, I'll take your word. What else can I do to help?"

"Nothing you weren't doing before. Leave the piratics to us. I'd
better get back." Blades extended his hand. "I haven't got the words
to thank you, Adam."

Janichevski accepted the shake. "No reason for thanks. You dragooned
me." A grin crossed his face. "I must confess though, I'm not sorry
you did."

       *       *       *       *       *

Blades left. He found his gang in the terminal, two dozen engineers
and rockjacks clumped tautly together.

"What's the word?" Carlos Odonaju shouted.

"Clear track," Blades said. "Go right aboard."

"Good. Fine. I always wanted to do something vicious and destructive,"
Odonaju laughed.

"The idea is to prevent destruction," Blades reminded him, and
proceeded toward the office.

Avis met him in Corridor Four. Her freckled countenance was distorted
by a scowl. "Hey, Mike, wait a minute," she said, low and hurriedly.
"Have you seen La Ziska?"

"The leftenant? Why, no. I left her with you, remember, hoping you
could calm her down."

"Uh-huh. She was incandescent mad. Called us a pack of bandits
and--But then she started crying. Seemed to break down completely. I
took her to your cabin and went back to help Jimmy. Only, when I
checked there a minute ago, she was gone."

"What? Where?"

"How should I know? But that she-devil's capable of anything to wreck
our chances."

"You're not being fair to her. She's got an oath to keep."

"All right," said Avis sweetly. "Far be it from me to prevent her
fulfilling her obligations. Afterward she may even write you an
occasional letter. I'm sure that'll brighten your Rehab cell no end."

"What can she do?" Blades argued, with an uneasy sense of whistling in
the dark. "She can't get off the asteroid without a scooter, and I've
already got Sam's gang working on all the scooters."

"Is there no other possibility? The radio shack?"

