us. I chased him back to the galley, but I don't like it."

Most of them had already eaten at least half of the food, but I saw
Muller wasn't touching his. The rest stopped now, as the words sank
in, and Napier looked shocked. "No!" he said, but his tone wasn't
positive. "He's a weakling, but I don't think he's insane--not enough
to poison us."

"There was that food poisoning before," Pietro said suddenly. "Paul,
come along. And don't eat anything until we come back."

We broke the record getting to the galley. There Bullard sat, beaming
happily, eating from a huge plate piled with the food he had cooked. I
checked on it quickly--and there wasn't anything he'd left out. He
looked up, and his grin widened foolishly.

"Hi, docs," he said. "Yes, sir, I knowed you'd be coming. It all came
to me in a dream. Looked just like my wife twenty years ago, she did,
with green and yellow halos. And she told it to me. Told me I'd been a
good man, and nothing was going to happen to me. Not to good old Emery
Bullard. Had it all figgered out."

He speared a big forkful of food and crammed it into his mouth,
munching noisily. "Had it all figgered. Pop-corn. Best damned pop-corn
you ever saw, kind they raise not fifty miles from where I was born.
You know, I didn't useta like you guys. But now I love everybody. When
we get to Saturn, I'm gonna make up for all the times I didn't give
you pop-corn. We'll pop and we'll pop. And beans, too. I useta hate
beans. Always beans on a ship. But now we're saved, and I love
beans!"

He stared after us, half coming out of his seat. "Hey, docs, ain't you
gonna let me tell you about it?"

"Later, Bullard," Pietro called back. "Something just came up. We want
to hear all about it."

       *       *       *       *       *

Inside the mess hall, he shrugged. "He's eating the food himself. If
he's crazy, he's in a happy stage of it. I'm sure he isn't trying to
poison us." He sat down and began eating, without any hesitation.

I didn't feel as sure, and suspected he didn't. But it was too late to
back out. Together, we summarized what he'd told us, while Napier
puzzled over it. Finally the doctor shrugged. "Visions. Euphoria.
Disconnection with reality. Apparently something of a delusion that
he's to save the world. I'm not a psychiatrist, but it sounds like
insanity to me. Probably not dangerous. At least, while he wants to
save us, we won't have to worry about the food. Still...."

Wilcox mulled it over, and resumed the eating he had neglected before.

"Grundy claimed he'd been down near the engine room, trying to get
permission to pop something in the big pile. I thought Grundy was just
getting his stories mixed up. But--pop-corn!"

"I'll have him locked in his cabin," Muller decided. He picked up the
nearest handset, saw that it was to the galley, and switched quickly.
"Grundy, lock Bullard up. And no rough stuff this time." Then he
turned to Napier. "Dr. Napier, you'll have to see him and find out
what you can."

I guess there's a primitive fear of insanity in most of us. We felt
sick, beyond the nagging worry about the food. Napier got up at once.
"I'll give him a sedative. Maybe it's just nerves, and he'll snap out
of it after a good sleep. Anyhow, your mate can stand watching."

"Who can cook?" Muller asked. His eyes swung down the table toward
Jenny.

I wondered how she'd get out of that. Apparently she'd never told
Muller about the scars she still had from spilled grease, and how
she'd never forgiven her mother or been able to go near a kitchen
since. But I should have guessed. She could remember my stories, too.
Her eyes swung up toward mine pleadingly.

Eve Nolan stood up suddenly. "I'm not only a good cook, but I enjoy
it," she stated flatly, and there was disgust in the look she threw at
Jenny. She swung toward me. "How about it, Paul, can you wrestle the
big pots around for me?"

"I used to be a short order cook when I was finishing school," I told
her. But she'd ruined the line. The grateful look and laugh from Jenny
weren't needed now. And curiously, I felt grateful to Eve for it. I
got up and went after Napier.

I found him in Bullard's little cubbyhole of a cabin. He must have
chased Grundy off, and now he was just drawing a hypo out of the
cook's arm. "It'll take the pain away," he was saying softly. "And
I'll see that he doesn't hit you again. You'll be all right, now. And
in the morning, I'll come and listen to you. Just go to sleep. Maybe
she'll come back and tell you more."

He must have heard me, since he signalled me out with his hand, and
backed out quietly himself, still talking. He shut the door, and
clicked the lock.

Bullard heard it, though. He jerked to a sitting position, and
screamed. "_No!_ No! He'll kill me! I'm a good man...."

He hunched up on the bed, forcing the sheet into his mouth. When he
looked up a second later, his face was frozen in fear, but it was a
desperate, calm kind of fear. He turned to face us, and his voice
raised to a full shout, with every word as clear as he could make it.

"All right. Now I'll never tell you the secret. Now you can all die
without air. I promise I'll never tell you what I know!"

He fell back, beating at the sheet with his hand and sobbing
hysterically. Napier watched him. "Poor devil," the doctor said at
last. "Well, in another minute the shot will take effect. Maybe he's
lucky. He won't be worrying for awhile. And maybe he'll be rational
tomorrow."

"All the same, I'm going to stand guard until Muller gets someone else
here," I decided. I kept remembering Lomax.

Napier nodded, and half an hour later Bill Sanderson came to take over
the watch. Bullard was sleeping soundly.

The next day, though, he woke up to start moaning and writhing again.
But he was keeping his word. He refused to answer any questions.
Napier looked worried as he reported he'd given the cook another shot
of sedative. There was nothing else he could do.

Cooking was a relief, in a way. By the time Eve and I had scrubbed all
the pots into what she considered proper order, located some of the
food lockers, and prepared and served a couple of meals, we'd evolved
a smooth system that settled into a routine with just enough work to
help keep our minds off the dwindling air in the tanks. In anything
like a kitchen, she lost most of her mannish pose and turned into a
live, efficient woman. And she could cook.

"First thing I learned," she told me. "I grew up in a kitchen. I guess
I'd never have turned to photography if my kid brother hadn't been
using our sink for his darkroom."

Wilcox brought her a bottle of his wine to celebrate her first dinner.
He seemed to want to stick around, but she chased him off after the
first drink. We saved half the bottle to make a sauce the next day.

It never got made. Muller called a council of war, and his face was
pinched and old. He was leaning on Jenny as Eve and I came into the
mess hall; oddly, she seemed to be trying to buck him up. He got down
to the facts as soon as all of us were together.

"Our oxygen tanks are empty," he announced. "They shouldn't be--but
they are. Someone must have sabotaged them before the plants were
poisoned--and done it so the dials don't show it. I just found it out
when the automatic switch to a new tank failed to work. We now have
the air in the ship, and no more. Dr. Napier and I have figured that
this will keep us all alive with the help of the plants for no more
than fifteen days. I am open to any suggestions!"

       *       *       *       *       *

There was silence after that, while it soaked in. Then it was broken
by a thin scream from Phil Riggs. He slumped into a seat and buried
his head in his hands. Pietro put a hand on the man's thin shoulders,
"Captain Muller--"

"Kill 'em!" It was Grundy's voice, bellowing sharply. "Let'em breathe
space! They got us into it! We can make out with the plants left! It's
our ship!"

Muller had walked forward. Now his fist lashed out, and Grundy
crumpled. He lay still for a second, then got to his feet unsteadily.
Jenny screamed, but Muller moved steadily back to his former place
without looking at the mate. Grundy hesitated, fumbled in his pocket
for something, and swallowed it.

"Captain, sir!" His voice was lower this time.

"Yes, Mr. Grundy?"

"How many of us can live off the plants?"

"Ten--perhaps eleven."

"Then--then give us a lottery!"

Pietro managed to break in over the yells of the rest of the crew. "I
was about to suggest calling for volunteers, Captain Muller. I still
have enough faith in humanity to believe...."

"You're a fool, Dr. Pietro," Muller said flatly. "Do you think Grundy
would volunteer? Or Bullard? But thanks for clearing the air, and
admitting your group has nothing more to offer. A lottery seems to be
the only fair system."

He sat down heavily. "We have tradition on this; in an emergency such
as this, death lotteries have been held, and have been considered
legal afterwards. Are there any protests?"

I could feel my tongue thicken in my mouth. I could see the others
stare about, hoping someone would object, wondering if this could be
happening. But nobody answered, and Muller nodded reluctantly. "A
working force must be left. Some men are indispensable. We must have
an engineer, a navigator, and a doctor. One man skilled with
engine-room practice and one with deck work must remain."

"And the cook goes," Grundy yelled. His eyes were intent and slitted
again.

Some of both groups nodded, but Muller brought his fist down on the
table. "This will be a legal lottery, Mr. Grundy. Dr. Napier will draw
for him."

"And for myself," Napier said. "It's obvious that ten men aren't going
on to Saturn--you'll have to turn back, or head for Jupiter. Jupiter,
in fact, is the only sensible answer. And a ship can get along without
a doctor that long when it has to. I demand my right to the draw."

Muller only shrugged and laid down the rules. They were simple enough.
He would cut drinking straws to various lengths, and each would draw
one. The two deck hands would compare theirs, and the longer would be
automatically safe. The same for the pair from the engine-room. Wilcox
was safe. "Mr. Peters and I will also have one of us eliminated," he
added quietly. "In an emergency, our abilities are sufficiently
alike."

The remaining group would have their straws measured, and the seven
shortest ones would be chosen to remove themselves into a vacant
section between hulls without air within three hours, or be forcibly
placed there. The remaining ten would head for Jupiter if no miracle
removed the danger in those three hours.

Peters got the straws, and Muller cut them and shuffled them. There
was a sick silence that let us hear the sounds of the scissors with
each snip. Muller arranged them so the visible ends were even. "Ladies
first," he said. There was no expression on his face or in his voice.

Jenny didn't giggle, but neither did she balk. She picked a straw, and
then shrieked faintly. It was obviously a long one. Eve reached for
hers--

And Wilcox yelled suddenly. "Captain Muller, protest! Protest! You're
using all long straws for the women!" He had jumped forward, and now
struck down Muller's hand, proving his point.

"You're quite right, Mr. Wilcox," Muller said woodenly. He dropped his
hand toward his lap and came up with a group of the straws that had
been cut, placed there somehow without our seeing it. He'd done a
