
The pollen seemed to be drawn toward the Indios, spun toward them in
dancing mist-motes. It settled on their bronzed bodies, their limbs
and faces. It covered them like a veil until they appeared to be six
statues, white as cold marble, there on the blue moss.

Lhar's petals lifted and closed again. She swayed toward me, her mind
sending a message into mine.

"The Other has no refuge now," she told me. "I have slain the--the
girls."

"They're dead?" My lips were dry.

"What semblance of life they had left is now gone. The Other cannot
use them again."

Lhar swayed toward me. A cool tentacle swept out, pressing lightly on
my forehead. Another touched my breast, above the heart.

"I give you of my strength," Lhar said. "It will be as shield and
buckler to you. The rest of the way you must go alone...."

Into me tide of power flowed. I sank into cool depths, passionless and
calm. Something was entering my body, my mind and soul, drowning my
fears, stiffening my resolve.

Strength of Lhar was now my strength!

The tentacles dropped away, their work done. The robot's cilia
signalled and Lhar said, "Your way lies there. That temple--do you see
it?"

I saw it. Far in the distance, half shrouded by the fog, a scarlet
structure, not ruined like the others, was visible.

"You will find the Other there. Slay the last Indio, then destroy the
Other."

I had no doubt now of my ability to do that. A new power seemed to
lift me from my feet, send me running across the moss. Once I glanced
back, to see Lhar and her robot standing motionless, watching me.

The temple enlarged as I came nearer. It was built of the same reddish
stone as the other ruined blocks I had seen. But erosion had weathered
its harsh angles till nothing now remained but a rounded, smoothly
sculptured monolith, twenty feet tall, shaped like a rifle shell.

A doorway gaped in the crimson wall. I paused for a moment on the
threshold. In the dimness within a shadow stirred. I stepped forward,
finding myself in a room that was tall and narrow, the ceiling hidden
in gloom. Along the walls were carvings I could not clearly see. They
gave a suggestion of inhuman beings that watched.

It was dark but I could see the Indio girl who had been Miranda Valle.
Her eyes were on me, and, even through the protecting armor of Lhar
strength; I could feel their terrible power.

The life in the girl was certainly not human!

"Destroy her!" my mind warned. "Destroy her! Quickly!"

But as I hesitated a veil of darkness seemed to fall upon me. Utter cold,
a frigidity as of outer space, lanced into my brain. My senses reeled
under the assault. Desperately, blind and sick and giddy, I called on the
reserve strength Lhar had given me. Then I blacked out....

When I awoke I saw smoke coiling up from the muzzle of the pistol in
my hand. At my feet lay the Indio girl, dead. My bullet had crashed
into her brain, driving out the terrible dweller there.

My eyes were drawn to the farther wall. An archway gaped there. I
walked across the room, passed under the archway. Instantly I was in
complete, stygian darkness. But I was not alone!

The power of the Other struck me like a tangible blow. I have no words
to tell of an experience so completely disassociated from human
memories. I remember only this: my mind and soul were sucked down into
a black abyss where I had no volition or consciousness. It was another
dimension of the mind where my senses were altered....

Nothing existed there but the intense blackness beyond time and
space. I could not see the Other nor conceive of it. It was pure
intelligence, stripped of flesh. It was alive and it had power--power
that was god-like.

There in the great darkness I stood alone, unaided, sensing the
approach of an entity from some horribly remote place where all values
were altered.

I sensed Lhar's nearness. "Hurry!" her thought came to me. "Before it
wakens!"

Warmth flowed into me. The blackness receded....

Against the farther wall something lay, a thing bafflingly human.... a
great-headed thing with a tiny pallid body coiled beneath it. It was
squirming toward me....

"Destroy it!" Lhar communicated.

The pistol in my hand thundered, bucking against my palm. Echoes
roared against the walls. I fired and fired again until the gun was
empty....

"It is dead," Lhar's thought entered my mind.

I stumbled, dropped the pistol.

"It was the child of an old super-race--a child not yet born."

Can you conceive of such a race? Where even the unborn had power
beyond human understanding? My mind wondered what the adult Alien must
be.

I shivered, suddenly cold. An icy wind gusted through the temple.
Lhar's thought was clear in my mind.

"Now the valley is no longer a barrier to the elements. The Other
created fog and warmth to protect itself. Now it is dead and your
world reclaims its own."

From the outer door of the temple I could see the fog being driven
away by a swift wind. Snow was falling slowly, great white flakes that
blanketed the blue moss and lay like caps on the red shards that
dotted the valley.

"I shall die swiftly and easily now, instead of slowly, by
starvation," Lhar said.
