the station. "How much money do you have?"

She shook her head, and held up her arm. "I left it, Will."

They were beyond the last hole, then. He realized now that as long as
they'd been in a crowded apartment house, filled with other humans, it
had proved a tough nut to crack for the aliens. But on the move....

"Maybe we have a chance," he told her. "If humans were after me, it'd
be tough--but these things have to avoid the police."

She looked at him, misery on her face. "There are no aliens, Will.
Those men you saw were F. B. I. men. That's where I reported you."

"You...."

He stared at her, but she was serious.

"But there was nothing about me in the papers, Ellen."

She pointed across the aisle. Spread over two columns on the front
page, an older picture of him showed plainly. And even at the
distance, the heading was boldly legible.

        $100,000 REWARD FOR
             THIS MAN!

He stared at the figure twice, unbelieving. He was no longer alone
against a small group of humans or aliens. Now every living human on
the face of the planet would be looking for him!

       *       *       *       *       *

He could feel their hot breath on his neck, feel eyes staring at him
through the papers. Fear began to rise in him, to be halted as the
train ground to a new station. Ellen jerked him out, and he moved with
her. It wasn't safe to be too long with one group, until they began to
wonder and compare faces!

"But what--"

She shook her head. "Nothing, Will. I don't know. What can we do?"

He'd been wondering, while they moved quietly through the groups of
people, and up the stairs. There was no place left. He had about a
dollar in change, and that would be of no use to them. They'd have to
dig a hole in the ground and pull it over them....

It joggled his memory, and he grabbed her hand and jerked open the
door of a cab that was waiting for the light. He barked out an
address----the corner of Tenth Avenue and one of the streets below
Twentieth. The driver got into motion, not bothering to look back. The
address was near enough to where Hawkes wanted to be--an old
warehouse, with a loading platform. He'd played there as a kid,
climbing back under it and digging holes down into the damp, soft
earth, as kids have always done. He'd been by there since, and it had
remained unchanged.

Sooner or later, the aliens would locate them. But it would give Ellen
and him a chance to rest--perhaps long enough for him to waylay
someone at night and steal enough for them to leave town. That
wouldn't be much help--but it was all he had left to count on.

He saw trucks loading there, as he paid the cab-driver. His heart sank
abruptly, until he studied the way the big trailer was parked. If he
watched carefully, he could slip under it from the side, and there was
a chance he wouldn't be seen.

He darted beneath it.

Luck, for once was with him as he drew Ellen under the trailer and the
platform. The old opening was covered with rubble, but he scraped it
aside, and found an entrance barely big enough for them to wiggle
through. Then they were back in a dark pocket under the back of the
platform, barely big enough for them to sit upright. The hole had
seemed bigger when he was a kid.

Outside, he heard a boy's voice yelling. "Monster attacks cops!
Monster kills five cops! Extra Paper!"

Now he was a monster, to be shot on sight, probably.

"I shouldn't have brought you into this, Ellen," he said bitterly. "I
should have left you. You don't even know what's going on--you haven't
the faintest idea. If it were just humans, as you think...."

She snuggled against him in the coldness of the little cave. "Shh. I
got you into it. I--I ratted on you, Scarface!"

       *       *       *       *       *

But he couldn't reply to her attempt at humor. There was no fear
now--not even the relief of fear. He'd felt brave for a few minutes,
back in the hallway of the apartment. Now the chips were down, and
sunk. They were here, in a dank hole, without food, and without a
chance, while all the world searched for him to kill him--and while
still-unknown aliens with unknown reasons played out their little game
with consummate skill that would inevitably locate him.

It might take them a day--they probably would do nothing to him until
night came, and the warehouse street was deserted! Ten more hours!

If he only knew what they wanted of him, or why! If he could remember!

He sat there, numbed within himself. Ellen leaned her head forward
onto his lap, and he began stroking her hair softly. He'd have liked
to have had a chance with her. One night wasn't enough for a whole
life. He reached down to draw her face to his....

Fear hit him, as something rustled behind him. He tried to turn and
look, but his neck refused. The fear grew to panic, and swelled higher
as the golden haze began to spread over the little cave. Then his
muscles snapped his head around sharply. The slim young man was
crawling toward them, holding something that looked like a flashlight.
Behind it, he could see the tense lips drawn back over clenched teeth.
The man wasn't smiling now. He opened his mouth, just as the thing
like a flashlight sprang into light.

No time seemed to elapse, but suddenly Ellen and the young man were
both gone, and he sat in the dark hole, alone. He let out an animal
cry, and dashed out, crawling through the opening, and kicking the
rubble back as he went. He slipped out, and under the trailer. But
there was no sign. They'd taken her, and left him unconscious!

He groaned, trying to figure. He'd always gone back to the same place
to hide, since he'd found it. They must expect him back there. They'd
take Ellen there and wait for him, drugging her, changing her mind,
setting her up to use against him. The first time hadn't worked, but
they'd try it again. It had to be that. If they hadn't taken her
there, he had no way of finding her, and he had to find her.

He began running down the street, forcing himself to believe she was
there. Then he slowed. It would do no good to have them all notice
him, here on the street. Someone might recognize him then. He turned
around, walking back to the bus stop. There were still two dimes and a
nickel in his pocket.

       *       *       *       *       *

He hunched down on the seat of the bus that seemed to crawl up Tenth
Avenue. But no one noticed him in the almost empty vehicle. He got off
at Sixty-Sixth and forced himself to walk to West End, up that to the
apartment-house.

Men were drawing up in cars--men with guns in their hands. He made a
final dash for the apartment entrance. This must be the real show--for
which the other had been only a dress rehearsal to throw him off
balance. They could wait.

He fumbled with the lock, until he finally got it open. Then he jumped
in, slamming the door shut behind him. Ellen stood there, and the
creature that had assaulted him before was pawing at her. But he had
no time for the monster.

"Stay there!" he shouted at her. "You can't risk it outside now! We've
got to--"

He saw she wasn't listening to him. He had to get rid of the creature
somehow, if he could get it far enough away from her. Then they'd find
some way to get outside, without going out through the entrance.

The creature sprang at him awkwardly. His arm darted down to catch one
shoulder, and his right hand swung back and up. There was a savage
satisfaction in seeing the creature crumple.

Ellen's voice reached him. "Will! Will, before I go crazy...."

"You're free," he told her. "Go down the fire escape and leave that
here. I'll get rid of them out front somehow."

He shut the door again, and went down. The words had sounded brave
enough, but there had been no courage behind them. Fear still rode
him, like the little golden haze that again hovered over him, showing
they had spotted him.

He walked out, with it thick around him, rising slowly in temperature.
They had him--but Ellen might get away. He walked down the steps, his
hands up. They drew back, surprise and something else on their
features, their eyes on the haze that surrounded him. They were
shouting, but he couldn't hear the words over the shrieks of the
people along the street, rushing inside or trying to drag their kids
to safety.

Hawkes doubled his legs under him and leaped. He was still attacking
the tiger--the slim young man, down by the big gas-storage tanks,
directing the new crop of human dupes.

His charge carried him there, while the young man slipped aside. Then
someone fired a gun.

He heard the young man yell hoarsely. "No shooting! Stop it! Damn it,
NO SHOOTING!"

They weren't paying any attention to the shouts. Bullets ticked
against the tanks. Hawkes ducked frantically, physical fear knotting
his stomach.

       *       *       *       *       *

Suddenly, he seemed to jerk upwards, to find himself suspended in
mid-air, fifty feet off the ground, just beyond the tanks. He stared
down at the men, dizzy with the height, but no longer surprised by
anything. The men were pointing their guns upwards, while the young
man leaped about among them. Bullets were splatting out, though none
came near Hawkes. They seemed to ricochet off the air a few feet in
front of him.

[Illustration]

The slim young man drew back. And now, the rubble and stones along the
street began to lift, and to drive savagely at the attackers. A gale
swept along the street, though Hawkes could feel no breath of air, and
the force of it was enough to knock most of them down.

They got up and began running, dashing away from the super-science
that the young man now seemed bent on turning against his own troop of
dupes, now that they were out of control.

Hawkes came drifting downward. He started to cry out in fear, until he
noticed that the ground was coming up at him slowly, and that he was
slipping sideways. He landed on a street back of the tanks, as gently
as a feather.

Surprisingly, everyone was gone when he risked a glance back at the
scene of the fight, with the back of the slim man just darting into
the apartment house. Then Hawkes cursed, as the creature came darting
out, with Ellen behind him, to leap into a car and drive off. The
sound of sirens grew louder, and a police car swung onto West End.

Hawkes straightened up slowly, as it hit him. It had been the same
scene he'd gone through before that morning--but with himself in the
middle! He shot a glance at the sun, to see it still to the east,
though his memory of the day indicated it should have been after noon.

Time! They'd twisted him back through time--the weapon that had looked
like a flashlight must have tossed him hours backwards, instead of
knocking him out. He'd been attacking himself there in the hallway of
his apartment! He'd knocked himself out. And the fight he had just
been through was the same fight that he had seen come to its end
before!

Now, his younger self and Ellen must be just fleeing toward the
hideout under the loading platform, with the slim man still following.
If he could get there in time, before the man could run off with
Ellen....


VII

The paper he'd found kept the other passengers on the bus from seeing
him, but he was too deep in his own thoughts to read it. His eyes
roamed back to the story of the cop-killing monster--a seemingly
harmless florist in Brooklyn who'd suddenly gone berserk and rushed
down the streets with a knife; he'd been wrong in thinking that
concerned him. And he'd been wrong in thinking anyone would try to
kill him on sight. The reward notice and picture were in front of his
eyes--but it was a reward for information, and there was a huge box
that proclaimed he was _not_ a criminal and must not be harmed, or
even allowed to know he was recognized.

The new facts only confused the issue. He twisted about in his mind,
trying to explain why the young man had left him to drift down, and
gone rushing into the apartment. He was ready for the collecting--and
he'd been left uncollected!

The girl had said there were no aliens. Now he wondered. She had known
