Harold caught up with Mr. Untz about the time a man he recognized as a
reporter did. The reporter was stout, freckled and bespectacled.

"_Untz!_" barked the reporter, with all the power of the press in his
voice, "do you realize this is a national danger? If those monsters
can't be stopped by bullets, what will stop them? Where will it all
end? Where did they come from?"

"Look in tomorrow's paper!" growled Mr. Untz, brushing the reporter
aside. He kept Jimsy's arm in a firm grip. Jimsy was bawling at the
top of his lungs now. Mr. Untz breasted the police cordon, broke
through.

"Max! _Stop!_" shouted Harold. "Max--have you gone mad?"

Max evidently had. He moved so swiftly that everyone was too surprised
to stop him. He burst into the small human-walled arena where the two
bewildered monsters squatted and he thrust little Jimsy LaRoche out
before him--right at the monsters.

An extraordinary thing happened. The monsters suddenly began to quiver
and squeak again but this time--it was clear to the ear somehow--not
with rage, but with _fear_. Pure and terrible fear. They trained their
eye-stalks on Jimsy LaRoche, they paled to a lighter shade of brown
and green, then slowly they began to back away.

"Hold your fire, men!" called a police captain, probably just to get
into the act.

Dr. Mildume appeared again from somewhere. So did Etienne Flaubert. So
did Eddie Tamoto and some of the other technicians. They gaped and
stared.

Slowly, inexorably, using Jimsy LaRoche as his threat, Mr. Untz backed
the two monsters into the studio, and gradually to the cage. Dr.
Mildume leaped forward to shut them in once more.

And through it all Jimsy LaRoche continued to bawl at the top of his
lungs.

       *       *       *       *       *

Later, in Mr. Untz's office-cottage, Harold read the newspaper
accounts. He read every word while Mr. Untz was in the other room
taking a shower. He had to admit that Max had even thrown a little
credit his way. "My assistant, Mr. Potter," Untz was quoted as saying,
"indirectly gave me the idea when he said that one man's meat was
another man's poison.

"Dr. Mildume had already explained that the monsters came from a
high-gravity planet--that the smaller of the species evidently seemed
the more capable, and therefore the dominant one." Harold was sure now
that the statement had been polished up a bit by the publicity
department.

"The only logical assumption, then," the statement continued, "was
that small stature would dominate these life forms, rather than large
stature, as in the environment we know. They were, in other words,
terrified by tiny Jimsy LaRoche--whose latest picture, 'The Atomic
Fissionist and the Waif,' is now at your local theatre, by the way--as
an Earth-being might have been terrified by a giant!"

Mr. Untz came out of the shower at that point. He was radiant in a
canary-colored rayon sharkskin. He was rubbing his hands. He was
beaming.

"Harold," he said, "they're putting me on a musical next. I got them
twined around my little finger. Life is good. I think that screwy Dr.
Mildume was smart to send those things back out into space before they
could get to him. Otherwise we might have _had_ to put them in
pictures and with contracts yet."

"Max," said Harold, staring at him quietly.

"Yes, Harold?"

"Just answer me one thing truthfully. I swear I'll never repeat it--or
even blame you. But for my own curiosity I've got to know."

"Why certainly, Harold, what is it?"

Harold Potter swallowed hard. "Did you," he asked, "_really_ figure
out that Jimsy would scare the beasts--or were you about to _throw_
the little brat to them?"




Transcriber Notes

This etext was produced from Fantastic Universe, January 1954.
Extensive research did not uncover any evidence that the U.S.
copyright on this publication has been renewed.






End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Jimsy and the Monsters, by Walt Sheldon

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK JIMSY AND THE MONSTERS ***

***** This file should be named 31716.txt or 31716.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/3/1/7/1/31716/

Produced by Greg Weeks, Katherine Ward and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

