face before it slammed against the floor, was jammed helplessly in the
corridor. I had time for one brief grin. The Patrol would zero in on
us, and I'd have a hundred thousand I could spend. What could I do
with six million I couldn't use?

Then hell broke out. A fire extinguisher came loose from its
fastenings and started flying around the room in complete defiance of
artificial gravity. Switches on the control board clicked on and off.
The ship bucked, shuddered and jumped. But the spin held. Redman,
crushed face down to the floor, couldn't see what he was doing.
Besides--he didn't know what he was doing--but he was trying. The fire
extinguisher came whizzing across the floor and cracked me on the
shin. A scream of pure agony left my lips as I felt the bone snap.

"Got you!" Redman grunted, as he lifted his head against the crushing
force and sighted at me like a gunner. The extinguisher reversed its
flight across the room and came hurtling at my head.

"Too late!" I gloated mentally. Then the world was filled with novae
and comets as the extinguisher struck. The cheerful thought that
Redman was trapped because he didn't--couldn't--know how to drive a
hypership was drowned in a rush of darkness.

       *       *       *       *       *

When I came to, my leg was aching like a thousand devils and I was
lying on a rocky surface. Near--terribly near--was a jagged rock
horizon cutting the black of space dotted with the blazing lights of
stars. I groaned and rolled over, wincing at the double pain in leg
and head. Redman was standing over me, carrying a couple of oxygen
bottles and a black case. He looked odd, standing there with a load in
his arms that would have crushed him flat on Mars. And then I knew. I
was on an asteroid.

"But how did I get here?"

"Easy," Redman's voice came over my headphone. "Didn't anyone ever
tell you an unconscious mind is easier to read than a conscious one?"
He chuckled. "No," he continued, "I don't suppose they did--but it is.
Indeed it is." He laid the bottles down, and put the box beside them.
"I learned how to operate the ship, stopped the spin, and got her back
into negative inertia before the Patrol found me. Found this place
about an hour ago--and since you began to look like you'd live, I
figured you should have a chance. So I'm leaving you a communicator
and enough air to keep you alive until you can get help. But so help
me--you don't deserve it. After I played square with you, you try to
do this to me."

"Square!" I yelped. "Why you--" The rest of what I said was
unprintable.

Redman grinned at me, his face rosy behind the glassite of his
helmet--and turned away. I turned to watch him picking his way
carefully back to where the yacht rested lightly on the naked rock. At
the airlock he turned and waved at me. Then he squeezed inside. The
lock closed. There was a brief shimmer around the ship--a briefer
blast of heat, and the yacht vanished.

I turned on the communicator and called for help. I used the Patrol
band. "I'll keep the transmitter turned on so you can home in on me,"
I broad-casted, "but get that Earthman first! He's got my money and my
ship. Pick me up later, but get him now!"

I didn't know whether my message was received or not, because Redman
didn't leave me any receiver other than the spacesuit intercom in my
helmet. It was, I suspected, a deliberate piece of meanness on his
part. So I kept talking until my voice was a hoarse croak, calling the
Patrol, calling--calling--calling, until a black shark shape blotted
out the stars overhead and a couple of Patrolmen in jetsuits homed in
on me.

"Did you get him?" I asked.

The Patrolman bending over me shrugged his shoulders. "They haven't
told me," he said.

       *       *       *       *       *

They hauled me back to Marsport, put my leg in a cast, ran me through
the lie detector, and then tossed me in jail for safekeeping. I beefed
about the jail, but not too loud. As I figured it I was lucky to be
out of Abie's hands.

Two days later, a Patrolman with the insignia of a Commander on his
collar tabs showed up at my cell. He was apologetic. I was a hero, he
said. Seems like the Patrol caught Redman trying to sneak through the
asteroid belt on standard drive and blasted him out of space.

So they gave me the reward and turned me loose.

But it didn't do me any good. After taxes, it only came to twenty
thousand, and Abie grabbed that before I could get out of town. Like
I said, Abie's unforgiving where money's concerned, and Redman had
taken him for over thirty kilos, which, according to Abie was my fault
for lifting him and getting him out of town. After he got my twenty
kilos he still figured I owed him twelve--and so I've never made it
back. Every time I get a stake he grabs it, and what with the
interest, I still owe him twelve.

But I still keep trying, because there's still a chance. You see, when
Redman probed around in my mind to learn how to run the spaceship, he
was in a hurry. He must have done something to my brain, because when
he left me on that asteroid, as he turned and waved at me, I could
hear him thinking that the Patrol would not be able to stop
hyperships, and if he made it to Earth his people could emigrate to
some clean world and stop having to inject their kids, and while they
couldn't make the grade themselves, their kids could crash the Galaxy
without any trouble. I got the impression that it wouldn't be too much
trouble to empty Earth. Seems as though there wasn't many more than a
million people left. The red color wasn't complete protection
apparently.

And there's another thing. About a month after I got the reward, there
was a minor complaint from Centaurus V about one of their officials
who disappeared on a vacation trip to Mars. His ship was a Starflite
class, Serial CY 122439. Get the idea?

So I keep watching all the incoming tourists like you. Someday I
figure I'm going to run into a decolorized Earthman. They won't be
able to stay away any more than the other peoples of the Galaxy. Old
Mother Earth keeps dragging them back even though they've been gone
for over a thousand years. Don't get the idea they want to see Mars.
It's Earth that draws them. And it'll draw an Earthman's kids. And I
figure that if I could read Redman's mind, I can read theirs, too even
