rent in the ship, intent on stopping the gases that were flooding the
craft's interior. Seconds were important. The radioactive wind, much
cooled during the long journey from its point of origin, but poisoned
by invisible emanations, struck their unprotected bodies. Yet they
kept on. They dared not breathe or speak; still they worked together
with an efficiency of terrible need, stepping over the forms of men
who had already fallen.

Bert found a flat sheet of metal to use as a patch. He fitted it over
the rent, and, while Lawler piled boxes of supplies against it to hold
it in place, sealed the edges with a thick, tarry substance.

When the job was done they staggered back to the lounge. Blotches of
color danced before their vision. Many corpuscles in their blood had
already been destroyed by radiation. They sank to the deck.

       *       *       *       *       *

Bert had a jangled impression of Alice, now in a spacesuit, holding
his head. He saw her lips mouthing endearments.... Game little
Allie.... His mind wandered off. He was going to die. Maybe everyone
on the ship was going to die. Lauren's last move had been meant to
provide a real disaster, with many deaths! Prove the Big Pill a
failure. Make sure that it would be banned for good by the Safe
Products Approval Board. Put the stamp of crime on Doc Kramer, the
gentle little scientist who had been murdered! And on him, Bert
Kraskow. And where was the rat, Lauren? On his way to the colonized
moons of Jupiter, or even Mars, yelling and accusing by radio all
along the line?

As consciousness faded further, Bert stopped thinking unpleasant
things. His mind drifted into Doc Kramer's dream--of the changes which
would make the near-dead worlds of space really habitable and
homelike, fit for human colonists. It was a beautiful, lost vision.

He was out cold, then, for several Earth-days, and only dimly aware
for many days afterward. He knew that he was in the ship's sick-bay,
and that Lawler and other men were there, too. He heard their voices,
and his own, without remembering what was said. Alice often came to
see him. Often he heard roaring, watery sounds, as of vast rains.

Gradually he came out of the dream-like period, learning of what had
happened. Until the time when he walked from the sick-bay, unsteadily,
but on the mend.

Alice, at his elbow, spoke: "It was like Doc Kramer planned, Bert,
solving the hardest problem."

He knew what this meant. Transmutation, or any atomic process, must
involve the generation of much radioactivity that can destroy life. In
the Big Pill, the problem was to make all the atoms break, and
rearrange their components into new elements as cleanly and sharply as
possible, so that residual atomic instability--radioactivity, that
is--would not linger for years, but would disappear quickly.

"Titan's new atmosphere is clean and breathable, now, Bert," Alice
went on. "And likewise the radioactive poisons that made you and
Lawler and the others very ill disappeared quickly from your bodies.
However, two colonists were beyond saving."

Lawler was with the Kraskows. They went out of the ship without the
cumbersome protection of spacesuits. A Space Patrolman hovered like a
worried hawk, watching Bert, but the latter seemed not to mind.

Far above, replacing the hard stars and blackness of space, common to
the firmaments of all dead and near-dead worlds, were great fleecy
clouds and blue sky. The atmosphere, because of Titan's low gravity,
was highly expanded and hence thin, but rich in oxygen. The breeze
smelled cool and fresh. Overhead was a second sun, seemingly much
larger in diameter than the distant central orb of the solar system.
It crept with visible motion across the sky. It was the molten globe
of what had been the _Prometheus_ and its cargo, locked in its
sub-lunar orbit around Titan. But it was calculated to provide
sufficient warmth and light to a small world such as this, for ten
Earth-years, without renewal.

Colonists were clearing away the wreckage of the now useless airdomes,
and putting their cottages in order. But they still looked around in
awe at the miracles that ended their space-nostalgia, making them feel
truly at home here. Down in the valley there was even a great lake of
rainwater from condensed steam--one of the end-products of the process
that had gone on in the rocks of the great crater on the other side of
Titan. That process had died to a sleepy smoking, now; but all over
this moon of Saturn there were many lakes.

Big Lawler chuckled gleefully, the sound rumbling deep in his chest.
"Rejuvenation of burnt-out spheres on a really progressive basis," he
growled. "No obsolete, jury-rigged junk! Expensive? Sure! But we can
pay for it! Out there are Saturn's metal-rich Rings!"

Bert was thinking that the same trick could be used on any world with
enough gravity to hold down a respectable atmosphere. Half-dead Mars.
Jupiter's four biggest moons. Some of the other satellites of Saturn.
Mercury.

"The one thing that burns me is that my brother, Nick, and Doc Kramer,
and those two colonists, had to die!" Bert grated. "Poor Doc. He was
rich from the atomic engines he invented. And I knew long ago that, by
his will, all his stock is to be put in trust for the welfare of
spacemen and colonists. Should we feel glad or humble?"

Lawler's grin had become a snarl. "Damn Trenton Lauren!" he said.

Alice didn't exactly smile. "I should have told you before this," she
offered seriously, "but death always upsets me. By radio report from a
scouting Patrol boat an hour ago, Lauren and his stooges were found,
smashed and burned in the crash of their craft a hundred miles from
camp. Their half-repaired spaceboat killed them."

Bert and Lawler exchanged glances. Their anger faded.

"What's new from the Safe Products Approval Board, Allie?" Lawler
asked at last. "You seem to find things out fast."

"Nothing new," she answered. "The latest messages are much the same as
those from a while ago. Guarded enthusiasm, and the statement that an
okay for the Kramer Methods must be withheld pending complete and
prompt investigation. Can't blame them. Caution is important."

"Maybe, if you played your cards right, you could become the new
president of the Prometheus outfit, Bert," Lawler kidded.

But the possibility was certainly there. Bert was proud of what he'd
done. Prometheus owed him plenty. Still, looking across camp past
cottages and shops to the red mud of the once-dry, frigid hills, and
down to the blue lake in the valley, reflecting sky and clouds, he
knew that his heart was here in this crescendoing colonial scene.
Somewhere a circle-saw screamed. From the metals-shop came the
clanging of a mechanical hammer. These were sounds of a great future
here.

"Nuts, pal," Bert chuckled to Lawler. "I'll leave the official
pencil-pushing to the lab experts. The building and progress are here.
