
      *      *      *      *      *

Perhaps half an hour later, a shape moved in the dank gloom of the
underwater cavern. The top plane of water rippled softly; little
wavelets eddied against the rocks and whispered as the shape slipped
down underneath. Then there was silence, no movement; and the water
again calmed into a black sheet, smooth as glass. For minutes it stayed
so, while Ken's deep, regular breathing stirred the air.

Then suddenly the water's calm was broken. Through its rippling waves
the shape reappeared, rivulets streaming from it. Quickly hauling itself
up on the rocks, it clambered towards the sleeper. For a moment it
paused; then its helmet swung back, revealing Chan's tense, pale face. A
hand reached out and gripped the sleeper's arm. A voice called:

"Ken! Wake up! Hurry!"

Even as the words reverberated in the close bowl, the black mirror of
water stirred once more. Something pierced through and drifted idly on
the surface. It was a large brown-skinned shape, apparently lifeless.

"Ken!" called Chan anxiously again.

The first torpooner stirred. Out of the depths of slumber he mumbled:

"What's the matter?"

"We've got to shove off right now! Quick! Put on your helmet!"

Kenneth Torrance sat up and peered through half-open eyes. He saw before
him the face of Chanley Beddoes, wild and excited. In one hand he held
the steel crowbar. And behind, on the surface of the water, floated the
motionless body of a blubber-man, its head beaten in, streamers of red
trailing from it.

Ken said sharply:

"You killed him? After what I told you? You fool!"

"Yes, I killed him!" Beddoes answered brazenly. "What of it?"

Ken said nothing for a moment. Bitter reproach trembled on his tongue,
but he did not speak the words, for Chan's mind was all too clearly on
the thin line this side of insanity. He only said:

"Well, you've forced the issue, and we've got to leave immediately. It
may mean our death, but let's forget it. Now--how much of your air-units
is left?"

"About two hours. I lost a lot through a leak."

Ken took half of his own store of the little cells from his helmet.
"I'll share mine. That'll give us both sixteen hours all told--in case
we don't find your torpoon. You're sure they killed the whale in that
trap? And you know the way?"

"I think so," said Beddoes excitedly. "You follow me."

"All right. On helmets, then."

The clasps were fastened down, cutting them off from spoken
communication with each other. Ken took the hand-flash and crowbar and
stuck them in his own belt, and both clumsy, grotesque figures splashed
into the water, vanished beneath its surface and ducked under the
shadowy body of the dead blubber-man.

Below, in the dim quarter-light, Ken peered out of the entrance to the
cell chamber. The corridor seemed safe, there being only the distant
colored streaks of light-fish, and occasionally even these disappeared,
leaving heaped shadows in the darkened water. He nodded to Beddoes and
boldly they began their flight.

Their progress was nerve-rackingly slow, in spite of their utmost
exertions. The water that retarded them at times contained unsuspected
currents that destroyed their equilibrium and sent them stroking madly
with both hands to regain it. Far different, this, than the swift,
effortless swimming of the blubber-men. Their weighted feet stumbled
often on the floor of the passage, and several times they lost balance
and fell towards the sides. Each time that this happened Ken was struck
with the fear of ripping the fabric of his sea-suit. And all the time
there was the apprehension of imminent discovery.

At last he saw Beddoes wave an arm and enter a dim cleft a few feet
ahead in the left side of the wall. In turn he floundered through--and
just in time. From around a bend in the corridor shortly ahead there
came two blubber-men. In only a few seconds they would pass the niche
the two humans had entered. Crowbar ready, Ken flattened himself against
the sidewall, pulling his companion back with him. They waited.

      *      *      *      *      *

The seal-men passed by--two sleek, blubbery shapes, flipper-arms and
legs weaving gracefully, bodies rolling slightly, eyes apparently
directed ahead. Close!

They had escaped that time, but there was a disturbing thought in Ken's
mind and in Beddoes' too, perhaps--as they resumed their slow-motion
flight down the second corridor. "What if those two were going to visit
us in the cell-chamber? Once they see the dead guard, hell sure will
start to pop!"

For a period that seemed to be measured in hours they fought their way
forward through the retarding pressure of the water. The corridor
described a long curve. They were on the last stretch--and still no
pursuit!

"If only the torp's there!" Ken kept exclaiming in his thoughts. "Just
that!"

"If only the torp's there!..." Had they come the right way? He had to
trust that to the memory of Beddoes. Beddoes, whose mind had clearly
been affected by his seven-day nightmare.... He shook his head. He dared
not doubt.

They increased their pace a little. Imagination stimulated their weary
muscles. The _Narwhal_! Men of their own kind! Sun and air! Life again!
Ken could have shouted when he saw his partner stop and gesture
excitedly before a dark spot in the wall. It could be nothing but the
entrance to a trap.

He pressed forward, flicking on his flash and making sure by the
water-waved beam it threw. But Beddoes was attending to some sight down
the corridor; and suddenly he pointed in fright. The first torpooner
looked in the indicated direction and saw what was meant.

Approaching was a wave of menacing brown-skinned bodies, streaming
swiftly through the passage several abreast. Their escape had been
discovered. The blubber-men were coming.

At once Ken acted, pushing Chan into the narrow opening and scrambling
after himself. They wormed along for several feet, till they emerged in
a large dark chamber at the far end of which was a big circular entrance
barred by three great pale stakes. They were certainly in a whale trap.

Rapidly Ken played his flash around, looking for the torp, but it was
nowhere visible. To one side was an out-jutting rock with a niche
beneath it. It was a promising place and he stumbled his way there,
followed by the other.

It was then that a most peculiar feeling came over him, a feeling that
was instantly a surge of panic. Something else was in the trap! His
flash arced around and up, and what lay revealed in its ray caused cold
shivers to run down the backs of the two men.

Above them, just over the three-toothed outer entrance, hung a black,
sleek body, white-striped. Head-on it was, and motionless, eyeing them.
A killer whale--alive!--and poised for a lunge!

It barred the way to the outer entrance. They could not retrace their
steps; already the round brown head of a blubber-men showed in the inner
entrance. They were trapped, front and rear, and confronted by the
deadliest animal in the sea.

A second they watched it, frozen immobile; then the whale's great body
curved and its flukes went up, and by purest instinct the men dove for
the niche at their feet. Head to head, they arrived in it, and just in
time, for the great jaws of the killer barely missed their snap.

As the monster curved past, the swirling water of its passage nearly
dislodged the torpooners, and they made haste to jam themselves into the
crevice as tightly as they dared for the safety of their suits.

The whale whipped around in a narrow circle and returned. Its pointed
teeth gleamed as it snapped shut its jaws and muzzled its hard, wicked
snout into Ken's ribs. Again it circled and streaked for the niche; and,
helpless, Kenneth Torrance lay there as the beast tried to slide its
head into it. He felt more of the terrifying nuzzling of the snout. But
the creature could not dislodge him.

"Can't bring his teeth to bear," he muttered with a certain relief.
"Niche isn't high enough. We're safe, I guess, for a couple of minutes.
Unless the blubber-men come in and kill him like they did the one Chan
followed last week."
