copper light and everything was still.

And the light was _copper_!

Duncan spun around in panic. There was no place for him to hide.

Before he could take another step, the _skun_ came and the winds
rushed out of nowhere. The air was clogged with flying leaves and
debris. Trees snapped and popped and tumbled in the air.

The wind hurled Duncan to his knees, and as he fought to regain his
feet, he remembered, in a blinding flash of total recall, how it had
looked from atop the escarpment--the boiling fury of the winds and the
mad swirling of the coppery mist and how the trees had whipped in
whirlpool fashion.

He came half erect and stumbled, clawing at the ground in an attempt
to get up again, while inside his brain an insistent, clicking voice
cried out for him to run, and somewhere another voice said to lie flat
upon the ground, to dig in as best he could.

Something struck him from behind and he went down, pinned flat, with
his rifle wedged beneath him. He cracked his head upon the ground and
the world whirled sickeningly and plastered his face with a handful of
mud and tattered leaves.

He tried to crawl and couldn't, for something had grabbed him by the
ankle and was hanging on.

       *       *       *       *       *

With a frantic hand, he clawed the mess out of his eyes, spat it from
his mouth.

Across the spinning ground, something black and angular tumbled
rapidly. It was coming straight toward him and he saw it was the Cytha
and that in another second it would be on top of him.

He threw up an arm across his face, with the elbow crooked, to take
the impact of the wind-blown Cytha and to ward it off.

But it never reached him. Less than a yard away, the ground opened up
to take the Cytha and it was no longer there.

Suddenly the wind cut off and the leaves once more hung motionless and
the heat clamped down again and that was the end of it. The _skun_ had
come and struck and gone.

Minutes, Duncan wondered, or perhaps no more than seconds. But in
those seconds, the forest had been flattened and the trees lay in
shattered heaps.

He raised himself on an elbow and looked to see what was the matter
with his foot and he saw that a fallen tree had trapped his foot
beneath it.

He tugged a few times experimentally. It was no use. Two close-set
limbs, branching almost at right angles from the hole, had been driven
deep into the ground and his foot, he saw, had been caught at the
ankle in the fork of the buried branches.

The foot didn't hurt--not yet. It didn't seem to be there at all. He
tried wiggling his toes and felt none.

He wiped the sweat off his face with a shirt sleeve and fought to
force down the panic that was rising in him. Getting panicky was the
worst thing a man could do in a spot like this. The thing to do was to
take stock of the situation, figure out the best approach, then go
ahead and try it.

The tree looked heavy, but perhaps he could handle it if he had to,
although there was the danger that if he shifted it, the bole might
settle more solidly and crush his foot beneath it. At the moment, the
two heavy branches, thrust into the ground on either side of his
ankle, were holding most of the tree's weight off his foot.

The best thing to do, he decided, was to dig the ground away beneath
his foot until he could pull it out.

He twisted around and started digging with the fingers of one hand.
Beneath the thin covering of humus, he struck a solid surface and his
fingers slid along it.

With mounting alarm, he explored the ground, scratching at the humus.
There was nothing but rock--some long-buried boulder, the top of which
lay just beneath the ground.

His foot was trapped beneath a heavy tree and a massive boulder, held
securely in place by forked branches that had forced their splintering
way down along the boulder's sides.

       *       *       *       *       *

He lay back, propped on an elbow. It was evident that he could do
nothing about the buried boulder. If he was going to do anything, his
problem was the tree.

To move the tree, he would need a lever and he had a good, stout lever
in his rifle. It would be a shame, he thought a little wryly, to use a
gun for such a purpose, but he had no choice.

He worked for an hour and it was no good. Even with the rifle as a
pry, he could not budge the tree.

He lay back, defeated, breathing hard, wringing wet with perspiration.

He grimaced at the sky.

All right, Cytha, he thought, you won out in the end. But it took a
_skun_ to do it. With all your tricks, you couldn't do the job
until....

Then he remembered.

He sat up hurriedly.

"Cytha!" he called.

The Cytha had fallen into a hole that had opened in the ground. The
hole was less than an arm's length away from him, with a little debris
around its edges still trickling into it.

Duncan stretched out his body, lying flat upon the ground, and looked
into the hole. There, at the bottom of it, was the Cytha.

It was the first time he'd gotten a good look at the Cytha and it was
a crazily put-together thing. It seemed to have nothing functional
about it and it looked more like a heap of something, just thrown on
the ground, than it did an animal.

The hole, he saw, was more than an ordinary hole. It was a pit and
very cleverly constructed. The mouth was about four feet in diameter
and it widened to roughly twice that at the bottom. It was, in
general, bottle-shaped, with an incurving shoulder at the top so that
anything that fell in could not climb out. Anything falling into that
pit was in to stay.

This, Duncan knew, was what had lain beneath that too-smooth interval
between the two sets of Cytha tracks. The Cytha had worked all night
to dig it, then had carried away the dirt dug out of the pit and had
built a flimsy camouflage cover over it. Then it had gone back and
made the trail that was so loud and clear, so easy to make out and
follow. And having done all that, having labored hard and stealthily,
the Cytha had settled down to watch, to make sure the following human
had fallen in the pit.

       *       *       *       *       *

"Hi, pal," said Duncan. "How are you making out?"

The Cytha did not answer.

"Classy pit," said Duncan. "Do you always den up in luxury like this?"

[Illustration]

But the Cytha didn't answer.

[Illustration]

Something queer was happening to the Cytha. It was coming all apart.

Duncan watched with fascinated horror as the Cytha broke down into a
thousand lumps of motion that scurried in the pit and tried to
scramble up its sides, only to fall back in tiny showers of sand.

Amid the scurrying lumps, one thing remained intact, a fragile object
that resembled nothing quite so much as the stripped skeleton of a
Thanksgiving turkey. But it was a most extraordinary Thanksgiving
skeleton, for it throbbed with pulsing life and glowed with a steady
violet light.

Chitterings and squeakings came out of the pit and the soft patter of
tiny running feet, and as Duncan's eyes became accustomed to the
darkness of the pit, he began to make out the forms of some of the
scurrying shapes. There were tiny screamers and some donovans and
sawmill birds and a bevy of kill-devils and something else as well.

Duncan raised a hand and pressed it against his eyes, then took it
quickly away. The little faces still were there, looking up as if
beseeching him, with the white shine of their teeth and the white
rolling of their eyes.

He felt horror wrenching at his stomach and the sour, bitter taste of
revulsion welled into his throat, but he fought it down, harking back
to that day at the farm before they had started on the hunt.

"I can track down anything but screamers, stilt-birds, longhorns and
donovans," Sipar had told him solemnly. "These are my taboos."

And Sipar was also their taboo, for he had not feared the donovan.
Sipar had been, however, somewhat fearful of the screamers in the dead
of night because, the native had told him reasonably, screamers were
forgetful.

Forgetful of what!

Forgetful of the Cytha-mother? Forgetful of the motley brood in which
they had spent their childhood?

For that was the only answer to what was running in the pit and the
whole, unsuspected answer to the enigma against which men like
Shotwell had frustratedly banged their heads for years.

       *       *       *       *       *

Strange, he told himself. All right, it might be strange, but if it
worked, what difference did it make? So the planet's denizens were
sexless because there was no need of sex--what was wrong with that? It
might, in fact, Duncan admitted to himself, head off a lot of trouble.
No family spats, no triangle trouble, no fighting over mates. While it
might be unexciting, it did seem downright peaceful.

And since there was no sex, the Cytha species was the planetary
mother--but more than just a mother. The Cytha, more than likely, was
mother-father, incubator, nursery, teacher and perhaps many other
things besides, all rolled into one.

In many ways, he thought, it might make a lot of sense. Here natural
selection would be ruled out and ecology could be controlled in
considerable degree and mutation might even be a matter of deliberate
choice rather than random happenstance.

And it would make for a potential planetary unity such as no other
world had ever known. Everything here was kin to everything else. Here
was a planet where Man, or any other alien, must learn to tread most
softly. For it was not inconceivable that, in a crisis or a clash of
interests, one might find himself faced suddenly with a unified and
cooperating planet, with every form of life making common cause
against the interloper.

The little scurrying things had given up; they'd gone back to their
places, clustered around the pulsing violet of the Thanksgiving
skeleton, each one fitting into place until the Cytha had taken shape
again. As if, Duncan told himself, blood and nerve and muscle had come
back from a brief vacation to form the beast anew.

"Mister," asked the Cytha, "what do we do now?"

"You should know," Duncan told it. "You were the one who dug the pit."

"I split myself," the Cytha said. "A part of me dug the pit and the
other part that stayed on the surface got me out when the job was
