"Hillary," I said trying to laugh. "Don't be playing gags on old George.
Where is it? Where's Oscar's play?"

"I--I'm afraid that's it," he said without turning his head.

"This--this fluff? This pablum?"

"Well--I thought I'd try something light to begin with."

"Light? This is no play. This is Pollyanna. It's been done. Where's your
conflict? Your problem? Your suspense? Dammit, where's your characters?"

"I'll get warmed up tomorrow," Hilliary said, but he didn't have much
conviction in his voice.

He tried. He really did. I heard him thrashing around for a whole hour
the next morning. By afternoon he was on his way to the hospital in an
ambulance with two men holding him down.

All I could get out of the doctors was, "complete nervous breakdown." I
finally found a hard-up intern and bribed him to spy for me. He reported
that Hillary had the whole staff stumped. He was acting more like a dope
addict with withdrawal symptoms or a drunk with the D.T.'s.

I got in touch with Hillary's sanitarium. The head psychiatrist was in
Europe, so I cabled him and flew him back. He took over, and pretty soon
I had the word I dreaded.

"Your wonder boy will recover," he told me, "but that's a wonder in
itself. I presume he told you of his experiments to achieve total
recall?"

I said yes.

"What he probably failed to tell you was that we all tried to dissuade
him."

"That he didn't mention, but I worried about it."

"Yes, well you might have. When Hillary Hardy succeeded in stripping
away the last remnant of protective insulation in his memory he exposed
himself not only to its full factual content, but also he lay naked
every past emotional upset, every pain, fear, dread and sorrow he had
ever experienced. It is no longer possible for him to recall an
experience and ponder it objectively. _He relives it._"

"Yes, I get that," I said, "but what's so--"

"Did you ever hit your thumb with a hammer?" the doctor with the
traditional, gray goatee interrupted.

"Sure, a couple of times."

"Ever lose a sweetheart or have a loved one die?"

I nodded.

"Suppose that to even think about such experiences you had to endure all
the actual physical or emotional pain of the original incident? The
crushing blow of the hammer? The heartache and tears of your loss? And
suppose further, that you were trying to write a play, and in order to
bring genuine emotion to it you forced yourself to endure these pains
and emotional stresses, minute after minute--"

"God!" I said. "But you said he'd recover?"

"In a few weeks, yes. Gradually we will reduce sedation until he can
control his memories again, but never ask him to write another dramatic
work. Another attack like this one could drive him irretrievably
insane."

It wasn't too hard to understand. After all, what is creative writing
but setting down little bits of yourself? And the demands of literature
are for human problems, conflicts, struggles.

Young as he was, Hillary was no different from the rest of us. Sure, he
was full of reading and second hand bits of business, but he dug deeply
into his own private pot of pain for his genuine dramatic effects. And
where others dig with a long-handled ladle, Hillary dipped with his bare
soul--and he got scalded.

Getting him well and keeping him that way was a matter of putting the
lid back on the pot, so to speak. Nobody ever invited him to write
another word. I saw to that. He's still with me, because after he went
bankrupt on the sanitarium deal he had nowhere to turn. After taxes and
the rooking the real estate boys gave him, his royalties were tied up
for years to come.

He did get better, though. And he even works a little. Turns out scripts
for mild little comic books, the Honey-Bunney type that are approved by
parent-teacher censors. They don't sell very well. No conflict. No guts.





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of The Mind Digger, by Winston Marks

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE MIND DIGGER ***

***** This file should be named 32353.txt or 32353.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/3/2/3/5/32353/

Produced by Greg Weeks, Mary Meehan and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
