wall of the canyon. It had been luck, too, which had forced Honath to
skirt the pool in order to reach the falls at all, and thus had taken
them all behind the silver curtain at the point where the weight of the
falling water was too low to hammer them down for good. And it had been
the blindest stroke of all that the demon had charged after them
directly into the pool, where the deep, boiling water had slowed its
thrashing hind legs enough to halt it before it went under the falls, as
it had earlier blundered into the hard wall of the gorge.

Not an iota of all this had been in Honath's mind before he had
discovered it to be true. At the moment that the huge reptile had
screamed for the second time, he had simply grasped Mathild's hand and
broken for the falls, leaping from low tree to shrub to fern faster than
he had ever leapt before. He did not stop to see how well Mathild was
keeping up with him, or whether or not Alaskon was following. He only
ran. He might have screamed, too; he could not remember.

They stood now, all three of them, wet through, behind the curtain until
the shadow of the demon faded and vanished. Finally Honath felt a hand
thumping his shoulder, and turned slowly.

Speech was impossible here, but Alaskon's pointing finger was eloquent
enough. Along the back wall of the falls, where centuries of erosion had
failed to wear away completely the original soft limestone, there was a
sort of serrated chimney, open toward the gorge, which looked as though
it could be climbed. At the top of the falls, the water shot out from
between the basalt pillars in a smooth, almost solid-looking tube,
arching at least six feet before beginning to break into the fan of
spray and rainbows which poured down into the gorge. Once the chimney
had been climbed, it should be possible to climb out from under the
falls without passing through the water again.

And after that--?

Abruptly, Honath grinned. He felt weak all through with reaction, and
the face of the demon would probably be grinning in his dreams for a
long time to come. But at the same time he could not repress a surge of
irrational confidence. He gestured upward jauntily, shook himself, and
loped forward into the throat of the chimney.

Hardly more than an hour later they were all standing on a ledge
overlooking the gorge, with the waterfall creaming over the brink next
to them, only a few yards away. From here, it was evident that the gorge
itself was only the bottom of a far greater cleft, a split in the
pink-and-grey cliffs as sharp as though it had been riven in the rock by
a bolt of sheet lightning. Beyond the basalt pillars from which the fall
issued, however, the stream foamed over a long ladder of rock shelves
which seemed to lead straight up into the sky.

"That way?" Mathild said.

"Yes, and as fast as possible," Alaskon said, shading his eyes. "It must
be late. I don't think the light will last much longer."

"We'll have to go single file," Honath added. "And we'd better keep hold
of each other's hands. One slip on those wet steps and--it's a long way
down again."

Mathild shuddered and took Honath's hand convulsively. To his
astonishment, the next instant she was tugging him toward the basalt
pillars.

The irregular patch of deepening violet sky grew slowly as they climbed.
They paused often, clinging to the jagged escarpments until their breath
came back, and snatching icy water in cupped palms from the stream that
fell down the ladder beside them. There was no way to tell how far up
into the dusk the way had taken them, but Honath suspected that they
were already somewhat above the level of their own vine-web world. The
air smelled colder and sharper than it ever had above the jungle.

The final cut in the cliffs through which the stream fell was another
chimney. It was steeper and more smooth-walled than the one which had
taken them out of the gorge under the waterfall, but narrow enough to be
climbed by bracing one's back against one side, and one's hands and feet
against the other. The column of air inside the chimney was filled with
spray, but in Hell that was too minor a discomfort to bother about.

At long last Honath heaved himself over the edge of the chimney onto
flat rock, drenched and exhausted, but filled with an elation he could
not suppress and did not want to. They were above the attic jungle; they
had beaten Hell itself. He looked around to make sure that Mathild was
safe, and then reached a hand down to Alaskon. The navigator's bad leg
had been giving him trouble. Honath heaved mightily and Alaskon came
heavily over the edge and lit sprawling on the high mesa.

The stars were out. For a while they simply sat and gasped for breath.
Then they turned, one by one, to see where they were.

There was not a great deal to see. There was the mesa, domed with stars
on all sides and a shining, finned spindle, like a gigantic minnow,
pointing skyward in the center of the rocky plateau. And around the
spindle, indistinct in the starlight....

... Around the shining minnow, tending it, were Giants.

       *       *       *       *       *

This, then, was the end of the battle to do what was right, whatever the
odds. All the show of courage against superstition, all the black
battles against Hell itself, came down to this: _The Giants were real!_

They were unarguably real. Though they were twice as tall as men, stood
straighter, had broader shoulders, were heavier across the seat and had
no visible tails, their fellowship with men was clear. Even their
voices, as they shouted to each other around their towering metal
minnow, were the voices of men made into gods, voices as remote from
those of men as the voices of men were remote from those of monkeys, yet
just as clearly of the same family.

These were the Giants of the Book of Laws. They were not only real, but
they had come back to Tellura as they had promised to do.

And they would know what to do with unbelievers, and with fugitives from
Hell. It had all been for nothing--not only the physical struggle, but
the fight to be allowed to think for oneself as well. The gods existed,
literally, actually. This belief was the real hell from which Honath had
been trying to fight free all his life--but now it was no longer just a
belief. It was a fact, a fact that he was seeing with his own eyes.

The Giants had returned to judge their handiwork. And the first of the
people they would meet would be three outcasts, three condemned and
degraded criminals, three jail-breakers--the worst possible detritus of
the attic world.

All this went searing through Honath's mind in less than a second, but
nevertheless Alaskon's mind evidently had worked still faster. Always
the most outspoken unbeliever of the entire little group of rebels, the
one among them whose whole world was founded upon the existence of
rational explanations for everything, his was the point of view most
completely challenged by the sight before them now. With a deep, sharply
indrawn breath, he turned abruptly and walked away from them.

Mathild uttered a cry of protest, which she choked off in the middle;
but it was already too late. A round eye on the great silver minnow came
alight, bathing them all in an oval patch of brilliance.

[Illustration]

Honath darted after the navigator. Without looking back, Alaskon
suddenly was running. For an instant longer Honath saw his figure,
poised delicately against the black sky. Then he dropped silently out of
sight, as suddenly and completely as if he had never been.

Alaskon had borne every hardship and every terror of the ascent from
Hell with courage and even with cheerfulness but he had been unable to
face being told that it had all been meaningless.

Sick at heart, Honath turned back, shielding his eyes from the
miraculous light. There was a clear call in some unknown language from
near the spindle.

Then there were footsteps, several pairs of them, coming closer.

It was time for the Second Judgment.

After a long moment, a big voice from the darkness said: "Don't be
afraid. We mean you no harm. We're men, just as you are."

The language had the archaic flavor of the Book of Laws, but it was
otherwise perfectly understandable. A second voice said: "What are you
called?"

Honath's tongue seemed to be stuck to the roof of his mouth. While he
was struggling with it, Mathild's voice came clearly from beside him:

"He is Honath the Pursemaker, and I am Mathild the Forager."

"You are a long distance from the place we left your people," the first
Giant said. "Don't you still live in the vine-webs above the jungles?"

"Lord--"

"My name is Jarl Eleven. This man is Gerhardt Adler."

This seemed to stop Mathild completely. Honath could understand why. The
very notion of addressing Giants by name was nearly paralyzing. But
since they were already as good as cast down into Hell again, nothing
could be lost by it.

"Jarl Eleven," he said, "the people still live among the vines. The
floor of the jungle is forbidden. Only criminals are sent there. We are
criminals."

"Oh?" Jarl Eleven said. "And you've come all the way from the surface to
this mesa? Gerhardt, this is prodigious. You have no idea what the
