vicious nasi-corn secretions eating the tin away and then with the
workers mandibles gnawing at the weakened metal. In time perhaps they
would learn to collapse steel bridges, sabotage rails, perforate the
engines of motorcars if these should prove to be menaces to their race.
As they had persevered through the eons of the past, so they would in
all the future; their civilization would be extant long after Man and
his work had disappeared from the earth....

With the aid of The Brain, Lee had accumulated more data, more knowledge
of the "_Ant-termes_" society within a few months than a lifetime of
study could have yielded him under normal conditions. Even so, some of
the greatest mysteries remained. What, for instance, caused these blind
creatures to attack a sealed tin can of syrup in preference to its
neighbor with tomatoes or some other stuff? No racial memory could have
taught them; there were no tin cans a million years, not even a hundred
years, ago. It couldn't be a sense of smell, it couldn't be any sense;
there would have to be some weird extrasensory powers in that
unfathomable collective brain of their race.

The magnifying fluoroscope screens arrayed all along the walls and
hooked up to the circuits of The Brain showed him details and phases of
the specie's life as The Brain perceived them and as no human eye had
ever seen before.

For a minute or so Lee stared at the luminous image nearest to him and
then with an effort he turned his eyes away to escape from its hypnotic
influence. It was but the head of one worn-out worker used as a living
storage tank for excremental food. It was absolutely immobile, its
decaying mandibles pointing down, cemented as the animal was by its
overextended belly to the ceiling. But magnified as were its remaining
life manifestations by the powers of The Brain, he could see it breathe,
could count the slow pulse, could sense a strain in its ophthalmic
region, some hidden effort to see, like a blind man's, and above all Lee
perceived the ganglion primitive as it was, yet twitching in reaction to
pain. There could be no doubt that in its last service for the racial
commonweal the animal was suffering slow torture even if its senses were
closed to that torture. It was a fascinating and at the same time a
terrible thing to see; and it was only one out of the hundred equally
revealing sights.

Lee frowned at himself; manifestly some emotional element interfered
with the objectivity of his observations; this was entirely out of
place, it would be better to call it a day.

       *       *       *       *       *

The electric clock showed 20 minutes to midnight. At midnight The Brain
would stop its mighty labors; the hours from midnight to four a.m. were
its rest periods, or "beauty-sleep" as the technicians jokingly called
it. It was the only period wherein the maintenance engineers were
permitted to enter the interior of the lobes, checking and servicing
group after group of its myriad cells and circuits, and incidentally it
was the most wonderful and exciting portion of Lee's day.

For the project which Scriven had handed him, this study of the
collective brains in insect societies, also involved a comparative study
of The Brain's organisms and functionings. Toward this end Lee had been
given a pass which allowed him freely to circulate through all the
lobes, to enter convolution, any gland during the overhaul period and to
ask question of the employees. The privilege was rare and he enjoyed it
immensely. So vast was this underground world that even now after months
he had not seen the half of it; to him the travels of every new night
were fantastic Alice-in-Wonderland adventures.

As he now left Apperception 36 through the door which led to the
interior, the glideways were already swarming with the maintenance crews
en route to their stations. The spectacle was colorful, almost like a
St. Patrick's Day parade. Gangs of air conditioners were dressed blue,
electricians white, black-light specialists in purple, radionics men in
orange. The maintenance engineers of the radioactive pyramidal cells
looked like illustrations from the science-fiction magazines, hardly
human in their twelve-inch armor or sponge rubber filled with a new
inert gas which was supposed to be almost gamma ray proof. All these men
were young, were tops in their fields, the pick of American
Universities, colleges and the most progressive industries. Carefully
selected for family background they had been screened through health and
intelligence tests, had been trained in special courses, had been
subjected to a five-minute personality analysis by The Brain itself.
They constituted what was undoubtedly the finest working team ever
assembled, and incidentally they made the little city of Cephalon the
socially healthiest community in the United States.

In his nightly expeditions over these past months Lee had spoken to a
great many of them. As now he joined the line, there were many who
hailed the lanky, queer looking man: There comes the ant-man. Hello,
Professor. Hello, Aussie.

For some reason most of the boys assumed that he was an Australian,
perhaps because with his graying mane and his emaciated face he looked
like a foreigner to them.

This popularity with the younger generation, coming as it did so late
and unexpected in his life, made Lee very proud. Those were the kind of
Americans he had been secretly longing for in those desert years,
hardworking, wide-awake, radiant with life:

"They really are the salt of the earth, the hope of the world," he
thought.

He had passed through the median section of the hemispheres and had
reached the point just below the cerebrum. This was a region of
cavities, the seats of various glands in the human brain. Some of these
had their mechanical counterparts in The Brain, huge storage tanks with
an elaborate pumping system which carried their fluid chemicals through
the labyrinth of The Brain. But there was one gland which had not been
duplicated in The Brain, the pineal gland.

In the human, the pineal gland was the despair of the medical sciences.
It was not demonstrably linked to any other organ nor did it serve any
demonstrable function. Yet, it was known that its sensitivity was
greater by far than even that of the pyramidal cells and that in some
mysterious manner the pineal gland was vitally connected with the center
of life because its slightest violation caused instant death.
Metaphysicists had dealt with this mystery of mysteries; it was their
theory that the pineal gland were the seat of "extrasensory" faculties
and it was often referred to as "the inner eye."

Even if such an organ could have been duplicated by science and
technology, there would have been no use for it; it could have served no
purpose in The Brain. The Brain had been designed for the solution of
exact problems; no matter what nature had created in the brains of
higher animals, no matter how unprejudiced their approach, scientists
like Dr. Scriven would have hesitated to impair an otherwise perfect
apparatus through the addition of nuisance values such as any
"extrasensory" faculties.

However, with The Brain being modelled so closely after the human brain,
the space for the pineal gland did exist even if in a sort of functional
vacuum. In order to utilize this space in some manner, the designers had
converted the gland into a subcenter for the distribution of spare
parts. As such it had become one of Lee's favorite observation posts.
Here he could get a closeup view of all types of electronic and
radioactive cells; he could even touch and handle them because they were
not hooked up in any circuit of The Brain; and above all there was Gus
Krinsley, master electrician, who never tired of telling Lee whatever he
wanted to know. Gus was a real friend....

       *       *       *       *       *

He had left the glideway on the point of its nearest approach; the
pineal gland in front of him looked like a miniature barrage balloon;
egg-shaped, it hung suspended from the cerebral roof, a shell of
plastics which could be entered only over a bridge across a dark abyss.
Inside, its walls were aglitter with sound-proofing aluminum foil, it
was piled with a bewildering variety of electronic parts on shelves
somewhat like an over-stocked radio store. Near the door a counter
divided the room; Gus used it and a little cubicle of an office to fill
the orders as the maintenance engineers handed in their slips. As usual
there was nobody in sight. "Gus!" he called.

Out of the jungle of machinery way back a head popped up like a
Jack-in-the-box. It was as bald and shiny as an electric bulb. High up
on its dome it balanced gold-rimmed glasses which quivered as it moved
seachingly from side to side. Then, with an amazing twisting of big
ears, the head caused the biofocals to drop onto a saddle near the tip
of a long, sensitive nose; and now the head could see.

"It's you Aussie, is it? Come over."

Gus Krinsley was a pony edition of a man; in fact he had once been hired
as a midget to install automatic bomb-sights in the confined spaces of
the early bombers of the second World War. Before long, however, he
became respectfully known as "the mighty midget" in the California
factory, and he had ended up as their master electrician before
Braintrust made him the head of one of its experimental divisions. The
midnight hours he spent in the pineal gland were only a sideline of his
work. Like many a small man in a country where six-footers enjoy a
preferred status, Gus made up for lack of size by mobility. He reminded
one much of a billiard ball in the way he bounced, collided and
ricocheted amongst taller men. That this was no more than act became
manifest the moment one saw Gus at work.

As Lee reached the spot where Gus' head had shown, he found his friend
crouching, his hands thrust deep in the intestines of something
radionic, his fingers working on it with the deft rhythm of a good
surgeon at his thousandth appendectomy. The bifocals had returned to
their incongruous perch on the dome of the head. Gus didn't need them;
even as he stared at his job he worked by touch alone.

"What is it?" Lee asked.

"Pulsemeter," came the quiet answer. "She's a dandy. Still got some bugs
in her, though."

A melodious chime came from a big instrument panel built into the wall
of the oval room. Dropping a number of tiny precision tools upon a piece
of velvet, Gus rushed over to the panel. A great many indicator needles
were tremulously receding around their luminous dials.

For a minute or so he went through the complex and precise ritual of a
bank cashier closing the vault.

"They'll do it every time," he said reproachfully. "Catch me by
surprise."

Lee grinned. It wasn't The Brain's fault if the midnight signal
surprised Gus. It merely announced that the current was being cut off by
the main power station. Repetition of this maneuver throughout all the
convolutions and glands of The Brain was required for the added safety
of the maintenance engineers, a double-check, a routine. Pointing to the
gadget which looked somewhat like a big radio console Lee asked:

"This pulsemeter, Gus, what does it do? I haven't seen it before."

"You haven't?" the little man frowned. "Ah, no; you haven't. It's
standard in most apperception centers, but not in yours. That's because
in yours The Brain works under a permanent problem-load."

Lee shook his head. "I don't get it, Gus; you know I'm the village idiot
of this mastermind community."

"It's like this," Gus explained. "The Brain has a given capacity. The
Brain also has an optimal operation speed, a definite rhythm in which it
works best. Now, if they feed The Brain too many problems too fast, it
results in a shock load, the operations rhythm gets disturbed,
efficiency goes down. On the other hand if The Brain works with an
under-capacity problem load, that's just as bad. In that case the
radioactive pyramidal cells will overheat and decompose. Consequently we
must aim at a balanced and an even problems load. That's why these
pulsemeters are built into all problem-intake panels for the operators
to check upon their speeds.

"Take an average problem--rocket ballistics, let's say--parts of it may
be as simple as adding two and two and others so bad Einstein would
reach for the aspirin from out of his grave.

"Now I'll show you how it works; the main power is cut off but there's
enough juice left in The Brain's system to make this pulsemeter react;
it's even more sensitive than a Geiger-Mueller counter."

He surveyed a big switchboard and picked out an outlet marked "Pons
Varolis for the plug-in." Then snapped a pair of earphones on Lee's
head.

"There," he said "you'll both see and hear what it does in a little
while."

       *       *       *       *       *

A soft glow slowly spread over the slanting screen on top of the
machine. A crackling as of static entered the earphones and turned into
a low hum. On the left corner of the screen a faint green streak of
luminosity crawled over to the right; its light gained in intensity and
it began to weave and to dance. Simultaneously the hum became articulate
like tickings of a heart only much faster.

"Is that the pulse of The Brain?" Lee asked.

"No," Gus snorted contemptuously. "The Brain isn't even operating.
Nothing moves in The Brain now excepting those ebbing residual currents,
too low in power to agitate anything but the amplifiers built into this
thing. If these were normal operations with a million impulses per
second passing through The Brain you could hear and see as little of the
pulse as of the beatings of a million mosquito wings. In that case the
dial to your right works a reduction-gear, kind of an inverted
stroboscope; that cuts the speed down a hundred-thousand to one and you
just barely see and hear the rhythm of the beat."

"I see."

Fascinated by the dance of the green line Lee said absently, "This
touches upon another question I had in mind; The Brain is expanding,
that is, new cell groups and circuits are constantly being added.
Right?"

"Right."

"I also understand that The Brain is learning all the time. The cerebral
mantle evolves through being worked; its cells enriched by the material
submitted to them for processing; the richer the material, the richer
their yield. Right?"

"Right."

"Okay; then what becomes of the new capacity which is being created by
the adding of new workshops and the increased efficiency of the old
ones? Is there a corresponding expansion of the apperception centers?"

Gus' smiling face suddenly turned serious. There was surprise mingled
with respect in his voice as he said:

"Now there you've hit upon a funny thing, Aussie. I've been wondering
about that myself of late: where does the new capacity go? Even the big
shots like Dr. Scriven begin to ask questions about that; they don't
seem rightly to know. They must have gotten their wires crossed
somewhere; the new capacity is there all right, only it doesn't show up,
it sort of evaporates.... Excuse me--"

Gus darted off to the front room with a jackrabbitt start. Voices were
calling for him and fingers were drumming on the counter with the
impatience of thirsty drinkers at a bar: Maintenance engineers, piling
in and slapping down their orders for Gus to fill. This was the rush
hour; Lee knew that it would be the same in all the tool and spare part
distribution centers of The Brain. He probably couldn't talk to Gus
again before 2 A.M. Sometimes the ruthlessness with which he exploited
the kindness of his little friend made Lee feel pretty bad; but then his
hunger for more knowledge always won out over his shame.

To sit alone in the semidarkness of this egg-shaped little room with
strange and fascinating things to play with as he willed was the
fulfillment of a childhood dream. The dream had been of a night in the
zoo. All the visitors and all the keepers would be asleep in their beds;
he would be all alone with the animals. The light of a full moon would
fall through the bars of the cages and he would slip in and play with
them.

Once they saw that it was only a little boy they would be very friendly;
he was convinced of that. The tigers would purr like big contented cats,
the sad-eyed chimpanzees would come to shake hands and the lion cubs
would tumble all over him.... He felt the same now with all these
gadgets and machines. Here they were rendered harmless, nor could he do
any harm as experimentally he plugged them in and out, as he pushed
buttons and turned dials. This interesting pulsemeter, for instance; the
beauty of it was that even with those weak residual currents it gave a
semblence of functioning....

       *       *       *       *       *

The switchboard-panel was within Lee's reach.

"Let's see what happens," he thought as he switched from main-circuit to
main-circuit. "Nervus vagus--nervus trigeminus--nervus opticus."

The magic dance of the green line was different each time and so were
the sounds in the phones. With the mainpower cut off, the residual
currents seemed to vary in strength and in amplitude, gaining an
individuality of their own within closed systems. Sometimes the swinging
line, like an inspired ballerina, would take a mighty jump accompanied
by rasping earphone sounds, not like tickings of a heart, but rather
like a heavy breathing under emotional stress. There probably would be
some repair work going on in those circuits....

He tried another outlet; this one was marked "pineal gland." What
happened if one plugged some apparatus of the pineal gland into the
