that they had the wrong woman? Probably not, for she would be hysterical
with terror, and her very youth and beauty taken in connection with the
"jealousy and envy of younger women" which was noted in her commitment
order, would seem to confirm her madness. He was still safe, for a
while--if he could keep Leah away from the Institute.

"I'm afraid," she whimpered. "Don't let them put me away."

"Then you'll have to do exactly as I tell you. Can you follow orders
exactly?"

"Yes, yes!"

"I'll have to hide you here. We can fix up my library as a room for you.
It's the only room I can keep locked, and which my Menial never enters
in my absence. Whatever happens, Leah--no matter what happens--keep
yourself hidden. More than your life depends on that."

       *       *       *       *       *

When the three convalescents returned from the hospital, pale and shaky,
David summoned them to his office. At the door, Watchguard Jones looked
them over.

"Say, that Blue Martian fever sure does take it out of you. You fellows
look like you've been plenty sick!"

"They have been," said David. "Let them by so they can sit down and
rest."

Jones moved aside, but he lounged in the doorway, listening.

David ignored him. "Glad to see you back, gentlemen. I'll make this
brief. You have been the victims of a laboratory accident just as much
as if you'd been contaminated with radiation. Our Leader Marley, who
understands the problems of all Categories, has very generously
consented to grant you a two weeks' convalescence, in addition to a Free
Choice. Take a few minutes to think over your decision."

He strolled over to the window and looked out at the green of the trees
just bursting into leaf. Then, as if on impulse, he turned back.

"While you're thinking it over, will you look at these protocols? We
discussed them before you got sick, you remember--a plan to prevent an
epidemic of Blue Martian. Do you approve of the final form? I'd like to
carry on, and after all," he added with an ironic smile, "it's getting
later than we might think."

He handed each man a sheet of paper whose contents were identical. They
studied them. Karl Haslam was the first to speak.

"You think, then, that other cases of Blue Martian may develop?"

"It is certainly probable. Those _Fafli_ insects were never caught."

Karl looked back at his paper. It contained a list of names, some of
which were well known to all the country, some of them obscure.
Thoughtfully, he nodded as he ran down the list.

Hudson glanced up, frowning, his finger pointed at one name.

"I don't know," he said slowly, "that this particular experiment would
prove useful. Surely the Lanza method has not proved to be as effective
as we once hoped."

"You may be right. But there's the bare possibility that the _modified_
Lanza method might be of enormous benefit to us."

"It is uncertain. Too much of a risk. That's my opinion."

"Then I'll reconsider. The rest has your approval? Very well. And now
what choice have you made for your holiday?"

"I think we are all agreed," said Karl soberly. "We'll have an Aimless
Tramp."

"An excellent idea," approved David. "Oh, Jones, will you get an aircab
to take the doctors to BureauMed, and then arrange for their Roboplanes
to be serviced and ready in an hour?"

"I don't know as I ought to leave my post," said Jones.

"You'd rather stay with us and perhaps be exposed to the Fever?"

"Okay, okay!"

When his footsteps had died away, David leaned forward.

"We've done our best. Another month or so and we should be completely
ready for our retirement act."

"If we have a month," said Faure.

David grinned. "Well, if our time runs out, at least we'll go down
fighting. You know all your lines, your props are ready, the plot is
worked out, and we can slip into our makeup in an instant--provided the
audience shows up."

"You're getting to be quite a joker, David," said Karl. "What if the
audience comes around to the stage door?"

"Then we'll try to receive him properly. Our Leader is a man of iron,
but I doubt that he's immortal."

They heard the approaching guard.

"I'm sure you'll benefit from your holiday," David went on. "That last
checkup showed an antibody titer entirely too high for safety."

"In other words, it's time for us to get going?" asked Karl, smiling.

"That's right. Only the next time the antibody curve rises, it will be
for keeps."

       *       *       *       *       *

Four days later it was reported that Judge Brinton, the well-known
champion of Category rights, was ill with Blue Martian fever. Three
little-known nuclear physicists living in the same apartment in Oak
Ridge developed symptoms on the same day. Sporadic cases of Blue Martian
flared up all over the continent. Occasionally a whole family was
affected--husband, wife, and all the children. There was a mild epidemic
at MIT, a more serious one at the School of Social Structure, and at
Harvard Medical School nearly a third of the senior class, and they the
most brilliant, were hospitalized at the same time.

Rumors blanketed the country like a fog, and people everywhere became
uneasy. There were no deaths from the illness, but the very idea that an
infectious disease could flare up unpredictably all over the nation, out
of control, was frightening. It was said that the disease had been
beamed to Earth by alien enemies from space; that all its victims became
sterile; or that their minds were permanently damaged.

It was also said, though people laughed even as they repeated the rumor,
that if you once had Blue Martian Fever you'd become immortal. This
particular theory had been clearly traced to the ravings of a red-haired
madwoman who was confined to Psycho-detention, but still it was too
ridiculous not to repeat. For a week, comedians rang a hundred changes
on the basic joke:

Wife: Drop dead!

Husband: I can't. I've had Blue Martian.

The unrest became so great that Leader Marley himself appeared on the
telecaster to reassure the nation.

He was an impressive figure on the lighted screen, resting solid and at
ease in a leather chair, raising his massive black head, lifting his big
hand to gesture as his rich voice rolled out.

"You have nothing to fear," he said. "Under your beneficent Leaders,
infectious disease has been wiped out many years ago. BureauMed informs
me that these scattered cases of Blue Martian fever have been caused by
the escape of a few _Fafli_ insects, which have, since then, been
isolated and destroyed. The illness has no serious after-effects. And as
for the rumors that it confers immortality--"

He allowed his face to break into a pitying smile as he slowly shook his
head, looking regretful and yet somehow amused.

"Those who continue to spread gossip about the fever will only reveal
themselves as either psychotics or traitors. Whichever they are, they
will be isolated for the good of our society."

The effect of his words was somewhat diminished by the brief glimpse
people had of Dr. Lanza, who reached a hand to help the Leader rise. For
Dr. Lanza wore an anxious frown, and his face was thin with worry.

In spite of numerous arrests, the rumors continued. For two weeks
sporadic outbreaks of the fever occurred, and then, abruptly, they
ceased.

       *       *       *       *       *

It was more than a week after the last case had been reported that David
sat in his basement laboratory beside the opened mouse cage, watching
with wry affection as the furry creatures crawled over his hand. These
were historic mice, he reflected, whose reactions to SDE had opened up a
new world, a world which he must somehow help to make better than the
present one.

His three colleagues had returned a few days ago from their holiday.
They had calmly come back to work, and apparently nobody had thought to
put two and two together, and thus connect the epidemic with the
vacationers. It had been unfortunate that Tanya should have been put
under arrest; it was difficult trying to find amusement for Leah so that
she would keep out of sight, but still, on the whole, their luck had
been good.

But it was time for David to go back to work in his office. Gently he
detached the mice from his hand, dropped them into their cage, and
closed the wire trap. He took his leather pencil case and the keys to
his desk from the pocket of his lab coat and laid them on the desk,
below the nail on which his wristwatch hung. Carelessly he dropped his
lab coat onto the desk and reached for his jacket, then paused,
listening.

The chatter in the technicians' room suddenly died. In the unnatural
quiet sounded a steady march of feet.

David turned to meet the probing black eyes of Leader Marley. Just
behind him were Dr. Lanza and Officer Magnun.

There was no time to conceal his mice, David realized. Shrugging into
his jacket, he strode forward without hesitation, a smile on his face,
and stretched out his hand.

"Leader Marley! This is indeed an honor. If you had only notified us of
your visit, we should have been prepared."

"Young as ever, I see, Wong."

"Thank you, Leader." There was no banter in Marley's eyes, he noted, but
he continued amiably. "It has been some years since you have honored us
by a visit in person. I'm afraid a laboratory is not a very exciting
place, but I'd be honored to show you anything that may be of interest
to you."

A faint contempt curled Marley's mouth as he glanced around the room.
"Nothing to see that I haven't seen before, is there? A lot of test
tubes, a bunch of flasks, a mess of apparatus you'd think had been
dreamed up by an idiot, and a bad smell. You still keep animals, I
notice."

He sauntered over to the bench, picked up the cage and looked at the
scurrying rodents.

David scarcely breathed.

Marley only nodded. "Well, mice are mice." He put down the cage and
turned away. "These look just like the ones I saw when I was here eight
or ten years ago. Same white patch on the forelimbs. I never knew mice
could live that long."

"But--" began Lanza, bending over to study the mice.

"What an amazing memory you have, Leader," said David. "Just as you
guessed, these mice are the direct descendants of the ones you saw on
your former visit, a special mutant strain. The chief difference is that
these are marked with white patches on the _right_ forelimbs, while, as
I am sure you recall, the original specimens were marked on the _left_
forelimbs. Odd how these marks run in families, isn't it?"

Lanza put down the cage and strolled toward the door as Marley took a
