the men, and it seems to be spreading. We have to find out what causes
it or we won't be able to run the Garrison."

       *       *       *       *       *

He waited for a moment. She nodded slightly. How silent she was! Silent
and unmoving. Like the ferns.

"Well, I've been able to find out a few things from them, and one very
interesting fact stands out. They keep saying that something
called--called The Pipers are responsible for their condition. They say
the Pipers taught them--" He stopped. A strange look had flitted across
her dark, small face. "Do you know the Pipers?"

She nodded.

Acute satisfaction flooded over Harris. "You do? I was sure the natives
would know." He stood up again. "I was sure they would, if the Pipers
really existed. Then they do exist, do they?"

"They exist."

Harris frowned. "And they're here, in the woods?"

"Yes."

"I see." He ground his cigarette out impatiently. "You don't suppose
there's any chance you could take me to them, do you?"

"Take you?"

"Yes. I have this problem and I have to solve it. You see, the Base
Commander on Terra has assigned this to me, this business about the
Pipers. It has to be solved. And I'm the one assigned to the job. So
it's important to me to find them. Do you see? Do you understand?"

She nodded.

"Well, will you take me to them?"

The girl was silent. For a long time she sat, staring down into the
water, resting her head against her knee. Harris began to become
impatient. He fidgeted back and forth, resting first on one leg and
then on the other.

"Well, will you?" he said again. "It's important to the whole Garrison.
What do you say?" He felt around in his pockets. "Maybe I could give you
something. What do I have...." He brought out his lighter. "I could give
you my lighter."

The girl stood up, rising slowly, gracefully, without motion or effort.
Harris' mouth fell open. How supple she was, gliding to her feet in a
single motion! He blinked. Without effort she had stood, seemingly
without _change_. All at once she was standing instead of sitting,
standing and looking calmly at him, her small face expressionless.

"Will you?" he said.

"Yes. Come along." She turned away, moving toward the row of ferns.

Harris followed quickly, stumbling across the rocks. "Fine," he said.
"Thanks a lot. I'm very interested to meet these Pipers. Where are you
taking me, to your village? How much time do we have before nightfall?"

The girl did not answer. She had entered the ferns already, and Harris
quickened his pace to keep from losing her. How silently she glided!

"Wait," he called. "Wait for me."

The girl paused, waiting for him, slim and lovely, looking silently
back.

He entered the ferns, hurrying after her.

       *       *       *       *       *

"Well, I'll be damned!" Commander Cox said. "It sure didn't take you
long." He leaped down the steps two at a time. "Let me give you a hand."

Harris grinned, lugging his heavy suitcases. He set them down and
breathed a sigh of relief. "It isn't worth it," he said. "I'm going to
give up taking so much."

"Come on inside. Soldier, give him a hand." A Patrolman hurried over and
took one of the suitcases. The three men went inside and down the
corridor to Harris' quarters. Harris unlocked the door and the Patrolman
deposited his suitcase inside.

"Thanks," Harris said. He set the other down beside it. "It's good to be
back, even for a little while."

"A little while?"

"I just came back to settle my affairs. I have to return to Y-3 tomorrow
morning."

"Then you didn't solve the problem?"

"I solved it, but I haven't _cured_ it. I'm going back and get to work
right away. There's a lot to be done."

"But you found out what it is?"

"Yes. It was just what the men said. The Pipers."

"The Pipers do exist?"

"Yes." Harris nodded. "They do exist." He removed his coat and put it
over the back of the chair. Then he went to the window and let it down.
Warm spring air rushed into the room. He settled himself on the bed,
leaning back.

"The Pipers exist, all right--in the minds of the Garrison crew! To the
crew, the Pipers are real. The crew created them. It's a mass hypnosis,
a group projection, and all the men there have it, to some degree."

"How did it start?"

"Those men on Y-3 were sent there because they were skilled,
highly-trained men with exceptional ability. All their lives they've
been schooled by complex modern society, fast tempo and high integration
between people. Constant pressure toward some goal, some job to be done.

"Those men are put down suddenly on an asteroid where there are natives
living the most primitive of existence, completely vegetable lives. No
concept of goal, no concept of purpose, and hence no ability to plan.
The natives live the way the animals live, from day to day, sleeping,
picking food from the trees. A kind of Garden-of-Eden existence, without
struggle or conflict."

"So? But--"

"Each of the Garrison crew sees the natives and _unconsciously_ thinks
of his own early life, when he was a child, when _he_ had no worries, no
responsibilities, before he joined modern society. A baby lying in the
sun.

"But he can't admit this to himself! He can't admit that he might _want_
to live like the natives, to lie and sleep all day. So he invents The
Pipers, the idea of a mysterious group living in the woods who trap him,
lead him into their kind of life. Then he can blame _them_, not himself.
They 'teach' him to become a part of the woods."

"What are you going to do? Have the woods burned?"

