"As I am," said Retoc slowly, his hard cruel eyes staring at something
Hultax could not--and would never be able to--see.

"So we just sit here in this rented house in Nadia City, cooling our
heels. It doesn't make sense, sire."

"Sense?" mused Retoc. "What is sense? Is it victory and power for the
strongest? Well, is it?"

"Yes, lord," Hultax responded. "But--"

"And you sent the message? Our legions will come?"

"Yes, lord. Two days hence they'll be encamped on the ice fields three
jeks march from the city gates. But I don't see--"

"You obey, Hultax. I see. I do the seeing."

"But I thought you ... the Princess Volna ... together...."

"The Princess can serve me, now. If she can deliver Nadia without a
fight, then Tarth is mine, Hultax, don't you see? In two days all the
royal blood of all the royal families of Tarth will be assembled here
in Nadia for the funeral games. If Bontarc's army doesn't interfere,
then I will be master of Tarth."

"But if Bontarc finds out--"

"That, Hultax," said Retoc with a smile, "is why you sent the
message."

"My sire," said the proud soldier Hultax humbly.

Soon, thought Retoc, all Tarth would call him that. _My sire...._

       *       *       *       *       *

Ahead of Bram Forest loomed the ramparts of the palace. He must hurry.
He knew he had to hurry. He pushed impatiently through the crowd.
Several times men looked up angrily, and would have said something.
But when they saw his face, they turned away.

What they saw in Bram Forest's face made them afraid.

"Majesty?" Prokliam the seneschal said.

"Well?" Volna demanded. "Didn't the guards send you for the girl?"

"Majesty, I was thinking...."

"Well, Prokliam, what is it? Didn't you go for the girl?"

"Not yet, majesty, begging your pardon...."

"If you have something to say, then say it. And get the girl."

"Majesty, a seneschal knows the palace. It is his job...."

"I warn you, Prokliam, I have little patience today." Her anxiety was
evident.

"No one wishes to be chosen," Prokliam blurted quickly, boldly, "even
as I did not wish to be chosen to accompany the body of Prince Jlomec
on the Journey of No Return. Now that you have spared me, in your
royal benevolence, I thought I might in turn advise you...."

"Yes, what is it, man?"

"You should not have killed the Utalian, majesty. If it is ordained
that a living man and a living woman accompany the Prince's body to
the Place of the Dead, to die there with him, their spirits serving
him in death, why choose from among the palace staff? We all have
family, we all have friends, we all stand something to lose. But
majesty, if you were to break with tradition, if you were to send
instead two strangers whose loss meant nothing to the palace, the
palace staff would love and revere you even more than they already
do."

       *       *       *       *       *

Volna's beautiful face smiled at him. He did not know what she was
thinking. He never knew. No one did. She might reward him or have him
slain on the spot. "Why do you tell me this, Prokliam?" she asked.

"For saving me when it was thought I would accompany--"

"No. There must be another reason."

"If you do this deed and if the palace and the people love you for it,
and if the scepter of power should slip from Bontarc's hand to yours,
and if, when it came time to select your prime minister...."

"Ha! Ha! Ha! We have an ambitious palace butler."

"But surely you--"

"Yes, Prokliam. I understand. I won't deny it. Perhaps I had the
Utalian slain impetuously. But there's still the girl."

"I'll fetch her at once, majesty."

"And if," mused Volna, no longer aware of the seneschal's presence,
"we could find another stranger, a man, to accompany the body of
Prince Jlomec on the Journey of No Return, not only the palace, but
the people as well would love me. A stranger...."

"Take me to your King," Bram Forest told the palace guard.

The guard smirked. "Do you think any stranger in the realm is granted
an audience with King Bontarc, fool?"

"It is a matter of life and death."

"But whose life and death?" demanded the guard, roaring with laughter.
"Yours, idiot?"

"It is about Ylia the Wayfarer."

"I know of no Ylia the Wayfarer. Begone, dolt!"

"It is about Prince Jlomec."

The guard's eyes narrowed. The word had been passed by no less a
person than Prokliam the seneschal that anyone with information
concerning the death of the royal Prince should be brought at once not
to Bontarc but to Princess Volna. Could the guard, could he, Porfis,
do less?

"Very well," he said. "Come with me."

Unarmed, but aware of his giant's strength and the mission which had
seen him spend the first hundred years of his life in a crypt on
Earth, Bram Forest went with the guard.

The way was long, through chambers in which priceless tapestries
hung, through narrow, musty corridors into which the light of day
barely penetrated, through rooms in which ladies in waiting and
courtiers talked and joked, up bare stone stairs and through heavy
wooden doors which Porfis the guard opened with a key which hung at
his belt. The doors opened slowly.

Bram Forest entered a large room. It was, he could see at a glance, a
woman's bower. Someone was standing at the far end of the room, in
shadow. He squinted. He took two slow steps into the room. He began to
run.

"Ylia! Ylia!" he cried.

Too late he saw the fetters binding her arms. Too late he saw her bite
savagely at something and twist her neck and spit the gag from her
mouth. Too late he heard her cry:

"Bram! Bram Forest! Behind you!"

He turned barely in time to see Porfis the guard, his whip-sword
raised overhead hilt-first. He lifted his arm, but it was swept aside
in the downward rush of the sword. Something exploded behind his eyes
and all eternity seemed to open beneath his feet. He plunged into
blackness with Ylia's name on his lips.

       *       *       *       *       *

Unconscious, he was taken with Ylia through subterranean passages to
the Royal Dock on the River of Ice. The barge with Jlomec's embalmed
body waited. It was very cold on the river. The Place of the Dead
beckoned from the unseen end of the Journey of No Return.




CHAPTER XIV

_Land Beyond the Stars_


At first Retoc the Abarian was too stunned by what he witnessed to
think coherently. With the other Tarthians of royal blood he had
received an unexpected summons to appear at the Royal Dock on the
River of Ice and, before he could even try to fathom what it was
about, an escort of Nadian guards had come to fetch him.

It was cold and murky on the banks of the River of Ice. The two men,
Retoc and Hultax had arrived barely in time to see them unfastening
the hawsers of the Royal Barge. Curious, he pushed closer through the
crowd of nobles. Suddenly, before the barge was quite unmoored, as it
swayed and rocked on the currents of the river, Nadian soldiers
appeared with a platform on poles slung across their shoulders, the
usual means of intra-city transportation for Nadian royalty. But this
was no royalty Retoc saw on the platform, although they were dressed
as royalty.

The woman, conscious and bound hand and foot, was the Virgin of the
Wayfarers who had witnessed Prince Jlomec's death. The man,
unconscious, his head propped high on pillows, was the white giant who
once on the Plains of Ofrid had almost strangled Retoc.

A hatred such as he had never known flashed through Retoc's brain. He
was so close he could see the gentle up-and-down motion of the giant's
chest as he breathed. Then, beyond the platform, he saw Volna. Volna
smiled at him. The platform bobbed by, was placed on the barge at the
foot of Jlomec's bier. The remaining hawsers were cut loose.

There was, Retoc thought triumphantly, no return from the Place of the
Dead.

But still, the white giant had recovered from what looked like certain
death once, had vanished abruptly and fantastically when he would have
died again. What was good enough for Volna the Beautiful was not
necessarily good enough for Retoc of Abaria. He watched only long
enough to see the royal barge pushed out into the icy currents of the
river, then he turned and made his way to the second tier of
observers, where Hultax stood among the lesser nobility and the
military officers of the planet Tarth. He found Hultax and whispered
for a time in his ear.

       *       *       *       *       *

Hultax's face blanched. "But lord," he protested, "there is no return ...
it is obvious the man will die ... you couldn't expect me to...." Hultax,
frightened, confused, could neither think clearly nor express himself
properly. His mouth hung open.

[Illustration: The boar charged while death and the Golden Ape stood
grinning.]

"Earlier, Hultax," Retoc said with a hard smile, "you craved action. I
give you action. Take a boat. There are some moored down-river for the
use of Nadian priests on their religious pilgrimages to the banks
where the stilt-birds dwell. Overtake the royal barge. Board it. Slay
the man and the woman."

"But I--the Place of the Dead...."

"Fool!" hissed Retoc. "I didn't ask you to visit the Place of the
Dead. That's up to you. If you slay them first, on the River of Ice,
and can bring back proof ... but the longer we talk, the further they
are. You'll go?"

It was phrased as a question; actually, it was a command. Grim-faced,
the whip-sword trailing at his side, Hultax left the crowd of soldiers
and made his way downstream. A few moments later he had poled a wooden
skiff out into the icy current and went down-river in pursuit of the
royal barge.

       *       *       *       *       *

The guards had unbound Ylia's fetters on the barge, knowing she could
never swim for safety in the waters of the River of Ice. She sat now
at the foot of Jlomec's bier, with Bram Forest's handsome head
cushioned on her lap. It was very cold there on the river. Wind blew,
rustling the reeds which grew along the bank. They had long since
emerged from the river's underground cavern. The swift current carried
them now through a country of ice, a tundra. The reeds, twice as tall
as a man, seemed to thrive on the riverbanks. They swallowed
everything.

Bram Forest opened his eyes, and looked at her, and smiled. He tried
to sit up, wincing as pain knifed through his head. "We seem to make a
habit of this," he said, smiling again.

"Shh, you mustn't talk."

She leaned close. He could smell the animal perfume of her body, like
musk and jasmine. Impulsively, she kissed him softly on the lips. His
arm went around her neck. He pulled her head down and drank deeply of
her.

"Why ..." she began, all breathless.

"Because I love you. I think I loved you the first moment I saw you.
But I didn't know it then." He laughed softly, gently, and she did not
know why this should be so.

"Why do you laugh?"

"I was an infant, the son of the Queen. Of Queen Evalla. Portox the
scientist fled with me, the last of the royal Ofridian blood, to the
other side of the solar system, to a world the twin of this, a world
we never see because the sun always stands between us, a world called
Earth. There I would wait until maturity. There I would be given the
strength and the wisdom I needed. And then I would return to Tarth and
right the ancient wrong. Well, I have returned. I love you. It is
enough, Ylia. I want to think of the future, not the past."

Ylia let him kiss her again. "Isn't it the same, the future and the
past? Aren't they one? I too am of Ofridian blood, Bram Forest, of the
lesser nobility. There are hundreds of us, living nomadic lives on the
Ofridian Plains, where once our great nation stood."

"I didn't know that. It wasn't in Portox's training. Now Portox is
dead. I buried him on this world called Earth. He could not even come
back to his native Tarth."

"Darling, don't you see? That's exactly why the ancient wrong must be
righted, why Retoc must pay for his infamous deeds. So Portox and the
millions of other Ofridians, slain, all slain, can sleep eternally in
peace. You are their champion."

"But revenge? What is revenge if--"

"You are the champion of the future too! Don't you see, oh, don't you?
Of all the unborn tomorrows when the Ofridian nation may live again.
Of all the unborn tomorrows when the nations of Tarth can live
together in peace and harmony. Don't you understand that?"

"It's funny. I try to see my mother's face. Queen Evalla. But all I
see is you. She's the past, Ylia. You're the future." He held her
lightly.

"There is no future for anyone as long as Retoc the Abarian rules, and
dreams of Tarth, all Tarth, as his domain."

Bram Forest stood up. The cold winds blew. He looked at the blue-cold
body of Jlomec, lying in state, at the ice-choked river, at the banks
of rustling reeds. He did not have to ask where they were. He knew.
"Perhaps," he said at last. "I only mean that if I do this thing it
will be more to see that future generations live in peace than to
bring vengeance on a power-mad Abarian."

"Oh, Bram! That's what I wanted you to say. I wanted to hear you say
that. For tomorrow! For all our tomorrows."

       *       *       *       *       *

Bram Forest walked to the rail of the barge, and gripped it, and
looked out over the ice-flows. He recited:

    "An ape, a boar, a stallion,
     A land beyond the stars.
     A Virgin's feast, a raging beast,
     A prison without bars."

"Why, what an unusual poem!" Ylia cried. Then: "Hold me close, it's so
cold. And I'm afraid, Bram Forest...."

"Of the Place of the Dead?"

"Yes, yes. The Place of the Dead."

"It and the poem are entwined," Bram Forest said musingly. "I know
they are. Together, they're my destiny."

"And the destiny of all Tarth?"

"Perhaps. Portox liked to think so, I guess."

"I like to think so, Bram Forest." She smiled up at him tremulously.
"And my destiny as well."

"Ylia," he asked abruptly, "what do you know about the Golden Ape? You
mentioned it to me once, when you thought I ... well, when you thought
I endangered your virginity."

"Why, nothing beyond what the legends say."

"And what do the legends say?"

"It is written in the most ancient of our religious beliefs that the
messenger to the Place of the Dead is a Golden Ape. Naturally, in
these same beliefs, a defiled virgin is supposed to kill herself.
Thus, in a way of speaking, she goes to the Golden Ape. You see?"

       *       *       *       *       *

Bram Forest smiled down at her. "What would you think if I told you
the Golden Ape was real? If I told you that there actually was a Place
of the Dead?"

"For the spirits of the departed?" Ylia asked in a very small voice.

"No. Man can't presume to know about that. It's in the realm of the
gods. I mean a place which somehow borders on Tarth and yet ... yet is
beyond the stars. A place which, when wayfarers returned from it
miraculously long and long ago, gave rise to the legends."

"Borders on Tarth ... yet beyond the stars? How can this be?"

"Portox found it and explained it with his science," Bram Forest
insisted. "Earth and Tarth, twin worlds, yet so different, forever
unseen one by the other, on opposite sides of the sun. They're unique in
the solar system, Ylia. Portox thought--if the memory he planted in my
mind is correct--that they're unique in the entire universe. Somehow, a
million million years ago, a world split, becoming two worlds. But
ordinary space ... I don't know, the memory is confused ... could not
hold them. There is a warp of space, a place where space bends. Learn to
master the warp and you go instantly from Tarth to Earth, or back again.
That was the way Portox brought me, as an infant, to Earth." He held
aloft his arm, showing her the steel-silver disc. "With this I can
travel back and forth at will. Without it, either Earth or Tarth would
be my prison...." His voice trailed off.

Then he blurted: "'A prison without bars!'"

"What...."

"The prophetic poem. Part of the poem. Anyway, Ylia, Earth and Tarth
exist at either end of this space warp, connected thus through normal
space where there should be no connection. And someplace along the
warp--where ordinary space-time distances don't matter...."

"I'm sorry, Bram Forest. I don't understand you."

       *       *       *       *       *

"I'm not sure I understand myself. Tarth is a primitive world. It is
beyond our science. It is even beyond the science of Earth, I believe,
and Earth is a millennium ahead of Tarth in its development. But
Portox knew. Anyhow, someplace along the warp--in ordinary distances
along the space-time continuum perhaps a billion light years distant
from either Earth or Tarth, is a third world. On the warp it is very
close. The River of Ice leads to it. We call it the Place of the
Dead."

"But the Golden Ape--?"

"--inhabits the so-called Place of the Dead. Their world was dying,
but Portox saved them. I think ... the science is beyond me ... the
entropy of their galaxy was running down ... their world perishing,
freezing ... when somehow with his great science Portox claimed for
their use the unavailable energy in their ... their thermodynamic
system, and saved them."

"Why do you frown so?"

"Words. Words only. I don't understand. I can only act."

"You can act," Ylia said, hugging herself tight against him. "For
Tarth and the future."

"For Tarth and the future," Bram Forest said, but he hardly heard the
words.

Ahead of them in the cold clear air a wall seemed to rise. It came up
so suddenly, and, in fact, the air had cleared so suddenly from the
accustomed murkiness, that Ylia was afraid. "It is in the legend," she
whispered. "The Black Wall, Bram Forest. And beyond it--the Place of
the Dead."

"More accurately, an edge-on view of the space-warp, where it meets
the normal world." But although he spoke the words of Portox, Bram
Forest did not sound too confident.

"We're coming closer to it, Bram. Hold me!"

He held her. There was nothing else he could do. The current swept the
barge on inexorably. The Black Wall reared ahead of them, frowned down
at them, seemed to block off all the rest of the universe and all
reality whether of Earth or of Tarth....

The barge penetrated the wall. Black and solid-seeming, solid as
stone, it yet offered no resistance. The barge disappeared within it.

Behind the barge, rope-trailing so close that its prow almost scraped
the royal wood, was a skiff in which, shaking and afraid yet somehow
triumphant because he had heard Bram Forest's strange words, was
Hultax the Abarian.




CHAPTER XV

_The Golden Ape_


Hultax the Abarian shook himself. He had lost consciousness as every
nerve-ending in his body had screamed with pain. Did this have
something to do with the warp--warping?--Bram Forest had mentioned.
Hultax the Abarian did not know. But he did know that he was alive, as
alive as anyone could be or had a right to be in the Place of the
Dead. And he did know, gratefully, that the intense cold of the River
of Ice was gone.

He wondered how long he had been unconscious. He blinked his eyes. A
balmy, pink-tinted sky. A pink sun, not on the horizon, when indeed
the sun might be pink, but overhead. On the horizon--Hultax blinked
again and thought he was mad--a second sun, smaller, paler, the ghost
of green in color.

The royal barge was in ruins. It had piled up on some rocks. The bier
of Jlomec, Prince of Nadia, had been thrown clear. He could see it on
the bank, also in ruins. He stood up unsteadily, then waded through
the shallow water in which he'd regained consciousness, over to the
wreck of the royal barge. The fingers of his right hand were poised
inches from the hilt of his whip-sword. Slay Bram Forest and the girl
if the wreck hadn't already killed them? He shook his head. Bram
Forest knew more about this strange place, this world of the pink sun
and the green sun, than he did.

       *       *       *       *       *

He climbed over the wreckage, and finally came upon the two bodies. He
went down on his knees beside them. They were covered with blood. They
were broken--broken being the only word that could describe them. They
had been crushed, perhaps by falling timber, perhaps by the bier of
Jlomec as it hurtled over the side. There probably was not a bone in
either of their bodies, at least a major bone, which had not been
crushed.

They were dead.

With a craftiness which surprised even himself, Hultax remembered the
dead Bram Forest's words. It was the bracelet with the shining disc
which gave Bram Forest the power to appear and disappear at will, as
Retoc had described. Or, as Bram Forest had put it, to journey between
the worlds. Carefully, Hultax took the bracelet--it was miraculously
intact--from the crushed, broken arm of Bram Forest's corpse. He
circled his own arm with it and felt, or imagined he felt, an
instantaneous source of power surge through his body. Without looking
back at the broken bodies of the man and woman who had found love and,
finding it, died in each other's arms, he made his way from the river
bank across a pleasant green meadow. Far in the distance he saw a dark
blur which looked like a forest. It was many miles away, almost at the
limit of vision.

