throughout the contents of thousands of cans of food-concentrate. Within
that time much of it would have been consumed by the inmates and
Managers.

At the end of that work period, Marquis returned to his cell. He went
past his own bed and stopped in front of 4901's bed.

The sleep bells sounded and the dark came again. This would be the final
dark, Marquis knew. This time he had beat the game. The delayed-action
poison would kill him. He had on 4901's clothes with his identification
number. He was on 4901's bed.

He would die--as 4901. The guards would finally check on the missing man
in the food-mart. But they would never find him. They would find 4901
dead, a suicide. And they would put the body labeled 4901 in the tank,
dissolve it into dissociated cells and they would subject those cells to
the electro-magnetic field of 4901.

And they would resurrect--4901.

Not only have I managed to die, Marquis thought, but I've managed the
ultimate suicide. There won't even be a body, no sign anywhere that I
have ever been at all. Even my cells will have been resurrected as
someone else. As a number 4901.

       *       *       *       *       *

"And that's the way it was," No. 4901 would tell new prisoners coming
in. Sometimes they listened to him and seemed interested, but the
interest always died during indoctrination. But No. 4901's interest in
the story never died.

He knew that now he could never let himself die as a human being either,
that he could never let himself become completely controlled by the
bells. He'd been nearly dead as an individual, but No. 5274 had saved
him from that dead-alive anonymity. He could keep alive, and maintain
hope now by remembering what 5274 had done. He clung to that memory. As
long as he retained that memory of hope--of triumph--at least some part
of him would keep burning, as something had kept on burning within the
heart of 5274.

So every night before the sleep bells sounded, he would go over the
whole thing in minute detail, remembering 5274's every word and gesture,
the details of his appearance. He told the plan over to himself every
night, and told everyone about it who came in to the indoctrination
ward.

Swimming up through the pain of resurrection, he had been a little mad
at 5274 at first, and then he had realized that at least the plan had
enabled one man to beat the game.

"He will always be alive to me. Maybe, in a way, he's part of me. Nobody
knows. But his memory will live. He succeeded in a kind of ultimate
dying--no trace of him anywhere. But the memory of him and what he did
will be alive when the New System and the Managers are dead. That spirit
will assure the Underground of victory--someday. And meanwhile, I'll
keep 5274 alive.

"He even knew the psychology of these Managers and their System. That
they can't afford to make an error. He knew they'd still have that
identification punch-plate of him. That they would have one more plate
than they had prisoners. But he anticipated what they would do there
too. To admit there was one more identification plate than there were
prisoners would be to admit a gross error. Of course they could dissolve
one of the other prisoners and use 5274's plate and resurrect 5274. But
they'd gain nothing. There would still be an extra plate. You see?

"So they destroyed the plate. He knew they would. And they also had to
go back through the records, to Earth, through the security files there,
through the birth records, everything. And they destroyed every trace,
every shred of evidence that No. 5274 ever existed."

So he kept the memory alive and that kept 4901 alive while the other
prisoners become automatons, hearing, feeling, sensing nothing except
the bells. Remembering nothing, anticipating nothing.

But 4901 could remember something magnificent, and so he could
anticipate, and that was hope, and faith. He found that no one really
believed him but he kept on telling it anyway, the story of the Plan.

"Maybe this number didn't exist," someone would say. "If there's no
record anywhere--"

4901 would smile. "In my head, there's where the record is. _I_ know.
_I_ remember."

And so it was that 4901 was the only one who still remembered and who
could still smile when sometime after that--no one in the prison colony
knew how long--the Underground was victorious, and the Managerial System
crumbled.





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of The Victor, by Bryce Walton

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE VICTOR ***

***** This file should be named 32903.txt or 32903.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/3/2/9/0/32903/

Produced by Greg Weeks, Mary Meehan and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
