principles. They have been practised to some extent upon man, but chiefly
upon those inferior animals which require a similar diet to man.

[Sidenote: 30. What has been demonstrated in the first place? Example?
Second demonstration? Example? Give the illustration in relation to
convertibility.]

30. By this means it has been demonstrated that--first, when any one of
these substances is eaten exclusively, the body is imperfectly nourished,
and life is shortened. Dogs fed exclusively upon either albumen, fat, or
sugar, soon die of starvation. Second, a diet long deprived of either of
these principles, is a fertile cause of disease; for example, on
ship-board, where fresh vegetables are not dealt out for a long period,
_scurvy_ becomes prevalent among the sailors. They are, however, to a
certain extent mutually convertible, and thus the missing article is
indirectly supplied. For {63} instance, sugar changes to fat in the body;
and hence, as is well known, the "hands" on a sugar plantation grow fat
during the sugar season, by partaking freely of the ripened juices of the
cane.

31. That is the best diet therefore which contains some of each of these
principles, in due proportion; and that is the worst which excludes the
most of them. The cravings and experience of man had unerringly guided him
to a correct regulation of his diet, long before the chemistry of food was
understood; so that his ordinary meals long ago combined these various
principles, the necessity and value of which are now explained.

QUESTIONS FOR TOPICAL REVIEW.

                                                                       PAGE
  1. What is understood by the term food?                                53
  2. What can you state in relation to the source of food?               53
  3. What discriminations and selections are necessary?              53, 54
  4. How can you tell the organic from the inorganic substances?         54
  5. What relative position does water hold as an article of food?       54
  6. In what parts of the body is water found?                       54, 55
  7. In what articles that we eat is it found?                           55
  8. If you were required to go without water or solid food for a
         number of days, which would you prefer to have, and why?        55
  9. What can you state of the importance of salt as an article
  of food?                                                           55, 56
  10. How abundant is salt, and how does it find its way into the
        human system?                                                55, 56
  11. What can you state of the importance of lime in the body?      56
  12. What, of the importance of iron?                               56, 57
  13. What further is stated of other inorganic substances?              57
  14. What in relation to organic substances?                            57
  15. What can you state in relation to the albuminoids?             57, 58
  16. What, in relation to albumen?                                      58
  17. What, in relation to casein?                                   58, 59
  18. In relation to the fats or oils, and how generally consumed?   59, 60
  19. What do we understand by the sugars or saccharine substances?      60
  20. State what you can of sugar--its origin and various qualities. 60, 61
  21. Of starch--its varieties and qualities.                            61
  22. Of the abundance of starch, and its importance as a food
        principle.                                                       61
  23. What is stated in relation to stimulating substances?              62
  24. Of the necessity for regulation in diet?                       62, 63

       *       *       *       *       *


{64}

CHAPTER V.

FOOD AND DRINK.

_Necessity for Food--Waste and Repair--Hunger and Thirst--Amount of
Food--Renovation of the Body--Mixed
Diet--Milk--Eggs--Meat--Cooking--Vegetable Food--Bread--The
Potato--Fruits--Purity of Water--Action of Water upon Lead--Coffee, Tea,
and Chocolate--Effects of Alcohol._

[Sidenote: 1. What follow activity? Examples? Necessity for food?]

1. NECESSITY FOR FOOD.--Activity is everywhere followed by waste. The
engine uses up coal and water to produce motion, the stream wears away its
bank, the growing corn-blade draws tribute from the soil. When the human
body acts, and it is always in action during life, some of its particles
are worn out and thrown off. This waste must constantly be repaired, or the
body suffers. In this fact is seen the necessity for food. The particles,
thus worn out, being henceforth useless, are removed from the body. Our
_food_ and _drink_ are rapidly transformed into a new supply of living,
useful material, to be in turn used up and replaced by a fresher supply.

[Sidenote: 2. Give the theory in relation to waste and repair.]

2. WASTE AND REPAIR.--In this way the healthful body, though always
wasting, is always building up, and does not greatly change in size, form,
or weight. At two periods of life the processes of waste and repair are not
exactly balanced. In early life the process of building up is more active,
and in consequence the form is plump, and the stature increases. Repair now
exceeds waste. On the other hand, when old age comes on, the wasting
process is more active, the flesh and weight diminish, the skin falls in
wrinkles, and the senses become dull. Only during the prime of life--from
about twenty to sixty years of age--is the balance exact between loss and
gain. {65}

[Sidenote: 3. System deprived of food? Warning? What is the pain? How
proved?]

3. HUNGER AND THIRST.--When the system is deprived of its supply of solid
food during a longer time than usual, nature gives warning by the sensation
of hunger, to repair the losses that have taken place. This sensation or
pain appears to be located in the stomach, but it is really a distress of
the system at large. Let a sufficient quantity of nourishment be introduced
into the system in any other way than by the mouth, and it will appease
hunger just as certainly as when taken in the usual manner.

[Sidenote: 4. Feeling of thirst? Seat of the pain? How proved? Time a
person can exist without food?]

4. The feeling of thirst, in like manner, is evidence that the system is
suffering from the want of water. The apparent seat of the distress of
thirst is in the throat; but the injection of water into the blood-vessels
is found to quench thirst, and by the immersion of the body in water, the
skin will absorb sufficient to satisfy the demands of the system. The
length of time that man can exist without food or drink is estimated to be
about seven days. If water alone be supplied, life will last much longer;
there being cases recorded where men have lived twenty days and over,
without taking any solid food.

[Sidenote: 5. Amount of food required? The young and others? Those living
in hot and cold climates? Habits?]

5. QUANTITY OF FOOD.--The quantity of food required varies greatly,
according to the individual and his mode of life. The young, and others who
lead active lives, or who live in the open air, require more food than the
old, the inactive, or the sedentary. Those who live in cold regions require
more than the inhabitants of hot climates. Habit, also, has much to do with
the quantity of food required. Some habitually eat and drink more than they
actually need, while a few eat less than they should.

[Sidenote: 6. Quantity of food daily? How divided? Compare with the weight
of the body?]

6. The average daily quantity of food and drink for a healthy man of active
habits is estimated at six pounds. This amount may be divided in about the
following {66} proportions: the mineral kingdom furnishes three and
one-half pounds, including water and salt; the vegetable kingdom, one and
one-half pounds, including bread, vegetables, and fruits; the animal
kingdom, one pound, comprising meat, eggs, butter, and the like. This
quantity is about one twenty-fourth the weight of the body, as it is
generally computed; the average weight of an adult man being placed at 140
pounds. A man, therefore, consumes an amount of solid and liquid nutriment
every twenty-four days equal in weight to that of his body, a corresponding
amount being _excreted_, or removed from the system in the same time.

[Sidenote: 7. How often then might the body be renewed? Why is it not?
Opinion? How correct? What further is stated?]

7. RENOVATION OF THE BODY.--By this process, so far as weight is concerned,
the body might be renewed every twenty-four days; but these pounds of food
are not all real nutriment. A considerable portion of that which we eat is
innutritious, and though useful in various ways, is not destined to repair
the losses of the system. An opinion has prevailed that the body is renewed
throughout once in seven years; how correct this may be it is not easy to
decide, but probably the renovation of the body takes place in a much
shorter period. Some parts are very frequently renewed, the nutritive
fluids changing more or less completely, several times during the day. The
muscles, and other parts in frequent exercise, change often during a year;
the bones not so often, and the enamel of the teeth probably never changes
after being once fully formed.

[Sidenote: 8. Habits of nations? Give the different cases.]

8. MIXED DIET.--The habits of different nations in respect to diet exhibit
the widest and strangest diversity. The civilized, cook their food, while
savages often eat it in a raw state. Some prefer it when fresh, others
allow it to remain until it has become tainted with decay. Those dwelling
in the far north subsist almost wholly on {67} animal food, while those
living in hot climates have bountiful supplies of delicious fruits with
which to satisfy all their bodily wants. One race subsists upon the banana,
another upon the blubber of seals. In temperate climates, a diet composed
partly of vegetable and partly of animal food is preferred.

[Sidenote: 9. The point to consider? Vegetable diet? Louis Cornaro? John
the Baptist?]

9. The important point to consider is, however, not one of origin, but
whether the chemical principles (mentioned in the last chapter) enter into
the composition of the diet. A purely vegetable diet may be selected which
would contain all the principles necessary to sustain life. It is recorded
of Louis Cornaro, a Venetian noble, that he supported himself comfortably
for fifty-eight years on a daily allowance of twelve ounces of vegetable
food, and about a pint of light wine. On the other hand, the food of John
the Baptist, consisting of "locusts and wild honey," is an example of the
sustaining power of a diet chiefly animal in its origin.

[Sidenote: 10. What has been found in our climate? Exclusive vegetable
diet?]

10. In our climate, those who lead active lives crave an allowance of
animal food; and it has been found by experience that with it they can
accomplish more work and are less subject to fatigue, than without it.
Among nations where an exclusively vegetable diet is employed, indigestion
is a disorder especially prevalent.

[Sidenote: 11. Necessity for change in diet? Continuous use of the same
diet? Exception? Why? Too rich diet? Horses?]

11. The necessity for occasionally changing or varying the diet, is seen in
the fact that no single article comprises all the necessary principles of
food, and that the continuous use of any one diet, whether salt or fresh,
is followed by defective nutrition and disease. There is one exception to
this rule: in infancy, milk alone is best calculated to support life; for
then the digestive powers are incompletely developed, and the food must be
presented in the simplest form possible. It should also be remembered {68}
that too rich diet is injurious, just as truly as one that is inadequate.
When the food of horses is too nutritious, instinct leads them to gnaw the
wood-work of their mangers.

[Sidenote: 12. Milk as a model food? Cow's milk? The constituents when
separated?]

12. DIFFERENT ARTICLES OF DIET--MILK.--Milk is the earliest nutriment of
the human race, and in the selection and arrangement of its constituents,
may be regarded as a model food, no other single article being capable of
sustaining life so long. Cow's milk holds casein, one of the albuminoids,
about five parts in one hundred; a fatty principle, when separated, known
as butter, about four parts; sugar of milk four parts; water and salts
eighty-seven parts. The casein and fatty substance are far more digestible
in milk, than after they have been separated from it in the form of cheese
and butter.

[Sidenote: 13. Milk as a beverage? Milk sold in cities? How to detect the
cheat?]

13. Since milk, in itself, is so rich an article of food, the use of it as
a beverage is unwise, unless the quantity of the other articles consumed be
reduced at the same time. The milk sold in cities is apt to be diluted with
water. The way to detect the cheat is by testing the specific gravity of
the article. Good milk is about 1030; skimmed milk 1035; but milk diluted
one-fifth is 1024. An instrument called the lactometer is also used, by
which the amount of cream present is ascertained.

[Sidenote: 14. Composition of eggs? Yolk? How should eggs be eaten? Why?
How boiled? Why?]

14. EGGS.--The egg is about two-thirds water, the balance is pure albumen
and fat in nearly equal proportions. The fat is in the yolk, and gives it
its yellow color. Eggs contain none of the sugar-principles, and should be
eaten with bread or vegetables that contain them. Soft-boiled eggs are more
wholesome than those which are hard-boiled or fried, as the latter require
longer time to digest.

[Sidenote: 15. Meats, whence derived? Why important? Flesh of young
animals?]

15. MEATS.--The meats, so called, are derived from the muscular parts of
various animals. They are most {69} important articles of food for adults,
inasmuch as they are richly stored with albuminoid substances, and contain
more or less fat. Such food is very nourishing and easily digested if eaten
when fresh,--veal and pork being exceptions. The flesh of young animals is
more tender and, in general, more digestible than that of older ones. All
meat is more tough immediately after the killing of the animal, but
improves by being kept a certain length of time.

[Sidenote: 16. Preference of persons? Venison? Mutton? Cheese? Uncooked
flesh?]

16. Some persons prefer flesh that has begun to show signs of
decomposition, or is unmistakably putrid. By some, venison is not
considered to have its proper flavor until it is tainted. In England,
people prefer mutton that is in a similar condition, just as on the
continent of Europe many delight in cheese that is in a state of
decomposition. In certain less civilized countries flesh is not only eaten
uncooked, but in a mouldy, rotten condition. The use of such food is not
always immediately injurious, but it predisposes to certain diseases, as
indigestion and fevers.

[Sidenote: 17. Cold as a preserver? Meat in Russia? Beef and pork, how
preserved? Salted meat as food? Scurvy?]

17. Cold is one means of preserving meat from decay. In the markets of
northern Russia, the frozen carcases of animals stand exposed for sale in
the winter air for a considerable time, and are sawn in pieces, like sticks
of wood, as the purchases are made; such meat, when thawed, being entirely
fit for food. Beef and pork are preserved by salting down in brine, and in
this condition may be carried on long voyages or kept for future use.
Salted meat is not as nutritious as fresh, since the brine absorbs its rich
juices and hardens its fibres. Long continued use of salt meats, without
fresh vegetables, gives rise to the disease called scurvy, formerly very
prevalent on shipboard and in prisons; but now scarcely known.

[Sidenote: 18. The antiquity of the custom of cooking food? Object of
cooking? The oyster? Raw meat as an occasional food?]

18. COOKING.--The preparation of food by the agency {70} of fire is of
almost universal practice, even among the rudest nations. The object of
cooking is to render food more easy of digestion by softening it, to
develop its flavor, and to raise its temperature more nearly to that of the
body. A few articles of flesh-food are eaten uncooked in civilized lands,
the oyster being an instance. Raw meat is occasionally eaten by invalids
with weak digestive powers, and by men training for athletic contests.

[Sidenote: 19. Effect of boiling meat? How may the cooking be done? The
proper method? Effect? Making of soup?]

19. In boiling meat, the water in which it is placed tends to dissolve its
nutrient juices. In fact, the cooking may be so conducted as to rob the
meat of its nourishment, its tenderness, and even of its flavor. The proper
method, in order to preserve or promote these qualities, is to place the
meat in boiling water, which, after a few minutes, should be reduced in
temperature. In this way the intense heat, at first, coagulates the
exterior layers of albumen, and imprisons the delicate juices; after that,
moderate heat best softens it throughout. When soup is to be made, an
opposite course should be pursued; for then the object is to extract the
juices and reject the fibre. Meat, for such purpose, should be cut in small
pieces and put into cold water, which should then be gradually raised to
boiling heat.

[Sidenote: 20. Roasting? How should it be done? Give the philosophy of the
process. Frying?]

20. Roasting is probably the best method of cooking meat, especially
"joints" or large pieces, as by this process the meat is cooked in its own
juices. Roasting should begin with intense heat, and be continued at a
moderate temperature, in order to prevent the drying out of the nutritious
juices, as by this process an outer coating or crust of coagulated albumen
is formed. During this process the meat loses one-fourth of its weight, but
the loss is almost wholly water, evaporated by the heat. Too {71} intense
or prolonged heat will dry the meat, or burn it. Frying is the worst
possible method, as the heated fat, by penetrating the meat, or other
article placed in it, dries and hardens it, and thus renders it
indigestible.

[Sidenote: 21. What is "Trichina?" How guarded against?]

21. TRICHINA.--It should be remembered that ham, sausages, and other forms
of pork, should never be eaten in a raw or imperfectly cooked condition.
The muscle of the pig is often infested by a minute animal parasite, or
worm, called _trichina spiralis_. This worm may be introduced alive into
the human body in pork food, where it multiplies with great rapidity, and
gives rise to a painful and serious disease. This disease has been
prevalent in Germany, and cases of it occur from time to time in this
country.

[Sidenote: 22. What part of fish is eaten? What does it resemble? Fish as
food for digestion? Fish as a diet?]

