contemporaries. It is probable that Moecenigo was acting for the
Inquisition.[218] At any rate, he soon denounced Bruno to that body
and in May, 1592, surrendered him to it.[219]

[Footnote 218: McIntyre: 68.]

[Footnote 219: Ibid: 47-72.]

In his trial before the Venetian Inquisition,[220] Bruno told the
story of his life and stated his beliefs in answer to the charges
against him, based mainly on travesties of his opinions. In this
statement as well as in _La Cena de le Ceneri_, and in _De Immenso et
Innumerabilis_,[221] Bruno shows how completely he had not merely
accepted the Copernican doctrine, but had expanded it far beyond its
author's conception. The universe according to Copernicus, though
vastly greater than that conceived by Aristotle and Ptolemy, was still
finite because enclosed within the sphere of the fixed stars. Bruno
declared that not only was the earth only a lesser planet, but "this
world itself was merely one of an infinite number of particular worlds
similar to this, and that all the planets and other stars are infinite
worlds without number composing an infinite universe, so that there is
a double infinitude, that of the greatness of the universe, and that
of the multitude of worlds."[222] How important this would be to the
Church authorities may be realized by recalling the patristic doctrine
that the universe was created for man and that his home is its center.
Of course their cherished belief must be defended from such an attack,
and naturally enough, the Copernican doctrine as the starting point of
Bruno's theory of an infinite universe was thus brought into
question;[223] for, as M. Berti has said,[224] Bruno's doctrine was
equally an astro-theology or a theological astronomy.

[Footnote 220: See official documents in Berti: 327-395.]

[Footnote 221: Bruno: _De Immenso et Innumerabilis_: Lib. III, cap. 9
(vol. 1, pt. 1, 380-386).]

[Footnote 222: Thayer: 268.]

[Footnote 223: Berti: 285.]

[Footnote 224: Ibid: 282.]

The Roman Inquisition was not content to let the Venetian court deal
with this arch heretic, but wrote in September, 1592, demanding his
extradition. The Venetian body referred its consent to the state for
ratification which the Doge and Council refused to grant. Finally,
when the Papal Nuncio had represented that Bruno was not a Venetian
but a Neapolitan, and that cases against him were still outstanding
both in Naples and in Rome, the state consented, and in February of
the next year, Bruno entered Rome, a prisoner of the Inquisition.
Nothing further is known about him until the Congregations took up his
case on February 4th, 1599. Perhaps Pope Clement had hoped to win back
to the true faith this prince of heretics.[225] However Bruno stood
firm, and early in the following year he was degraded, sentenced and
handed over to the secular authorities, who burned him at the stake in
the Campo di Fiori, February 17, 1600.[226] All his books were put on
the Index by decree of February 8, 1600, (where they remain to this
day), and as a consequence they became extremely rare. It is well to
remember Bruno's fate, when considering Galileo's case, for
Galileo[227] was at that time professor of mathematics in the
university of Padua and fully cognizant of the event.

[Footnote 225: Fahie: 82-89.]

[Footnote 226: Thayer: 299.]

[Footnote 227: The publication of A. Favaro's _Galileo e
l'Inquisizione: Documenti del Processo Galileiano ... per la prima
volta integralmente pubblicati_, (Firenze, 1907), together with that
of the National Edition (in 20 vols.) of Galileo's works, edited by
Favaro (Firenze, completed 1909), renders somewhat obsolete all
earlier lives of Galileo. The more valuable, however, of these books
are: Martin's _Galilee_ (Paris, 1868), a scholarly Catholic study
containing valuable bibliographical notes; Anon. (Mrs. Olney):
_Private Life of Galileo_, based largely on his correspondence with
his daughter from which many extracts are given; and von Gebler's
_Galileo Galilei and the Roman Curia_ (trans. by Mrs. Sturge, London,
1879), which includes in the appendix the various decrees in the
original. Fahie's _Life of Galileo_ (London, 1903), is based on
Favaro's researches and is reliable. The documents of the trial have
been published in part by de l'Epinois, von Gebler and Berti, but
Favaro's is the complete and authoritative edition.]

Galileo's father, though himself a skilled mathematician, had
intended that his son (born at Pisa, February 15, 1564), should be a
cloth-dealer, but at length permitted him to study medicine instead at
the university of Pisa, after an elementary education at the monastery
of Vallombrosa near Florence. At the Tuscan Court in Pisa, Galileo
received his first lesson in mathematics, which thereupon became his
absorbing interest. After nearly four years he withdrew from the
university to Florence and devoted himself to that science and to
physics. His services as a professor at this time were refused by five
of the Italian universities; finally, in 1589, he obtained the
appointment to the chair of physics at Pisa. He became so unpopular
there, however, through his attacks on the Aristotelian physics of the
day, that after three years he resigned and accepted a similar
position at Padua.[228] He remained here nearly eighteen years till
his longing for leisure in which to pursue his researches, and the
patronage of his good friend, the Grand Duke of Tuscany, brought him a
professorship at the university of Pisa again, this time without
obligation of residence nor of lecturing. He took up his residence in
Florence in 1610; and later (1626), purchased a villa at Arcetri
outside the city, in order to be near the convent where his favorite
daughter "Suor Maria Celeste" was a religious.[229]

[Footnote 228: Fahie: 20-40.]

[Footnote 229: Ibid: 121.]

During the greater part of his lectureship at Padua, Galileo taught
according to the Ptolemaic cosmogony out of compliance with popular
feeling, though himself a Copernican. In a letter to Kepler (August 4,
1597)[230] he speaks of his entire acceptance of the new system for
some years; but not until after the appearance of the New Star in the
heavens in 1604 and 1605, and the controversy that its appearance
aroused over the Aristotelian notion of the perfect and unchangeable
heavens, did he publicly repudiate the old scheme and teach the new.
The only information we have as to how he came to adopt the Copernican
scheme for himself is the account given by "_Sagredo_," Galileo's
spokesman in the famous _Dialogue on the Two Principal Systems_
(1632):

     "Being very young and having scarcely finished my course of
     Philosophy which I left off, as being set upon other
     employments, there chanced to come into these parts a
     certain foreigner of Rostock, whose name as I remember, was
     Christianus Vurstitius, a follower of Copernicus, who in an
     Academy made two or three lectures upon this point, to whom
     many flock't as auditors; but I thinking they went more for
     the novelty of the subject than otherwise, did not go to
     hear him; for I had concluded with myself that that opinion
     could be no other than a solemn madnesse. And questioning
     some of those who had been there, I perceived they all made
     a jest thereof, except one, who told me that the business
     was not altogether to be laugh't at, and because this man
     was reputed by me to be very intelligent and wary, I
     repented that I was not there, and began from that time
     forward as oft as I met with anyone of the Copernican
     persuasion, to demand of them, if they had always been of
     the same judgment; and of as many as I examined, I found not
     so much as one, who told me not that he had been a long time
     of the contrary opinion, but to have changed it for this, as
     convinced by the reasons proving the same: and afterwards
     questioning them, one by one, to see whether they were well
     possest of the reasons of the other side, I found them all
     to be very ready and perfect in them; so that I could not
     truly say that they had took up this opinion out of
     ignorance, vanity, or to show the acuteness of their wits.
     On the contrary, of as many of the Peripateticks and
     Ptolemeans as I have asked (and out of curiosity I have
     talked with many) what pains they had taken in the Book of
     Copernicus, I found very few that had so much as
     superficially perused it: but of those whom, I thought, had
     understood the same, not one; and moreover, I have enquired
     amongst the followers of the Peripatetick Doctrine, if ever
     any of them had held the contrary opinion, and likewise
     found that none had. Whereupon considering that there was no
     man who followed the opinion of Copernicus that had not been
     first on the contrary side, and that was not very well
     acquainted with the reasons of Aristotle and Ptolemy; and on
     the contrary, that there is not one of the followers of
     Ptolemy that had ever been of the judgment of Copernicus,
     and that had left that to embrace this of Aristotle,
     considering, I say, these things, I began to think that one,
     who leaveth an opinion imbued with his milk, and followed by
     very many, to take up another owned by very few, and denied
     by all the Schools, and that really seems a very great
     Parodox, must needs have been moved, not to say forced, by
     more powerful reasons. For this cause I am become very
     curious to dive, as they say, into the bottom of this
     business ... and bring myself to a certainty in this
     subject."[231]

[Footnote 230: Galileo: _Opere_, X, 68.]

[Footnote 231: 'The Second Day' in Salusbury: _Math. Coll._ I,
110-111.]

Galileo's brilliant work in mechanics and his great popularity--for
his lectures were thronged--combined with his skilled and witty
attacks upon the accepted scientific ideas of the age, embittered and
antagonized many who were both conservative and jealous.[232] The
Jesuits particularly resented his influence and power, for they
claimed the leadership in the educational world and were jealous of
intruders. Furthermore, they were bound by the decree of the fiftieth
General Congregation of their society in 1593 to defend Aristotle, a
decree strictly enforced.[233] While a few of the Jesuits were
friendly disposed to Galileo at first, the controversies in which he
and they became involved and their bitter attacks upon him made him
feel by 1633 that they were among his chief enemies.[234]

[Footnote 232: Fahie: 265.]

[Footnote 233: Conway: 46-47.]

[Footnote 234: Conway: 46-47.]

Early in 1609, Galileo heard a rumor of a spy-glass having been made
in Flanders, and proceeded to work one out for himself according to
the laws of perspective. The fifth telescope that he made magnified
thirty diameters, and it was with such instruments of his own
manufacture that he made in the next three years his famous
discoveries: Jupiter's four satellites (which he named the Medicean
Planets), Saturn's "tripartite" character (the rings were not
recognized as such for several decades thereafter), the stars of the
Milky Way, the crescent form of Venus, the mountains of the moon, many
more fixed stars, and the spots on the sun. Popular interest waxed
with each new discovery and from all sides came requests for
telescopes; yet there were those who absolutely refused even to look
through a telescope lest they be compelled to admit Aristotle was
mistaken, and others claimed that Jupiter's moons were merely defects
in the instrument. The formal announcement of the first of these
discoveries was made in the _Sidereus Nuncius_ (1610), a book that
aroused no little opposition. Kepler, however, had it reprinted at
once in Prague with a long appreciative preface of his own.[235]

[Footnote 235: Fahie: 77-126.]

The following March Galileo went to Rome to show his discoveries and
was received with the utmost distinction by princes and church
dignitaries alike. A commission of four scientific members of the
Roman College had previously examined his claims at Cardinal
Bellarmin's suggestion, and had admitted their truth. Now Pope Paul V
gave him long audiences; the Academia dei Lincei elected him a member,
and everywhere he was acclaimed. Nevertheless his name appears on the
secret books of the Holy Office as early as May of that year
(1611).[236] Already he was a suspect.

[Footnote 236: Doc. in Favaro: 13.]

His _Delle Macchie Solari_ (1611) brought on a sharp contest over the
question of priority of discovery between him and the Jesuit father,
Christopher Scheiner of Ingolstadt, from which Galileo emerged
victorious and more disliked than before by that order. Opposition was
becoming active; Father Castelli, for instance, the professor of
mathematics at Pisa and Galileo's intimate friend, was forbidden to
discuss in his lectures the double motion of the earth or even to hint
at its probability. This same father wrote to his friend early in
December, 1613, to tell him of a dinner-table conversation on this
matter at the Tuscan Court, then wintering at Pisa. Castelli told how
the Dowager Grand Duchess Cristina had had her religious scruples
aroused by a remark that the earth's motion must be wrong because it
contradicted the Scriptures, a statement that he had tried to
refute.[237] Galileo wrote in reply (December 21, 1613), the
letter[238] that was to cause him endless trouble, in which he marked
out the boundaries between science and religion and declared it a
mistake to take the literal interpretation of passages in Scripture
that were obviously written according to the understanding of the
common people. He pointed out in addition how futile the miracle of
the sun's standing still was as an argument against the Copernican
doctrine for, even according to the Ptolemaic system, not the sun but
the _primum mobile_ must be stayed for the day to be lengthened.

[Footnote 237: Fahie: 149.]

[Footnote 238: Galileo: _Opere_, V, 281-288.]

Father Castelli allowed others to read and to copy this supposedly
private letter; copies went from hand to hand in Florence and
discussion ran high. On the fourth Sunday in December, 1614, Father
Caccini of the Dominicans preached a sermon in the church of S.M.
Novella on Joshua's miracle, in which he sharply denounced the
Copernican doctrine taught by Galileo as heretical, so he
believed.[239] The Copernicans found a Neapolitan Jesuit who replied
to Caccini the following Sunday from the pulpit of the Duomo.[240]

[Footnote 239: Doc. in Favaro: 48-49.]

[Footnote 240: Doc. in Favaro: 49.]

In February (1615), came the formal denunciation of Galileo to the
Holy Office at Rome by Father Lorini, a Dominican associate of
Caccini's at the Convent San Marco. The father sent with his "friendly
warning," a copy of the letter to Castelli charging that it contained
"many propositions which were either suspect or temerarious," and, he
added, "though the _Galileisti_ were good Christians they were rather
stubborn and obstinate in their opinions."[241] The machinery of the
Inquisition began secretly to turn. The authorities failed to get the
original of the letter, for Castelli had returned that to Galileo at
the latter's request.[242] Pope Paul sent word to Father Caccini to
appear before the Holy Office in Rome to depose on this matter of
Galileo's errors "pro exoneratione suae conscientiae."[243] This he did
"freely" in March and was of course sworn to secrecy. He named a
certain nobleman, a Copernican, as the source of his information about
Galileo, for he did not know the latter even by sight. This nobleman
was by order of the Pope examined in November after some delay by the
Inquisitor at Florence. His testimony was to the effect that he
considered Galileo the best of Catholics.[244]

[Footnote 241: Ibid: 38: "amorevole avviso."]

[Footnote 242: Ibid: 46, 47, 51.]

[Footnote 243: Ibid: 47.]

[Footnote 244: Ibid: 49.]

Meanwhile the Consultors of the Holy Office had examined Lorini's copy
of the letter and reported the finding of only three objectionable
places all of which, they stated, could be amended by changing certain
doubtful phrases; otherwise it did not deviate from the true faith. It
is interesting to note that the copy they had differed in many minor
respects from the original letter, and in one place heightened a
passage with which the Examiners found fault as imputing falsehood to
the Scriptures although they are infallible.[245] Galileo's own
statement ran that there were many passages in the Scriptures which
according to the literal meaning of the words, "hanno aspetto diverso
dal vero...." The copy read, "molte propositioni falso quanto al nudo
senso delle parole."

[Footnote 245: Ibid: 43-45, see original in Galileo: _Opere_, V,
281-285.]

Rumors of trouble reached Galileo and, urged on by his friends, in
1615 he wrote a long formal elaboration of the earlier letter,
addressing this one to the Dowager Grand Duchess, but he had only
added fuel to the fire. At the end of the year he voluntarily went to
Rome, regardless of any possible danger to himself, to see if he could
not prevent a condemnation of the doctrine.[246] It came as a decided
surprise to him to receive an order to appear before Cardinal
Bellarmin on February 26, 1616,[2] and there to learn that the Holy
Office had already condemned it two days before. He was told that the
Holy Office had declared: first, "that the proposition that the sun is
the center of the universe and is immobile is foolish and absurd in
philosophy and formally heretical since it contradicts the express
words of the Scriptures in many places, according to the meaning of
the words and the common interpretation and sense of the Fathers and
the doctors of theology; and, secondly, that the proposition that the
earth is not the center of the universe nor immobile receives the same
censure in philosophy and in regard to its theological truth, it at
least is erroneous in Faith."[247]

[Footnote 246: Doc. in Favaro: 78.]

[Footnote 247: Ibid: 61.]

Exactly what was said at that meeting between the two men became the
crucial point in Galileo's trial sixteen years later, hence a somewhat
detailed study is important. At the meeting of the Congregation on
February 25th, the Pope ordered Cardinal Bellarmin to summon Galileo
and, in the presence of a notary and witnesses lest he should prove
recusant, warn him to abandon the condemned opinion and in every way
to abstain from teaching, defending or discussing it; if he did not
acquiesce, he was to be imprisoned.[248] The Secret Archives of the
Vatican contain a minute reporting this interview (dated February 26,
1616), in which the Cardinal is said to have ordered Galileo to
