The three men looked at him, and realized there was no irony in his
words, no sarcasm, no realization at all of what had truly happened.

"I can see a va-a-ast fleet of no-o-ble ships...." the senator began to
orate.

But the roar of the arriving jeep outside took his audience away from
him. They made a dash for the bunker door, no longer interested in the
senator and his progress report. It was the progress report as revealed
by the instruments on the ship which interested them more.

The senator was close behind them as they piled out of the bunker door,
and into the jeep, with Jennings unceremoniously pulling the driver from
the wheel and taking his place.

Over the rough dirt road toward the launching site where the ship had
come to rest, their minds were bemused and feverish, as they projected
ahead, trying to read in advance what the instruments would reveal of
that blank period.

The senator's mind projected even farther ahead to the fleet of space
ships he would own and control. And he had been worried about some
ignorant stupid voters! Stupid animals! How he despised them! What would
he care about voters when he could be master of the spaceways to the
stars?

Jennings swerved the jeep off the dirt road and took out across the
hummocks of sagebrush to the ship a few rods away. He hardly slacked
speed, and in a swirl of dust pulled up to the side of the ship. Before
it had even stopped, the men were piling out of the jeep, running toward
the side of the ship.

And stopped short.

       *       *       *       *       *

Unable to believe their eyes, to absorb the incredible, they stared at
the swinging open door in the side of the ship. Slowly they realized the
iridescent purple glow around the doorframe, the rotted metal,
disintegrating and falling to the dirt below. The implications of the
tampering with the door held them unmoving. Only the senator had not
caught it yet. Slower than they, now he was chugging up to where they
had stopped, an elephantine amble.

"Well, well, what's holding us up?" he panted irritably.

Cautiously then, Jennings moved toward the open door. And as cautiously,
Major Eddy and Professor Stein followed him. O'Noonan hung behind,
sensing the caution, but not knowing the reason behind it.

They entered the ship, wary of what might be lurking inside, what had
burned open the door out there in space, what had been able to capture
the ship, cut it off from its contact with controls, stop it in its
headlong flight out into space, turn it, return it to their controls at
precisely the same point and altitude. Wary, but they entered.

At first glance, nothing seemed disturbed. The bulkhead leading to the
power plant was still whole. But farther down the passage, the door
leading to the control room where the instruments were housed also swung
open. It, too, showed the iridescent purple disintegration of its metal
frame.

They hardly recognized the control room. They had known it intimately,
had helped to build and fit it. They knew each weld, each nut and bolt.

"The instruments are gone," the professor gasped in awe.

It was true. As they crowded there in the doorway, they saw the gaping
holes along the walls where the instruments had been inserted, one by
one, each to tell its own story of conditions in space.

The senator pushed himself into the room and looked about him. Even he
could tell the room had been dismantled.

"What kind of sabotage is this?" he exclaimed, and turned in anger
toward Jennings. No one answered him. Jennings did not even bother to
meet the accusing eyes.

They walked down the narrow passage between the twisted frames where the
instruments should have been. They came to the spot where the master
integrator should have stood, the one which should have co-ordinated all
the results of life-sustenance measurements, the one which was to give
them their progress report.

There, too, was a gaping hole--but not without its message. Etched in
the metal frame, in the same iridescent purple glow, were two words. Two
enigmatic words to reverberate throughout the world, burned in by some
watcher--some keeper--some warden.

"_Not yet._"


THE END


       *       *       *       *       *


          Transcriber Notes

  This etext was produced from If Worlds of Science Fiction July 1953.
  Extensive research did not uncover any evidence that the U.S. copyright
  on this publication was renewed.

  Typo was corrected on page 110:

  Original text: "Son," he said with a ringing thrill in his voice.
  "Mankind much reach the stars! We must allow ...

  Changed text: "Son," he said with a ringing thrill in his voice.
  "Mankind must reach the stars! We must allow ...






End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Progress Report, by 
Mark Clifton and Alex Apostolides
