"and that today. O he!" she cried, laughing gleefully, "verily do I
believe I have captured the wild Norman of Torn, for this very knight,
who styles himself Roger de Conde, fights as I ne'er saw man fight
before, and he rode with his visor down until I chide him for it."

Norman of Torn led in the laugh which followed, and of all the company
he most enjoyed the joke.

"An' speaking of the Devil," said the Baron, "how think you he will side
should the King eventually force war upon the barons? With his thousand
hell-hounds, the fate of England might well be in the palm of his bloody
hand."

"He loves neither King nor baron," spoke Mary de Stutevill, "and I
rather lean to the thought that he will serve neither, but rather
plunder the castles of both rebel and royalist whilst their masters be
absent at war."

"It be more to his liking to come while the master be home to welcome
him," said De Stutevill, ruthfully. "But yet I am always in fear for the
safety of my wife and daughters when I be away from Derby for any time.
May the good God soon deliver England from this Devil of Torn."

"I think you may have no need of fear on that score," spoke Mary, "for
Norman of Torn offered no violence to any woman within the wall of
Stutevill, and when one of his men laid a heavy hand upon me, it was the
great outlaw himself who struck the fellow such a blow with his mailed
hand as to crack the ruffian's helm, saying at the time, 'Know you,
fellow, Norman of Torn does not war upon women?'"

Presently the conversation turned to other subjects and Norman of Torn
heard no more of himself during that evening.

His stay at the castle of Stutevill was drawn out to three days, and
then, on the third day, as he sat with Bertrade de Montfort in an
embrasure of the south tower of the old castle, he spoke once more of
the necessity for leaving and once more she urged him to remain.

"To be with you, Bertrade of Montfort," he said boldly, "I would forego
any other pleasure, and endure any privation, or face any danger, but
there are others who look to me for guidance and my duty calls me away
from you. You shall see me again, and at the castle of your father,
Simon de Montfort, in Leicester. Provided," he added, "that you will
welcome me there."

"I shall always welcome you, wherever I may be, Roger de Conde," replied
the girl.

"Remember that promise," he said smiling. "Some day you may be glad to
repudiate it."

"Never," she insisted, and a light that shone in her eyes as she said it
would have meant much to a man better versed in the ways of women than
was Norman of Torn.

"I hope not," he said gravely. "I cannot tell you, being but poorly
trained in courtly ways, what I should like to tell you, that you
might know how much your friendship means to me. Goodbye, Bertrade de
Montfort," and he bent to one knee, as he raised her fingers to his
lips.

As he passed over the drawbridge and down toward the highroad a few
minutes later on his way back to Torn, he turned for one last look at
the castle and there, in an embrasure in the south tower, stood a
young woman who raised her hand to wave, and then, as though by sudden
impulse, threw a kiss after the departing knight, only to disappear from
the embrasure with the act.

As Norman of Torn rode back to his grim castle in the hills of Derby, he
had much food for thought upon the way. Never till now had he realized
what might lie in another manner of life, and he felt a twinge of
bitterness toward the hard, old man whom he called father, and whose
teachings from the boy's earliest childhood had guided him in the ways
that had cut him off completely from the society of other men, except
the wild horde of outlaws, ruffians and adventurers that rode beneath
the grisly banner of the young chief of Torn.

Only in an ill-defined, nebulous way did he feel that it was the girl
who had come into his life that caused him for the first time to feel
shame for his past deeds. He did not know the meaning of love, and so he
could not know that he loved Bertrade de Montfort.

And another thought which now filled his mind was the fact of his
strange likeness to the Crown Prince of England. This, together with the
words of Father Claude, puzzled him sorely. What might it mean? Was it a
heinous offence to own an accidental likeness to a king's son?

But now that he felt he had solved the reason that he rode always with
closed helm, he was for the first time anxious himself to hide his face
from the sight of men. Not from fear, for he knew not fear, but from
some inward impulse which he did not attempt to fathom.




CHAPTER VIII

As Norman of Torn rode out from the castle of De Stutevill, Father
Claude dismounted from his sleek donkey within the ballium of Torn. The
austere stronghold, notwithstanding its repellent exterior and unsavory
reputation, always extended a warm welcome to the kindly, genial priest;
not alone because of the deep friendship which the master of Torn felt
for the good father, but through the personal charm, and lovableness of
the holy man's nature, which shone alike on saint and sinner.

It was doubtless due to his unremitting labors with the youthful Norman,
during the period that the boy's character was most amenable to strong
impressions, that the policy of the mighty outlaw was in many respects
pure and lofty. It was this same influence, though, which won for Father
Claude his only enemy in Torn; the little, grim, gray, old man whose
sole aim in life seemed to have been to smother every finer instinct of
chivalry and manhood in the boy, to whose training he had devoted the
past nineteen years of his life.

As Father Claude climbed down from his donkey--fat people do not
"dismount"--a half dozen young squires ran forward to assist him, and to
lead the animal to the stables.

The good priest called each of his willing helpers by name, asking a
question here, passing a merry joke there with the ease and familiarity
that bespoke mutual affection and old acquaintance.

As he passed in through the great gate, the men-at-arms threw him
laughing, though respectful, welcomes and within the great court,
beautified with smooth lawn, beds of gorgeous plants, fountains, statues
and small shrubs and bushes, he came upon the giant, Red Shandy, now the
principal lieutenant of Norman of Torn.

"Good morrow, Saint Claude!" cried the burly ruffian. "Hast come to save
our souls, or damn us? What manner of sacrilege have we committed now,
or have we merited the blessings of Holy Church? Dost come to scold, or
praise?"

"Neither, thou unregenerate villain," cried the priest, laughing.
"Though methinks ye merit chiding for the grievous poor courtesy with
which thou didst treat the great Bishop of Norwich the past week."

"Tut, tut, Father," replied Red Shandy. "We did but aid him to adhere
more closely to the injunctions and precepts of Him whose servant and
disciple he claims to be. Were it not better for an Archbishop of His
Church to walk in humility and poverty among His people, than to be ever
surrounded with the temptations of fine clothing, jewels and much gold,
to say nothing of two sumpter beasts heavy laden with runlets of wine?"

"I warrant his temptations were less by at least as many runlets of
wine as may be borne by two sumpter beasts when thou, red robber, had
finished with him," exclaimed Father Claude.

"Yes, Father," laughed the great fellow, "for the sake of Holy Church, I
did indeed confiscate that temptation completely, and if you must needs
have proof in order to absolve me from my sins, come with me now and you
shall sample the excellent discrimination which the Bishop of Norwich
displays in the selection of his temptations."

"They tell me you left the great man quite destitute of finery, Red
Shandy," continued Father Claude, as he locked his arm in that of the
outlaw and proceeded toward the castle.

"One garment was all that Norman of Torn would permit him, and as the
sun was hot overhead, he selected for the Bishop a bassinet for that
single article of apparel, to protect his tonsured pate from the rays of
old sol. Then, fearing that it might be stolen from him by some vandals
of the road, he had One Eye Kanty rivet it at each side of the gorget so
that it could not be removed by other than a smithy, and thus, strapped
face to tail upon a donkey, he sent the great Bishop of Norwich rattling
down the dusty road with his head, at least, protected from the idle
gaze of whomsoever he might chance to meet. Forty stripes he gave to
each of the Bishop's retinue for being abroad in bad company; but come,
here we are where you shall have the wine as proof of my tale."

As the two sat sipping the Bishop's good Canary, the little old man of
Torn entered. He spoke to Father Claude in a surly tone, asking him if
he knew aught of the whereabouts of Norman of Torn.

"We have seen nothing of him since, some three days gone, he rode out in
the direction of your cottage," he concluded.

"Why, yes," said the priest, "I saw him that day. He had an adventure
with several knights from the castle of Peter of Colfax, from whom he
rescued a damsel whom I suspect from the trappings of her palfrey to be
of the house of Montfort. Together they rode north, but thy son did
not say whither or for what purpose. His only remark, as he donned his
armor, while the girl waited without, was that I should now behold the
falcon guarding the dove. Hast he not returned?"

"No," said the old man, "and doubtless his adventure is of a nature
in line with thy puerile and effeminate teachings. Had he followed my
training, without thy accurst priestly interference, he had made an
iron-barred nest in Torn for many of the doves of thy damned English
nobility. An' thou leave him not alone, he will soon be seeking service
in the household of the King."

"Where, perchance, he might be more at home than here," said the priest
quietly.

"Why say you that?" snapped the little old man, eyeing Father Claude
narrowly.

"Oh," laughed the priest, "because he whose power and mien be even more
kingly than the King's would rightly grace the royal palace," but he had
not failed to note the perturbation his remark had caused, nor did his
off-hand reply entirely deceive the old man.

At this juncture, a squire entered to say that Shandy's presence was
required at the gates, and that worthy, with a sorrowing and regretful
glance at the unemptied flagon, left the room.

For a few moments, the two men sat in meditative silence, which was
presently broken by the old man of Torn.

"Priest," he said, "thy ways with my son are, as you know, not to my
liking. It were needless that he should have wasted so much precious
time from swordplay to learn the useless art of letters. Of what benefit
may a knowledge of Latin be to one whose doom looms large before him. It
may be years and again it may be but months, but as sure as there be a
devil in hell, Norman of Torn will swing from a king's gibbet. And thou
knowst it, and he too, as well as I. The things which thou hast taught
him be above his station, and the hopes and ambitions they inspire will
but make his end the bitterer for him. Of late I have noted that he
rides upon the highway with less enthusiasm than was his wont, but he
has gone too far ever to go back now; nor is there where to go back to.
What has he ever been other than outcast and outlaw? What hopes could
you have engendered in his breast greater than to be hated and feared
among his blood enemies?"

"I knowst not thy reasons, old man," replied the priest, "for devoting
thy life to the ruining of his, and what I guess at be such as I dare
not voice; but let us understand each other once and for all. For all
thou dost and hast done to blight and curse the nobleness of his nature,
I have done and shall continue to do all in my power to controvert. As
thou hast been his bad angel, so shall I try to be his good angel, and
when all is said and done and Norman of Torn swings from the King's
gibbet, as I only too well fear he must, there will be more to mourn his
loss than there be to curse him.

"His friends are from the ranks of the lowly, but so too were the
friends and followers of our Dear Lord Jesus; so that shall be more
greatly to his honor than had he preyed upon the already unfortunate.

"Women have never been his prey; that also will be spoken of to his
honor when he is gone, and that he has been cruel to men will be
forgotten in the greater glory of his mercy to the weak.

"Whatever be thy object: whether revenge or the natural bent of a cruel
and degraded mind, I know not; but if any be curst because of the Outlaw
of Torn, it will be thou--I had almost said, unnatural father; but I do
not believe a single drop of thy debased blood flows in the veins of him
thou callest son."

The grim old man of Torn had sat motionless throughout this indictment,
his face, somewhat pale, was drawn into lines of malevolent hatred and
rage, but he permitted Father Claude to finish without interruption.

"Thou hast made thyself and thy opinions quite clear," he said bitterly,
"but I be glad to know just how thou standeth. In the past there has
been peace between us, though no love; now let us both understand
that it be war and hate. My life work is cut out for me. Others, like
thyself, have stood in my path, yet today I am here, but where are they?
Dost understand me, priest?" And the old man leaned far across the table
so that his eyes, burning with an insane fire of venom, blazed but a few
inches from those of the priest.

Father Claude returned the look with calm level gaze.

"I understand," he said, and, rising, left the castle.

Shortly after he had reached his cottage, a loud knock sounded at the
door, which immediately swung open without waiting the formality of
permission. Father Claude looked up to see the tall figure of Norman of
Torn, and his face lighted with a pleased smile of welcome.

"Greetings, my son," said the priest.

"And to thee, Father," replied the outlaw, "And what may be the news of
Torn. I have been absent for several days. Is all well at the castle?"

"All be well at the castle," replied Father Claude, "if by that you mean
have none been captured or hanged for their murders. Ah, my boy, why
wilt thou not give up this wicked life of thine? It has never been my
way to scold or chide thee, yet always hath my heart ached for each
crime laid at the door of Norman of Torn."

"Come, come, Father," replied the outlaw, "what dost I that I have not
good example for from the barons, and the King, and Holy Church. Murder,
theft, rapine! Passeth a day over England which sees not one or all
perpetrated in the name of some of these?

"Be it wicked for Norman of Torn to prey upon the wolf, yet righteous
for the wolf to tear the sheep? Methinks not. Only do I collect from
those who have more than they need, from my natural enemies; while they
prey upon those who have naught.

"Yet," and his manner suddenly changed, "I do not love it, Father. That
thou know. I would that there might be some way out of it, but there is
none.

"If I told you why I wished it, you would be surprised indeed, nor can I
myself understand; but, of a verity, my greatest wish to be out of
this life is due to the fact that I crave the association of those very
enemies I have been taught to hate. But it is too late, Father, there
can be but one end and that the lower end of a hempen rope."

"No, my son, there is another way, an honorable way," replied the good
Father. "In some foreign clime there be opportunities abundant for such
as thee. France offers a magnificent future to such a soldier as Norman
of Torn. In the court of Louis, you would take your place among the
highest of the land. You be rich and brave and handsome. Nay do not
raise your hand. You be all these and more, for you have learning far
beyond the majority of nobles, and you have a good heart and a true
chivalry of character. With such wondrous gifts, naught could bar your
way to the highest pinnacles of power and glory, while here you have no
future beyond the halter. Canst thou hesitate, Norman of Torn?"

The young man stood silent for a moment, then he drew his hand across
his eyes as though to brush away a vision.

"There be a reason, Father, why I must remain in England for a time at
least, though the picture you put is indeed wondrous alluring."

And the reason was Bertrade de Montfort.




CHAPTER IX

The visit of Bertrade de Montfort with her friend Mary de Stutevill
was drawing to a close. Three weeks had passed since Roger de Conde had
ridden out from the portals of Stutevill and many times the handsome
young knight's name had been on the lips of his fair hostess and her
fairer friend.

Today the two girls roamed slowly through the gardens of the great
court, their arms about each other's waists, pouring the last
confidences into each other's ears, for tomorrow Bertrade had elected to
return to Leicester.

"Methinks thou be very rash indeed, my Bertrade," said Mary. "Wert my
father here he would, I am sure, not permit thee to leave with only the
small escort which we be able to give."

"Fear not, Mary," replied Bertrade. "Five of thy father's knights be
ample protection for so short a journey. By evening it will have been
accomplished; and, as the only one I fear in these parts received such
a sound set back from Roger de Conde recently, I do not think he will
venture again to molest me."

"But what about the Devil of Torn, Bertrade?" urged Mary. "Only
yestereve, you wot, one of Lord de Grey's men-at-arms came limping to
us with the news of the awful carnage the foul fiend had wrought on his
master's household. He be abroad, Bertrade, and I canst think of naught
more horrible than to fall into his hands."

"Why, Mary, thou didst but recently say thy very self that Norman
of Torn was most courteous to thee when he sacked this, thy father's
castle. How be it thou so soon has changed thy mind?"

"Yes, Bertrade, he was indeed respectful then, but who knows what
horrid freak his mind may take, and they do say that he be cruel beyond
compare. Again, forget not that thou be Leicester's daughter and Henry's
niece; against both of whom the Outlaw of Torn openly swears his hatred
and his vengeance. Oh, Bertrade, wait but for a day or so, I be sure
my father must return ere then, and fifty knights shall accompany thee
instead of five."

"What be fifty knights against Norman of Torn, Mary? Thy reasoning is on
a parity with thy fears, both have flown wide of the mark.

"If I am to meet with this wild ruffian, it were better that five
knights were sacrificed than fifty, for either number would be but a
mouthful to that horrid horde of unhung murderers. No, Mary, I shall
start tomorrow and your good knights shall return the following day with
the best of word from me."

"If thou wilst, thou wilst," cried Mary petulantly. "Indeed it were
plain that thou be a De Montfort; that race whose historic bravery be
second only to their historic stubbornness."

Bertrade de Montfort laughed, and kissed her friend upon the cheek.

"Mayhap I shall find the brave Roger de Conde again upon the highroad
to protect me. Then indeed shall I send back your five knights, for of
a truth, his blade is more powerful than that of any ten men I ere saw
fight before."

"Methinks," said Mary, still peeved at her friend's determination to
leave on the morrow, "that should you meet the doughty Sir Roger all
