Washington. He'd been so thoroughly cleared that they'd be inclined to
trust whatever he said. But Sworsky doubted the whole story; like many
men who'd suffered through irresponsible Congressional charges, he was
almost fanatic about having proof before accusing anyone of anything.
Moreover, Kennedy knew that Sworsky was Fraser's friend; he'd probably
be keeping close tabs on the physicist and ready to block any attempts
he might make to help. With the backing of a man like Snyder, Kennedy
could hire as many detectives as he wanted.

In fact, whatever the counter-attack, it was necessary to go warily.
Kennedy's threat to get rid of Fraser if the engineer kept working
against him was not idle mouthing. He could do it--and, being a fanatic,
would.

But Kennedy, like the demon of legend, would grant one wish--just to
salve his own conscience. Only what should the wish be? Another woman?
Or merely to be reconciled, artificially, to an otherwise-intolerable
situation?

_Judy, Judy, Judy!_

Fraser swore at himself. Damn it to hell, this was a problem in logic.
No room for emotion. Of course, it might be a problem without a
solution. There are plenty of those.

He squinted, trying to visualize the office. He thought of burglary,
stealing evidence--silly thought. But let's see, now. What was the
layout, exactly? Four suites on one floor of the skyscraper, three of
them unimportant offices of unimportant men. And--

_Oh, Lord!_

Fraser sat for a long while, hardly moving. Then he uncoiled himself and
ran, downstairs and into the street and to the nearest pay phone. His
own line might be tapped--

"Hello, hello, Juan?... Yes, I know I got you out of bed, and I'm not
sorry. This is too bloody important.... Okay, okay.... Look, I want a
complete report on the Messenger Advertising Service.... When?
Immediately, if not sooner. And I mean _complete_.... That's right,
Messenger.... Okay, fine. I'll buy you a drink sometime."

"Hello, Jim? Were you asleep too?... Sorry.... But look, would you make
a list of all the important men you know fairly well? I need it bad....
No, don't come over. I think I'd better not see you for a while. Just
mail it to me.... All right, so I am paranoid...."

       *       *       *       *       *

Jerome K. Ferris was a large man, with a sense of his own importance
that was even larger. He sat hunched in the chair, his head dwarfed by
the aluminum helmet, his breathing shallow. Around him danced and
flickered a hundred meters, indicator lights, tubes. There was a low
humming in the room, otherwise it was altogether silent, blocked and
shielded against the outside world. The fluorescent lights were a muted
glow.

Fraser sat watching the greenish trace on the huge oscilloscope screen.
It was an intricate set of convolutions, looking more like a plate of
spaghetti than anything else. He wondered how many frequencies were
involved. Several thousand, at the very least.

"Fraser," repeated Kennedy softly into the ear of the hypnotized man.
"Colin Fraser. Colin Fraser." He touched a dial with infinite care.
"Colin Fraser. Colin Fraser."

The oscilloscope flickered as he readjusted, a new trace appeared.
Kennedy waited for a while, then: "Robert Kennedy. Sentiment, Inc.
Robert Kennedy. Sentiment, Inc. Robert Kennedy. Sentiment--"

He turned off the machine, its murmur and glow died away. Facing Fraser
with a tight little smile, he said: "All right. Your job is done. Are we
even now?"

"As even, as we'll ever get, I suppose," said Fraser.

"I wish you'd trust me," said Kennedy with a hint of wistfulness. "I'd
have done the job honestly; you didn't have to watch."

"Well, I was interested," said Fraser.

"Frankly, I still don't see what you stand to gain by the doglike
devotion of this Ferris. He's rich, but he's too weak and short-sighted
to be a leader. I'd never planned on conditioning him for my purposes."

"I've explained that," said Fraser patiently. "Ferris is a large
stockholder in a number of corporations. His influence can swing a lot
of business my way."

"Yes, I know. I didn't grant your wish blindly, you realize. I had
Ferris studied; he's unable to harm me." Kennedy regarded Fraser with
hard eyes. "And just in case you still have foolish notions, please
remember that I gave him the father-conditioning with respect to myself.
He'll do a lot for you, but not if it's going to hurt me in any way."

"I know when I'm licked," said Fraser bleakly; "I'm getting out of town
as soon as I finish those courses I'm signed up for."

Kennedy snapped his fingers. "All right, Ferris, wake up now."

Ferris blinked. "What's been happening?" he asked.

"Nothing much," said Kennedy, unbuckling the electrodes. "I've taken my
readings. Thank you very much for the help, sir. I'll see that you get
due credit when my research is published."

"Ah--yes. Yes." Ferris puffed himself out. Then he put an arm around
Fraser's shoulder. "If you aren't busy," he said, "maybe we could go
have lunch."

"Thanks," said Fraser. "I'd like to talk to you about a few things."

He lingered for a moment after Ferris had left the room. "I imagine this
is goodbye for us," he said.

"Well, so long, at least. We'll probably hear from each other again."
Kennedy shook Fraser's hand. "No hard feelings? I did go to a lot of
trouble for you--wangling your introduction to Ferris when you'd named
him, and having one of my men persuade him to come here. And right when
I'm so infernally busy, too."

"Sure," said Fraser. "It's all right. I can't pretend to love you for
what you've done, but you aren't a bad sort."

"No worse than you," said Kennedy with a short laugh. "You've used the
machine for your own ends, now."

"Yeah," said Fraser. "I guess I have."

       *       *       *       *       *

Sworsky asked, "Why do you insist on calling me from drugstores? And why
at my office? I've got a home phone, you know."

"I'm not sure but that our own lines are tapped," said Fraser.
"Kennedy's a smart cookie, and don't you forget it. I think he's about
ready to dismiss me as a danger, but you're certainly being watched;
you're on his list."

"You're getting a persecution-complex. Honest, Colin, I'm worried."

"Well, bear with me for a while. Now, have you had any information on
Kennedy since I called last?"

"Hm, no. I did mention to Thomson, as you asked me to, that I'd heard
rumors of some revolutionary encephalographic techniques and would be
interested in seeing the work. Why did you want me to do that?"

"Thomson," said Fraser, "is one of Kennedy's men. Now look, Jim, before
long you're going to be invited to visit Kennedy. He'll give you a spiel
about his research and ask to measure your brain waves. I want you to
say yes. Then I want to know the exact times of the three appointments
he'll give you--the first two, at least."

"Hmmm--if Kennedy's doing what you claim--"

"Jim, it's a necessary risk, but _I'm_ the one who's taking it. You'll
be okay, I promise you; though perhaps later you'll read of me being
found in the river. You see, I got Kennedy to influence a big stockowner
for me. One of the lesser companies in which he has a loud voice is
Messenger. I don't suppose Kennedy knows that. I hope not!"

       *       *       *       *       *

Sworsky looked as if he'd been sandbagged. He was white, and the hand
that poured a drink shook.

"Lord," he muttered. "Lord, Colin, you were right."

Fraser's teeth drew back from his lips. "You went through with it, eh?"

"Yes. I let the son hypnotize me, and afterward I walked off with a
dreamy expression, as you told me to. Just three hours ago, he dropped
around here in person. He gave me a long rigmarole about the stupidity
