I must not close without warning my hearers against the baneful effects of
alcohol and tobacco upon the eyes. It is not uncommon for the eye surgeon
to meet with persons who have become partially blind from the effects of
these poisons upon their optic nerves. Of course, only a small proportion
of those who use alcohol and tobacco to excess are affected in this way,
but this renders it none the less certain that impaired sight is one of
the dangers that we may avoid by abstaining from the use of these
unnecessary and poisonous luxuries.




                         TUMORS OF THE BLADDER.

       DIAGNOSED BY MEANS OF THE ELECTRO-ENDOSCOPIC CYSTOSCOPE.

                           By Dr. MAX NITZE.


In the following lines I wish to direct the attention of my English
_confreres_ to the value of the electro-endoscopic mode of examination of
the male urinary bladder, invented by me. I believe I could not have
chosen a more suitable theme for that purpose than a short report of the
bladder tumors diagnosed by me cystoscopically; for the diagnosis of these
new formations offers the greatest difficulty, and in most cases it has
been impossible till now to prove their existence with accuracy without
digital exploration of the bladder. By the new method of cystoscopical
examination the conditions have entirely changed. One look into the
bladder, illuminated as if by daylight, is generally sufficient to afford
means for forming an opinion of all the questions coming into
consideration--viz., size, form, and site of the tumor. The accompanying
diagrams (Figs. 1, 2, 3, 4) may give an idea of the appearances which the
different forms of bladder tumors present endoscopically. I regret that
they cannot show the brightness of the light by which one sees the tumors
during examination. The celebrated Vienna specialist, V. Dittel, is right
in saying that "they offer sometimes truly charming pictures;" especially
certain kinds of villous tumors, whose long slender villi floating in the
liquid often present a splendid appearance. The following are the cases
cystoscopically diagnosed by me.

[Illustration: FIG. 1.]

_Case 1._--A man, aged fifty-five, under the care of Dr. Ch. Mayer,
suffered from attacks of haematuria for thirty years. During the last six
years he has had dysuria and inability to empty the bladder completely.
The patient had been examined by the sound repeatedly by eminent surgeons
and specialists, but none could give a certain diagnosis. On Nov. 11,
1886, I undertook the cystoscopic examination. I found on the anterior
wall of the bladder a puffy swelling covered with white masses of mucus.
(See Fig. 1.) The trigone was covered by a mass consisting of pointed
papillae. On account of the weakness of the patient extirpation was
impossible. The patient became weaker and weaker, and died in June, 1887.
The post mortem examination showed the internal orifice of the urethra
surrounded by a swelling representing a continuous tumor as large as a
small apple. It was found that the instrument had penetrated through the
middle of this swelling, which bled easily on pressure. In spite of this,
the clearness of the picture was not interfered with in the least.

[Illustration: FIG. 2.]

_Case 2._--A man, aged fifty, was obliged to exert a strong pressure in
order to empty the bladder. The flow of urine often stopped. He himself
introduced a catheter, and on withdrawing it a piece of villous tissue was
found. On Dec. 10, 1886, I saw, on cystoscopical examination, directly and
immediately over the internal orifice of the urethra, a villous swelling
hanging from the anterior wall of the bladder. (See Fig. 2.) On Jan. 15,
1887, extirpation of the tumor by means of the high section was performed
by Professor v. Bergmann. The size of the tumor (which was as large as a
pigeon's egg) and its position corresponded exactly to the endoscopic
picture. The patient recovered.

[Illustration: FIG. 3.]

_Case 3._--A patient under the care of Professor Madelung, aged
fifty-five, suffered from attacks of haematuria. Examination by sound and
rectal palpation had given me negative results. On Feb. 20, 1887,
cystoscopical examination was made. On the left side of the trigone a
tumor with a broad base was seen, which resembled somewhat a strawberry in
size and form. (See Fig. 3.) On March 1, Professor Madelung undertook the
extirpation of the tumor. The appearance corresponded exactly to the
cystoscopic picture. The patient recovered.

[Illustration: FIG. 4.]

_Case 4._--This was a patient on whom Dr. Israel had performed the high
section a long time before, on account of a bladder tumor. The extent was
so great that only its most prominent part could be removed. The
microscopical examination proved the diagnosis of cancer. Quick healing
took place. The patient became free from pain, and the urine became clear.
In order to see what had become of the remaining part, the cystoscopical
examination was undertaken on April 3. It was easy to see that the right
lateral wall was covered to an extent of from three to four centimeters
with thick masses of verrucous and fungiform excrescences. (See Fig. 4.)

[We omit the description of the additional cases.]

The above shortly described fifteen[9] cases of bladder tumors have been
diagnosed by me cystoscopically during the last sixteen months. This is a
proof, on the one hand, of the value of the cystoscopic examination; on
the other hand, of the fact that the new formations in question are not of
so rare occurrence as has been hitherto thought. I would like to emphasize
that the important results were often obtained under the most difficult
circumstances. In several cases the external orifice of the urethra was
found abnormally small; in others (Cases 8 and 11) the examination was
made during the occurrence of a continuous hemorrhage from the tumor; in
one case (Case 1) I introduced the instrument through the center of the
tumor, which bled on the slightest pressure. In spite of this the
appearances were seen satisfactorily. In the first case a post mortem
examination was made; in eight other cases (Cases 2, 3, 9, 10, 11, 13, 14,
and 15) the tumor was extirpated, seven times by the high section--in one
case, that of a woman, through the dilated urethra. In these nine cases
the endoscopic appearances were in every important respect confirmed in
the most perfect manner. In every case my opinion regarding the size,
position, and form was found to be correct. It is only in those cases
where the edges of the tumor overlap the short pedicle that the latter
cannot be observed. Besides, the relative good results of the operations
undertaken on account of the cystoscopic appearance may be emphasized. Of
the eight patients from whom the tumors had been extirpated, none died
from the result of the operation. Case 9 proved fatal on account of the
progressive extension of the growth. In the eleventh case there was a
recurrence, but the patient is still alive. Five patients (Cases 2, 3, 10,
13, 14) must be considered entirely cured. Case 15 is still under
treatment, and, as the conditions of the patient are at present (ninth day
after operation) in every way satisfactory, a complete recovery is
anticipated.

[9] The first eight cases are more fully described in the Arch. fur
Chirurgie, vol. xxxvi., Part 3 (Dr. Nitze, Beitrage zur Endoscopie der
mannlichen Harnblase). The full account of the last seven cases will be
published soon.

Finally, on comparing the above cystoscopic appearances with the results
obtained by other methods of examination, it must be observed that the
examination of the urine, in most cases carefully made, had only in two
cases shown the presence of villous tissue, which in one instance was
brought out by the catheter. The rectal palpation, when made, had always
given negative results. Further, the examination by means of the sound had
been made in nine cases before the cystoscopic examination. In none of the
cases had the sound revealed the presence of a tumor (which in two had
attained the size of a small apple), although the examination was made by
most experienced surgeons and eminent specialists. Those cases show how
imperfect an instrument the sound is for the diagnosis of bladder tumors.

Only one method can compare with the cystoscope in giving valuable
information regarding the size and nature of a bladder tumor--viz., the
digital exploration of the internal surface of the bladder after a
previous _boutonniere_, or the high section. The superiority of the
cystoscopic method over the latter, on account of the smaller amount of
inconvenience it causes the patient, need not be insisted on. The latter
involves a cutting operation not free from danger, as well as deep
narcosis, while the cystoscopic method is similar to a simple
catheterization.

[Illustration: FIG. 5.]

The accompanying diagram (Fig. 5) shows the instrument used by me for
cystoscopic examination. It has been made by the Berlin instrument maker,
Hartwig, according to my instructions. The source of the light (Mignon
lamp) is cemented in a silver capsule, which is screwed into the distal
end of the cystoscope. This instrument is superior to that made by Leiter,
the Vienna instrument maker, because of its greater simplicity in
construction, which allows the lamp to be easily replaced when necessary,
and also on account of the greater length of the shaft.

I mention this because it differs from the explanation which Mr. Fenwick
gave in his speech concerning my method of examination at the meeting of
the Medical Society of London on Jan. 23, 1888. I must also strongly
contradict Mr. Fenwick's statements concerning the share which he
attributed to the Vienna instrument maker in the construction of the
instrument. Leiter's connection with our instrument will be best explained
when I say that he had to buy the patent[10] from me first in order to be
allowed to make the instrument. Leiter has had no share in those
peculiarities which characterize it as new. The introduction of the source
of light into the organ had been practically brought about, the optical
apparatus enlarging the view designed, the whole construction perfected,
the instrument had proved itself useful in examining patients, and had
been demonstrated by me in the Saechsisches Landes Medicinal Collegium
before Leiter had any idea of the new invention! Also the eventual
replacement of the first source of light (platinum wire) had been provided
for.[11] Leiter has only made a few technical modifications on the
finished instrument. I protest most emphatically against the incorrect
explanations given by Mr. Fenwick, and against every connection of
Leiter's name with my instruments. I hope to obtain in England the same
generous recognition of my labors in this field that has been accorded to
me in Germany.--_Lancet._

[10] Deutsche Patentschrifte, No. 6, 853.

[11] Ibid.




            PAPILLOMATOUS TUMOR OF THE BLADDER, DEMONSTRATED BY
                 MEANS OF LISTER'S ELECTRO-CYSTOSCOPE.

    By F. N. Otis, M.D., Clinical Professor, College of Physicians and
                           Surgeons, New York.


A. G----, aged twenty-three, United States; single; barber.

The young man was referred to me by his former medical attendant, March
16, 1883. His urine was found to be slightly but distinctly tinged with
blood, and contained some small clots as well as some pus and mucus. He
complained of exquisite pain on urination, increased at the close,
recurring every half hour. Through examination per rectum (_a posteriori_)
unusual tenderness was found. Distinct increase in the density and
thickness of the right inferior section of the bladder was recognized by
the bimanual touch; a catheter was introduced, and three ounces of bloody
urine removed. The bladder was then irrigated gently with a saturated
solution of boric acid until the fluid returned clear. The catheter was
then withdrawn, leaving about four ounces of the solution, of a
temperature of 80 deg., in the bladder, as a preparation for its examination
by the electro-cystoscope of Lister. The required current was furnished by
the small six-cell battery of the Galvano-Faradic Co. The cystoscope was
then introduced into the bladder, and the current turned on. The
illumination was complete. Through the slightly rosy medium the small
blood vessels in the bladder mucous membrane were distinctly seen. On the
right side a deep red, granular-looking mass, with a wavy outline, was
then distinctly observed, covering about one-fourth of the cystoscopic
field. This appearance was verified by Drs. Abbe, Bangs, and W. K.
Otis--the unanimous opinion being that it represented a papillomatous
growth, to some extent covered by coagulated blood. Two days later a
similar examination was made, under the influence of an anaesthetic, which
corroborated the previous observations in every particular. (See
illustration.)

[Illustration: DIAGRAM OF BLADDER, SHOWING LOCATION OF TUMOR
AND POSITION OF CYSTOSCOPE.]

Some small filaments were subsequently removed with the lithotrite, but on
microscopical examination nothing of diagnostic importance was discovered.
From lack of the capacity of the bladder, the field was necessarily
limited, nevertheless, a very excellent view of the tumor could be
obtained. This is shown in the illustration, from a sketch made at the
time of the first examination. It represents the position of the tumor and
cystoscope when the best view of it was obtained.

On the following Monday the patient entered St. Luke's Hospital, and was
operated upon by my associate, Dr. L. B. Bangs, Dr. Charles McBurney
assisting. The high operation was performed, and the bladder being
examined by means of an electric light, introduced through the suprapubic
incision, the diagnosis made by the cystoscope was verified in every
particular. The growth was then removed, as far as possible, with the
scissors, and the surface cauterized with the Paquelin cautery. At the
present writing the patient is going on toward a satisfactory recovery.
The pathological examination made by Dr. Frank Ferguson, pathologist of
St. Luke's Hospital, showed the neoplasm to be a simple papilloma.

This case is deserving of especial interest as being the first tumor of
the bladder diagnosticated in this country by means of the cystoscope, and
verified by subsequent operation, and adds one more to the list of
sixteen cases so made out by foreign observers, and two by Dr. Fenwick, of
England. In this instance the instrument deserves particular credit, as
other methods had completely failed in the practice of competent
observers.

This consists of a metal tube, about seven inches long, of a caliber of 22
French, having at the proximal end a funnel shaped ocular opening; at the
distal, a short beak, similar to that of the catheter coude. A window of
rock crystal is set in the end of this beak, behind which a small electric
lamp, controlled by a switch at the ocular end, is placed. A rectangular
prism, the hypothenuse plane of which is silvered, is placed in the end of
the straight portion of the tube, its superior face being seen just
anterior to the angle formed by the beak. The distended bladder is
illuminated by the electric lamp, the rays reflected from its wall falling
on the prism experience total reflection, an inverted image being formed
within the tube. The size of the field thus obtained is greatly increased
by means of a telescope introduced into the tube. The image seen through
the cystoscope is an inverted image, but right and left are not
transposed.

[Illustration: THE CYSTOSCOPE.]

There can be no question as to the great prospective value of the
electro-cystoscope in diagnosis of many difficulties to which the bladder
is subject. A variety of foreign bodies have already been reported as made
out by use of this instrument. The locality, size, and color of vesical
calculi have been demonstrated in my own experience. In one instance two
stones were seen where only one had been previously found, but this of
course might with care have been effected by means of the lithotrite. But
it is in the diagnosis of the tumors, and encysted or impacted calculi,
that the most essential service may be anticipated from the use of the
cystoscope. The orifices of the ureters are quite readily brought into the
cystoscopic field, and it is more than probable that (perhaps through the
introduction of some clear fluid with which blood does not readily
mingle--glycerine, for instance) the true source of a previously doubtful
haematuria will be demonstrated.--_Medical Record._




                  DISTANCE AND CONSTITUTION OF THE SUN.


So many queries about the solar system, or the members of it, have come
recently to the attention of those in charge of this journal, from various
sources, that it is thought best to make a brief statement of the present
state of knowledge that astronomy has of the solar neighborhood in which
we live.

Naturally we begin with the sun, and the oldest and most important problem
which the study of this body offers is the determination of its distance
from the earth in terrestrial units of measure. This distance is important
because the knowledge of all the phenomena of all the heavenly bodies,
except those of the moon, depend directly or indirectly on its value. The
problem of the sun's distance is difficult because the data given for
determining it are insufficient to enable the astronomer to apply the
principles of trigonometry directly to it. He is, therefore, compelled to
use indirect methods of solution, which, at best, give only approximations
to the true distance, arising chiefly from small errors in observation,
which, at the present time, seem unavoidable. A familiar illustration will
make our meaning clear. The knowledge we have of the sun's distance
depends on the accurate measurement of a small angle formed by drawing two
lines from a point at the sun to the extremities of the earth's radius.
That angle is called the sun's parallax. Ptolemy thought that this angle
was 3' of arc, but we now know that its value is very near 8.80" of arc,
and that the error of this amount from the true angle probably is not more
than 0.02". To measure this small angle has been the astronomer's great
trouble since the time of Aristarchus, and he does not yet know its value
accurately. His problem is like that of a surveyor attempting to measure a
ball, whose real diameter is one foot, at the distance of 4.4 miles
nearly; and unless he can determine the diameter of the ball so that he
shall not be uncertain in his measure to the amount of 0.03 of an inch,
his work will not add anything useful to present knowledge.

If we suppose the angle of parallax to be known, the computation of the
distance of a celestial body is easy. Multiply earth's radius by 206,265
(seconds of arc in the unit radius), and divide the product by the angle
of parallax in seconds of arc. The mean equatorial radius of the earth, as
given in Clark's Geodesy, is 3963.3 English miles. The sun's distance for
a parallax of 8.78" would be

  206,265" x 3963.3
  -----------------  = 93,108,000 miles.
        8.78"

  For parallax of 8.80" = 92,897,000 miles.
  For parallax of 8.82" = 92,686,000 miles.

The range of error in parallax, as here given, is 0.04", and the change of
the distance of the sun in allowing for this error is nearly half a
million of miles. If 8.80" be the assumed parallax, with +- 0.02" as
probable error, then the uncertainty of the sun's distance is still nearly
a quarter of a million of miles.

So far astronomers are pretty generally agreed, unless it be in the value
of the earth's radius used above. In his excellent work, entitled "The
Sun," we notice that Professor Young gives 3,962.72 English miles as the
"latest and most reliable determination" (page 22), while he seems to use
Bessel's value of 3,962.80 in obtaining 92,885,000. This may be because
the last named value is still in most general use, though less accurate
undoubtedly than that of Clarke.

Since the transit of Venus, of 1874, the determination of the solar
parallax has not been very much improved. The transit of 1882, so far as
known, has given surprisingly discordant results, and probably they will
be of very little service in improving our knowledge of the distance of
the sun. In the midst of all this uncertainty of late work, in ordinary
methods two ways of studying the problem show results almost exactly
alike. They are obtained from late improved measures of the velocity of
light, and from measures by the heliometer. The parallax from these
sources is 8.794". The Brazilian results of transit of Venus for 1882, by
Wolf and Andre, recently published, make the parallax 8.808". The American
reductions for the last transit are not yet completed.

From the above brief statement of results, it seems that the value of the
solar parallax is likely to be a trifle under 8.80", rather than above it,
making the distance of the sun probably very near 93,000,000 miles.

The next most important problem pertaining to the sun is its constitution,
which is usually considered under four heads:

1. The central portion, thought to be made up chiefly of intensely heated
gases.

2. That part which is seen by the aid of the telescope, called the
photosphere, consisting of a "shell of luminous clouds formed by the
cooling and condensation of the condensible vapors at the surface where
exposed to the cold of outer space." (Young.)

3. Outside of the photosphere is a shallow stratum, called the
chromosphere, "composed mainly of uncondensible gases (conspicuously
hydrogen) left behind by the formation of the photospheric clouds, and
bearing something the same relation to them that the oxygen and nitrogen
of our own atmosphere do to our own clouds." (Young.) And--

4. The corona, which is the beautiful halo seen, with the naked eye,
outside of all, during the time of a total eclipse of the sun. This
curious halo with all its streamers and rifts is thought to be composed
chiefly of an incandescent material, in a far more attenuated state than
that of hydrogen, the rarest gas known, because it yields freely in the
spectroscope a certain line, 1474 K, which most agree can mean nothing
else, although no one knows what the gas or metallic vapor is. Hydrogen is
also found in the corona extending to the height of 600,000 miles above
the photosphere, and possibly 1,200,000 miles. Suspended in this mixture
of vapors, and "falling into, or projected from, the sun is a large
quantity of solid or liquid material, which is at such a temperature as to
be self-luminous. It is this which yields the continuous spectrum, free
from dark lines.

"Besides these components in the outer envelope, there is present matter
which reflects or diffuses light much as our own atmosphere does.

"To this is attributed the partial radial polarization of the corona. The
streamers and rifts indicate matter repelled, in various quantities, from
the sun by forces which may be electrical." (Hastings.)

These are the views advanced by astronomers and physicists, as theories or
working hypotheses, until something better or more certain can be known.
They are not held as facts by any, because of insufficient proof to
establish them as such, and because there are very grave objections to
some of them which are at present unanswerable.

For example, the spectroscope shows that the gaseous pressure at the limit
of the chromosphere is very small, although that is at the base of an
atmosphere from 600,000 to 1,200,000 miles deep, and under the influence
of a force of gravity more than twenty-seven times as great as that in
action at the surface of the earth.

Optically, the atmosphere of the earth ceases at a height of forty-five
miles, but bodies at twice that altitude, moving at the rate of
twenty-seven miles per second, meet resistance of air enough to render
them incandescent almost instantly. But the evidence seems clear that, far
within the corona, the resistance to moving bodies is much less than in
our atmosphere at a height of sixty miles. The great comet of 1882 passed
through the coronal atmosphere within 300,000 miles of the sun, with a
velocity one hundred and eighty times that of the earth in its orbit. The
comet was not stopped, nor destroyed, nor its orbit disturbed, as
subsequent observations showed. The same thing was true, so far as known,
of the comet of 1843, which passed still nearer the solar surface. These
facts are troublesome to explain on the hypothesis of a coronal
atmosphere.

Still further: if the sun be surrounded by a gaseous envelope, its
density, as aforesaid, ought to diminish from the solar surface outward to
its upper limits; but the fact is, the material of 1474 K line always
appears in the spectrum of chromosphere, which would seem to indicate, by
its place, that it is as much more dense than hydrogen as is magnesium
vapor, or even the vapor of iron. But the evidence of the spectroscope
makes this 1474 K material far less dense than that of hydrogen, and this
is a contradiction that is very troublesome to the student of solar
physics.

In studying the polarization of the light of the corona, it is clear that
the amount of polarized light reflected from a particle at the surface of
the sun is nothing, "because the luminous source there is a surface with
an angular subtense of 180 deg.;" hence polarization of the corona near the
limb of the moon ought to be small, farther away, larger. But observation
shows that the contrary is true, _i. e._, the percent. of polarized light
increases as the corona is observed nearer the limb of the moon during
totality.

These are a few of the difficult questions that stand in the way of
accepting the foregoing theories as facts pertaining to, or well grounded
knowledge of, the constitution of the sun. They are by no means all, or
possibly the most important ones. They are certainly among those that are
receiving very general attention at the hands of physicists at the present
time.--_Sidereal Messenger._




                    CHANGES IN THE STELLAR HEAVENS.

   By J. E. GORE, F.R.A.S., Honorary Associate and Vice-President of the
                     Liverpool Astronomical Society.


If we look up at the starry heavens on a clear, moonless night, all seems
still, lifeless, and devoid of energy and motion. All of us are--or at
least should be--familiar with the apparent diurnal motion of the star
sphere, caused by the actual rotation of the earth on its axis, and with
the slower annual motion, due to the earth's revolution round the sun,
which brings different constellations into view at different seasons of
the year. These motions, due to the great and universal law of
gravitation, discovered and so ably expounded by the famous Sir Isaac
Newton, are of course wonderful and orderly in their regularity, and bear
silent testimony to the amazing power, majesty, and goodness of a great
and glorious Creator. There are, however, other motions and changes, even
still more wonderful, going on in the depths of space, which, though
unperceived by the ordinary observer, have been revealed to the eye and
contemplation of the astronomer by the accurate instruments and methods of
research which modern science has placed at his disposal. Some accounts of
these marvelous discoveries may prove of interest to the reader. The
"fixed stars" are so called because they apparently hold a fixed position
