long bridge swung into view, then Riverside Drive and the procession of
docks with the rusting liners lying beside them. Ben waggled the
machine-gun, tried to adjust its sights and squeezed the trigger. A
little line of smoke-puffs leaped forth. Tracer bullets--but nowhere
near the birds. On and on--lower New York--the Battery. Wham! The water
beneath and behind them boiled. Ben looked up. The birds were above
them, too high to be reached, dropping bombs.

"All right, old soaks," he muttered, "keep that up. You'll never hit us
that way."

Again something struck the water beneath them. The airplane pitched and
swerved as the pilot changed course to disturb the aim of the bombers.
In the distance the form of the cruiser could be seen now, heading
toward them. As he watched, there was a flash from her foredeck. Up in
the blue above them appeared the white burst of a shell, then another
and another.

One of the dodos suddenly dived out of the formation, sweeping down more
swiftly than Ben would have believed possible. He swung the gun this way
and that, sending out streams of tracers, but the bird did not appear to
heed. Closer--closer--and then with a crash something burst right behind
him. The airplane gyrated; the water rushed upward. The end? he thought,
and wondered inconsequentially whether his teeth would rust. The next
moment the water struck them.

       *       *       *       *       *

When Ben Ruby came to, he beheld a ceiling which moved jerkily to and
fro and stared lazily at it, wondering what it was. Then memory returned
with a snap; he sat up and looked about him. He was in one of those
cubby-holes which are called "cabins" on warships, and alone. Beneath
him he could hear the steady throb of the engines; at his side was a
small table with a wooden rack on it, in one compartment of which stood
a glass, whose contents, on inspection, proved to be oil. He drank it,
looked at and felt of himself, and finding nothing wrong, got out of the
hammock and stepped to the door. A seaman was on guard in the corridor.

"Where is everybody?"

"On deck, sir. I hope you are feeling all right now sir."

"Top of the world, thanks. Is the aviator O.K.?"

"Yes, sir. This way."

He ascended to the bridge, to be greeted riotously by the assembled
company. The _Brisbane_ was steaming steadily along in the open sea,
with no speck of land in sight and no traces of the giant birds.

"What happened?" Ben asked. "Did you get rid of 'em?"

"I think so. We shot down two and the rest made off after trying to bomb
us. What did you two find out?"

Ben briefly described their experiences. "I thought there was something
wrong with one of your wingtips," said the captain, "but your plane sank
so quickly after being hit that we didn't have time to examine it. That
light-ray cannon of theirs sounds serious. Do you suppose the dodos
managed it?"

"Can't tell," said Ben. "From what I could make out through the glasses,
it didn't look like birds that were handling it."

"But what could it be?"

"Ask me! Delirium tremens, I guess. Nothing in this world is like what
it ought to be any more. Where did those birds come from; how did we get
this way, all of us; who is it up there in the Catskills that don't like
us? Answer me those and I'll tell you who was handling the gun."

"Message, sir," said a sailor, touching his cap, and handing a folded
paper. The captain read it, frowning.

"There you are--" he extended the sheet to Ben. "My government is
recalling all ships. Our sister-ship, the _Melbourne_, has been attacked
off San Francisco and severely damaged by bomb-dropping dodos, and they
have made a mass descent on Sumatra. Gentlemen, this has all the
characteristics of a formal war." He strode off to give the necessary
orders to hurry the cruiser home, but Walter Beeville, who had joined
the group at the bridge, said under his breath:

"If those birds have enough intelligence to plan out anything like that
I'll eat my hat."

       *       *       *       *       *

"If you were not before my eyes," said Sir George Graham Harris,
president of the Australian Scientific Commission, "as living proof of
what you say, and if our biological and metallurgical experts did not
report that your physiology is utterly beyond their comprehension, I do
not know but that I would believe you were some cleverly constructed
machines, actuated in some way by radio. However, that is not the
point ... I have here a series of reports from different quarters on
such explorations as have been made since the arrival of the comet and
our recovery from its effects. We are, it appears, confronted with a
menace of considerable seriousness in the form of these birds.

"In the light of your closer acquaintance with them and with conditions
generally in the devastated areas, they may be more suggestive to you
than to us." He stopped and ruffled over the papers piled beside him at
the big conference table. He was a kindly old gentleman, whose white Van
Dyke and pale blue lips contrasted oddly with the almost indigo tint of
his visage (before the comet it had been a rich wine-red, the result of
a lifelong devotion to brandy and soda). Smiling round the table at his
scientific colleagues and at Ben, Murray, Gloria and Beeville, who
occupied the position of honor, he went on:

"I give you mainly excerpts.... The first is from the South African
government. They have ... hm, hm ... sent an aerial expedition
northward, all lines of communication appearing to be broken. At
Nairobi, they report for the first time, finding a town entirely
unoccupied and its inhabitants turned into cast-metal statues ... Addis
Ababa the same ... Wadi Hafa likewise. Twenty miles north of Wadi Hafa
they noted the first sign of life--a bird of some kind at a considerable
distance to the west of them and flying parallel with them and very
rapidly."

The scientist looked up. "It would appear beyond doubt that this bird
belonged to the species we call dodos and to which Dr. Beeville has
given the excellent scientific name, tetrapteryx.... As the expedition
proceeded northward, they encountered more of them; sometimes as many as
four being in sight at one time. At Alexandria, where they halted for
supplies, the dodos closed in. When the expedition took the air again
with the object of flying to Crete and thence to Europe, these
remarkable avians came very close, apparently trying to turn the
expedition back. They reached Crete that afternoon, in spite of the
interference of the birds, but that night were actively attacked on the
ground. The phenomena that accompanied all other attacks were observed;
the birds used incendiary bombs of great intensity. One machine was
entirely destroyed with its aviators. The others, since their object was
exploration, at once took to the air and returned.

"Any comments, gentlemen? No? Well the next is the report of the Dutch
ship _Corlaer_, which attempted to reach Japan. She was permitted to
proceed to within a few miles of the islands, and then began to receive
light-warnings in the sky, such as Captain Entwhistle reports.
Unfortunately they were in Japanese characters and there was no one
aboard who could read them. She put in at the port of Nagasaki and sent
out a landing party. It never returned; as in the other cases the ship
was bombed at night and only made Sumatra with the greatest difficulty,
one of the bombs having fallen on the quarter-deck, wrecking the
steering-gear and causing extensive internal damage....

"There are minor reports with which I will not bother you. But the
report of H. M. A. S. _Melbourne_ appears highly significant. She
touched at several South American ports. In the cities she reports
finding all life at a standstill, although at Iquique, the landing party
encountered some hill-Indians who had suffered a bluing of the blood
similar to ours, and who proved distinctly unfriendly. They are reported
as engaged in looting the city and getting drunk on the contents of the
bodegas.

"North of Callao she found no signs of life until she reached San Pedro
Bay. There a man was observed to be waving from the beach. The
_Melbourne_ put in and launched a boat, but before it reached shore, one
of the birds made its appearance overhead and the man disappeared into
the trees and was not seen again. From the ship he appeared to be a
mechanical man, such as you. Shortly afterward, the _Melbourne_ began to
see the dodos constantly, and at the region of San Francisco, she saw
one of the light signals. The wording of it was: 'DEPART AWAY FAREWELL
FOREVER.'"

Gloria stirred and Sir George looked at her with mild eyes. "Nothing,
sir. I was just thinking that these dodos are uncommonly poetical. They
told us to fly from the accursed place."

"Yes, yes.... Naturally the _Melbourne_, not anticipating any trouble as
the result of a refusal to obey this absurd command, did not heed the
warning, and steamed into the bay. Like the other ships she was attacked
at night. One of the bombs fell on the fire-control station and wrecked
it, bringing down the tripod mast and fusing the top of the conning
tower. She got under way immediately and replied with all guns, but
before escaping number three turret was struck by another bomb and all
the men in the turret were killed. The roof of the turret was driven in
and even the breeches of the guns melted.... That, I think, summarizes
the reports we have. We have seen a little of the birds, mostly at a
distance, and they appear to have carried off several individuals,
especially in Sumatra. I am afraid that is all we can offer."

There was a moment's silence.

"Well, what the material in the bombs is I can't say," said Ben, "but
they know all about projecting it from guns in the form of a beam. I
told you about my experience in company with the aviator from the
_Brisbane_?"

"The eggs Roberts found, too," said Gloria.

"Oh, yes, Dr. Beeville can tell you about that."

"Why, there's nothing much to it," said the scientist. "One of our
people found what appeared to be a nest of these birds in a building.
The nest was built of soft cloths and contained large eggs, but when the
place was revisited the eggs had been removed.... I may say that I have
examined the remains of one rather badly mangled specimen. The
brain-case is extraordinarily large--larger than I have ever seen in any
animal, and they appear to be of a high order of intelligence.

"On the other hand I should certainly put the use and control of such a
material as these bombs contain beyond their powers. And the fact that
the nest was found in a building would indicate that the headquarters in
the Catskills were used by some other and higher intelligence which was
separate from and perhaps in control of these birds. Moreover, they do
not appear to wish to destroy us mechanical men, but to carry us off,
and the messages seen by the ships seem to indicate that the
intelligence behind these birds is capable of reading and understanding
English. I cannot conceive that the birds themselves would be able to do
this.

"Further, there is the very strong evidence of the gun which fired on
Mr. Ruby. In every case where these birds have attacked man, they have
used bombs of this material put up in portable form, although the gun
would have been much more effective. It would have gone right through
the _Melbourne_ or the _Brisbane_ like a red-hot poker through a board.
From this I argue that the birds are directed rather than directing, and
that the directing intelligence is either too indolent or too
contemptuous of us to attack man except through their agency. Finally, I
deduce that we are dealing with some powerful and as yet unknown form of
life. What it is or how it reached the earth, I am not prepared to say."

"Wunnerful," said Gloria irreverently, and a smile passed across the
faces of the conferees.

"But what are the bombs made of and what makes them tick?" asked Murray
Lee.

"That is a question to which I would very much like to know the answer,"
said Sir George, stroking his white beard. "Perhaps Mr. Nasmith, our
chemical member, will be good enough to give us something on the point."

"Not much," said Nasmith, a lantern-jawed man with black hair. "We made
a chemical analysis of the portions of the _Melbourne_ which had been
struck by the bombs, and all we can say is that it gave a most
extraordinary result. These portions were originally made of Krupp armor
steel, as you know. Our analysis showed the presence of a long series of
chemical elements, including even gold and thorium, most of them in
minute quantities. Titanium appeared to be the leading constituent after
iron."

"Then," said Sir George, "the situation appears to be this. We don't
know what the dodos are or what is behind them, but they have possession
of a large part of the world to which they are disposed to forbid us
any access. They have powerful weapons and the intelligence to use them,
and they appear to be unfriendly. I suggest that the sense of this
meeting is that the government should take immediate measures of
investigation and if necessary, of hostility."

"Swell," said Gloria, "only you didn't go half far enough. We've been
there and you haven't. You want to get the best guns you've got and go
for them right away."

There was a murmur of approval. As Sir George rose to put the question
to a vote there came a knock at the door. Heads were turned to greet a
young man who hurried to the president and whispered something. Sir
George turned to the meeting with a startled face.

"Ladies and gentlemen," he said, "the dodos are bombing Canberra, the
capital of Australia, and are being engaged by the Australian air
force."




CHAPTER IX

The Opening of the Conflict


"I'm glad," said Gloria to Murray Lee, as they leaned against the rail
of the steamer _Paramatta_ in their new American Army uniforms, "that
they're going to attack these things in the old U. S. I'd hate like
anything to think we last Americans were shoved out of our country by a
lot of chickens."

Murray glanced around him. In every direction the long lines of the
convoy stretched out, big liners loaded to the funnels with men, guns,
tanks and ammunition. On the fringes of the troopships the sleek grey
sides of the cruisers and destroyers that protected them were visible,
and overhead there soared an armada of fast airplanes--no mere
observation machines, or peaceful explorers like the South Africans, but
fierce, deadly fighting planes, rocket-powered, which could step along
at four miles a minute and climb, dive and maneuver better than a dodo.

He nodded. "You said something, sister. Say won't it be great to take a
whack at them under the Stars and Stripes. I'm glad they let us do it,
even if there are only fourteen of us."

In the four months since the conference with the Australian Scientific
Committee it had been amply demonstrated to the three remaining
governments of the world that there was not room for both man and dodos
on the same planet. A carefully-worked out campaign had evidently been
set in operation by whatever central intelligence led the four-winged
birds with the object of wiping human life from the earth. The bombing
of Canberra was merely the first blow.

While Australia was arming and organizing to meet the menace the second
blow fell--on Sourabaya, the great metropolis of Java, which was wiped
out in a single night. At this evidence of the hostile intentions of the
dodos radio apparatus began to tap in Australia, in the Dutch colonies
and in South Africa; old guns forgotten since the last great war, were
wheeled out; the factories began to turn out fighting airplanes and the
young men drilled in the parks.

When, late in November, a flock of twenty-five dodos was observed over
north Australia, headed for Sydney, the forces of the defence were on
their guard. Long before the birds reached the town they were met by a
big squadron of rocket-powered fighting planes and in a desperate battle
over the desert, with claw and beak and bomb against machine-gun, were
shot down to the last bird. With that the attacks had suddenly ceased,
and the federated governments, convinced that it was but the calm
before a greater storm, had gathered their strength for a trial of arms.

It was realized that whatever lay behind this attempt to conquer all
there was left of the old earth must be in some way due to the coming of
the great comet and must center somewhere in America, where the comet
had struck. So for the first time the race of man began to learn what
international cooperation meant. Delegates from the three surviving
governments met in conference at Perth with Ben Ruby accorded a place as
the representative of the United States. The decision of the conference
was to mobilize every man and weapon to attack the birds in America and
exterminate them there if possible; if impossible to do this, then to
keep them so occupied at home that they would be unable to deliver any
counter-attack.

There was plenty of shipping to carry an army far larger than the
federated governments could mobilize; the main weakness of the
expedition lay in the lack of naval protection, for the great navies of
the world had perished when the northern hemisphere passed under the
influence of the comet. It was sought to make up for this deficiency by
a vast cloud of airplanes, flying from the decks of many merchant ships,
converted into aircraft carriers, though some of the new rocket-planes
were powerful enough to cruise around the world under their own power.
And so, on this March morning in 1947 the whole vast armada was crossing
the Atlantic toward the United States. In view of the fact that the
headquarters of the dodos seemed to be somewhere in the Catskills, it
had been decided to land in New Jersey, form a base there and work
northward.

In the preliminary training for the coming conflict the metal Americans
had played an important part. Their construction made them impossible as
aviators, which they would have preferred. But quite early it was
discovered that they made ideal operators for tanks. The oil fumes and
the lack of air did not in the least affect beings to whom breathing had
become unimportant, and the oil was actually a benefit.

As a result the little American army had been composed of fourteen tanks
of a special type, fitted at the direction of the military experts, with
all the latest and best in scientific devices. They were given
extra-heavy armor, fitted in two thicknesses, with a chamber between, as
a protection against the light-bombs, and each tank, intended to be
handled by a single operator, was provided with one heavy gun, so
arranged that it could be used against aerial attack.

       *       *       *       *       *

A stir of motion was visible at the head of the convoy. A destroyer
dashed past the _Paramatta_, smoke pouring from her funnels, the white
bow-wave rising as high as her bridge as she put on full speed. From the
airplane carrier just behind them in the line, one, two, three flights
of fighters swung off, circled a moment to gain altitude and then
whirled off to the north and west.

"What is it?" asked Gloria.

A sailor touched his cap. "Sighted a dodo, I believe, miss," he said.

"Oh, boy," said Gloria, "here we go. What would you give to be in one of
those planes?"

They craned their necks eagerly, but nothing was visible except a few
flecks in the sky that might be dodos or might equally well be
airplanes. Faint and far, a rattle of machine-guns drifted down; there
was a flash of intense light, like the reflection in a far-distant
mirror, and the machine-guns ceased. A few moments later the airplanes
came winging back to their mother ship. A sailor on her deck began to
swing his arms in the curious semaphore language of the sea.

"What happened?" asked Gloria of the man by their side.

"I'm trying to make out, miss. One dodo, he says, carrying a
bomb--hit--by--machine-gun.... Oh, the bomb went off in the dodo's claws
and blew him all to pieces."

The echo of a cheer came across the water from the other ships. The
first brush had gone in favor of the race of man!

That night dodos announced their presence by a few bombs dropped
tentatively among the ships, but did no damage, being so hurried and
harried by the airmen, and by morning the dream-towers of Atlantic City,
necked with the early morning sun, rose out of the west. Far in the
distance the aviators of the expedition had spied more of the birds, but
after the first day's encounter with the airplanes they kept a healthy
distance, apparently contented to observe what they could.

As ship after ship swung in toward the piers and discharged its cargo of
men, guns and munitions, the birds became bolder, as though to inspect
what was going on. But the Australian aviators attacked them fiercely,
driving them back at every attempt to pierce the aerial cordon, and when
night came on, nearly a third of the force had been landed and quartered
in parts of the one-time pleasure city.

Covered by the darkness a few dodos came down to drop bombs that night.
They met with poor success. Delicate listening apparatus, intended
originally to pick up the sound of approaching enemy airplanes had been
one of the first things landed. The whir of the birds' wings was plainly
audible, and before they had realized that man had a weapon to meet
their night attacks half a dozen of them had been caught in the bursts
