"Perhaps he was called. See!"

But before Gnom could execute the order a commotion arose in the
passage. A voice called from outside:

"Officer of the hour prays audience with The Manager."

"Enter."

An officer with an extreme hunchback dashed in, bowed low before The
Manager.

"It is the end!" he gasped. "They watched our glowing ships plunge under
the water, and they are setting bombing rockets for this area. The first
ranging shots have already been fired. Listen!"

After a few moments there came a dull thud, as though a blow had been
struck against the ceiling. A pendent drop of water fell. The Manager's
hairless face became bleak.

"I made great plans, great inventions--forgot a simple detail!" He
slumped as he stood, a mixture of the absurd and the tragic. The
mutation that had made a brilliant mind had nevertheless left it
incomplete, and none had realized it until in this extremity. Again came
that dull shock, and this time it seemed a little stronger.

The Manager shook off his apathy. His great eyes burned with livid fire,
as he called:

"Officer of the watch. Take these prisoners to the locks. Kill them and
put them out."

"I obey!" The officer, squat, with enormous torso, pointed a small wand,
pointed with a tiny spot of that peculiar pulsating pink light,
threateningly. Stolidly he herded them through a broad corridor. Now and
then they passed inhabitants of this submarine city, nightmarish,
pitiable creatures, now disturbed, dreading death. Sine wondered
vaguely that they should cling to such an unhappy existence.

He was recalled to their own predicament when a metal gate, closed by a
screw-wheel, loomed up in the poor light. The inside lock! The guard
motioned them ahead, stood between them and the passage. He fumbled at
his belt, ignoring the dull hammerblows of explosions transmitted by the
water. He seized Kass by the throat, prepared to plunge the knife into
his body.

Sine leaped past, crooked his arm around the man's thick neck, attempted
to break his neck. But a giant arm threw him off easily. He fell to the
floor. Like an echo came the concussion of another explosion.

The guard, without trace of ill-humor, turned his attention to Sine. He
pointed the little wand at him, and the light glowed brighter. Sine felt
again that torturing paralysis. His senses were leaving him. The pink
light was throbbing, expanding....

He wondered why the stones of the passage should be pushing in, spurting
water. The pink light faded. Tepid water struck him, stinging like
needles. There was a roaring, blackness. A fat arm hooked around his
waist--Lents', no doubt. He felt himself borne along in a swirl of
water, strangling, fighting blindly. There was another terrific
explosion shock, an interminable climbing struggle. Then his head broke
water and he breathed air again. Lents came up beside him, puffing and
blowing, and after a long wait--so long that they despaired, Kass came
weakly to the surface.




CHAPTER V

The Struggle for Freedom


They were afloat, and comparatively safe from the rockets which shrieked
out of the leaden sky and threw spectral waterspouts up into the fog
before they exploded. Unless one exploded directly under them, or very
near, they would be safe--for the time being.

"Which way is shore?" Lents puffed.

"Rockets seem to come from that way," Sine answered, flipping his hand.
"Swim that way. Fish probably lost appetites, so won't bother us."

The bombardment had indeed frightened away the monsters of the deep, and
even the dead in the ruined submarine city would rest in peace for a
while. But the Earthmen, after several hours of swimming, doubted that
this was more than a postponement of death. The long greasy swells were
rising, presaging another of Jupiter's unimaginably violent storms.

"I see a light!" Sine strained his eyes to get another glimpse of it
through the brown fog. "There it is again." Something was moving slowly
through the air a short distance over the water, following the course of
the rockets, which had ceased coming. A powerful searchlight was cutting
through the murk. A war party of the First Race, looking for wreckage.

In their methodical search they soon found the swimming men, and they
were helped into the chief's cabin. Sine, looking up with half-blinded
eyes, saw Governor Nikkia sitting in his chair, looking at him coldly.

"So!" the governor bit off his words. "The traitors are fished out." His
arrogant, handsome face was vindictive, uncompromising. "We forgot that
the aborigines of Earth would naturally sympathize with their equals,
the Mugs! That was nicely timed, your 'visit.' How long have you been in
communication with the rebels?"

The Earthmen, weak and exhausted by their long exposure, resisted their
desire to lie down on the floor. They stood before the governor, hemmed
in by hostile fighting men, and tried to maintain the traditions and
dignity of their planet.

"We were not in communication with your slaves," Sine declared. "You
should know that. Your radio monitors would have picked up any messages,
and your own patrol ships picked us up when we were far out in space.
Our mission is one of peace. As for your quarrels, they do not concern
us. We are strictly neutral."

Nikkia laughed, a short, clipped bark in which there was little
amusement.

"Well, your guilt is a matter of small moment anyway. We have paid the
Mugs for the damage they did, and they will not have another chance. And
if they had an idea of getting help from Earth, you shall be an object
lesson on the uselessness of such hopes."

"Meaning?" But Sine and his companions knew that the meaning must be
evil.

"Meaning," Nikkia snapped, "that from now on you three are Mugs, no
better and no worse than the Jovian Mugs. Except that I shall instruct
the labor office to put you to work at one of the power
integrators--perhaps in The Bubble. We don't want to waste you" he added
with grim humor--"and the gravity here on Jupiter might reduce your life
of usefulness."

The governor turned his back in dismissal, and the prisoners were
hustled into a dark, extremely hot storage hold. Here they lay down amid
an untidy collection of miscellaneous gear, thick with dust. They rested
gratefully until some of their strength should return to them.

When they awoke from their sleep of exhaustion they were aware that the
ship had landed, and a few minutes later the door of their prison was
opened and an officer, heat pistol trained on them, commanded the
prisoners to get into another ship for transfer to the metal and crystal
satellite where they were condemned to drag out the rest of their lives
as slaves.

The second coming of the Earthmen to The Bubble was in marked contrast
to their first. Instead of the large, commodious lock in the upper
hemisphere, they entered this time through a drab, dull orifice in the
black half of the sphere. The patrol ship which brought them was
contacted without ceremony. They were thrust though with curt orders to
ask somebody for the Mug superintendent's office. Then the valve closed
behind them. There was a grating sound as it was locked from the
outside, and then silence. The ship was gone. They were marooned in the
gloom, the grisly domain of the rays and the Mugs. Sentenced for life,
with their only companions, a few broken, despairing men.

The corridor in which they found themselves sloped gently downward, and
artificial gravity made it possible to walk naturally. Sine taking the
lead, they passed into the depths. Everywhere were monstrous shadows,
with occasional stabbing eerie beams of light. But it seemed that an
ominous hush hung over this metal-interlaced gulf. Here there was no
sense of motion--no sense of bubble-like lightness. It was like a
descent into the nether regions of the ancient--into an inferno. But of
the denizens of this dismal place there was no trace.

"Let's go to Proserpina's home," Sine suggested. "I'm anxious to see if
she's still all right. And the old man too."

Accordingly they watched for the numbered corridor, and after some
fruitless wandering, came again to the deep crack that was the only home
this timid girl knew. She started up in terror as the Earthmen came into
view. Not unnaturally, for they were all bristly with unshaven beards
and grimy with the dust they had collected when prisoners in the Jovian
ship's hold.

But after her first reaction of terror she gave a glad cry, and running
up to Sine, threw her thin arms around his muscular neck.

"Now listen, kid!" The young scientist began with unwonted
embarrassment. But the girl clung to him, and he could not quite bring
himself to tear her arms away. She released him herself, in a few
moments, became suddenly shy.

Lents laughed with genuine amusement.

"Don't be silly, Sine. She's just glad to see us again. Poor kid was
lonesome. Come here, Prosie."

       *       *       *       *       *

She went to him, gravely embraced him; then Kass.

They noticed she was trembling.

"What's the matter?" Kass asked. "You act as if you're glad to see us,
but wished we hadn't come."

"Why are you here?" she asked with a troubled frown.

The Earthmen told her of what had transpired--that they were now
condemned for life to serve in the dark hemisphere. As they spoke her
fears seemed to vanish. She became radiant with delight.

"Then you have come at the right time!" she cried. "Our slavery is at an
end, and you shall pilot us back to the Mother planet!"

"You're not crazy, are you kid?" Sine asked, lifting her little pointed
chin with his hand.

"No!" she laughed delightfully. "Not crazy!" And she would have embraced
Sine again. "My father has been building a ship for the past two years,
hoping to escape to Ganymede, or some other moon of Jupiter. But now we
shall go to Earth!" She clapped her hands excitedly.
