
"I haven't seen you since you were a boy at school."

The King smiled again, this time rather wanly. Koshar hurried on.

"But I would like to introduce my daughter to you, for it's her party.
Clea--." The old man turned to the balcony stairs, and the crowd's eyes
turned with him.

She was standing on the top step, in a white dress made of panel over
silken panel, held with pearl clasps. Her black hair cascaded across one
shoulder, webbed and re-webbed with a chain of silver strung with
pearls. Her hands at her sides, she came down the stairs. People stepped
back; she smiled, and walked forward. Jon watched while at last his
sister reached his father's side.

"My daughter Clea," said old Koshar to the King.

"Charmed."

Koshar raised his left hand, and the musicians began the introduction to
the changing partners dance. Jon watched the King take Clea in his arms,
and also saw the soldier move toward them, and then stop. A woman in a
smoky gray dress suddenly blocked his view, smiled at him, and said,
"Will you dance?" He smiled back, to avoid another expression, and she
was in his arms. Apparently the soldier had had a similar experience,
for at the first turn of the music, Jon saw the soldier was dancing too.
A few couples away, Clea and the King turned round and round, white and
white, brunette and blond. The steps came back to Jon like a poem
remembered, the turn, the dip, separate, and join again. When a girl
does the strange little outward step, and the boy bows, so that for a
moment she is out of sight, her gown always swishes just so. Yes, like
that! This whole day had been filled with the sudden remembrances of
tiny facts like that, forgotten for five years, at once relearned with
startling vividness that shocked him. The music signaled for partners to
change. Gowns whirled into momentary flowers, and he was dancing with
the brown-haired woman the soldier had been dancing with a moment
before. Looking to his left, he saw that the soldier had somehow
contrived to get Clea for a partner. Moving closer, he overheard.

"I didn't think you were going to get here at all. I'm so glad," from
Clea.

"I could have even come earlier," Tomar said. "But you'd have been
busy."

"You could have come up."

"And once I got here, I didn't think we'd get a chance to talk, either."

"Well, you've got one now. Better make it quick. We change partners in a
moment. What happened to the scouting planes?"

"All crippled. Didn't sight a thing. They got back to base almost before
I did this morning. The report was nothing. What about the picnic,
Clea?"

"We can have it on ..."

A burst of music signaled the change. Jon did not hear the day, but
expected his sister to whirl into his arms. But instead (he saw her
white dress flare and turn by him) an emerald iridescence caught in his
eye, then rich mahogany flame. He was dancing with the Duchess. She was
nearly his height, and watched him with a smile hung in the subtle area
between friendship and knowing cynicism. She moved easily, and he had
just remembered that he ought to smile back to be polite when the music
sounded the change. The instant before she whirled away, he heard her
say, very distinctly, "Good luck, Jon Koshar."

His name brought him to a halt, and he stared after her. When he did
turn back to his new partner, surprise still on his face, his eyes were
filled with sudden whiteness. It was Clea. He should have been dancing,
but he was standing still. When she looked at his face to discover why,
she suddenly drew a breath. At first he thought his head had disappeared
again. Then, as shock and surprise became suddenly as real as her wide
eyes, her open mouth, he whispered, "Clea!" And her hand went to her
mouth.

_Clumsy!_ he thought, and the word was a sudden ache in his hands and
chest. Reach for her. Dance. As his hands went out, the music stopped,
and the languid voice of the King came over the loudspeaker.

"Ladies and gentlemen, citizens of Toromon, I have just received a
message from the council that necessitates an announcement to you as my
friends and loyal subjects. I have been requested by the council to make
their declaration of war official by my consent. An emergency meeting
over sudden developments has made it imperative that we begin immediate
action against our most hostile enemies on the mainland. Therefore,
before you all, I declare the Empire of Toromon to be at war."

In the silence, Jon looked for his sister, but she was gone. Someone
near the microphone cried out, "Long live the King." Then the cry echoed
again. The musicians started the music once more, partners found one
another, and the talking and laughing grew in his ears like waves, like
crumbling rock, like the cutter teeth clawing into the rock face of the
ore deposits....

Jon shook his head. But he was in his own house, yes. His room was on
the second floor and he could go up and lie down. And by his bed would
be the copper night table, and the copy of _Delcord the Whaler_ which he
had been reading the night before.

He'd left the ballroom and gotten halfway down the hall before he
remembered that his room was probably not his room any longer. And that
he certainly couldn't go up to it and lie down. He was standing in front
of the door of one of the sitting rooms that opened off the hall. The
door was ajar, and from it he heard a woman's voice.

"Well, can't you do something about his index of refraction? If he's
going to be doing any work at night, you can't have him popping on and
off like a cigarette lighter." There was silence. Then: "Well, at least
don't you think he should be told more than he knows now? Fine. So do I,
especially since the war has been officially declared."

Jon took a breath and stepped in.

Her emerald train whirled across the duller green of the carpet as she
turned. The bright hair, untonsured save by two coral combs, fell behind
her shoulders. Her smile showed faint surprise. Very faint. "Who were
you talking to?" Jon Koshar asked.

"Mutual friends," the Duchess said. They were alone in the room.

After a moment, Jon said, "What do they want us to do? It's treason,
isn't it?"

The Duchess' eyes went thin. "Are you serious?" she asked. "You call
that treason, keeping these idiots from destroying themselves, eating
themselves up in a war with a nameless enemy, something so powerful that
if there were any consideration of real fighting, we could be destroyed
with a thought. Do you remember who the enemy is? You've heard his name.
There are only three people in Toromon who have, Jon Koshar. Everyone
else is ignorant. So we're the only ones who can say we're fully
responsible. That responsibility is to Toromon. Have you any idea what
state the economy is in? Your own father is responsible for a good bit
of it; but if he closed down his aquariums now, the panic he would cause
would equal the destruction their being open already causes. The empire
is snowballing toward its own destruction, and it's going to take it out
in the war. You call trying to prevent it treason?"

"Whatever we call it, we don't have much choice, do we?"

"With people like you around, I'm not sure it isn't a bad idea."

"Look," said Jon. "I was cooped up in a prison mine way out beyond
nowhere for five years. All I wanted was out, see. All I wanted was to
get free. Well, I'm back in Toron and I'm still not free."

"First of all," said the Duchess, "if it wasn't for them, you wouldn't
be as free as you are now. After a day of clean clothes and walking in
fresh air, if you're not well on the road to what you want, then I'd
better change some ideas of my own. I want something too, Jon Koshar.
When I was seventeen, I worked for a summer in your father's aquarium.
My nine hours a day were spent with a metal spoon about the size of your
head scraping the bottoms of the used tank tube of the stuff that even
the glass filters were too touchy to take out. Afterwards I was too
tired to do much more than read. So I read. Most of it was about
Toromon's history. I read a lot about the mainland expeditions. Then, in
my first winter out of school, I lived in a fishing village at the edge
of the forest, studying what I could of the customs of the forest
people. I made sketches of their temples, tried to map their nomadic
movements. I even wrote an article on the architecture of their
temporary shelters that was published in the university journal.

"Well, what I want is for Toromon to be free, free of its own ridiculous
self-entanglements. Perhaps coming from the royal family, I had a easier
path toward a sense of Toromon's history. At its best, that's all an
aristocracy is good for anyway. But I wanted more than a sense, I wanted
to know what it was worth. So I went out and looked, and I found out it
was worth a whole lot. Somehow Toromon is going to have to pick itself
up by the back of the neck and give itself a shaking. If I have to be
the part that does the shaking, then I will. That's what I want, Jon
Koshar, and I want it as badly as you want to be free."

Jon was quiet a moment. Then he said, "Anyway, to get what we want, I
guess we more or less have to do the same thing. All right, I'll go
along. But you're going to have to explain some things to me. There's a
lot I still don't understand."

"A lot we both don't," the Duchess said. "But we know this: they're not
from Earth, they're not human, and they come from very far away.
Inconceivably far."

"What about the rest?"

"They'll help us help Toromon if we help them. How, I still don't
understand for sure. Already I've arranged to have Price Let kidnaped."

"Kidnaped? But why?"

"Because if we get through this, Toromon is going to need a strong king.
And I think you'll agree that Uske will never quite make that. Also,
he's ill, and under any great strain, might die in a moment, not to
mention the underground groups that are bound to spring up to undermine
whatever the government decides to do, once the war gets going. Let is
going where he can become a strong man, with the proper training, so
that if anything happens to Uske, he can return and there'll be someone
to guide the government through its crises. After that, how we're to
help them, I'm not sure."

"I see," said Jon. "How did they get hold of you, anyway? For that
matter, how did they get me?"

"You? They contacted you just outside of Telphar, didn't they? They had
to rearrange the molecular structure of some of your more delicate
proteins and do a general overhaul on your sub-crystalline structure so
the radiation wouldn't kill you. That, unfortunately had the unpleasant
side effect of booting down your index of refraction a couple of points,
which is why you keep fading in dim light. In fact, I got a blow-by-blow
description of your entire escape from them. It kept me on the edge of
my seat all night. How was I contacted? The same way you were, suddenly,
and with those words: _Lord of the Flames_. Now, your first direct
assignment will be ..."

       *       *       *       *       *

In another room, Clea was sitting on a blue velvet hassock with her
hands tight in her lap. Then suddenly they flew apart like springs,
shook beside her head, and then clasped again. "Tomar," she said.
"Please, excuse me, but I'm upset. It was so strange. When I was dancing
with the King, he told me how he had dreamed of my brother this morning.
I didn't think anything of it. I thought it was just small talk. Then,
just after I changed partners for the third time, there I was, staring
into a face that I could have sworn was Jon's. And the man wasn't
dancing, either. He was just looking at me, very funny, and then he said
my name. Tomar, it was the same voice Jon used to use when I'd hurt
myself and he wanted to help. Oh, it couldn't have been him, because he
was too tall, and too gaunt, and the voice was just a little too deep.
But it was so much like what he might have been. That was when the King
made his announcement. I just turned and ran. The whole thing seemed
supernatural. Oh, don't worry, I'm not superstitious, but it unnerved
me. And that plus what you said this morning."

"What I said?" asked Tomar. He stood beside the hassock in the
blue-draped sitting room, his hands in his pockets, listening with
animal patience.

"About their drafting all the degree students into the war effort. Maybe
the war is good, but Tomar, I'm working on another project, and all at
once, the thing I want most in the world is to be left alone to work on
it. And I want you, and I want to have a picnic. I'm nearly at the
solution now, and to have to stop and work on bomb sightings and missile
trajectories ... Tomar, there's a beauty in abstract mathematics that
shouldn't have to be dulled with that sort of thing. Also, maybe you'll
go away, or I'll go away. That doesn't seem fair either. Tomar, have you
ever had things you wanted, had them in your hands, and suddenly have a
situation come up that made it look like they might fly out of your grip
forever?"

Tomar rubbed his hand across his brush-cut red hair and shook his head.
"There was a time once, when I wanted things. Like food, work, and a bed
where all four legs touched the ground. So I came to Toron. And I got
them. And I got you, and so I guess there isn't anything else to want,
or want that bad." He grinned, and the grin made her smile.

"I guess," she started, "... I guess it was just that he looked so much
like my brother."

"Clea," Tomar said. "About your brother. I wasn't going to tell you this
until later. Maybe I shouldn't say it now. But you were asking whether
or not they were going to draft prisoners into the army; and whether at
the end of their service, they'd be freed. Well, I did some checking.
They are going to, and I sent through a recommendation that they take
your brother among the first bunch. In three hours I got a memorandum
from the penal commissioner. Your brother's dead."

She looked at him hard, trying to hold her eyes open and to prevent the
little snarl of sound that was a sob from loosening in the back of her
throat.

"In fact it happened last night," Tomar went on. "He and two others
attempted an escape. Two of their bodies were found. And there's no
chance that the third one could have escaped alive."

The snarl collapsed into a sound she would not make. She sat for a
moment. Then she said, "Let's go back to the party." She stood up, and
they walked across the white rug to the door. Once she shook her head
and opened her mouth. Then she closed it again and went on. "Yes. I'm
glad you said it. I don't know. Maybe it was a sign ... a sign that he
was dead. Maybe it was a sign ..." She stopped. "No. It wasn't. It
wasn't anything, was it? No." They went down the steps to the ballroom
once more. The music was very, very happy.




CHAPTER V


A few hours earlier, Geryn gave Tel a kharba fruit. The boy took the
bright-speckled melon around the inn, looking for Alter. Unable to find
her, he wandered onto the street and up the block. Once a cat with a
struggling gray shape in its teeth hurtled across his path. Later he saw
an overturned garbage can with a filigree of fish bones ornamenting the
parti-colored heap. Over the house roofs across the street, the taller
buildings and towers of Toron paled to blue, with sudden yellow
rectangles of window light scattered unevenly over their faces.

Turning down another block, he saw Rara standing on the corner, stopping
the occasional passers-by. Tel started up to her, but she saw him and
motioned him away. Puzzled, he went to a stoop and sat down to watch. As
he ran his thumbnail along the orange rind, and juice oozed from the
slit, he heard Rara talking to a stranger.

"Your fortune, sir. I'll spread your future before you like a silver
mirror ..." The stranger passed. Rara turned to a woman now coming toward
her. "Ma'am, a fragment of a unit will spread your life out like a
patterned carpet where you may trace the designs of your fate. Just a
quarter of a unit ..." The woman smiled, but shook her head. "You look
like you come from the mainland," Rara called after her. "Well, good
luck here in the New World, sister, the Island of Opportunity."
Immediately she turned to another man, this one in a deep green uniform.
"Sir," Tel heard her begin. Then she paused as she surveyed his costume.
"Sir," she continued, "for a single unit I will unweave the threads of
your destiny from eternity's loom. Would you like to know the promotion
about to come your way? How many children you'll ..."

"Come on, lady," said the man in uniform. "It's illegal to tell fortunes
here."

"But I've got my license," declared Rara. "I'm a genuine clairvoyant.
Just a second ..." And her hands began to plunge into the seams and
pockets of her gray rags.

