For a short age Pict and Hyrkanian snarled at each other over the ruins
of the world they had conquered. Then began the glacier ages, and the
great Nordic drift. Before the southward moving ice-fields the northern
tribes drifted, driving kindred clans before them. The AEsir blotted out
the ancient kingdom of Hyperborea, and across its ruins came to grips
with the Hyrkanians. Nemedia had already become a Nordic kingdom, ruled
by the descendants of the AEsir mercenaries. Driven before the onrushing
tides of Nordic invasion, the Cimmerians were on the march, and neither
army nor city stood before them. They surged across and completely
destroyed the kingdom of Gunderland, and marched across ancient
Aquilonia, hewing their irresistible way through the Pictish hosts. They
defeated the Nordic-Nemedians and sacked some of their cities, but did
not halt. They continued eastward, overthrowing a Hyrkanian army on the
borders of Brythunia.

Behind them hordes of AEsir and Vanir swarmed into the lands, and the
Pictish empire reeled beneath their strokes. Nemedia was overthrown, and
the half-civilized Nordics fled before their wilder kinsmen, leaving the
cities of Nemedia ruined and deserted. These fleeing Nordics, who had
adopted the name of the older kingdom, and to whom the term Nemedian
henceforth refers, came into the ancient land of Koth, expelled both
Picts and Hyrkanians, and aided the people of Shem to throw off the
Hyrkanian yoke. All over the western world, the Picts and Hyrkanians
were staggering before this younger, fiercer people. A band of AEsir
drove the eastern riders from Brythunia and settled there themselves,
adopting the name for themselves. The Nordics who had conquered
Hyperborea assailed their eastern enemies so savagely that the
dark-skinned descendants of the Lemurians retreated into the steppes,
pushed irresistibly back toward Vilayet.

Meanwhile the Cimmerians, wandering southeastward, destroyed the ancient
Hyrkanian kingdom of Turan, and settled on the southwestern shores of
the inland sea. The power of the eastern conquerors was broken. Before
the attacks of the Nordheimir and the Cimmerians, they destroyed all
their cities, butchered such captives as were not fit to make the long
march, and then, herding thousands of slaves before them, rode back into
the mysterious east, skirting the northern edge of the sea, and
vanishing from western history, until they rode out of the east again,
thousands of years later, as Huns, Mongols, Tatars and Turks. With them
in their retreat went thousands of Zamorians and Zingarans, who were
settled together far to the east, formed a mixed race, and emerged ages
afterward as gypsies.

Meanwhile, also, a tribe of Vanir adventurers had passed along the
Pictish coast southward, ravaged ancient Zingara, and come into Stygia,
which, oppressed by a cruel aristocratic ruling class, was staggering
under the thrusts of the black kingdoms to the south. The red-haired
Vanir led the slaves in a general revolt, overthrew the reigning class,
and set themselves up as a caste of conquerors. They subjugated the
northern-most black kingdoms, and built a vast southern empire, which
they called Egypt. From these red-haired conquerors the earlier Pharaohs
boasted descent.

The western world was now dominated by Nordic barbarians. The Picts
still held Aquilonia and part of Zingara, and the western coast of the
continent. But east to Vilayet, and from the Arctic circle to the lands
of Shem, the only inhabitants were roving tribes of Nordheimir,
excepting the Cimmerians, settled in the old Turanian kingdom. There
were no cities anywhere, except in Stygia and the lands of Shem; the
invading tides of Picts, Hyrkanians, Cimmerians and Nordics had levelled
them in ruins, and the once dominant Hyborians had vanished from the
earth, leaving scarcely a trace of their blood in the veins of their
conquerors. Only a few names of lands, tribes and cities remained in the
languages of the barbarians, to come down through the centuries
connected with distorted legend and fable, until the whole history of
the Hyborian age was lost sight of in a cloud of myths and fantasies.
Thus in the speech of the gypsies lingered the terms Zingara and Zamora;
the AEsir who dominated Nemedia were called Nemedians, and later figured
in Irish history, and the Nordics who settled in Brythunia were known as
Brythunians, Brythons or Britons.

There was no such thing, at that time, as a consolidated Nordic empire.
As always, the tribes had each its own chief or king, and they fought
savagely among themselves. What their destiny might have been will not
be known, because another terrific convulsion of the earth, carving out
the lands as they are known to moderns, hurled all into chaos again.
Great strips of the western coast sank; Vanaheim and western
Asgard--uninhabited and glacier-haunted wastes for a hundred
years--vanished beneath the waves. The ocean flowed around the mountains
of western Cimmeria to form the North Sea; these mountains became the
islands later known as England, Scotland and Ireland, and the waves
rolled over what had been the Pictish wilderness and the Bossonian
marches. In the north the Baltic Sea was formed, cutting Asgard into the
peninsulas later known as Norway, Sweden and Denmark, and far to the
south the Stygian continent was broken away from the rest of the world,
on the line of cleavage formed by the river Nilus in its westward trend.
Over Argos, western Koth and the western lands of Shem, washed the blue
ocean men later called the Mediterranean. But where land sank elsewhere,
a vast expanse west of Stygia rose out of the waves, forming the whole
western half of the continent of Africa.

The buckling of the land thrust up great mountain ranges in the central
part of the northern continent. Whole Nordic tribes were blotted out,
and the rest retreated eastward. The territory about the slowly drying
inland sea was not affected, and there, on the western shores, the
Nordic tribes began a pastoral existence, living in more or less peace
with the Cimmerians, and gradually mixing with them. In the west the
remnants of the Picts, reduced by the cataclysm once more to the status
of stone-age savages, began, with the incredible virility of their race,
once more to possess the land, until, at a later age, they were
overthrown by the westward drift of the Cimmerians and Nordics. This was
so long after the breaking-up of the continent that only meaningless
legends told of former empires.

This drift comes within the reach of modern history and need not be
repeated. It resulted from a growing population which thronged the
steppes west of the inland sea--which still later, much reduced in size,
was known as the Caspian--to such an extent that migration became an
economic necessity. The tribes moved southward, northward and westward,
into those lands now known as India, Asia Minor and central and western
Europe.

They came into these countries as Aryans. But there were variations
among these primitive Aryans, some of which are still recognized today,
others which have long been forgotten. The blond Achaians, Gauls and
Britons, for instance, were descendants of pure-blooded AEsir. The
Nemedians of Irish legendry were the Nemedian AEsir. The Danes were
descendants of pure-blooded Vanir; the Goths--ancestors of the other
Scandinavian and Germanic tribes, including the Anglo-Saxons--were
descendants of a mixed race whose elements contained Vanir, AEsir and
Cimmerian strains. The Gaels, ancestors of the Irish and Highland
Scotch, descended from pure-blooded Cimmerian clans. The Cymric tribes
of Britain were a mixed Nordic-Cimmerian race which preceded the purely
Nordic Britons into the isles, and thus gave rise to a legend of Gaelic
priority. The Cimbri who fought Rome were of the same blood, as well as
the Gimmerai of the Assyrians and Grecians, and Gomer of the Hebrews.
Other clans of the Cimmerians adventured east of the drying inland sea,
