splendid hips.

A low cry escaped her as the door shook and a bolt gave way with a
groan.

Conan did not look around. He knew the door would hold a little while
longer.

'They told me you had escaped,' he said. 'A Yuetshi fisher told me you
were hiding here. What is your name?'

'Octavia,' she gasped mechanically. Then words came in a rush. She
caught at him with desperate fingers. 'Oh Mitra! what nightmare is this?
The people--the dark-skinned people--one of them caught me in the forest
and brought me here. They carried me to--to that--that _thing_. He told
me--he said--am I mad? Is this a dream?'

He glanced at the door which bulged inward as if from the impact of a
battering-ram.

'No,' he said, 'it's no dream. That hinge is giving way. Strange that a
devil has to break down a door like a common man; but after all, his
strength itself is a diabolism.'

'Can you not kill him?' she panted. 'You are strong.'

Conan was too honest to lie. 'If a mortal man could kill him, he'd be
dead now,' he answered. 'I nicked my blade on his belly.'

Her eyes dulled. 'Then you must die, and I must--oh Mitra!' she screamed
in sudden frenzy, and Conan caught her hands, fearing that she would
harm herself. 'He told me what he was going to do to me!' she panted.
'Kill me! Kill me with your sword before he bursts the door!'

Conan looked at her, and shook his head.

'I'll do what I can,' he said. 'That won't be much, but it'll give you a
chance to get past him down the stair. Then run for the cliffs. I have a
boat tied at the foot of the steps. If you can get out of the palace you
may escape him yet. The people of this city are all asleep.'

She dropped her head in her hands. Conan took up his scimitar and moved
over to stand before the echoing door. One watching him would have
realized that he was waiting for a death he regarded as inevitable. His
eyes smoldered more vividly; his muscular hand knotted harder on his
hilt; that was all.

The hinges had given under the giant's terrible assault and the door
rocked crazily, held only by the bolts. And these solid steel bars were
buckling, bending, bulging out of their sockets. Conan watched in an
almost impersonal fascination, envying the monster his inhuman strength.

Then without warning the bombardment ceased. In the stillness Conan
heard other noises on the landing outside--the beat of wings, and a
muttering voice that was like the whining of wind through midnight
branches. Then presently there was silence, but there was a new _feel_
in the air. Only the whetted instincts of barbarism could have sensed
it, but Conan knew, without seeing or hearing him leave, that the master
of Dagon no longer stood outside the door.

He glared through a crack that had been started in the steel of the
portal. The landing was empty. He drew the warped bolts and cautiously
pulled aside the sagging door. Khosatral was not on the stair, but far
below he heard the clang of a metal door. He did not know whether the
giant was plotting new devilries or had been summoned away by that
muttering voice, but he wasted no time in conjectures.

He called to Octavia, and the new note in his voice brought her up to
her feet and to his side almost without her conscious volition.

'What is it?' she gasped.

'Don't stop to talk!' He caught her wrist. 'Come on!' The chance for
action had transformed him; his eyes blazed, his voice crackled. 'The
knife!' he muttered, while almost dragging the girl down the stair in
his fierce haste. 'The magic Yuetshi blade! He left it in the dome! I--'
his voice died suddenly as a clear mental picture sprang up before him.
The dome adjoined the great room where stood the copper throne--sweat
started out on his body. The only way to that dome was through that room
with its copper throne and the foul thing that slumbered in it.

But he did not hesitate. Swiftly they descended the stair, crossed the
chamber, descended the next stair, and came into the great dim hall with
its mysterious hangings. They had seen no sign of the colossus. Halting
before the great bronze-valved door, Conan caught Octavia by her
shoulders and shook her in his intensity.

'Listen!' he snapped. 'I'm going into that room and fasten the door.
Stand here and listen; if Khosatral comes, call to me. If you hear me
cry for you to go, run as though the devil were on your heels--which he
probably will be. Make for that door at the other end of the hall,
because I'll be past helping you. I'm going for the Yuetshi knife!'

Before she could voice the protest her lips were framing, he had slid
through the valves and shut them behind him. He lowered the bolt
cautiously, not noticing that it could be worked from the outside. In
the dim twilight his gaze sought that grim copper throne; yes, the scaly
brute was still there, filling the throne with its loathsome coils. He
saw a door behind the throne and knew that it led into the dome. But to
reach it he must mount the dais, a few feet from the throne itself.

A wind blowing across the green floor would have made more noise than
Conan's slinking feet. Eyes glued on the sleeping reptile he reached the
dais and mounted the glass steps. The snake had not moved. He was
reaching for the door....

The bolt on the bronze portal clanged and Conan stifled an awful oath as
he saw Octavia come into the room. She stared about, uncertain in the
deeper gloom, and he stood frozen, not daring to shout a warning. Then
she saw his shadowy figure and ran toward the dais, crying: 'I want to
go with you! I'm afraid to stay alone--_oh_! She threw up her hands
with a terrible scream as for the first time she saw the occupant of the
throne. The wedge-shaped head had lifted from its coils and thrust out
toward her on a yard of shining neck.

Conan cleared the space between him and the throne with a desperate
bound, his scimitar swinging with all his power. And with such blinding
speed did the serpent move that it whipped about and met him in full
midair, lapping his limbs and body with half a dozen coils. His
half-checked stroke fell futilely as he crashed down on the dais,
gashing the scaly trunk but not severing it.

Then he was writhing on the glass steps with fold after slimy fold
knotting about him, twisting, crushing, killing him. His right arm was
still free, but he could get no purchase to strike a killing blow, and
he knew one blow must suffice. With a groaning convulsion of muscular
expansion that bulged his veins almost to bursting on his temples and
tied his muscles in quivering, tortured knots, he heaved up on his feet,
lifting almost the full weight of that forty-foot devil.

An instant he reeled on wide-braced legs, feeling his ribs caving in on
his vitals and his sight growing dark, while his scimitar gleamed above
his head. Then it fell, shearing through the scales and flesh and
vertebrae. And where there had been one huge writhing cable, now there
were horribly two, lashing and flopping in the death throes. Conan
staggered away from their blind strokes. He was sick and dizzy, and
blood oozed from his nose. Groping in a dark mist he clutched Octavia
and shook her until she gasped for breath.

'Next time I tell you to stay somewhere,' he gasped, 'you stay!'

He was too dizzy even to know whether she replied. Taking her wrist like
a truant schoolgirl, he led her around the hideous stumps that still
looped and knotted on the floor. Somewhere, in the distance, he thought
he heard men yelling, but his ears were still roaring so that he could
not be sure.

The door gave to his efforts. If Khosatral had placed the snake there to
guard the thing he feared, evidently he considered it ample precaution.
Conan half expected some other monstrosity to leap at him with the
opening of the door, but in the dimmer light he saw only the vague sweep
of the arch above, a dully gleaming block of gold, and a half-moon
glimmer on the stone.

With a gasp of gratification he scooped it up, and did not linger for
further exploration. He turned and fled across the room and down the
great hall toward the distant door that he felt led to the outer air. He
was correct. A few minutes later he emerged into the silent streets,
half carrying, half guiding his companion. There was no one to be seen,
but beyond the western wall there sounded cries and moaning wails that
made Octavia tremble. He led her to the southwestern wall, and without
difficulty found a stone stair that mounted the rampart. He had
appropriated a thick tapestry rope in the great hall, and now, having
reached the parapet, he looped the soft strong cord about the girl's
hips and lowered her to the earth. Then, making one end fast to a
merlon, he slid down after her. There was but one way of escape from the
island--the stair on the western cliffs. In that direction he hurried,
swinging wide around the spot from which had come the cries and the
sound of terrible blows.

