follow Brawn, Moran almost duplicated Hallet's gestures to have him
remove his helmet.

"I want Burleigh to come next trip," he told Harper, "and make some
excuse to stay behind a moment and talk to me without the helmet-phones
picking up everything I say to him. Understand?"

Harper nodded. But Burleigh did not come on the next trip. It was not
until near midday that he came to carry a load of treasure to the yacht.

When he did come, though, he took off his helmet and turned off the
phone without the need of a suggestion.

"I've been arranging storage for this stuff," he said. "I've opened
plates between the hulls to dump it in. I've told Carol, too, that we've
got to do a perfect job of cleaning up. There must be no stray crystals
on the floor."

"Better search the bunks, too," said Moran drily, "so nobody will put
aside a particularly pretty crystal to gloat over. Listen!"

He told Burleigh exactly what Hallet had said and what he'd answered.
Burleigh looked acutely unhappy.

"Hallet isn't dedicated like the rest of us were," he said distressedly.
"We brought him along partly out of fear that if he were captured he'd
break down and reveal what he knows of the Underground we led, and much
of which we had to leave behind. But I'll be able to finance a real
revolt, now!"

       *       *       *       *       *

Moran regarded him with irony. Burleigh was a capable man and a
conscientious one. It would be very easy to trust him, and it is
all-important to an Underground that its leaders be trusted. But it is
also important that they be capable of flint-like hardness on occasion.
To Moran, it seemed that Burleigh had not quite the adamantine
resolution required for leadership in a conspiracy which was to become a
successful revolt. He was--and to Moran it seemed regrettable--capable
of the virtue of charity.

"I've told you," he said evenly. "Maybe you'll think it's a scheme on my
part to get Hallet dumped and myself elected to take his identity. But
what happens from now on is your business. Beginning this moment, I'm
taking care of my own skin. I've gotten reconciled to the idea of dying,
but I'd hate for it not to do anybody any good."

"Carol," said Burleigh unhappily, "is much distressed."

"That's very kind," said Moran sarcastically. "Now take your bag of
stuff and get going."

Burleigh obeyed. Moran went back to the business of breaking open the
strong plastic boxes of bessendium so their contents could be carried in
forty-pound lots to the _Nadine_.

Thinking of Carol, he did not like the way things seemed to be going.
Since the discovery of the bessendium, Hallet had been developing ideas.
They did not look as if they meant good fortune for Moran without
corresponding bad fortune for the others. Obviously, Moran couldn't be
hidden on the _Nadine_ during the space-port sterilization of the ship
which prevented plagues from being carried from world to world. Hallet
could have no reason to promise such a thing. Before landing here, he'd
urged that Moran simply be dumped out the airlock. This proposal to save
his life....

Moran considered the situation grimly while the business of ferrying
treasure to the yacht went on almost monotonously. It had stopped once
during the forenoon while a giant beetle went by. Later, it stopped
again because a gigantic flying thing hovered overhead. Carol did not
know what it was, but its bulging abdomen ended in an organ which
appeared to be a sting. It was plainly hunting. There was no point in
fighting it. Presently it went away, and just before it disappeared in
the circular wall of mist it dived headlong to the ground. A little
later it rose slowly into the air, carrying something almost as large as
itself. It went away into the mist.

Again, once a green-and-yellow caterpillar marched past upon some
mysterious enterprise. It was covered with incredibly long fur, and it
moved with an undulating motion of all its segments, one after another.
It seemed well over ten yards in length, and its body appeared
impossibly massive. But a large part of the bulk would be the
two-foot-long or longer hairs which stuck out stiffly in all directions.
It, too, went away.

But continually and constantly there was a bedlam of noises. From
underneath the yielding skin of the yeast-ground, there came clickings.
Sometimes there were quiverings of the surface as if it were alive, but
they would be the activities of ten and twelve-inch beetles who lived in
subterranean tunnels in it. There were those preposterous noises like
someone rattling a stick along a picket fence--only deafening--and there
were baritone chirpings and deep bass boomings from somewhere far away.
Moran guessed that the last might be frogs, but if so they were vastly
larger than men.

       *       *       *       *       *

Shortly after what was probably midday, Moran brushed off his hands. The
bessendium part of the cargo of the wrecked _Malabar_ had been salvaged.
It was hidden between the twin hulls of the yacht. Moran had, quite
privately, attended to a matter the wreck's long-dead crew should have
done when they left it. Now, in theory, the _Nadine_ should lift off and
take Moran to some hastily scouted spot not too far from the ice-cap. It
should leave him there with what food could be spared, and the kit of
seeds that might feed him after it was gone, and weapons that might but
probably wouldn't enable him to defend himself, and with a radio-beacon
to try to have hope in. Then,--that would be that.

"Calling," said Moran sardonically into his helmet-phone. "Everything's
cleaned up here. What next?"

"_You can come along_," said Hallet's voice from the ship. It was
shivery. It was gleeful. "_Just in time for lunch!_"

Moran went along the disoriented passages of the _Malabar_ to the lock.
He turned off the beacon that had tried uselessly during six human
generations to call for help for men now long dead. He went out the
lock and closed it behind him. It was not likely that this planet would
ever become a home for men. If there were some strangeness in its
constitution that made the descendents of insects placed upon it grow to
be giants, humans would not want to settle on it. And there were plenty
of much more suitable worlds. So the wrecked space-ship would lie here,
under deeper and ever deeper accumulations of the noisesome stuff that
passed for soil. Perhaps millenia from now, the sturdy, resistant metal
of the hull would finally rust through, and then--nothing. No man in all
time to come would ever see the _Malabar_ again.

Shrugging, he went toward the _Nadine_. He walked through bedlam. He
could see a quarter-mile in one direction, and a quarter-mile in
another. He could not see more than a little distance upward. The
_Nadine_ had landed upon a world with tens of millions of square miles
of surface, and nobody had moved more than a hundred yards from its
landing-place, and now it would leave and all wonders and all horrors
outside this one quarter of a square mile would remain unknown....

He went to the airlock and shed his suit. He opened the inner door.
Hallet waited for him.

"Everybody's at lunch," he said. "We'll join them."

Moran eyed him sharply. Hallet grinned widely.

"We're going to take off to find a place for you as soon as we've
eaten," he said.

There was mockery in the tone. It occurred abruptly to Moran that Hallet
was the kind of person who might, to be sure, plan complete disloyalty
to his companions for his own benefit. But he might also enjoy betrayal
for its own sake. He might, for example, find it amusing to make a man
under sentence of death or marooning believe that he would escape, so
Hallet could have the purely malicious pleasure of disappointing him. He
might look for Moran to break when he learned that he was to die here
after all.

Moran clamped his lips tightly. Carol would be better off if that was
the answer. He went toward the yacht's mess-room. Hallet followed close
behind. Moran pushed the door aside and entered. Burleigh and Harper and
Brawn looked at him, Carol raised her eyes. They glistened with tears.

Hallet said gleefully;

"Here goes!"

Standing behind Moran, he thrust a hand-blaster past Moran's body and
pulled the trigger. He held the trigger down for continuous fire as he
traversed the weapon to wipe out everybody but Moran and himself.


IV.

Moran responded instantly. His hands flew to Hallet's throat, blind fury
making him unaware of any thought but a frantic lust to kill. It was
very strange that Moran somehow noticed Hallet's hand insanely pulling
the trigger of the blast-pistol over and over and over without result.
He remembered it later. Perhaps he shared Hallet's blank disbelief that
one could pull the trigger of a blaster and have nothing at all happen
in consequence. But nothing did happen, and suddenly he dropped the
weapon and clawed desperately at Moran's fingers about his throat. But
that was too late.

There was singularly little disturbance at the luncheon-table. The whole
event was climax and anticlimax together. Hallet's intention was so
appallingly murderous and his action so shockingly futile that the four
who were to have been his victims tended to stare blankly while Moran
throttled him.

Burleigh seemed to recover first. He tried to pull Moran's hands loose
from Hallet's throat. Lacking success he called to the others. "Harper!
Brawn! Help me!"

It took all three of them to release Hallet. Then Moran stood panting,
shaking, his eyes like flames.

"He--he--" panted Moran. "He was going to kill Carol!"

"I know," said Burleigh, distressedly. "He was going to kill all of us.
You gave me an inkling, so while he was packing bessendium between the
hulls, and had his space-suit hanging in the airlock, I doctored the
blaster in the space-suit pocket." He looked down at Hallet. "Is he
still alive?"

Brawn bent over Hallet. He nodded.

"Put him in the airlock for the time being," said Burleigh. "And lock
it. When he comes to, we'll decide what to do."

       *       *       *       *       *

Harper and Brawn took Hallet by the arms and hauled him along the
passageway. The inner door of the lock clanged shut on him.

"We'll give him a hearing, of course," said Burleigh conscientiously.
"But we should survey the situation first."

To Moran the situation required no survey, but he viewed it from a
violently personal viewpoint which would neither require or allow
discussion. He knew what he meant to do about Hallet. He said harshly;

"Go ahead. When you're through I'll tell you what will be done."

       *       *       *       *       *

He went away. To the control-room. There he paced up and down, trying to
beat back the fury which rose afresh at intervals of less than minutes.
He did not think of his own situation, just then. There are more
important things than survival.

He struggled for coolness, with the action before him known. He didn't
glance out the ports at the half-mile circle in which vision was
possible. Beyond the mist there might be anything; an ocean, swarming
metropoli of giant insects, a mountain-range. Nobody on the _Nadine_ had
explored. But Moran did not think of such matters now. Hallet had tried
to murder Carol, and Moran meant to take action, and there were matters
which might result from it. The matter the crew of the _Malabar_ had
forgotten to attend to--.

He searched for paper and a pen. He found both in a drawer for the
yacht's hand-written log. He wrote. He placed a small object in the
drawer. He had barely closed it when Carol was at the control-room door.
She said in a small voice;

"They want to talk to you."

He held up the paper.

"Read this later. Not now," he said curtly. He opened and closed the
drawer again, this time putting the paper in it. "I want you to read
this after the Hallet business is settled. I'm afraid that I'm not going
to look well in your eyes."

She swallowed and did not speak. He went to where the others sat in
official council. Burleigh said heavily;

"We've come to a decision. We shall call Hallet and hear what he has to
say, but we had to consider various courses of action and decide which
were possible and which were not."

Moran nodded grimly. He had made his own decision. It was not too much
unlike the one that, carried out, had made him seize the _Nadine_ for
escape from Coryus. But he'd listen. Harper looked doggedly resolved.
Brawn seemed moody as usual.

"I'm listening," said Moran.

"Hallet," said Burleigh regretfully, "intended to murder all of us and
with your help take the _Nadine_ to some place where he could hope to
land without space-port inspection."

Moran observed;

