ray-projectors, heroine consisting mainly of lipstick and legs, and a
dastardly villain, are not dragged in by the nape of their respective
necks certainly does nothing to impair the excellence of his dulcet
prose, but rather it an agreeable relief."

Come on, now, everybody join in the battle!




ANNALS OF THE JINNS

by R. H. Barlow

"...Thither Ganigul often retired in the daytime to read in quiet the
marvelous annals of the Jinns, the chronicles of ancient worlds, and
the prophecies relating to the worlds that are yet to be born...."

    Wm. Beckford
    --"Story of Prince Barkiarokh"


1--The Black Tower

At the head of the winding river Olaee, nearby the fragrant forest,
stands the Black Tower of the Southlands. High into the air rise its
bleak stone walls, piercing the sunset with slender spire. For
eternity it has been there; by the sluggish waters on which float
great bloated crimson lilies and for eternity will it be there. The
peasants of the nearby village know not whence it came nor why 'tis
there, and wisely avoid it when the moon is on the wane. Few dare
visit the colourful forest of evil or the treacherous river, for
strange and unholy things dwell therein.

Some tell of how on the dark of the moon there comes from the great
star Sirius a growing speck of flame ultimately losing itself in the
eternal midnight of outer space. However this may be, it is certain
strange and alien beings built this ebon tower in the dawn of the
world, for purposes not understood by mortals; sealing the door long
ages since.

There is a tale the old wives spin, saying: One of the adventurous
villagers, Castor by name, took undue interest in the tower and was
frequently seen slipping furtively to and from it in the dusk. Of all
the people of the town he had the least savoury ancestry, his father
being a satyr, his mother a witch-woman. True, others mated with the
people of the glen, yet it is not considered a thing to be proud of.
The very Burgomaster had a gnome none too far back in his lineage,
which was expressed in the coarse features of his evil countenance.
But a satyr! The righteous citizens avoided Castor scrupulously, and
the dislike was mutual. So it was he continued on his silent trips
unheeded.

What he did there so often not known but the seasons came and went and
the winter merged into spring and in time it was Walburgas Eve. That
night the town gates were tightly closed and bolted and all cowered
behind locked doors. Strange shapes flew screeching through the air
and sniffed most horribly at the doorsteps.

That night Castor went to the tower as had become his habit, though
his better sense warned him to stay home abed. His satyr ancestry
openly rebelled, but the witch proved stronger. As he stole timorously
through the wood he heard sounds of high revelry from within the
castle. Therefore, he was quiet as he hesitated before the foot of the
long unopened door. Queer things were abroad though he dared not
return home alone through the forest, still more did he fear to remain
within reach of the Things of the tower. As he deliberated on the
course to take the great door swung silently open and a crab like claw
lovingly encircled his waist and drew him in.

And he was seen no more by the villagers.




SCIENCE FICTION IN ENGLISH MAGAZINES

(Series 2)

by Bob Tucker


What England needs is a good science fiction mag. The present ones are
thrilling, but small and cheap. They have swell titles, but often the
story falls short. On the other hand, that's an old American custom.
Believe it or not, but just 653210987600 stories have been written
under the title "The End of the World"! (Editor's note: Mr. Tucker, I
think you exaggerate. I haven't seen half that many.). And if you
scientifictionists want some darned good arguments over anything
scientific, just give this fellow a line: Dennis Gilbert Smith, 521
Bearwood Road, Smeethwick, Staffs., England. He is a student of
theology.

Talk about a swell picture!--Wesso or Paul should look at the
illustration of the moon-men attacking a giant army tank way back in
the April 1st issue of "The Skipper," an English mag that makes a
specialty of science-fiction.

Freaks in the raw: An English mag printed a story of a kid (age about
14) who had magnetic hands, and could draw metals to him by merely
extending his fingers--well, the kid, instead of capturing the earth
by pulling out its magnets with his fingers, as would usually be done
does nothing but play tricks with scales, making water buckets dance
in the air, etc--darn dumb, some of these authors.

"Red Raiders of Mystery" is a future air-war story in "Weekly Boy's
Magazine", while another "The Rover," printed "Britain Invaded," this
time by Chinese--what, again?...well, times are hard everywhere....
(Editor's note: not anymore. How about the N R A?) Another mag by the
name of "Modern Boy" prints about two series of interplanetary stories
a year concerning the adventures of Captain Justice. Blood and
thunder. George Ward, 91 Milton Road Margate, Kent, England, would
like to hear from some American fans.




MY SCIENCE FICTION COLLECTION

by Forrest J. Ackerman

Part Two


The foregoing covers approximately half of my set. The remaining
portions of my stf collection are more to be looked at than read. My
stf books and magazines lie behind sliding panels. These panels are
decorated with various original stf illustrations. Two are by an
artist friend showing the rocketship STF-I over a foreign world, and
the other a city of the future. One is by Morey. There is a Tarzan
jig-saw puzzle, and one of the mighty 56 foot prehistoric ape, King
Kong, engaging in a battle with a flesh-eating allosaur. From "The
Swordsman of Mars" comes another drawing. Two striking Paul
illustrations are prominent, one being what I consider one of his very
best: the inside drawing for "The City of Singing Flame," picturing
the towering black and ivory edifices of that weird world. Buck Rogers
in his interesting costume with rocket pistol smiles down. And Elliott
Dold, Jr. has autographed his original frontispiece for Miracle
Stories' first issue, "The Midnite Mail takes off for Mars." Paul's
original Wonder Stories' cover for "The Dust of Destruction" hangs on
a side wall.

(Next month Mr. Ackerman describes his science fiction autographs.)




THE SCIENCE FICTION ALPHABET

by Allen Glasser

Part Two--Conclusion


    N is for Newton, the Gravity King,
    Whose laws, in our mags, just don't mean a thing.

    O's for Ourselves, who read science-fiction
    We know what we like, and there's no dereliction.

    P's for the Princess that's always on hand
    To wed the brave Earthman who visits her land.

    Q is for Quinn, the weird-story writer;
    If he'd do science fiction his fame might be brighter.

    R is for Robot, of whom much is said;
    For many an author his antics have fed.

    S is for Starzl, Schachner, and Sloane;
    And let's not forget Doc Smith and Miss Stone.

