launching the SCIENCE FICTION DIGEST without adequate preparation.
Unwilling to take any credit for the work he appointed Maurice Z.
Ingher as the Digest's editor, but when Mr. Ingher was forced to
resign because of other duties, he reluctantly took the editorship.
There is plenty of testimony to satisfy all as to the success he has
attained with his little magazine, the SCIENCE FICTION DIGEST.

As for his age, and other personal points, he is 21, unmarried, and
considers life quite thrilling. He is a printer by occupation, being
one of the partners of the ARRA Printers, who have given the fans
several science fiction pamphlets.

Though he declares he is not modest, he cannot be convinced that he
has done anything unusual. It is his courage and determination that
has carried the 'Science Fiction Digest' through the rough spots of
its career, and it is stern judgement that selects the articles and
stories which so please the readers of SFD, or FANTASY Magazine, as it
will be called.

                     *      *      *      *      *

The word "weird" as meaning bizarre probably originated with Edgar
Allan Poe, who was one of the greatest coiner of words. Is his poem
"Ulalume," he speaks of the country of "Weir" from which the word
"weird" was derived to describe anything horrible or unique.

                     *      *      *      *      *

Come over to "Our Readers Say" and "The Boiling Point" and join in the
comment. We always like to get letters from our readers.

                     *      *      *      *      *

Send in your comments on the current issue. We want to know your likes
and dislikes. That is the only way we can supply you with the kind of
material you like.

                     *      *      *      *      *

Subscribe now and insure yourself of a monthly copy. Only a limited
number are printed.




CELEBRITIES I'VE MET

by Mortimer Weisinger


Dr. T. O'Conor Sloane--who wishes he were related to the owner of
'Sloan's Liniment.'

                     *      *      *      *      *

Hugo Gernsback--who, when commended for his ability to turn out new
editorials month after month, modestly shrugged it off with: "It's all
in the day's work."

                     *      *      *      *      *

Harry Bates--who evasively answers all questions pertaining to the
identity of Anthony Gilmore by saying, "I'll speak only upon advice
from my counsel."

                     *      *      *      *      *

A. Merritt--who, though he is perhaps the greatest man I have ever
known, is incredibly unaffected for a person with his success.

                     *      *      *      *      *

Dr. David Henry Keller--who can tell a story almost better than he can
write, as witness the tale, "The Dead Woman," told to me in his room
at the Hotel New Yorker.

                     *      *      *      *      *

Mrs. David Keller--who enjoys piquing one's curiosity when quizzed
about the name of the magazine for which her husband writes under a
nom-de-plume.

                     *      *      *      *      *

Angelica Keller--who is the 'Angelica' of scores of Keller stories,
and upon whom Dr. Keller's story, "A Pyschological Experiment," was
based.

                     *      *      *      *      *

Abner Joseph Gelula--who gleefully claims that he wishes the movie
magnates would buy each of his stories for the movies, as they did
"Automaton."

                     *      *      *      *      *

Miss Florence Bothner, Dr. Sloane's capable secretary, who rightly
insists that Bob Olsen is the wittiest s-f writer.

                     *      *      *      *      *

Leo Morey--one of the most handsome chaps of the science fiction gang,
and perhaps the slickest dresser of them all.

                     *      *      *      *      *

H. W. Wesso--who confesses that he knows less about technical sciences
than Homer Eon Flint knows of the sequel to "The Blind Spot."

                     *      *      *      *      *

Miss Miriam Bourne--whose pet diversion is telling Dr. Keller that he
is not a real author, in the true sense of the word, although she
tells friends that Doctor Keller is the greatest of them all, when he
isn't around!

                     *      *      *      *      *

Arthur J. Burks--who reeled off his five thousand word part for the
serial, COSMOS, in exactly two hours! I vas dere, Sharlie.

                     *      *      *      *      *

Gawain Edwards,--who when asked to pay only one dollar as initiation
fee for membership in the old Scienceers, slapped it down with such
contempt as if to say, "What Pikers!"

                     *      *      *      *      *

Charles D. Hornig, a New Jerseyite, who wishes there were dozens of
Clark Ashton Smiths and also dozens of H. P. Lovecrafts.




UNUSUAL STORIES


The new magazine of fantastic fiction presents such stories as:

    "The White Sybil"
    by Clark Ashton Smith

    "Countries in the Sea"
    by August W. Derleth

    "The Sixth Sense"
    by Stanton A. Coblentz

    "On Board the Space-Ship Terra"
    by L. A. Eshbach

    "The Strange Case of Tony Rizutti"
