further to state that there will be no more department known as "The
Boiling Point." The name implies that everything contained therein
should be boiling hot--and these boiling hot arguments, as we have
found out, create an unpleasant atmosphere for many concerned. THE
FANTASY FAN is attempting to bind the lovers of science and weird
fiction tighter together with friendship, and not to separate them
thru dislike of each others ideas. However, to take the place of "The
Boiling Point" we are starting a new department next month entitled
"Your Views." This will not contain any debates, but the opinions of
you, the readers, on various subjects which we will nominate. So,
write in us immediately answering the following questions: "What is
there in the 'horror' story as associated with weird and fantastic
fiction? Is there any virtue to them? How can they be defended when
people will read them and say that they are distasteful to the well
and normal mind? Why does a person wish to read a sinister tale of
evil or monstrosities? Is it healthy reading? Is it not morbid?"
Forrest J. Ackerman has suggested this subject. Let's see what you
think about it.




SUPERNATURAL HORROR IN LITERATURE

Part Five

by H. P. Lovecraft

(Copyright 1927, by W. Paul Cook)


Just as all fiction first found extensive embodiment in poetry, so is
it in poetry that we first encounter the permanent entry of the weird
into standard literature. Most of the ancient instances, curiously
enough, are in prose; as the werewolf incident in Petronius, the
gruesome passages in Apuleius, the brief but celebrated letter of
Pliny the younger to Sura, and the odd compilation "On Wonderful
Events" by the Emperor Hadrian's Greek freedman, Phlegon. It is in
Phlegon that we first find that hideous tale of the corpse-bride,
"Philinnion and Machates," later related by Procius and in modern
times forming the inspiration of Goethe's "Bride of Corinth" and
Washington Irving's "German Student." But by the time the old Northern
myths take literary form, and in that later time when the weird
appears as a steady element in the literature of the day, we find it
mostly in metrical dress; as indeed we find the greater part of the
strictly imaginative writing of the Middle Ages and Renaissance. The
Scandinavian Eddas and Sagas thunder with cosmic horror, and shake
with the stark fear of Ymir and his shapeless spawn; whilst our own
Anglo-Saxon "Beowulf" and the later Continental Nibelung tales are
full of eldritch weirdness. Dante is a pioneer in the classic capture
of macabre atmosphere, and in Spencer's stately stanzas will be seen
more than a few touches of fantastic terror in landscape, incident,
and character. Prose literature gives us Malory's "Morte d'Arthur," in
which are presented many ghastly situations taken from early ballad
sources--the theft of the sword and silk from the corpse in Chapel
Perilous by Sir Launcelot, the ghost of Sir Gawaine, and the
tomb-fiend seen by Sir Galahad--whilst other and cruder specimens were
doubtless set forth in the Supernatural Horror in Literature cheap and
sensational "chapbooks" vulgarly hawked about and devoured by the
ignorant. In Elizabethan drama, with its "Dr. Faustus," the witches in
"Macbeth," and the horrible gruesomeness of Webster, we may easily
discern the strong hold of the daemoniac on the public mind; a hold
intensified by the very real fear of living witchcraft, whose terrors,
first witnessed on the Continent, begin to echo loudly in English ears
as the witch hunting crusades of James the First gain headway. To the
lurking mystical prose of the ages is added a long list of treatises
on witchcraft and daemonology which aid in exciting the imagination of
the reading world.

    (Continued Next Month)




MY SCIENCE FICTION COLLECTION

by Forrest J. Ackerman

Part Six--Conclusion


Lastly there is the third--and an extremely interesting part of the
scientifilm division of my collection: the sound discs from "Dr.
Jekyll and Mr. Hyde." Of an evening, it is a great enjoyment to listen
to the Doctor with coughs and groans and an accompaniment of whirring
thoughts change into the savage Mr. Hyde or before that, to hear him
expound his theory of man being "not one, but truly two;" and later
to listen to the final battle in which he is killed. As the records
are recorded at two or three times normal speed, it proves most
interesting (ordinarily, they must be slowed down by a weight or the
hand). Run at recorded tempo, one hears characters speaking as they
would if they were speeded up as in such stories as "A Year in a Day,"
"The Super-Man of Dr. Jukes," "The Super-Velociter," and "A New
Accelerator." The result is startling.

In conclusion--I have complete files of The Time Traveller (with
issues of The which preceded it), _Science Fiction Digest_ and Science
Fiction. And I'm looking forward to every number of _The Fantasy Fan_.
Good luck!




FAMOUS FANTASY FICTION

by Emil Petaja


Perhaps the most interesting collection of mystery stories ever
brought together under one cover is Dorothy L. Sayers' "Omnibus of
Crime." This is of special interest to weird story fans, as of its
1177 pages, over 400 are devoted exclusively to this type. It's
authors include A. Conan Doyle, Bram Stoker, Arthur Machen, Ambrose
Bierce, and many others whom Fantasy Fans are familiar with. Don't
miss reading it.

Among other weird story collections are "Famous Modern Ghost Stories"
and "Famous Humorous Ghost Stories," both edited by Dorothy
Scarborough. These books are filled with fascinating ghost stories,
all by famous authors of all times.

Elliot O'Donnell, famous English author, has written many collections
of true ghost stories. His two latest are "Haunted Houses of London"
and "More Haunted Houses of London." You will find many of his stories
and articles reprinted in various collections. He has also written for
_Weird Tales_.

Some years ago, The Macauley Company published a collection under the
title, "Beware After Dark." It includes H. P. Lovecraft's "Call of
Cthulhu" and Machen's "Novel of the White Powder," and others of note.
A splendid addition to your book-shelf.

The Modern Library's collection "Best Ghost Stories" is no doubt
familiar to most of you, but it is certainly worth mentioning. It
contains an introduction by Arthur B. Reeve, and stories by Algernon
Blackwood, Dr. M. R. James, and Rudyard Kipling.




FANS I'VE MET
