became a byword for the weird and ghastly. In England, one of the first
imitators was the celebrated Mr. Barbauld, then Miss Aiken, who in 1773
published an unfinished fragment called _Sir Bertrand_, in which the
strings of genuine terror were truly touched with no clumsy hand. A
nobleman on a dark and lonely moor, attracted by a tolling bell and
distant light, enters a strange and ancient turreted castle whose doors
open and close and whose bluish will-o'-the-wisps lead up mysterious
staircases toward dead hands and animated black statues. A coffin with
a dead lady, whom Sir Bertrand kisses, is finally reached; and upon the
kiss, the scene dissolves to give place to a splendid apartment where
the lady, restored to life, holds a banquet in honour of her rescuer.
Walpole admired this tale, though he accorded less respect to an even
more prominent off-spring of his Otranto--_The Old English Baron_, by
Clara Reeve, published in 1777. Truly enough, this tale lacks the real
vibration to the note of outer darkness and mystery which distinguishes
Mrs. Barbauld's fragment and though less crude than Walpole's novel,
and more artistically economical of horror in its possession of only
one spectral figure, it is nevertheless too definitely insipid for
greatness. Here again we have the virtuous heir to the castle disguised
as a peasant and restored to his heritage through the ghost of his
father; and here again we have a case of wide popularity leading to
many editions, dramatizations, and ultimate translation into French.
Miss Reeve wrote another weird novel, unfortunately unpublished and
lost.

[Illustration: continued next month]




    YOUR VIEWS


"I should venture that the fascination of the weird is through a
vaguely masochistic pleasure that derives delight from frightening
one's self! I believe the simile is ancient that our gaze will often
return to the ugliest person in a room rather than the most handsome.
Perhaps it is that constant saccharine palls. I claim it is untrue that
'the beautiful, the good, is the aim of every true artist.'"

  --R. H. Barlow

"The element of horror in a tale often makes the story; it gives you
that weird, creepy sensation and cold chills. Thus, the greater those
feelings affect us after, or during, the reading of the yarn, the
greater we say the story is. Of course, if the horror part is of too
intense a nature in that it causes a continued after-effect producing
nervousness in the reader, then the virtue of the use of horror may be
questioned. However, strong horror can be read by strong minds, or by
uncomprehending minds, without damage. It would appear, then, that it
depends equally upon the reader and the quality of horror used. Horror
has a certain fascination to everyone; it is a thing that seems inborn
in us--perhaps it is because we try to understand subconsciously,
something mysterious, just beyond the conscious cognizance of the
things that are known."

  --Kenneth B. Pritchard

"In the horror story, one can find true beauty--beauty that is
glorified from tossing seas of blackness--shining beauty that comes
with cosmic fear, lurid silence, frightful death--all this and more
fascinates one's appreciation of true art. 'When people read these
and say that they are distasteful to the well and normal mind' then
these certain people should not read them. No one is compelling them
to do such. And why do we wish to read a sinister tale of evil or
monstrosities? Listen, readers! Those of us who know life and have
grown tired of its futile strivings, its worries, its hard realities,
(and most of us have by now) are able to forget it all by steeping
ourselves with the nameless terrors and evil spawns of that 'darkness
visible'."

  --Robert Nelson

"As to the virtue of horror stories, one might ask what virtue there is
in any yarn? What are we looking for in a story?--mental relaxation,
thrills, morals, spine chills, or what have you. Certainly, they are
_different_ from the usual run of blood and thunder, hero stuff. They
are also something to think about _after reading_. We read them again
to feel the effect of the words once more. I dare say that the average
story one reads is enjoyed while being absorbed, then forgotten. I am
probably wrong, but pass over it. The point is, we read horror tales
because we _like_ them."

  --Duane W. Rimel

"Aren't most tales that are weird and fantastic a bit
horrifying? Consider the strange beings around which the tale is
woven--incomprehensible monsters, neither animal nor reptile; strange
man-things bearing only a resemblance in bodily structure, but too
warped to be human. I can see no virtue in them, except that when I
finish the story and come back to the normal world, I'm glad that I am
what I am. It takes real intelligence to write something that is not
known to the general populace. I read weird tales for variety. I get a
bit tired of the general run of stories found in _sensible_ magazines."

  --Gertrude Hemken

"Just what is a normal mind? This pertains, I think, to the commonly
accepted _norms_ in vogue at any specified time in history. Even in
different communities, what is considered normal in one is sometimes
abnormal in others. This must be constantly kept in mind. On the other
hand, how many people are what you might call 'normal'? Not many, I
imagine. The ones that are probably the most utterly boring, stupid,
lifeless creatures that roam this planet are the _normal_ ones. Also,
please remember that when a person dislikes something he (or she)
usually says it's distasteful to a 'normal' mind."

  --Lester Anderson

Now, fans, write this department immediately and tell us who your
favorite author is and what quality in his work puts him at the head of
your list. Material received by us before April 22nd will be used in
our May issue. Make your contributions brief and to the point--but be
sure to send in your entry!

[Illustration: Subscribe to TFF]




    ADVERTISEMENTS

  Rates: one cent per word
  Minimum Charge, 25 cents


SEABURY QUINN--An extraordinary collection of his stories, 5 and 10
cents each. Postcard for prices on your favorite de Grandin tales, or
stamp for list of all exploits available. In fairness to fans, limit
four stories per person.

Forrest J. Ackerman, 530 Staples Ave. San Francisco, Calif.

       *       *       *       *       *

CLARK ASHTON SMITH presents THE DOUBLE SHADOW AND OTHER FANTASIES--a
booklet containing a half-dozen imaginative and atmospheric
tales--stories of exotic beauty, glamor, terror, strangeness, irony and
satire. Price: 25 cents each (coin or stamps). Also a small remainder
of EBONY AND CRYSTAL--a book of prose-poems published at $2.00, reduced
to $1.00 per copy. Everything sent postpaid, Clark Ashton Smith,
Auburn, California.

       *       *       *       *       *

