Trifolium is a natural genus, and the leaves of all

* Pfeffer, 'Die Period. Bewegungen,' 1875, p. 157.
[page 118]

the species seen by us are pulvinated; so it is with the cotyledons of T.
subterraneum and strictum, which stand vertically at night; whereas those
of T. resupinatum exhibit not a trace of a pulvinus, nor of any nocturnal
movement. This was ascertained by measuring the distance between the tips
of the cotyledons of four seedlings at mid-day and at night. In this
species, however, as in the others, the first-formed leaf, which is simple
or not trifoliate, rises up and sleeps like the terminal leaflet on a
mature plant.

In another natural genus, Oxalis, the cotyledons of O. Valdiviana, rosea,
floribunda, articulata, and sensitiva are pulvinated, and all move at night
into an upward or downward vertical position. In these several species the
pulvinus is seated close to the blade of the cotyledon, as is the usual
rule with most plants. Oxalis corniculata (var. Atro-purpurea) differs in
several respects; the cotyledons rise at night to a very variable amount,
rarely more than 45o; and in one lot of seedlings (purchased under the name
of O. tropaeoloides, but certainly belonging to the above variety) they
rose only from 5o to 15o above the horizon. The pulvinus is developed
imperfectly and to an extremely variable degree, so that apparently it is
tending towards abortion. No such case has hitherto, we believe, been
described. It is coloured green from its cells containing chlorophyll; and
it is seated nearly in the middle of the petiole, instead of at the upper
end as in all the other species. The nocturnal movement is effected partly
by its aid, and partly by the growth of the upper part of the petiole as in
the case of plants destitute of a pulvinus. From these several reasons and
from our having partially traced the development of the pulvinus from an
early age, the case seems worth describing in some detail.
[page 119]

[When the cotyledons of O. corniculata were dissected out of a seed from
which they would soon have naturally emerged, no trace of a pulvinus could
be detected; and all the cells forming the short petiole, 7 in number in a
longitudinal row, were of nearly equal size. In seedlings one or two days
old, the pulvinus was so indistinct that we thought at first that it did
not exist; but in the middle of the petiole an ill-defined transverse zone
of cells could be seen, which were much shorter than those both above and
below, although of the same breadth with them. They presented the
appearance of having been just formed by the transverse division of longer
cells; and there can be little doubt that this had occurred, for the cells
in the petiole which had

Fig. 64. Oxalis corniculata: A and B the almost rudimentary pulvini of the
cotyledons of two rather old seedlings, viewed as transparent objects.
Magnified 50 times.

been dissected out of the seed averaged in length 7 divisions of the
micrometer (each division equalling .003 mm.), and were a little longer
than those forming a well-developed pulvinus, which varied between 4 and 6
of these same divisions. After a few additional days the ill-defined zone
of cells becomes distinct, and although it does not extend across the whole
width of the petiole, and although the cells are of a green colour from
containing chlorophyll, yet they certainly constitute a pulvinus, which as
we shall presently see, acts as one. These small cells were arranged in
longitudinal rows, and varied from 4 to 7 in number; and the cells
themselves varied in length in different parts of the
[page 120]
same pulvinus and in different individuals. In the accompanying figures, A
and B (Fig. 64), we have views of the epidermis* in the middle part of the
petioles of two seedlings, in which the pulvinus was for this species well
developed. They offer a striking contrast with the pulvinus of O. rosea
(see former Fig. 63), or of O. Valdiviana. With the seedlings, falsely
called O. tropaeoloides, the cotyledons of which rise very little at night,
the small cells were still fewer in number and in parts formed a single
transverse row, and in other parts short longitudinal rows of only two or
three. Nevertheless they sufficed to attract the eye, when the whole
petiole was viewed as a transparent object beneath the microscope. In these
seedlings there could hardly be a doubt that the pulvinus was becoming
rudimentary and tending to disappear; and this accounts for its great
variability in structure and function.

In the following Table some measurements of the cells in fairly
well-developed pulvini of O. corniculata are given:--

Seedling 1 day old, with cotyledon 2.3 mm. in length.
Divisions of  Micrometer.**
Average length of cells of
pulvinus..................................................6 to 7
Length of longest cell below the
pulvinus.....................................  13
Length of longest cell above the
pulvinus......................................  20

Seedling 5 days old, cotyledon 3.1 mm. in length, with the pulvinus quite
distinct.
Average length of cells of
pulvinus..................................................   6
Length of longest cell below the
pulvinus.....................................  22
Length of longest cell above the
pulvinus......................................  40

Seedling 8 days old, cotyledon 5 mm. in length, with a true leaf formed but
not yet expanded.
Average length of cells of
pulvinus..................................................   9
Length of longest cell below the
pulvinus.....................................  44
Length of longest cell above the
pulvinus......................................  70

Seedling 13 days old, cotyledon 4.5 mm. in length, with a small true leaf
fully developed. Average length of cells of
pulvinus..................................................   7
Length of longest cell below the
pulvinus..................................... 30
Length of longest cell above the
pulvinus......................................  60

______________________________________

* Longitudinal sections show that the forms of the epidermic cells may be
taken as a fair representation of those constituting the pulvinus.

** Each division equalled .003 mm.
[page 121]

We here see that the cells of the pulvinus increase but little in length
with advancing age, in comparison with those of the petiole both above and
below it; but they continue to grow in width, and keep equal in this
respect with the other cells of the petiole. The rate of growth, however,
varies in all parts of the cotyledons, as may be observed in the
measurements of the 8-days' old seedling.

The cotyledons of seedlings only a day old rise at night considerably,
sometimes as much as afterwards; but there was much variation in this
respect. As the pulvinus is so indistinct at first, the movement probably
does not then depend on the expansion of its cells, but on periodically
unequal growth in the petiole. By the comparison of seedlings of different
known ages, it was evident that the chief seat of growth of the petiole was
in the upper part between the pulvinus and the blade; and this agrees with
the fact (shown in the measurements above given) that the cells grow to a
greater length in the upper than in the lower part. With a seedling 11 days
old, the nocturnal rise was found to depend largely on the action of the
pulvinus, for the petiole at night was curved upwards at this point; and
during the day, whilst the petiole was horizontal, the lower surface of the
pulvinus was wrinkled with the upper surface tense. Although the cotyledons
at an advanced age do not rise at night to a higher inclination than whilst
young, yet they have to pass through a larger angle (in one instance
amounting to 63o) to gain their nocturnal position, as they are generally
deflected beneath the horizon during the day. Even with the 11-days' old
seedling the movement did not depend exclusively on the pulvinus, for the
blade where joined to the petiole was curved upwards, and this must be
attributed to unequal growth. Therefore the periodic movements of the
cotyledons of 'O. corniculata' depend on two distinct but conjoint actions,
namely, the expansion of the cells of the pulvinus and on the growth of the
upper part of the petiole, including the base of the blade.

Lotus Jacoboeus.--The seedlings of this plant present a case parallel to
that of Oxalis corniculata in some respects, and in others unique, as far
as we have seen. The cotyledons during the first 4 or 5 days of their life
do not exhibit any plain nocturnal movement; but afterwards they stand
vertically or almost vertically up at night. There is, however, some degree
of variability in this respect, apparently dependent on the season and on
the degree to which they have been illuminated during
[page 122]
the day. With older seedlings, having cotyledons 4 mm. in length, which
rise considerably at night, there is a well-developed pulvinus close to the
blade, colourless, and rather narrower than the rest of the petiole, from
which it is abruptly separated. It is formed of a mass of small cells of an
average length of .021 mm.; whereas the cells in the lower part of the
petiole are about .06 mm., and those in the blade from .034 to .04 mm. in
length. The epidermic cells in the lower part of the petiole project
conically, and thus differ in shape from those over the pulvinus.

Turning now to very young seedlings, the cotyledons of which do not rise at
night and are only from 2 to 2 ½ mm. in length, their petioles do not
exhibit any defined zone of small cells, destitute of chlorophyll and
differing in shape exteriorly from the lower ones. Nevertheless, the cells
at the place where a pulvinus will afterwards be developed are smaller
(being on an average .015 mm. in length) than those in the lower parts of
the same petiole, which gradually become larger in proceeding downwards,
the largest being .030 mm. in length. At this early age the cells of the
blade are about .027 mm. in length. We thus see that the pulvinus is formed
by the cells in the uppermost part of the petiole, continuing for only a
short time to increase in length, then being arrested in their growth,
accompanied by the loss of their chlorophyll grains; whilst the cells in
the lower part of the petiole continue for a long time to increase in
length, those of the epidermis becoming more conical. The singular fact of
the cotyledons of this plant not sleeping at first is therefore due to the
pulvinus not being developed at an early age.]

We learn from these two cases of Lotus and Oxalis, that the development of
a pulvinus follows from the growth of the cells over a small defined space
of the petiole being almost arrested at an early age. With Lotus Jacobaeus
the cells at first increase a little in length; in Oxalis corniculata they
decrease a little, owing to self-division. A mass of such small cells
forming a pulvinus, might therefore be either acquired or lost without any
special difficulty, by different species in the same natural genus: and we
know that
[page 123]
with seedlings of Trifolium, Lotus, and Oxalis some of the species have a
well-developed pulvinus, and others have none, or one in a rudimentary
condition. As the movements caused by the alternate turgescence of the
cells in the two halves of a pulvinus, must be largely determined by the
extensibility and subsequent contraction of their walls, we can perhaps
understand why a large number of small cells will be more efficient than a
small number of large cells occupying the same space. As a pulvinus is
formed by the arrestment of the growth of its cells, movements dependent on
their action may be long-continued without any increase in length of the
part thus provided; and such long-continued movements seem to be one chief
end gained by the development of a pulvinus. Long-continued movement would
be impossible in any part, without an inordinate increase in its length, if
the turgescence of the cells was always followed by growth.

Disturbance of the Periodic Movements of Cotyledons by Light.--The
hypocotyls and cotyledons of most seedling plants are, as is well known,
extremely heliotropic; but cotyledons, besides being heliotropic, are
affected paratonically (to use Sachs' expression) by light; that is, their
daily periodic movements are greatly and quickly disturbed by changes in
its intensity or by its absence. It is not that they cease to circumnutate
in darkness, for in all the many cases observed by us they continued to do
so; but the normal order of their movements in relation to the alternations
of day and night is much disturbed or quite annulled. This holds good with
species the cotyledons of which rise or sink so much at night that they may
be said to sleep, as well as with others which rise only a little. But
different species are affected in very different degrees by changes in the
light.
[page 124]

[For instance, the cotyledons of Beta vulgaris, Solanum lycopersicum,
Cerinthe major, and Lupinus luteus, when placed in darkness, moved down
during the afternoon and early night, instead of rising as they would have
done if they had been exposed to the light. All the individuals of the
Solanum did not behave in the same manner, for the cotyledons of one
circumnutated about the same spot between 2.30 and 10 P.M. The cotyledons
of a seedling of Oxalis corniculata, which was feebly illuminated from
above, moved downwards during the first morning in the normal manner, but
on the second morning it moved upwards. The cotyledons of Lotus Jacoboeus
were not affected by 4 h. of complete darkness, but when placed under a
double skylight and thus feebly illuminated, they quite lost their
periodical movements on the third morning. On the other hand, the
cotyledons of Cucurbita ovifera moved in the normal manner during a whole
day in darkness.

Seedlings of Githago segetum were feebly illuminated from above in the
morning before their cotyledons had expanded, and they remained closed for
the next 40 h. Other seedlings were placed in the dark after their
cotyledons had opened in the morning and these did not begin to close until
about 4 h. had elapsed. The cotyledons of Oxalis rosea sank vertically
downwards after being left for 1 h. 20 m. in darkness; but those of some
other species of Oxalis were not affected by several hours of darkness. The
cotyledons of several species of Cassia are eminently susceptible to
changes in the degree of light to which they are exposed: thus seedlings of
an unnamed S. Brazilian species (a large and beautiful tree) were brought
out of the hot-house and placed on a table in the middle of a room with two
north-east and one north-west window, so that they were fairly well
illuminated, though of course less so than in the hot-house, the day being
moderately bright; and after 36 m. the cotyledons which had been horizontal
rose up vertically and closed together as when asleep; after thus remaining
on the table for 1 h. 13 m. they began to open. The cotyledons of young
seedlings of another Brazilian species and of C. neglecta, treated in the
same manner, behaved similarly, excepting that they did not rise up quite
so much: they again became horizontal after about an hour.

Here is a more interesting case: seedlings of Cassia tora in two pots,
which had stood for some time on the table in the room just described, had
their cotyledons horizontal. One pot was now exposed for 2 h. to dull
sunshine, and the cotyledons
[page 125]
remained horizontal; it was then brought back to the table, and after 50 m.
the cotyledons had risen 68o above the horizon. The other pot was placed
during the same 2 h. behind a screen in the room, where the light was very
obscure, and the cotyledons rose 63o above the horizon; the pot was then
replaced on the table, and after 50 m. the cotyledons had fallen 33o. These
two pots with seedlings of the same age stood close together, and were
exposed to exactly the same amount of light, yet the cotyledons in the one
pot were rising, whilst those in the other pot were at the same time
sinking. This fact illustrates in a striking manner that their movements
are not governed by the actual amount, but by a change in the intensity or
degree of the light. A similar experiment was tried with two sets of
seedlings, both exposed to a dull light, but different in degree, and the
result was the same. The movements of the cotyledons of this Cassia are,
however, determined (as in many other cases) largely by habit or
inheritance, independently of light; for seedlings which had been
moderately illuminated during the day, were kept all night and on the
following morning in complete darkness; yet the cotyledons were partially
open in the morning and remained open in the dark for about 6 h. The
cotyledons in another pot, similarly treated on another occasion, were open
at 7 A.M. and remained open in the dark for 4 h. 30 m., after which time
they began to close. Yet these same seedlings, when brought in the middle
of the day from a moderately bright into only a moderately dull light
raised, as we have seen, their cotyledons high above the horizon.

Sensitiveness of Cotyledons to contact.--This subject does not possess much
interest, as it is not known that sensitiveness of this kind is of any
service to seedling plants. We have observed cases in only four genera,
though we have vainly observed the cotyledons of many others. The genus
cassia seems to be pre-eminent in this respect: thus, the cotyledons of C.
tora, when extended horizontally, were both lightly tapped with a very thin
twig for 3 m. and in the course of a few minutes they formed together an
angle of 90o, so that each had risen 45o. A single cotyledon of another
seedling was tapped in a like manner for 1 m., and it rose 27o in 9 m.; and
after eight additional minutes it had risen 10o more; the opposite
cotyledon, which was not tapped, hardly moved at all. The cotyledons in all
these cases became horizontal again in less than half an hour. The pulvinus
is the most sensitive part, for on slightly pricking three cotyledons with
a
[page 126]
pin in this part, they rose up vertically; but the blade was found also to
be sensitive, care having been taken that the pulvinus was not touched.
Drops of water placed quietly on these cotyledons produced no effect, but
an extremely fine stream of water, ejected from a syringe, caused them to
move upwards. When a pot of seedlings was rapidly hit with a stick and thus
jarred, the cotyledons rose slightly. When a minute drop of nitric acid was
placed on both pulvini of a seedling, the cotyledons rose so quickly that
they could easily be seen to move, and almost immediately afterwards they
began to fall; but the pulvini had been killed and became brown.

The cotyledons of an unnamed species of Cassia (a large tree from S.
Brazil) rose 31o in the course of 26 m. after the pulvini and the blades
had both been rubbed during 1 m. with a twig; but when the blade alone was
similarly rubbed the cotyledons rose only 8o. The remarkably long and
narrow cotyledons, of a third unnamed species from S. Brazil, did not move
when their blades were rubbed on six occasions with a pointed stick for 30
s. or for 1 m.; but when the pulvinus was rubbed and slightly pricked with
a pin, the cotyledons rose in the course of a few minutes through an angle
of 60o. Several cotyledons of C. neglecta (likewise from S. Brazil) rose in
from 5 m. to 15 m. to various angles between 16o and 34o, after being
rubbed during 1 m. with a twig. Their sensitiveness is retained to a
somewhat advanced age, for the cotyledons of a little plant of C. neglecta,
34 days old and bearing three true leaves, rose when lightly pinched
between the finger and thumb. Some seedlings were exposed for 30 m. to a
wind (temp. 50o F.) sufficiently strong to keep the cotyledons vibrating,
but this to our surprise did not cause any movement. The cotyledons of four
seedlings of the Indian C. glauca were either rubbed with a thin twig for 2
m. or were lightly pinched: one rose 34o; a second only 6o; a third 13o; and
a fourth 17o. A cotyledon of C. florida similarly treated rose 9o; one of
C. corymbosa rose 7 1/2o, and one of the very distinct C. mimosoides only
6o. Those of C. pubescens did not appear to be in the least sensitive; nor
were those of C. nodosa, but these latter are rather thick and fleshy, and
do not rise at night or go to sleep.

Smithia sensitiva.--This plant belongs to a distinct sub-order of the
Leguminosae from Cassia. Both cotyledons of an oldish seedling, with the
first true leaf partially unfolded, were rubbed for 1 m. with a fine twig,
and in 5 m. each rose 32o; they
[page 127]
remained in this position for 15 m., but when looked at again 40 m. after
the rubbing, each had fallen 14o. Both cotyledons of another and younger
seedling were lightly rubbed in the same manner for 1 m., and after an
interval of 32 m. each had risen 30o. They were hardly at all sensitive to
a fine jet of water. The cotyledons of S. Pfundii, an African water plant,
are thick and fleshy; they are not sensitive and do not go to sleep.

Mimosa pudica and albida.--The blades of several cotyledons of both these
plants were rubbed or slightly scratched with a needle during 1 m. or 2 m.;
but they did not move in the least. When, however, the pulvini of six
cotyledons of M. pudica were thus scratched, two of them were slightly
raised. In these two cases perhaps the pulvinus was accidentally pricked,
for on pricking the pulvinus of another cotyledon it rose a little. It thus
appears that the cotyledons of Mimosa are less sensitive than those of the
previously mentioned plants.*

Oxalis sensitiva.--The blades and pulvini of two cotyledons, standing
horizontally, were rubbed or rather tickled for 30 s. with a fine split
bristle, and in 10 m. each had risen 48o; when looked at again in 35 m.
after being rubbed they had risen 4o more; after 30 additional minutes they
were again horizontal. On hitting a pot rapidly with a stick for 1 m., the
cotyledons of two seedlings were considerably raised in the course of 11 m.
A pot was carried a little distance on a tray and thus jolted; and the
cotyledons of four seedlings were all raised in 10 m.; after 17 m. one had
risen 56o, a second 45o, a third almost 90o, and a fourth 90o. After an
additional interval of 40 m. three of them had re-expanded to a
considerable extent. These observations were made before we were aware at
what an extraordinarily rapid rate the cotyledons circumnutate, and are
therefore liable to error. Nevertheless it is extremely improbable that the
cotyledons in the eight cases given, should all have been rising at the
time when they were irritated. The cotyledons of Oxalis Valdiviana and
rosea were rubbed and did not exhibit any sensitiveness.]

Finally, there seems to exist some relation between

* The sole notice which we have met with on the sensitiveness of
cotyledons, relates to Mimosa; for Aug. P. De Candolle says ('Phys. Vég.,'
1832, tom. ii. p. 865), "les cotyledons du M. pudica tendent à se raprocher
par leurs faces supérieures lorsqu'on les irrite."
[page 128]

the habit of cotyledons rising vertically at night or going to sleep, and
their sensitiveness, especially that of their pulvini, to a touch; for all
the above-named plants sleep at night. On the other hand, there are many
plants the cotyledons of which sleep, and are not in the least sensitive.
As the cotyledons of several species of Cassia are easily affected both by
slightly diminished light and by contact, we thought that these two kinds
of sensitiveness might be connected; but this is not necessarily the case,
for the cotyledons of Oxalis sensitiva did not rise when kept on one
occasion for 1 ½ h., and on a second occasion for nearly 4 h., in a dark
closet. Some other cotyledons, as those of Githago segetum, are much
affected by a feeble light, but do not move when scratched by a needle.
That with the same plant there is some relation between the sensitiveness
of its cotyledons and leaves seems highly probable, for the above described
Smithia and Oxalis have been called sensitiva, owing to their leaves being
sensitive; and though the leaves of the several species of Cassia are not
sensitive to a touch, yet if a branch be shaken or syringed with water,
they partially assume their nocturnal dependent position. But the relation
between the sensitiveness to contact of the cotyledons and of the leaves of
the same plant is not very close, as may be inferred from the cotyledons of
Mimosa pudica being only slightly sensitive, whilst the leaves are well
known to be so in the highest degree. Again, the leaves of Neptunia
oleracea are very sensitive to a touch, whilst the cotyledons do not appear
to be so in any degree.
[page 129]





CHAPTER III.

SENSITIVENESS OF THE APEX OF THE RADICLE TO CONTACT AND TO OTHER IRRITANTS.

Manner in which radicles bend when they encounter an obstacle in the soil--
Vicia faba, tips of radicles highly sensitive to contact and other
irritants--Effects of too high a temperature--Power of discriminating
between objects attached on opposite sides--Tips of secondary radicles
sensitive--Pisum, tips of radicles sensitive--Effects of such sensitiveness
in overcoming geotropism--Secondary radicles--Phaseolus, tips of radicles
hardly sensitive to contact, but highly sensitive to caustic and to the
removal of a slice--Tropaeolum--Gossypium--Cucurbita--Raphanus--Aesculus,
tip not sensitive to slight contact, highly sensitive to caustic--Quercus,
tip highly sensitive to contact--Power of discrimination--Zea, tip highly
sensitive, secondary radicles--Sensitiveness of radicles to moist air--
Summary of chapter.

IN order to see how the radicles of seedlings would pass over stones,
roots, and other obstacles, which they must incessantly encounter in the
soil, germinating beans (Vicia faba) were so placed that the tips of the
radicles came into contact, almost rectangularly or at a high angle, with
underlying plates of glass. In other cases the beans were turned about
whilst their radicles were growing, so that they descended nearly
vertically on their own smooth, almost flat, broad upper surfaces. The
delicate root-cap, when it first touched any directly opposing surface, was
a little flattened transversely; the flattening soon became oblique, and in
a few hours quite disappeared, the apex now pointing at right angles, or at
nearly right angles, to its former course. The radicle then seemed to glide
in its new direction over the surface which had opposed
[page 130]
it, pressing on it with very little force. How far such abrupt changes in
its former course are aided by the circumnutation of the tip must be left
doubtful. Thin slips of wood were cemented on more or less steeply inclined
glass-plates, at right angles to the radicles which were gliding down them.
Straight lines had been painted along the growing terminal part of some of
these radicles, before they met the opposing slip of wood; and the lines
became sensibly curved in 2 h. after the apex had come into contact with
the slips. In one case of a radicle, which was growing rather slowly, the
root-cap, after encountering a rough slip of wood at right angles, was at
first slightly flattened transversely: after an interval of 2 h. 30 m. the
flattening became oblique; and after an additional 3 hours the flattening
had wholly disappeared, and the apex now pointed at right angles to its
former course. It then continued to grow in its new direction alongside the
slip of wood, until it came to the end of it, round which it bent
rectangularly. Soon afterwards when coming to the edge of the plate of
glass, it was again bent at a large angle, and descended perpendicularly
into the damp sand.

When, as in the above cases, radicles encountered an obstacle at right
angles to their course, the terminal growing part became curved for a
length of between .3 and .4 of an inch (8-10 mm.), measured from the apex.
This was well shown by the black lines which had been previously painted on
them. The first and most obvious explanation of the curvature is, that it
results merely from the mechanical resistance to the growth of the radicle
in its original direction. Nevertheless, this explanation did not seem to
us satisfactory. The radicles did not present the appearance of having been
subjected to a sufficient pressure to account for
[page 131]
their curvature; and Sachs has shown* that the growing part is more rigid
than the part immediately above which has ceased to grow, so that the
latter might have been expected to yield and become curved as soon as the
apex encountered an unyielding object; whereas it was the stiff growing
part which became curved. Moreover, an object which yields with the
greatest ease will deflect a radicle: thus, as we have seen, when the apex
of the radicle of the bean encountered the polished surface of extremely
thin tin-foil laid on soft sand, no impression was left on it, yet the
radicle became deflected at right angles. A second explanation occurred to
us, namely, that even the gentlest pressure might check the growth of the
apex, and in this case growth could continue only on one side, and thus the
radicle would assume a rectangular form; but this view leaves wholly
unexplained the curvature of the upper part, extending for a length of 8-10
mm.

We were therefore led to suspect that the apex was sensitive to contact,
and that an effect was transmitted from it to the upper part of the
radicle, which was thus excited to bend away from the touching object. As a
little loop of fine thread hung on a tendril or on the petiole of a
leaf-climbing plant, causes it to bend, we thought that any small hard
object affixed to the tip of a radicle, freely suspended and growing in
damp air, might cause it to bend, if it were sensitive, and yet would not
offer any mechanical resistance to its growth. Full details will be given
of the experiments which were tried, as the result proved remarkable. The
fact of the apex of a radicle being sensitive to contact has never been
observed, though, as we shall

* 'Arbeiten Bot. Inst. Würzburg,' Heft iii. 1873, p. 398.

[page 132]
hereafter see, Sachs discovered that the radicle a little above the apex is
sensitive, and bends like a tendril towards the touching object. But when
one side of the apex is pressed by any object, the growing part bends away
from the object; and this seems a beautiful adaptation for avoiding
obstacles in the soil, and, as we shall see, for following the lines of
least resistance. Many organs, when touched, bend in one fixed direction,
such as the stamens of Berberis, the lobes of Dionaea, etc.; and many
organs, such as tendrils, whether modified leaves or flower-peduncles, and
some few stems, bend towards a touching object; but no case, we believe, is
known of an organ bending away from a touching object.

Sensitiveness of the Apex of the Radicle of Vicia faba.--Common beans,
after being soaked in water for 24 h., were pinned with the hilum downwards
(in the manner followed by Sachs), inside the cork lids of glass-vessels,
which were half filled with water; the sides and the cork were well
moistened, and light was excluded. As soon as the beans had protruded
radicles, some to a length of less than a tenth of an inch, and others to a
length of several tenths, little squares or oblongs of card were affixed to
the short sloping sides of their conical tips. The squares therefore
adhered obliquely with reference to the longitudinal axis of the radicle;
and this is a very necessary precaution, for if the bits of card
accidentally became displaced, or were drawn by the viscid matter employed
so as to adhere parallel to the side of the radicle, although only a little
way above the conical apex, the radicle did not bend in the peculiar manner
which we are here considering. Squares of about the 1/20th of an inch (i.e.
about 1 ½ mm.), or oblong bits of nearly the same size, were found to
[page 133]
be the most convenient and effective. We employed at first ordinary thin
card, such as visiting cards, or bits of very thin glass, and various other
objects; but afterwards sand-paper was chiefly employed, for it was almost
as stiff as thin card, and the roughened surface favoured its adhesion. At
first we generally used very thick gum-water; and this of course, under the
circumstances, never dried in the least; on the contrary, it sometimes
seemed to absorb vapour, so that the bits of card became separated by a
layer of fluid from the tip. When there was no such absorption and the card
was not displaced, it acted well and caused the radicle to bend to the
opposite side. I should state that thick gum-water by itself induces no
action. In most cases the bits of card were touched with an extremely small
quantity of a solution of shellac in spirits of wine, which had been left
to evaporate until it was thick; it then set hard in a few seconds, and
fixed the bits of card well. When small drops of the shellac were placed on
the tips without any card, they set into hard little beads, and these acted
like any other hard object, causing the radicles to bend to the opposite
side. Even extremely minute beads of the shellac occasionally acted in a
slight degree, as will hereafter be described. But that it was the cards
which chiefly acted in our many trials, was proved by coating one side of
the tip with a little bit of goldbeaters' skin (which by itself hardly
acts), and then fixing a bit of card to the skin with shellac which never
came into contact with the radicle: nevertheless the radicle bent away from
the attached card in the ordinary manner.

Some preliminary trials were made, presently to be described, by which the
proper temperature was determined, and then the following experiments were
made. It should be premised that the beans were
[page 134]
always fixed to the cork-lids, for the convenience of manipulation, with
the edge from which the radicle and plumule protrudes, outwards; and it
must be remembered that owing to what we have called Sachs' curvature, the
radicles, instead of growing perpendicularly downwards, often bend
somewhat, even as much

Fig. 65. Vicia faba: A, radicle beginning to bend from the attached little
square of card; B, bent at a rectangle; C, bent into a circle or loop, with
the tip beginning to bend downwards through the action of geotropism.

as about 45o inwards, or under the suspended bean. Therefore when a square
of card was fixed to the apex in front, the bowing induced by it coincided
with Sachs' curvature, and could be distinguished from it only by being
more strongly pronounced or by occurring more quickly. To avoid this source
of doubt, the squares
[page 135]
were fixed either behind, causing a curvature in direct opposition to that
of Sachs', or more commonly to the right or left sides. For the sake of
brevity, we will speak of the bits of card, etc., as fixed in front, or
behind, or laterally. As the chief curvature of the radicle is at a little
distance from the apex, and as the extreme terminal and basal portions are
nearly straight, it is possible to estimate in a rough manner the amount of
curvature by an angle; and when it is said that the radicle became
deflected at any angle from the perpendicular, this implies that the apex
was turned upwards by so many degrees from the downward direction which it
would naturally have followed, and to the side opposite to that to which
the card was affixed. That the reader may have a clear idea of the kind of
movement excited by the bits of attached card, we append here accurate
sketches of three germinating beans thus treated, and selected out of
several specimens to show the gradations in the degrees of curvature. We
will now give in detail a series of experiments, and afterwards a summary
of the results.

[In the first 12 trials, little squares or oblongs of sanded card, 1.8 mm.
in length, and 1.5 or only 0.9 mm. in breadth (i.e. .071 of an inch in
length and .059 or .035 of an inch in breadth) were fixed with shellac to
the tips of the radicles. In the subsequent trials the little squares were
only occasionally measured, but were of about the same size.

(1.) A young radicle, 4 mm. in length, had a card fixed behind: after 9 h.
deflected in the plane in which the bean is flattened, 50o from the
perpendicular and from the card, and in opposition to Sachs' curvature: no
change next morning, 23 h. from the time of attachment.

(2.) Radicle 5.5 mm. in length, card fixed behind: after 9 h. deflected in
the plane of the bean 20o from the perpendicular and from the card, and in
opposition to Sachs' curvature: after 23 h. no change.
[page 136]

(3.) Radicle 11 mm. in length, card fixed behind: after 9 h. deflected in
the plane of the bean 40o from the perpendicular and from the card, and in
opposition to Sachs' curvature. The tip of the radicle more curved than the
upper part, but in the same plane. After 23 h. the extreme tip was slightly
bent towards the card; the general curvature of the radicle remaining the
same.

(4.) Radicle 9 mm. long, card fixed behind and a little laterally: after 9
h. deflected in the plane of the bean only about 7o or 8o from the
perpendicular and from the card, in opposition to Sachs' curvature. There
was in addition a slight lateral curvature directed partly from the card.
After 23 h. no change.

(5.) Radicle 8 mm. long, card affixed almost laterally: after 9 h.
deflected 30o from the perpendicular, in the plane of the bean and in
opposition to Sachs' curvature; also deflected in a plane at right angles
to the above one, 20o from the perpendicular: after 23 h. no change.

(6.) Radicle 9 mm. long, card affixed in front: after 9 h. deflected in the
plane of the bean about 40o from the vertical, away from the card and in
the direction of Sachs' curvature. Here therefore we have no evidence of
the card being the cause of the deflection, except that a radicle never
moves spontaneously, as far as we have seen, as much as 40o in the course
of 9 h. After 23 h. no change.

(7.) Radicle 7 mm. long, card affixed to the back: after 9 h. the terminal
part of the radicle deflected in the plane of the bean 20o from the
vertical, away from the card and in opposition to Sachs' curvature. After
22 h. 30 m. this part of the radicle had become straight.

(8.) Radicle 12 mm. long, card affixed almost laterally: after 9 h.
deflected laterally in a plane at right angles to that of the bean between
40o and 50o from the vertical and from the card. In the plane of the bean
itself the deflection amounted to 8o or 9o from the vertical and from the
card, in opposition to Sachs' curvature. After 22 h. 30 m. the extreme tip
had become slightly curved towards the card.

(9.) Card fixed laterally: after 11 h. 30 m. no effect, the radicle being
still almost vertical.

(10.) Card fixed almost laterally: after 11 h. 30 m. deflected 90o from the
vertical and from the card, in a plane intermediate between that of the
bean itself and one at right
[page 137]
angles to it. Radicle consequently partially deflected from Sachs'
curvature.

(11.) Tip of radicle protected with goldbeaters' skin, with a square of
card of the usual dimensions affixed with shellac: after 11 h. greatly
deflected in the plane of the bean, in the direction of Sachs' curvature,
but to a much greater degree and in less time than ever occurs
spontaneously.

(12.) Tip of radicle protected as in last case: after 11 h. no effect, but
