IV

A PUZZLED WORLD

For a moment blank amazement gripped the four. Then amazement gave way
to genuine apprehension. Were they insane to imagine that this man of
another world had spoken to them in their own language? Each looked at
the other, and was astounded to see that all had heard the same thing.

Presently the stranger spoke again; if anything, the kindly smile on his
face became even broader. "Suppose we postpone explaining how I am able
to use your tongue. It will be easier for you to understand after you
have been with us a while." He spoke slowly and carefully, yet with a
faint lisp, much as some infant prodigy might speak.

But there was no doubt that he had really done it. The doctor managed to
clear his throat.

"You are right," said he, with vastly less assurance than the amazing
stranger. "We will try to understand things in the order you think best
to present them. You--should know best."

Kinney introduced himself by name and profession, also the other three.
The stranger nodded affably to each. "You may call me Estra," said he,
pronouncing it "Ethtra." "There is no occupation on the Earth
corresponding with mine, but in my spare moments I am an astronomer like
yourself."

The doctor silently marveled. He had not told the stranger about his
hobby. Meanwhile the architect attempted to break the ice even finer.

"We take it for granted," said she rather nervously, "that your people
are somewhat further advanced than us on the earth. However, we expect
to be given credit for having visited your planet before you visited
ours!" She said this with an engaging smile which won an instant
response; the Venusian's lips almost lost their curves in his generous
effort.

"You will find that we greatly respect all that you have accomplished,"
he declared earnestly. "As for your apparatus"--glancing at the cube--
"you have the advantage on the earth of certain chemical elements which
are entirely lacking here, otherwise we should have called upon you long
ago."

He slipped a panel of glass to one side. "Step in quickly!" he
exclaimed, gasping; and the four obeyed him without thought. It was only
when the panel was replaced that they noticed the floor of the cage; it
was of clear glass, like the sides, and looked totally incapable of
bearing their combined weight.

The Venusian smiled at Smith's worried look. "The material is amply
strong enough," said he. "I am only concerned about your machine there.
Is it safe to be left alone?"

"So far as we know, yes," answered Van Emmon, who did not feel quite as
much confidence in the stranger as the rest.

"Then we can go down at once." With these words the man in satin turned
to a small black box in one wall of the elevator and touched a button.
[Footnote: For details of this and other matters of an electrical and
mechanical nature, the technical reader is referred to Mr. Smith's
reports to the A. S. M. E.]

Instantly the car began to descend, at first slowly and then with
swiftly increasing velocity. By the time the explorers had accustomed
their eyes to the sudden semi-darkness, the cage was dropping at such a
speed that the air fairly sang past its sides.

Far overhead was a square, black shadow in the waxlike crust which they
had left; it was the shadow of the cube. All about them was a dimly lit
network of braces, arches and semitransparent columns; to all
appearances the system seemed to support the crust. Billie whirled upon
the Venusian:

"I've got it now! The whole globe is covered with glass!"

Estra smiled his approval. "For thousands upon thousands of centuries,
my friend. The thing was done when our ancestors first suspected that
our planet was doomed to come so near the sun. It was the only way we
could protect ourselves from the heat."

"Great!" exploded the doctor, admiration overcoming regret that he had
not thought of it himself. But Smith had other thoughts:

"How long did it take to finish the job? And what did it cost?"

"Two centuries; and about twice the cost of your last war. I need only
suggest to you that we colored the material so as to reflect most of the
heat. That is why the material looks blue from below, although pink from
above."

"Say"--from Billie--"how long are we to keep on dropping like this?"

"We will arrive in a moment or two," answered the smiling one. "The roof
is raised several miles above the sea-level in order to cover all the
mountains."

By this time the four were able to make out things pretty well. They saw
that the dimness was only relative; the Venusian world was actually as
well lighted as any part of the earth on a cloudy day. And they saw that
they were descending in a locality of astonishing beauty.

The stranger halted the car so that they could inspect the scene as
though from an airplane. In no way did the landscape resemble that of
the earth. To begin with, pillars of huge dimensions were placed every
quarter-mile or so; it was these that supported the intricate archwork
above. They were made of the same translucent stuff as the crust, but
had a light topaz tint. The Venusian said:

"You will not need to be told that the science of metallurgy has
advanced quite far with us. All our metals can be made transparent, if
we like; those pillars are colored variously in different regions so as
to be clearly distinguishable and prevent collisions of flying
apparatus."

But Van Emmon and Billie were both more interested in what lay between
the columns. They scarcely noticed that there were no people in sight at
the time. The ground was covered with an indescribable wealth of color;
and it was only by a close examination that the buildings could be
distinguished as such.

For they were all made of that semi-transparent stuff. Of every
conceivable tint and shade, the structure showed an utter lack of
uniformity in size, shape or arrangement. Moreover, the ground was
absolutely packed with them; they spread as far as the eye could reach.

But if there was profusion, there also was confusion--apparently.
Streets ran anywhere and everywhere; there was no visible system to
anything. And where there was no space for a building, invariably there
was a shrub, a bush or a small tree of some kind, all in full flower.
The only sign of regularity to be seen was in the roofs--practically all
of them were flat. Whether the building was some rambling, loosely
gathered agglomeration of vari-colored wings, or a single, towering
skyscraper of one tint, almost inevitably it was crowned with a
perfectly level surface.

"I see," said Van Emmon, thoughtfully. "You have no rain."

"Precisely"--from Estra. "We have the air completely under our control.
We give our vegetation artificial showers when we think it should have
it, not when nature wills; and similarly we use electricity instead of
sunlight that we may stimulate its growth."

"In short"--Van Emmon put it as the car slid slowly down the remaining
distance--"in short, you have abolished the weather."

The Venusian nodded. "And I'll save you the trouble of suggesting," he
added, "that we are nothing more nor less than hothouse people!"



V

THE HUMAN CONSERVATORY


"But there is this difference," he cautioned as they stepped out of the
elevator into a sort of a plaza, "that, whereas you people on the earth
have only begun to use the hothouse principle, we here have perfected
it.

"I suggest that you waste no time looking for faults."

Van Emmon stared at the doctor. "How does this idea fit your theory,
Kinney--that Venus is simply the earth plus several thousand extra
generations of civilization?"

"Fit?" echoed the doctor. "Fits like a glove. We humans are fast
becoming a race of indoor-people despite all the various "back-to-
nature" movements. Look at the popularity of inclosed automobiles, for
example.

"The only thing that surprises me"--turning to their guide--"is that
you use your legs for their original purpose."

Estra smiled, and pointed out something standing a few feet away. It was
a small, shuttle-shaped air-craft, with clear glass sides which had
actually made them overlook it at first. Peering closer they saw that
the plaza and surrounding streets were nearly filled with these all but
invisible cars.

The Venusian explained. "You marvel that I use my legs and walk the same
as you do. I am glad you have brought up this point, because it is a
fact that our people use mechanisms instead of bodily energy, almost
altogether. These cars you see are universally used for transportation.
I am one of the very few who appreciate the value of natural exercise."

"Do you mean to say," demanded Van Emmon, "that the average Venusian
does no walking?"

"Not a mile a year," said Estra gravely.

"Just what he is obliged to do indoors from room to room." And he
involuntarily glanced down at his own extremely thin legs.

The architect's eyes widened with a growing understanding. "I see now,"
she murmured. "That's why there was no one else to greet us."

The Venusian smiled gratefully. "We thought it best. You'd have been
shocked outright, I am sure, had you been introduced to a representative
Venusian without any explanation."

They fell silent. Still, without moving from the point where they had
left the elevator, the four from the earth examined the surrounding
buildings in a renewed effort to see some system in their arrangement.
Directly in front of them was a particularly large structure. Like all
the rest, it was of hopelessly irregular design, yet it had a large
domed central portion which gave it the appearance of an auditorium; and
the effect was further borne out by a subdued humming sound which seemed
to come from it.

Smith asked Estra if it were a hall.

"Yes and no," was the answer. "It fills the purpose of a hall, but is
not built on the hall plan." And Smith tried to stare through the
translucent walls of the thing.

The other buildings within immediate reach were of every possible
appearance. Some would have passed for cottages, others for stores,
still others for the most fanciful of studios. And nowhere was there
such a thing as a sign, even at the street corners, much less on a
building.

"Not that we would be able to read your signs, if you had them,"
commented the doctor, "but I'd like to know how your people find their
way without something of that kind to guide them."

Estra's smile did not change. "That is something you will understand
better before long," said he, "provided you feel ready to explore a
little further."

The four looked at each other in question, and suddenly it struck them
all that they were a rather pugnacious-looking crew in their cumbersome
suits of armor and formidable helmets. The doctor turned to Estra.

"You ought to know"--he appealed--"whether we can take off these suits
now."

"It would be best," was the reply. "You will find the air and
temperature decidedly more warm and moist than what you have been used
to, but otherwise practically the same. There is a slightly larger
proportion of oxygen; that is all. Just imagine you are in a hothouse."

Smith and the doctor were already discarding their suits. Van Emmon and
Billie followed more slowly; the one, because he did not share the
doctor's confidence in their guide; the other, because of a sudden
shyness in his presence. The Venusian noted this.

"You need not feel any embarrassment," said he to Billie's vast
astonishment. "There is no distinction here between the dress of the two
sexes." And again all four marveled that he should know so much about
them.

Once out of the armor the visitors felt much more at ease. The slightly
reduced gravitation gave them a sense of lightness and freedom which
more than balanced the junglelike oppressiveness of the air. They found
themselves guarding against a certain exuberance; perhaps it was the
extra oxygen, too.

They strode toward the large structure directly ahead. At its entrance--
a wide, square portal which opened into a fan-shaped lobby--Estra paused
and smiled apologetically--as he mopped his forehead and upper lip with
a paper handkerchief, which he immediately dropped into a small, trap-
covered opening in the wall at his side.

These little doors, by the way, were to be seen at frequent intervals
wherever they went. Incidentally not a scrap of paper or other refuse
was to be noted anywhere--streets and all were spotless.

As for Estra--"I am not accustomed to moving at such speed," he
explained his discomfort. "If you do not mind, please walk a little more
leisurely."

They took their time about passing through this lobby. For one thing,
Estra said there would have to be a small delay; and for another, the
walls and ceilings of the space were most remarkably ornamented. They
were fairly covered with what appeared, at first glance, to be
absolutely lifelike paintings and sculptures. They were so arranged as
to strengthen the structural lines of the place, and, of course, they
were of more interest to Billie than to the others. [Footnote: The
specialist in architecture and related subjects is referred to E.
Williams Jackson's report to the A.I.A., for details of these basrelief
photographs.]

Desiring to examine some of the work far overhead, Billie clambered up
on a convenient pedestal in order to look more closely. She took the
strength of things for granted, and put her weight too heavily on a
molding on the edge of the pedestal; with the result that there was a
sharp crack; and the girl struck the floor in a heap. She got to her
feet before Van Emmon could reach her side, but her face was white with
pain.

"Sprained--ankle," said she between set lips, and proceeded to stump up
and down the lobby, "to limber up," as she said, although her three
companions offered to do anything that might relieve her.

To the surprise of all, Estra leaned against a pillar and watched the
whole affair with perfect composure. He made no offer of help, said
nothing whatever in sympathy. In a moment he noticed the looks they gave
him--their stares.

"I must beg your pardon," he said, still smiling. "I am sorry this
happened; it will not be easy to explain.

"But you will find all Venusians very unsympathetic. Not that we are
hard hearted, but because we simply lost the power of sympathy.

"We do not know what pity is. We have eliminated everything that is
disagreeable, all that is painful, from our lives to such an extent that
there is never any cause for pity."

The three young people could say nothing in answer. The doctor, however,
spoke thoughtfully:

"Perhaps it is superfluous; but--tell me--have you done away with
injustice, Estra?"

"That is just the point," agreed the Venusian. "Justice took the place
of pity and mercy; it was so long ago I am barely able to appreciate
your own views on the subject."

Billie, her ankle somewhat better, turned to examine other work; but at
the moment another Venusian approached from the upper end of the lobby.
Walking slowly, he carried four small parcels with a great deal of
effort, and the explorers had time to scrutinize him closely.

He was built much like Estra, but shorter, and with a little more flesh
about the torso. His forehead bulged directly over his eyes, instead of
above his ears, as did Estra's; also his eyes were smaller and not as
far apart. His whole expression was equally kind and affable, despite a
curiously shriveled appearance of his lips; they made the front of his
mouth quite flat, and served to take attention away from his pitifully
thin legs.

Estra greeted him with a cheery phrase, in a language decidedly
different from any the explorers were familiar with. In a way, it was
Spanish, or, rather, the pure Castilian tongue; but it seemed to be
devoid of dental consonants. It was very agreeable to listen to.

Estra, however, had taken the four parcels from his comrade, and now
presented him to the four, saying that his name was Kalara, and that he
was a machinist. "He cannot use your tongue," said the Venusian. "Few of
us have mastered it. There are difficulties.

"As for these machines"--unwrapping the parcels--"I must apologize in
advance for certain defects in their design. I invented them under
pressure, so to speak, having to perfect the whole idea in the rather
short time that has elapsed since you, doctor, began the sky-car."

"And what is the purpose of the machines?" from Billie, as she was about
to accept the first of the devices from the Venusian.

For some reason he appeared to be especially interested in the girl, and
addressed half of his remarks to her; and it was while his smiling gaze
was fixed upon her eyes that he gave the answer:

"They are to serve"--very carefully--"partly as lexicons and partly as
grammars. In short, they are mechanical interpreters."



VI

THE TRANSLATING MACHINES


"First, let me remind you," said the Venusian, "of our lack of certain
elements that you are familiar with on the Earth. We have never been
able to improve on the common telephone. That is why we must still
assemble in person whenever we have any collective activity; while on
the Earth the time will come when your wireless principle will be
developed to the point of transmitting both light and sound; and after
that there will be little need of gatherings of any sort."

Then he explained the apparatus. It consisted of a miniature head-
telephone, connected to a small, metallic case the size of a cigar-box,
the cover of which was a transparent diaphragm. Estra did not open the
case, but showed the mechanism through the cover.

"Essentially, this is a 'word-for-word' device," said he, pointing to a
swiftly revolving dial within the box. "On one face of that dial are
some ten thousand word-images, made by vibration, after the phonograph
method. Directly opposite, on the other face, are the corresponding
words in the other language. The disk is rotating at such an enormous
speed that, for all practical purposes, any word which may chance to be
spoken will be translated almost instantaneously."

He indicated two delicate, many-tentacled "feelers," as he called them,
one on each face of the disk. One of these "felt" the proper word-image
as it whirled beneath, while the other established an electrical contact
with the corresponding waves beneath, at the same time exciting a
complicated-looking talking machine.

"That," commented Estra, "is not so easy to explain. It transforms this
literal translation into an idiomatic one. Perhaps you will understand
its workings a little later when you learn how and why I am able to use
your own language."

By this time the four had reached the point where nothing could surprise
them. They were becoming accustomed to the unaccustomed. Had they been
told that the Venusians had abolished speech altogether, they would have
felt disappointed, but not incredulous. However, the doctor thought of
something.

"Have you any extra 'records,' to be used in case we visit some other
nations while we are here?"

For just a second the Venusian was puzzled; then his smile broadened.
"The one record will do," said he, "wherever you go."

"A universal language!" Billie's eyes sparkled with interest.

"Long, long ago," Estra said. "It was established soon after our league
of nations was formed."

"Does the league actually prevent war and promote peace?" demanded Van
Emmon. This had been a disputed question when the four left the earth.

"We no longer have a league of nations," said their guide slowly. And
instantly the four were eying him eagerly. This was really refreshing,
to find that the Venusians were actually lacking in something.

"So it didn't work?" commented the doctor, disappointed.

But the Venusian's smile was still there. "It worked itself out," said
he. "We have no further use for a league. We have no more nations. We
are now--one."

And he helped them adjust the machines.

The cases were slung over their shoulders and the telephones clamped to
their ears. When all ready, Estra began to talk, and his voice came
nearly as sharp and clear through the apparatus as before. It was
modified by a metallic flatness, together with a certain amount of
mechanical noise in which a peculiar hissing was the most noticeable.
Otherwise he said:

"I am now using my own language. If I make any mistakes, you must not
blame the machine. It is as nearly perfect as I was able to make it."

He then asked them what blunders they noted. Billie, who was the most
enthusiastic about the thing, declared that they would have no trouble
in understanding; whereupon Estra quietly asked:

"Do you feel like going now to try them out?"

Once more an exchange of glances between the four from the earth.
Clearly the Venusians were extremely considerate people, to leave their
visitors in the care of the one man, apparently, who was able to make
them feel at home. There seemed to be no reason for uneasiness.

But Van Emmon still had his old misgivings about Estra. There was
something about the effeminate Venusian which irritated the big
geologist; it always does make a strong man suspicious to see a weaker
one show such self-confidence. Van Emmon drew the doctor and Billie
aside, while Smith and Estra went on with the test. Said Van Emmon:

"It just occurred to me that the cube might look pretty good to these
people. You remember what this chap said about their lack of some of our
chemicals. What do you think--is it really safe to put ourselves
entirely in their power?"

"You mean," said the doctor slowly, "that they might try to keep us here
rather than lose the cube?"

Van Emmon nodded gravely, but Billie had strong objections. "Estra
doesn't look like that sort," she declared vehemently.

"He's too good natured to be a crook; he needs a guardian rather than a
warden."

It flashed into the doctor's mind that many a woman had fallen in love
with a man merely because he seemed to be in need of some one to take
care of him.

That is, the self-reliant kind of woman; and Billie certainly was self-
reliant. Something of the same notion came vaguely to the geologist at
the same time; and with a vigor that was quite uncalled for, he urged:

"I say, 'safety first.' We shouldn't have left the cube unguarded. I
propose that one of us, at least, return to the surface while the others
attend this meeting--or trap, for all we know."

"All right," said Billie promptly. "Get Estra to show you how to use the
elevator, and wait for us in the vestibule."

Van Emmon's face flamed. "That isn't what I meant!" hotly. "If anybody
goes to the cube, it should be you, Billie!"

If Billie did not notice the use of her nickname, at least the doctor
did. The girl simply snorted.

"If you think for one second that I'm going to back out just because I'm
a woman, let me tell you that you're very badly mistaken!"

Van Emmon turned to the doctor appealingly, but the doctor took the
action personally. He shook his head. "I wouldn't miss this for
anything, Van. Estra looks safe to me. Go and ask Smith; maybe he is
willing to be the goat."

The geologist took one good look at the engineer's absorbed,
unquestioning manner as he listened to the Venusian, and gave up the
idea with a sigh. For a moment he was sour; then he smiled shyly.

"I'm more than anxious to meet the bunch myself," he admitted; and led
the way back to Estra. The Venusian looked at him with no change of
expression, although there was something very disconcerting in the
precocious wisdom of his eyes. Their very kindliness and serenity gave
him an appearance of superiority, such as only aggravated the
geologist's suspicions.

But there was nothing to do but to trust him. They followed him through
two sets of doors, which slid noiselessly open before them in response
to some mechanism operated by the Venusian's steps. This brought them to
another of the glass elevators, in which they descended perhaps ten
feet, stepping out of it onto a moving platform; this, in turn, extended
the length of a low dimly lighted passageway about a hundred yards long.
When they got off, they were standing in a small anteroom.

The Venusian paused and smiled at the four again. "Do you feel like
going on display now?" he asked; then added: "I should have said: 'Do
you feel like seeing Venus on display, for we all know more or less
about you already.'"

But the visitors were braced for the experience. Estra looked at each
approvingly, and then did something which made them wonder. He stood
stock still for perhaps a second, his eyes closed as though listening;
and then, without explanation, he led the way through an opal-glass door
into a brilliantly lighted space.

Next moment the explorers were standing in the midst of the people of
Venus.



VII

THE ULTIMATE RACE


The four were at the bottom of a huge, conelike pit, such as instantly
reminded the doctor of a medical clinic. The space where they stood was,
perhaps, twenty feet in diameter, while the walls enclosing the whole
hall were many hundreds of feet apart. And sloping up from the center,
on all sides, was tier upon tier of the most extraordinary seats in all
creation.

For each and every one of those thousands of Venusians was separately
enclosed in glass. Nowhere was there a figure to be seen who was not
installed in one of those small, transparent boxes, just large enough
for a single person. Moreover--and it came somewhat as a shock to the
four when they noted it--the central platform itself was both covered
and surrounded with the same material.

"Make yourselves at home," Estra was saying. He pointed to several
microphones within easy reach. "These are provided with my translators,
so when you are ready to open up conversation, go right ahead as though
you were among your own people." And he made himself comfortable in a
saddlelike chair, as much as to say that there was no hurry.

For a long time the explorers stood taking it in. The Venusians, without
exception, stared back at them with nearly equal curiosity. And despite
the extraordinary nature of the proceeding, this mutual scrutiny took
place in comparative silence; for while the glass gave a certain sense
of security to the newcomers, it also cut off all sound except that low
humming.

The nearest row of the people got their closest attention. Without
exception, they had the same general build as Estra; slim, delicate, and
anemic, they resembled a "ward full of convalescent consumptives," as
the doctor commented under his breath. Not one of them would ever give a
joke-smith material for a fat-man anecdote; at the same time there was
nothing feverish, nervous, or broken down in their appearance. "A pretty
lot of invalids," as Billie added to the doctor's remark.

Many observers would have been struck, first, by the extreme diversity
in the matter of dress. All wore skin-tight clothing, and much of it was
silky, like Estra's. But there was a bewildering assortment of colors,
and the most extraordinary decorations, or, rather, ornaments. So far as
dress went, there was no telling anything whatever about sex.

"Are they all men?" asked Billie, wondering, of Estra. The Venusian
shook his head with his invariable smile. "Nor all women either," said
he enigmatically.

But in many respects they were astonishingly alike. Almost to a soul
their upper lips were withered and flat. One and all had short,
emaciated-looking legs. Each and every one had a crop of really
luxuriant hair; the shades varied between the usual blonde and brunette,
with little of the reddishness so common on the earth; but there were no
