vasculose containing the fiber and other conjoined matter, known as
cellulose, between which and the woody stem is the pectose, or gum,
which causes the skin or bark, as a whole, fiber included, to adhere to
the wood. The Professor, therefore, proceeded to carefully investigate
the nature of these various substances, and in the result he found
that the vasculose and pectose were soluble in an alkali under certain
conditions, and that the cellulose was insoluble. He therefore dissolves
out the cutose, vasculose, and pectose by a very simple process,
obtaining the fiber clean, and free from all extraneous adherent matter,
ready for the spinner.

In order, however, to insure as a result a perfectly uniform and
marketable article, the Professor uses various chemicals at the several
stages of the process. These, however, are not administered haphazard,
or by rule of thumb, as has been the case in some processes bearing in
the same direction, and which have consequently failed, in the sense
that they have not yet taken their places as commercial successes. The
Professor, therefore, carefully examines the article which he has to
treat, and, according to its nature and the character of its components,
he determines the proportions of the various chemicals which he
introduces at the several stages. All chance of failure thus appears to
be eliminated, and the production of a fiber of uniform and reliable
quality removed from the region of doubt into that of certainty. The two
processes of M. Favier and M. Fremy have, therefore, been combined, and
machinery has been put up in France on a scale sufficiently large
to fairly approximate to practical working, and to demonstrate the
practicability of the combined inventions.

The experimental works are situated in the Route d'Orleans, Grand
Montrouge, just outside Paris, and a few days ago a series of
demonstrations were given there by Messrs. G.W.H. Brogden and Co., of
Gresham-house, London. The trials were carried out by M. Albert Alroy,
under the supervision of M. Urbain, who is Professor Fremy's chief
assistant and copatentee, and were attended by Dr. Forbes Watson, Mr.
M. Collyer, Mr. C.J. Taylor, late member of the General Assembly, New
Zealand, M. Barbe, M. Favier, Mr. G. Brogden, Mr. Caspar, and a number
of other gentlemen representing those interested in the question at
issue. The process, as carried out, consists in first treating the rhea
according to M. Favier's invention. The apparatus employed for this
purpose is very simple and inexpensive, consisting merely of a stout
deal trough or box, about 8 ft. long, 2 ft. wide, and 1 ft. 8 in. deep.
The box has a hinged lid and a false open bottom, under which steam is
admitted by a perforated pipe, there being an outlet for the condensed
water at one end of the box. Into this box the bundles of rhea were
placed, the lid closed, steam turned on, and in about twenty minutes it
was invariably found that the bark had been sufficiently softened to
allow of its being readily and rapidly stripped off by hand, together
with the whole of the fiber, in what may be called ribbons. Thus the
process of decortication is effectively accomplished in a few minutes,
instead of requiring, as it sometimes does in the retting process, days,
and even weeks, and being at the best attended with uncertainty as
to results, as is also the case when decortication is effected by
machinery.

Moreover, the retting process, which is simply steeping the cut plants
in water, is a delicate operation, requiring constant watching, to say
nothing of its serious inconvenience from a sanitary point of view, on
account of the pestilential emanations from the retteries. Decortication
by steam having been effected, the work of M. Favier ceases, and
the process is carried forward by M. Fremy. The ribbons having been
produced, the fiber in them has to be freed from the mucilaginous
secretions. To this end, after examination in the laboratory, they are
laid on metal trays, which are placed one above the other in a vertical
perforated metal cylinder. When charged, this cylinder is placed within
a strong iron cylinder, containing a known quantity of water, to which
an alkali is added in certain proportions. Within the cylinder is a
steam coil for heating the water, and, steam having been turned on, the
temperature is raised to a certain point, when the cylinder is closed
and made steam-tight. The process of boiling is continued under pressure
until the temperature--and consequently the steam pressure--within the
cylinder has attained a high degree.

On the completion of this part of the process, which occupies about
four hours, and upon which the success of the whole mainly depends,
the cementitious matter surrounding the fiber is found to have been
transformed into a substance easily dissolved. The fibrous mass is then
removed to a centrifugal machine, in which it is quickly deprived of its
surplus alkaline moisture, and it is then placed in a weak solution of
hydrochloric acid for a short time. It is then transferred to a bath
of pure cold water, in which it remains for about an hour, and it is
subsequently placed for a short time in a weak acid bath, after which it
is again washed in cold water, and dried for the market. Such are the
processes by which China grass may become a source of profit alike to
the cultivator and the spinner. A factory situate at Louviers has been
acquired, where there is machinery already erected for preparing the
fiber according to the processes we have described, at the rate of one
ton per day. There is also machinery for spinning the fiber into yarns.
These works were also visited by those gentlemen who were at the
experimental works at Montrouge, and who also visited the Government
laboratory in Paris, of which Professor Fremy is chief and M. Urbain
_sous-chef_, and where those gentlemen explained the details of their
process and made their visitors familiar with the progressive steps of
their investigations.

With regard to the rhea treated at Montrouge, we may observe that it was
grown at La Reolle, near Bordeaux. Some special experiments were also
carried out by Dr. Forbes Watson with some rhea grown by the Duke of
Wellington at Stratfield-saye, his Grace having taken an active interest
in the question for some years past. In all cases the rhea was used
green and comparatively freshly cut. One of the objects of Dr. Watson's
experiments was, by treating rhea cut at certain stages of growth,
to ascertain at which stage the plant yields the best fiber, and
consequently how many crops can be raised in the year with the best
advantage.

This question has often presented itself as one of the points to be
determined, and advantage has been taken of the present opportunity with
a view to the solution of the question. Mr. C.J. Taylor also took with
him a sample of New Zealand flax, which was successfully treated by
the process. On the whole, the conclusion is that the results of
the combined processes, so far as they have gone, are eminently
satisfactory, and justify the expectation that a large enterprise in the
cultivation and utilization of China grass is on the eve of being opened
up, not only in India and our colonies, but possibly also much nearer
home.

       *       *       *       *       *




APPARATUS FOR HEATING BY GAS.


This new heating apparatus consists of a cast iron box, E, provided with
an inclined cover, F, into which are fixed 100 copper tubes that are
arranged in several lines, and form a semi-cylindrical heating surface.
The box, E, is divided into two compartments (Fig. 5), so that the air
and gas may enter simultaneously either one or both of the compartments,
according to the quantity of heat it is desired to have. Regulation is
effected by means of the keys, G and G', which open the gas conduits
of the solid and movable disk, H, which serves as a regulator for
distributing air through the two compartments. This disk revolves by
hand and may be closed or opened by means of a screw to which it is
fixed.

Beneath the tubes that serve to burn the mixture of air and gas, there
is placed a metallic gauze, I, the object of which is to prevent the
flames from entering the fire place box. These tubes traverse a sheet
iron piece, J, which forms the surface of the fire place, and are
covered with a layer of asbestos filaments that serve to increase the
calorific power of the apparatus.

[Illustration: GOMEZ'S APPARATUS FOR HEATING BY GAS.

FIG. 1.--Front View. Scale of 0.25 to 1. FIG. 2.--Section through AB.
FIG.3.--Plan View. FIG. 4.--Section through CD. FIG. 5.--Transverse
Section through the Fireplace. Scale of 0.50 to 1.]

The cast iron box, E, is inclosed within a base of refractory clay, L,
which is surmounted by a reflector, M, of the same material, that is
designed to concentrate the heat and increase its radiation. This
reflector terminates above in a dome, in whose center is placed a
refractory clay box. This latter, which is round, is provided in the
center with a cylinder that is closed above. The box contains a large
number of apertures, which give passage to the products of combustion
carried along by the hot air. The carbonic acid which such products
contain is absorbed by a layer of quick-lime that has previously been
introduced into the box, N.

This heating apparatus, which is inclosed within a cast iron casing
similar to that of an ordinary gas stove, is employed without a chimney,
thus permitting of its being placed against the wall or at any other
point whatever in the room to be heated.--_Annales Industrielles_.

       *       *       *       *       *




IMPROVED GAS BURNER FOR SINGEING MACHINES.


Since the introduction of the process of gas-singeing in finishing
textiles, many improvements have been made in the construction of the
machines for this purpose as well as in that of the burners, for the
object of the latter must be to effect the singeing not only evenly and
thoroughly, but at the same time with a complete combustion of the gas
and avoidance of sooty deposits upon the cloth. The latter object is
attained by what are called atmospheric or Bunsen burners, and in which
the coal gas before burning is mixed with the necessary amount of
atmospheric air. The arrangement under consideration, patented abroad,
has this object specially in view. The main gas pipe of the machine is
shown at A, being a copper pipe closed at one end and having a tap at
the other. On this pipe the vertical pipes, C, are screwed at stated
intervals, each being in its turn provided with a tap near its base. On
the top of each vertical table the burner, IJ, is placed, whose upper
end spreads in the shape of a fan, and allows the gas to escape through
a slit or a number of minute holes. Over the tube, C, a mantle, E, is
slipped, which contains two holes, HG, on opposite sides, and made
nearly at the height of the outlet of the gas. When the gas passes out
of this and upward into the burner, it induces a current of air up
through the holes, HG, and carries it along with it. By covering these
holes with a loose adjustable collar, the amount of admissible air can
be regulated so that the flame is perfectly non-luminous, and therefore
containing no free particles of carbon or soot. The distance of the
vertical tubes, C; and of the fan-shaped burners is calculated so that
the latter touch each other, and thus a continuous flame is formed,
which is found to be the most effective for singeing cloth. Should it be
deemed advisable to singe only part of the cloth, or a narrow piece,
the arrangement admits of the taps, D, being turned off as
desired.--_Textile Manufacturer_.

[Illustration]

       *       *       *       *       *




SILAS' CHRONOPHORE.


In many industries there are operations that have to be repeated
at regular intervals, and, for this reason, the construction of an
apparatus for giving a signal, not only at the hour fixed, but also at
equal intervals, is a matter of interest. The question of doing this has
been solved in a very elegant way by Mr. Silas in the invention of the
apparatus which we represent in Fig. 1. It consists of a clock whose
dial is provided with a series of small pins. The hands are insulated
from the case and communicate with one of the poles of a pile contained
in the box. The case is connected with the other pole. A small vibrating
bell is interposed in the circuit. If it be desired to obtain a signal
at a certain hour, the corresponding pin is inserted, and the hand
upon touching this closes the circuit, and the bell rings. The bell is
likewise inclosed within the box. There are two rows of pins--one of
them for hours, and the other for minutes. They are spaced according to
requirements. In the model exhibited by the house Breguet, at the Vienna
Exhibition, there were 24 pins for minutes and 12 for hours. Fig. 2
gives a section of the dial. It will be seen that the hands are provided
at the extremity with a small spring, r, which is itself provided with
a small platinum contact, p. The pins also carry a small platinum or
silver point, a. In front of the box there will be observed a small
commutator, M, (Fig. 1). The use of this is indicated in the diagram
(Fig. 3). It will be seen that, according as the plug, B, is introduced
into the aperture to the left or right, the bell. S, will operate as an
ordinary vibrator, or give but a single stroke.

[Illustration: FIG. 1.--SILAS' CHRONOPHORE.]

P is the pile; C is the dial; and A is the commutator.

It is evident that this apparatus will likewise be able to render
services in scientific researches and laboratory operations, by sparing
the operator the trouble of continually consulting his watch.--_La
Lumiere Electrique_.

[Illustration: FIG. 2.]

[Illustration: FIG. 3.]

       *       *       *       *       *

[THE GARDEN.]




THE ZELKOWAS.


Two of the three species which form the subject of this article are not
only highly ornamental, but also valuable timber trees. Until recently
they were considered to belong to the genus Planera, which, however,
consists of but a single New World species; now, they properly
constitute a distinct genus, viz., Zelkova, which differs materially
from the true Planer tree in the structure of the fruit, etc. Z.
crenata, from the Caucasus, and Z. acuminata, from Japan, are quick
growing, handsome trees, with smooth bark not unlike that of beech or
hornbeam; it is only when the trees are old that the bark is cast off in
rather large sized plates, as is the case with the planes. The habit of
both is somewhat peculiar; in Z. crenata especially there is a decided
tendency for all the main branches to be given off from one point;
these, too, do not spread, as for instance do those of the elm or beech,
but each forms an acute angle with the center of the tree. The trunks
are more columnar than those of almost all other hardy trees. Their
distinct and graceful habit renders them wonderfully well adapted for
planting for effect, either singly or in groups. The flowers, like those
of the elm, are produced before the leaves are developed; in color they
are greenish brown, and smell like those of the elder. It does not
appear that fruits have yet been ripened in England. All the Zelkowas
are easily propagated by layers or by grafting on the common elm.

[Illustration: YOUNG ZELKOWA TREE (21 FEET HIGH)]

_Zelkcova crenata_--The Caucasian Zelkowa is a native of the country
lying between the Black and the Caspian Sea between latitudes 35 deg. and
47 deg. of the north of Persia and Georgia. According to Loudon, it was
introduced to this country in 1760, and it appears to have been planted
both at Kew and Syon at about that date. A very full account of the
history, etc., of the Zelkowa, from which Loudon largely quotes, was
presented to the French Academy of Science by Michaux the younger, who
speaks highly of the value of the tree. In this he is fully corroborated
by Mirbel and Desfontaine, on whom devolved the duty of reporting on
this memoir. They say that it attains a size equal to that of the
largest trees of French forests, and recommend its being largely
planted. They particularly mention its suitability for roadside avenues,
and affirm that its leaves are never devoured by caterpillars, and that
the stems are not subject, to the canker which frequently ruins the elm.
The name Orme de Siberie, which is or was commonly applied to Zelkova
crenata in French books and gardens, is doubly wrong, for the tree is
neither an elm nor is it native of Siberia. In 1782 Michaux, the father
of the author of the paper above mentioned, undertook, under the
auspices, of a Monsieur (afterward Louis XVIII.), a journey into Persia,
in order to make botanical researches.

[Illustration: FOLIAGE OF A YOUNG ZELKOWA TREE, WITH FLOWERS AND FRUIT.]

"Having left Ispahan, in order to explore the province of Ghilan, he
found this tree in the forests which he traversed before arriving
at Recht, a town situated on the Caspian Sea. In this town he had
opportunities of remarking the use made of the wood, and of judging how
highly it was appreciated by the inhabitants." The first tree introduced
into Europe appears to have been planted by M. Lemonnier, Professor of
Botany in the Jardin des Plautes, etc., in his garden near Versailles.
This garden was destroyed in 1820, and the dimensions of the tree
when it was cut down were as follows: Height 70 feet, trunk 7 feet in
circumference at 5 feet from the ground. The bole of the trunk was 20
feet in length and of nearly uniform thickness; and the proportion of
heart-wood to sap-wood was about three quarters of its diameter. This
tree was about fifty years old, but was still in a growing state and in
vigorous health. The oldest tree existing in France at the time of the
publication of Loudon's great work, was one in the Jardin des Plantes,
which in 1831 was about 60 feet high. It was planted in 1786 (when a
sucker of four years old), about the same time as the limes which form
the grand avenue called the Allee de Buffon. "There is, however, a much
larger Zelkowa on an estate of M. le Comte de Dijon, an enthusiastic
planter of exotic trees, at Podenas, near Nerac, in the department of
the Lot et Garonne. This fine tree was planted in 1789, and on the 20th
of January, 1831. it measured nearly 80 feet high, and the trunk was
nearly 3 feet in diameter at 3 feet from the ground." A drawing of this
tree, made by the count in the autumn of that year, was lent to Loudon
by Michaux, and the engraving prepared from that sketch (on a scale of 1
