Therefore, if we desire to warm any of this fresh air supplied to the
fire, it must be made to pass over a heated surface. The fender may be
used for this purpose by filling up the two inch space along the front,
as shown in the drawing, with coarse perforated metal. This will also
prevent cinders from getting under it. It will be found that for the
greater part of the year the chimney ventilator and the supply to the
fire will materially prevent "stuffiness," and keep those disagreeable
draughts under control, even although the room be lighted with a 3 light
chandelier burning a large quantity of gas.

[Illustration]

With improvements in gas burners, we may expect to light rooms perfectly
with a less expenditure of gas than we now do. But we cannot light a
room without in some measure creating heat; and I think I have shown
that we want this heat at the ceiling line for the greater part of the
year.

In summer we do not use gas for many hours; but, on the other hand, it
is more difficult, with an outside temperature at 65 deg. to 70 deg. Fahr., to
keep the air in proper movement in small rooms. There are also times in
the fall of the year, and also in spring, when the nights are unusually
warm; and, with a few friends in our rooms, the lighting becomes a "hot"
question, not to say a "burning" one. On these occasions we have to
resort to exceptional ventilation, which for ordinary every-day life
would be too much. It is then, and on summer nights, that the system of
ventilation by diffusion is most useful. To explain it, when two volumes
of air of different temperatures or specific gravities find themselves
on opposite sides of a screen or other medium, of muslin, cloth, or some
more or less porous substance, they diffuse themselves through this
medium with varying rapidity, until they become of equal density or
temperature. Therefore, if we fill the upper part of a window (which can
be opened, downward) with a strained piece of fine muslin or washed
common calico, the air in the room, if hotter than the external air,
will, when the window is more or less opened, pass out readily into the
cooler air, and the cooler air will pass in through the pores of the
medium. The hotter air passing out faster than the cooler air will come
in, no draught will be experienced; and the window may be opened very
widely without any discomfort from it.

It is, of course, quite impossible, in the limits of a paper, to do more
than indicate a means of ventilation which will be effective under most
circumstances of lighting with those gas burners and fittings usually
employed, and which will lend itself readily to modifications which will
be necessitated by the use of some of the newest forms of burners and
ventilating gas lights.

[Illustration]

In conclusion, I wish to draw attention to an important discovery I have
made in reference to blackened ceilings, for which, up to the present
time, gas has been chiefly blamed. I have long entertained the belief
that with a proper burner it is possible to obtain perfect combustion,
without any smoke; and a series of experiments with white porcelain
plates hung over some burners used in my own house proved conclusively
that the discoloration which spread itself all over my whitewashed
ceilings arose from the state of the atmosphere, which in all large
towns is largely mixed with heavy smoky particles, and from the dust or
dirt created in rooms by the use of coal fires as well as from the smoke
which, more frequently than one is at first supposed to imagine, escapes
from the fire-place into the room. I therefore, in two of my best rooms,
which required to have the ceilings whitened every year, substituted
varnished paper ceilings (light oak paper, simply put on in the usual
way, and varnished) instead of whitewash. I also changed the coal fires
for gas fires. These alterations have gone through the test of two
winters, and the ceilings are now as clean as when they were first done.
The burners have been used every night, and the gas fires every day,
during the two winters. No alteration has been made in the burners
employed, and no "consumers" have been used over them. If the varnished
paper ceilings are tried, I am sure that every one will like them better
than the time honored dirty whitewash, which is simply a fine sieve.
This fact is clearly shown by the appearance of the rafters, which,
after a short time, invariably show themselves whiter than the spaces
between.

       *       *       *       *       *




ANDERS' TELEPHONE.


Mr. G.L. Anders' telephone, shown in the accompanying cut, combines in a
single apparatus a transmitter, A, a receiver, B, and a pile, C. The
transmitter consists of a felt disk, a, containing several large
apertures, and fixed by an insulating ring, c, to a metallic disk, d,
situated within the box, D. The apertures, b, are filled with powdered
carbon, e, and are covered by a thin metal plate, f, which is fixed to
the insulating ring, c, by means of a metallic washer, g. Back of the
transmitter is arranged the receiver, B, which consists of an ordinary
electro-magnet with a disk in front of its poles. The pile, C, placed
behind the receiver, consists of a piece of carbon, h, held by a
partition, i, and covered with a salt of mercury, and of a plate of
zinc, l, which is held at a distance from the mercurial salt by a
spring, m, fixed to the insulating piece, n.

[Illustration: ANDERS TELEPHONE]

When the button, o, which is a poor conductor, is pressed, the zinc
plate, l, comes into contact with the mercurial salt, and the circuit is
closed through the line wire 1, the pile, the receiver, the transmitter,
and the line wire 2, while when the button is freed the current no
longer passes. The apparatus, then, can serve as a receiver or
transmitter only when the button is pressed.--_Bull. de la Musee de
l'Industrie_.

       *       *       *       *       *




BROWN'S ELECTRIC SPEED REGULATOR.


When the sea is rough, and the screw leaves the water as a consequence
of the ship's motions, the rotary velocity of the screw and engine
increases to a dangerous degree, because the resistance that the screw
was meeting in the water suddenly disappears. When the screw enters the
water again, the resistance makes itself abruptly felt, and causes
powerful shocks, which put both the screw and engine in danger. Ordinary
regulators are powerless to overcome this trouble, since their
construction is such that they act upon the engine only when the excess
of velocity has already been reached.

Several remedies have been proposed for this danger. For example, use
has been made of a float placed in a channel at the side of the screw,
and which closes the moderator valve by mechanical means or by
electricity when the screw descends too low or rises too high.

[Illustration: BROWN'S ELECTRIC SPEED REGULATOR.]

Mr. Brown's system is based upon a new idea. The apparatus (see figure)
consists of two contacts connected by an electric circuit. One of them,
b, is fixed to the ship in such a way as to be constantly in the water,
while the other, a, corresponds to the position above which the screw
cannot rise without taking on a dangerous velocity. In the normal
situation of the ship, the electric circuit, c (in which circulates a
current produced by a dynamo, d), is closed through the intermedium of
the water, which establishes a connection between the two contacts. When
the contact, a, rises out of the water, the current is interrupted. The
electro, d, then frees its armature, f, and the latter is pulled back by
a spring--a motion that sets in action a small steam engine that closes
the moderator valve. When the contact, a, is again immersed, the
electro, e, attracts its armature, and thus brings the moderator valve
back to its normal position. It is clear that the contact, a, must be
insulated from the ship's side.

Several contacts, a, might be advantageously arranged one above another,
in order to close the moderator valve more or less, according to the
extent of the screw's rise or fall.

       *       *       *       *       *




MAGNETO-ELECTRIC CROSSING SIGNAL.


We illustrate to-day a new application of electricity to railroad
crossing signaling which the Pennsylvania Steel Company, of Steelton,
Pa., has just perfected. By its operation an isolated highway crossing
in the woods or any lonely place can be made perfectly safe, and that,
too, without the expense of gates and a man to work them or of a
flagman. It is surely a great improvement over the old methods, and it
is likely to have a large sale. In addition to considerations of safety,
possible saving in salaries to railroad companies by its use will be
great. This device is more reliable than a human being, and can make any
crossing safe to which it is applied. Its operation is described as
follows:

[Illustration: FIG. 2.--MAGNETO-ELECTRIC CROSSING SIGNAL]

The illustration shows the device as used on a single track railroad,
where it is so arranged as to be operated only by trains approaching the
crossing (i.e., in the form illustrated, from the right). A similar box
on the other side of the crossing is used for trains approaching in the
other direction. Two plates connected by a link, and pivoted, are placed
alongside of one rail, close enough to it to be depressed by the treads
of the wheels. By another link, one of the plates called the rock plate
(the one to the right) is connected to a rock shaft which extends
through a strong bearing into the heavy iron case or box shown, at a
suitable distance from the rail, within which an electric generator is
placed; the whole being mounted and secured upon the ends of two long
ties framed to receive it.

The action of this rock plate is peculiar. It is pivoted at the rear
end, not to a fixed point, but to a short crank arm, the bearing for
which is inclosed in the small box shown. As the first wheel of a train
which is approaching in the desired direction (from the right in the
engraving) touches it, it will be seen that it must not only depress it,
but produce a slight forward motion, causing a corresponding rotary
motion in the rock shaft which actuates the apparatus. On the other
hand, when a train is approaching from the other direction, or has
already passed the crossing, its wheels strike first the curved plate to
the left of the illustration, and by means of the peculiar link
connections shown, depress the rock plate so as to clear the wheels
before the wheels touch it, but the depression is directly vertical, so
that it does not give any horizontal motion to it, which would have the
effect of actuating the rock shaft. Consequently, trains pass over the
apparatus in one direction without having any effect upon it whatever,
the different point at which the same force is applied to the rock plate
giving the latter an entirely different motion.

[Illustration: FIG. 2.--MAGNETO-ELECTRIC CROSSING SIGNAL]

The slight rotary motion which is in this way communicated to the rock
shaft, when a train is approaching in the right direction, compresses a
spring inside the case. As each wheel passes off the rock plate, the
reaction of the spring throws it up again to its former position, giving
additional speed to the gearing within, which is set in motion at the
passage of the first wheel, and operates the electric "generator." The
spring is really the motive power of the alarm. A small but heavy
fly-wheel is connected with the apparatus, the top of which is just
visible in the engraving, which serves to store up power to run the
"generator," which is nothing more than a small dynamo, for the
necessary number of seconds after the rear of the train has passed. The
dynamo dispenses with all need for batteries, and reduces the work of
maintenance to occasionally refilling the oil-cups and noticing if any
part has been broken.

A suitable wire circuit is provided, commencing at the generator with
insulated and protected wire, and continued with ordinary telegraph
wire, which can be strung on telegraph poles or trees leading to the
electric gong, Fig. 2, which rings as long as the armature revolves. It
is a simple matter so to proportion the mechanism for the required
distance and speed that the revolutions of the armature and the ringing
of the gong shall continue until the train reaches the crossing; and as
each wheel acts upon the apparatus, the more wheels there are in the
train the longer the bell will ring, a very convenient property, since
the slowest trains have nearly always the most wheels. The practical
limits to the ringing of the gong are that it will stop sounding after
the head of the train has passed the crossing and before or very soon
after the rear has passed. A "wild" engine running very slowly might not
actuate the signal as long as was desirable, but even then it is not
unreasonably claimed the warning would probably last long enough for all
practical requirements, as a team approaching a crossing at eight miles
per hour takes 42 seconds to go 500 feet. All the bearings of any
importance are self-lubricated by oil cups, the whole apparatus being
designed to require inspection not more than once a month. The iron case
when shut is water-tight, and when duly locked cannot be maliciously
tampered with without breaking open the case; so that, the manufacturers
claim, it will not be essential to examine it more than once a month.
The parts outside the case are all strong and heavy, and not likely to
get out of order, while easily inspected.

The apparatus can be used for announcing trains as well as sounding
alarms, as the gongs can be placed upon any post or building. The gong
has a heavy striker, and makes a great deal of noise, so that no one
should fail to hear it.--_Railway Review_.

       *       *       *       *       *




THE SIZES OF BLOOD CORPUSCLES.


Professor Theodore G. Wormley, in the new edition of his work, gives the
following sizes of blood corpuscles, as measured by himself and
Professor Gulliver. We have only copied the sizes for mammals and birds.
It will be seen that, with three or four exceptions, the sizes obtained
by the two observers are practically the same:

    Mammals              Wormley.      Gulliver.

   Man                    1-3250        1-3260
   Monkey                 1-3382        1-3412
   Opossum                1-3145        1-3557
   Guinea pig             1-3223        1-3538
   Kangaroo               1-3410        1-3440
   Muskrat                1-3282        1-3550
   Dog                    1-3561        1-3532
   Rabbit                 1-3653        1-3607
   Rat                    1-3652        1-3754
   Mouse                  1-3743        1-3814
   Pig                    1-4268        1-4230
   Ox                     1-4219        1-4267
   Horse                  1-4243        1-4600
   Cat                    1-4372        1-4404
   Elk                    1-4384        1-3938
   Buffalo                1-4351        1-4586
   Wolf (prairie)         1-3422        1-3600
   Bear (black)           1-3656        1-3693
   Hyena                  1-3644        1-3735
   Squirrel (red)         1-4140        1-4000
   Raccoon                1-4084        1-3950
   Elephant               1-2738        1-2745
   Leopard                1-4390        1-4319
   Hippopotamus           1-3560        1-3429
   Rhinoceros             1-3649        1-3765
   Tapir                  1-4175        1-4000
   Lion                   1-4143        1-4322
   Ocelot                 1-3885        1-4220
   Mule                   1-3760
   Ass                    1-3620        1-4000
   Ground squirrel        1-4200
   Bat                    1-3966        1-4173
   Sheep                  1-4912        1-5300
   Ibex                   1-6445
   Goat                   1-6189        1-6366
   Sloth                                1-2865
   Platypus (duck-billed)               1-3000
   Whale                                1-3099
   Capybara               1-3164        1-3190
   Seal                                 1-3281
   Woodchuck                            1-3484
   Muskdeer                             1-12325
   Beaver                               1-3325
   Porcupine                            1-3369
   Llama,  Long diam.     1-3201        1-3361
           Short "        1-6408        1-6229
   Camel,  Long diam.     1-3331        1-3123
           Short "        1-5280        1-5876

                          WORMLEY               GULLIVER.
      Birds.           Length. Breadth.     Length. Breadth.

  Chicken              1-2080   1-3483      1-2102   1-3466
  Turkey               1-1894   1-3444      1-2045   1-3599
  Duck                 1-1955   1-3504      1-1937   1-3424
  Pigeon               1-1892   1-3804      1-1973   1-3643
  Goose                                       1836   1-3839
  Quail                                       2347   1-3470
  Dove                                        2005   1-3369
  Sparrow                                     2140   1-3500
  Owl                                         1736   1-4076

The subject of minute measurements was discussed in an interesting
manner in an address before the Microscopical Section of the A.A.A.S.
last year, an abstract of which was published in this journal, vol. v.,
p. 181.

The slight differences in size accurately given in this table are not
always appreciable under modern amplification, but under a power of
1,150 diameters "corpuscles differing by the 1-100000 of an inch are
readily discriminated." For the conclusions of Prof. Wormley as regards
the possibility of identifying blood of different animals, the reader is
referred to his book on Micro-Chemistry of Poisons.--_Amer. Micro.
Jour._

       *       *       *       *       *




THE ABSORPTION OF PETROLEUM OINTMENT AND LARD BY THE SKIN.

[Footnote: From the _American Druggist_.]


E. Joerss has investigated the question whether ointments made with
vaseline or other petroleum ointments are really as difficult of
resorption by the skin, or of yielding their medicinal ingredients to
the latter, as has been asserted. In solving this question, he
considered himself justified in drawing conclusions from the manner in
which such compounds behaved toward _dead_ animal membrane. If any kind
of osmosis could take place, he argued, from ointments prepared with
vaseline, etc., through dead membranes, such osmosis would most probably
also take place through living membranes. At all events, the endosmotic
or exosmotic action of the skin of a living body must necessarily play
an important _role_ in the absorption of medicinal agents; and, on the
other hand, it is plain that fats, which render the living skin
impermeable, necessarily also diminish or entirely neutralize its
osmotic action. To test this, the author made the following experiments:

Bladder was tied over the necks of three wide-mouthed vials, with
bottoms cut off, and each was filled with iodide of potassium ointment.

No. 1 contained an ointment made with lard.

No. 2, one made with unguentum paraffini (_Germ. Pharm_.), and

No. 3, one made with unguentum paraffini mixed with 3 per cent. of lard.

All three vials were then suspended in beakers filled with water. After
standing twenty-four hours at the ordinary temperature, the contents of
none of the beakers gave any iodine reaction. After having been placed
into a warm temperature, between 25-37 deg. C., all three showed iodine
reactions after three hours, Nos. 2 and 3 very strongly, No. 1 (with
lard alone) very faintly.

The same experiment was now repeated, with the precaution that the
bladder was previously washed completely free from chlorine. Each vial
was suspended, at a temperature of 25-27 deg. C., in 50 grammes of distilled
water. After three hours, the contents of No. 1 (containing the ointment
made with _lard_) gave _no_ iodine reaction; the contents of the other
two, however, gave traces. After eight hours no further change had taken
place. The temperature was now raised to 30-35 deg. C., and kept so for
eight hours. All three beakers now gave a strong iodine reaction, 0.2
c.c. of normal silver solution being required for each 15 grammes of the
contents of the beakers.

In addition to the iodide, some of the fatty base had osmosed through
the membrane in each case.

The next experiment was made by substituting a piece of the skin (freed
from chlorine by washing) of a freshly killed sheep for the bladder. The
ointment in No. 3 in this case was made with 10 per cent. of lard. No
reaction was obtained, at the ordinary temperature, after twelve hours,
nor after eight more hours, at a temperature of 25-30 deg. C. After letting
them stand for eight hours longer at 30-37 deg. C., a faint reaction was
obtained in the case of the ointment made with unguentum paraffini; a
still fainter with No. 3; but no reaction at all with No. 1 (that made
with lard). None of the fats passed through by osmosis. After eight
hours more, the iodine reaction was quite decisive in all cases, but no
fat had passed through even now. On titrating 20 grammes of the contents
of each beaker,

        No. 1 required 0.5 c.c. of silver solution.
        No. 3    "     0.5 c.c.         "
        No. 2    "     0.7 c.c.         "

showing that the most iodine had osmosed in the case of the ointment
made with unguentum paraffini (equivalent to vaseline).

       *       *       *       *       *




THE TAILS OF COMETS.


I.--If we throw a stone into the water, a wave will be produced that
will extend in a circle. The size of this wave and the velocity with
which it extends depend upon the size of the stone, that is to say, upon
the intensity of the mechanical action that created it. The extent and
depth of the water are likewise factors.

If we cause a cord to vibrate in the water, we shall obtain a succession
of waves, the velocity and size of which will be derived from the cord's
size and the intensity of its action. These waves, which are visible
upon the surface, constitute what I shall call _mechanical waves_. But
there will be created at the same time other waves, whose velocity of
propagation will be much greater than that of the mechanical ones, and
apparently independent of mechanical intensity. These are _acoustic
waves_. Finally, there will doubtless be created _optical waves_, whose
