From the Rio Grande region, near Laredo, Texas, to Chihuahua.

Specimens examined: Texas (Poselger of 1851): Chihuahua
(specimens from Coll. Salm-Dyck.).

56. Cactus tuberculosus  (Engelm.) Kuntze, Rev. Gen. Pl. 261
(1891).

  Mamillaria strobiliformis  Scheer in Salm Cact. Hort. Dyck. 104
    (1850), not Muhlenpf. (1848), nor Engelm. (1848).
  Mamillaria tuberculosa  Engelm. Syn. Cact. 268 (1856).

Ovate to cylindrical, 5 to 15 cm. high, 2.5 to 5 cm. in diameter,
simple or branching at base: tubercles short-ovate from a broad
base, 5 to 6 mm. long, deeply grooved, crowded and imbricate, at
length covering the older parts as naked and gray corky
protuberances: radial spines 20 to 30, slender but stiff, white,
radiant and interwoven with adjacent clusters, 4 to 8 mm. long
(uppermost rarely 10 to 12 mm.); central spines 5 to 9, stouter,
purplish above, the upper ones longer, erect, 10 to 14 mm. long
(sometimes even 16 to 18 mm.), the lower one shorter (6 to 8
mm.), stout, porrect or deflexed: flowers about 2.5 cm. in
diameter, pale purple: fruit oval, elongated (sometimes almost
cylindric), red, about 18 mm. long: seeds subglobose, brown and
pitted, very small (0.8 to 1.2 mm. long).  (Ill. Cact. Mex.
Bound. t. 12. figs. 1-16)  Type of Scheer's strobiliformis is
unknown; but the specimens of Prince Salm-Dyck in Herb. Mo. Bot.
Gard. are marked "authentic" by Dr. Engelmann.  The Wright
specimens in the same Herb, represent the type of M tuberculosa
Engelm.

From the mountains of extreme southwestern Texas (common west of
Devil's River), southward into Chihuahua and Coahuila.  Fl.
May-June.

Specimens examined: Texas (Wright 18, 19, 20, 23, 24, 29,
30,31,32, 535, of 1849 and 1852; Bigelow of 1852; Engelmann, with
no number or date; Evans of 1891): Chihuahua (Pringle 250, 251 in
part, and 258 of 1885): Coahuila (Palmer of 1880): also specimens
from Coll. Salm. Dyck in 1857; also growing in Mo Bot. Gard. 1893
(specimens, sent by G. G. Briggs in 1892 from El Paso, Texas.

The identification of Engelmann's tuberculosa with Scheer's
strobiliformis was made by Dr. Engelmann himself upon an
examination of Scheer's type.  The use of the specific name
tuberculosa is necessitated by the law of homonyms, as
strobiliformis had been used twice already before it was taken up
by Scheer.  M. strobiliformis Muhlenpf. is C. scolymoides
sulcatus; and M. strobiliformis Engelm. is C. conoideus.

57. Cactus viviparus  Nutt. in Fraser's Cat. (1813).

  Mamillaria vivipara  Haw. Syn. Succ. Suppl. 72 (1819).

Low and depressed-globose, usually proliferous and cespitose
(forming large masses), but sometimes simple: tubercles terete
and loose, lightly grooved: radial spines 12 to 20, stiff and
white, often dark-tipped, 6 to 8 mm. long; central spines usually
4 (sometimes less, often more, even as many as 8), brownish, 8 to
12 mm. long, 3 spreading upwards, the lowest stouter and shorter
and deflexed: flowers about 3.5 cm. long (large for the size of
the plant) and even broader when expanded, bright purple: stigmas
pointed with a short mucro: fruit oval, pale green, juicy, 12 to
18 mm. long: seeds yellowish-brown, obliquely obovate and curved
about the small hilum, 1.4 to 1.6 mm. long).  (Ill. Cact. Mex.
Bound. t. 74. fig. 3, seeds)  Type unknown.

On the northwestern plains, from the boundary provinces of
British America (western Manitoba, Assiniboia and Alberta), and
throughout the Upper Missouri region, southward through western
Nebraska to western Kansas and to the eastern foothills of
central Colorado.  It is also mentioned by Howell (Cat. of
Oregon, Washington and Idaho plants), as occurring beyond the
Rocky Mountain divide in Idaho and Washington, which is probable,
but no specimens have been seen.

Specimens examined: Montana (Hayden, nos. 1854, 1855; Vernon
Bailey of 1890, near Bridger): Colorado (Hayden of 1869):
Nebraska (Rydberg 1379 of 1893, Thomas Co.): also specimens
cultivated in St. Louis in 1869; also growing in Mo. Bot. Gard.
1893.

It seems best to keep this northwestern form specifically
separate from that large assemblage of southern forms that have
been commonly referred to it.  The forms referred to this species
from western Kansas (Smyth's check list) have not been examined,
and they may represent intermediate forms, inclining to simple
habit and ovate form, as in the Colorado forms.  The southern
type (C. radiosus) is distinguished from C. viviparus not only by
its very different range, but also by its ovate to cylindrical
form, simple habit, more numerous (12 to 40) and longer (6 to 22
mm.) radial spines, usually more numerous (3 to 14) central
spines in which the upper are more robust than the lower, porrect
lower central, obtuse stigmas, and brown obovate straight seeds.

58. Cactus radiosus (Engelm.).

  Mamillaria vivipara  Engelm. Pl. Fendl. 49 (1849), not Haw.
    (1819).
  Mamillaria radiosa  Engelm. Pl. Lindh. 196 (1850).
  Mamillaria vivipara radiosa texana  Engelm. Syn. Cact. 269
    (1856).

Ovate or cylindrical, 5 to 12.5 cm. high and about 5 cm. in
diameter, simple or sparingly proliferous: tubercles terete, more
or less grooved above, 8 to 12 mm. long: radial spines 20 to 30,
straight, slender, with with dusky apex, very unequal, 6 to 8 mm
long; central spines 4 or 5, stouter, yellowish or tawny, 8 to 12
mm. long, the upper ones the longer and more robust, the lowest
one shorter and porrect: flowers 3.5 to 5.5 cm. long, about the
same diameter when fully open, violet to dark purple: stigmas 7
to 9, obtuse: fruit oval and green: seeds yellowish or brown,
obovate, pitted, fully 2 mm, long.  (Ill. Cact. Mex. Bound. t.
74, fig.5, seeds)  Type, Lindheimer of 1846 in Herb. Mo. Bot.
Gard.

Extending across southern Texas, from the Guadalupe to El Paso.
thence into contiguous New Mexico and across the Rio Grande near
Juarez (northern Chihuahua).  Fl. May-June.

Specimens examined: Texas (Lindheimer of 1846): New Mexico
(Bigelow of 1855): Chihuahua, near Juarez (Evans of 1891): also
specimens cultivated from the type in St. Louis in 1846.

Attention has been called under C. viviparus to the characters
that distinguish from C. radiosus  The characters there given for
the latter species apply to to the whole group of included forms.
The type of the species is the var. Texana of Engelmann's Syn.
Cact. and Mex. Bound., which is characterized in the above.
description.

59. Cactus radiosus neo-mexicanus  (Engelm.).

  Mamillaria vivipara radiosa neo-mexicana  Engelm. Syn. Cact.
    269 (1856).

Generally lower (3.5 to 10 cm.) and subglobose to ovate or even
sub-cylindrical, branching at base or simple, with more numerous
(12 to 40) radial spines, more numerous (3 to 12) and purplish
centrals, and smaller seeds.  (Ill. Cact. Mex. Bound. t. 74. fig.
4, seeds)  Type, presumably the Wright, Bigelow, and Schott
specimens from western Texas, New Mexico, and Sonora, all in
Herb. Mo. Bot. Gard.

From southern Utah, central Colorado, and western Kansas,
southward through western Texas, New Mexico and Arizona into
Chihuahua and Sonora.

Specimens examined: Kansas (Carleton 530 of 1891, in Meade
County): Oklahoma (Carleton 233 of 1891): Colorado (Hall and
Harbour of 1862; Brandegee 645 of 1873; Hicks of 1890): Utah
(Siler of 1870): New Mexico (Wislizenus of 1846; Fendler 244,
271, of 1847: Wright 298; Bigelow of 1853; G. R. Vasey of 1881):
Texas (Wright of 1849, 1851, 1852; Bigelow of 1853): Arizona
(Rothrock, with no number or date): Sonora (Schott of 1855):
Chihuahua (Evans of 1891, near Juarez).

It is through this variety that C. radiosus approaches most
nearly to C. viviparus, in the forms with few radials and
centrals, but the specific characters seem to hold.  This is the
Mamillaria vivipara of the Syn Fl. Colorado (Porter and Coulter).

60. Cactus radiosus arizonicus  (Engelm.).

  Mamillaria arizonica  Engelm Bot. Calif. i. 244 (1876).

A robust globose or ovate simple form (7.5 to 10 cm. in
diameter), with long (12 to 25 mm.) deeply-grooved tubercles, 15
to 20 long (10 to 30 mm.) rigid whitish radial spines, and 3 to 6
centrals deep brown above.  Type, the specimens of Cous, Palmer,
Bischoff and Johnson, all in Herb. Mo. Bot. Gard.

Sandy and rocky soil from southern Utah through northern and
western Arizona to southern California.

Specimens examined: Arizona (Cous of 1865; Cous & Palmer of 1865
and 1872; Palmer of 1869; Bischoff of 1871; Miller of 1881; Rusby
617 of 1853; Pringle of 1884): Utah (Johnson of 1871, 1872, 1874;
Parry of 1875, 1877): California (Parish of 1880): also specimens
cultivated in Mo. Bot. Gard. in 1881; and in Meehan's Gard. in
1882.

61. Cactus radiosus deserti  (Engelm.).

  Mamillaria deserti  Engelm. Bot. Calif. ii. 449 (1880).

Subglobose or oval (5 to 10 cm. high) and simple, with deeply
grooved tubercles (slender and about 12 mm. long), 25 to 30
rather long (10 to 16 mm.) grayish white radial spines (the
larger with reddish tips), 3 or 4 shorter and stouter centrals
with 5 or 6 intermediate ones above, small (2.5 cm. long)
straw-colored flowers (becoming purplish-tipped), 5 or 6 stigmas,
and obliquely obovate curved seeds.  Type, Parish 433 in Herb.
Mo. Bot. Gard.

In the mountains bordering the deserts of southeastern California
(San Bernardino County) and extending to central Nevada (Reese
River Valley).

Specimens examined: California (Parish 453 of 1880, also of 1882;
Bailey of 1890): Nevada, Lincoln County (Coville & Funston of
1891, Death Valley Expedition): also specimens cultivated in
Meehan's Gard. in 1882.

The smaller straw-colored flowers alone suggest the propriety of
keeping this form specifically distinct, but even in size and
color there is an occasional tendency toward the specific
character.  The obliquely obovate curved seeds resemble those of
C. viviparus.  The plant densely covered with stout ashy-gray
interlocking spines is easily recognized.

62. Cactus radiosus chloranthus  (Engelm.).

  Mamillaria chlorantha  Engelm. Wheeler's Rep. 127 (1878).

Oval to cylindrical (7.5 cm. in diameter, sometimes 20 to 22.5
cm. high), with 20 to 25 gray radial spines almost in two series,
6 to 9 stouter reddish or brownish-tipped centrals (12 to 25 mm.
long), and yellowish or greenish-yellow flowers 3.5 cm. long and
wide.  Type: Southern Utah specimens of both Parry and Johnson
occur in Herb. Mo. Bot. Gard., but they are all referred to C.
radiosus arizonicus, and I can find no trace of any specimens of
C. radiosus chloranthus in the Engelmann collection.

Southern Utah, east of St. George (Parry; Johnson).

The plant is evidently near C. radiosus deserti, of which variety
it seems to be the Utah representative, but in the absence not
only of the type, but even of authentic specimens, the two are
kept separate, a thing fully justified by the description.

63. Cactus radiosus alversoni, var. nov.

Differs from var. deserti in its more robust and branching habit
(becoming 12.5 cm. tall and 10 cm. in diameter), shorter and
thicker tubercles, more numerous (12 to 14 centrals) stouter and
longer (12 to 22 mm.) spines, all of which are black-tipped (the
centrals black half way down, shading into red), and pink
flowers.  Type, Alverson's specimens in Herb. Mo. Bot. Gard. and
in Herb. Coulter.

In the desert region of extreme southeastern California.

Specimens examined: Southern California (A. H. Alverson of 1892):
also growing in Mo. Bot. Gard. 1893.

The covering of stout bushy interlocking spines is like that of
var. deserti, but the black and reddish coloration gives a
decidedly different appearance.  On account of this appearance of
a reddish-black brush the plant has been popularly called
"foxtail cactus."  The decidedly pink flowers were sent by Mr. S.
B. Parish from specimens growing in cultivation in San Diego, and
are not from the original collection of Mr. Alverson.

64. Cactus macromeris  (Engelm.) Kuntze Rev. Gen. Pl. 260 (1891).

  Mamillaria macromeris  Engelm. Wisliz. Rep. 13 (1848).
  Mamillaria heteromorpha  Scheer in Salm. Cact. Hort. Dyck. 128
    (1850).
  Mamillaria dactylithele  Labouret, Monogr. Cact. 146 (1858).

Ovate or cylindrical, 5 to 10 cm. high, simple or branching from
the base and at length cespitose: tubercles large, loose and
spreading, from a dilated base, more or less elongated (12 to 30
mm.) and teretish (often incurved), the groove absent in young
plants and never reaching the axil: radial spines 10 to 17,
slender and terete, or stouter and often angled, spreading, 12 to
40 mm. long, whitish (or more or less rose-colored when young),
straight or a little curved; central spines 4 (or fewer in young
plants or even wanting), spreading, 25 to 55 mm. long, stouter,
bulbous at base, mostly black (the lowest the longest and
stoutest), straight or sometimes curved or twisted: flowers 6 to
7.5 cm. long and of same diameter, deep red to purple: fruit
ovate-subglobose, green, 15 to 25 mm, long: seeds
globose-obovate, yellow, and smooth. 1.2 to 1.6 mm. long. (Ill.
Cact. Mex. Bound. t. 14 and 15)  Type, Wislizenus of 1846 in
Herb. Mo. Bot. Gard.

Mostly in loose sand, in the valley of the Rio Grande (on both
sides of the river), from southern New Mexico to Eagle Pass,
Texas, and doubtless further down.

Specimens examined: New Mexico (Wislizenus of 1846; Wright 384,
531, of 1852; G. R. Vasey of 1881): Texas (Wright of 1850, 1851,
1852; Bigelow of 1852): Chihuahua (Evans of 1891; Budd of 1891):
also growing in Mo. Bot. Gard. 1893.

This species shows an interesting transition from Coryphantha to
