carry it upon my person--and with that and the compass we will have an
advantage over them."

My words seemed to cheer them both, and they were for starting off at
once in pursuit.  There was no reason why we should delay, and we set
forth down the river.  As we tramped along, we discussed a question
that was uppermost in the mind of each--what we should do with Snider
when we had captured him, for with the action of pursuit had come the
optimistic conviction that we should succeed.  As a matter of fact, we
had to succeed.  The very thought of remaining in this utter wilderness
for the rest of our lives was impossible.

We arrived at nothing very definite in the matter of Snider's
punishment, since Taylor was for shooting him, Delcarte insisting that
he should be hanged, while I, although fully conscious of the gravity
of his offense, could not bring myself to give the death penalty.

I fell to wondering what charm Victory had found in such a man as
Snider, and why I insisted upon finding excuses for her and trying to
defend her indefensible act.  She was nothing to me.  Aside from the
natural gratitude I felt for her since she had saved my life, I owed
her nothing.  She was a half-naked little savage--I, a gentleman, and
an officer in the world's greatest navy.  There could be no close bonds
of interest between us.

This line of reflection I discovered to be as distressing as the
former, but, though I tried to turn my mind to other things, it
persisted in returning to the vision of an oval face, sun-tanned; of
smiling lips, revealing white and even teeth; of brave eyes that
harbored no shadow of guile; and of a tumbling mass of wavy hair that
crowned the loveliest picture on which my eyes had ever rested.

Every time this vision presented itself I felt myself turn cold with
rage and hate against Snider.  I could forgive the launch, but if he
had wronged her he should die--he should die at my own hands; in this I
was determined.

For two days we followed the river northward, cutting off where we
could, but confined for the most part to the game trails that
paralleled the stream.  One afternoon, we cut across a narrow neck of
land that saved us many miles, where the river wound to the west and
back again.

Here we decided to halt, for we had had a hard day of it, and, if the
truth were known, I think that we had all given up hope of overtaking
the launch other than by the merest accident.

We had shot a deer just before our halt, and, as Taylor and Delcarte
were preparing it, I walked down to the water to fill our canteens.  I
had just finished, and was straightening up, when something floating
around a bend above me caught my eye.  For a moment I could not believe
the testimony of my own senses.  It was a boat.

I shouted to Delcarte and Taylor, who came running to my side.

"The launch!" cried Delcarte; and, indeed, it was the launch, floating
down-river from above us.  Where had it been?  How had we passed it?
And how were we to reach it now, should Snider and the girl discover us?

"It's drifting," said Taylor.  "I see no one in it."

I was stripping off my clothes, and Delcarte soon followed my example.
I told Taylor to remain on shore with the clothing and rifles.  He
might also serve us better there, since it would give him an
opportunity to take a shot at Snider should the man discover us and
show himself.

With powerful strokes we swam out in the path of the oncoming launch.
Being a stronger swimmer than Delcarte, I soon was far in the lead,
reaching the center of the channel just as the launch bore down upon
me.  It was drifting broadside on.  I seized the gunwale and raised
myself quickly, so that my chin topped the side.  I expected a blow the
moment that I came within the view of the occupants, but no blow fell.

Snider lay upon his back in the bottom of the boat alone.  Even before
I had clambered in and stooped above him I knew that he was dead.
Without examining him further, I ran forward to the control board and
pressed the starting button.  To my relief, the mechanism
responded--the launch was uninjured.  Coming about, I picked up
Delcarte.  He was astounded at the sight that met his eyes, and
immediately fell to examining Snider's body for signs of life or an
explanation of the manner in which he met his death.

The fellow had been dead for hours--he was cold and still.  But
Delcarte's search was not without results, for above Snider's heart was
a wound, a slit about an inch in length--such a slit as a sharp knife
would make, and in the dead fingers of one hand was clutched a strand
of long brown hair--Victory's hair was brown.

They say that dead men tell no tales, but Snider told the story of his
end as clearly as though the dead lips had parted and poured forth the
truth.  The beast had attacked the girl, and she had defended her honor.

We buried Snider beside the Rhine, and no stone marks his last resting
place.  Beasts do not require headstones.

Then we set out in the launch, turning her nose upstream.  When I had
told Delcarte and Taylor that I intended searching for the girl,
neither had demurred.

"We had her wrong in our thoughts," said Delcarte, "and the least that
we can do in expiation is to find and rescue her."

We called her name aloud every few minutes as we motored up the river,
but, though we returned all the way to our former camping place, we did
not find her.  I then decided to retrace our journey, letting Taylor
handle the launch, while Delcarte and I, upon opposite sides of the
river, searched for some sign of the spot where Victory had landed.

We found nothing until we had reached a point a few miles above the
spot where I had first seen the launch drifting down toward us, and
there I discovered the remnants of a recent camp fire.

That Victory carried flint and steel I was aware, and that it was she
who built the fire I was positive.  But which way had she gone since
she stopped here?

Would she go on down the river, that she might thus bring herself
nearer her own Grabritin, or would she have sought to search for us
upstream, where she had seen us last?

I had hailed Taylor, and sent him across the river to take in Delcarte,
that the two might join me and discuss my discovery and our future
plans.

While waiting for them, I stood looking out over the river, my back
toward the woods that stretched away to the east behind me.  Delcarte
was just stepping into the launch upon the opposite side of the stream,
when, without the least warning, I was violently seized by both arms
and about the waist--three or four men were upon me at once; my rifle
was snatched from my hands and my revolver from my belt.

I struggled for an instant, but finding my efforts of no avail, I
ceased them, and turned my head to have a look at my assailants.  At
the same time several others of them walked around in front of me, and,
to my astonishment, I found myself looking upon uniformed soldiery,
armed with rifles, revolvers, and sabers, but with faces as black as
coal.



8


Delcarte and Taylor were now in mid-stream, coming toward us, and I
called to them to keep aloof until I knew whether the intentions of my
captors were friendly or otherwise.  My good men wanted to come on and
annihilate the blacks.  But there were upward of a hundred of the
latter, all well armed, and so I commanded Delcarte to keep out of
harm's way, and stay where he was till I needed him.

A young officer called and beckoned to them.  But they refused to come,
and so he gave orders that resulted in my hands being secured at my
back, after which the company marched away, straight toward the east.

I noticed that the men wore spurs, which seemed strange to me.  But
when, late in the afternoon, we arrived at their encampment, I
discovered that my captors were cavalrymen.

In the center of a plain stood a log fort, with a blockhouse at each of
its four corners.  As we approached, I saw a herd of cavalry horses
grazing under guard outside the walls of the post.  They were small,
stocky horses, but the telltale saddle galls proclaimed their calling.
The flag flying from a tall staff inside the palisade was one which I
had never before seen nor heard of.

We marched directly into the compound, where the company was dismissed,
with the exception of a guard of four privates, who escorted me in the
wake of the young officer.  The latter led us across a small parade
ground, where a battery of light field guns was parked, and toward a
log building, in front of which rose the flagstaff.

I was escorted within the building into the presence of an old negro, a
fine looking man, with a dignified and military bearing.  He was a
colonel, I was to learn later, and to him I owe the very humane
treatment that was accorded me while I remained his prisoner.

He listened to the report of his junior, and then turned to question
me, but with no better results than the former had accomplished.  Then
he summoned an orderly, and gave some instructions.  The soldier
saluted, and left the room, returning in about five minutes with a
hairy old white man--just such a savage, primeval-looking fellow as I
had discovered in the woods the day that Snider had disappeared with
the launch.

The colonel evidently expected to use the fellow as interpreter, but
when the savage addressed me it was in a language as foreign to me as
was that of the blacks.  At last the old officer gave it up, and,
shaking his head, gave instructions for my removal.

From his office I was led to a guardhouse, in which I found about fifty
half-naked whites, clad in the skins of wild beasts.  I tried to
converse with them, but not one of them could understand Pan-American,
nor could I make head or tail of their jargon.

For over a month I remained a prisoner there, working from morning
until night at odd jobs about the headquarters building of the
commanding officer.  The other prisoners worked harder than I did, and
I owe my better treatment solely to the kindliness and discrimination
of the old colonel.

What had become of Victory, of Delcarte, of Taylor I could not know;
nor did it seem likely that I should ever learn.  I was most depressed.
But I whiled away my time in performing the duties given me to the best
of my ability and attempting to learn the language of my captors.

Who they were or where they came from was a mystery to me.  That they
were the outpost of some powerful black nation seemed likely, yet where
the seat of that nation lay I could not guess.

They looked upon the whites as their inferiors, and treated us
accordingly.  They had a literature of their own, and many of the men,
even the common soldiers, were omnivorous readers.  Every two weeks a
dust-covered trooper would trot his jaded mount into the post and
deliver a bulging sack of mail at headquarters.  The next day he would
be away again upon a fresh horse toward the south, carrying the
soldiers' letters to friends in the far off land of mystery from whence
they all had come.

Troops, sometimes mounted and sometimes afoot, left the post daily for
what I assumed to be patrol duty.  I judged the little force of a
thousand men were detailed here to maintain the authority of a distant
government in a conquered country.  Later, I learned that my surmise
was correct, and this was but one of a great chain of similar posts
that dotted the new frontier of the black nation into whose hands I had
fallen.

Slowly I learned their tongue, so that I could understand what was said
before me, and make myself understood.  I had seen from the first that
I was being treated as a slave--that all whites that fell into the
hands of the blacks were thus treated.

Almost daily new prisoners were brought in, and about three weeks after
I was brought in to the post a troop of cavalry came from the south to
relieve one of the troops stationed there.  There was great jubilation
in the encampment after the arrival of the newcomers, old friendships
were renewed and new ones made.  But the happiest men were those of the
troop that was to be relieved.

The next morning they started away, and as they were forced upon the
parade ground we prisoners were marched from our quarters and lined up
before them.  A couple of long chains were brought, with rings in the
links every few feet.  At first I could not guess the purpose of these
chains.  But I was soon to learn.

A couple of soldiers snapped the first ring around the neck of a
powerful white slave, and one by one the rest of us were herded to our
places, and the work of shackling us neck to neck commenced.

The colonel stood watching the procedure.  Presently his eyes fell upon
me, and he spoke to a young officer at his side.  The latter stepped
toward me and motioned me to follow him.  I did so, and was led back to
the colonel.

By this time I could understand a few words of their strange language,
and when the colonel asked me if I would prefer to remain at the post
as his body servant, I signified my willingness as emphatically as
possible, for I had seen enough of the brutality of the common soldiers
toward their white slaves to have no desire to start out upon a march
of unknown length, chained by the neck, and driven on by the great
whips that a score of the soldiers carried to accelerate the speed of
their charges.

About three hundred prisoners who had been housed in six prisons at the
post marched out of the gates that morning, toward what fate and what
future I could not guess.  Neither had the poor devils themselves more
than the most vague conception of what lay in store for them, except
that they were going elsewhere to continue in the slavery that they had
known since their capture by their black conquerors--a slavery that was
to continue until death released them.

My position was altered at the post.  From working about the
headquarters office, I was transferred to the colonel's living
quarters.  I had greater freedom, and no longer slept in one of the
prisons, but had a little room to myself off the kitchen of the
colonel's log house.

My master was always kind to me, and under him I rapidly learned the
language of my captors, and much concerning them that had been a
mystery to me before.  His name was Abu Belik.  He was a colonel in the
cavalry of Abyssinia, a country of which I do not remember ever
hearing, but which Colonel Belik assured me is the oldest civilized
country in the world.

Colonel Belik was born in Adis Abeba, the capital of the empire, and
until recently had been in command of the emperor's palace guard.
Jealousy and the ambition and intrigue of another officer had lost him
the favor of his emperor, and he had been detailed to this frontier
post as a mark of his sovereign's displeasure.

Some fifty years before, the young emperor, Menelek XIV, was ambitious.
He knew that a great world lay across the waters far to the north of
his capital.  Once he had crossed the desert and looked out upon the
blue sea that was the northern boundary of his dominions.

There lay another world to conquer.  Menelek busied himself with the
building of a great fleet, though his people were not a maritime race.
His army crossed into Europe.  It met with little resistance, and for
fifty years his soldiers had been pushing his boundaries farther and
farther toward the north.

"The yellow men from the east and north are contesting our rights here
now," said the colonel, "but we shall win--we shall conquer the world,
carrying Christianity to all the benighted heathen of Europe, and Asia
as well."

"You are a Christian people?" I asked.

He looked at me in surprise, nodding his head affirmatively.

"I am a Christian," I said.  "My people are the most powerful on earth."

He smiled, and shook his head indulgently, as a father to a child who
sets up his childish judgment against that of his elders.

Then I set out to prove my point.  I told him of our cities, of our
army, of our great navy.  He came right back at me asking for figures,
and when he was done I had to admit that only in our navy were we
numerically superior.

Menelek XIV is the undisputed ruler of all the continent of Africa, of
all of ancient Europe except the British Isles, Scandinavia, and
eastern Russia, and has large possessions and prosperous colonies in
what once were Arabia and Turkey in Asia.

He has a standing army of ten million men, and his people possess
slaves--white slaves--to the number of ten or fifteen million.

Colonel Belik was much surprised, however, upon his part to learn of
the great nation which lay across the ocean, and when he found that I
was a naval officer, he was inclined to accord me even greater
consideration than formerly.  It was difficult for him to believe my
assertion that there were but few blacks in my country, and that these
occupied a lower social plane than the whites.

Just the reverse is true in Colonel Belik's land.  He considered whites
inferior beings, creatures of a lower order, and assuring me that even
the few white freemen of Abyssinia were never accorded anything
approximating a position of social equality with the blacks.  They live
in the poorer districts of the cities, in little white colonies, and a
black who marries a white is socially ostracized.

The arms and ammunition of the Abyssinians are greatly inferior to
ours, yet they are tremendously effective against the ill-armed
barbarians of Europe.  Their rifles are of a type similar to the
magazine rifles of twentieth century Pan-America, but carrying only
five cartridges in the magazine, in addition to the one in the chamber.
They are of extraordinary length, even those of the cavalry, and are of
extreme accuracy.

The Abyssinians themselves are a fine looking race of black men--tall,
muscular, with fine teeth, and regular features, which incline
distinctly toward Semitic mold--I refer to the full-blooded natives of
Abyssinia.  They are the patricians--the aristocracy.  The army is
officered almost exclusively by them.  Among the soldiery a lower type
of negro predominates, with thicker lips and broader, flatter noses.
These men are recruited, so the colonel told me, from among the
conquered tribes of Africa.  They are good soldiers--brave and loyal.
They can read and write, and they are endowed with a self-confidence
and pride which, from my readings of the words of ancient African
explorers, must have been wanting in their earliest progenitors.  On
the whole, it is apparent that the black race has thrived far better in
the past two centuries under men of its own color than it had under the
domination of whites during all previous history.

I had been a prisoner at the little frontier post for over a month,
when orders came to Colonel Belik to hasten to the eastern frontier
with the major portion of his command, leaving only one troop to
garrison the fort.  As his body servant, I accompanied him mounted upon
a fiery little Abyssinian pony.

We marched rapidly for ten days through the heart of the ancient German
empire, halting when night found us in proximity to water.  Often we
passed small posts similar to that at which the colonel's regiment had
been quartered, finding in each instance that only a single company or
troop remained for defence, the balance having been withdrawn toward
the northeast, in the same direction in which we were moving.

Naturally, the colonel had not confided to me the nature of his orders.
But the rapidity of our march and the fact that all available troops
were being hastened toward the northeast assured me that a matter of
vital importance to the dominion of Menelek XIV in that part of Europe
was threatening or had already broken.

I could not believe that a simple rising of the savage tribes of whites
would necessitate the mobilizing of such a force as we presently met
with converging from the south into our trail.  There were large bodies
of cavalry and infantry, endless streams of artillery wagons and guns,
and countless horse-drawn covered vehicles laden with camp equipage,
munitions, and provisions.

Here, for the first time, I saw camels, great caravans of them, bearing
all sorts of heavy burdens, and miles upon miles of elephants doing
similar service.  It was a scene of wondrous and barbaric splendor, for
the men and beasts from the south were gaily caparisoned in rich
colors, in marked contrast to the gray uniformed forces of the
frontier, with which I had been familiar.

The rumor reached us that Menelek himself was coming, and the pitch of
excitement to which this announcement raised the troops was little
short of miraculous--at least, to one of my race and nationality whose
rulers for centuries had been but ordinary men, holding office at the
will of the people for a few brief years.

As I witnessed it, I could not but speculate upon the moral effect upon
his troops of a sovereign's presence in the midst of battle.  All else
being equal in war between the troops of a republic and an empire,
could not this exhilarated mental state, amounting almost to hysteria
on the part of the imperial troops, weigh heavily against the soldiers
of a president?  I wonder.

But if the emperor chanced to be absent?  What then? Again I wonder.

On the eleventh day we reached our destination--a walled frontier city
of about twenty thousand.  We passed some lakes, and crossed some old
canals before entering the gates.  Within, beside the frame buildings,
were many built of ancient brick and well-cut stone.  These, I was
told, were of material taken from the ruins of the ancient city which,
once, had stood upon the site of the present town.

The name of the town, translated from the Abyssinian, is New Gondar.
It stands, I am convinced, upon the ruins of ancient Berlin, the one
time capital of the old German empire, but except for the old building
material used in the new town there is no sign of the former city.

The day after we arrived, the town was gaily decorated with flags,
streamers, gorgeous rugs, and banners, for the rumor had proved
true--the emperor was coming.

Colonel Belik had accorded me the greatest liberty, permitting me to go
where I pleased, after my few duties had been performed.  As a result
of his kindness, I spent much time wandering about New Gondar, talking
with the inhabitants, and exploring the city of black men.

As I had been given a semi-military uniform which bore insignia
indicating that I was an officer's body servant, even the blacks
treated me with a species of respect, though I could see by their
manner that I was really as the dirt beneath their feet.  They answered
my questions civilly enough, but they would not enter into conversation
with me.  It was from other slaves that I learned the gossip of the
city.

Troops were pouring in from the west and south, and pouring out toward
the east.  I asked an old slave who was sweeping the dirt into little
piles in the gutters of the street where the soldiers were going.  He
looked at me in surprise.

"Why, to fight the yellow men, of course," he said.  "They have crossed
the border, and are marching toward New Gondar."

"Who will win?" I asked.

He shrugged his shoulders.  "Who knows?" he said.  "I hope it will be
the yellow men, but Menelek is powerful--it will take many yellow men
to defeat him."

Crowds were gathering along the sidewalks to view the emperor's entry
into the city.  I took my place among them, although I hate crowds, and
I am glad that I did, for I witnessed such a spectacle of barbaric
splendor as no other Pan-American has ever looked upon.

Down the broad main thoroughfare, which may once have been the historic
Unter den Linden, came a brilliant cortege.  At the head rode a
regiment of red-coated hussars--enormous men, black as night.  There
were troops of riflemen mounted on camels.  The emperor rode in a
