deviation, and for this purpose the observer must not be content with
a single setting, but must perform the operation five or six times,
and take the mean of these different readings. If one or more of the
readings show a deviation of more than 0.3 deg. from the general average,
they should be rejected as incorrect. Between each observation the eye
should be allowed 10 to 20 seconds of rest.

The "setting" of the zero having been performed as above, the
determination of the accurate adjustment of the instrument by means of
the "control" quartz plates is proceeded with. Three such plates will
be furnished with each polariscope, which have "sugar values"
respectively approximating 80 deg., 90 deg., and 100 deg.. These values may vary
with the temperature, and tables are furnished with them which give
their exact value at different temperatures, from 10 deg. to 35 deg. C.

One of these plates is placed in the instrument, and the field
observed; it will be seen that the uniform appearance of the field is
changed. The milled head is turned to the right until the exact point
of neutrality is re-established, just as described above in setting
the zero. The scale is read, the observation repeated, the reading
taken again, and so on until five or six readings have been made. The
average is taken, readings being rejected which show a divergence of
more than 0.3, and the result corrected for the deviation of the zero
point, if any was found, the deviation being added if it was to the
left, and subtracted if to the right. If the adjustment of the
instrument be correct, the result should be the value of the control
plate used, as ascertained from the table, for the temperature of 20 deg..
Each of the three plates is read in the instrument in this way. A
variation of 0.3 from the established values may be allowed for errors
of observation, temperature, etc., but in the hands of a careful
observer a deviation greater than this with one of the three plates,
after a careful setting of the zero, shows that the instrument is not
accurately adjusted.

The complete verification of the accurate adjustment of the
polariscope by means of three control plates, as given above, should
be employed whenever it is set up for the first time by the officer
using it, whenever it has sustained any serious shock or injury, and
whenever it has been transported from one place to another. It should
also be done at least once a week while the instrument is in active
use.

After the complete verification has been performed as described,
further checking of the instrument is done by means of one control
plate alone, the one approximating 90 deg., and the setting of the zero
point is dispensed with, the indication of the scale for sugar
solutions being corrected by the amount of deviation shown in the
reading of the 90 deg. control plate from its established value as
ascertained from the table, at the temperature of the room.

For example: A sugar solution polarizes 80.5; the control plate just
before had given a polarization of 91.4, the temperature of the room
during both observations being 25 deg. C. According to the table the value
of the control plate at 25 deg. C. is 91.7; the reading is, therefore, 0.3
too low, and 0.3 is added to the reading of the sugar solution, making
the corrected result 80.8. The temperature of the room should be
ascertained from a standardized thermometer placed close to the
instrument and in such a position as to be subject to the same
conditions.


PREPARATION OF THE SUGAR SOLUTION FOR POLARIZATION.

If the sample is not entirely uniform it must be thoroughly mixed
before weighing out, after all the lumps are broken up, best with a
mortar and pestle. Then 26.048 grammes are weighed out on the balance
in the tared German silver dish furnished for this purpose. Care must
be taken that the operations of mixing and weighing out are not unduly
prolonged, otherwise the sample may easily suffer considerable loss of
moisture, especially in a warm room. The portion of sugar weighed out
is washed by means of a jet from a wash bottle into a 100 c.c. flask,
the dish being well rinsed three or four times and the rinsings added
to the contents of the flask. The water used must be either distilled
water or clear water which has been found to have no optical activity.
After the dish has been thoroughly rinsed, enough water is added to
bring the contents of the flask to about 80 c.c. and it is gently
rotated until all the sugar has dissolved. The flask should be held by
the neck with the thumb and finger, and the bulb not handled during
this operation. Care must be taken that no particle of the sugar or
solution is lost. To determine if all the sugar is dissolved, the
flask is held above the level of the eye, in which position any
undissolved crystals can be easily seen at the bottom. The character
of the solution is now observed. If it be colorless or of a very light
straw color, and not opalescent, so that it will give a clear
transparent liquid on filtration through paper, the volume is made up
directly with water to the 100 c.c. mark on the flask. Most sugar
solutions, however, will require the addition of a clarifying or
decolorizing agent in order to render them sufficiently clear and
colorless to polarize. In such case, before making up to the mark, a
saturated solution of subacetate of lead is added.

The quantity of this agent required will vary according to the quality
of the sugar; for sugar which has been grained in the strike pan and
washed in the centrifugals, from 3 to 15 drops will be required; for
sugar grained in the strike pan but not well washed in the
centrifugals, that is, sugar intended for refining purposes, from 15
to 30 drops will be required; for sugar not grained in the strike pan,
that is, "wagon" or "string sugar," "second sugar," etc., from 1 to 3
c.c. will be required. After adding the solution of subacetate of lead
the flask must be gently shaken, so as to mix it with the sugar
solution. If the proper amount has been added, the precipitate will
usually subside rapidly, but if not, the operator may judge of the
completeness of the precipitation by holding the flask above the level
of the eye and allowing an additional drop of subacetate of lead to
flow down the side of the flask into the solution; if this drop leaves
a clear track along the glass through the solution it indicates that
the precipitation is complete; if, on the other hand, all traces of
the drop are lost on entering the solution, it indicates that an
additional small quantity of the subacetate of lead is required. The
operator must learn by experience the point where the addition should
cease; a decided excess of subacetate of lead solution should never be
used.

The use of subacetate of lead should, in all cases, be followed by the
addition of "alumina cream" (aluminic hydrate suspended in water)[2]
in about double the volume of the subacetate solution used, for the
purpose of completing the clarification, precipitating excess of lead,
and facilitating filtration. In many cases of high grade sugars,
especially beet sugars, the use of alumina alone will be sufficient
for clarification without the previous addition of subacetate of lead.

    [Footnote 2: Prepared as follows: Shake up powdered commercial
    alum with water at ordinary temperature until a saturated
    solution is obtained. Set aside a little of the solution, and to
    the residue add ammonia, little by little, stirring between
    additions, until the mixture is alkaline to litmus paper. Then
    drop in additions of the portion left aside, until the mixture
    is just acid to litmus paper. By this procedure a cream of
    aluminum hydroxide is obtained suspended in a solution of
    ammonium sulphate, the presence of which is not at all
    detrimental for sugar work when added after subacetate of lead,
    the ammonium sulphate precipitating whatever excess of lead may
    be present.]

The solution is now made up to the mark by the addition of distilled
water in the following manner. The flask, grasped by the neck between
the thumb and finger, is held before the operator in an upright
position, so that the mark is at the level of the eye, and distilled
water is added drop by drop from a siphon bottle or wash bottle, until
the lowest point of the curve or meniscus formed by the surface of the
liquid just touches the mark. If bubbles hinder the operation, they
may be broken up by adding a single drop of ether, or a spray from an
ether atomizer, before making up to the mark. The mouth of the flask
is now tightly closed with the thumb, and the contents of the flask
are thoroughly mixed by turning and shaking. The entire solution is
now poured upon the filter, using for this purpose a funnel large
enough to contain all the 100 c.c. at once, and a watch glass is
placed over the funnel during filtration to prevent a concentration of
the solution by evaporation.

The funnel and vessel used to receive the filtrate must be perfectly
dry. The first portion of the filtrate, about 20 to 30 c.c., should be
rejected entirely, as its concentration may be affected by a previous
hygroscopic moisture content of the filter paper. It may also be
necessary to return subsequent portions to the filter until the liquid
passes through perfectly clear.

If a satisfactory clarification has not been obtained, the entire
operation must be repeated, since only with solutions that are
entirely clear and bright can accurate polarimetric observations be
made.

When a sufficient quantity of the clear liquid has passed through the
filter, the 200 mm. observation tube is filled with it. The 100 mm.
tube should never be used except in rare cases, when notwithstanding
all the means used to effect the proper decolorization of the
solution, it is still too dark to polarize in the 200 mm. tube. In
such cases the shorter tube may be used, and its reading multiplied by
two. The zero deviation must then be determined and applied to the
product. This will give the reading which would have been obtained if
a 200 mm. tube could have been used, and it only remains to apply the
correction determined by the use of the control plate as previously
described.

Example:

     Solution reads in 100 mm. tube       47.0
     Multiplied by 2                       2.0
                                          ----
     Product                              94.0
     Zero reads plus 0.3                   0.3
                                          ----
     Solution would read in 200 mm. tube  93.7

     Reading of control plate             90.4
     Sugar value of control plate         90.5
                                          ----
     Instrument too low by                 0.1
     Add 0.1 to                           93.7
                                          ----
     Correct polarization of solution     93.8

Before filling the tube it must either be thoroughly dried by pushing
a plug of filter paper through it, or it must be rinsed several times
with the solution itself. The cover glasses must also be clean and
dry, and without serious defects or scratches. Unnecessary warming of
the tube by the hand during filling should be avoided; it is closed at
one end with the screw cap and cover glass, and grasped by the other
end with the thumb and finger. The solution is poured into it until
its curved surface projects slightly above the opening, the air
bubbles allowed time to rise, and the cover glass pushed horizontally
over the end of the tube in such a manner that the excess of liquid is
carried over the side, leaving the cover glass exactly closing the
tube with no air bubbles beneath it, and with no portion of the liquid
upon its upper surface. If this result is not attained, the operation
must be repeated, the cover glass being rubbed clean and dry, and the
solution again brought up over the end by adding a few more drops. The
cover glass being in position, the tube is closed by screwing on the
cap. The greatest care must be observed in screwing down the caps that
they do not press too tightly upon the cover glasses; by such pressure
the glasses themselves may become optically active, and cause
erroneous readings when placed in the instrument. It should therefore
be ascertained that the rubber washers are in position over the cover
glasses, and the caps should be screwed on lightly. It must also be
remembered that a cover glass, once compressed, may part with its
acquired optical activity very slowly, and some time must be allowed
to elapse before it is used again.

The polariscopic reading may now be taken, an observation on the 90 deg.
control plate having been made immediately before as previously
described. Then without altering the position of the instrument
relative to the light, or changing the character of the latter in any
way, the tube filled with the sugar solution is substituted for the
control plate. The telescope is adjusted, if necessary, so as to give
a sharply defined field, which must appear round and clear. (This
condition must be fulfilled before the observation is performed, as it
is essential to accuracy.) The milled head is turned until the neutral
point is found, and the reading is taken exactly as previously
described, the operation repeated five or six times, the average taken
with the rejection of aberrant readings, the average figure corrected
for the deviation shown by the control observation from the sugar
value of the control plate at the temperature of observation as given
in the table, and the result taken as the polarization of the sugar.
When a series of successive polarizations is made under the same
conditions as regards temperature, position of the instrument with
relation to the high intensity, of the light, etc., the control
observation need not be made before each polarization, one such
observation being sufficient for the entire series. The control must
be repeated at least once an hour, however, and oftener when the
operator has reason to think that any of the factors indicated above
have been altered, for any such alteration of conditions may change
the zero point of the instrument.

In the polarization of the quartz plates, as also in the polarization
of very white sugars, difficulty may be experienced in obtaining a
complete correspondence of both halves of the field. With a little
practice this may be overcome and the neutral point found, but when it
cannot, the ordinary telescope of the instrument may be replaced by
another, which is furnished with the polariscope and which carries a
yellow plate. This removes the difficulty and renders it possible,
even for one not well accustomed to the instrument, to set it at the
exact point of neutrality.


SUMMARIZED SOURCES OF ERROR.

The following principal sources of error must be especially guarded
against:

1. Drying out of sample during weighing.

2. Excess of subacetate of lead solution in clarification.

3. Incomplete mixing of solution after making up to mark.

4. Imperfect clarification or filtration.

5. Concentration of solution by evaporation during filtration.

6. Undue compression of the cover glass.

7. Alteration of the temperature of room, position of instrument, or
intensity of light while the observation or control observation is
being performed.

8. Performances of polarization with a cloudy, dim, or not completely
round or sharply defined field.

In closing this report the members of this commission hereby signify
their intention to promote uniformity and accuracy by adopting and
using the standards and general plan of procedure recommended in this
report in the polarimetric determinations over which, in their
respective branches of government work, they have control.

       *       *       *       *       *




THE GRAND FALLS OF LABRADOR.


Hamilton Inlet, or Ionektoke, as the Esquimaus call it, is the outlet
to the largest river on the Labrador Peninsula, and of great
importance to commerce, Rigolet, the headquarters of the Hudson Bay
Company in this region, being situated on its shores. This inlet is
the great waterway to Central Labrador, extending into the interior
for nearly 200 miles.

This immense basin is undoubtedly of glacial origin, evidences of ice
erosion being plainly seen. It is divided into two general basins,
connected by the "narrows," a small strait, through which the water
rushes with frightful rapidity at each tide. Into the head of the
inlet flows the Hamilton, or Grand River, an exploration of which,
though attended with the greatest danger and privation, has enticed
many men to these barren shores. Perhaps the most successful
expedition thus far was that of Mr. Holme, an Englishman, who, in the
summer of 1888, went as far as Lake Waminikapon, where, by failure of
his provisions, he was obliged to turn back, leaving the main object
of the trip, the discovery of the Grand Falls, wholly unaccomplished.

It has been left for Bowdoin College to accomplish the work left
undone by Mr. Holme, to do honor to herself and her country by not
only discovering, measuring, and photographing the falls, but making
known the general features of the inland plateau, the geological
structure of the continent, and the course of the river.

On Sunday, July 26, a party of the Bowdoin expedition, consisting of
Messrs. Cary, Cole, Young, and Smith, equipped with two Rushton boats
and a complement of provisions and instruments, left the schooner at
the head of the inlet for a five weeks' trip into the interior, the
ultimate object being the discovery of the Grand Falls. The mouth of
the river, which is about one mile wide, is blockaded by immense sand
bars, which have been laid down gradually by the erosive power of the
river. These bars extend far out into Goose Bay, at the head of Lake
Melville, and it is impossible to approach the shores except in a
small boat. Twenty-five miles up the river are the first falls, a
descent of the water of twenty-five feet, forming a beautiful sight.
Here a cache of provisions was made, large enough to carry the party
back to the appointed meeting place at Northwest River. The carry
around the first falls is about one and a half miles in length, and
very difficult on account of the steep sides of the river.

From the first falls to Gull Island Lake, forty miles above, the river
is alternately quick and dead water. Part of it is very heavy rapids,
over which it was necessary to track, and in some places to double the
crews. Each boat had a tow line of fifty feet, and in tracking the end
was taken ashore by one of the crew of two, while the boat was kept
off the bank by the other man with an oar. At the Horseshoe Rapids,
ten miles above Gull Island Lake, an accident happened which
threatened to put a stop to further progress of the expedition. While
tracking around a steep point in crossing these rapids the boat which
Messrs. Cary and Smith were tracking was overturned, dumping
barometer, shotgun, and ax into the river, together with nearly
one-half the total amount of provisions. In the swift water of the
rapids all these things were irrevocably lost, a very serious loss at
this stage in the expedition. On this day so great was the force of
the water that only one mile was made, and that only with the greatest
difficulty.

Just above the mouth of the Nimpa River, which enters the Grand River
twenty-five miles above Gull Island Lake, a second cache of provisions
was made, holding enough to carry the party to their first cache at
the first falls. One of the boats was now found to be leaking badly,
and a stop was made to pitch the cracks and repair her, making
necessary the loss of a few hours. From Nimpa River to the Mouni
Rapids, at the entrance to Lake Waminikapon, the water was found to be
fairly smooth, and good progress was made. The change in the scenery,
too, is noticeable, becoming more magnificent and grand. The
mountains, which are bolder and more barren, approach much nearer to
each other on each side of the river, and at the base of these grim
sentinels the river flows silvery and silently. The Mouni Rapids,
through which the water passes from Lake Waminikapon, presented the
next obstacle to further progress, but the swift water here was soon
passed, and well repaid the traveler with the sight here presented
almost unexpectedly to his view.

The lake was entered about 4 o'clock in the afternoon, and, as the
narrow entrance was passed, the sun poured its full rich light on
rocky mountains stretching as far away as the eye could reach, on each
side of the lake, and terminating in rocky cliffs from 600 to 800 feet
in perpendicular height, which formed the shores or confines of the
lake. Across Lake Waminikapon, which is, more properly speaking, not a
lake at all, but rather a widening of the river bed, the progress was
very good, the water having no motion to retard the boats, and forty
miles were made during the day.

Here a misfortune, which had been threatening for several days, came
upon the party. Mr. Young's arm was so swollen, from the shoulder to
finger tips, that he could scarcely move it, the pain being excessive.
It had been brought on doubtless by cold and exposure. Seeing that he
could be of no further use to the party, it was decided to divide
forces, Mr. Smith returning with the sick man to Rigolet for medical
assistance. The separation took place August 8, when the party had
been on the river eleven days. The party were very sorry to return at
this point, since from the best information which they could get in
regard to the distance, the falls were but fifty miles above them.
Under the circumstances, however, there was no help for it. So Smith
and Young, bidding their friends good fortune, started on their return
trip. The mouth of the river was reached in three days, a little less
than one-third the time consumed in going up, and that, too, with only
one man to handle the boat.

On the way down the river another party, composed of Messrs. Bryant
and Kenaston of Philadelphia, was met, who were on the same business
as the Bowdoin party, the discovery of the falls. Mr. Bryant handed to
Mr. Young a twenty-five pound can of flour, which, he said, he had
found in the whirlpool below the first falls. It had been in the boat
which was overturned in the Horseshoe Rapids, and had made the journey
to the first falls, a distance of over fifty miles, without denting or
injuring the can in any way. It was a great relief to the Bryant party
to learn the cause of the mishap, as they had feared a more serious
calamity.

After the departure of the other two, Messrs. Cary and Cole
encountered much rapid water, so that their progress was necessarily
slow. On the third day, when they had proceeded sixty-five miles above
Lake Waminikapon, and had seen no indications of any falls, the
rapidity of the current forced them to leave the river and make any
further progress on foot. The boat was cached at this point, together
with all that was left of provisions and instruments except the
compass and food for six days. They left just enough provisions to
carry them to their last cache at Ninipi River, and hoped, by careful
use of the remainder, to find the object of their search. If they had
not enough provisions, then they must turn back, leaving reports of
falls as destitute of confirmation as ever.

The land bordering the river at this point was heavily wooded, and in
places where the river shore could not be followed on account of the
cliffs, their progress was necessarily slow. Finding an elevation of
land at no great distance from them, they ascended it for a general
survey of the country. Far away in the distance could be seen the
current of the Grand River flowing sluggishly but majestically on its
course to the sea. Lakes on all sides were visible, most of them
probably of glacial origin. Descending from this mountain, which the
explorers christened Mount Bowdoin, a course was laid on the river
bank, where camp was made that night. Being now somewhat weak from
hard labor and insufficient food, their progress was slow through the
thick wood, but on the next night camp was made on the edge of the
plateau or table land of Labrador.

After proceeding a short distance on the next day, Aug. 13, a loud
roar was heard in the distance, and a course was laid for the river at
the nearest point. The river at this point, about one mile above the
falls, was 500 yards wide, narrowing to fifty yards a short distance
below, where great clouds of spray floating in the air warned the
weary travelers that their object had been attained. Quickly they
proceeded to the scene, and a magnificent sight burst upon their view.

Grand Falls, though not approaching the incredible height attributed
to it by legendary accounts of the Indians, is a grand fall of water.
Its total descent is accomplished in a series of falls aggregating
nearly 500 feet. The greatest perpendicular descent is not over 200
feet. The half dozen falls between this grand descent and the bed of
the river on the plateau vary from ten to twenty-five feet, adding to
the majesty and grandeur of the scene. It was with great difficulty
that the bottom of the falls was reached and a photograph of the scene
taken.

After leaving the plateau and plunging over the falls, the waters
enter an immense canon or gorge, nearly 40 miles long and 300 yards
wide, the perpendicular sides of which rise to a height of from 300 to
500 feet. The sides of this canon show it to be hollowed out of solid
Archaean rock. Through this canon the water rushes with terrific
rapidity, making passage by boat wholly impossible. Many erroneous
stories have been told in regard to the height of these falls, all of
them greatly exaggerating the descent of the water. The Indians of
this locality of the tribe of the Nascopee or the race of Crees have
long believed the falls to be haunted by an evil spirit, who punished
with death any one who might dare to look upon them. The height of
land or plateau which constitutes the interior of the Labrador
peninsula is from 2,000 to 2,500 feet above the sea level, fairly
heavily wooded with spruce, fir, hackmatack, and birch, and not at all
the desolate waste it has been pictured by many writers. The
barrenness of Labrador is confined to the coast, and one cannot enter
the interior in any direction without being struck by the latent
possibilities of the peninsula were it not for the abundance of flies
and mosquitoes. Their greed is insatiable, and at times the two men
were weakened from the loss of blood occasioned by these insects.

The object of the expedition being attained, the return trip was
begun, and the sight of the cached boat and provisions eagerly watched
for. On Aug. 15 the camp was sighted, but to their horror they saw
smoke issuing from the spot. It at once flashed upon their minds what
had taken place, and when they arrived they found that their fears had
been all too truly realized. Charred remains of the boat, a burned
octant, and a few unexploded cartridges were all that remained of the
meager outfit upon which they depended to take them to the mouth of
the river, a distance of over 250 miles. The camp fire, not having
been completely extinguished, had burned the boat and destroyed all
their provisions.

It was truly a hard outlook for them, but no time must be lost if
provisions were to be obtained. Hastily a raft was constructed, the
logs being bound together with spruce roots. In this way, by
alternately walking and rafting, the mouth of the river was reached
Aug. 29. On the way down the river five rafts had been made and
abandoned. The only weapon was a small pocket revolver, and with the
products of this weapon, mostly red squirrels and a few fish, they
lived until they reached the different caches. Many a meal was made of
one red squirrel divided between them, and upon such food they were
compelled to make the best time possible. On the way up the river the
shoes of one of the party had given wholly out, and he was obliged to
make a rude pair of slippers from the back of a leather pack. With
torn clothes and hungry bodies they presented a hard sight indeed when
they joined their friends at Rigolet on the 1st of September. The
party composed of Messrs. Bryant and Kenaston was passed by Cary and
Cole while on the way down, but was not seen. Probably this occurred
on Lake Waminikapon, the width of the lake preventing one party from
seeing the other. It seemed a waste of time and energy that two
expeditions in the same summer should be sent upon the same object,
but neither party knew of the intention of the other until it was too
late to turn back.

Grand River has long been a highway for the dependents of the Hudson
Bay Company. The company formerly had a post on Lake Waminikapon, and
another, called Height of Land, on the plateau. Provisions were
carried to these posts, and furs brought from them by way of Grand
River, the parties proceeding as far as the lake, and then, leaving
Grand River some distance below the canon, no longer being able to
follow it on account of the swiftness of the water, they carried their
canoes across the land to a chain of lakes connecting with the post.
This station has been given up many years, and the river is used now
chiefly be Indians and hunters in the winter.

It has long been known that Hamilton Inlet was of glacial origin, the
immense basin hollowed out by this erosive agent being 150 miles in
length. How much further this immense valley extended has never been
known. Mr. Cary says that the same basin which forms Hamilton Inlet
and enters Lake Melville, the two being connected by twelve miles of
narrows, extends up the Grand River Valley as far as Gull Island Lake,
