weight; but, on the other hand, gains largely in pliability and
elasticity, so that the paper made from it is of great strength, and
not only resists tearing, but especially crumpling and breaking.

The jute may be submitted to the process in any form whatever, either
crude, in scraps, or as thread or tissue.

The material to be bleached is first treated with gaseous chlorine or
chlorine water, in order to attack the jute pigment, which is very
difficult to bleach, until it takes an orange shade. After having
removed the acids, etc., formed by this treatment, the jute is placed
in a weak alkaline bath, cold or hot, of caustic soda, caustic potash,
caustic ammonia, quicklime, sodium or potassium carbonate, etc., or a
mixture of several of these substances, which converts the greatest
part of the jute pigment, already altered by the chlorine, into a form
easily soluble in water, so that the pigment can be readily removed by
a washing with water. After this washing the jute can be bleached as
easily as any other vegetable fiber in the ordinary manner, by means
of bleaching powder, etc., and an excellent fibrous material is
obtained, which can be made use of with advantage in the textile and
paper industries.

The application of the process may be illustrated by an example:

One hundred kilos. of waste jute scraps are first of all treated in
the manner usually employed in the paper industry; 15 per cent. of
quicklime is added, and they are treated for 10 hours at a pressure of
11/2 atmospheres. The scraps are then freed from water by means of a
hydro-extractor, or a press, and finally saturated with chlorine in a
gas chamber for 24 hours or less, according to the requirements of the
case. Every 100 kilos. of jute requires 75 kilos. of hydrochloric acid
(20 deg. B.) and 20 kilos. of manganese peroxide (78-80 per cent.).

The jute then takes an orange color, and is subsequently washed in a
tank, a kilo. of caustic soda being added per 100 kilos. of jute; this
amount of alkali is sufficient to dissolve the pigment, which colors
the water flowing from the washer a deep brown. After washing, the
jute can be completely bleached by the use of 5-7 kilos. of bleaching
powder per 100 kilos. of jute.--_Mon. de la Teinture_.

       *       *       *       *       *




THE INDEPENDENT--STORAGE OR PRIMARY BATTERY--SYSTEM OF ELECTRIC MOTIVE
POWER.[1]

  [Footnote 1: Abstract of a paper read before the American Streel
  Railway Association, Oct. 23, 1891.]

By KNIGHT NEFTEL.


Owing to a variety of causes, the system which was assigned to me at
the last convention to report on has made less material progress in a
commercial way than its competitors.


PRIMARY BATTERIES.

So far, primary batteries have been applied only to the operation of
the smallest stationary motors. Their application in the near future
to traction may, I think, be entirely disregarded. Were it not a
purely technical matter, it might be easily demonstrated, with our
knowledge of electro-chemistry, that such an arrangement as an
electric primary battery driving a car is an impossibility.

In view of the claims of certain inventors, I regret to be obliged to
make so absolute a statement; but the results so far have produced
nothing of value.


SECONDARY BATTERIES.

The application of secondary or storage batteries to electrical
traction has been accomplished in a number of cities, with a varying
amount of success. Roads equipped by batteries have now been
sufficiently long in operation to allow us to draw some conclusions as
to the practical results obtained and what is possible in the near
future. The advantages which have been demonstrated on Madison Avenue,
in New York; Dubuque, Iowa; Washington, D.C., and elsewhere, may be
summarized as follows:

_First_. The independent feature of the system. The cars independent
of each other, and free from drawbacks of broken trolley wires;
temporary stoppages at the power station; the grounding of one motor
affecting other motors, and sudden and severe strains upon the
machinery at the power station, such as frequently occur in direct
systems; the absence of all street structures and repairs to the same,
and the loss by grounds and leakages, are also very considerable
advantages, both as to economy and satisfactory operation.

_Second_. The comparatively small space required for the power
station. Each car being provided with two or more sets of batteries,
the same can be charged at a uniform rate without undue strain on the
machinery of the power station, and as it can be done more rapidly
than the discharge required for the operation of the motors, a less
amount of general machinery is necessary for a given amount of work.

Another and important advantage of the system is the low pressure of
the current used to supply the motors, and the consequent increased
durability of the motor, and practically absolute safety to life from
electrical shock.

It has been demonstrated also that the cars can be easily handled in
the street; run at any desired speed, and reversed with far more
safety to the armature of the motor than in the direct system. The
increased weight requires simply more brake leverage.

The modern battery, improved in many of its details during the last
year, is still an unknown quantity as to durability. There is the same
doubt concerning this as there was at the time incandescent lamps were
first introduced. At that time some phenomenal records were made by
lamps grouped with other lamps.

Similarly, some plates appeared to be almost indestructible, while
others, made practically in the same manner, deteriorate within a very
short time. It is, consequently, very difficult to exactly and fairly
place a limit on the life of the positive plates as yet. Speaking
simply from observation of a large number of plates of various kinds,
I am inclined to put the limit at about eight months; though it is
claimed by some of the more prominent manufacturers--and undoubtedly
it is true in special cases--that entire elements have lasted ten
months, and even longer.

It must be remembered, however, that the jolting and handling to which
these batteries are subjected, in traction work, increases the
tendency to disintegrate, buckle and short circuit, and that the
record for durability for this application can never be the same as
for stationary work. A serious inconvenience to the use of batteries
in traction work is the necessary presence of the liquid in the jars.
This causes the whole equipment to be somewhat cumbersome, and unless
arranged with great care, and with a variety of devices lately
designed, a source of considerable annoyance.

The connections between the plates, which formerly gave so much
trouble by breaking off, have been perfected so as to prevent this
difficulty, and the shape of the jars has been designed to prevent the
spilling of the acid while the car is running. The car seats are now
practically hermetically sealed, so that the escaping gases are not
offensive to the passengers.

The handling of the batteries is an exceedingly important
consideration. Many devices have been invented to render this easy and
cheap. I have witnessed the changing of batteries in a car, one set
being taken out and a charged set replaced by four men in the short
space of three minutes. This is accomplished by electrical elevators,
which move the batteries opposite the car, and upon the platforms of
which the discharged elements are again charged.

The general conclusions which the year's experience and progress have
afforded us an opportunity to make may be summarized as follows:

Storage battery cars are as yet applicable only to those roads which
are practically level; where the direct system cannot be used, and
where cable traction cannot be used; and applicable to those roads
only at about the same cost as horse traction.

I feel justified in making this statement in view of the guarantees
which some of the more prominent manufacturers of batteries are
willing to enter into, and which practically insure the customer
against loss due to the deterioration of plates: leaving the question
of the responsibility of the company the only one for him to look
into.

       *       *       *       *       *




ON THE ELIMINATION OF SULPHUR FROM PIG IRON.[1]

  [Footnote 1: Paper read before the Iron and Steel Institute.]

By J. MASSENEZ, Hoerde.


If in the acid and the basic Bessemer processes the molten pig iron is
taken direct to the converter from the blast furnace, there is the
disadvantage that the running of the individual blast furnaces can
hardly ever be kept so uniform as it is desirable should be the case
in order to secure regularity in the converter charges. In the
manufacture of Bessemer steel the variable proportions of silicon and
of carbon here come chiefly under consideration, while in the basic
process it is chiefly the varying proportions of silicon and of
sulphur; and in cases where either ores containing variable
percentages of phosphorus, or puddle slags, are treated, the varying
proportion of phosphorus has also to be considered. This disadvantage
of the irregular composition of the individual blast furnace charges
is obviated in a simple and effective manner by W.R. Jones's mixing
process. In this as much pig iron from the various blast furnaces of a
works as is sufficient for a large number of Bessemer charges, say
from seven to twelve charges, or, in other words, from 70 to 120 tons
of pig iron, is placed in a mixing vessel. Only a portion of pig iron
placed in the mixer is taken for further treatment for steel, while
new supplies of pig iron are brought from the blast furnace. In this
way homogeneity sufficient for practical purposes is obtained.

In the treatment of phosphoric pig iron, which is employed in the
production of basic steel, it is, however, not sufficient merely to
conduct the molten pig iron in large quantities to the converter in a
mixed condition, but the problem here is to render the proportion of
sulphur also independent of the blast furnace process to such an
extent that the proportion of sulphur in the finished steel is so low
that the quality of the steel is in no way influenced by it. The
question of desulphurization has, especially of late years, become of
the utmost importance, at any rate for the iron industry of the
Continent. By the great strike of 1889, the German colliers have
succeeded in greatly improving their wages; and with this increase in
wages not only is there a distinct diminution in the amount of coal
wrought, but, unfortunately, the coal produced since then is raised in
a much less pure condition than was formerly the case. Consequently
the proportion of sulphur in the coke has considerably increased.
Whereas formerly this proportion did not exceed one per cent., it has
now in many cases risen to 18 per cent.; so that an unpleasant ratio
exists between the wages of the workmen and the amount of sulphur in
the coal raised. It is therefore not remarkable that, even when ores
fairly free from sulphur are treated, it easily happens that a
sulphureted pig iron is obtained.

In order to effect satisfactory desulphurization, attention has been
bestowed on the fact that iron sulphide is converted by manganese into
manganese sulphide and iron. If sulphureted pig iron, poor in
manganese, is added in a fluid condition to manganiferous molten pig
iron, poor in sulphur, the metal is desulphurized, and a manganese
sulphide slag is formed. It may be urged that it does not seem
necessary to effect the desulphurization by means of the reaction of
the manganese and iron sulphide outside of the blast furnace, as it is
possible, by suitably directing the blast furnace, by the employment
of manganiferous ores or highly basic slag, so to desulphurize the
iron in the blast furnace itself that it would be unnecessary further
to lower the percentage of sulphur. Every blast furnace manager,
however, will have observed that, even with every precaution in the
blast furnace practice, pig iron will often be obtained with so high a
percentage of sulphur as to render it useless for the Bessemer acid or
basic processes. If the desulphurization in the blast furnace is
carried sufficiently far, it is always necessary to work the furnace
hot, and thus to obtain hotter iron than is desirable for further
treatment in the converter. On the other hand, the method of further
desulphurization outside the blast furnace, described in this paper,
presents the double advantage that part of the blast furnace can be
kept cooler, and thus lime and coke be saved, and that there is a
certainty that no red-short charges are obtained in the treatment in
the converter, while the pig iron passes to the converter at a
suitable temperature.

[Illustration: FIGS. 1 through 5]

A further advantage presented by the direct process described in this
paper is that the Bessemer works is independent of the time at which
the individual blast furnaces are tapped, as the pig iron required for
the Bessemer process can be taken at any moment from the
desulphurizing plant. In Hoerde, where the mixing and desulphurizing
process has for a considerable time been regularly in use, it has been
found that all the chief difficulties formerly encountered in the
method of taking the fluid pig iron direct from the various blast
furnaces to the converter have been obviated. At Hoerde the mixing and
desulphurizing plant shown in the accompanying engravings is employed.
This apparatus holds 70 tons of pig iron. It is, however, advisable to
have an apparatus of greater capacity, say 120 tons. The apparatus has
the shape of a converter, and the hydraulic machinery by which it is
moved is simple and effective. An hydraulic pressure of eight
atmospheres is sufficient to set it in motion. The vessel is provided
with a double lining of firebricks of the same quality as those used
for the lining of blast furnaces. This lining is gradually attacked
only along the slag line, and does not require repair until it has
been in use for some six weeks. Further repairs are then necessary
every three weeks. Only the few courses of spoilt bricks are renewed,
and for the repairs, including the cooling of the vessel, a period of
two or three days is required. At the end of the week the vessel is
kept filled, so that its contents suffice for the last charge to be
blown on Saturday. On Sunday night the vessel is again filled. The
consumption of manganese is very low; theoretically, it is the
quantity required for the formation of manganese sulphide, and in
practice it has been found that this amounts to about 0.2 per cent.
The proportion of manganese which the desulphurized pig iron coming
from the vessel should contain is best kept at about 1.5 per cent. in
order to render the desulphurization as complete as possible. Thus, a
mean proportion of 1.7 per cent. of manganese in the pig iron passing
into the vessel is more than sufficient to effect a thorough
desulphurization. Indeed, 1 to 1.2 per cent. of manganese is
sufficient to effect a satisfactory desulphurization. For the extent
of the removal of the sulphur, the temperature and the duration of the
reaction are of importance. It has been found that if highly
sulphureted pig iron is poured from the blast furnace into the
desulphurizing vessel, fifteen to twenty minutes are sufficient to
effect the desulphurization requisite for the steel process. The part
played by the duration of the process is seen from the results
obtained with the last charges, if the vessel is emptied at the end of
the week without fresh pig iron being added from the blast furnace.
If, for example, 60 tons of pig iron with 0.065 per cent. of sulphur
remain in the vessel, the proportion of sulphur with the last charges
falls to 0.03 per cent. The iron in the vessel remains sufficiently
fluid for several hours. When necessary, a little wood is thrown in.
It has been found quite unnecessary to obtain heat by passing and
burning a current of gas above the bath of metal.

A number of results, showing the separation of sulphur at the Hoerde
Works, was published a few months ago[2] by Professor P. Tunner, one
of our honorary members.

  [Footnote 2: "Oesterreichische Zeitschrift fur Berg und
  Huttenwesen," 1891, No. 19.]

The totals represent, respectively, 138,500 kilogrammes of pig iron
and 98,654 kilogrammes of sulphur.

Thus, from 138,500 kilogrammes of pig iron there has been eliminated
179,577-98,654 = 80,923 kilogrammes of sulphur, or, in other words,
45.063 per cent.

The proportion of sulphur in the slags rises with that in the iron
from the blast furnace to 17 per cent., an inappreciable portion of
the sulphur of the slag being oxidized to sulphurous anhydride by
access of air. An analysis of the slag yielded the following results:

                                Per cent.
  Sulphur                        17.07
  Manganese                      30.31
  Phosphoric anhydride            0.61
  Iron                            7.13
  Bases                          35.04

An analysis of an average sample gave:

                                Per cent.
  Manganese sulphide             28.01
  Manganous oxide                20.23
  Ferrous oxide                  25.46
  Silica                         18.90
  Alumina                         5.00
  Lime                            3.53
  Magnesia                        0.43

The great convenience and certainty presented by the method described
in this paper will in all probability lead to its general adoption. As
a matter of fact, several works are now occupied with the installation
of this mixing and desulphurizing plant.

       *       *       *       *       *




ON THE OCCURRENCE OF TIN IN CANNED FOOD.

By H.A. WEBER, Ph.D.


The following investigation of the condition of foods packed in tin
cans was prompted by an alleged case of poisoning, which occurred at
Mansfield, Ohio, in April, 1890. A man and woman were reported to the
writer as having been made sick by eating pumpkin pie made from canned
pumpkin. The attending physician pronounced the case one of lead
poisoning. The wholesale dealer from whose stock the canned pumpkin
originally came, procured a portion of the same at the house where the
poisoning occurred, and sent it to the writer for examination.

The results of the examination as reported in Serial No. 552, below,
showed that the canned pumpkin contained an amount of stannous salts
equivalent to 6.4 maximum doses and 51.4 minimum doses of stannous
chloride per pound. On being notified of this fact, the dealer sent a
can of the same brand of pumpkin from his stock. The inner coating of
the can was found to be badly eroded, and upon examination, as
reported in Serial No. 563, below, one pound of the pumpkin contained
tin salts equivalent to 7 maximum and 56 minimum doses of stannous
chloride.

The unexpected large amount of tin salts in such an insipid article as
canned pumpkin, and the claimed ill effects of the consumption of the
same, suggested the advisability of extending the investigation to
other canned goods in common use. Accordingly a line of articles was
purchased in open market as sold to consumers, no pains being taken to
procure old samples. The collection embraced fruits, vegetables, fish
and condensed milk. With the exception of the condensed milk, every
article examined was contaminated with salts of tin. In most cases the
amount of tin salts present was so large that there can be no doubt of
danger to health from the consumption of the food, especially if
several kinds are consumed at the same meal.


METHOD.

The method employed in the determination of the tin was simply as
follows:

The contents of each can were emptied into a large porcelain dish, and
the condition of the inner coating of the can noted. After thoroughly
mixing the contents, fifty grammes were weighed off and incinerated in
a porcelain dish of suitable size. The residue was treated with a
large excess of concentrated hydrochloric acid, evaporated to dryness,
moistened with hydrochloric acid, water was added, and the mass was
filtered and washed, the insoluble matter being all washed upon the
filter. After drying the filter with its contents, the whole was again
incinerated in a porcelain dish and the residue treated as before. The
solution thus obtained was properly diluted and saturated with
hydrogen sulphide. After standing about twelve hours in a covered
beaker the precipitate was filtered off and the tin weighed as stannic
oxide.


RESULTS OF EXAMINATION.

_Serial No. 552._--Sample of canned pumpkin, received of F.A.
Derthick, April 22, 1890, sent by Albert F. Remy & Co., Mansfield,
Ohio. Pie made from it supposed to have made a man and woman sick. The
attending physician pronounced the case one of lead poisoning.

                                      Per cent.
  Tin dioxide with trace of lead       0.0424
  Grains per pound                     2.97
  Equivalent to stannous chloride      3.74
  Minimum doses                       51.4
  Maximum doses                        6.4

_Serial No. 563._--Sample of canned pumpkin, received of Edward
Bethel, June 27, 1890. Labeled: Choice Pie Pumpkin, packed at Salem,
Columbiana County, Ohio, by G.B. McNabb, sent by A.F. Remy & Co.,
Mansfield, Ohio.

                                      Per Cent.
  Tin dioxide                          0.0444
  Grains per pound                     3.11
  Equivalent to stannous chloride      3.91
  Minimum doses                       56
  Maximum doses                        7

  Can eroded.

_Serial No. 565._--Sample of canned pumpkin, bought of T.B. Vaure,
July 11, 1890. Labeled: Belpre Pumpkin, Golden. George Dana & Sons,
Belpre, Ohio.

                                      Per Cent.
  Tin dioxide                          0.0054
  Grains per pound                     0.38
  Equivalent to stannous chloride      0.48
  Minimum doses                        7.7
  Maximum doses                        1.0

  Can eroded.

_Serial No. 566._--Sample of canned Hubbard Squash, bought of T.B.
Vaure, July 11, 1890. Labeled: Ladd Brand, L. Ladd, Adrian, Michigan.

                                      Per Cent.
  Tin dioxide                          0.026
  Grains per pound                     1.85
  Equivalent to stannous chloride      2.33
  Minimum doses                       37.00
  Maximum doses                        4.7

  Can badly eroded.

_Serial No. 567._--Sample of canned tomatoes, bought of T.B. Vaure,
July 11, 1890. Labeled: Extra Fine Tomatoes. Blue Label. Curtice Bros.
Co., Rochester, N.Y.

                                      Per Cent.
  Tin dioxide                          0.012
  Grains per pound                     0.84
  Equivalent to stannous chloride      1.06
  Minimum doses                       16.00
  Maximum doses                        2.00

  Inner coating eroded.

_Serial No. 568._--Sample of canned tomatoes, bought of T.B. Vaure,
July 11, 1890. Labeled: Fresh Tomatoes, Curtice Bros. Co., Rochester,
N.Y.

                                      Per Cent.
  Tin dioxide                          0.014
  Grains per pound                     0.98
  Equivalent to stannous chloride      1.23
  Minimum doses                       19.00
