they were crude, wasteful, and expensive, so that they can be employed
to-day only in a very few localities favored with good and cheap ore,
fuel, and labor.

The construction of larger furnaces and the employment of higher
temperatures led to the production of a highly carbonized, fusible
metal, without any special design on the part of the manufacturers in
producing it. This pig iron, however, could be used only for a few
purposes for which metallic iron was needed; but it was produced
cheaply and with little loss of metal, and the attempt to decarbonize
this product and bring it into a state in which it could be hammered
and welded was soon successfully made. This process of decarbonization,
or some modification of it, has successfully held the field against
all so-called, direct processes up to the present time. Why? Because
the old fashioned bloomeries and Catalan forges could produce blooms
only at a high cost, and because the new processes introduced failed
to turn out good blooms. Those produced were invariably "red short,"
that is, they contained unreduced oxide of iron, which prevented the
contact of the metallic particles, and rendered the welding together
of these particles to form a solid bloom impossible.

The process of puddling cast iron, and transforming it by
decarbonization into wrought iron, has, as everybody knows, been in
successful practical operation for many years, and the direct process
referred to so closely resembles this, that a short description of the
theory of puddling is not out of place here.

The material operated on in puddling is iron containing from 21/2 to 4
per cent. of carbon. During the first stage of the process this iron
is melted down to a fluid bath in the bottom of a reverberatory
furnace. Then the oxidation of the carbon contained in the iron
commences, and at the same time a fluid, basic cinder, or slag, is
produced, which covers a portion of the surface of the metal bath, and
prevents too hasty oxidation. This slag results from the union of
oxides of iron with the sand adhering to the pigs, and the silica
resulting from the oxidation of the silicon contained in the iron.

This cinder now plays a very important part in the process. It takes
up the oxides of iron formed by the contact of the oxidizing flame
with the exposed portion of the metal bath, and at the same time the
carbon of the iron, coming in contact with the under surface of the
cinder covering, where it is protected from oxidizing influences,
reduces these oxides from the cinder and restores them to the bath in
metallic form. This alternate oxidation of exposed metal, and its
reduction by the carbon of the cast iron, continues till the carbon is
nearly exhausted, when the iron assumes a pasty condition, or "comes
to nature," as the puddlers call this change. The charge is then
worked up into balls, and removed for treatment in the squeezer, and
then hammered or rolled. In the Wilson process the conditions which we
have noted in the puddling operation are very closely approximated.
Iron ore reduced to a coarse sand is mixed with the proper proportion
of charcoal or coke dust, and the mixture fed into upright retorts
placed in the chimney of the puddling furnace. By exposure for 24
hours to the heat of the waste gases from the furnace, in the presence
of solid carbon, a considerable portion of the oxygen of the ore is
removed, but little or no metallic iron is formed. The ore is then
drawn from the deoxidizer into the rear or second hearth of the
puddling furnace, situated below it, where it is exposed for 20
minutes to a much higher temperature than that of the deoxidizer. Here
the presence of the solid carbon, mixed with the ore, prevents any
oxidizing action, and the temperature of the mass is raised to a point
at which the cinder begins to form. Then the charge is carried forward
by the workmen to the front hearth, in which the temperature of a
puddling furnace prevails. Here the cinder melts, and at the same
time the solid carbon reacts on the oxygen remaining combined with the
ore, and forms metallic iron; but by this time the molten cinder is
present to prevent undue oxidation of the metal formed, and solid
carbon is still present in the mixture to play the same role, of
reducing protoxide of iron from the cinder, as the carbon of the cast
iron does in the ordinary puddling process. I have said that the cast
iron used as the material for puddling contains about 3 per cent. of
carbon; but in this process sufficient carbon is added to effect the
reduction of the ore to a metallic state, and leave enough in the mass
to play the part of the carbon of the cast iron when the metallic
stage has been reached.

It would be interesting to compare the Wilson with the numerous other
direct processes to which allusion has already been made, but there
have been so many of them, and the data concerning them are so
incomplete, that this is impossible. Two processes, however, the Blair
and the Siemens, have attracted sufficient attention, and are
sufficiently modern to deserve notice. In the Blair process a metallic
iron sponge was made from the ore in a closed retort, this sponge
cooled down in receptacles from which the air was excluded, to the
temperature of the atmosphere, then charged into a puddling furnace
and heated for working. In this way (and the same plan essentially has
been followed by other inventors), the metallic iron, in the finest
possible state of subdivision, is subjected to the more or less
oxidizing influences of the flame, without liquid slag to save it from
oxidation, and with no carbon present to again reduce the iron oxides
from the cinder after it is formed. The loss of metal is consequently
very large, but oxides of iron being left in the metal the blooms are
invariably "red short."

In the Siemens process pieces of ore of the size of beans or peas,
mixed with lime or other fluxing material, form the charge, which is
introduced into a rotating furnace; and when this charge has become
heated to a bright-red heat, small coal of uniform size is added in
sufficient quantity to effect the reduction of the ore.

The size of the pieces of the material employed prevents the intimate
mixture of the particles of iron with the particles of carbon, and
hence we would, on theoretical grounds, anticipate just what practice
has proved, viz., that the reduction is incomplete, and the resulting
metal being charged with oxides is red-short. In practice, blooms made
by this process have been so red-short that they could not be hammered
at all.

It would be impracticable in this process to employ ore and carbon in
as fine particles as Wilson does, as a very large portion of the
charge would be carried off by the draught, and a sticking of the
material to the sides of the rotating furnace could scarcely be
avoided. I do not imagine that a division of the material into
anything like the supposed size of molecules is necessary; we know
that the graphitic carbon in the pig-iron employed in puddling is not
so finely divided, but it is much smaller particles than bean or pea
size, and by approximating the size of the graphite particles in pig
iron, Wilson has succeeded in obtaining good results.

If we examine the utilization of the heat developed by the combustion
of a given quantity of coal in this process, and compare it with the
result of the combustion of an equivalent amount of fuel in a blast
furnace, we shall soon see the theoretical economy of the process. The
coal is burned on the grate of the puddling-furnace, to carbonic acid,
and the flame is more fully utilized than in an ordinary
puddling-furnace, for besides the ordinary hearth there is the second
or rear hearth, where additional heat is taken up, and then the
products of combustion are further utilized in heating the retorts in
which the ore is partly reduced. After this the heat is still further
utilized by passing it under the boilers for the generation of steam,
and the heat lost in the gases, when they finally escape, is very
small. In a blast furnace the carbon is at first burned only to
carbonic oxide, and the products of combustion issue mainly in this
form from the top of the furnace. Then a portion of the heat resulting
from the subsequent burning of these gases is pretty well utilized in
making steam to supply the power required about the works, but the
rest of the gas can only be utilized for heating the blast, and here
there is an enormous waste, the amount of heat returned to the furnace
by the heated blast being very small in proportion to the amount
generated by the burning of that portion of carbonic oxide expended in
heating it, and the gases escape from both the hot-blast and the
boilers at a high temperature.

In the direct process under consideration the fuel burned is more
completely utilized than in the puddling process, to which the cast
iron from the blast furnace is subjected to convert it into wrought
iron.

The economy claimed for this process, over the blast furnace and
puddling practice for the production of wrought iron, is that nearly
all the fuel used in the puddling operation is saved, and that with
about the same amount of fuel used in the blast furnace to produce a
ton of pig iron, a ton of wrought iron blooms can be made. I had no
opportunity of weighing the charges of ore and coal used, but I saw
the process in actual operation at Rockaway, N.J. The iron produced
was hammered up into good solid blooms, containing but little cinder.
The muck-bar made from the blooms was fibrous in fracture, and showed
every appearance of good iron. I am informed by the manager of the
Sanderson Brothers' steel works, at Syracuse, N.Y., that they
purchased blooms made by the Wilson process in 1881-1882, that _none_
of them showed red-shortness, and that they discontinued their use
only on account of the injurious action of the titanium they contained
on the melting pots. These blooms were made from magnetic sands from
the Long Island and Connecticut coasts.

[Illustration: NEW PROCESS FOR MAKING WROUGHT IRON FROM THE ORE.]

The drawing given shows the construction of the furnace employed. I
quote from the published description:

    "The upper part, or deoxidizer, is supported on a strong
    mantel plate resting on four cast iron columns.

    "The retorts and flues are made entirely of fire-brick, from
    special patterns. The outside is protected by a wrought iron
    jacket made of No. 14 iron. The puddling furnace is of the
    ordinary construction, except in the working bottom, which is
    made longer to accommodate two charges of ore, and thus
    utilize more of the waste heat in reducing the ore to metallic
    iron.

    "The operation of the furnace is as follows: The pulverized
    ore is mixed with 20 per cent. of pulverized charcoal or coke,
    and is fed into an elevator which discharges into the hopper
    on the deoxidizer leading into the retorts marked C. These
    retorts are proportioned so that they will hold ore enough to
    run the puddling furnace 24 hours, the time required for
    perfect deoxidation. After the retorts are filled, a fire is
    started in the furnace, and the products of combustion pass up
    through the main flue, or well, B, where they are deflected by
    the arch, and pass out through suitable openings, as indicated
    by arrows, into the down-takes marked E, and out through an
    annular flue, where they are passed under a boiler.

    "It will be noticed that the ore is exposed to the waste heat
    on three sides of the retorts, and owing to the great surface
    so exposed, the ore is very thoroughly deoxidized, and reduced
    in the retorts before it is introduced into the puddling
    furnace for final reduction. The curved cast iron pipes marked
    D are provided with slides, and are for the purpose of
    introducing the deoxidized ore into the second bottom of the
    furnace. As before stated, the furnace is intended to
    accommodate two charges of ore, and as fast as it is balled up
    and taken out of the working bottom, the charge remaining in
    the second bottom is worked up in the place occupied by the
    first charge, and a _new_ charge is introduced. As fast as the
    ore is drawn out from the retorts the elevator supplies a new
    lot, so that the retorts are always filled, thus making the
    process continuous."

The temperature of the charge in the deoxidizer is from 800 deg. to 1,000 deg.
F.--_Amer. Engineer._

       *       *       *       *       *




SOME REMARKS ON THE DETERMINATION OF HARDNESS IN WATERS.

By HERBERT JACKSON.


Having had occasion some short time ago to examine a hard water which
owed half its hardness to salts of magnesium, I noticed that the soap
test, applied in the usual way, gave a result which differed very much
from that obtained by the quantitative estimation of calcium and
magnesium. A perfectly normal lather was obtained when soap had been
added in quantities sufficient to neutralize 14 deg. of hardness, whereas
the water contained salts of calcium and magnesium equivalent, on
Clark's scale, to a hardness of 27 deg..

Although I was aware that similar observations had been made before, I
thought that it might be useful to determine the conditions under
which the soap test could not be depended upon for reliable results.

I found with waters containing calcium or magnesium alone that,
whenever salts of either of these metals were in solution in
quantities sufficient to give 23 deg. of hardness on Clark's scale, no
dependence could be placed upon the results given by the soap test. In
the case of waters containing salts of both calcium and magnesium, I
found that if the salts of the latter metal were in solution in
quantities sufficient to give more than 10 deg. of hardness, no evidence
could be obtained of their presence so long as the salts of calcium in
the same water exceeded 6 deg.; in such a case a perfect and permanent
lather was produced when soap had been added equivalent to 7 deg. of
hardness.

If any water be diluted so as to reduce the proportions of the salts
of calcium and magnesium below those stated above, perfectly reliable
results will of course be obtained.

Instead of dilution I found that heating the water to about 70 deg. C. was
sufficient to cause a complete reaction between the soap and the salts
of calcium and magnesium, even if these were present in far larger
quantities than any given here.

The experiments so far had all been made with a solution of Castile
soap of the strength suggested by Mr. Wanklyn in his book on "Water
Analysis." My attention was next directed to the use of any one of the
compounds of which such a soap is composed. I commenced with sodium
oleate, and found that by employing this substance in a moderately
pure condition, perfectly reliable results could be obtained in very
hard waters without the trouble of either diluting or heating. I was
unable to try sodium stearate directly because of the slight
solubility of this substance in cold water or dilute alcohol; but I
found that a mixture of sodium oleate and stearate behaved in exactly
the same manner as the Castile soap.

I am not prepared at present to state the exact reaction which takes
place between salts of calcium and magnesium and a compound soap
containing sodium oleate and stearate. I publish these results because
I have not noticed anywhere the fact that some waters show a greater
hardness with soap when their temperatures approach the boiling point
than they do at the average temperature of the air, it being, I
believe, the ordinary impression that cold water wastes more soap than
hot water before a good and useful lather can be obtained, whereas
with very many waters the case is quite the reverse. Neither am I
aware at present whether it is well known that the use of sodium
oleate unmixed with sodium stearate dispenses with the process of
dilution even in very hard waters.--_Chem. News._

       *       *       *       *       *




THE DENSITY AND PRESSURE OF DETONATING GAS MIXTURES.


MM. Berthelot and Vielle have recently been studying the influence of
the density of detonating gaseous mixtures upon the pressure
developed. The measure of pressure developed by the same gaseous
system, taken under two initial states of different density to which
the same quantity of heat is communicated, is an important matter in
thermodynamics. If the pressures vary in the same ratio as the
densities, we may conclude, independently of all special hypotheses on
the laws of gases, first, that the specific heat of the system is
independent of its density (that is to say, of its initial pressure),
and depends only on the absolute temperature, whatever that may mean;
and secondly, that the relative variation of the pressure at constant
volume, produced by the introduction of a determinate quantity of
heat, is also independent of the pressure, and a function only of the
temperature. Lastly, the pressure itself will vary proportionally with
the absolute temperature, as defined by the theory of a perfect gas,
and will serve to determine it. MM. Berthelot and Vielle operated with
a bomb, at first kept at ordinary temperatures in the air, and
afterward heated in an oil bath to 153 deg. Cent. They also employed
isomeric mixtures of the gases; methylic ether, cyanogen, hydrogen,
acetylene, and other gases were experimented upon, and the general
conclusions are as follows: 1. The same quantity of heat being
furnished to a gaseous system, the pressure of the system varies
proportionally to the density of the system. 2. The specific heat of
the gas is sensibly independent of the density as well toward very
high temperatures as about deg. Cent. This is all true for densities
near to those that the gas possesses cold under normal pressure, and
which varied in the experiment to double the original value. 3. The
pressure increases with the quantity of heat furnished to the same
system. 4. The apparent specific heat increases parallel with this
quantity of heat. These conclusions are independent of all hypotheses
on the nature and laws of gases, and were simply drawn from the
experiments in question.

       *       *       *       *       *




TURKISH BATHS FOR HORSES.


The Turkish bath has become an established institution in this
country; men of all classes now use it for sanitary as well as
remedial purposes. Athletes of various descriptions find it invaluable
in "training," and all the distinguished jockeys and light weights
keep themselves in condition by its use.

It was thought probable that what was good for man might also be good
for the horse, and the fact has been proved. Messrs. Pickford, the
eminent carriers, in their hospital for horses at Finchley, have had a
bath in operation over eleven years, and find the horses derive great
benefit from its use. The bath is put in operation three days a week,
and is administered to over twenty horses in this time. The value of
the bath having been thus proved, it is rather strange that it has not
been more generally adopted by the large carrying firms. However, the
Great Northern Railway Company at their new hospital for horses at
Totteridge, are erecting a very complete Turkish bath. It consists of
three rooms. First, a large wash room or grooming room, from which is
entered the first hot room, or tepidarium, from 140 deg. to 150 deg. Fahr.;
from this room, the horse, after being thoroughly acclimated, can, if
necessary, pass to the hottest room, or calidarium, from 160 deg. to 170 deg.
Fahr., and without any turning round can pass on into the grooming and
washing room again. This last room is slightly heated from the two
other rooms, and in each are stocks in which the animal can he
fastened if required. The heating is done most economically by
Constantine's convoluted stove, and thorough ventilation is secured
from the large volume of hot air constantly supplied, which passes
through the baths, and as it becomes vitiated is drawn off by
specially designed outlets. The wash room is supplied with hot and
cold water, which can, of course, be mixed to any required
temperature.--_Building News._

[Illustration]

   ||
   |+-------------------------------------------------------+
   |+-------------------++---__-------____------------__---+|
   ||                   ||FOUL AIR  FOUL AIR       FOUL AIR||
   ||                   ||                                 ||
   ||                   ||                                 ||
   ||                   ||         ==============          ||
   ||                  /     /                             ||
   ||                 /     /       1ST HOT ROOM           ||
   ||                /     /                               ||
   ||               /     /        ==============          ||
   ||                   ||                                 ||
   /         =======+   ||                                 ||
  /                ||   ||                          CURTAIN||
       WASHING ROOM||   |+===========================     =||
  \                ||   ||                                 ||
   \         =======+   ||                                 ||
   ||                   ||                                 ||
   ||               \     \        ==============          ||
   ||                \     \                               ||
   ||                 \     \       2ND HOT ROOM           ||  FRESH
   ||                  \     \                             || / AIR
   ||                   ||         ==============          ||==
   ||                   ||                          +======||  |
   ||                   ||                          | WARM ||  |
   ||                   ||FOUL AIR          FOUL AIR| AIR  ||  |
   |+-------------------++---__--+===+---------__----------+|==
   |+----------------------------|_|_|---------------------+|
   ||      |     ||||| |                                   ||
   ||      |     ||||| |                                   ||
   ||      |============           S T O K E R Y           ||
   ||                 ||                                   ||
   ||                 ||                                   ||
   ||                 |+-----------------------------------||
                      +-------------------------------------+


       *       *       *       *       *




MIRYACHIT, A NEWLY DESCRIBED DISEASE OF THE NERVOUS SYSTEM, AND
ITS ANALOGUES.[1]

   [Footnote 1: Read before the New York Neurological Society,
   February 5, 1884.]

By WILLIAM A. HAMMOND, M.D., Surgeon-General, U.S. Army (Retired
List); Professor of Diseases of the Mind and Nervous System in the New
York Post-Graduate Medical School and Hospital.


In a very interesting account of a journey from the Pacific Ocean
through Asia to the United States, by Lieutenant B.H. Buckingham and
Ensigns George C. Foulk and Walter McLean,[2] United States navy, I
find an affection of the nervous system described which, on account of
its remarkable characteristics, as well as by reason of certain known
analogies, I think should be brought to the special notice of the
medical profession. I quote from the work referred to, the following
account of this disease. The party is on the Ussuri River not far from
its junction with the Amur in Eastern Siberia: "While we were walking
on the bank here we observed our messmate, the captain of the general
staff (of the Russian army), approach the steward of the boat
suddenly, and, without any apparent reason or remark, clap his hands
before his face; instantly the steward clapped _his_ hands in the same
manner, put on an angry look, and passed on. The incident was somewhat
curious, as it involved a degree of familiarity with the steward
hardly to have been expected. After this we observed a number of queer
performances of the steward, and finally comprehended the situation.
It seemed that he was afflicted with a peculiar mental or nervous
disease, which forced him to imitate everything suddenly presented to
his senses. Thus, when the captain slapped the paddle-box suddenly in
the presence of the steward, the latter instantly gave it a similar
thump; or, if any noise were made suddenly, he seemed compelled
against his will to imitate it instantly, and with remarkable
accuracy. To annoy him, some of the passengers imitated pigs grunting,
or called out absurd names; others clapped their hands and shouted,
jumped, or threw their hats on the deck suddenly, and the poor
steward, suddenly startled, would echo them all precisely, and
sometimes several consecutively. Frequently he would expostulate,
begging people not to startle him, and again would grow furiously
angry, but even in the midst of his passion he would helplessly
imitate some ridiculous shout or motion directed at him by his
pitiless tormenters. Frequently he shut himself up in his pantry,
which was without windows, and locked the door, but even there he
could be heard answering the grunts, shouts, or pounds on the bulkhead
outside. He was a man of middle age, fair physique, rather intelligent
in facial expression, and without the slightest indication in
appearance of his disability. As we descended the bank to go on board
the steamer, some one gave a loud shout and threw his cap on the
ground; looking about for the steward, for the shout was evidently
made for his benefit, we saw him violently throw his cap, with a
shout, into a chicken-coop, into which he was about to put the result
of his foraging expedition among the houses of the stanitza.

   [Footnote 2: "Observations upon the Korean Coast, Japanese-Korean
   Ports, and Siberia, made during a journey from the Asiatic
   Station to the United States, through Siberia to Europe, June 3
   to September 8, 1882." Published by the United States Navy
   Department, Washington, 1883, pp. 51.]

"We afterward witnessed an incident which illustrated the extent of
his disability. The captain of the steamer, running up to him,
suddenly clapping his hands at the same time, accidentally slipped and
fell hard on the deck; without having been touched by the captain, the
steward instantly clapped his bands and shouted, and then, in
powerless imitation, he too fell as hard and almost precisely in the
same manner and position as the captain. In speaking of the steward's
disorder, the captain of the general staff stated that it was not
uncommon in Siberia; that he had seen a number of cases of it, and
that it was commonest about Yakutsk, where the winter cold is extreme.
Both sexes were subject to it, but men much less than women. It was
known to Russians by the name of 'miryachit'".

So far as I am aware--and I have looked carefully through several
books of travel in Siberia--no account of this curious disease has
been hitherto published.

The description given by the naval officers at once, however, brings
to mind the remarks made by the late Dr. George M. Beard, before the
meeting of the American Neurological Association in 1880, relative to
the "Jumpers" or "Jumping Frenchmen" of Maine and northern New
Hampshire.[3]

   [Footnote 3: "Journal of Nervous and Mental Diseases," vol. vii.,
   1880, p. 487.]

In June, 1880, Dr. Beard visited Moosehead Lake, found the "Jumpers,"
and experimented with them. He ascertained that whatever order was
given them was at once obeyed. Thus, one of the jumpers who was
sitting in a chair with a knife in his hand was told to throw it, and
he threw it quickly, so that it stuck in a beam opposite; at the same
time he repeated the order to throw it with a cry of alarm not unlike
that of hysteria or epilepsy. He also threw away his pipe, which he
was filling with tobacco, when he was slapped upon the shoulder. Two
jumpers standing near each other were told to strike, and they struck
each other very forcibly. One jumper, when standing by a window, was
suddenly commanded by a person on the other side of the window to
jump, and he jumped up half a foot from the floor, repeating the
