
Unbounded enthusiasm and unjust blame alike subsided into a silence
that was not broken for ten years. Then Charles Richet, a renowned
scientist, came forward in 1875, impelled by the duty he felt he owed
as a priest of truth, and made some announcements concerning the
phenomena of somnambulism; and in countless books, all of which are
worthy of attention, he has since then considered the problem from its
various sides.

He separates somnambulism into three periods. The word here is used
for this whole class of subjects as Richet himself uses it, viz.,
_torpeur_, _excitation_, and _stupeur_. In the first, which is
produced by the so-called magnetic passes and the fixing of the eyes,
silence and languor come over the subject. The second period, usually
produced by constant repetition of the experiment, is characterized
chiefly by sensibility to hallucination and suggestion. The third
period has as its principal characteristics supersensibility of the
muscles and lack of sensation. Yet let it be noticed that these
divisions were not expressed in their present clearness until 1880;
while in the years between 1872 and 1880, from an entirely different
quarter, a similar hypothesis was made out for hypnotic phenomena.

Jean Martin Charcot, the renowned neurologist of the Parisian
Salpetriere, without exactly desiring it, was led into the study of
artificial somnambulism by his careful experiments in reference to
hysteria, and especially by the question of _metallotherapie_, and in
the year 1879 had prepared suitable demonstrations, which were given
in public lectures at the Salpetriere. In the following years he
devoted himself to closer investigation of this subject, and was
happily and skillfully assisted by Dr. Paul Richer, with whom were
associated many other physicians, such as Bourneville, Regnard, Fere,
and Binet. The investigations of these men present the peculiarity
that they observe hypnotism from its clinical and nosographical side,
which side had until now been entirely neglected, and that they
observe patients of the strongest hysterical temperaments. "If we can
reasonably assert that the hypnotic phenomena which depend upon the
disturbance of a regular function of the organism demand for their
development a peculiar temperament, then we shall find the most marked
phenomena when we turn to an hysterical person."

The inferences of the Parisian school up to this time are somewhat the
following, but their results, belonging almost entirely to the medical
side of the question, can have no place in this discussion. They
divide the phenomena of hystero-hypnotism, which they also call
_grande hysterie_, into three plainly separable classes, which Charcot
designates catalepsy, lethargy, and somnambulism.

Catalepsy is produced by a sudden sharp noise, or by the sight of a
brightly gleaming object. It also produces itself in a person who is
in a state of lethargy, and whose eyes are opened. The most striking
characteristic of the cataleptic condition is immobility. The subject
retains every position in which he is placed, even if it is an
unnatural one, and is only aroused by the action of suggestion from
the rigor of a statue to the half life of an automaton. The face is
expressionless and the eyes wide open. If they are closed, the patient
falls into a lethargy.

In this second condition, behind the tightly closed lids, the pupils
of the eyes are convulsively turned upward. The body is almost
entirely without sensation or power of thought. Especially
characteristic of lethargy is the hyper-excitability of the nerves and
muscles (_hyperexcitabilite neuromusculaire_), which manifests itself
at the slightest touch of any object. For instance, if the extensor
muscles of the arm are lightly touched, the arm stiffens immediately,
and is only made flexible again by a hard rubbing of the same muscles.
The nerves also react in a similar manner. The irritation of a nerve
trunk not only contracts all the small nerves into which it branches,
but also all those muscles through which it runs.

Finally, the somnambulistic condition proceeds from catalepsy or from
lethargy by means of a slight pressure upon the _vertex_, and is
particularly sensitive to every psychical influence. In some subjects
the eyes are open, in others closed. Here, also, a slight irritation
produces a certain amount of rigor in the muscle that has been
touched, but it does not weaken the antagonistic muscle, as in
lethargy, nor does it vanish under the influence of the same
excitement that has produced it. In order to put an end to the
somnambulistic condition, one must press softly upon the pupil of the
eye, upon which the subject becomes lethargic, and is easily roused by
breathing upon him. In this early stage, somnambulism appears very
infrequently.

Charcot's school also recognize the existence of compound conditions,
the history of whose symptoms we must not follow here. These slightly
sketched results, as well as a number of other facts, were only
obtained in the course of several years; yet in 1882 the fundamental
investigations of this school were considered virtually concluded.
Then Dumont-Pallier, the head of the Parisian Hospital Pitie, came
forward with a number of observations, drawn also exclusively from the
study of hystero-hypnotism, and yet differing widely from those
reached by the physicians of the Salpetriere. In a long series of
communications, he has given his views, which have in their turn been
violently attacked, especially by Magnin and Berillon. I give only the
most important points.

According to these men, the hyper-excitability of the nerves and
muscles is present not only in the lethargic condition, but in all
three periods; and in order to prove this, we need only apply the
suitable remedy, which must be changed for each period and every
subject. Slight irritations of the skin prove this most powerfully. A
drop of warm water or a ray of sunshine produces contractions of a
muscle whose skin covering they touch.

Dumont-Pallier and Magnin accede to the theory of intermediate stages,
and have tried to lay down rules for them with as great exactness as
Charcot's school. They also are very decided about the three periods,
whose succession does not appear to them as fixed; but they discovered
a new fundamental law which regulates the production as well as the
cessation of the condition--_La cause qui fait, defait_; that is, the
stimulus which produces one of the three periods needs only to be
repeated in order to do away with that condition. From this the
following diagram of hypnotic conditions is evolved:

[Illustration]

And, furthermore, Dumont-Pallier should be considered as the founder
of a series of experiments, for he was the first one to show in a
decisive manner that the duality of the cerebral system was proved by
these hypnotic phenomena; and his works, as well as those of Messrs.
Berillon and Descourtis, have brought to light the following facts:
Under hypnotic conditions, the psychical activity of a brain
hemisphere may be suppressed without nullifying the intellectual
activity or consciousness. Both hemispheres may be started at the same
time in different degrees of activity; and also, when the grade is the
same, they may be independently the seat of psychical manifestations
which are in their natures entirely different. In close connection
with this and with the whole doctrine of hemi-hypnotism, which is
founded upon these facts, stand the phenomena of thought transference,
which we must consider later.

As an addition to the investigations of Charcot and Dumont-Pallier,
Bremaud, in 1884, made the discovery that there was a fourth hypnotic
state, "fascination," which preceded the three others, and manifested
itself by a tendency to muscular contractions, as well as through
sensitiveness to hallucination and suggestion, but at the same time
left to the subject a full consciousness of his surroundings and
remembrance of what had taken place. Descourtis, in addition,
perceived a similar condition in the transition from hypnotic sleep to
waking, which he called _delire posthypnotique_, and, instead of using
the word "fascination" to express the opening stage, he substituted
"captation." According to him, the diagram would be the following:

[Illustration]

This whole movement, which I have tried to sketch, and whose chief
peculiarity is that it considers hypnotism a nervous malady, and one
that must be treated clinically and nosographically, was opposed in
1880 in two directions--one source of opposition producing great
results, while the other fell to the ground. The latter joined itself
to the theory of the mesmerists, and tried, by means of exact
experiments, to measure the fluid emanating from the human body--an
undertaking which gave slight promise of any satisfactory result.

Baillif in his thesis (1878) and Chevillard in his (for spiritualists)
very interesting books, tried, by means of various arguments, to
uphold the fluidic explanation. Despine also thought that by its help
he had been able to explain the phenomena; but it was Barety who, in
the year 1881, first turned general attention in this direction.
According to him, mankind possesses a nerve force which emanates from
him in different kinds of streams. Those coming from the eyes and
fingers produce insensibility to pain, while those generated by the
breath cause hypnotic conditions. This nerve force goes out into the
ether, and there obeys the laws that govern light, being broken into
spectra, etc.

Claude Perronnet has more lately advanced similar views, and his
greatest work is now in press. Frederick W.H. Myers and Edmund Gurney
sympathize with these views, and try to unite them with the mesmerist
doctrine of personal influence and their theory of telepathy. The
third champion in England of hypnotism, Prof. Hack Tuke, on the
contrary, sympathizes entirely with the Parisian school, only
differing from them in that he has experimented with satisfactory
results upon healthy subjects. In France this view has lately been
accepted by Dr. Bottey, who recognizes the three hypnotic stages in
healthy persons, but has observed other phenomena in them, and
vehemently opposes the conception of hypnotism as a malady. His
excellently written book is particularly commended to those who wish
to experiment in the same manner as the French investigator, without
using hysterical subjects.

The second counter current that opposed itself to the French
neuropathologists, and produced the most lasting impression, is
expressed by the magic word "suggestion." A generation ago, Dr.
Liebault, the patient investigator and skillful physician, had
endeavored to make a remedial use of suggestion in his clinic at
Nancy. Charles Richet and others have since referred to it, but
Professor Bernheim was the first one to demonstrate its full
significance in the realm of hypnotism. According to him,
suggestion--that is, the influence of any idea, whether received
through the senses or in a hypersensible manner (_suggestion
mentale_)--is the key to all hypnotic phenomena. He has not been able
in a single case to verify the bodily phenomena of _grandehypnotisme_
without finding suggestion the primary cause, and on this account
denies the truth of the asserted physical causes. Bernheim says that
when the intense expectance of the subject has produced a compliant
condition, a peculiar capacity is developed to change the idea that
has been received into an action as well as a great acuteness of
acceptation, which together will produce all those phenomena that we
should call by the name of "pathological sleep," since they are only
separable in a gradual way from the ordinary sleep and dream
conditions. Bernheim is particularly strenuous that psychology should
appear in the foreground of hypnotism, and on this point has been
strongly upheld by men like Professors Beaunis and Richet.

The possibility of suggestion in waking conditions, and also a long
time after the sleep has passed off (_suggestions posthypnotiques ou
suggestions a (longue) echeance_), as well as the remarkable capacity
of subjects to change their personality (_changement de la
personnalite objectivation des types_), have been made the subject of
careful investigation. The voluntary production of bleeding and
stigmata through spiritual influence has been asserted, particularly
by Messrs. Tocachon, Bourru, and Burot. The judicial significance of
suggestion has been discussed by Professor Liegeois and Dr. Ladame.
Professor Pitres in Bordeaux is one of the suggestionists, though
differing in many points from the Nancy school.

This whole tendency brings into prominence the psychical influence,
while it denies the production of these results from purely physical
phenomena, endeavoring to explain them in a different manner. These
explanations carry us into two realms, the first of which has been
lately opened, and at present seems to abound more in enigmas than in
solutions.

_Metallotherapie_, which was called into existence by Dr. Burg, and
further extended by Dr. Gelle, contains a special point of
interest--the so-called transference in the case of hysterically or
hypnotically affected persons. Transference is caused by
electro-magnetism, which has this peculiarity--that in the case of
specially sensitive persons it can transfer the bodily affection from
left to right, and _vice versa_. The transference of paralysis, the
cures attempted on this plan, and the so-called "psychical
transference," which contains special interest for graphologists, are
at the present time still open questions, as well as the closely
connected theory of human polarity; and the odic experiments of Dr.
Chazarain are yet waiting for their confirmation. At present the
problem of the connection between magnetism and hypnotism is under
investigation, and in such a manner that we may hope for a speedy
solution.

Still stranger than these reports are the accounts of the distant
operation of certain bodies; at least, they seem strange to those
unacquainted with psychometry and the literature of the past century
relating to this subject. Two physicians in Rochefort, Professors
Bourru and Burot, in treating a hystero-epileptic person, found that
gold, even when at a distance of fifteen centimeters, produced in him
a feeling of unbearable heat. They continued these experiments with
great care, and, after a number of trials, came to this
conclusion--that in some persons certain substances, even when
carefully separated from them by long distance, exercise exactly the
same physiological influence as if introduced into their organism. In
order to explain these phenomena, they refer to the radiating force of
Barety, an explanation neither satisfactory to themselves nor to
others. Lately the distinguished Parisian physician, Dr. Luys, has
confirmed by his experiments the existence of these phenomena, but he
thinks the explanation referable to hyper-sensitiveness of the
"_regions emotives et intellectuelles de l'encephale_" yet even he has
not reached the kernel of the difficulty.

In close connection with action at a distance is the question of
distant production of hypnotic sleep. For an answer to this problem,
they are experimenting in both France and England; and Frederick W.H.
Myers has thrown an entirely new light upon the subject by the
investigations he is making upon a purely experimental basis. In Italy
they have limited themselves to the study of isolated cases of
hystero-hypnotism, except as the phenomena of magnetic fascination
investigated by Donato have given rise to further research; but all
the books I have seen upon this subject, as well as many by French
authors, suffer from ignorance of the latest English discoveries.

With this I think that I have given a slight outline of the history of
hypnotic investigation to the end of the year 1886. I shall attempt a
criticism of this whole movement at some other time, as space is not
afforded to me here; but I should like to make this statement now,
that two of the characteristic indications of this period are of the
gravest import--first the method ("Our work," says Richet, "is that of
strictly scientific _testing_, _observation_, and _arrangement_");
and, secondly, the result. Hypnotism has been received into the realm
of scientific investigation, and with this the foundation of a true
experimental psychology has been laid.

MAX DESSOIR.

       *       *       *       *       *




THE DUODENUM: A SIPHON TRAP.

By MAYO COLLIER, M.S. Lond., F.R.C.S. Eng.; Senior
Assistant Surgeon, North-West London Hospital; Assistant Demonstrator
of Anatomy, London Hospital Medical College.


We may take it for granted that all gases generated in the jejunum,
ileum, and large intestines pass onward toward the anus, and there
sooner or later escape. Fetid gases--except those generated in the
stomach and duodenum--never pass upward, not even during vomiting due
to hernia, obstruction, and other causes. Physiologists, it would
appear, have never busied themselves to find an explanation for this
apparent breach of the laws of gravity. The intestinal canal is a tube
with various dilatations and constrictions, but at no spot except the
pylorus does the constriction completely obliterate the lumen of the
tube, and here only periodically. It is perfectly evident, then, that,
unless some system of trap exists in the canal, gases are free to
travel from below upward in obedience to the laws of gravity, and
would, as a matter of fact, sooner or later do so. From the straight,
course and vertical position of the oesophagus, a very slight
pressure of gas in the stomach easily overcomes the closure of its
cardiac sphincter and allows of escape. When the stomach has digested
its contents and the pylorus is relaxed, gases generated in the
duodenum can and do ascend into the stomach and so escape. Normally,
no fetid gases are generated in the stomach or duodenum. If we follow
the course of the intestines down, we find that the duodenum presents
a remarkable curve.

Now, there are some points of great interest in connection with this
remarkable, almost circular, curve of the duodenum. In the first
place, this curve is a constant feature in all mammalians. Mr. Treves
says it is one of the most constant features in the anatomy of the
intestines in man, and, speaking of mammalians in general, that the
curve of the duodenum varies in shape, but is never absent, becoming
more complex in some of the higher primates, but seldom less distinct
than in man. In birds the duodenum always forms a long loop embracing
the pancreas.

A second point of great interest is the absolute constancy and
fixation of its terminal portion at the point of junction with the
jejunum, more correctly termed second ascending or fourth portion. Mr.
Treves says that this fourth portion is never less than an inch, and
is practically constant. It extends along the side of the left crus of
the diaphragm opposite the second lumbar vertebra, and is there firmly
fixed to the front of the aorta and crus of the diaphragm by a strong
fibro-muscular band, slinging it up and absolutely retaining it in
position. This band has been termed the "musculus suspensorius
duodeni," but is chiefly composed of white fibrous tissue, and is more
of the native of a ligament than a muscle. This ligament is always
present, and its position is never altered. The curve of the duodenum
may descend as far as the iliac fossa, but the terminal portion is
always maintained by this band in its normal position.

Another point of great constancy is the position of the pancreas and
its relation to the curve of the duodenum. The duodenum always curves
round the head of the pancreas and is, as it were, moulded on it and
retained in position by it. In birds the duodenum always forms a long
loop embracing the pancreas. Further, the ducts of the liver and
pancreas always open into the center Of the duodenum, either
separately or by a common opening.

[Illustration]

Now, the absolute constancy of the curve of the duodenum, the complete
fixation of its fourth portion, the position of the pancreas, and the
place of entry of the ducts of the pancreas and liver, are all
component parts of a siphon trap, whereby gases generated below the
duodenum are prevented from passing upward. A reference to the
accompanying diagrams will make this quite clear. A is a diagram of a
siphon trap copied from Parkes' hygiene. B is a very diagrammatic
outline of the stomach and duodenum, _a_ is intended to mark the
position of the fibrous band, or musculus suspensorius duodeni; and
_b_ the position of entry of the ducts of the liver and pancreas. The
duodenum, then, is a siphon trap, and a most efficient one. Now, the
efficiency of a siphon trap depends not only on its shape, but what is
absolutely essential is that the curve must be kept constantly full of
fluid, without which it ceases to be a trap, and would allow gases to
ascend freely. The position of the place of entry of the ducts of the
pancreas and liver assures that this _sine qua non_ shall be present.
The discharge of the secretions of the pancreas and liver, although
more active during and after feeding, is practically constant, and so
insures in an admirable manner that the curve on which the efficiency
of the trap depends shall be constantly kept full not only with fluid,
but, as I would suggest, antiseptic fluid. There is no other trap in
the intestinal canal, but the peculiar position of the colon would no
doubt have more or less effect in preventing gases ascending through
the ileo-caecal valve.--_Lancet._

       *       *       *       *       *




WISCONSIN CRANBERRY CULTURE.


Among the many thousands of well informed persons with whom the
cranberry is a staple article of food throughout the autumn and
winter, and who especially derive from its pungent flavor sharp relish
for their Thanksgiving and Christmas turkey, not one in ten has any
definite idea as to where the delicious fruit comes from, or of the
method of growing and harvesting it. Most people are, however, aware
that it is raised on little "truck patches" somewhere down in New
Jersey or about Cape Cod, and some have heard that it is gleaned from
the swamps in the Far West by Indians and shipped to market by white
traders. But to the great majority its real history is unknown.

Yet the cranberry culture is an industry in which millions of dollars
are invested in this country, and it gives employment, for at least a
portion of each year, to many thousands of people. In the East, where
the value of an acre of even swamp land may run up into the thousands
of dollars, a cranberry marsh of five or ten acres is considered a
large one, and, cultivated in the careful, frugal style in vogue
there, may yield its owner a handsome yearly income. But in the great,
boundless West, where land, and more especially swamp land, may be had
for from $1 to $5 an acre, we do these things differently, if not
better.

The State of Wisconsin produces nearly one-half of the cranberries
annually grown in the United States. There are marshes there covering
thousands of acres, whereon this fruit grows wild, having done so even
as far back as the oldest tradition of the native red man extends. In
many cases the land on which the berries grow has been bought from the
government by individuals or firms, in vast tracts, and the growth of
the fruit promoted and encouraged by a system of dikes and dams
whereby the effects of droughts, frost, and heavy rainfalls are
counteracted to almost any extent desired. Some of these holdings
aggregate many thousands of acres under a single ownership; and after
a marsh of this vast extent has been thoroughly ditched and good
buildings, water works, etc., are erected on it, its value may reach
many thousands of dollars, while the original cost of the land may
have been merely nominal.

Large portions of Jackson, Wood, Monroe, Marinette, Juneau, and Green
counties are natural cranberry marshes. The Wisconsin Valley division
of the Chicago, Milwaukee & St. Paul Railway runs through a closely
continuous marsh, forty miles long and nearly as wide, as level as a
floor, which is an almost unbroken series of cranberry farms. The
Indians, who inhabited this country before the white man came, used to
congregate here every fall, many of them traveling several hundred
miles, to lay in their winter supply of berries. Many thousands of
barrels are now annually shipped from this region; and thus this vast
area, which to the stranger looking upon it would appear utterly
worthless, is as valuable as the richest farming lands in the State.

In a few instances, however, this fruit is cultivated in Wisconsin in
a style similar to that practiced in the East; that is, by paring the
natural sod from the bog, covering the earth to a depth of two or
three inches with sand, and then transplanting the vines into soil
thus prepared. The weeds are then kept down for a year or two, when
the vines take full possession of the soil, and further attention is
unnecessary. The natural "stand" of the vines in the sod is so
productive, however, and the extent of country over which bountiful
nature has distributed them so vast, that few operators have thought
it necessary to incur the expense of special culture.

One of the best and most perfectly equipped marshes in Wisconsin is
owned by Mr. G.B. Sackett, of Berlin. It is situated four miles north
of that village, and comprises 1,600 acres, nearly all of which is a
veritable bog, and is covered with a natural and luxuriant growth of
cranberry vines. A canal has been cut from the Fox River to the
southern limit of the marsh, a distance of 4,400 ft. It is 45 ft.
wide, and the water stands in it to a depth of nine feet, sufficient
to float fair sized steamboats. At the intersection of the canal with
the marsh steam water works have been erected, with flood gates and
dams by means of which the entire marsh may be flooded to a depth of a
foot or more when desired. There are two engines of 150 horse power
each, and two pumps that are capable of raising 80,000 gallons per
minute.

When, in early autumn, the meteorological conditions indicate the
approach of frost, the pumps may he put to work in the afternoon and
the berries be effectually covered by water and thus protected before
nightfall. At sunrise the gates are opened and the water allowed to
run off again, so that the pickers may proceed with their work. The
marsh is flooded to a depth of about two feet at the beginning of each
winter and allowed to remain so until spring, the heavy body of ice
that forms preventing the upheaval that would result from freezing and
thawing--a natural process which, if permitted, works injury to the
vines.

There is a three-story warehouse on the marsh, with a capacity of
20,000 barrels of berries, and four large two-story houses capable of
furnishing shelter for 1,500 pickers. The superintendent's residence
is a comfortable cottage house, surrounded by giant oaks and elms, and
stands near the warehouse on an "island," or small tract of high, dry
land near the center of the great marsh. The pickers' quarters stand
on another island about 200 yards away.

A plank roadway, built on piles, about two feet above the level of the
ground, leads from the mainland to the warehouse and other buildings,
a distance of more than half a mile. Several wooden railways diverge
from the warehouse to all parts of the marsh, and on them flat cars,
propelled by hand, are sent out at intervals during the picking season
to bring in the berries from the hands of the pickers. Each picker is
