among the highest plants.

One alkaloid is found in many genera of the loganiaceae; berberine in
genera of the berberidaceae, ranunculaceae, menispermaceae, rutaceae,
papaveraceae, anonaceae.

Waxes are widely distributed in plants. They occur in quantities in
some closely related families.

Ethereal oils occur in many families, in the bark, root, wood, leaf,
flower, and fruit; particularly in myrtaceae, laurineae, cyperaceae,
crucifereae, aurantiaceae, labiatae, and umbelliferae.

Resins are found in most of the higher plants. Tropical plants are
richer in resins than those of cold climates.

Chemical resemblance between groups, as indicating morphological
relations, has been well shown. For example: the similarity[37] of the
viscid juices, and a like taste and smell, among cactaceae and
portulaceae, indicate a closer relationship between these two orders
than botanical classification would perhaps allow. This fact was
corroborated by the discovery of irritable stamens in _Portulaca_ and
_Opuntia_, and other genera of cactaceae.

Darwin[38] states that in the compositae the ray florets are more
poisonous than the disk florets, in the ratio of about 3 to 2.

Comparing the cycadeae and palmae, the former are differently placed by
different botanists, but the general resemblance is remarkable, and
they both yield sago.

Chemical constituents of plants are found in varying quantities during
stated periods of the year. Certain compounds present at one stage of
growth are absent at another. Many facts could be brought forward to
show the different chemical composition of plants in different stages
of growth. The _Thuja occidentalis_[39] in the juvenescent and adult
form, offers an example where morphological and chemical differences
go hand in hand. Analyses of this plant under both conditions show a
striking difference.

Different parts of plants may contain distinct chemical compounds, and
the comparative chemical study of plant orders comprises the analysis
of all parts of plants of different species.

For example; four portions of the _Yucca angustifolia_[40] were
examined chemically; the bark and wood of the root and the base and
blades of the leaves. Fixed oils were separated from each part. These
were not identical; two were fluid at ordinary temperature, and two
were solid. Their melting and solidifying points were not the same.

This difference in the physical character and chemical reaction of
these fixed oils may be due to the presence of free fatty acid and
glycerides in varying proportions in the four parts of the plants. It
is of interest to note that, in the subterranean part of the _Yucca_,
the oil extracted from the bark is solid at the ordinary temperature;
from the wood it was of a less solid consistency; while the yellow
base of the leaf contained an oil quite soft, and in the green leaf
the oil is almost fluid.

Two new resins were extracted from the yellow and green parts of the
leaf. It was proposed to name them _yuccal_ and _pyrophaeal_ An
examination of the contents of each extract showed a different
quantitative and qualitative result.

Saponin was found in all parts of the plant.

Many of the above facts have been collected from the investigations of
others. I have introduced these statements, selected from a mass of
material, as evidences in favor of the view stated at the beginning of
this paper.[41] My own study has been directed toward the discovery of
saponin in those plants where it was presumably to be found. The
practical use of this theory in plant analysis will lead the chemists
at once to a search for those compounds which morphology shows are
probably present.

I have discovered saponin in all parts of the _Yucca angustifolia_, in
the _Y. filimentosa_ and _Y. gloriosa_, in several species of agavae,
and in plants belonging to the leguminosae family.

The list[42] of plants in which saponin has been discovered is given
in the note. All these plants are contained in the middle plane of
Heckel's scheme. No plants containing saponin have been found among
apetalous groups. No plants have been found containing saponin among
the lower monocotyledons.

The plane of saponin passes from the liliaceae and allied groups to the
rosales and higher dicotyledons.

Saponin belongs to a class of substances called glucosides. Under the
action of dilute acids, it is split up into two substances, glucose
and sopogenin. The chemical nature of this substance is not thoroughly
understood. The commercial[43] product is probably a mixture of
several substances.

This complexity of chemical composition of saponin is admirably
adapted for the nutrition of the plant, and it is associated with the
corresponding complexity of the morphological elements of the plant's
organs. According to M. Perrey,[44] it seems that the power of a plant
to direct the distribution of its carbon, hydrogen, and oxygen to form
complex glucosides is indicative of its higher functions and
developments.

The solvent action of saponin on resins has been already discussed.
Saponin likewise acts as a solvent upon barium[45] sulphate and
calcium[46] oxalate, and as a solvent of insoluble or slightly soluble
salts would assist the plant in obtaining food, otherwise difficult of
access.

The botanical classifications based upon morphology are so frequently
Saponin is found in endogens and exogens. The line dividing these two
groups is not always clearly defined. Statements pointing to this are
found in the works of Haeckel, Bentham, and others.

Smilax belongs to a transition class, partaking somewhat of the nature
of endogen and of exogen. It is worthy of note that this intermediate
group of the sarsaparillas should contain saponin.

It is a significant fact that all the groups above named containing
saponin belong to Heckel's middle division.

It may be suggested that saponin is thus a constructive element in
developing the plant from the multiplicity of floral elements to the
cephalization of those organs.

It has been observed that the composite occurs where the materials for
growth are supplied in greatest abundance, and the more simple forms
arise where sources of nutrition are remote. We may gather from this
fact that the simpler organs of plants low in the evolutionary scale
contain simpler non-nitrogenous chemical compounds for their
nutrition.

The presence of saponin seems essential to the life of the plant where
it is found, and it is an indispensable principle in the progression
of certain lines of plants, passing from their lower to their higher
stages.

Saponin is invariably absent where the floral elements are simple; it
is invariably absent where the floral elements are condensed to their
greatest extent. Its position is plainly that of a factor in the great
middle realm of vegetable life, where the elements of the individual
are striving to condense, and thus increase their physiological action
and the economy of parts.

It may be suggested as a line of research to study what are the
conditions which control the synthesis and gradual formation of
saponin in plants. The simpler compounds of which this complex
substance is built up, if located as compounds of lower plants, would
indicate the lines of progression from the lower to the saponin
groups.

In my paper[47] read in Buffalo at the last meeting of the American
Association for the Advancement of Science, various suggestions were
offered why chemical compounds should be used as a means of botanical
classification.

The botanical classifications based upon morphology are so frequently
unsatisfactory, that efforts in some directions have been made to
introduce other methods.[48]

There has been comparatively little study of the chemical principles
of plants from a purely botanical view. It promises to become a new
field of research.

The leguminosae are conspicuous as furnishing us with important dyes,
e.g., indigo, logwood, catechin. The former is obtained principally
from different species of the genus _Indigofera_, and logwood from the
_Haematoxylon_ and _Saraca indica_.

The discovery[49] of haematoxylin in the _Saraca indica_ illustrates
very well how this plant in its chemical, as well as botanical,
character is related to the _Haematoxylon campechianum_; also, I found
a substance like catechin in the _Saraca_. This compound is found in
the _acacias_, to which class _Saraca_ is related by its chemical
position, as well as botanically. Saponin is found in both of these
plants, as well as in many other plants of the leguminosae. The
leguminosae come under the middle plane or multiplicity of floral
elements, and the presence of saponin in these plants was to be
expected.

From many of the facts above stated, it may be inferred that the
chemical compounds of plants do not occur at random. Each stage of
growth and development has its own particular chemistry.

It is said that many of the constituents found in plants are the
result of destructive metabolism, and are of no further use in the
plant's economy. This subject is by no means settled, and even should
we be forced to accept that ground, it is a significant fact that
certain cells, tissues, or organs peculiar to a plant secrete or
excrete chemical compounds peculiar to them, which are to be found in
one family, or in species closely allied to it.

It is a fact that the chemical compounds are there, no matter why or
whence they came. They will serve our purposes of study and
classification.

The result of experiment shows that the presence of certain compounds
is essential to the vigor and development of all plants and particular
compounds to the development of certain plants. Plant chemistry and
morphology are related. Future investigations will demonstrate this
relation.

In general terms, we may say that amides and carbohydrates are
utilized in the manufacture of proteids. Organic acids cause a
turgescence of cells. Glucosides may be a form of reserve food
material.

Resins and waxes may serve only as protection to the surfaces of
plants; coloring matters, as screens to shut off or admit certain of
the sun's rays; but we are still far from penetrating the mystery of
life.

A simple plant does what animals more highly endowed cannot do. From
simplest substances they manufacture the most complex. We owe our
existence to plants, as they do theirs to the air and soil.

The elements carbon, oxygen, hydrogen, and nitrogen pass through a
cycle of changes from simple inorganic substances to the complex
compounds of the living cell. Upon the decomposition of these bodies
the elements return to their original state. During this transition
those properties of protoplasm which were mentioned at the beginning,
in turn, follow their path. From germination to death this course
appears like a crescent, the other half of the circle closed from
view. Where chemistry begins and ends it is difficult to say.--_Jour.
Fr. Inst._

  [Footnote 1: A lecture delivered before the Franklin Institute,
  January 24, 1887.]

  [Footnote 2: Studien uber das Protoplasm, 1881.]

  [Footnote 3: Vines, p. 1. Rostafinski: Mem. de la Soc. des Sc.
  Nat. de Cherbourg, 1875. Strasburger: Zeitschr., xii, 1878.]

  [Footnote 4: Botany: Prantl and Vines. London, 1886, p. 110.]

  [Footnote 5: For the literature of starch, see p. 115, Die
  Pflanzenstoffe, von Hilger and Husemann.]

  [Footnote 6: Kutzing: Arch. Pharm., xli, 38. Kraus and Millardet:
  Bul. Soc. Sciences Nat., Strasbourg, 1868, 22. Sorby: Jour. Lin.
  Soc., xv, 34. J. Reinke: Jahrb. Wissenscht. Botan., x, B. 399.
  Phipson: Phar. Jour. Trans., clxii, 479.]

  [Footnote 7: Prantl and Vines, p. 111.]

  [Footnote 8: L. Crie: Compt. Rend., lxxxviii, 759 and 985. J. De
  Seynes, 820, 1043.]

  [Footnote 9: Page 279.]

  [Footnote 10: M. Nencki and F. Schaffer. N. Sieher: Jour. Pract.
  Chem., 23, 412.]

  [Footnote 11: E. Klein: Quar. Jour. Micros. Science, 1875, 381. O.
  Helm: Arch. Pharm., 1875, 19-24. G. Gugini: Gaz. Chem., 7, 4. W.
  Thorner: Bul. Ber, xi, 533.]

  [Footnote 12: Handbook of Dyeing. By W. Crookes, London, 1874. p. 367.
  Schunck: Ann. Chem. Pharm., 41, 157; 54, 261; 61, 72; 61, 64; 61, 78.
  Rochelder and Heldt, ibid., 48, 2; 48, 9. Stenhouse, ibid., 68, 57;
  68, 72; 68, 97, 104; 125, 353. See also researches of Strecker, O.
  Hesse, Reymann, Liebermann, Lamparter, Knop, and Schnedermann.]

  [Footnote 13: Stahlschmidt.]

  [Footnote 14: E. Treffner: Inaugur. Diss. Dorpat, 1880.]

  [Footnote 15: W. Pfeffer: Flora, 1874.]

  [Footnote 16: Die Pflanzenstoffe, p. 323 W. Lange: Bul. Ber., xi,
  822.]

  [Footnote 17: Ann. Chim. Phys., 41, 62, 208; Ann. Chim. Pharm.,
  77, 295.]

  [Footnote 18: Fluckiger: Pharmakognosie. Kamp: Ann. Chim. Pharm.,
  100, 300.]

  [Footnote 19: Revue Scientifiqe, 13 Mars, 1886.]

  [Footnote 20: Dictionary of Economic Plants. By J. Smith. London,
  1882, p. 294.]

  [Footnote 21: Ibid., p. 160. Pharmakognosie des Pflanzenreichs,
  Wittstein, p. 736. Ann. Chem. Pharm., 77, 295.]

  [Footnote 22: Rabenhorst: Repert. Pharm., lx, 214. Moore: Chem.
  Centralbl., 1862, 779, Dana.]

  [Footnote 23: Johansen: Arch. Pharm., 3, ix, 210. Ibid., 3, ix
  103. Bente: Berl. Ber., viii, 476. Braconnot: Ann. Chim. Phys., 2,
  44, 296.]

  [Footnote 24: Wittstein; Pharm. des Pflanzenreichs, p. 249.]

  [Footnote 25: John; Ibid., p. 651.]

  [Footnote 26: Dulong. Oersted, Lucas, Pontet; Ibid., p. 640.]

  [Footnote 27: Braconnot: Ann. Chim. Phys., 2, 3. 277. Stenhouse:
  Ann. Chim. Phann., 198, 166].

  [Footnote 28: 3 Pflanzenstoffe, p. 412.]

  [Footnote 29: Lecocq: Braconnot: Pharmacog. Pflan, p. 693.]

  [Footnote 30: Gorup-Besanez.]

  [Footnote 31: Siebold and Brodbury: Phar. Jour. Trans., 3, 590,
  1881, 326.]

  [Footnote 32: Wagner: Jour. Prakt. Chem., 58, 352. B. Peters, v.
  Gohren: Jahresb. Agric., viii, 114; ix, 105; v. 58. Ann. Jour.
  Pharm., 4, 49.]

  [Footnote 33: Dragendorff: Pharm. Zeitschr. Russ., xvii, 65-97.]

  [Footnote 34: Bonssingault: Ann. Chim. Phys., 2, 27, 315. Erdmann:
  Jour. Pract. Chem., 71, 198.]

  [Footnote 35: Die Pflanzenstoffe, p. 21.]

  [Footnote 36: Ibid.]

  [Footnote 37: Meehan: Proc. Acad. Nat. Sciences.]

  [Footnote 38: Different forms of flowers on plants of the same
  species. Introduction.]

  [Footnote 39: Meehan: Proc. Acad. Nat. Sciences.]

  [Footnote 40: H.C. De S. Abbott: Trans. Amer. Philos. Soc., 1886.]

  [Footnote 41: For further facts confirming this theory, see
  "Comparative Chemistry of Higher and Lower Plants." By H.C. De S.
  Abbott. Amer. Naturalist, August, 1887.]

  [Footnote 42: Different genera and species of the following:
  Ranunculaceae, Berberidaceae, Carophyllaceae, Polygalaceae,
  Bromeliaceae, Liliaceae, Smilaceae, Yuccas, Amaryllideae, Leguminosae,
  Primulaceae, Rosaceae, Sapindaceae, Sapotaceae]

  [Footnote 43: Kobert: Chem Ztg.]

  [Footnote 44: Compt. Rend., xciv, p. 1124.]

  [Footnote 45: Bul. de la Soc. Chim.]

  [Footnote 46: "Yucca angus." Trans. Am. Philos. Soc., Dec., 1885.]

  [Footnote 47: Botanical Gazette, October, 1886.]

  [Footnote 48: Borodin: Pharm. Jour. Trans., xvi, 369. Pax. Firemy:
  Ann. Sci. Nat., xiii.]

  [Footnote 49: H.C. De S. Abbott, Proc. Acad. Nat. Sciences, Nov.
  30, 1886.]

       *       *       *       *       *




NEW METHOD FOR THE QUANTITATIVE DETERMINATION OF STARCH.

A.V. ASBOTH.


The author maintains that unsatisfactory results are obtained in
determinations of starch when the method employed is based upon the
inversion of sugar, formed as an intermediate product, since maltose,
dextrose, and levulose are partly decomposed by boiling with dilute
acids. He proposes to replace the methods hitherto employed by one
which depends upon the formation of a barium salt of starch, to which
he assigns the formula BaO.C_{24}H_{40}O_{20}. This salt is sparingly
soluble in water and insoluble in dilute alcohol.

In making a determination a weighed quantity of starch is saccharified
with water, then mixed with an excess of normal baryta solution,
dilute alcohol added to make up to a certain volume, and, after the
precipitate has settled, the excess of baryta is titrated back with
acid.

[Illustration: Titrating apparatus]

The author also describes the apparatus he employs for storing and
titrating with baryta solution. The latter is contained in the bottle,
A, and the drying tube attached to the neck of the same is filled with
quicklime. The burette, B, which is in direct connection with the
bottle, may be filled with the solution by opening the stop cock, and
the small drying tube, _n_, is filled with dry KOH, thus preventing
the entrance of any CO_{2}. Numbers are appended which seem to testify
to the excellence of the method employed. The author finally gives a
detailed account of the entire analysis of various cereals.--_A.R. in
Jour. Soc. Chem. Indus._

       *       *       *       *       *




SYNTHESIS OF THE ALKALOIDS.


In the note on the constitution of alkaloids in a recent issue, we
referred more especially to what we may term the less highly organized
bases. Most of our knowledge, as we now have it, regarding such
alkaloids as muscarine and choline has been acquired during the past
dozen years. This is not exactly the case with the higher groups of
alkaloids--the derivatives of pyridine and quinoline. It so happens
that the oldest alkaloids are in these groups. They have, almost
necessarily, been subjected to a longer period of attack, but the
extreme complexity of their molecules, and the infinite number of
differing parts or substances into which these molecules split up when
attacked, are the main cause of the small progress which has been made
in this department. All, however, yield one or more bodies or bases in
common, while each has its distinctive and peculiar decomposition
product. For example, cinchonine and quinine both afford the basic
quinoline under certain conditions, but on oxidation of cinchonine, an
acid--cinchoninic acid (C_{10}H_{7}NO_{2})--is the principal body
formed, while in the case of quinine, quininic acid (C_{10}H_{9}NO_{3})
is the principal product. The acquirement through experiment of such
knowledge as that is, however, so much gained. We find, indeed, that
obstacles are gradually being cleared away, and the actual synthetic
formation of such alkaloids as piperidine and coniine is a proof that
the chemist is on the right track in studying the decomposition
products, and building up from them, theoretically, bodies of similar
constitution. It is noteworthy that the synthesis of the alkaloids has
led to some of the most brilliant discoveries of the present day,
especially in the discovery of dye stuffs. Many of our quinine
substitutes, such as thalline, for example, are the result of
endeavors to make quinine artificially. If there is romance in
chemistry at all, it is to be found certainly in this branch of it,
which is generally considered the most uninteresting and unfathomable.
We may take piperidine and coniine as examples of the methods followed
in alkaloidal synthesis; these are pyridine bases. Pyridine has the
formula C_{5}H_{5}N, that is, it is benzene with CH replaced by N. The
relationship between these and piperidine is seen in the following
formulae:

       CH            N                NH
      /  \          /  \             /  \
    HC    CH      HC    CH     H_{2}C    CH_{2}
     |    |        |    |           |    |
    HC    CH      HC    CH     H_{2}C    CH_{2}
      \  /          \  /             \  /
       CH            CH               CH_{2}

    (Benzene,)    (Pyridine,)    (Piperidine,)
    (C_{6}H_{6})  (C_{5}H_{5}N)  (C_{5}H_{11}N)

If we introduce six hydrogen atoms into pyridine, we convert it into
piperidine. Ladenburg succeeded in so hydrogenizing pyridine by acting
upon an alcoholic solution with sodium, and from the base which was
formed he obtained a platinochloride which agreed with the similar
double salt of piperidine. He has also prepared it from trimethyline
cyanide by the action of sodium. Pentamethylinediamine is the
principal intermediary product, and this gives piperidine when
distilled with superheated steam. He has proved that the alkaloid so
obtained is identical with that prepared from piperine. Another
curious point which Ladenburg has lately proved is that cadaverine
(one of the products of flesh decomposition) is identical with
pentamethylinediamine, and that its imine is the same as piperidine.
The synthesis of coniine by Ladenburg is one of the most notable
achievements of modern chemistry. He at first supposed that this
alkaloid was piperidine in which two hydrogen atoms were replaced by
the isopropyl radical (C_{3}H_{7}), its formula being taken as
C_{5}H_{9}(C_{3}H_{7})NH. But he has since changed his view, as will
