discovery of a new primary planet and its attendant satellites was but
the first step of his progress into the labyrinth of the heavens.
Cotemporaneously with his observations, the French astronomers, and
especially La Place, with a geometrical skill scarcely, if at all,
inferior to that of its great author, resumed the whole system of
Newton, and brought every phenomenon observed since his time within his
laws. Difficulties of fact, with which he struggled in vain, gave way to
more accurate observations; and problems that defied the power of his
analysis, yielded to the modern improvements of the calculus.


                      HERSCHELL'S NEBULAR THEORY.

But there is no _Ultima Thule_ in the progress of science. With the
recent augmentations of telescopic power, the details of the nebular
theory, proposed by Sir W. Herschell with such courage and ingenuity,
have been drawn in question. Many--most--of those milky patches in which
he beheld what he regarded as cosmical matter, as yet in an unformed
state,--the rudimental material of worlds not yet condensed,--have been
resolved into stars, as bright and distinct as any in the firmament. I
well recall the glow of satisfaction with which, on the 22d of
September, 1847, being then connected with the University at Cambridge,
I received a letter from the venerable director of the Observatory
there, beginning with these memorable words:--"You will rejoice with me
that the great nebula in Orion has yielded to the powers of our
incomparable telescope! * * * It should be borne in mind that this
nebula, and that of Andromeda [which has been also resolved at
Cambridge], are the last strongholds of the nebular theory."[A]

[Footnote A: _Annals of the Observatory of Harvard College_, p. 121.]

But if some of the adventurous speculations built by Sir William
Herschell on the bewildering revelations of his telescope have been
since questioned, the vast progress which has been made in sidereal
astronomy, to which, as I understand, the Dudley Observatory will be
particularly devoted, the discovery of the parallax of the fixed stars,
the investigation of the interior relations of binary and triple systems
of stars, the theories for the explanation of the extraordinary, not to
say fantastic, shapes discerned in some of the nebulous systems--whirls
and spirals radiating through spaces as vast as the orbit of Neptune;[A]
the glimpses at systems beyond that to which our sun belongs;--these are
all splendid results, which may fairly be attributed to the school of
Herschell, and will for ever insure no secondary place to that name in
the annals of science.

[Footnote A: See the remarkable memoir of Professor Alexander, "On the
origin of the forms and the present condition of some of the clusters of
stars, and several of the nebulae," (Gould's _Astronomical Journal_, Vol.
iii, p. 95.)]


                   RELATIONSHIP OF THE LIBERAL ARTS.

In the remarks which I have hitherto made, I have had mainly in view the
direct connection of astronomical science with the uses of life and the
service of man. But a generous philosophy contemplates the subject in
higher relations. It is a remark as old, at least, as Plato, and is
repeated from him more than once by Cicero, that all the liberal arts
have a common bond and relationship.[A] The different sciences
contemplate as their immediate object the different departments of
animate and inanimate nature; but this great system itself is but one,
and its parts are so interwoven with each other, that the most
extraordinary relations and unexpected analogies are constantly
presenting themselves; and arts and sciences seemingly the least
connected, render to each other the most effective assistance.

[Footnote A: Archias, i.; De Oratore, iii., 21.]

The history of electricity, galvanism, and magnetism, furnishes the most
striking illustration of this remark. Commencing with the meteorological
phenomena of our own atmosphere, and terminating with the observation of
the remotest heavens, it may well be adduced, on an occasion like the
present. Franklin demonstrated the identity of lightning and the
electric fluid. This discovery gave a great impulse to electrical
research, with little else in view but the means of protection from the
thunder-cloud. A purely accidental circumstance led the physician
Galvani, at Bologna, to trace the mysterious element, under conditions
entirely novel, both of development and application. In this new form it
became, in the hands of Davy, the instrument of the most extraordinary
chemical operations; and earths and alkalis, touched by the creative
wire, started up into metals that float on water, and kindle in the air.
At a later period, the closest affinities are observed between
electricity and magnetism, on the one hand; while, on the other, the
relations of polarity are detected between acids and alkalis. Plating
and gilding henceforth become electrical processes. In the last
applications of the same subtle medium, it has become the messenger of
intelligence across the land and beneath the sea; and is now employed by
the astronomer to ascertain the difference of longitudes, to transfer
the beats of the clock from one station to another, and to record the
moment of his observations with automatic accuracy. How large a share
has been borne by America in these magnificent discoveries and
applications, among the most brilliant achievements of modern science,
will sufficiently appear from the repetition of the names of Franklin,
Henry, Morse, Walker, Mitchell, Lock, and Bond.


                         VERSATILITY OF GENIUS.

It has sometimes happened, whether from the harmonious relations to each
other of every department of science, or from rare felicity of
individual genius, that the most extraordinary intellectual versatility
has been manifested by the same person. Although Newton's transcendent
talent did not blaze out in childhood, yet as a boy he discovered great
aptitude for mechanical contrivance. His water-clock, self-moving
vehicle, and mill, were the wonder of the village; the latter propelled
by a living mouse. Sir David Brewster represents the accounts as
differing, whether the mouse was made to advance "by a string attached
to its tail," or by "its unavailing attempts to reach a portion of corn
placed above the wheel." It seems more reasonable to conclude that the
youthful discoverer of the law of gravitation intended by the
combination of these opposite attractions to produce a balanced
movement. It is consoling to the average mediocrity of the race to
perceive in these sportive assays, that the mind of Newton passed
through the stage of boyhood. But emerging from boyhood, what a bound it
made, as from earth to heaven! Hardly commencing bachelor of arts, at
the age of twenty-four, he untwisted the golden and silver threads of
the solar spectrum, simultaneously or soon after conceived the method of
fluxions, and arrived at the elemental idea of universal gravity before
he had passed to his master's degree. Master of Arts indeed! That
degree, if no other, was well bestowed. Universities are unjustly
accused of fixing science in stereotype. That diploma is enough of
itself to redeem the honors of academical parchment from centuries of
learned dullness and scholastic dogmatism.

But the great object of all knowledge is to enlarge and purify the soul,
to fill the mind with noble contemplations, to furnish a refined
pleasure, and to lead our feeble reason from the works of nature up to
its great Author and Sustainer. Considering this as the ultimate end of
science, no branch of it can surely claim precedence of Astronomy. No
other science furnishes such a palpable embodiment of the abstractions
which lie at the foundation of our intellectual system; the great ideas
of time, and space, and extension, and magnitude, and number, and
motion, and power. How grand the conception of the ages on ages required
for several of the secular equations of the solar system; of distances
from which the light of a fixed star would not reach us in twenty
millions of years, of magnitudes compared with which the earth is but a
foot-ball; of starry hosts--suns like our own--numberless as the sands
on the shore; of worlds and systems shooting through the infinite
spaces, with a velocity compared with which the cannon-ball is a
way-worn, heavy-paced traveler![A]

[Footnote A: Nichol's _Architecture of the Heavens_, p. 160.]


                    THE SPECTACLE OF THE HEAVENS.

Much, however, as we are indebted to our observatories for elevating our
conceptions of the heavenly bodies, they present, even to the unaided
sight, scenes of glory which words are too feeble to describe. I had
occasion, a few weeks since, to take the early train from Providence to
Boston; and for this purpose rose at 2 o'clock in the morning. Every
thing around was wrapped in darkness and hushed in silence, broken only
by what seemed at that hour the unearthly clank and rush of the train.
It was a mild, serene midsummer's night; the sky was without a
cloud--the winds were whist. The moon, then in the last quarter, had
just risen, and the stars shone with a spectral luster but little
affected by her presence; Jupiter, two hours high, was the herald of the
day; the Pleiades, just above the horizon, shed their sweet influence in
the east; Lyra sparkled near the zenith; Andromeda veiled her newly
discovered glories from the naked eye in the south; the steady Pointers,
far beneath the pole, looked meekly up from the depths of the north to
their sovereign.

Such was the glorious spectacle as I entered the train. As we proceeded,
the timid approach of twilight became more perceptible; the intense blue
of the sky began to soften, the smaller stars, like little children,
went first to rest; the sister-beams of the Pleiades soon melted
together; but the bright constellations of the west and north remained
unchanged. Steadily the wondrous transfiguration went on. Hands of
angels hidden from mortal eyes shifted the scenery of the heavens; the
glories of night dissolved into the glories of the dawn. The blue sky
now turned more softly gray; the great watch-stars shut up their holy
eyes; the east began to kindle. Faint streaks of purple soon blushed
along the sky; the whole celestial concave was filled with the inflowing
tides of the morning light, which came pouring down from above in one
great ocean of radiance; till at length, as we reached the Blue Hills, a
flash of purple fire blazed out from above the horizon, and turned the
dewy teardrops of flower and leaf into rubies and diamonds. In a few
seconds the everlasting gates of the morning were thrown wide open, and
the lord of day, arrayed in glories too severe for the gaze of man,
began his course.

I do not wonder at the superstition of the ancient Magians, who in the
morning of the world went up to the hill-tops of Central Asia, and
ignorant of the true God, adored the most glorious work of his hand. But
I am filled with amazement, when I am told that in this enlightened age,
and in the heart of the Christian world, there are persons who can
witness this daily manifestation of the power and wisdom of the Creator,
and yet say in their hearts, "There is no God."


                          UNDISCOVERED BODIES.

Numerous as are the heavenly bodies visible to the naked eye, and
glorious as are their manifestations, it is probable that in our own
system there are great numbers as yet undiscovered. Just two hundred
years ago this year, Huyghens announced the discovery of one satellite
of Saturn, and expressed the opinion that the six planets and six
satellites then known, and making up the perfect number of _twelve_,
composed the whole of our planetary system. In 1729 an astronomical
writer expressed the opinion that there might be other bodies in our
system, but that the limit of telescopic power had been reached, and no
further discoveries were likely to be made.[A] The orbit of one comet
only had been definitively calculated. Since that time the power of the
telescope has been indefinitely increased; two primary planets of the
first class, ten satellites, and forty-three small planets revolving
between Mars and Jupiter, have been discovered, the orbits of six or
seven hundred comets, some of brief period, have been ascertained;--and
it has been computed, that hundreds of thousands of these mysterious
bodies wander through our system. There is no reason to think that all
the primary planets, which revolve about the sun, have been discovered.
An indefinite increase in the number of asteroids may be anticipated;
while outside of Neptune, between our sun and the nearest fixed star,
supposing the attraction of the sun to prevail through half the
distance, there is room for ten more primary planets succeeding each
other at distances increasing in a geometrical ratio. The first of these
will, unquestionably, be discovered as soon as the perturbations of
Neptune shall have been accurately observed; and with maps of the
heavens, on which the smallest telescopic stars are laid down, it may be
discovered much sooner.

[Footnote A: _Memoirs of A.A.S._, vol. iii, 275.]


                       THE VASTNESS OF CREATION.

But it is when we turn our observation and our thoughts from our own
system, to the systems which lie beyond it in the heavenly spaces, that
we approach a more adequate conception of the vastness of creation. All
analogy teaches us that the sun which gives light to us is but one of
those countless stellar fires which deck the firmament, and that every
glittering star in that shining host is the center of a system as vast
and as full of subordinate luminaries as our own. Of these suns--centers
of planetary systems--thousands are visible to the naked eye, millions
are discovered by the telescope. Sir John Herschell, in the account of
his operations at the Cape of Good Hope (p. 381) calculates that about
five and a half millions of stars are visible enough to be _distinctly
counted_ in a twenty-foot reflector, in both hemispheres. He adds, that
"the actual number is much greater, there can be little doubt." His
illustrious father, estimated on one occasion that 125,000 stars passed
through the field of his forty foot reflector in a quarter of an hour.
This would give 12,000,000 for the entire circuit of the heavens, in a
single telescopic zone; and this estimate was made under the assumption
that the nebulae were masses of luminous matter not yet condensed into
suns.

These stupendous calculations, however, form but the first column of the
inventory of the universe. Faint white specks are visible, even to the
naked eye of a practiced observer in different parts of the heavens.
Under high magnifying powers, several thousands of such spots are
visible,--no longer however, faint, white specks, but many of them
resolved by powerful telescopes into vast aggregations of stars, each of
