tight. On the opposite side of the barrel there is a valve connected
with an air pump, through which air to about the pressure of four
atmospheres is pumped in, to liquefy the chlorine gas that is
generated, after which the valve is screwed down. The barrel is then
set revolving at about ten revolutions a minute, the power being
transmitted by a friction wheel. According to the nature of the ore,
or the size of the grains of gold, this movement is continued from one
to four hours, during which time the gold, from combination with the
chlorine gas, has formed a soluble gold chloride, which has all been
taken up by the water in the barrel. The chlorinator is then stopped,
and the gas and compressed air allowed to escape from the valve
through a rubber hose into a vat of lime water. This is to prevent the
inhalation of any chlorine gas by the workmen. The manhole cover is
now removed and the barrel again set revolving, by which means the
contents are thrown automatically into the filter below. This filter
is an iron vat lined with lead. It has a false bottom, to which is
connected a pipe from a vacuum pump working intermittently. As soon as
all the ore has fallen from the chlorinator into the filter, the pump
is set going, a partial vacuum is produced in the chamber below the
false bottom in the filter, and very rapid filtration results. By this
means all the gold chlorides contained in the wet ore may be washed
out, a continual stream being passed through it while filtration is
going on. The solution running from the filter is continually tested,
and when found free from gold, the stream of water is stopped, as is
also the vacuum pump. The filter is then tipped up into a truck below,
and the tailings run out to the waste heap. The process of washing and
filtration occupies about an hour, during which time another charge
may be in process of treatment in the chlorinator above. The discharge
from the filter and the washings are run into a vat, and from this
they are allowed to pass slowly through a tap into a charcoal filter.
During the passage of the liquid through the charcoal filter, the
chloride of gold is decomposed and the gold is deposited on the
charcoal, which, when fully charged, is burnt, the ashes are fused
with borax in a crucible, and the gold is obtained.

[Illustration: THE NEWBERY-VAUTIN CHLORINATION PROCESS.]

We have specified above the objections to the old processes of
chlorination, so it may be fairly asked in what way the Newbery-Vautin
process avoids the various chemical actions which have hitherto proved
so difficult to contend with.

For any system of chlorination yet introduced it is necessary to free
the ore from sulphides. This is done by roasting according to any of
the well-known systems in vogue. It is a matter which requires great
care and considerable skill. The heat must be applied and increased
slowly and steadily. If, through any neglect on the part of the
roaster, the ore is allowed to fuse, in most cases it is best to throw
the charge away, as waste. This roasting applies equally to the Vautin
process as to any others. So on this head there is no alteration. One
of the most important advantages is not a chemical one, but is the
rapidity with which the charge can be treated. In the older styles of
treatment the time varied from thirty six to ninety hours. Now this is
accomplished in from three to six hours with a practically perfect
result. The older processes required a careful damping of the ore,
which, to get good results, must leave the ore neither too wet nor too
dry. Now "damping" is entirely done away with, and in its place water
is poured into the barrel. Pressure to the extent of four atmospheres
causes chlorine gas to leave its vaporous form. Thus the pressure
applied not only enables a strong solution of chlorine to be formed
with the water in the barrel, but forces this into contact with the
gold through every crevice in the ore. Chlorine gas also takes up any
silver which may exist in association with the gold. In the older
processes this is deposited as a film of chloride of silver around the
fine gold grains, and from its insolubility in water prevents the
absorption of the gold. The rotary motion of the barrel in the
Newbery-Vautin method counteracts this by continually rubbing the
particles together; this frees the particles from any accumulations,
so that they always present fresh surfaces for the action of the
solvent. Again, the short time the ore is in contact with the chlorine
does not allow of the formation of hydrochloric acid, which has a
tendency to precipitate the gold from its soluble form in the water
before being withdrawn from the chlorinator.

Hitherto, when the ore was very fine or contained slimes, the
difficulty of filtration was increased, sometimes in extreme cases to
such an extent that chlorination became impracticable. By the
introduction of the vacuum pump this is greatly facilitated; then by
making the action intermittent a jigging motion is given to the
material in the filter which prevents any clogging except in cases of
extreme fineness.

The advantage of using charcoal as a decomposing agent for chloride of
gold was pointed out by Mr. Newbery some twenty years ago; four or
five years since the idea was patented in the United States, but as
this was given gratis to the world years before, the patent did not
hold good. The form of precipitation generally adopted was to add
sulphate of iron to the liquid drawn from the filter. This not only
threw down the gold it contained, but also the lime and magnesia. Then
very great care was necessary, and a tedious process had to be gone
through to divide the gold from these. Now, by filtration through
charcoal everything that is soluble in hydrochloric acid passes away
with the water; for instance, lime and magnesia, which before gave
such great trouble. In passing through the charcoal, the chloride of
gold is decomposed and all fine gold particles are taken up by the
charcoal, so that it is coated by what appears to be a purple film.

Should copper be associated with the gold, the water, after running
through the charcoal filter, is passed over scrap iron, upon which the
copper is precipitated by a natural chemical action. If silver is
contained in the ore, it is found among the tailings in the filter, in
a chloride which is insoluble in water. Should the quantity prove
sufficiently large, it may be leached out in the usual way by
hyposulphites.

One of the great advantages common to all systems of chlorination is
that ores may be crushed dry and treated, so that the loss from float
gold may be avoided. Of this loss, which is most serious, we shall
have something to say on another occasion. An advantage in
amalgamation with chlorine gas instead of amalgamation with
quicksilver in the wet way, is that the ore need not be crushed so
finely. Roasting takes the place of fine crushing, as the ore from the
roasting furnace is either found somewhat spongy in texture or the
grains of silica in which fine gold may be incased are split or flawed
by the fire. For quicksilver amalgamation very fine crushing is
necessary to bring all gold particles in contact with it. Quicksilver
being so thick in substance, it will not find its way readily in and
out of a microscopically fine spongy body or through very fine flaws
in grains of silica, whereas chlorine gas or a solution of liquefied
chlorine does this, and absorbs the gold far more readily.

There are cases when gold is contained in ores in what is known as a
perfectly "free" form--that is, there is an absence of all sulphides,
arsenides, etc.--when it is not practicable to extract it either with
the ordinary forms of quicksilver amalgamation of or any process of
chlorination, without first roasting. This is because the finer gold
is locked up inside fine grains of silica and hydrated oxide of iron.
No ordinary crushing will bring this fine enough, but when roasting is
resorted to by drawing it rapidly through a furnace heated to a cherry
red, these grains are split up so that chlorine gas is enabled to
penetrate to the gold.

It may be said that an equally clever chemist will be required to work
this improved process as compared with those that have, one by one,
fallen into disuse, mainly from want of knowledge among the operators.
To a certain extent this is so. The natural chemical actions are not
so delicate, but an ignorant operator would spoil this process, as he
does nearly every other. When a reef is discovered, practice shows
that its strongest characteristics are consistently carried throughout
it wherever it bears gold. Before Messrs. Newbery and Vautin leave a
purchaser to deal himself with their process, they get large samples
of his ore to their works and there experiment continually until a
practically perfect result is obtained; then any one with a moderate
amount of knowledge can work with the formula supplied. It has been
their experience that the ore from any two mines rarely presents the
same characteristics. Experiments are begun by treating very coarse
crushings. These, if not satisfactory, are gradually reduced until the
desired result is obtained.

To treat the whole body of ore from a mine, dry crushing is strongly
recommended. To accomplish this in the most efficient manner, a stone
breaker which will reduce to about 1/4 in. cubes is necessary. For
subsequent crushing Kroms rolls have, up to the present time, proved
most satisfactory. They will crush with considerable evenness to a
thirty mesh, which is generally sufficient. The crushings are then
roasted in the ordinary way in a reverberatory furnace and the whole
of the roastings are passed through the machine we have just
described. By this it is claimed that over 90 per cent. of the gold
can be extracted at very much the same cost as the processes now in
general use in gold producing countries, which on the average barely
return 50 per cent. If so, the gentlemen who have brought forward
these improvements deserve all the success their process
promises.--_Engineering._

       *       *       *       *       *




APPARATUS FOR EXERCISING THE MUSCLES.


The apparatus herewith illustrated consists of a wooden base, which
may be bolted to the floor, and which supports two wooden uprights, to
which is affixed the apparatus designed to exercise the legs. The
apparatus for exercising the arms is mounted upon a second frame that
slides up and down the wooden supports. It is fixed in position at any
height by means of two screws.

[Illustration: APPARATUS FOR EXERCISING THE MUSCLES.]

The apparatus for exercising the legs, as well as the one for the
arms, consists essentially of a fly wheel mounted upon an axle
extending to the second upright and bent into the form of a crank in
the center. The fly wheel is provided with a winch whose arm is
capable of elongation in order to accommodate it to the reach of the
sound limb.

The apparatus for the legs is arranged in a contrary direction, that
is to say, the wheel is on the opposite side of the frame, and upon
the fixed uprights. It is really a velocipede, one of the pedals of
which is movable upon the winch, and is capable of running from the
axle to the extremity, as in the upper apparatus. This pedal has the
form of a shoe, and is provided with two straps to keep the foot in
place and cause it to follow the pedal in its rotary motion. A movable
seat, capable of rising and descending and moving backward and
forward, according to the leg that needs treatment, is fixed back of
the apparatus.

The operation is as follows: Suppose that the atrophied arm is the
left one. The invalid, facing the apparatus, grasps the movable handle
on the crank with his left hand, and revolves the winch with his
right. The left hand being thus carried along, the arm is submitted to
a motion that obliges it to elongate and contract alternately, and the
result is an extension of the muscles which strengthens them.

The apparatus, which is as simple as it is ingenious, can, it is true,
be applied only when one of the two limbs, arm or leg, is diseased,
the other being always necessary to set the apparatus in motion; but,
even reduced to such conditions, it is destined to render numerous
services in cases of paralysis, atrophy, contusions, etc.--_Moniteur
des Inventions Industrielles._

       *       *       *       *       *




THE BULL OPTOMETER.


Dr. Javal has just presented to the Academy of Medicine a very
ingenious and practical optometer devised by George J. Bull, a young
American doctor, after a number of researches made at the laboratory
of ophthalmology at the Sorbonne. Among other applications that can be
made of it, there is one that is quite original and that will insure
it some success in the world. It permits, in fact, of approximately
deducing the age of a person from certain data that it furnishes as to
his or her sight. As well known, the organs become weak with age,
their functions are accomplished with less regularity and precision,
and, according to the expression of the poet,

  "_En marchant a la mort, on meurt a chaque pas,_"

the senses become blunted, the hearing becomes dull, the eyes lose
their luster, vivacity, and strength, and vision becomes in general
shorter, less piercing, and less powerful.

The various parts of the eye, but more particularly the crystalline
lens, undergo modifications in form and structure. Accommodation is
effected with more and more difficulty, and, toward the age of sixty,
it can hardly be effected at all.

These changes occur in emmetropics as well as in hypermetropics and
myopics.

As will be seen, then, there is a relation between the age of a
person and the amplitude of the accommodation of his eyes. If we
cannot express a law, we can at least, through statistics, find out,
approximately, the age of a person if we know the extent of the
accommodation of his eyes.

A Dutch oculist, Donders, has got up a table in which, opposite the
amplitudes, the corresponding ages are found. Now, the Javal-Bull
optometer permits of a quick determination of the value of the
amplitude of accommodation in _dioptries_. (A dioptrie is the power of
a lens whose focal distance is one meter.)

The first idea of this apparatus is due to the illustrious physicist
Thomas Young, who flourished about a century ago. The Young apparatus
is now a scarcely known scientific curiosity that Messrs. Javal and
Bull have resuscitated and transformed and completed.

It consists of a light wooden rule about 24 inches long by 11/4 inch
wide that can easily be held in the hand by means of a handle fixed at
right angles with the flat part (Fig. 1). At one extremity there is a
square thin piece of metal of the width of the rule, and at right
angles with the latter, but on the side opposite the handle. This
piece of metal contains a circular aperture a few hundredths of an
inch in diameter (Fig. 3). Toward this aperture there may be moved
either a converging lens of five dioptries or a diverging lens of the
same diameter, but of six dioptries.

[Illustration: FIG 1.--MODE OF USING THE BULL OPTOMETER]

On holding the apparatus by the handle and putting the eye to the
aperture, provided or not with a lens, we see a series of dominoes
extending along the rule, from the double ace, which occupies the
extremity most distant from the eye, to the double six, which is very
near the eye (Fig. 2). The numbers from two to twelve, simply, are
indicated, but this original means of representing them has been
chosen in order to call attention to them better.

[Illustration: FIG 2.--THE RULE, WITH THE DOMINOES (1/4 Actual
Size.) ]

Figures are characters without physiognomy, if we may so express
ourselves, while the spots on the dominoes take particular
arrangements according to the number represented, and differentiate
themselves more clearly from each other than figures do. They are at
the same time more easily read than figures or regularly spaced dots.
Now, it is very important to fix the attention upon the numbers, since
they are arranged at distances expressed in dioptries and indicated by
the number of the spots. On looking through the aperture, we see in
the first place one of the dominoes more distinctly than the rest.
Then, on endeavoring to see those that are nearer or farther off, we
succeed in accommodating the eye and in seeing the numbers that
express the extreme terms of the accommodation, and consequently the
amplitude.

[Illustration: FIG. 3.--DETAILS OF EYE PIECE.]

Let us now take some examples: If we wish to express in dioptries the
myopia of a person, we put the apparatus in his hand, and ask him to
place his eye very near the aperture and note the number of spots on
the most distant domino that he sees distinctly. This is the number
sought. If the observation be made through the upper lens, it will be
necessary to subtract five from the number obtained; if, on the
contrary, the other lens is used, it will be necessary to add six.

If it is a question of a presbyope, let him look with his spectacles,
and note the nearest domino seen distinctly. This will be the number
of dioptries expressing the nearest point at which he can read. This
number permits us to know whether it is necessary to add or subtract
dioptries in order to allow him to read nearer by or farther off. If,
for example, he sees the deuce and the ace distinctly, say 3 dioptries
or 0.33 meter, and we want to allow him to read at 0.25 meter,
corresponding to four dioptries, it will be necessary to increase the
power of his spectacles by one dioptrie.

Upon the whole, Dr. Bull's optometer permits of measuring the
amplitude of accommodation, and, consequently, of obtaining the
approximate age of people, of knowing the extreme distances of the
accommodation, and of quickly finding the number of the glass
necessary for each one. It reveals the defects in the accommodation,
and serves for the quick determination of refraction. So, in saying
that this little instrument is very ingenious and very practical, Dr.
Javal has used no exaggeration.--_La Nature._

       *       *       *       *       *




THE SANITATION OF TOWNS.[1]

  [Footnote 1: Abstract from the presidential address delivered
  before the Association of Municipal and Sanitary Engineers and
  Surveyors, at the annual meeting in Leicester, July 18, 1887.]

By Mr. J. GORDON, C.E.


The average mortality for England and Wales was 22.4 in 1838, and in
1886 19.3, which shows a saving on last year's population of England
and Wales of 86,400 lives annually, and a saving in suffering from an
estimated number of about 1,728,000 cases of sickness. To accomplish
all this, vast sums of money have been expended, probably not always
wisely, inasmuch as there have been mistakes made in this direction,
as in all new developments of science when applied in practice, and
evils have arisen which, if foreseen at all at the outset, were
underrated.

The great object of the public health act, 1848, was to enable local
authorities by its adoption to properly sewer, drain, and cleanse
their towns, and to provide efficient supplies of water, free from
contamination and impurities dangerous to health. The raising of money
by loans repayable in a series of years, which the act empowered,
enabled all these objects to be accomplished, and, while the first
duty of local authorities was undoubtedly the provision of a good
supply of water and proper sewerage for the removal of liquid filth
from the immediate vicinity of inhabited dwellings, the carrying out
of proper works for the latter object has been of much slower growth
than the former. Private companies led the way, in fact, in providing
supplies of water, inasmuch as there was a prospect of the works
becoming remunerative to shareholders investing their money in them;
and in nearly every instance where local authorities have eventually
found it to be in the interests of the inhabitants of their districts
to purchase the work, they have had to pay high prices for the
undertaking. This has generally led to a great deal of dissatisfaction
with companies holding such works, but it must not be forgotten that
the companies would, in most instances, never have had any existence
if the local authorities had taken the initiative, and that but for
the companies this great boon of a pure supply of water would most
probably have been long delayed to many large as well as small
communities.

The evils which have arisen from the sewering and draining of towns
have been of a twofold character. First, in the increased pollution of
rivers and streams into which the sewage, in the earlier stages of
these works, was poured without any previous treatment; and secondly,
in the production of sewer gas, which up to the present moment seems
so difficult to deal with. These concomitant evils and difficulties
attending the execution of sanitary works are in no way to be
underrated, but it still remains the first duty of town authorities to
remove, as quickly as possible, all liquid and other refuse from the
midst and immediate vicinity of large populations, before putrefaction
has had time to take place.

There are some minds whose course of reasoning seems to lead them to
the conclusion that the evils attending the introduction of modern
systems of sewerage are greater than those of the old methods of
dealing with town sewage and refuse, but the facts are against them to
such an extent that it would be difficult to point to a responsible
medical officer in the kingdom who would be courageous enough to
advocate a return to the old regime of cesspools, privy ashpits, open
ditches, and flat bottomed culverts. The introduction of earth closets
as one of the safeguards against sewer gas has made no headway for
large populations, and is beset with practical difficulties.

In the Midland and Lancashire towns the system known as the pail or
tub system has been much more largely introduced as a substitute for
the water closet, and it has, from a landlord's point of view, many
attractions. In the first place, the first cost, as compared with that
of a water closet, is very small, and the landlord is relieved for
ever afterward I believe, in most towns, of all future costs and
maintenance; whereas, in the case of water closets, there is
undoubtedly great difficulty in cottage property in keeping them in
good working order, especially during the frosts of winter. There are,
however, many objections to the pail system, which it is not proposed
to touch upon in this address, beyond this, that it appears to be a
costly appendage to the water carriage system, without the expected
corresponding advantage of relieving the municipal authorities of any
of the difficulties of river pollution, inasmuch as the remaining
liquid refuse of the town has still to be dealt with by the modern
systems of precipitation or irrigation, at practically the same cost
as would have been the case if the water carriage system had been
adopted in its entirety.

The rivers pollution act gave an impetus to works for the treatment of
sewage, although much had been done prior to that, and Leicester was
one of those towns which led the way so early as 1854 in precipitating
the solids of the sewage before allowing it to enter the river. The
innumerable methods which have since then been tried, and after large
expenditures of money have proved to be failures, show the
difficulties of the question.

On the whole, however, sewage farms, or a combination of the chemical
system with irrigation or intermittent filtration, have been the most
successful, so that the first evil to which the cleansing of towns by
the increased pollution of rivers gave rise may now be said to be
capable of satisfactory solution, notwithstanding that the old battle
of the systems of precipitation versus application of sewage to land
still wages whenever opportunity occurs.

The second evil to which I have made reference, viz., that of sewer
ventilation, seems still unsolved, and I would earnestly entreat
members, all of whom have more or less opportunities of experimenting
and making observations of the behavior of sewer gas under certain
conditions, to direct their attention to this subject. It is admitted
on all hands that the sewers must be ventilated--that is, that there
must be a means of escape for the polluted air of the sewers; for it
is well known that the conditions prevailing within the sewers during
the twenty-four hours of the day are very varying, and on this subject
the early observations of the late medical officer for the City of
London (Dr. Letheby), and the present engineer for the City of London
(Lieutenant-Colonel Heywood), and the still more recent investigations
of Professor Pettenkofer, of Munich, Professor Soyka, of Prague, and
our own members, Mr. McKie, of Carlisle, Mr. Read, of Gloucester, and
others, are worthy of attention. It does not, however, seem to be so
readily or universally conceded that a plentiful supply of fresh air
is of equal importance, and that the great aim and object of sewer
