strength in the apparatus to be able, finally, like others, to face
the various perils that await us from the cradle.

The results that have been obtained for some time back at Paris, where
the surroundings are so unfavorable, no longer leave any doubt as to
the excellence of the process. At the lying-in clinic of Assas Street,
Doctors Farnier, Chantreuil, and Budin succeeded in a few days in
bringing some infants born at six months (genuine human dolls,
weighing scarcely more than from 21/4 to 41/2 pounds) up to the normal
weight of 71/2 pounds.--_L'Illustration._

       *       *       *       *       *




GASTROSTOMY.


Surgery has, as is well known, made great progress in recent years.
Apropos of this subject, we shall describe to our readers an operation
that was recently performed by one of our most skillful surgeons, Dr.
Terrillon, under peculiar circumstances, in which success is quite
rare. The subject was a man whose oesophagus was obstructed, and who
could no longer swallow any food, or drink the least quantity of
liquid, and to whom death was imminent. Dr. Terrillon made an incision
in the patient's stomach, and, through a tube, enabled him to take
nourishment and regain his strength. We borrow a few details
concerning the operation from a note presented by the doctor at one of
the last meetings of the Academy of Medicine.

[Illustration: FIG. 1.--FEEDING A PATIENT THROUGH A STOMACHAL TUBE.]

[Illustration: FIG. 2.--DETAILS OF THE TUBE. C, rubber tube for
leading food to the stomach, E; B B', rubber balls, which, inflated
with air by means of the tube, T, and rubber ball, P, effect a
hermetic closing; A, stopper for the tube, C; R, cock of the air
tube.]

Mr. X., fifty-three years of age, is a strong man of arthritic
temperament. He has suffered for several years with violent gastralgia
and obstinate dyspepsia, for which he has long used morphine. The
oesophagal symptoms appear to date back to the month of September,
1887, when he had a painful regurgitation of a certain quantity of
meat that he had swallowed somewhat rapidly.

Since that epoch, the passage of solid food has been either painful or
difficult, and often followed by regurgitation. The food seemed to
stop at the level of the pit of the stomach. So he gave up solid food,
and confined himself to liquids or semi-liquids, which readily passed
up to December 20, 1887. At this epoch, he remarked that liquids were
swallowed with difficulty, especially at certain moments, they
remaining behind the sternum and afterward slowly descending or being
regurgitated. This state of things was more marked especially in the
first part of January. He was successfully sounded several times, but
soon the sound was not able to pass. Doctors Affre and Bazenet got him
to come to Paris, where he arrived February 5, 1888.

For ten days, the patient had not been able to swallow anything but
about a quart of milk or bouillon in small doses. As soon as he had
swallowed the liquid, he experienced distress over the pit of the
stomach, followed by painful regurgitations. For three days, every
attempt made by Dr. Terrillon to remove the obstacle that evidently
existed at the level of the cardia entirely failed. Several times
after such attempts a little blood was brought out, but there was
never any hemorrhage.

The patient suffered, grew lean and impatient, and was unable to
introduce into his stomach anything but a few spoonfuls of water from
time to time. As he was not cachectic and no apparent ganglion was
found, and as his thoracic respiration was perfect, it seemed to be
indicated that an incision should be made in his stomach. The patient
at once consented.

The operation was performed February 9, at 11 o'clock, with the aid of
Dr. Routier, the patient being under the influence of chloroform. A
small aperture was made in the wall of the stomach and a red rubber
sound was at once introduced in the direction of the cardia and great
tuberosity. This gave exit to some yellowish gastric liquid. The tube
was fixed in the abdominal wall with a silver wire. The operation took
three quarters of an hour. The patient was not unduly weakened, and
awoke a short time afterward. He had no nausea, but merely a burning
thirst. The operation was followed by no peritoneal reaction or fever.
Three hours afterward, bouillon and milk were injected and easily
digested.

Passing in silence the technical details, which would not interest the
majority of our readers, we shall be content to say that Mr. X.,
thanks to this alimentation, has regained his strength, and is daily
taking his food as shown in Fig. 1. The aperture made in the stomach
permits of the introduction of the rubber apparatus shown in Fig. 2,
the object of which is to prevent the egress of the liquids of the
stomach and at the same time to introduce food. A funnel is fitted to
the tube, and the liquid or semi-liquid food is directly poured into
the stomach. Digestion proceeds with perfect regularity, and Mr. X.,
who has presented himself, of his own accord, before the Academy, and
whom we have recently seen, has resumed his health and good
spirits.--_La Nature._

       *       *       *       *       *




HOW TO CATCH AND PRESERVE MOTHS AND BUTTERFLIES.


There is no part of our country in which one cannot form a beautiful
local collection, and any young person who wants amusement,
instruction, and benefit from two, three, or more weeks in the country
can find all in catching butterflies and moths, arranging them, and
studying them up.

Provide yourself first with two tools, a net and a poison bottle. The
net may be made of any light material. I find the thinnest Swiss
muslin best. Get a piece of iron wire, not as heavy as telegraph wire,
bend it in a circle of about ten inches diameter, with the ends
projecting from the circle two or three inches; lash this net frame to
the end of a light stick four or five feet long. Sew the net on the
wire. The net must be a bag whose depth is not quite the length of
your arm--so deep that when you hold the wire in one hand you can
easily reach the bottom with the bottle (to be described) in the other
hand. Never touch wing of moth or butterfly with your fingers. The
colors are in the dusty down (as you call it), which comes off at a
touch. Get a glass bottle or vial, with large, open mouth, and cork
which you can easily put in and take out. The bottles in which
druggists usually get quinine are the most convenient. It should not
be so large that you cannot easily carry it in your pocket. Let the
druggist put in the bottle a half ounce of cyanide of potassium; on
this pour water to the depth of about three-fourths of an inch, and
then sprinkle in and mix gently and evenly enough plaster of Paris to
form a thick cream, which will _set_ in a cake in the bottom of the
vial. Let it stand open an hour to set and dry, then wipe out the
inside of the vial above the cake and keep it corked. This is the
regular entomological poison bottle, used everywhere. An insect put in
it dies quietly at once. It will last several months.

These two tools, the net and the poison bottle, are your catching and
killing instruments. You know where to look for butterflies. Moths are
vastly more numerous, and while equally beautiful, present more
varieties of beauty than butterflies. They can be found by daylight in
all kinds of weather, in the grass fields, in brush, in dark woods,
sometimes on flowers. Many spend the daytime spread out, others with
close shut wings on the trunks of trees in dark woods. The night moths
are more numerous and of great variety. They come around lamps, set
out on verandas in the night, in great numbers. A European fashion is
to spread on tree trunks a sirup made of brown sugar and rum, and
visit them once in a while at night with net and lantern. Catch your
moth in the net, take him out of it by cornering him with the open
mouth of your poison bottle, so that you secure him unrubbed.

Now comes the work of stretching your moths. This is easy, but must be
done carefully. Provide your own stretching boards. These can be made
anywhere with hammer and nail and strips of wood. You want two flat
strips of wood about seven-eighths or three-fourths of an inch thick
and eight to fourteen inches long, nailed parallel to each other on
another strip, so as to leave a narrow open space between the two
parallel strips. Make two or three or more of these, with the slit or
space between the strips of various widths, for large and small moths
and butterflies. Make as many of them, with as various widths of slit,
as your catches may demand. Take your moth by the feet, gently in your
fingers, put a long pin down through his body, set the pin down in the
slit of the stretching board, so that the body of the moth will be at
the top of the slit and the wings can be laid out flat on the boards
on each side. Have ready narrow slips of white paper. Lay out one
_upper_ wing flat, raising it gently and carefully by using the point
of a pin to draw it with, until the lower edge of this upper wing is
nearly at a right angle with the body. Pin it there temporarily with
one pin, carefully, while you draw up the _under_ wing to a natural
position, and pin that. Put a slip of paper over both wings, pinning
one end above the upper and the other below the under wing, thus
holding both wings flat on the stretching board. Take out the pins
first put in the wings and let the paper do the holding. Treat the
opposite wings in the same way. Put as many moths or butterflies on
your stretching board as it will hold, and let them remain in a dry
room for two, three, or more days, according to size of moths and
dampness of climate. Put them in sunshine or near a stove to hasten
drying. When dry, take off the slips of paper, lift the moth out by
the pin through the body, and place him permanently in your
collection.--_Wm. C. Prime, in N.Y. Jour. of Commerce._

       *       *       *       *       *




THE CLAVI HARP.


The beautiful instrument which we illustrate to-day is the invention
of M. Dietz, of Brussels. His grandfather was one of the first
manufacturers of upright pianos, and being struck with the
difficulties and defects of the harp, constructed, in 1810, an
instrument _a cordes pincees a clavier_--the strings connected with a
keyboard.

Many improvements have from time to time been made on this model,
which at last arrived at the perfection exhibited in the newly
patented clavi harp. The difficulty of learning to play the ordinary
harp, and the inherent inconveniences of the instrument, limit its
use. It is furnished with catgut strings, which are affected by all
the influences of temperature, and require to be frequently tuned. The
necessity of playing the strings with the fingers renders it difficult
to obtain equality in the sounds. It gives only the natural sounds of
the diatonic gamut, and in order to obtain changes of modulation, the
pedals must be employed. Harmonics and shakes are very difficult to
execute on the harp, and--last, but not least--it is not provided with
dampers. The external form of the clavi harp resembles that of the
harp, and all the cords, or strings, are visible. The mechanism which
produces the sound is put into motion directly a key is depressed, and
acts in a similar manner to the fingers of a harpist; the strings
being pulled, not struck. The clavi harp is free from all the
objections inherent in the ordinary harp. The strings are of a
peculiar metal, covered with an insulating material, which has for its
object the production of sounds similar to that obtained from catgut
strings, and to prevent the strings from falling out of tune. The
keyboard, exactly like that of a piano, permits of playing in all
keys, without the employment of pedals. The clavi harp has two pedals.
The first, connected with the dampers, permits the playing of
sustained sounds, or damping them instantaneously. The second pedal
divides certain strings into two equal parts, to give the harmonic
octaves; by the aid of this pedal the performer can produce ten
harmonic sounds simultaneously; on the ordinary harp only four
simultaneous harmonics are possible. An ordinary keyboard being the
intermediary between the performer and the movement of the mechanical
"fingers" which pluck the strings, perfect equality of manipulation is
secured. The mechanical "fingers" instantaneously quit the strings on
which they operate, and are ready for further action. The "fingers"
are covered with suitable material, so that their contact with the
strings takes place with the softness necessary to obtain the most
beautiful tones possible.

[Illustration: THE CLAVI HARP.]

The clavi harp is much lighter than the piano--so that it can easily
be moved from room to room, or taken into an orchestra, by one or two
persons--and is of an elegant form, favorable to artistic decoration.
Sufficient will have been said to give a general idea of the new
instrument.

It is undeniable that at the present day that beautiful instrument,
the harp, is seldom played; still seldomer well played. This is
attributable to the difficulties it presents to pupils. Its seven
pedals must be employed in different ways when notes are to be raised
or lowered a semitone; chromatic passages easy of execution on the
piano are almost impracticable on the harp. The same may be said of
the shake; and it is only after long and exclusive devotion to its
study that the harp can become endurable in the hands of an amateur,
or the means of furnishing a professional harpist with a moderate
income. It is needless to point out how far, in these respects, the
harp is surpassed by the clavi harp.

Vocalists who accompany themselves on the harp are forced, by the
extension of their arms to reach the lower strings, and by frequent
employment of their feet on the pedals, into postures and movements
unfavorable to voice production; but they can accompany themselves
with ease on the clavi harp.

Composers are restricted in the introduction of harp passages in their
orchestral scores, owing to the paucity of harpists. In some cases,
composers have written harp passages beyond the possibility of
execution by a single harpist, and the difficulty and cost of
providing two harpists have been inevitable. These difficulties will
disappear, and composers may give full play to their inspirations,
when the harp is displaced by the clavi harp.--_Building News._

       *       *       *       *       *




THE ARGAND BURNER.


Argand, a poor Swiss, invented a lamp with a wick fitted into a hollow
cylinder, up which a current of air was permitted to pass, thus giving
a supply of oxygen to the interior as well as the exterior of the
circular frame. At first Argand used the lamp without a glass chimney.
One day he was busy in his work room and sitting before the burning
lamp. His little brother was amusing himself by placing a bottomless
oil flask over different articles. Suddenly he placed it upon the
flame of the lamp, which instantly shot up the long, circular neck of
the flask with increased brilliancy. It did more, for it flashed into
Argand's mind the idea of the lamp chimney, by which his invention was
perfected.

       *       *       *       *       *




THE SUBTERRANEAN TEMPLES OF INDIA.


During the last fifteen years Bombay has undergone a complete
transformation, and the English are now making of it one of the
prettiest cities that it is possible to see. The environs likewise
have been improved, and thanks to the railways and _bungalows_ (inns),
many excursions may now be easily made, and tourists can thus visit
the wonders of India, such as the subterranean temples of Ajunta,
Elephanta, Nassik, etc., without the difficulties of heretofore.

The excavations of Elephanta are very near Bombay, and the trip in the
bay by boat to the island where they are located is a delightful one.
The deplorable state in which these temples now exist, with their
broken columns and statues, detracts much from their interest. The
temples of Ajunta, perhaps the most interesting of all, are easier of
access, and are situated 250 miles from Bombay and far from the
railway station at Pachora, where it is necessary to leave the cars.
Here an ox cart has to be obtained, and thirty miles have to be
traveled over roads that are almost impassable. It takes the oxen
fifteen hours to reach the bungalow of Furdapore, the last village
before the temples, and so it is necessary to purchase provisions. In
these wild and most picturesque places, the Hindoos cannot give you a
dinner, even of the most primitive character. It was formerly thought
that the subterranean temples of India were of an extraordinary
antiquity.

The Hindoos still say that the gods constructed these works, but of
the national history of the country they are entirely ignorant, and
they do not, so to speak, know how to estimate the value of a century.
The researches made by Mr. Jas. Prinsep between 1830 and 1840 have
enlightened the scientific world as to the antiquity of the monuments
of India. He succeeded in deciphering the Buddhist inscriptions that
exist in all the north of India beyond the Indus as far as to the
banks of the Bengal. These discoveries opened the way to the work done
by Mr. Turnour on the Buddhist literature of Ceylon, and it was thus
that was determined the date of the birth of Sakya Muni, the founder
of Buddhism. He was born 625 B.C. and his death occurred eighty years
later, in 543. It is also certain that Buddhism did not become a true
religion until 300 years after these events, under the reign of Aoska.
The first subterranean temples cannot therefore be of a greater
antiquity. Researches that have been made more recently have in all
cases confirmed these different results, and we can now no longer
doubt that these temples have been excavated within a period of
fourteen centuries.

Dasaratha, the grandson of Aoska, first excavated the temples known
under the name of Milkmaid, in Behar (Bengal), 200 B.C., and the
finishing of the last monument of Ellora, dedicated by Indradyumna to
Indra Subha, occurred during the twelfth century of our era.

[Illustration: FIG. 1.--FACADE OF THE TEMPLE OF PANDU LENA.]

We shall speak first of the temples of Pandu Lena, situated in the
vicinity of Nassik, near Bombay. These are less frequented by
travelers, and that is why I desired to make a sketch of them (Fig. 1).
The church of Pandu Lena is very ancient. Inscriptions have been found
upon its front, and in the interior on one of the pillars, that teach
us that it was excavated by an inhabitant of Nassik, under the reign
of King Krishna, in honor of King Badrakaraka, the fifth of the
dynasty of Sunga, who mounted the throne 129 B.C.

The front of this church, all carved in the rock, is especially
remarkable by the perfection of the ornaments. In these it is to be
seen that the artist has endeavored to imitate in rock a structure
made of wood. This is the case in nearly all the subterranean temples,
and it is presumable that the architects of the time did their
composing after the reminiscences of the antique wooden monuments that
still existed in India at their epoch, but which for a long time have
been forever destroyed. The large bay placed over the small front door
gives a mysterious light in the nave of the church, and sends the rays
directly upon the main altar or _dagoba_, leaving the lateral columns
and porticoes in a semi-obscurity well calculated to inspire
meditation and prayer.

The temples and monasteries of Ajunta, too, are of the highest
interest. They consist of 27 grottoes, of which four only are churches
or _chaityas_. The 23 other excavations compose the monasteries or
_viharas_. Begun 100 B.C., they have remained since the tenth century
of our era as we now see them. The subterranean monasteries are
majestic in appearance. Sustained by superb columns with curiously
sculptured capitals, they are ornamented with admirable frescoes which
make us live over again the ancient Hindoo life. The paintings are
unfortunately in a sad state, yet for the tourist they are an
inexhaustible source of interesting observations.

The excavations, which have been made one after another in the wall of
volcanic rock of the mountain, form, like the latter, a sort of
semicircle. But the churches and monasteries have fronts whose
richness of ornamentation is unequaled. The profusion of the
sculptures and friezes, ornamented with the most artistic taste,
strikes you with so much the more admiration in that in these places
they offer a perfect and varied _ensemble_ of the true type of the
Buddhist religion during this long period of centuries. The
picturesque landscape that surrounds these astonishing sculptures adds
to the beauty of these various pictures.

The temples of Ellora are no less remarkable, but they do not offer
the same artistic _ensemble_. The excavations may be divided into
three series: ten of them belong to the religion of Buddha, fourteen
to that of Brahma, and six to the Dravidian sect, which resembles that
of Jaius, of which we still have numerous specimens in the Indies.
Excavated in the same amygdaloid rock, the temples and monasteries
differ in aspect from those of Ajunta, on account of the form of the
mountain. Ajunta is a nearly vertical wall. At Ellora, the rock has a
gentle slope, so that, in order to have the desired height for
excavating the immense halls of the _viharas_ or the naves of the
_chaityas_, it became necessary to carve out a sort of forecourt in
front of each excavation.

[Illustration: FIG. 2.--PLAN OF THE TEMPLES OF KYLAS.]

Some of the churches thus have their entrance ornamented with
porticoes, and the immense monasteries (which are sometimes three
stories high) with lateral entrances and facades. The mountain has
also been excavated in other places, so as to form a relatively narrow
entrance, which gives access to the internal court of one of these
monasteries. It thus becomes nearly invisible to whoever passes along
the road formed on the sloping side of the mountain. The greatest
curiosity among the monuments of Ellora is the group of temples known
by the name of Kylas (Fig. 2). The monks have excavated the rocky
slope on three faces so as to isolate completely, in the center, an
immense block, out of which they have carved an admirable temple (see
T in the plan, Fig. 2), with its annexed chapels. These temples are
thus roofless and are sculptured externally in the form of pagodas.
Literally covered with sculptures composed with infinite art, they
form a very unique collection. These temples seem to rest upon a
fantastic base in which are carved in alto rilievo all the gods of
Hindoo mythology, along with symbolic monsters and rows of elephants.
These are so many caryatides of strange and mysterious aspect,
certainly designed to strike the imagination of the ancient Indian
population (Fig. 3).

[Illustration: FIG. 3.--SUBTERRANEAN TEMPLE AT ELLORA.]

Two flights of steps at S and S (Fig. 2) near the main entrance of
Kylas lead to the top of this unique base and to the floor of the
temples.

The interior of the central pagoda, ornamented with sixteen
magnificent columns, formerly covered, like the walls, with paintings,
and the central sanctuary that contains the great idol, are composed
with a perfect understanding of architectural proportions.

Exit from this temple is effected through two doors at the sides.
These open upon a platform where there are five pagodas of smaller
size that equal the central temple in the beauty of their sculptures
and the elegance of their proportions.

Around these temples great excavations have been made in the sides of
the mountain. At A (Fig. 2), on a level with the ground, is seen a
great cloister ornamented with a series of bass reliefs representing
the principal gods of the Hindoo paradise. The side walls contain
large, two-storied halls ornamented with superb sculptures of various
divinities. Columns of squat proportions support the ceilings. A small
