
The system of optical communication proposed by Capt. Gaumet, and
which he names the _Telelogue_, is based upon the visibility of
colored or luminous objects, and upon the possibility of piercing the
opaque curtain formed by the atmosphere between the observer's eye and
a signal, by utilizing the difference in brightness that exists
between such objects and the atmosphere. It is a question, then, of
giving such difference in intensity its maximum of brightness. To do
this, Capt. Gaumet proposes to employ silvered signals upon a black
background. He uses the simple letters of the alphabet, but changes
their value. His apparatus has the form of a large album glued at the
back to a sloping desk. Each silvered letter, glued to a piece of
black cloth, is seen in relief upon the open register. A sort of index
along the side, as in commercial blank-books, permits of quickly
finding any letter at will. Such is the manipulator of the apparatus.

The receiver consists of a spy-glass affixed to the board that carries
the register. For a range of two and a half miles, the complete
apparatus, with a 12x16 inch manipulator and telescope, weighs but
four and a half pounds. For double this range, with a 20x28 inch
manipulator and telescope, the total weight is thirteen pounds. The
larger apparatus, according to the inventor, have a range of seven
miles.

For night work the manipulator is lighted either by one lamp, or by
two lamps with reflector, placed laterally against it.

This apparatus, although well known, and having been publicly
experimented with, has not, to our knowledge, been applied
practically. From a military standpoint, its short range will
evidently not permit it to compete with optical telegraphic apparatus,
properly so called. Perhaps it might rather be of service for private
communications between localities not very far apart, since it costs
but little and is easily operated.


OPTICAL SIGNALING BETWEEN BODIES OF TROOPS.

Optical communications by signals, during day and night, with
experienced men, may, in the absence of telephones, telegraphs, and
messengers, render important service when the distance involved is
greater than two thousand feet.

This mode of correspondence is based upon the use of the Morse
alphabet. The signals are divided into night and day ones. The day
signals are made with small flags. When these are wanting, sheets of
white cardboard may be used. The night signals are made with a lantern
provided with a support, which may be fixed to a wall or upon a
bayonet.

In day signaling, the dashes of the Morse alphabet are formed by means
of two flags (Fig. 23) held simultaneously at arm's length by the
signaler. The dots are formed with a single flag held in the right
hand (Fig. 24). In this way it is possible, by extremely simple
combinations, to establish a correspondence, and produce any
conventional signal. By means of relay stations, the signals may be
transmitted from one to another to a great distance.

In signaling with the lantern, long and short interruptions of the
luminous source are produced by means of a screen.


OPTICAL TELEGRAPHY BY LUMINOUS BALLOONS.

Various interesting experiments have been made with a view to
utilizing luminous captive balloons for optical communications. As we
have already seen, this maybe effected by using opaque balloons, and
throwing upon them at unequal intervals a luminous fascicle by means
of a projector. As for using a luminous source placed in the car of a
balloon, that cannot be thought of in the present state of aeronautic
science; the continual rotation of the balloon around its axis would
render the projection and reception of the signals in a given
direction impossible.


OPTICAL TELEGRAPHY IN THE MARINE.

For communicating optically from ship to ship during the day, the
marine uses flags of different forms and colors, and flames. Between
ships and the land there are used what are called semaphore signals,
which are made by means of a mast provided with three arms and a disk
placed at the upper part. The combinations of signs thus obtained,
which are analogous in principle to those of the Chappe telegraph,
permit of satisfactorily communicating to a distance.

On board ship, hand signals are used like those employed by the army
for communicating between bodies of troops. For night communications
the marine employs lights corresponding to the day flags, as well as
rockets, and luminous rays projected by means of reflectors and
intercepted by screens.

In conclusion, it may be said that optical telegraphy, which has only
within a few years emerged from the domain of theory to enter that of
practice, has taken a remarkable stride in the military art and in
science. It is due to its processes that Col. Perrier has in recent
years been enabled to carry out certain geodesic work that would have
formerly been regarded as impracticable, notably the prolongation of
the arc of the meridian between France and Spain. Very recently, an
optical communication established between Mauritius and Reunion
islands, to a distance of 129 miles, with 24 inch apparatus, proved
that, in certain cases, the costly laying of a submarine cable may be
replaced by the direct emission of a luminous ray.

       *       *       *       *       *




A NEW STYLE OF SUBMARINE TELEGRAPH.


Mr. F. Von Faund-Szyll has devised an original system of submarine
telegraph, which is based upon the well known property that selenium
exhibits of modifying its resistance under the influence of luminous
rays, and which he styles the _Selen-Differenzialrecorder_.

Contrary to what is found in the other systems hitherto employed, the
Faund-Szyll system utilizes the cable current merely for starting the
receiving apparatus, which are operated by means of strong local
batteries. The result is that the mechanical work that devolves upon
the line current, which is, as well known, very weak, is exceedingly
reduced.

The system consists of two essential parts: (1) The receiver, properly
so called. (2) The relay as well as the registering apparatus or
_differenzialrecorder_. The receiver consists of a closed box, K, in
the interior of which there is a very intense source of light whose
rays escape by passing through apertures, _a a'_, in the front part
(Fig. 1).

As a source of light, there may be conveniently employed an
incandescent lamp, _g_, capable of giving an intense light, and
arranged (as shown in Fig. 2) behind the side that contains the slits,
_a a'_.

The starting apparatus consists of a small galvanometric helix, _r_,
analogous to Thomson's siphon recorder, which is suspended from a
cocoon fiber and capable of moving in an extremely powerful magnetic
field, N S. This helix carries, as may be seen in Figs. 1, 3 and 4, a
prolongation, _v_, at its lower end whose form is that of a prism, and
which is arranged in front of the partition of the box, K, in such a
way that it exactly covers the two slits, a and _a_ when the bobbin is
at rest, and in this case prevents the luminous rays of the lamp, _g_,
from escaping from the box. But, as soon as the current sent through
the cable reaches the spirals of the bobbin, through the conductors,
_y y'_, the sum of the elementary electrodynamic actions that arise
causes the helix to revolve to the right or left, according to the
polarity of the current, while at the same time the helix slightly
approaches one or the other of the poles of the magnet. The
prolongation, _v_, of the helix, being firmly united with the latter,
follows it in its motion, and has the effect of permitting the
luminous rays to escape through one or the other of the slits, _a a'_,
so that the freeing of the luminous fascicle, if such an expression is
allowable, is effected.

[Illustration: FIG. 1.]

In order to prevent oscillations, which could not fail to occur after
each emission of a current (so that the helix, instead of returning to
a position of equilibrium and stopping there, would go beyond it and
alternately uncover the slits, _a a'_), the apparatus is provided with
a liquid deadener. To this end, the prolongation, _v_, carries a
piece, _o_, which dips into a cup containing a mixture of glycerine
and water.

We shall now describe the _differenzialrecorder_. Opposite the two
slits, _a_ and _a'_, there are two powerful converging lenses, _l_ and
_l'_, whose foci coincide with two sorts of selenium plate rheostat,
_z_ and _z'_. The result of this arrangement is that as soon as one of
the slits, as a consequence of the displacement of the helix, _r_,
allows a luminous fascicle to escape, this latter falls upon the
corresponding lens, which concentrates it and sends it to the selenium
plates just mentioned. Under the influence of the luminous rays, the
resistance that the selenium offers to the passage of an electric
current instantly changes. At M and M' are placed two horseshoe
magnets whose poles are provided with pieces of soft iron that serve
as cores to exceedingly fine wire bobbins, _d_. These polarized pieces
are arranged in the shape of a St. Andrew's cross, and in such a way
that the poles of the same name occupy the two extremities of the same
arm of the cross, an arrangement very clearly shown in Fig. 2.

[Illustration: FIG. 2.]

Between the poles of the magnets, M and M', there is a permanent
magnet, A, movable around a vertical axis, _i_. Four spiral springs,
_f_, whose tension may be regulated, permit of centering this latter
piece in such a way that when the current is traversing the spirals of
the polar bobbins it is equally distant from the four poles, _n_, _s_,
_s'_, and _n'_. Under such circumstances it is evident that a
difference in the power of attraction of these four poles, however
feeble it be, will result in moving the magnet, A, in one direction or
the other around its axis. The energy and extent of such motion may,
moreover, be magnified by properly acting upon the four regulating
springs.

The bobbins of the magnet, M, are mounted in series with the selenium
plates, _z_, the local battery, B, and a resistance box, W. Those of
the magnet, M', are in series with _z'_, B', and W'. The local
batteries, B and B', are composed of quite a large number of elements.
The current from the battery, B, traverses the selenium plates and the
bobbins of the magnet, M, and returns to B through the rheostat, W;
and the same occurs with the current from B'. The two currents, then,
are absolutely independent of one another.

From this description it is very easy to see how the system works. Let
us suppose, in fact, that the current which is traversing the spirals
of the helix, _r_, has a direction such that the helix in its movement
approaches the pole, S; then the prolongation, _v_, will uncover the
slit, _a_, which, along with _a'_, had up to this moment been closed,
and a luminous fascicle escaping through _a_ will strike the lens,
_l'_, and from thence converge upon the selenium plates, _z'_. This is
all the duty that the line current has to perform.

The luminous rays, in falling upon the selenium plates, _z'_, modify
the resistance that these offered to the passage of the current
produced by the battery, B'. As this resistance diminishes, the
intensity of the current in the circuit supplied by the battery, B',
increases, the attractive action of the polar pieces of the magnet,
M', diminishes, the equilibrium is destroyed, and the piece, A,
revolves around the axis, _i_. If the polarity of the line current
were different, the same succession of phenomena would occur, save
that the direction of A's rotation would be contrary. As for the
rheostats, W W', their object is to correct variations in the
selenium's resistance and to balance the resistances of the two
corresponding circuits. The magnet, A, will be combined with a
registering apparatus so as to directly or indirectly actuate the
printing lever. The entire first part of this apparatus, which is very
sensitive, may be easily protected from all external influence by
placing it in a box, and, if need be, in a room distant from the one
in which the employes work.

[Illustration: FIGS. 3 AND 4.]

The _differenzialrecorder_ alone has to be in the work room.

As may be seen, the system is not wanting in originality. Experience
alone will permit of pronouncing upon the question as to whether it is
as practical as ingenious.--_La Lumiere Electrique._

       *       *       *       *       *




A NEW CIRCUIT CUTTER.


Messrs. Thomson & Bottomley have recently invented a peculiar circuit
cutter based upon the use of a metal whose melting point is
exceedingly low. Recourse is had to this process for breaking the
current within as short a time as possible. In this new device the
ends of the conductors are soldered together with the metal in
question at one or several points of the circuit. The metal employed
is silver or copper of very great conductivity, seeing that the
increase of temperature in a conductor, due to a sudden increase of
the current, is inversely proportional to the product of the electric
resistance by the specific heat of the conductor; that these metals
are best adapted for giving constant and definite results; and that
the contacts are better than with lead or the other metals of low
melting point which are frequently employed in circuit cutters.

[Illustration: FIG. 1.]

Fig. 1 represents one form of the new device. Here, a is the copper or
silver wire, and _b_ is a soldering made with a very fusible metal and
securing a continuity of the circuit. Each extremity of the wire, _a_,
is connected with a heavy ring, _c_, of copper or other good
conducting metal. The hook, _d_, with which the upper ring, _c_, is in
contact, communicates metallically with one of the extremities of the
conductor at the place where the latter is interrupted for the
insertion of the circuit cutter. The hook, _e_, with which the lower
ring, _c_, is in contact, tends constantly to descend under the action
of a spiral spring, _f_, which is connected metallically with the
other extremity of the principal conductor. The hooks, _d_ and _e_,
are arranged approximately in the same vertical plane, and have a
slightly rounded upper and lower surface, designed to prevent the
rings, _c_, of the fusible wire, _a_, from escaping from the hooks. In
Fig. 1 the position of the arm, _e_, when there is no fusible wire in
circuit, is shown by dotted lines. When this arm occupies the position
shown by entire lines, it exerts a certain traction upon the
soldering, _b_, and separates the two halves of the wire, _a_, as soon
as the intensity of circulation exceeds its normal value. The mode of
putting the wire with fusible soldering into circuit is clearly shown
in the engraving.

[Illustration: FIG. 2.]

Fig. 2 shows a different mode of mounting the wire. The wire, _q_, is
soldered in the center, and is bent into the shape of a U, and kept in
place by the pieces, _r_ and _s_. In this way the two ends of it tend
constantly to separate from each other. Messrs. Thomson & Bottomley
likewise employ weights, simply, for submitting the wire to a constant
stress. The apparatus is inclosed in a box provided with a glass
cover.--_La Lumiere Electrique._

       *       *       *       *       *




NEW MICRO-TELEPHONIC APPARATUS.


Despite the simplicity of their parts, and the slight value of the
materials employed, the existing micro-telephonic apparatus keep at
relatively high prices, and the use of them is often rejected, to the
benefit of speaking tubes, when the distance between stations is not
too great. We propose to describe a new style of apparatus that are in
no wise inferior to those in general use, and the price of which is
relatively low.

The microphone transmitter may have several forms. The most elementary
of these consists of two pieces of carbon, from one to one and a
quarter inches in length by one-half inch in width, between which are
fixed two _nails_, about two inches in length, whose extremities,
filed to a point, enter small conical apertures in the carbons. Fig. 1
gives an idea of the arrangement.

[Illustration: FIG. 1.]

Fig. 2 represents a model which is a little more complicated, but
which gives remarkable results. The largest nail is here two inches in
length, and the shortest three-quarter inch.

[Illustration: FIG. 2.]

The receivers may be Bell telephones of the simplest form found in the
market (Fig. 3); but for these there may be substituted a bar of soft
iron, cast iron, or steel, one of the extremities of which is provided
with a bobbin upon, which is wound insulated copper wire 0.02 inch in
diameter. The apparatus is mounted like an ordinary Bell telephone. A
horseshoe electro may also be used, and the poles be made to act (Fig.
4). The current sent by the transmitter suffices to produce a magnetic
field in which the variations in intensity produced by the microphone
succeed perfectly in reproducing speech and music. With four Leclanche
elements, the sounds are perceived very clearly. The elements used may
be bichromate of potash ones, those of Lelande and Chaperon, etc.

[Illustration: FIG. 3.--RECEIVER.]

[Illustration: FIG. 4.]

To this apparatus there may be added a second bobbin of coarser wire
into which is passed a current from a local pile. This produces a much
intenser magnetic field, and, consequently, louder sounds. This
modification, however, is really useful only for long distances.

Any arrangement imaginable may be given the transmitter and receiver;
but, aside from the fact that the ones just indicated are the
simplest, they give results that are at least equal, if not superior,
to all others.

We shall insist here only upon the arrangement of the microphone,
which is new (at least in practice), and upon the uselessness of
having well magnetized steel bars and wires of extreme fineness in the
receiver.

[Illustration: FIG. 5.]

We have stated that the nail microphones are the simplest. The nails
may be replaced by copper or any other metal, or they may be well
nickelized; but common nails answer very well, and do not oxidize
much. An apparatus of this kind (Fig. 5) that has been for more than a
year in a laboratory filled with acid vapors is yet working very well.
These apparatus possess the further advantage of being very strong,
and of undergoing violent shocks without breaking or even getting out
of order. They may be used either with or without induction coils. We
have not yet measured their range, but can cite the following fact:

One of these apparatus, quite crudely mounted, was put into a circuit
with a resistance of 300 ohms. With a single already exhausted
bichromate element, giving scarcely 2 volts, musical sounds and speech
reached the receiver without being notably weakened. Such resistance
represents a length of eighteen miles of ordinary telegraph wire.
After this, 700 ohms were overcome with 3.4 volts. This result was
obtained by direct transmission, and without an induction coil, and it
is probable that it might be much exceeded without sensibly increasing
the electromotive force of the current.--_Le Genie Civil._

       *       *       *       *       *




MESSRS. KAPP AND CROMPTON'S MEASURING INSTRUMENTS.


We give herewith, from the _Elektrotechnische Zeitschrift_, a few
interesting details in regard to the measuring apparatus of Messrs.
Kapp and Crompton.

It is evident that when we use permanent magnets or springs as
directing forces in measuring instruments, we cannot count upon an
absolute constancy in the indications, as the magnetism of the
magnetized pieces, or the tension of the springs, modifies in time.
The apparatus require to be regulated from time to time, and hence the
idea of substituting electro-magnets for permanent ones.

[Illustration: FIG. 1.]

If we suppose (Fig. 1) a magnetized needle, _n s_, placed between the
extremities of a soft iron core, N S, and if we group the circuit in
such a way that the current, after traversing the coil, _e e_, of the
electro, traverses a circle, _d d_, situated in a plane at right
angles with the plane of the needle's oscillation, it is evident that
we shall have obtained an apparatus that satisfies the aforesaid
conditions. It seems at first sight that in such an instrument the
directing force should be constant from the moment the electro was
saturated, and it would be possible, were sufficiently thin cores
used, to obtain a constancy in the directing magnetic field for
relatively feeble intensities. In reality, the actions are more
complex. The needle, _n s_, is, in fact, induced to return to its
position of equilibrium by two forces, the first of which (the
attraction of the poles, N S) rapidly increases with the intensity so
as to become quickly and perceptibly constant, while the second (the
sum of the elementary electrodynamic actions that are exerted between
the spirals, _e e_, and the needle, _n s_) increases proportionally to
the intensity of the current. If we represent these two sections
graphically by referring the magnetic moments as ordinates and the
current intensities as abscissas to two co-ordinate axes (Fig. 2), we
shall obtain for the first force the curve, O A B, which, starting
from A, becomes sensibly parallel with the axis of X, and for the
second the right line, O D. The resultant action is represented by the
curve, O E E'_F. It will be seen that this action, far from being
constant, increases quite rapidly with the intensity of the current,
so that the deflections would become feebler and feebler for strong
intensities, of current; and this, as well known, would render the
apparatus very defective from a practical point of view.

[Illustration: FIG. 2.]

But the action of the spirals can be annulled without sensibly
diminishing the magnetism of the core by arranging a second system of
spirals identical with the first, but placed in a plane at right
angles therewith, or, more simply still, by having a single system of
spirals comprising the coil of the electro-magnet, but distributed in
a plane that is oblique with respect to the needle's position of rest.
It then becomes possible, by properly modifying such angle of
inclination, to obtain a total directing action that shall continue to
increase with the intensity, and which, graphically represented, shall
give the curve, O G G'_H, for example (Fig. 2).

[Illustration: FIG. 3.]

[Illustration: FIG. 4.]

[Illustration: FIG. 5.]

This arrangement, which is adopted in Mr. Kapp's instruments, gives
very good results, as may be easily seen by reference to Figs. 3 and
