current per foot of conductor is at the present time very low as
compared with the output of gas per foot of gas pipe in any of the
large cities. The expense of wiring (which must of necessity be borne
by the householder) is large, and it is often a barrier to the
adoption of electric illumination, but as the rule to wire houses
becomes more general, the output per foot of main will constantly
increase, and therefore the interest per unit of output per foot of
main will constantly decrease. This same rule will apply in the case
of expenses of taking care of and repairing the distribution system,
although to not so great an extent.

If you will take into account these various factors constantly
operating toward a reduction of operating and general expense cost,
and interest cost, the conclusion must necessarily be forced upon you
that the price at which current can be sold at a profit to-day is in
no sense a measure of the income per unit which it will be necessary
for central station managers to obtain in the future. In 1881-82 it
was difficult to make both ends meet with an income of 25 cents per
kilowatt hour, to-day there are many stations showing a substantial
return on their investment whose average income does not exceed 7
cents per kilowatt hour, showing 70 per cent. reduction in price in
less than two decades. How far this constant reduction in cost,
followed by a constant reduction in selling price, will go, it is
difficult to determine; but if so much has been accomplished during
the first 20 years of the existence of the industry, is it too much to
predict that in a far less time than the succeeding 20 years electric
current for all purposes will be within the reach of the smallest
householder and the poorest citizen? But few industries can parallel
the record already obtained. If you will trace the history of the
introduction of gas as an illuminant, you will find that it took a
much longer time to establish it on a commercial basis than it has
taken to establish most firmly the electric lighting industry. All the
great improvements in gas, the introduction of water gas, the
economizing in consumption by the use of the Welsbach burner, have all
been made within the time of those before me, and yet, notwithstanding
that when these gas improvements started, the electric lighting
business was hardly conceived, and certainly had not advanced to a
point where you could claim that it had passed the experimental
stage--notwithstanding this, the cost of electrical energy has
decreased so rapidly that to-day there are many large central station
plants making handsome returns on their investments at a far lower
average income per unit of light than the income obtained by the gas
company in the same community. In making my calculations which have
led me to this conclusion, I have assumed that 10,000 watts are equal
to 1,000 feet of gas. This comparison holds good, provided an
incandescent lamp of high economy is used as against the ordinary gas
burner. To make a comparison between electric illumination and
incandescent gas burners, such as the Welsbach burner, you must figure
on the use of an arc lamp in the electric circuit instead of an
incandescent lamp, which is certainly fair when it is remembered that
incandescent gas burners are, as a rule, used in places where arc
lamps should be used if electric illumination is employed.

With such brilliant results obtained in the past, the prospects of the
central station industry are certainly most dazzling. While the growth
of the business has been phenomenal, more especially since 1890, I
think it can be conservatively stated that we have scarcely entered
upon the threshold of the development which may be expected in the
future. In very few cities in the United States can you find that
electric illumination exceeds more than 20 per cent. of the total
artificial illumination for which the citizens pay. If this be the
state of affairs in connection with the use of electricity for
illuminating purposes, and if you will bear in mind the many other
purposes to which electricity can be adapted throughout a city and
supplied to customers in small quantities, you may get some faint
conception of the possible consumption of electrical energy in the not
far distant future. Methods of producing it may change, but these
methods cannot possibly go into use unless their adoption is justified
by saving in the cost of production--a saving which must be sufficient
to show a profit above the interest and depreciation on the new plant
employed. It is within the realms of possibility that the present form
of generating station may be entirely dispensed with. It has already
been demonstrated experimentally that electrical energy may be
produced direct from the coal itself without the intervention of the
boiler, engine and dynamo machine. Whether this can be done
commercially remains to be proved. Whatever changes may take place in
generating methods, I should, were I not engaged in a business which
affords so many remarkable surprises, be inclined to question the
possibility of any further material change in the distributing system.
Improvements in the translating devices, such as lamps, may add
enormously to the capacity of the distributing system per unit of
light; but it does seem to me that the system itself, as originally
conceived, is to a large extent a permanency. Should any great
improvements take place in the medium employed for turning electrical
energy into light, the possible effect on cost, and consequently
selling price, would be enormous.

       *       *       *       *       *

THE PROPOSAL of Gov. Black, which has now become law, to depute to
Cornell the care of a considerable tract of forest land, and the duty
of demonstrating to Americans the theory, methods and profits of
scientific forestry, has a curious appropriateness much commented on
at the university, since two-thirds of the wealth of Cornell has been
derived from the location and skillful management of forest lands, the
net receipts from this source being to date $4,112,000. In the course
of twenty years management the university has thrice sold the timber
on some pieces of land which it still holds, and received a larger
price at the third sale than at the first. The conduct of this land
business is so systematized that the treasurer of the university knows
to a dot the amount of pine, hemlock, birch, maple, basswood and oak
timber, even to the number of potential railroad ties, telegraph poles
and fence posts on each fourth part of a quarter section owned by
Cornell. Certainly, Cornell is rich in experience for the business
side of a forestry experiment such as Gov. Black proposes. The
university forest lands from which its endowment has been realized are
in Wisconsin.

       *       *       *       *       *

Books may be called heavy when the qualifying term is not applied to
their writers, but to the paper makers. It is falsifications in the
paper that give it weight. Sulphate of baryta, the well known
adulterate of white lead, does the work. A correspondent, writing to
The London Saturday Review, gives the weight of certain books as: Miss
Kingsley's "Travels in Africa." 3 pounds 5 ounces; "Tragedy of the
Caesars," 3 pounds; Mahan's "Nelson" (1 vol.), 2 pounds 10 ounces;
"Tennyson" (1 vol.), 2 pounds 6 ounces; "Life and Letters of Jowett"
(1 vol.), 2 pounds 1 ounce. To handle these dumb-bell books, The
Saturday Review advises that readers take lessons in athletics.

       *       *       *       *       *




THE LOCK OF THE DORTMUND-EMS CANAL AT HENRICHENBURG.


The Dortmund-Ems Canal, destined to connect the heart of German
industry with the sea, was formally dedicated on April 1, and
partially opened to commerce. After its completion, German coal will
be transported to the harbors of the Ems at the same cost as the
English coal which has hitherto forced back the treasures of our soil;
our black diamonds will then be sold in the markets of the world, and
the Kaiser Wilhelm Canal will enable the western part of the empire to
exchange its coal and iron for the grain and wood of the East.

Many difficulties were encountered in cutting the canal, owing partly
to the vast network of railroads in the coal region of Westphalia, but
chiefly due to the insufficiency of moisture in the highlands, the
latter not containing enough water to supply the many necessary
sluices, at which it could be easily foreseen considerable traffic
would occur.

[Illustration: THE LOCK OF THE DORTMUND-EMS CANAL AT HENRICHENBURG.]

For the modern engineer there are, however, no insurmountable
obstacles. Instead of a line of ordinary locks, a single structure was
erected sufficient for the needs of the entire region. This lock is
situated at Henrichenburg, near Dortmund, and our illustration
pictures it with its lock-chamber half raised.

The lock, which serves to overcome a difference in level of fifty-nine
feet, raises vessels of 1,000 tons capacity with a velocity of 0.3 to
0.7 foot per second, and has been constructed after a new and
astonishingly simple system.

The lock chamber, designed for the reception of the various vessels,
is 229.60 feet in length and 28.864 feet in breadth and normally
contains 8.2 feet of water. Under the sluice in a line with the long
axis are five wells filled with water in which cylindrical floats are
placed, connected to the bottom of the chamber by means of iron
trellis-work. The floats are placed so deeply that, in their highest
position, their upper edges are always submerged; they are, moreover,
of such size that by means of their upward impulsion the chamber is
held in equilibrium. Irrespective of the small differences of pressure
which arise from the varying immersion of the framework, the lock will
in all positions be in equilibrium. Since a vessel which enters the
lock displaces a volume of water whose weight is equal to the weight
of the vessel, a constant equilibrium will always be maintained and
only a minimum force required to raise or lower the chamber. In order
to move the lock-chamber up and down and to sustain it constantly in a
horizontal position, nuts have been fixed to strong crossbeams,
through which powerful screw-rods work.

These rods are held in place by a massive framework of iron and are
turned to the left or to the right by means of a small steam engine,
placed at one side of the lock, which engine, by means of a
longitudinal shaft, drives two cross shafts to which bevel wheels are
attached. By this means the chamber is lowered and raised. The screw
rods are so powerful that they sustain the entire weight of the lock
chamber, and the pitch of the thread is such that spontaneous sliding
or slipping is impossible, the chamber being, therefore, kept
constantly in the desired position.

It is interesting to note that the hollow space in the screw rods is
heated by steam during winter, thus preventing the formation of ice in
the machinery.

During the eighties, locks for ships of 400 tons capacity were
erected in England and France, at Anderton, Les Fontinettes and La
Louviere. The lock at Henrichenburg, however, exceeds all its
predecessors, not only in size, but also in security. At all events,
the structure is a worthy memorial of the energy and genius of
German engineers.--Illustrirte Zeitung.

       *       *       *       *       *

Paper hanging by machine is the latest achievement, according to a
German contemporary, says The Engineer. The arrangement used for this
purpose is provided with a rod upon which the roll of paper is placed.
A paste receptacle with a brushing arrangement is attached in such a
manner that the paste is applied automatically on the back of the
paper. The end of the wall paper is fixed at the bottom of the wall
and the implement rises on the wall and only needs to be set by one
workman. While the wall paper unrolls and, provided with paste, is
held against the wall, an elastic roller follows on the outside, which
presses it firmly to the wall. When the wall paper has reached the
top, the workman pulls a cord, whereby it is cut off from the
remainder on the roll.

       *       *       *       *       *




THE AMERICAN "REGULAR."

BY THE ENGLISH CORRESPONDENT OF THE LONDON TIMES ON BOARD THE
UNITED STATES TRANSPORT "GUSSIE."


The "regular" of the United States is in many respects the least
equipped foot soldier of my acquaintance. This was my reflection as I
overhauled the kit of a private this morning on board the "Gussie."
There was not a single brush in his knapsack. I counted three in that
of a Spanish foot soldier only a few weeks ago. The American knapsack
is merely a canvas bag cut to the outward proportions of the European
knapsack, but in practical features bearing affinity with the
"rueckensack" of the Tyrolean chamois hunters, or pack-sack of the
backwoodsmen of Canada and the Adirondack Mountains. This knapsack of
the American is not intended to be carried on any extended marches,
although the total weight he is ever called upon to carry, including
everything, is only 50 pounds, a good 12 pounds less than what is
carried by the private of Germany. The men of this regiment, in heavy
marching order, carry an overcoat with a cape, a blanket, the half of
a shelter tent, and one wooden tent pole in two sections. The rifle
could be used as a tent pole--so say men I talk with on the subject.
On this expedition overcoats are a superfluity, and it is absurd that
troops should be sent to the tropics in summer wearing exactly the
same uniform they would be using throughout the winter on the
frontiers of Canada. This war will, no doubt, produce a change after
English models. At present the situation here is prevented from being
painful because no marching has yet been attempted, and the commanding
officers permit the most generous construction in the definition of
what is a suitable uniform.

On the trip of this ship to Cuba, no officer or man has ever worn a
tunic excepting at guard mounting inspection. The 50 men who went
ashore near Cabanas on May 12 and pitched into some 500 Spaniards left
their coats behind and fought in their blue flannel shirts. Of the
officers, some wore a sword, some did not, though all carried a
revolver. No orders were issued on the subject--it was left to
individual taste, I have experienced hotter days at German maneuvers
than on the coast of Cuba during the days we happened to be there, yet
I have never noticed any disposition in the army of William II. to
relax the severity of service even temporarily. My German friends
sincerely believe that the black stock and the hot tunic are what has
made Prussia a strong nation, and to disturb that superstition would
be a thankless task.

In the way of clothing the American private carries a complete change
of under-drawers, under-shirt, socks, laced boots and uniform
trousers. My particular private was carrying a double allowance of
socks, handkerchiefs, and underwear. He had a toothbrush and comb.
That is the heavy marching order knapsack. For light marching, which
is the usual manner, the man begins by spreading on the ground his
half-tent, which is about the size of a traveling rug. On this he
spreads his blanket, rolls it up tightly into a long narrow sausage,
having first distributed along its length a pair of socks, a change of
underwear, and the two sticks of his one tent pole. Then he brings the
ends of this canvas roll together, not closely, as in the German army,
but more like the ends of a horse-shoe, held by a rope which at the
same time stops the ends of the roll tightly. When this horse shoe is
slung over the man's shoulder, it does not press uncomfortably upon
his chest. The total weight is distributed in the most convenient
manner for marching.

The packing of the man's things is strictly according to regulation,
excepting only the single pocket in his knapsack, where he may carry
what he chooses, as he chooses. His light canvas haversack is much
like the English one, and his round, rather flat water flask is
covered with canvas. It is made of tin, and the one I inspected was
rusty inside. It would be better if of aluminum. In the haversack is a
pannikin with a hinged handle that may be used as a saucepan. Over
this fits a tin plate, and when the two are covering one another the
handle of the pannikin fits over both by way of handle. It is an
excellent arrangement, but should be of aluminum instead of a metal
liable to rust. The most valuable part of this haversack is a big tin
cup that can be used for a great variety of purposes, including
cooking coffee. It is hung loose at the strap of the haversack. Of
course each man has knife, fork and spoon, each in a leather case.

The cartridge belt contains 100 rounds, which are distributed all the
way around the waist, there being a double row of them. The belt is
remarkably light, being woven all in one operation. It is of cotton
and partly some material which prevents shrinking or loosening. The
belts have stood admirably the test put upon them for the last six
days, when it has rained every day, on top of the ordinary heavy
moisture usual at sea in the tropics. The test is the more interesting
from their having been previously in a very dry country. Officers and
men alike unite in praise of this cartridge belt. The particular
private whom I was inspecting said he now carried 100 as easily as he
formerly carried 50. This belt rests loosely on the hips, without any
straps over the shoulders. It is eminently businesslike in appearance.
The hat is the gray felt of South Africa, Australia, and every other
part of the world where comfort and cost are consulted. No boots are
blacked on expeditions of this kind. The men who form in line for
guard duty have their tunics well brushed, but that may be due to
extraneous assistance.

For fighting purposes, then, the United States private has nothing to
keep clean excepting his rifle and bayonet. He carries no contrivances
for polishing buttons, boots, or the dozen of bits of accouterment
deemed essential to a good soldier in Europe. In Spain, for instance,
the private, though he may have nothing in his haversack, will,
nevertheless, carry a clumsy outfit of tools for making his uniform
look imposing.

Now, as to discipline in the American army I cannot speak at present,
for the war is yet too young. It may, however, be worth noting that in
this particular regiment, while most complete liberty was allowed the
men all the twelve days of the rail journey from San Francisco to
Tampa, not a single case of drunkenness or any other breach of
discipline was reported. Among the 105 men on this boat there has not
in the past seven days been a single case of sickness of any kind or
any occasion for punishing. The firing discipline during the three
times we have been under fire has been excellent; the obedience of
soldiers to their officers has been as prompt and intelligent as
anything I have seen in Europe; and as to coolness under fire and
accuracy of aim, what I have seen is most satisfactory. The men
evidently regard their officers as soldiers of equal courage and
superior technical knowledge. To the Yankee private "West Pointer"
means what to the soldier of Prussia is conveyed by noble rank. In my
intimate intercourse with officers and men aboard this ship I cannot
recall an instance of an officer addressing a private otherwise than
is usual when a gentleman issues an order. I have never heard an
officer or noncommissioned officer curse a man. During the engagement
of Cabanas the orders were issued as quietly as at any other time, and
the men went about their work as steadily as bluejackets on a
man-o'-war.

All this I note, because this is the first occasion that United States
troops have been in action since the civil war, and because I have
more than once heard European officers question the possibility of
making an army out of elements different from those to which they were
accustomed. I have heard Germans insist that unless the officer
appears in uniform he cannot command the respect of his men. On this
ship it would be frequently difficult to tell officers from men when
the tunic is laid aside and shoulder straps are not seen. There are
numberless points of resemblance between Tommy Atkins and the Yankee
private; and the Sandhurst man has no difficulty in understanding the
West Pointer. But to do this we must go a little beneath the surface
and see things, not on the parade ground, but in actual war. For dress
occasions the American uniform is far and away the ugliest and most
useless of all the uniforms I know. The helmets and cocked hats are of
the pattern affected by theatrical managers, the decorations tawdry,
the swords absurd, the whole appearance indicative of a taste
unmilitary and inartistic. The parade uniform has been designed by a
lot of unsoldierly politicians and tailors about Washington. Their
notion of military glory is confused with memories of St. Patrick's
Day processions and Masonic installations. They have made the patient
United States army a victim of their vulgar designs, and to-day at
every European army maneuver one can pick out the American military
attache by merely pointing to the most unsoldierly uniform on the
field. On the battlefield, however, there are no political tailors,
and the Washington dress regulations are ruthlessly disregarded.

       *       *       *       *       *




STEERING GEAR OF NORTH GERMAN LLOYD STEAMERS "COBLENTZ," "MAINZ,"
AND "TRIER."


The steering gear illustrated below, which has been fitted to a number
of vessels in this country as well as on the three North German Lloyd
steamers above named, is designed, primarily, to effect the
distribution of the leverage more in proportion to the resistance of
the rudder than exists in ordinary gears. The latter, as a rule, exert
a uniform and decreasing, instead of an increasing, purchase on the
rudder, in moving it from midgear to hard over. This important object
is attained in the gear under notice chiefly through the arrangement
of the quadrant and the spring buffers, which form an essential part
of it, and of the tiller crosshead. The quadrant--which, as may be
gathered from our illustration, has its main body formed of wrought
steel, flanged and riveted, making an exceptionally strong
design--works on its own center. It travels through 51 degrees in
moving the tiller crosshead through 40 degrees, and in doing so
increases the leverage over the rudder to an extent which is
equivalent to a gain of 60 per cent. upon midgear position.

[Illustration: HAND GEAR HARD OVER.]

[Illustration: HAND GEAR AMIDSHIPS.
CROOM & ARTHUR'S STEERING GEAR.]
