ran, Murray Hughes paused, turned, and fired behind him.

Then his pursuers came into sight. They ran erect, and they wore a few
rags of skin garments, and they carried spears and hatchets and clubs,
so they were probably classifiable as men. Their hair was long and
unkempt; their bodies were almost black with dirt and from the sun. A
few of them were yelling; most of them ran silently. They ran more
swiftly than the boy they were pursuing; the distance between them
narrowed every moment. There were at least fifty of them.

Verner Hughes' rifle barked; one of them dropped. As coolly as though
he were shooting squirrels instead of his son's pursuers, he dropped
the butt of his rifle to the ground, poured a charge of powder,
patched a ball and rammed it home, replaced the ramrod. Tenant Jones
fired then, and then Birdy Edwards joined them and began shooting with
the telescope-sighted hunting rifle. The young man who had been north
of the Cathedral of Learning had one of the auto-carbines; Altamont
had providently set the fire-control for semi-auto before giving it
to him. He dropped to one knee and began to empty the clip, shooting
slowly and deliberately, picking off the runners who were in the lead.
The boy who had started to climb down off the library halted, fired
his flintlock, and began reloading it. And Altamont, sitting down and
propping his elbows on his knees, took both hands to the automatic
which was his only weapon, emptying the magazine and replacing it. The
last three of the savages he shot in the back; they had had enough and
were running for their lives.

So far, everybody was safe. The boy in the library came down through a
place where the wall had fallen. Murray Hughes stopped running and
came slowly toward the bunker, putting a fresh clip into his rifle.
The others came drifting in.

       *       *       *       *       *

"Altamont, calling Loudons," the scientist from Fort Ridgeway was
saying into the radio. "Monty to Jim; can you hear me, Jim?"

Silence.

"We'd better get ready for another attack," Birdy Edwards said.
"There's another gang coming from down that way. I never saw so many
Scowrers!"

"Maybe there's a reason, Birdy," Tenant Jones said. "The Enemy is
after big game, this time."

"Jim! Where the devil are you?" Altamont fairly yelled into the radio,
and as he did, he knew the answer. Loudons was in the village, away
from the helicopter, gathering tools and workers. Nothing to do but
keep on trying.

"Here they come!" Reader Rawson warned.

"How far can these rifles be depended on?" Birdy Edwards wanted to
know.

Altamont straightened, saw the second band of savages approaching,
about four hundred yards away.

"Start shooting now," he said. "Aim for the upper part of their
bodies."

The two auto-loading rifles began to crack. After a few shots, the
savages took cover. Evidently they understood the capabilities and
limitations of the villagers' flintlocks; this was a terrifying
surprise to them.

"Jim!" Altamont was almost praying into the radio. "Come in, Jim!"

"What is it, Monty? I was outside."

Altamont told him.

"Those fellows you had up with you yesterday; think they could be
trusted to handle the guns? A couple of them are here with me,"
Loudons inquired.

"Take a chance on it; it won't cost you anything but my life, and
that's not worth much at present."

"All right; hold on. We'll be along in a few minutes."

"Loudons is bringing the helicopter," he told the others. "All we have
to do is hold on, here, till he comes."

A naked savage raised his head from behind what might, two hundred
years ago, have been a cement park-bench, a hundred yards away.
Reader Stamford Rawson promptly killed him and began reloading.

"I think you're right, Tenant," he said. "The Scowrers have never
attacked in bands like this before. They must have had a powerful
reason, and I can think of only one."

"That's what I'm beginning to think, too," Verner Hughes agreed. "At
least, we have eliminated the third of your possibilities, Tenant. And
I think probably the second, as well."

Altamont wondered what they were double-talking about. There wasn't
any particular mystery about the mass attack of the wild men to him.
Debased as they were, they still possessed speech and the ability to
transmit experiences. No matter how beclouded in superstition, they
still remembered that aircraft dropped bombs, and bombs killed people,
and where people had been killed, they would find fresh meat. They had
seen the helicopter circling about, and had heard the blasting; every
one in the area had been drawn to the scene as soon as Loudons had
gone down the river.

Maybe they had forgotten that aircraft also carried guns. At least,
when they sprang to their feet and started to run at the return of the
helicopter, many did not run far.

       *       *       *       *       *

Altamont and Loudons shook hands many times in front of the Aitch-Cue
House, and listened to many good wishes, and repeated their promise to
return. Most of the microfilmed books were still stored in the old
church; they were taking away with them only the catalogue and a few
of the more important works. Finally, they entered the helicopter. The
crowd shouted farewell, as they rose.

Altamont, at the controls, waited until they had gained five thousand
feet, then turned on a compass-course for Colony Three.

"I can't wait till we're in radio-range of the Fort, to report this,
Jim," he said. "Of all the wonderful luck! And I don't yet know which
is more important; finding those books, or finding those people. In a
few years, when we can get them supplied with modern equipment and
instructed in its use--"

"I'm not very happy about it, Monty," Loudons confessed. "I keep
thinking about what's going to happen to them."

"Why, nothing's going to happen to them. They're going to be given the
means of producing more food, keeping more of them alive, having more
leisure to develop themselves in--"

"Monty; I saw the Sacred Books."

"The deuce! What were they?"

"It. One volume; a collection of works. We have it at the Fort; I've
read it. How I ever missed all the clues--You see Monty, what I'm
worried about is what's going to happen to those people when they find
out that we're not really Sherlock Holmes and Dr. Watson."


THE END






End of Project Gutenberg's The Return, by H. Beam Piper and John J. McGuire

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE RETURN ***

***** This file should be named 18855.txt or 18855.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/1/8/8/5/18855/

Produced by Greg Weeks, Sankar Viswanathan, and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
