by their influence did constantly attract such a vapour towards that
place of heaven, so that it alwaies appeared white. Now by the same
reason may a brighter vapor be the cause of these appearances.

But how probable soever this opinion may seeme, yet if well considered,
you shall finde it to be altogether absurd and impossible: for,

1. These starres were never seene there before, and tis not likely that
a vapour being hard by us can so multiply that light which could not
before be at all discerned.

2. This supposed vapour cannot be either contracted into a narrow
compasse or dilated into a broad: 1. it could not be within a little
space, for then that starre would not appeare with the same multiplied
light to those in other climates: 2. it cannot be a dilated vapour, for
then other starres which were discerned through the same vapour would
seeme as bigg as that; this argument is the same in effect with that of
the paralax, as you may see in this Figure.

  [Illustration]

Suppose A B to be a Hemispheare of one earth, C D to be the upper part
of the highest region, in which there might be either a contracted
vapour, as G, or else a dilated one, as H I. Suppose E F likewise to
represent halfe the heavens, wherein was this appearing Comet at K. Now
I say, that a contracted vapour, as G, could not cause this appearance,
because an inhabitant at M could not discerne the same starre with this
brightnesse, but perhaps another at L, betwixt which the vapour is
directly interposed. Nor could it be caused by a dilated vapour, as H I,
because then all the starres that were discerned through it would be
perceived with the same brightnesse.

Tis necessary therefore that the cause of this appearance should be in
the heavens. And this is granted by the most and best Astronomers. But,
say some, this doth not argue any naturall alteration in those purer
bodies, since tis probable that the concourse of many little vagabond
starres by the union of their beames may cause so great a light. Of this
opinion were _Anaxagoras_ and _Zeno_ amongst the ancient, and _Baptista
Cisatus_, _Blancanus_, with others amongst our moderne Astronomers. For,
say they, when there happens to be a concourse of some few starres, then
doe many other flie unto them from all the parts of heaven like so many
Bees unto their King. But 1. tis not likely that amongst those which wee
count the fixed starres there should be any such uncertaine motions,
that they can wander from all parts of the heavens, as if Nature had
neglected them, or forgot to appoint them a determinate course. 2. If
there be such a conflux of these, as of Bees to their King, then what
reason is there that they doe not still tarry with it, that so the Comet
may not be dissolved? But enough of this. You may commonly see it
confuted by many other arguments. Others there are, who affirme these to
be some new created stars, produced by an extraordinary supernaturall
power. I answer, true indeed, tis possible they might be so, but however
tis not likely they were so, since such appearances may be salved some
other way, wherefore to fly unto a miracle for such things, were a great
injury to nature, and to derogate from her skill, an indignitie much
mis-becomming a man who professes himselfe to be a Philosopher,
_Miraculum_ (saith one) _est ignorantiae Asylum_, a miracle often serves
for the receptacle of a lazy ignorance which any industrious Spirit
would be ashamed of, it being but an idle way to shift off the labour of
any further search. But here's the misery of it, wee first tie our
selves unto _Aristotles_ Principles, and then conclude, that nothing
could contradict them but a miracle, whereas 'twould be much better for
the Common-wealth of learning, if we would ground our Principles rather
upon the frequent experiences of our owne, then the bare authority of
others.

Some there are, who thinke that these Comets are nothing else, but
exhalations from our earth, carried up into the higher parts of the
Heaven. So _Peno_, _Rothmannus_ & _Galilaeus_,[1] but this is not
possible, since by computation 'tis found that one of them is above 300
times bigger than the whole Globe of Land and Water. Others therefore
have thought that they did proceed from the body of the Sun, and that
that Planet onely is

  _Cometarum officina, unde tanquam emissarii & exploratores
  emitterentur, brevi ad solem redituri_:

The shop or forge of Comets from whence they were sent, like so many
spies, that they might in some short space returne againe, but this
cannot be, since if so much matter had proceeded from him alone, it
would have made a sensible diminution in his body. The Noble _Tycho_
therefore thinkes that they consist of some such fluider parts of the
Heaven, as the milkie way is framed of, which being condenst together,
yet not attaining to the consistency of a Starre, is in some space of
time rarified againe into its wonted nature. But this is not likely, for
if there had beene so great a condensation as to make them shine so
bright, and last so long, they would then sensibly have moved downewards
towards some center of gravity, because whatsoever is condenst must
necessarily grow heavier, whereas these rather seemed to ascend higher,
as they lasted longer. But some may object, that a thing may be of the
same weight, when it is rarified, as it had while it was condenst: so
metalls, when they are melted, and when they are cold: so water also
when it is frozen, and when it is fluid, doth not differ in respect of
gravity. But to these I answer: First, Metalls are not rarified by
melting, but molified. Secondly, waters are not properly condensed, but
congealed into a harder substance, the parts being not contracted closer
together, but still possessing the same extension.

  [Sidenote 1: _Tycho Progym. l. 1. cap. 9._]

And beside, what likely cause can we conceive of this condensation,
unlesse there be such qualities there, as there are in our ayre, and
then why may not the Planets have the like qualities, as our earth? and
if so, then 'tis more probable that they are made by the ordinary way of
nature, as they are with us, and consist of exhalations from the bodies
of the Planets. Nor is this a singular opinion; but it seemed most
likely to _Camillus Gloriosus_, _Th. Campanella_, _Fromondus_,[1] with
some others. But if you aske whither all these exhalations shall
returne, I answer, every one into his owne Planet: if it be againe
objected,[2] that then there will be so many centers of gravity, and
each severall Planet will be a distinct world; I reply, perhaps all of
them are so except the Sunne, though _Cusanus_ thinkes there is one
also, and later times have discovered some lesser Planets moving round
about him. But as for _Saturne_, he hath two Moones on each side.
_Jupiter_ hath foure, that incircle his body with their motion. _Venus_
is observed to increase and decrease as the Moone. _Mars_, and all the
rest, derive their light from the Sunne onely. Concerning _Mercury_,
there hath beene little or no observation, because for the most part,
he lies hid under the Sunne beames, and seldome appeares by himselfe.
So that if you consider their quantity, their opacity, or these other
discoveries, you shall finde it probable enough, that each of them may
be a severall world. But this would be too much for to vent at the
first: the chiefe thing at which I now ayme in this discourse, is to
prove that there may be one in the Moone.

  [Sidenote 1: _De Comet. l. 5. c. 4._
  _Apolog._
  _Meteor. l. 3. c. 2. Art. 6._]

  [Sidenote 2: _Iohan. Fabr._
  _Carolus Malaptius de Heliocyc._
  _Scheiner. Rosa Vrsina._]

It hath beene before confirmed that there was a spheare of thicke
vaporous aire encompasing the Moone, as the first and second regions doe
this earth. I have now shewed, that thence such exhalations may proceede
as doe produce the Comets: now from hence it may probably follow, that
there may be wind also and raine, with such other Meteors as are common
amongst us. This consequence is so dependant, that _Fromondus_[1] dares
not deny it, though hee would (as hee confesses himselfe) for if the
Sunne be able to exhale from them such fumes as may cause Comets, why
not then such as may cause winds, and why not such also as cause raine,
since I have above shewed, that there is Sea and Land as with us. Now
raine seemes to be more especially requisite for them, since it may
allay the heate and scorchings of the Sunne, when he is over their
heads. And nature hath thus provided for those in _Peru_, with the other
inhabitants under the line.

  [Sidenote 1: _De meteor. l. 3. c. 2. Art. 6._]

But if there be such great, and frequent alterations in the Heavens, why
cannot wee discerne them?

I answer:

1. There may be such, and we not able to perceive them, because of the
weaknesse of our eye, and the distance of those places from us, they are
the words of _Fienus_, as they are quoted by _Fromondus_ in the above
cited place,

  _Possunt maximae permutationes in coelo fieri, etiamsi a nobis non
  conspiciantur, hoc visus nostri debilitas & immensa coeli distantia
  faciunt._

And unto him assents _Fromondus_ himselfe, when a little after hee
saies,

  _Si in sphaeris planetarum degeremus, plurima forsan coelestium
  nebularum vellere toto aethere passim dispersa videremus, quorum
  species jam evanescit nimia spatii intercapedine._

  "If we did live in the spheares of the Planets, wee might there,
  perhaps, discerne many great clouds dispersed through the whole
  Heavens, which are not now visible by reason of this great distance."

2. _Maeslin_ and _Keplar_ affirme, that they have seene some of these
alterations. The words of _Maeslin_ are these (as I finde them cited.)[1]

  _In eclipsi Lunari vespere Dominicae Palmarum Anni 1605, in corpore
  Lunae versus Boream, nigricans quaedam macula conspecta fuit, obscurior
  caetero toto corpore, quod candentis ferri figuram repraesentabat;
  dixisses nubila in multam regionem extensa pluviis & tempestuosis
  imbribus gravida, cujusmodi ab excelsorum montium jugis in humiliora
  convallium loca videre non raro contingit._

  "In that lunary eclipse which happened in the even of Palme-sunday,
  in the yeere 1605, there was a certaine blackish spot discerned in
  the Northerly part of the Moone, being darker than any other part of
  her body, and representing the colour of red hot yron; you might
  conjecture that it was some dilated cloud, being pregnant with
  showers, for thus doe such lower clouds appeare from the tops of
  high mountaines."

  [Sidenote 1: _Disser. 2. cum nunc. Galil._]

Unto this I may adde another testimony of _Bapt. Cisatus_, as he is
quoted by _Nierembergius_,[1] grounded upon an observation taken 23.
yeeres after this of _Maeslin_, and writ to this _Euseb. Nieremberg._ in
a letter by that diligent and judicious Astronomer. The words of it
runne thus:

  _Et quidem in eclipsi nupra solari quae fuit ipso die natali Christi,
  observavi clare in luna soli supposita, quidpiam quod valde probat
  id ipsum quod Cometae quoque & maculae solares urgent, nempe coelum non
  esse a tenuitate & variationibus aeris exemptum, nam circa Lunam
  adverti esse sphaeram seu orbem quendam vaporosum, non secus atque
  circum terram, adeoque sicut ex terra in aliquam usque sphaeram
  vapores & exhalationes expirant, ita quoque ex luna._

  "In that late solary eclipse which happened on Christmas day, when
  the Moone was just under the Sunne, I plainly discerned that in her
  which may clearely confirme what the Comets and Sunne spots doe seeme
  to prove, _viz._ that the heavens are not solid, nor freed from those
  changes which our aire is liable unto, for about the Moone I perceived
  such an orbe of vaporous aire, as that is which doth encompasse our
  earth, and as vapours and exhalations, are raised from our earth into
  this aire, so are they also from the Moone."

  [Sidenote 1: _Hist. Nat. l. 2. c. 11._]

You see what probable grounds and plaine testimonies have brought for
the confirmation of this Proposition: many other things in this behalfe
might be spoken, which for brevity sake I now omit, and passe unto the
next.




Proposition 13.

_That tis probable there may be inhabitants in this other World, but
  of what kinde they are is uncertaine._


I have already handled the Seasons and Meteors belonging to this new
World: 'tis requisite that in the next place I should come unto the
third thing which I promised, and to say somewhat of the inhabitants,
concerning whom there might be many difficult questions raised, as
whether that place be more inconvenient for habitation then our World
(as _Keplar_ thinkes) whether they are the seed of _Adam_, whether they
are there in a blessed estate, or else what meanes there may be for
their salvation, with many other such uncertaine enquiries, which I
shall willingly omit, leaving it to their examination, who have more
leisure and learning for the search of such particulars.

Being for mine own part content only to set downe such notes belonging
unto these which have observed in other Writers.

  _Cum tota illa regio nobis ignota sit, remanent inhabitores illi
  ignoti penitus_,

(saith _Cusanus_)[1] since we know not the regions of that place, wee
must be altogether ignorant of the inhabitants. There hath not yet beene
any such discovery concerning these, upon which wee may build a
certainty, or good probability: well may wee guesse at them, and that
too very doubtfully, but we can know nothing, for if we doe hardly
guesse aright at things which be upon earth, if with labour wee doe
finde the things that are at hand, [2]how then can wee search out those
things that are in Heaven? What a little is that which wee know? in
respect of those many matters contained within this great Universe, this
whole globe of earth and water? though it seeme to us to be of a large
extent, yet it beares not so great a proportion unto the whole frame of
Nature, as a small sand doth unto it; and what can such little creatures
as wee discerne, who are tied to this point of earth? or what can they
in the Moone know of us? If wee understand any thing (saith _Esdras_[3])
'tis nothing but that which is upon the earth, and hee that dwelleth
above in the Heavens, may onely understand the things that are above in
the heighth of the heavens.

  [Sidenote 1: _De doct. ign. l. 2. c. 12._]

  [Sidenote 2: Wisd. 9. 16.]

  [Sidenote 3: 2 Esd. 4. 22.]

So that 'twere a very needelesse thing for us, to search after any
particulars, however, wee may guesse in the generall, that there are
some inhabitans in that Planet: for why else did Providence furnish that
place with all such conveniences of habitation as have beene above
declared?

But you will say, perhaps, is there not too great and intollerable a
heate, since the Sunne is in their Zinith every moneth, and doth tarry
their so long before hee leaves it?

I answer, 1. This may, perhaps, be remedied (as it is under the line) by
the frequencie of mid-day showers, which may cloud their Sunne, and
coole their earth: 2. The equality of their nights doth much temper the
scorching of the day, and the extreme cold that comes from the one,
require some space before it can be dispelled by the other, so that the
heate spending a great while before it can have the victory, hath not
afterwards much time to rage in. Wherfore notwithstanding this, yet that
place may remaine habitable. And this was the opinion of the _Cardinal
de Cusa_, when speaking of this Planet, he saies,[1]

  _Hic locus Mundi est habitatio hominum & animalium atque
  vegetabilium_.

  "This part of the world is inhabited by men and beasts, and Plantes."

To him assented _Campanella_, but hee cannot determine whether there
were men, or rather some other kinde of creatures. If they were men,
then he thinkes they could not be infected with _Adams_ sinne; yet,
perhaps, they had some of their owne, which might make them liable to
the same misery with us, out of which, perhaps, they were delivered by
the same means as we, the death of Christ, and thus he thinkes that
place of the _Ephesians_ may be interpreted, where the Apostle saies,[2]
_God gathered all things together in Christ, both which are in earth,
and which are in the heavens_: So also that of the same Apostle to the
_Colossians_, where hee saies,[3] that _it pleased the Father to
reconcile all things unto himselfe by Christ, whether they be things in
earth, or things in heaven_.

  [Sidenote 1: _De doct. ign. l. 2. c. 12._]

  [Sidenote 2: Eph. 1. 10.]

  [Sidenote 3: Col. 1. 20.]

But I dare not jest with Divine truthes, or apply these places according
as fancy directs. As I thinke this opinion doth not any where contradict
Scripture, so I thinke likewise, that it cannot be proved from it,
wherefore _Campanella's_ second conjecture may be more probable, that
the inhabitants of that world, are not men as wee are, but some other
kinde of creatures which beare some proportion and likenesse to our
natures, and _Cusanus_ too thinkes they differ from us in many respects;
I will set downe his words as they may bee found in the abovecited
place,

  _Suspicamus in regione solis magis esse solares, claros & illuminatos
  intellectuares habitatores, spiritu aliores etiam quam in luna, ubi
  magis lunatici, & in terra, magis materiales, & grossi, ut illi
  intellectualis naturae solares sint multum in actu & parum in
  potentia; terreni vero magis in potentia, & parum in actu, lunares
  in medio fluctuantes. Hoc quidem opinamur ex influentia ignili
  solis aquatica simul & aeria lunae, & gravedine materiali terrae,
  & consimiliter de aliis stellarum regionibus suspicantes, nullam
  habitatoribus carere, quasi tot sint partes particulares mundiales
  omnius universi, quot sunt stellae quarum non est numerus, nisi apud
  eum qui omnia in numero creavit._

  "Wee may conjecture (saith he) the inhabiters of the Sunne are
  like to the nature of that Planet, more cleare and bright, more
  intellectuall and spirituall than those in the Moone where they
  are neerer to the nature of that duller Planet, and those of the
  earth being more grosse and materiall than either, so that these
  intellectuall natures in the Sun, are more forme than matter, those
  in the earth more matter than forme, and those in the Moone betwixt
  both. This wee may guesse from the fiery influence of the Sunne, the
  watery and aereous influence of the Moone, as also the matereall
  heavinesse of the earth. In some such manner likewise is it with the
  regions of the other Starres, for wee conjecture that none of them
  are without inhabitants, but that there are so many particular
  worlds and parts of this one universe, as there are Stars which are
  innumerable, unlesse it bee to him who created all things in number."

For he held that the stars were not all in one equall Orbe as we
commonly suppose, but that some were farre higher than others which made
them appeare lesse and that many others were so farre above any of
these, that they were altogether invisible unto us. An opinion (which as
I conceive) hath not any great probability for it, nor certainty against
it.

The Priest of _Saturne_ relating to _Plutarch_ (as he faignes it) the
nature of the Selenites, told him they were of divers dispositions, some
desiring to live in the lower parts of the Moone, where they might looke
downewards upon us, while others were more surely mounted aloft, all of
them shining like the rayes of the Sun, and as being victorious are
crowned with garlands made with the wings of _Eustathia_ or
_Constancie_.

It hath beene the opinion amongst some of the Ancients, that their
Heavens and Elysian fields were in the Moone where the aire is most
quiet and pure. Thus _Socrates_, thus _Plato_,[1] with his followers,
did esteeme this to bee the place where those purer soules inhabit, who
are freed from the Sepulchre, and contagion of the body. And by the
Fable of _Ceres_, continually wandring in search of her daughter
_Proserpina_, is meant nothing else but the longing desire of men, who
live upon _Ceres_ earth, to attaine a place in _Proserpina_, the Moone
or Heaven.

  [Sidenote 1: _Nat. Com. lib. 3. c. 19._]

_Plutarch_ also seemes to assent unto this, but hee thinkes moreover,
that there are two places of happinesse answerable to those two parts
which hee fancies to remaine of a man when hee is dead, the soule and
the understanding; the soule he thinkes is made of the Moone, and as our
bodies doe so proceede from the dust of this earth, that they shall
returne to it hereafter, so our soules were generated out of that
Planet, and shall bee resolved into it againe, whereas the understanding
shall ascend unto the Sunne, out of which it was made where it shall
possesse an eternity of well being, and farre greater happinesse than
that which is enjoyed in the Moone. So that when a man dies, if his
soule bee much polluted, then must it wander up and downe in the middle
regions of the aire where hell is, and there suffer unspeakable torments
for those sinnes whereof it is guilty. Whereas the soules of better men,
when they have in some space of time beene purged from that impurity
which they did derive from the body, then doe they returne into the
Moone, where they are possest with such a joy, as those men feele who
professe holy misteries, from which place (saith he) some are sent downe
to have the superintendance of Oracles, being diligent either in the
preservation of the good, either from or in all perils, and the
prevention or punishment of all wicked actions, but if in these
imployments they mis-behave themselves, then are they againe to be
imprisoned in a body, otherwise they remaine in the Moone till their
body be resolved into it, & the understanding being cleared from all
impediments, ascends to the Sunne which is its proper place. But this
requires a diverse space of time according to the diverse affections of
the soule. As for those who have beene retired and honest, addicting
themselves to a studious and quiet life, these are quickly preferred to
a higher happinesse. But as for such who have busied themselves in many
broyles, or have beene vehement in the prosecution of any lust, as the
ambitious, the amorous, the wrathfull man, these still retaine the
glimpses and dreames of such things as they have performed in their
bodies, which makes them either altogether unfit to remaine there where
they are, or else keepes them long ere they can put off their soules.
Thus you see _Plutarchs_ opinion concerning the inhabitants and
neighbours of the Moone, which (according to the manner of the
Academickes) hee delivers in a third person; you see he makes that
Planet an inferiour kind of heaven, and though hee differ in many
circumstances, yet doth hee describe it to be some such place, as wee
suppose Paradise to be. You see likewise his opinion concerning the
place of damned spirits, that it is in the middle region of the aire,
and in neither of these is hee singular, but some more late and Orthodox
Writers have agreed with him. As for the place of hell, many thinke it
may be in the aire as well as any where else.

True indeed, Saint _Austin_ affirmes that this place cannot bee
discovered;[1] But others there are who can shew the situation of it out
of Scripture; Some holding it to bee in some other world without this,
because our Saviour calls it +skotos exoteron+, outward darkenesse.[2]
But the most will have it placed towards the Center of our earth,
because 'tis said,[3] Christ descended into the lower parts of the
earth, and some of these are so confident, that this is its situation,
that they can describe you its bignes also, and of what capacity it is.
_Francis Ribera_ in his Comment on the _Revelations_, speaking of those
words, where 'tis said,[4] that the blood went out of the Wine-presse,
even unto the horses bridles by the space of one thousand and sixe
hundred furlongs, interprets them to bee meant of Hell, and that that
number expresses the diameter of its concavity, which is 200 _Italian_
miles; but _Lessius_ thinkes that this opinion gives them too much roome
in hell,[5] and therefore hee guesses that 'tis not so wide; for (saith
hee) the diameter of one league being cubically multiplied, will make a
