
"I do not ask you to believe in the reality of what you call my dreams,
Highness," replied Phadrig slowly, "but I do ask--nay, I require, as the
price of my faithful service, your solemn promise in writing, signed and
attested, that, if and when my dreams become realities, and your own
hopes are fulfilled, the independence and sovereignty of the Ancient
Land shall be restored; her temples and tombs and palaces shall be
rebuilt; her ancient worship revived in my person, and the sceptre of
Rameses replaced in the hand of Nitocris the Queen."

The Prince was silent for a few moments. To grant the seemingly
extravagant demand meant to reduce the splendid dream and scheme of his
life to cold, tangible writing, and to put into this man's hand the
power to betray him. On the other hand, their aims were one, and only
through him could Phadrig hope to realise his dreams. Of course they
were only dreams; but he was faithful to them, and so he would be
faithful to him. At the worst it would be easy to arrange a burglary,
or, for the matter of that, a murder in Candler's Court, and that would
make an end of the matter.

"Very well, Phadrig," he said at length. "It is settled. I will trust
you, for it is necessary that we should trust each other. You shall have
what you ask for within a week. Now I must go. I shall tell them that I
have been arranging the exhibition of your powers which you are going to
give them. It will be well to startle them sufficiently to shake their
British beef-sense up into something like fear. Make them wonder, but,
for the sake of our hostess, don't frighten them too much."

Phadrig only acknowledged his promise with a bow, and he turned away and
joined the growing group in which Nitocris and Brenda were still the
central objects of attraction.

+------------------------------------------------------------+
|FOOTNOTE:                                                   |
|                                                            |
|[1] The Doctrine, of course, affords the same explanation of|
|friendships between man and man, and woman and woman.       |
|                                                            |
+------------------------------------------------------------+




CHAPTER XI

THE MARVELS OF PHADRIG


The time, about an hour or so before tea, was occupied by the guests
according to their varying tastes--in tennis, croquet, more or less
good-natured gossip, and flirtations which may or may not have been
serious.

Nitocris saw with growing cause for self-gratulation that Lord Leighton
and Brenda were decidedly attracted towards each other. He, in spite of
having received his gracious, but, as he well knew, final _conge_ from
Nitocris, still felt that he was not quite playing the game with
himself; but for all that it was impossible for him not to see that the
emotion, which was even now stirring in his heart, awakened by the first
touch of Brenda's hand, and the first meeting of their eyes, was
something very different from the tenderly respectful admiration, the
real friendship, inevitably exalted by the magic of sex, which, as he
saw now, he had innocently mistaken for love.

He managed quite adroitly to separate Brenda from the circle, and to
lure her into a stroll about the outside grounds, during which he told
her the history and traditions of "The Wilderness" not, of course,
omitting the sad little tragedy of the Lady Alicia, all of which Miss
Brenda listened to with an interest which was not, perhaps, wholly
derived from the story itself. She had never yet met any one who was
quite like this learned, much-travelled, quiet-spoken young aristocrat.
On her father's side she was descended from one of the oldest
Knickerbocker families in the State of New York and her aristocracy
responded instinctively to his, and formed a first bond between them.

It need hardly be said that her beauty and her prospective wealth, to
say nothing of the bright, mental, and intellectual atmosphere in which
she seemed to live and move, had attracted to her many men whom she had
inspired with a very genuine desire to link their lives with hers. She
was only twenty-two, but she had already refused more than one coronet
of respectable dignity, and so far her heart had remained as virgin as
it was when she had admired herself in her first long skirt. But now,
for the first time in her life, she began to feel a strange disquietude
in the presence of a man, and a man, too, whom she had not known for an
hour. Nitocris had, happily, told her nothing of what had passed between
Lord Leighton and herself, and so the pleasant element in her
disquietude was entirely unalloyed.

Her father was already too deeply engrossed in learned converse with his
brother professors to take any notice of the great fact which was
beginning to get itself accomplished; but her mother's instinct
instantly noticed the subtle change that had come over her daughter,
and she saw it with anything but displeasure. All sensible mothers of
beautiful daughters are discreetly sanguine. She was far too wise in her
generation not to have agreed with Brenda's decision in certain former
cases. The idea of her daughter's beauty and her father's millions being
bartered for mere rank and social power, however splendid, was utterly
repugnant to her. She had married for love, and she wanted Brenda to do
the same, whoever the chosen man might be, provided always that he was a
man--and in this regard there could be no doubt about Lord Lester
Leighton; so as they walked away she said to Nitocris with a confidence
which was almost girlish:

"His Lordship is just delightful--now, isn't he, Miss Marmion? Just the
sort that you seem to raise over here, and nowhere else. Tells you that
you have to take him for a gentleman and nothing else in the first three
words he says to you--and Brenda seems to like him. I never saw her go
off with a man like that on such short notice, for Brenda's pretty proud
and cold with men, for all her nice ways and high spirits."

"You would have to search a long time, Mrs van Huysman," replied
Nitocris very demurely, "before you found a better type of the real
English gentleman than Lord Leighton. His family is one of the oldest in
the country, and, unlike too many of our noble families, the Kynestons
have no bar-sinister on their escutcheon."

"I guess you're getting a little beyond me there, Miss Marmion. I don't
think I ever heard of a--what is it?--a bar-sinister, before. What might
it be?"

Nitocris flushed very faintly as she replied:

"I think I can explain it best, Mrs van Huysman, by saying that it means
that Lord Leighton's ancestors have preserved their honour unstained
through many generations. Of course, you know that some of our so-called
noble families in England spring from anything but a noble origin. There
are not a few English dukes and earls who would find it rather awkward
to introduce their great-great-grandmothers to their present circle of
friends."

"I should think they would, from what I have read of them, the shameless
creatures!" said Mrs van Huysman, with a sniff of real republican
virtue.

Then the Prince joined them, and the conversation was promptly switched
off on to another line of interest.

Tea was served on the Old Lawn under the shade of the great cedars,
which made its greatest adornment; and when everybody had had what he or
she wanted, and the men had lit their cigarettes--and the Professors, by
special permission, their pipes--Nitocris looked across a couple of
tables at Oscarovitch, whom she had so far managed most adroitly to keep
at an endurable distance, and said:

"Now, Prince, if your friend the Adept is in the mood to astonish us
with his wonders, perhaps you will be good enough to tell him that we
are all ready and willing to be startled--only I hope that he will be
merciful to our ignorance and not frighten us too much."

"I can assure you, Miss Marmion, that my good friend from Egypt will be
discretion itself," replied the Prince, with a look and a courtly
gesture that inspired Commander Merrill with an almost passionate
longing to take him down one of the quiet paths under the beeches for a
ten minutes' interlude. "I can promise that he will show you some
marvels which even your learned and distinguished father and his
_confreres_ may find difficult of explanation: but it shall all be white
magic. I understand that your real adept considers the black variety as
what you call bad form."

As the company rose and went in little groups towards the tennis-lawn,
where Phadrig had elected to display his powers, the three Professors
instinctively joined each other in a small phalanx of scepticism. If
there was any trick or deception to be discovered all looked to them to
do it, and they were almost gleefully aware of their responsibility.
Figuratively speaking, they each wore the scalps of many spiritualistic
mediums, and both Professor van Huysman and Professor Hartley sensed a
possible addition to their belts of scientific wampum which would not be
the least of their trophies. It had been agreed to by Phadrig, with a
quiet scorn, that they were to take any measures they liked to detect
him in any practice that would convict him of being merely a conjurer;
and they had accepted the permission with that whole-souled devotion to
truth which excludes all idea of pity from the really scientific mind.
Franklin Marmion was naturally in a very different frame of mind,
although, from reasons of high policy, he assumed a similar mask of
almost scornful scepticism; but for all that he was by far the most
anxious man in the company.

At the request of their hostess the guests arranged themselves sitting
and standing in a spacious circle on the tennis-lawn; and when this was,
formed, Phadrig, whose isolation so far from the rest of the company had
been satisfactorily explained by the Prince, walked slowly into the
middle of it, and, after a quick, keen glance round him--a glance which
rested for just a moment or so on Professor Marmion and his _confreres_,
and then on Nitocris, who was sitting beside Brenda attended by Lord
Leighton and Merrill--he said in a low but clear and far-reaching voice,
and in perfect English:

"Ladies and gentlemen, I have come to the house of the learned Professor
Marmion at the request of my very good friend and patron, His Highness
Prince Oscar Oscarovitch, to give you a little display of what I may
call white magic. But before I begin I must ask you to accept my word of
honour as a humble student of the mysteries of what, for want of a
better word, we call Nature, that I am not in any sense a conjurer, by
which I mean one who performs apparent marvels by merely deceiving your
senses.

"What I am going to show you, you really will see. My marvels, if you
please to think them such, will be realities, not illusions; and I shall
be pleased if you will take every means to satisfy yourselves that they
are so. I say this with all the more pleasure because I know that there
are present three gentlemen of great eminence in the world of science,
and if they are not able to detect me in anything approaching trickery,
I think you will take their word for it that I am not deceiving you.

"In order that there may not be the smallest possible chance of error, I
will ask Professors Marmion, Hartley, and Van Huysman to come and stand
near to me, so that they may be satisfied that I make use of none of the
mere conjurer's apparatus. I shall use nothing but the knowledge, and
therefore the power, to which it has been my privilege to attain."

Phadrig spoke with all the calm confidence of perfect self-reliance, and
therefore his words were not wanting in effect on his audience, critical
and sceptical as it was.

"I reckon that's a challenge we can't very well afford to let go," said
Professor van Huysman, with a keen look at his two brother scientists.
"Of course he's just a trick-merchant, but they're so mighty clever
nowadays, especially these fellows from the gorgeous East, that you've
got to keep your eyes wide open all the time they've got the platform."

"Certainly," said Professor Hartley, as they moved out from the circle;
"it must be trickery of some sort, and we shall be doing a public
service by exposing it. What do you think, Marmion? I hope you won't
mind the exposure taking place in your own garden and among your own
guests?"

"Not a bit, my dear Hartley," replied Franklin Marmion with a smile,
which was quite lost upon his absolutely materialistic friends. "We
have, as Van Huysman says, received a direct challenge. We should be
most unworthy servants of our great Mistress if we did not take it up.
Personally, I mean to find out everything that I can."

"And, gentlemen," laughed the Prince, who had been standing with them
and now moved away towards Nitocris, "I sincerely hope that what you
find out will be worth the learning."

"He's a big man, that," said Professor van Huysman, when he was out of
earshot, "but he's not the sort I'd have much use for. I wonder why
those people who are on the war-path in his country ever let him out of
it alive?"

In accordance with Phadrig's request, they made a triangle of which he
was the central point. Without any formula of introduction, he said
rather abruptly:

"Professor van Huysman, will you oblige me by taking a croquet ball and
holding it in your hand as tightly as you can?"

Brenda ran out of the circle and gave him one. He took it and gripped it
in a fist that looked made to hold things. Phadrig glanced at the ball,
and said quietly:

"Follow me!"

Then he turned away, and, in spite of all the Professor's efforts to
hold it, the ball somehow slipped through his fingers and fell on to the
lawn. Then, to the utter amazement of every one, except Franklin
Marmion, it rolled towards the Adept and followed him at a distance of
about three yards as he walked round the circle of spectators. He did
not even look at it. When he had made the round, he took his place in
the Triangle of Science, and the ball stopped at his feet.

"It is now released, Professor," he said to Van Huysman. "You may take
it away, if you wish."

There was something in the saying of the last sentence that nettled him.
He had seen all, or nearly all, the physical laws, which were to him as
the Credo is to a Catholic or the Profession of Faith to a Moslem,
openly and shamelessly outraged, defied, and set at nought. To say he
was angry would be to give a very inadequate idea of his feelings,
because he, the greatest exposer of Spiritualism, Dowieism, and
Christian Scientism in the United States, was not only angry, but--for
the time being only, as he hoped--utterly bewildered. It was too much,
as he would have put it, to take lying down, and so, greatly daring, he
took a couple of strides towards Phadrig, and said with a snarl in his
voice:

"I guess you mean really if _you_ wish, Mr Miracle-Worker. It was mighty
clever, however you did it, but you haven't got me to believe that
physical laws are frauds yet. You want me to pick that ball up?"

"Certainly, Professor--if you can--now," replied Phadrig, with a little
twitch of his lips which might have been a smile, or something else.

Hoskins van Huysman was a strong man, and he knew it. Not very many
years before, he had been able to shoulder a sack of flour and take it
away at a run, and now he could bend a poker across his shoulders
without much trouble. He stooped down and gripped the ball, expecting,
of course, to lift it quite easily. It didn't move. He put more force
into his arms and tried again. For "all the move he got on it," as he
said afterwards, it might have weighed a ton. It was ridiculous, but it
was a fact. In spite of all his pulling and straining, the ball remained
where it was as though it had been rooted in the foundations of the
world. He was wise enough to know when he was beaten, so he let go, and
when he pulled himself up, somewhat flushed after his exertions, he
said:


"Well, Mister Phadrig, I don't know how you do it, but I've got to
confess that it lets me out. I'm beaten. If you can make the law of
gravitation do what you want, you're a lot bigger man in physics than I
am."

He turned and went back to his place, looking, as his daughter whispered
to Nitocris, "pretty well shaken up." The Prince caught Phadrig's eye
for an instant, and said:

"Miss Marmion, will you confound the wisdom of the wise and bring the
ball here?"

It was not the words but the challenge in them that impelled her to
rise from her chair, aided by Merrill's hand, and not the one that the
Prince held out, and walk across the lawn towards Phadrig. She took no
notice of him. She just stooped and picked up the ball and carried it
back to her chair. She tossed it down on the grass, and sat down again
without a word, quaking with many inward emotions, but outwardly as calm
as ever. What Professor van Huysman said to himself when he saw this
will be better left to himself.

It might have been expected that the miracle, or at least the
extraordinary defiance of physical law which had been accomplished by
Phadrig, would have produced something like consternation among the bulk
of the spectators. It did nothing of the sort. They were, perhaps, above
the ordinary level of Society intellect in London; but they only saw
something wonderful in what had been done. Nothing would have persuaded
them that it was not the result of such skill as produced the marvels of
the Egyptian Hall, simply because they were not capable of grasping its
inner significance. Could they have done that, the panic which Professor
Marmion was beginning to fear would probably have broken the party up in
somewhat unpleasant fashion. As it was they contented themselves with
saying: "How exceedingly clever!" "He must be quite a remarkable man!"
"I wonder we've never heard of him before!" "He must make a great deal
of money!" "I wonder if I could persuade the dear Prince--what a
charming man he is!--to bring him to my next At Home day?" and so on,
perfectly ignorant, as it was well they should be, that they had
witnessed a real conquest of Knowledge over Force.

Phadrig, who seemed to be the least interested person on the lawn,
looked about him, and said as quietly as before:

"I should be very much obliged if the best tennis player in the company
will do me the honour to have a game with me."

Now, it so happened that Brenda, in addition to her other athletic
honours, had recently won the Ladies' Tennis Tournament at Washington,
which carried with it the Championship of the State for the year, and so
this challenge appealed both to her pride in the game and her spirit of
adventure. She looked round at Nitocris, and said:

"I've half a mind to try, Niti. I suppose he won't strike me with
lightning or send me down through the earth if I happen to beat him.
Shall I?"

"Yes, do," replied her hostess, with a suspicion of mischief in her
voice; "those dear Professors of ours are puzzling so delightfully over
the first miracle, or whatever it was, that I _do_ want to see them
worried a little more. It will be a wholesome chastening for the
overweening pride of knowledge."

"Very well," laughed Brenda, rising and dropping a light cloak from her
shoulders. "It's the first time I've had the honour of playing against a
magician, mind, so you mustn't be too hard on me if I lose."

Lord Leighton fetched her racquet and one for Phadrig, and they went
together towards the tennis-court in which he was standing. The three
Professors left their places and stood at one end of the net, Messrs
Hartley and Van Huysman indulging in audible growls of baffled
scepticism, and Franklin Marmion silently observant, divided between
interest and amusement. He could not help imagining what would happen if
he were to stand in the middle of the circle and remove himself to the
Higher Plane, and then go round shaking hands and saying, "Good
afternoon."

Brenda acknowledged Phadrig's bow with a gracious nod as she took her
place. Then Lord Leighton handed the other racquet to the Adept. To his
astonishment he declined it with another bow, saying:

"I thank you, my lord, but I do not need it."

"What!" exclaimed the other, with a frank stare of astonishment. "Excuse
me, but tennis without a racquet, you know--are you going to play with
your hands?"

"To some extent, yes, my lord," replied Phadrig, as he took his place.
"Will you ask Miss van Huysman if she will be kind enough to serve?"

Brenda would. Phadrig stood on the middle line between the two courts
with his hands folded in front of him. She certainly felt a little
nervous, but she knew her skill, and she sent a scorcher of an undercut
skimming across the net. The ball stopped dead. Phadrig gave a flick
with his right forefinger, and it hopped back over the net and ran
swiftly along the ground to Brenda's feet. She flushed as she picked it
up and changed courts. Then she raised her racquet and sent a really
vicious slasher into the opposite court. Phadrig, without moving, raised
his hand at the same moment. The ball, hard as it had been driven,
stopped in mid-air over the net, hung there for a moment, then dropped
on Brenda's side and rolled to her feet again. She picked it up, walked
to the net with it in her hand, and said quite good-humouredly:

"I think you're a bit too smart for me, Mr Phadrig. I can't pretend to
play against a gentleman who can suspend the law of gravitation just to
win a game of tennis."

"I did not do it to win the game, Miss van Huysman," he replied with a
gentle smile; "I only desired to amuse you and the other guests of
Professor Marmion. Now, it may be that some excellent but ignorant
people here may think that that ball is bewitched, as they would call
it, so if you will give it to me, I will send it out of reach."

She handed him the ball, wondering what was going to happen next. He
took it and put it on the thumb of his right hand as one does with a
coin when tossing. He flicked it into the air, and, to the amazement of
every one, saving always Franklin Marmion, it rose slowly up to the
cloudless sky, followed by the gaze of a hundred eyes, and vanished.
Then he bowed again to Brenda, and said in the most commonplace tone:

"It is out of harm's way now. Thank you once more for your
condescension."

"But how did it go up like that?" asked Brenda, looking him frankly and
somewhat defiantly in the eyes.

"That, Miss Huysman," he replied with perfect gravity, "was only a
demonstration of what Spiritualists and Theosophists are accustomed to
call levitation. It is only a matter of reversing the force of gravity."

"Is that all?" laughed Brenda, as she turned away. "You talk of it as
though it were a matter of turning a paper bag inside out."

"The one is as easy as the other," he smiled. "It is only a question of
knowing how to do it."

She walked back to her chair very much mystified, and, for the first
time in her so far triumphal journey through the interlude between the
eternities which we call life, a trifle humiliated: but that fact, of
course, she kept to herself. As she dropped back in her chair, she said
to Lord Leighton:

"That was pretty wonderful, wasn't it? I'm quite certain that there's no
