and have it explained before the results could be believed. But at last
Chris bent over her own slide. A minute later she glanced up, nodding.
"What it should be. It checks."

Tom whooped and went out the door to notify Jake. There was only plasma
for some two hundred injections, but that should yield sufficient proof.
Once salvation was offered, there should be no trouble convincing the
people that blood donations from their children were worthwhile.

Later, when the last of the plasma had been used, they could finally
relax. Chris slipped off her smock and dropped onto the cot. A tired
smile came onto her lips. "You're forgiven, Dan," she said. A moment
later she was obviously asleep. Doc meant to join her, but it was too
much effort. He leaned his head forward onto his arms, vaguely wondering
why she was calling off the feud.

It was night outside when he awoke, and he was lying on the cot, though
he still felt cramped and strained. He stirred, groaning, and finally
realized that a hand was on his shoulder shaking him. He looked up to
see Jake above him. Chris was busy with the coffee maker.

Jake slumped onto the cot beside Doc. "We took Southport," he announced.

That knocked the sleep out of Doc's system. "You what?"

"We took it, lock, stock and barrel. I figured the news of your cure
would put guts into the men, and it did. But we'd probably have taken it
anyhow. There wasn't anything to fight for there after Earth pulled out
and the plague really hit. Wilson mistook last-minute panic for fighting
spirit. The poor devils didn't have anything to fight about, once the
Lobby stopped goading them."

Doc tried to assimilate the news. But once the surprise was gone, he
found it meant very little. Maybe his revolutionary zeal had cooled,
once the Lobby men had pulled out. "We'll need a lot more plasma than
there is in Southport," he said.

"Not so much, maybe," Jake denied. "Doc, three of the men you injected
were shot down as runners. Your plasma's no good."

"It takes time to work, Jake. I told you there might be a case or two
that would be too close to the edge. Three is more than I expected; but
it's not impossible."

"There was plenty of time. They blew after we got back from Southport."
Jack dropped his hand on Doc's shoulder, and his face softened.
"Harkness tested every man you injected. He finished half an hour ago.
Five showed dead bugs. The rest of them weren't helped at all."

Doc fumbled for a weed, trying to think. But his thoughts refused to
focus. "Five!"

"Five out of two hundred. That's about average. And what about Tom? He
was jumping around after the test last night, telling how you'd cured
him, how he'd seen the dead bugs; but he never had the jumping headache,
and you never gave him the plasma! He's got dead bugs, though. Harkness
tested him."

Doc let his realization of his own idiocy sink in until he could believe
it. Jake was right. Tom had never been treated, yet Chris had reported
dead bugs. They'd all been so ready to believe in miracles that no one
had been able to think straight after the long wait.

"There was a bump on his neck--a small one," he said slowly. "Jake, he
must have caught it, even if he seemed immune. If he was taking anodyne
anyway for something--or unconscious--"

"He was up in Northport six years ago for a kidney operation," Jake
admitted doubtfully. "We had to chip in to pay for it. But you still
didn't treat him, and he's cured. Face it, Doc, that plasma is no good
inside the body."

His hand tightened on Doc's shoulder again. "We're not blaming you. We
don't judge a man here except by what he is. Maybe the stuff helps a
little. We'll go on using it when we get it; tell everybody you were a
mite optimistic, so they'll figure it's a gamble, but have a little hope
left. And you keep trying. Something cured it in Tom. Now you find out
what."

Doc watched him go out numbly, and turned to Chris.

"It can't be right," she said shakily. "You and Swanee were cured. Maybe
it was the accelerator. It had to be something."

"You didn't have the accelerator," he accused.

"No, and I've still got live bugs. I was never supposed to be cured, so
I expected to see just what I saw. How I missed the fact that Tom should
have been like me, I don't know. Damn it, oh, damn it!"

He's never seen her cry before, except in fury. But she mastered it
almost at once, shaking tears out of her eyes. "All right. Plasma works
in a bottle but not in an adult body. Maybe something works in the body
but not in a bottle."

"Maybe. And maybe some people are just naturally immune after it reaches
a certain stage. Maybe we ran into coincidence."

But he didn't believe that, any more than she did. The answer had to be
in the room. He'd taken a massive dose of the disease and been cured in
a few hours.

Outside the room, the war went on, drawing toward a close. The supposed
partial cure was good propaganda, if nothing else, and Jake was widening
his territory steadily. There was only token resistance against him. He
had the Southport shuttles now to cover huge areas in a hurry. But
inside the room, the battle was less successful. It wasn't the
accelerator. It wasn't the tablets of anodyne. They even tried sweeping
the floor and using the dust without results.

Then another test in the room, made with four volunteers Jake selected,
yielded complete cures after injections with plain salt water in place
of plasma.

The plague speeded up again. About four people out of a hundred now
seemed to have caught the disease and cured themselves. They accounted
for what faith was left in Doc's plasma and gave some unfounded hope to
the others.

Northport fell a week later, putting the whole planet in rebel hands.

Jake returned, wearier than ever. He'd proved to be one of the natural
immunes, but the weight of the campaign that could only end in a defeat
by the plague left him no room to rejoice in his personal fortune.

This time he looked completely defeated. And a moment later, Doc saw why
as Jake flipped a flimsy sheet onto the table. It bore the seals of
Space and Medical Lobbies.

Jake pointed upwards. "The war rockets are there, all right. We knew
they'd come. Now all they want for calling them off is our surrender and
your cure. If they don't get both, they'll blow the planet to bits. We
have two days."

The rockets could be seen clearly with binoculars. There were more than
enough to destroy all life on the planet. Maybe they'd be used
eventually, anyhow, since the Lobbies wanted no more rebellion. But with
a cure for the plague, he might have bought them off.

Chris stood beside him, looking as if it were a bitter pill for her,
too. She'd risked herself in the hands of the enemy, had cooperated with
him in everything she'd been taught to oppose, and had worked like a
dog. Now the Lobbies seemed to forget her as a useless tool. They were
falling back on a raw power play and forgetting any earlier schemes.

"Maybe they'd hold off for a while if I agreed to go to them and share
all my ideas, specimens and notes," he said at last. "Do you think your
Lobby would settle for that, Chris?"

"I don't know, Dan. I've stopped thinking their way." She seemed almost
apologetic for the admission.

He dropped an arm over her shoulder and turned with her back to the
laboratory. "Okay, then we've got to find a miracle. We've got two days
ahead of us. At least we can try."

But he knew he was lying to himself. There wasn't anything he could
think of to try.




XV

Decision


Two days was never enough time for a miracle. Doc decided as he packed
his notes into a small bag and put it beside his bundle of personal
belongings. He glanced around the room for the last time, and managed a
grin at Jake's gloomy expression.

"Maybe I can bluff them, or maybe they'll string along for a while," he
said. "Anyhow, now that they've agreed to take me and my notes in place
of the cure we're fresh out of, I've got to be on that shuttle when it
goes back to their men at orbital station."

Jake nodded. "I don't like selling friends down the river, Doc. But it
wouldn't do you any more good to blow up with the planet, I reckon. They
won't call off the war rockets when they do get you, of course. But
maybe they won't use them, except as a threat to put the Lobbies back
in, stronger than ever."

He stuck out one of his awkwardly shaped hands, clapped the aspirator
over his face and hurried out. Doc picked up his bags and went toward
the little tractor where Lou was waiting to drive him and Chris back
toward Southport and the shuttle rocket that would be landing for them.
They hadn't mentioned Chris in their demands, but her father must expect
her to return.

After they had him, he'd be on his own. His best course was probably to
insist on talking only to Ryan at Medical Lobby, and then being
completely honest. The room here would be kept sealed, in case the
Lobby wanted to investigate where he had failed. And his notes were
honest, which was something that could usually be determined. Chris
could testify to that, anyhow, since she'd kept a lot of them for him.

At best, there would be a chance for some compromise and perhaps some
clue for them that might eventually end the plague. They had enough men
to work on it, and billions in equipment. At worst, he should gain a
little time.

"Cheer up, Chris," he told her as he climbed through the little airlock.
"Maybe Harkness will turn up the cure before our negotiations break
down. He has the whole of Northport Hospital to play with. They haven't
tried to chase him out of there yet. After all, we almost found
something with no equipment except wild imaginations."

She shook her head as the tractor began moving. "Shut up! I've got
enough trouble without your coming down with logorrhea. Don't be a
fool."

"Why change now?" he asked her. "Everything I've done has been because I
am a fool. I guess my luck lasted longer than I could expect. And I'm
still fool enough to think that the solution has to turn up eventually.
We know it has to be in that room. Damn it, we must know it--if we could
only think straight now."

She reached over and touched his hand, but made no comment. They had
been over that statement of desperation too many times already. But it
kept nagging at him--something in the room, something in the room!
Something so common that nobody noticed it!

They passed a crowd chasing down a runner. Something in that room could
have saved the unlucky man. It could have saved Mars, perhaps.

He growled for the hundredth time, cursing his fatigue-numbed mind. Too
little sleep, too much coffee and bracky....

He reached for the package of weed, realizing that he would miss it on
Earth, if he ever got there. Like everything here on the planet, he'd
begun by detesting it and wound up finding it the thing he wanted to
keep forever. He lighted the bracky and sat smoking, watching Lou drive.
When the first was finished, he lighted another from the butt.

She put out a hand and took it away. "Please, Dan. I can stand the
stuff, but I'll never like it, and the tractor's stuffy enough already.
I've taken enough of it. And it keeps reminding me of our test--the
three of you stinking up the place, puffing and blowing that out, while
I couldn't even get a breath of air...."

She was getting logorrhea herself now and--

The answer finally hit him! He jerked around, making a grab for Lou's
shoulder, motioning for the man to head back.

"Bracky--it has to be! Chris, that's it. Jake picked out the second
group of men from his friends--and they are all cronies because they
hang around so much in their so-called smoking room. The first time, it
killed the bugs for all of us who smoked--and it didn't work for you
because you never learned the habit."

Lou had the tractor turned and the rheostat all the way to the floor.

She was sitting up now, but she wasn't fully satisfied. "The percentage
of immunes seems about right. But why do some of the smokers get the
disease while some don't?"

"Why not? It depends on whether they pick up the habit before or after
the disease gets started. Tom must have got his while he was in
Northport. They wouldn't let him smoke there--if he had the habit
before, for that matter."

She found no fault with that. He twisted it back and forth in his mind,
trying to find a fault. There seemed to be none. The only trouble was
that they couldn't send a message that bracky was the cure and hope that
Earth would prove it true. No polite note of apology would do after
that. They had to be sure. Too many other ideas had proved wrong
already.

Jake saw them coming and came running toward the laboratory, but Lou
stopped the tractor before it reached the building and let the older man
in.

"Get me a dozen men who have the plague. I want the worst cases you
have, and ones that Harkness tested himself," Doc ordered. "And then
start praying that the cure we've got works fast."

Chris was at the electron mike at once, but one of her hands reached out
for the weed. She began puffing valiantly, making sick faces. Now other
men began coming in, their faces struggling to find hope, but not daring
to believe yet. Jake followed them.

"We'll test at ten-minute intervals. That will be about two hours for
the last from the group," Doc decided. One of the doctors Harkness had
brought to the villages was busy cutting tiny sections from the lumps on
the men's necks, while Chris ran them through the microscope to make
sure the bugs were still alive. The regular optical mike was strong
enough for that.

Doc handed each man a bracky weed, with instructions to keep smoking, no
matter how sick it made him.

There were no results at the end of ten minutes when the first test was
made. The second, at the end of twenty minutes, was still infected with
live bugs. At the half-hour, Chris frowned.

"I can't be sure--take a look, Dan."

He bent over, moving the slide to examine another spot. "I think so. The
next one should tell."

There was no doubt about the fourth test. The bugs were dead, without a
single exception that they could find.

One by one, the men were tested and went storming out, shouting the
news. For a minute, the gathering crowd was skeptical, remembering the
other failures. Then, abruptly, men were screaming, crying and fighting
for the precious bracky, like the legions of the damned grabbing for
lottery tickets when the prize was a passport to paradise.

Jake swore as he moved toward the door. "We're low on bracky here. Have
to get a supply from Edison, I guess, and cart it to the shuttle. Enough
for a sample, and to make them want more. It'll be tough, but we'll get
it there in time--by the time the shuttle should be picking you up. Doc,
you've won our war! From now on, if Earth wants to keep her population
up, we'll be a free planet!"

Chris turned slowly from the microscope, holding a slide in her hands.
"My bugs," she said unbelievingly. "Dan, they're dead!"

Jake patted her shoulder. "That makes it perfect, girl. Now come on.
We've got to start celebrating a victory!"

       *       *       *       *       *

It was the general feeling of most of the heads of the villages when
they met the next day in Southport, using the courtroom that had been
presided over so long by Judge Ben Wilson. It was victory, and to the
victor belonged the spoils. The bracky had gone out to Earth on a
converted war rocket that could make the trip in less than two weeks,
and one packet had been specially labeled for Captain Everts. But Earth
had already confirmed the cure. The small amounts of the herb found in
the botanical collections had been enough to satisfy all doubts.

Harkness, Chris and Doc had been fighting against the desire to rob
Earth blind that filled most of the men here for hours now. Now they had
the backing of Jake and Ben Wilson. And now finally they leaned back,
sensing that the argument had been won.

Bargaining was all right in its place, but it had no place in affairs of
life and death such as this. They had to see that Earth received all the
bracky she needed. It was only right to charge a fair price for it, but
they couldn't restrict it by withholding or overcharging. And they could
still gain their ends without blackmail.

Martian alkaloids were tricky things, and bracky smoke contained a
number of them. It would take Earth at least ten years to discover and
synthesize the right one--and it would still probably cost more than it
would to import the weed from Mars. As long as the source of that weed
was here, and in the hands of the colonials, there would be no danger of
Earth's bombing the planet.

Harkness got up to underscore a point Wilson had made. "The plague lived
a million years, and it won't disappear now. The jumping headache, or
Selznick's migraine, is unpleasant enough to make us reasonably sure
that there will be a steady consumption of the weed. Our problem will be
to keep the children from using too much of it, probably." He pulled a
weed out and lighted it, puckering his face as the smoke bit his
tongue. "I'm told that this gets to be an enjoyable habit. If I can
believe that, surely you can believe me when I say we don't have to
bargain with lives."

The village men were human, and most of them could remember the strain
they had been under when they expected those they loved to die at any
hour. It had made them crave vengeance, but now as they had a chance to
reexamine it, they began to find it harder to impose the horror of any
such threat on others. The final vote was almost unanimous.

Doc listened as they wrangled over the wording of the message to Earth,
feeling disconnected from it. He passed Chris a bracky and lighted it
for her. She took it automatically, smiling as the smoke hit her lungs.
It was one thing they had in common now, at least.

Ben Wilson finally read the message.

"To the people of Earth, greetings!

"On behalf of the free people of Mars, I have the honor to announce that
this planet hereby declares itself a sovereign and independent world. We
shall continue to regard Earth as our mother, and to consider the health
and welfare of her people in no way second to our own in matters which
affect both planets. We trust that Earth will share this feeling of
mutual friendship. We trust that all strains of hostility will be ended.
The advantages to each from peaceful commerce make any course other than
the most cordial of relations unthinkable.

"We shall consider proof of such friendship an order by Earth to all
rockets circling this planet that they shall deliver themselves safely
into our hands, in order that we may begin converting them to peaceful
purposes for the trade that is to come. In turn, we pledge that all
efforts will be made to ensure a prompt delivery of those products most
in demand, including the curative bracky plant."

He turned to Doc then. "You want to sign it, Dr. Feldman? Make it as
acting president or something, until we can get around to voting you
into permanent office."

"You and Jake fight over the job," Doc told him. "No, Ben, I mean it."

He got up and moved out into the outer room, where he could avoid the
stares of amazement that were turned to him. He'd never asked for the
honor, and he didn't want it.

Chris came with him. Her face was shocked and something was slowly
draining out of it as he looked at her.

"Forget it, Chris," he said. "You're going back to Earth. There is
nothing for you here."

She hadn't quite given up. "There could be, Dan. You know that."

"No. No, Chris, I don't think there ever can be. You can't find a man
strong enough to rule who'll be weak enough to let you rule in his
place. It didn't work on Earth, and it won't work here. Forget the
dreams you had of what could be done with a new planet. Those are the
dreams that made a mess of the old one."

"I'll be back," she told him. "Some day I'll be back."

He shook his head again. "No. You wouldn't like what you find here.
Freedom is heady stuff, but you have to have a taste for it. You can't
acquire a fondness for it secondhand. And for a while, there's going to
be freedom here. Besides, once you get back to Earth, you'll forget what
happened here."

She sighed at last. For the first time since he had known her, she
seemed to give in completely. And for that brief moment, he loved what
she could have been, but never would be.

"All right, Dan," she said quietly. "I can't fight you. I never could, I
see now. I'll take the rocket back. What are you going to do?"

He hadn't bothered to think, but he knew the answer. "Research. What
else?"

There would be a lot of research done here. It had been suppressed too
long, and had piled up a back-pressure that would have to be relieved.
And from that research, he suspected, would come the end of the stable
oligarchy of Earth. It could never stand against the changes that would
be pouring out of Mars.

She put her hands on his shoulders and moved forward to kiss him. He
bent down to meet her, and found her eyes were wet. Maybe his were, too.
Then she broke free.

"You're a fool, Dan Feldman," she whispered, and began moving down the
hallway and out of the council hall of Mars.

Doc Feldman nodded slowly as he let her go. He was a fool. He had always
been a fool, and always would be. And that was why he could never take
over leadership here. Fools and idealists should never govern a world.
It took practical men such as Jake to do that.

But the practical men needed the foolish idealists, too. And maybe for a
time here on Mars their kind of men and his kind of fools could make one
more stab at the ancient puzzle of freedom.

Outside the war rockets of Earth began landing quietly on the free soil
of Mars.


[Transcriber's Note: The following errors in the original have been
corrected in this version:

Page 5: 'and there was' to 'and there were'

Page 9: 'ideopathic gastroentiritis' to 'idiopathic gastroenteritis'

Page 29: 'The cheapness of snythetics' to 'The cheapness of synthetics'

Page 42: 'huband's' to 'husband's'

Page 43: 'Southpost' to 'Southport'

Page 47: 'laywer' to 'lawyer'

Page 50: 'in a can' to 'to a can'

Page 118: 'Selnick's' to 'Selznick's'

]

       *       *       *       *       *


ANDRE NORTON

