kept him there.

They were returning, the guards, and herded between their lines three
men. Two were Hawaikans, their bare dark bodies easily identifiable. But
the third--Ashe! Ross almost shouted his name aloud.

The Terran stumbled along and there was a bandage above his knee. He had
been stripped to his swimming trunks, all his equipment taken from him.
There was a dark bruise on his left temple, the angry weal of a lash
mark on neck and shoulder.

Ross's hands clenched. Never in his life had he so desperately wanted a
weapon as he did at that moment. To spray the company below with a
machine gun would have given him great satisfaction. But he had nothing
but the knife in his belt and he was as cut off from Ashe as if they
were in separate cells of some prison.

The caution which had been one of his inborn gifts and which had been
fostered by his training, clamped down on his first wild desire for
action. There was not the slightest chance of his doing Ashe any good at
the present. But he had this much--he knew that Gordon was alive and
that he was in the aliens' hands. Faced by those facts Ross could plan
his own moves.

The Foanna chant began again, and the three prisoners moved; the two
Hawaikans turned, set themselves on either side of Ashe, and gave him
support. Their actions had a mechanical quality as if they were directed
by a will beyond their own. Ashe gazed about him at the Wreckers and the
robed figures. His awareness of them both suggested to Ross that if the
natives had come under the control of the Foanna, the Terran resisted
their influence. But Ashe did not try to escape the assistance of his
two fellow prisoners, and he limped with their aid back down the hall,
following the Foanna.

Ross deduced that the captives had been transferred from the lord of the
castle to the Foanna. Which meant Ashe was on his way to another
destination. The Terran was on his feet and headed back, intent on
returning to the sea cave and starting out after Ashe as soon as he
could.

"You have found Gordon!" Karara read his news from his face.

"The Wreckers had him prisoner. Now they've turned him over to the
Foanna--"

"What will _they_ do with him?" the girl demanded of Loketh.

His answer came roundabout as usual as the native squatted by the
analyzer and clicked his answer into it.

"They have claimed the wreck survivors for tribute. Your companion will
be witches' meat."

"Witches' meat?" repeated Ross, uncomprehending.

Then Karara drew a gagged breath which was a gasp of horror.

"Sacrifice! Ross, he must mean they are going to use Gordon for a
sacrifice."

Ross stiffened and then whirled to catch Loketh by the shoulders. The
inability to question the native directly was an added disaster now.

"Where are they taking him? Where?" He began that fiercely, and then
forced control on himself.

Karara's eyes were half closed, her head back; she was manifestly aiming
that inquiry at the dolphins, to be translated to Loketh.

Symbols burned on the analyzer screen.

"The Foanna have their own fortress. It can be entered best by sea.
There is a boat ... I can show you, for it is my own secret."

"Tell him--yes, as soon as we can!" Ross broke out. The old feeling that
time was all-important worried at him. Witches' meat ... witches' meat
... the words were sharp as a lash.




8

The Free Rovers


Twilight made a gray world where one could not trace the true meeting of
land and water, sea and sky. Surely the haze about them was more than
just the normal dusk of coming night.

Ross balanced in the middle of the skiff as it bobbed along the swell of
waves inside a barrier reef. To his mind the craft carrying the three of
them and their net of supplies was too frail, rode too high. But Karara
paddling in the bow, Loketh at the stern seemed to be content, and Ross
could not, for pride's sake, question their competency. He comforted
himself with the knowledge that no agent was able to absorb every
primitive skill, and Karara's people had explored the Pacific in
out-rigger canoes hardly more stable than their present vessel,
navigating by currents and stars.

Smothering his feeling of helplessness and the slow anger that roused in
him, the Terran busied himself with study of a sort. They had had the
longer part of the day in the cave before Loketh would agree to venture
out of hiding and paddle south. Ross, using the analyzer, had, with
Loketh's aid, set about learning what he could of the native tongue.

Now possessed of a working vocabulary of clicked words, he was able to
follow Loketh's speech so that translation through the dolphins was not
necessary except for complicated directions. Also, he had a more
detailed briefing of the present situation on Hawaika.

Enough to know that they might be embarking on a mad venture. The
citadel of the Foanna was distinctly forbidden ground, not only for
Loketh's people but also for the Foanna's Hawaikan followers who were
housed and labored in an outer ring of fortification-cum-village. Those
natives were, Ross gathered, a hereditary corps of servants and
warriors, born to that status and not recruited from the native
population at large. As such, they were armored by the "magic" of their
masters.

"If the Foanna are so powerful," Ross had demanded, "why do you go with
us against them?" To depend so heavily on the native made him uneasy.

The Hawaikan looked to Karara. One of his hands raised; his fingers
sketched a sign toward the girl.

"With the Sea Maid and her magic I do not fear." He paused before
adding, "Always has it been said of me--and to me--that I am a useless
one, fit only to do women's tasks. No word weaver shall ever chant my
battle deeds in the great hall of Zahur. I who am Zahur's true son can
not carry my sword in any lord's train. But now you offer me one of the
great to-be-remembered quests. If I go, so may I prove that I am a man,
even if I go limpingly. There is nothing the Foanna can do to me which
is worse than what the Shadow has already done. Choosing to follow you I
may stand up to face Zahur in his own hall, show him that the blood of
his House has not been drained from my veins because I walk crookedly!"

There was such bitter fire, not only in the sputtering rush of Loketh's
words, but in his eyes, his face, the wry twist of his lips, that Ross
believed him. The Terran no longer had any doubts that the castle
outcast was willing to brave the unknown terrors of the Foanna keep, not
just to aid Ross whom he considered himself bound to serve by the
customs of his people, but because he saw in this venture a chance to
gain what he had never had, a place in his warrior culture.

Shut off from the normal life of his people, he had early turned to the
sea. His twisted leg had not proved a handicap in the water, and he
stated with confidence that he was the best swimmer in the castle. Not
that the men of his father's following had taken greatly to the sea,
which they looked upon merely as a way of preying upon the true sea
rovers.

The reef on which the ships had been wrecked was a snare of sorts--first
by the whim of nature when wind and current piled up the trading ships
there. Then, Ross was startled when Loketh elaborated on a later
development of that trap.

"So Zahur returned from this meeting and set up a great magic among the
rock, according to the spells he was taught. Now ships are drawn there
so the wrecks have been many and Zahur becomes an even greater lord with
many men coming to take sword oath under him."

"This magic," asked Ross, "of what manner is it and where did Zahur
obtain it?"

"It is fashioned so--" Loketh sketched two straight lines in the air,
"not curved as a sword. And the color of water under a storm sky, both
rods being as tall as a man. There was much care to set them in place,
that was done by a man of Glicmas."

"A man of Glicmas?"

"Glicmas is now the high lord of the Iccio. He is blood kin to Zahur,
yet Zahur must take sword oath to send to Glicmas a fourth of all his
sea-gleanings for a year in payment for this magic."

"And Glicmas, where did he get it? From the Foanna?"

Loketh made an emphatic denial of that. "No, the Foanna have spoken out
against their use, making even greater ill feeling between the Old Ones
and the coast people. It is said that Glicmas saw a great wonder in the
sky and followed it to a high place of his own country. A mountain broke
in twain and a voice issued forth from the rent, calling that the lord
of the country come and stand to hear it. When Glicmas did so he was
told that the magic would be his. Then the mountain closed again and he
found many strange things upon the ground. As he uses them they make him
akin to the Foanna in power. Some he gives to those who are his blood
kin, and together they will be great until they close their fists not
only upon the sea rovers, but upon the Foanna also. This they have come
to believe."

"But you do not?" Karara asked then.

"I do not know, Sea Maid. The time is coming when perhaps they shall
have their chance to prove how strong is their magic. Already the Rovers
gather in fleets as they never did before. And it seems that they, too,
have found a new magic, for their ships fly through the water, depending
no longer on wind-filling sails, or upon strong arms of men at long
paddles. There is a struggle before us. But that you must know, being
who and what you are, Sea Maid."

"And what do you think I am? What do you think Ross is?"

"If the Foanna dwell on land and hold old knowledge and power beyond our
reckoning in their two hands," he replied, "then it is possible that the
same could have roots in the sea. It is my belief that you are of the
Shades, but not the Shadow. And this warrior is also of your kind--but
perhaps in different degree, putting into action your desires and
wishes. Thus, if you go up against the Foanna, you shall be well
matched, kind to kind."

Nice to be so certain of that, Ross thought. He did not share Loketh's
confidence on that subject.

"The Shades ... the Shadow ..." Karara persisted. "What are these,
Loketh?"

An odd expression crossed the Hawaikan's face. "Are those not known
to you, Sea Maid? Indeed, then you are of a breed different from the
men of land. The Shades are those of power who may come to the aid
of men should it be their desire to influence the future. And the
Shadow ... the Shadow is That Which Ends All--man, hope, good. To Which
there is no appeal, and Which holds a vast and enduring hatred for that
which has life and full substance."

"So Zahur has this new magic. Is it the gift of Shades or Shadow?" Ross
brought them back to the subject which had sparked in him a small
warning signal.

"Zahur prospers mightily." Loketh's answer was ambiguous.

"And so the Shadow could not provide such magic?" The Terran pushed.

But before the Hawaikan had a chance to answer, Karara added another
question:

"But you believe that it did?"

"I do not know. Only the magic has made Zahur a part of Glicmas, and
Glicmas is now perhaps a part of that which spoke from the mountain. It
is not well to accept gifts which tie one man to another unless there is
from the first a saying of how deep that bond may run."

"I think you are wise in that, Loketh," Karara said.

But the uneasiness had grown in Ross. Alien powers, out of a mountain
heart, passed from one lord to another. And on the other hand the
Rovers' sudden magic in turn, lending their ships wings. The two facts
balanced in an odd way. Back on Terra there had been those sudden and
unaccountable jumps in technical knowledge on the part of the enemy,
jumps which had set in action the whole Time Travel service of which he
had become a part. And these jumps had not been the result of normal
research; they had come from the looting of derelict spaceships wrecked
on his world in the far past.

Could driblets of the same stellar knowledge have been here deliberately
fed to warring communities? He asked Loketh about the possibility of
space-borne explorers. But to the Hawaikan that was a totally foreign
conception. The stars, for Loketh, were the doorways and windows of the
Shades, and he treated the suggestion of space travel as perhaps natural
to those all-powerful specters, but certainly not for beings like
himself. There was no hint that Hawaika had been openly visited by a
galactic ship. Though that did not bar such landings. The planet was,
Ross thought, thinly populated. Whole sections of the interiors of the
larger islands were wilderness, and this world must be in the same state
of only partial occupation as his own earth had been in the Bronze Age
when tribes on the march had fanned out into virgin wilderness, great
forests, and steppes unwalked by man before their coming.

Now as he balanced in the canoe and tried to keep his mind off the
queasiness in his middle and the insecurity of the one thickness of
sea-creature hide stretched over a bone framework which made up the
craft between his person and the water, Ross still mulled over what
might be true. Had the galactic invaders for their own purposes begun to
meddle here, leaking weapons or tools to upset what must be a very
delicate balance of power? Why? To bring on a conflict which would
occupy the native population to the point of exhaustion or depopulation?
So they could win a world for their own purposes without effort or risk
on their part? Such cold-blooded fishing in carefully troubled waters
fitted very well with the persons of the Baldies as he had known them on
Terra.

And he could not set aside that memory of this very coast as he had seen
it through the peep, the castle in ruins, tall pylons reaching from the
land into the sea. Was this the beginning of that change which would end
in the Hawaika of his own time, empty of intelligent life, shattered
into a loose network of islands?

"This fog is strange." Karara's words startled Ross to return to the
here and now.

The haze he had been only half conscious of when they had put out from
the tiny secret bay where Loketh kept his boat, was truly a fog, piling
up in soft billows and cutting down visibility with speed.

"The Foanna!" Loketh's answer was sharp, a recognition of danger. "Their
magic--they hide their place so! There is trouble, trouble on the move!"

"Do we land then?" Ross did not ascribe the present blotting out of the
landscape to any real manipulation of nature on the part of the
all-powerful Foanna. Too many times the reputations of "medicine men"
had been so enhanced by coincidence. But he did doubt the wisdom of
trying to bore ahead blindly in this murk.

"Taua and Tino-rau can guide us," Karara reminded him. "Throw out the
rope, Ross. What is above water will not confuse them."

He moved cautiously, striving to adapt his actions to the swing of the
boat. The line was ready coiled to hand and he tossed the loose end
overboard, to feel the cord jerk taut as one of the dolphins caught it
up.

They were being towed now, though both paddlers reinforced the forward
tug with their efforts. The curtain gathering above the surface of the
water did not hamper the swimmers beneath its surface, and Ross felt
relief. He turned his head to speak to Loketh.

"How near are we?"

The mist had thickened to the point that, close as the native was, the
lines of his body blurred. His clicking answer seemed distorted, too,
almost as if the fog had altered not only his form but his personality.

"Maybe very soon now. We must see the sea gate before we are sure."

"And if we aren't able to see that?" challenged Ross.

"The sea gate is above and below the water. Those who obey the Sea Maid,
who are able to speak thought to thought, will find it if we can not."

But they were never to reach that goal. Karara gave warning: "There are
ships about."

Ross knew that the dolphins had told her. He demanded in turn: "What
kind?"

"Larger, much larger than this."

Then Loketh broke in: "A Rover Raider--three of them!"

Ross frowned. He was the cripple here. The other two, with their ability
to communicate with the dolphins, were the sighted, he the blind. And he
resented his handicap in a burst of bitterness which must have colored
his tone as he ordered, "Head inshore--now!"

Once on land, even in the fog, he felt that they had the advantage in
any hide-and-seek which might ensue with this superior enemy force. But
afloat he was helpless and vulnerable, a state Ross did not accept
easily.

"No," Loketh returned as sharply. "There is no place to land along the
cliff."

"We are between two of the ships," Karara reported.

"Your paddles--" Ross schooled his voice to a whisper, "hold them--don't
use them. Let the dolphins take us on. In the fog, if we make no sound,
we may get by the ships."

