
The others turned to fly to the shelter of the neighboring forests.

"Hurrah! they're bolting," said Mont.

"But they've collared what was left of our bread, and the remains of the
roast pork," said the hired boy angrily. "Oh, the varmints! I'll just
give them something."

He advanced to fire better.

An aged chief, however, turned at this moment and discharged a parting
shot which took effect in the calf of Stump's leg.

"Oh, dear! I'm hit," he cried. "A great wooden skewer's stuck right in
my leg, sir. Perhaps it's poisoned, sir. Oh, dear, but I wish it hadn't
been me. There's the professor, now; he could have borne it better than
me."

"Thank you, my young friend," said the professor, "the calf of my leg is
as susceptible to pain as yours; let us get away, as arrowheads are
sharp, and in certain parts of the body mortal."

"Where shall we go?" asked Mont.

"We are not safe here. The savages will return in larger numbers
directly, and we shall probably lose our lives, so I propose to seek our
boat."

"And go back to the _Searcher_?" asked Carl.

"Yes."

"Never! I for one will not go!" cried Carl.

"And I can't crawl. I'm as lame as a dog," said Stump, half crying.

"Roll, if you can't walk," said the professor jokingly.

"Pull it out, sir. Give me a hand with it. It hurts awful."

Mont advanced to the boy and seized the arrowhead, which he tugged at
until, with a torrent of blood, it came out of the wound.

It was with difficulty Stump managed to limp on one leg, and seemed very
grateful when Mont bound up the wound and told him to lean on his
shoulder.

"My dear boy," said the professor, "discretion is the better part of
valor. I am averse to the taking of human life, for I am a man of
science and not a fighter. My advice is to check the advance of those
bloodthirsty savages, and when your ammunition is spent, to run. As I am
old, and not quick of foot, I will start at once."

So saying, he ran with all speed to the boat.

"Coward!" said Mont angrily.

"What are we to do?" asked Carl blankly.

"Follow him, I suppose," replied Mont. "Bring up the rear, Carl, while I
help Stump along, and if the beasts show again, call us, and we will
turn and fire."

They began to beat a retreat in this order, and, fortunately, the
natives did not again make an appearance.

The half-mile was traversed quickly, Stump groaning dreadfully as he was
forced along.

When within a few paces of the boat awful yells were heard behind them.

Turning to see from whence they proceeded, Mont saw a horde of savages
in pursuit. The sands seemed to be alive with them.

Evidently the defeated party had returned to obtain re-enforcements and
apprise their companions of the slaughter which had taken place, urging
them to avenge it.

An army of at least three hundred wild-looking fiends were at their
heels, and not a moment was to be lost.

"Quick, for Heaven's sake!" said Professor Woddle. "The savages are upon
us. Quick, boys, or we are lost!"

The boys sprang into the boat, placing Stump in the bows, and pushed
off.

Carl and Mont plied the oars vigorously.

Fortunately, when the savages reached the beach they were some distance
out.

A flight of arrows fell close to them without doing them any harm.

At least a hundred of the natives plunged into the sea up to the waist,
but they did not attempt to swim after the boat, which soon reached the
_Searcher_.

Mont expected to see someone, but the platform was deserted.

Our hero at once went to the captain, being alarmed at the hostile
attitude of the savages, whom he did not doubt were possessed of canoes
and would make an attack upon the ship.

He was annoyed at being obliged to take shelter so soon, but what could
he do?

All his hopes of liberty in flight were nipped in the bud.

He began to see now that Captain Vindex knew the character of the coast,
and had calculated well on their return to their captivity.

Imprisonment with him was better than death or slavery among the savages
of the island.

The captain was sitting in front of the organ playing an exquisite air
of Beethoven.

Full of excitement, Mont had no time to listen.

He touched him on the shoulder.

The Wizard of the Sea seemed unconscious of his presence.

"Captain," said our hero.

The strange being shivered and turned round.

"Ah," he cried, "'tis you, Mr. Folsom. Have you had good sport? You have
returned sooner than I expected."

"The sport was not bad," replied Mont, "but unfortunately we met with a
troop of savages, who spoilt our fun."

The captain smiled ironically.

"Savages!" he repeated. "Were you surprised at meeting with them? Have
you so little geographical knowledge that you do not know they swarm
hereabouts?"

"All I know is," replied Mont, "that if you don't want them on board the
boat, you had better look out."

"My dear fellow," said the captain, "I am not likely to trouble my head
about such wretches."

"But there are lots of them."

"How many?"

"Over three hundred, I should think, as well as I could count."

"We have nothing to fear from them, nothing at all," said the captain.
"Don't be alarmed."

Without another word he turned again to the organ, and played a Scotch
air which had an indescribable charm about it.

He was plunged again in a reverie that Mont did not think it prudent to
interrupt.

He remounted to the platform without seeing a single negro.

The most absolute want of precaution reigned on board the _Searcher_,
and it looked as if no one knew that hundreds of howling savages were
within five minutes' row of them.

In the growing darkness, which came on while Mont was alone, he could
see the forms of the natives running backward and forward on the beach.

They were evidently planning an attack upon a large scale.

What could account for the captain's strange apathy?

After a time he forgot the natives in admiring the lovely night of the
tropics.

The zodiacal stars appeared, and the moon shone brightly amidst
innumerable constellations of the zenith.

He wished that the moon would light the _Searcher_ to the coral bed, and
that they would sink to the bottom, where they would be safe from their
enemies.

Proceeding below again he sought his friends.

The door giving access to the interior of the boat remained open, and he
observed a slave standing at the bottom of the staircase as if on watch.

Stump had his leg plastered up, and, though in pain, was much better.

Strange to say, all were pleased to return to the boat, and to escape a
fearful death of lifelong slavery among the savages, who are known to
travelers as the Papouans.

Mont slept badly, for he anticipated a night attack.




CHAPTER XXIII.

ELECTRIFYING THE SAVAGES.


"What a sight! They are going to attack us, sure!"

It was Mont who spoke, as at six o'clock in the morning he ascended to
the platform.

The morning mist had lifted, and he could see the land distinctly.

The savages were very busy, and more numerous than they had been the
night before.

As well as he could calculate, he counted six or seven hundred of them.

They were tall, handsome men, with an erect bearing, their features well
chiseled.

In their ears they wore rings of bone.

Their arms were bows and arrows, spears, and shields made of the skins
of fish stretched over a wooden frame or the back of the turtle.

A chief rowed in a canoe toward the _Searcher_, keeping at a safe
distance.

He was adorned with a fantastic headdress of feathers and leaves, and
seemed to be the king of the country.

Having nothing better to do, Mont got a fishing line from the negro who
usually attended upon him, and amused himself with catching some of the
fish that swam round the ship.

No one made any preparation to repel an attack of the Papouans, which
alarmed Mont very much.

He had, however, so much confidence in the sagacity of Captain Vindex
that he believed he would not be caught asleep.

For two hours he continued his sport with tolerable success, and was so
wrapped up in it that he forgot the natives for the time.

While he was engaged in pulling up a good bite, an arrow whizzed past
him.

Mont dropped his fish, and very nearly his line.

"Bother the brutes!" he exclaimed; "can't they let a fellow fish in
peace? Why doesn't the captain make a start and get away from them?"

He was as eager now to leave the land as he had been the day before to
reach it.

It was clear that the Papouans were puzzled.

They had seen European ships before, but what could they make of a long
cylinder of iron, without masts, almost flush with the surface of the
water, and no chimney like a steamer?

But they gained confidence as they saw no attempt made to drive them
away.

They had seen some of their number killed by the air-guns, yet they had
heard no noise.

All at once a flotilla consisting of a score of canoes, full of savages,
put off from the shore, and approached the ship.

Mont at once sought refuge in the interior of the ship, and ran to
apprise the captain of the formidable state affairs were assuming.

Clearly no orders had been given to repel boarders.

Knocking at the captain's door, he was told to enter.

Captain Vindex was reading.

"Do I disturb you?" asked Mont politely.

"A little," replied the captain; "but I suppose you have good reason for
seeking me?"

"Rather," answered our hero. "We are surrounded by savages, and in a few
minutes we shall have them on board."

"Ah," said the captain, "they have got their canoes, I suppose?"

"Heaps of them."

"Then we must do something."

"Shut up the shop," said Mont.

"That is easily done," replied the captain, touching a bell, and adding:
"In half a minute the trapdoor will be closed. You need not be afraid
that they will break in."

"No, but to-morrow we shall want air, and you must open the door again
for your pumps to work."

"Yes; our ship is like a great whale, and cannot live without air."

"In a moment the Papouans will be on the top of us, and I don't suppose
they will go away in a hurry," replied Mont.

"You suppose they will take possession of the outside and keep it?"

"Exactly."

"Well, then," answered the captain calmly, "I don't see why they
shouldn't. Why should I kill the poor creatures if I can help it? I know
many savages in the civilized world whom I would cut off with more
pleasure. Leave them to me. If it is necessary I will make a terrible
example of them."

"You have no cannon."

"I shall not fire a shot, and I shall not wound them in any way, and yet
they will fall like leaves in autumn. Go to your friends, and rest
perfectly easy," said the captain.

This was a dismissal, and, wondering much, Mont went away.

As he sought his cabin he heard the fierce cries of the savages, who
swarmed on the back of the iron ship like flies in summer.

The night passed without any incident. Plenty of oxygen still passed
through the ship, but it was time to renew the air, which was becoming
impure.

Breakfast was served in the morning, as usual.

Eleven o'clock came, and the captain showed no signs of moving.

This apathy appeared incomprehensible to Mont.

Without any difficulty the vessel could have gone out to sea, risen in
mid-ocean, and taken in fresh air.

"It is very odd we don't move," he remarked.

"I can't understand it," said the professor. "But everything is so
remarkable on board this ship that I have ceased to wonder at anything."

"I've had a taste of niggers, and don't want another," said Stump, who
was lying on a mattress with his leg bound up.

"Hark at the reptiles! What a thundering row they're kicking up!"
remarked Mont.

"I never heard such a racket," answered Carl; "our skipper must be out
of his head not to start the vipers."

The captain appeared in the doorway.

There was a pleasant smile on his face, and he did not seem at all
alarmed at the menacing aspect of affairs.

"Gentlemen," he said, "we resume our voyage at twelve o'clock exactly."

"It is now a quarter to," said the professor, regarding his chronometer.

"Precisely. I shall open the flap, and take in air directly."

"And the niggers?" said Mont.

"The Papouans?" replied the captain, shrugging his shoulders.

"Won't they get in?"

"How?"

"Easily enough, by walking down the ladder. They can do that when the
flap is up, and can kill us all without any trouble."

"Gentlemen," said Captain Vindex, "the Papouans will not descend the
staircase, although the flap is open."

They regarded this singular man in amazement.

"You do not understand me," he continued. "Come to the bottom of the
ladder, and you shall see."

"Shall we take our guns?" asked the professor.

"Not the slightest necessity."

"At least your slaves are armed?"

"They are all at their work; follow me," said the captain.

They obeyed his order, and walked to the foot of the metal ladder.

The captain folded his arms, and stood by the side of the professor.

Mont and Carl were together.

Even Stump had crawled along the passage to see what would happen.

Captain Vindex made a sign to a slave, who, touching a spring, caused a
trapdoor in the back of the _Searcher_ to fly open.

The sunshine descended in a flood.

Terrible cries of rage and triumph were heard, and a swarm of natives
appeared on all sides.

At least twenty made a rush at the ladder, brandishing their tomahawks
and spears, while they uttered fierce yells and scraps of war songs.

The first who grasped the railing, and placed his foot on the ladder,
gave a bound back, and the most fearful shrieks burst from his quivering
lips. A second, a third, and a fourth did the same.

What invisible force was at work Mont did not know. He thought the days
of magic and sorcery had returned.

A score of Papouans tried to descend; but they had no sooner made the
attempt than they instantly retreated, yelling dismally, and threw
themselves into the sea.

"Stunning," said Mont. "It's fine, but I don't know how you do it."

The captain smiled.

To get a better view, Mont put one foot on the staircase and one hand on
the railing.

He immediately withdrew them, uttering a cry which was loud enough to
wake the dead.

"Oh, oh!" he cried.

"What's up?" exclaimed Carl, who could not help laughing.

"I see the dodge now," said Mont; "it's an electric battery applied to
the metal of the staircase, and whoever touches it has a shock. I've had
it before at Coney Island, and at fairs. You pay a dime and get
electrified."

"Ah!" ejaculated the professor, upon whom a light began to dawn.

"You are right," said the captain calmly. "I have connected the brass
staircase with the powerful storage battery that gives us light and
power, and the ignorant savages are frightened at they know not what. If
they had persisted in their attempt to enter the ship I should have
applied all my electrical force, and they would have fallen as dead as
flies on a fly paper; but I did not wish to harm them. They are enemies
unworthy of my hatred."

The news of the dreadful and mysterious pains which they felt were
spread by the shocked natives to their friends.

Alarmed and horrified, they beat a precipitate retreat, swimming and
rowing back to the shore.

In half an hour the beach was deserted, and all flew away from the sea
fiend whose nature they could not understand.

"They take us for the Old Nick," said Mont.

"Twelve o'clock," exclaimed the captain, who was always as punctual as
fate; "I said we should sail at twelve."

At this moment the engines began to revolve, and the _Searcher_ skimmed
over the surface of the sea like a bird.

The air was soon taken into the reservoirs, the flap or panel was
closed, and sinking into the bosom of the waves, she glided along, moved
by her powerful screw, like a big fish; only the helmsman, sitting in
his solitary place of lookout, being responsible for her management.




CHAPTER XXIV.

A PEARL WORTH A FORTUNE.


They traversed the ocean at a depth of about a hundred yards from the
surface.

The health of the captives continued good.

Stump was the only grumbler; the others read and talked, resigning
themselves to their fate, and waiting the next adventure which should
befall them in their singular voyage.

"I tell you what it is, sir," exclaimed Stump one day; "I wish I could
get my fist near that there captain. If I wouldn't give him a knockout
I'd let a whale come and eat me."

"What have you to grumble at, my friend?" inquired Professor Woddle.
"You are comfortably housed, well fed, and have a constant source of
excitement in the movements of this remarkable ship."

"Bother the ship. Why didn't she strike on a rock and bust up?" said
Stump. "I'd rather be back to Nautical Hall any day than here."

"Bide your time, my lad," continued the professor; "something will
happen some day."

"Very prob'ble, sir, but it's waiting for it to turn up as I don't like.
Just shove me alongside of that blessed captain, and if I don't give
him----"

"Stump," interrupted Mont, "you shut up. I wouldn't mind being back to
the Hall myself, but finding fault won't take us there."

"Certainly, sir. I don't have much chance of talking. I shall forget my
own language soon; but no matter, I am only a hired boy, I know, and, of
course, shouldn't have no feelings."

Mont took the trouble to pacify him, explaining that to provoke a
quarrel with the captain would not in any way improve their position.

On the contrary, it might deprive them of the little liberty and
comforts they now enjoyed, and make their miserable condition much
worse.

Stump saw this and promised to be quiet.

He was a strong lad for his age, as hard as iron, and brave as a young
lion.

"Just promise me this, sir," he said.
