domes had to be shielded from chance meteors. Besides, radar screens were
more dependable than eyes, even though they could pick up only solid
objects. If the Consops cruiser happened to be searching visually, it
would see the blast. But the chance had to be taken. It wasn't really much
of a chance.

"One minute," he said. He faced the asteroid, then darkened his helmet,
counting to himself.

The minute ticked off slowly, though his count was a little fast. When he
reached five, brilliant, incandescent light lit up the interior of the
boat. Rip saw it even though his helmet was dark. The light faded slowly,
and he put his helmet back on full transparent.

A mighty column of fire now reached out from the asteroid into space. Rip
held his breath until he saw that the little planet was sheering off its
course under the great blast. Then he sighed with relief. All was well so
far.

Someone muttered, "By Gemini! I'm glad we're out here instead of down
there!"

The column of fire lengthened, thinned out, grew fainter until there was
only a glow behind the asteroid. Rip took his astrogation instruments and
made a number of sights. They looked good. The first blast had worked
about as predicted, although he wouldn't be able to tell how much
correction was needed until he had taken star sights over a period of five
or six days.

"Let's go home," he ordered.

Back on the asteroid, a pit that glowed with radioactivity marked the site
of the first blast. Rip ordered it covered as much as possible with the
thorium that had been taken from the hole. While the men worked, he
plotted the lines for the second blast, found the spot, and put Kemp back
to work on a new hole.

Two hours later the second blast threw fire into space. In another three
hours, with the asteroid now speeding on its new course, Rip set off the
explosion that blasted straight back and gave extra speed.

Three radioactive craters marked the asteroid. Rip checked the radiation
level and didn't like it a bit. He decided to set up the landing boat and
their supplies as far away from the craters as possible, which was on the
sun side. They could move to the dark side as they approached the orbit of
earth. By then the radioactivity from the blasts would have died down
considerably.

He was selecting the location for a base when Dowst suddenly called.
"Lieutenant! Lieutenant Foster!"

There was urgency in the Planeteer's voice. "What is it, Dowst?"

"Sir, take a look, about two degrees south of Rigel!"

Rip found the constellation Orion and looked at bright Rigel. For a moment
he saw nothing; then, south of the star, he saw a thin, orange line.

Nuclear drive cruisers didn't have exhausts of that color, and there was
only one rocket-drive ship around, so far as they knew.

Rip said softly, "Let's get our house in order, gang. Looks like we're
going to get a visit from our friends the Connies!"





CHAPTER EIGHT - DUCK - OR DIE!


Sergeant-major Koa's great frame loomed in front of Rip. "Think they've
spotted us, sir?"

Rip hated to say it. "Probably. Koa, can you estimate from the exhaust how
far away they are?"

"Not very well, Lieutenant. From the position of the streak, I'd say
they're decelerating."

The Planeteers looked at Rip. He was in command, and they expected him to
do something about the situation. Rip didn't know what to do. The rocket
launcher, their only weapon, wasn't designed for fighting spaceships. It
was useful against snapper-boats and people, but firing at a cruiser would
be like sending mosquitoes to fight elephants.

He sized up their position. For one thing, they were right out in the
open, exposed to anything the Connie cruiser might throw at them. If they
could get under cover, there might be a chance. It would at least take the
Connies a while to find them.

For a moment he thought of hurrying into the landing boat and sending out
a call for help to the _Scorpius_, but he thought better of it. They
weren't certain that Connie had spotted them. He would wait until there
was no doubt. Meanwhile, they had to find cover.

His searching eyes fell on the cutting torch. If they could use that to
cut themselves right into the asteroid ... suddenly he knew how it could
be done. On the sun side he remembered a series of high-piled, giant
crystals of thorium. They could cut into the side of one of those. And
with Kemp's skill, they might be able to do it in time.

He called, "Kemp! Koa, bring the torch and fuel and follow me."

In his haste he took a misstep and flew headlong a few feet above the
metal surface. Koa, gliding along behind him, turned him upright again. He
saw that the giant Hawaiian was grinning. Rip grinned back. It was the
second time he had lost his footing.

They reached the peaks of thorium and Rip looked them over. The tallest
was perhaps 40 feet high. It was roughly pyramidal, with a base about 60
feet thick. It would do.

"Kemp." The private hurried to his side. "Take the torch and make us a
cave. Make it big enough for all hands and the equipment."

Kemp was a good Planeteer. He didn't stop to ask questions. He said, "I'll
make a small entrance and open the cave out inside." He picked up the
torch and got busy.

Rip smiled. The Planeteer was right. He should have thought of it himself,
but it was good to see increasing proof that his men were smart as well as
tough and disciplined.

"Bring up all supplies," he told Koa. "Move the boat over here, too. We
won't be able to bury that, but we want it close by." He had an idea for
the landing boat. It could maneuver infinitely faster than the big
cruiser. They could put the supplies in the cave, then take to the boat,
depending on its ability to turn quickly and on Dowst's skill at piloting
to play hide and seek. Dowst certainly could keep the asteroid between
them and the cruiser.

The plan would fail when the cruiser sent a landing party. They would
certainly come in snapper-boats, and the deadly little fighting craft
could blast rings around the landing boat. The snapper-boats had gotten
their name because fast acceleration and quick changes of position could
snap a man right out of his seat, if he forgot to buckle his harness
tightly.

The solution would be to keep the landing boat close to the asteroid. At
the first sign of a landing party, they would blast in and take to the
cave, using the rocket launcher as a defense.

The supplies began to arrive. The Planeteers towed them two crates at a
time in a steady line of hurrying men.

Kemp's torch sent an incandescent knife three feet into the metal at each
cut. He was rapidly slicing out a cave. He cut the metal out in great
triangular bars, angling the torch from first one side, then the other.

Koa came and stood beside Rip. "I haven't seen the Connie's exhaust for a
while, sir. Looks like they've stopped decelerating. We can't see them at
all."

"Meaning what?" Rip asked. He thought he knew, but he wanted Koa's
opinion.

"They're in free fall now, sir. That could mean they're just hunting in
the area. Or it could mean, that they've stopped somewhere close by. They
could be looking us over, for all we know."

Rip surveyed the stars. "If that's so, they're not too close, Koa.
Otherwise they'd block out a patch of stars."

"Well, sir--" Koa hesitated. "I mean, if you were looking over this
asteroid and you weren't sure whether the enemy had it or not, how close
would you get?"

"Probably about one AU," Rip said jokingly. That was one astronomical
unit, equal to about 93 million miles, the distance from earth to the sun.

"That would be a good, safe distance, sir," Koa agreed with a grin.

"But let's suppose the Connie isn't as timid as I am," Rip went on. "He
might be only a few miles out. The question is, would he wait to get
closer before launching his snapper-boats?"

The big Hawaiian answered frankly, "I've never been in a spacegrab like
this before. I don't know what the answer is."

       [Illustration: "That Connie Cruiser's Not Too Close, Koa."]

               "That Connie Cruiser's Not Too Close, Koa."


"We'll soon know," Rip replied grimly. A thought had just struck him. The
_Scorpius_ had trouble finding the asteroid because it was just one of
many sailing along through the belt. But now the asteroid was the only one
traveling _across_ the belt. It would make an outstanding blip on any
radar 'scope. It wasn't possible that the Connie cruiser had missed the
blip and its significance.

"The Connie may be looking us over," Rip added, "but I can tell you one
thing for sure. He knows we've taken the asteroid." Only human hands could
swerve a heavenly body from its orbit.

Koa looked wistfully at the atomic bomb which remained. "If we had a way
to throw that thing at them...."

"But we haven't. And the thing wouldn't explode anyway. We don't have the
outside casing with an exploder mechanism, so it has to be turned on
electrically." Rip could see no way to use the atomic bomb against the
Connies. It was too big for use against a landing party. Besides, it would
put the Planeteers in danger.

"Ever have trouble with the Connies before?" he asked Koa.

"More'n once, sir. Sometimes it seems like I'll never get a job where I
don't have to fight Connies."

Rip was trained in science and Planeteer techniques and he didn't pretend
to know the ins and outs of interplanetary politics. Just the same, he
couldn't help wondering about the strange relationship between the
Consolidation of People's Governments and the Federation of Free Nations.

Connies and Feds, mostly Planeteers but sometimes spacemen, were
constantly skirmishing. They fought over property, over control of ports
on distant planets and moons, and over space salvage. Often there was
bloodshed. Sometimes there were pitched battles between groups of platoon
size.

But at that point, the struggle ended. The law of the Federation said that
no spaceship could fire on a Connie spaceship, or on Connie land bases,
except with special permission of the Space Council. The theory was that
small struggles between men, or even between small fighting craft like the
snapper-boats, was not war. But firing on a spaceship was war, and the
first such act could mean starting war throughout the Solar System.

It made a sort of sense to Rip when he thought about it. Little fights
here and there were better than a full war among the planets.

Koa suddenly gripped his arm. "Sir! Look up!"

The short hairs on the back of Rip's neck prickled. Far above, blackness
blotted out stars in the shape of a spaceship. The Connie had arrived!

Rip ordered urgently, "Kemp! Stop cutting. The rest of you get the stuff
under cover. Ram it!" He hurried to lend a hand himself, hustling crates
into the cave.

Kemp had made astonishing progress. There was room for the crates, if
stacked properly, and for the men besides. Rip supervised the stacking,
then the placement of the rocket launcher at the entrance.

"All hands inside the boat," he ordered. "Dowst, be ready to take off at a
moment's notice. You'll have to buck this box around like never before."
He explained to the pilot his plan to dodge, keeping the asteroid between
the boat and the cruiser.

"We'll make it, sir," Dowst said.

"I'm not worried," Rip replied, and wished it were true. He looked up at
the Connie again. It was getting larger. The cruiser was within a few
miles of the asteroid.

As Rip watched, fire spurted from the cruiser and it moved with gathering
speed toward the asteroid's horizon. He watched the exhaust trail,
wondering why the Connie had blasted off.

"He has something up his sleeve," Koa muttered. "Wish we knew what."

"Let's take no chances," Rip stated. "Come on."

The men were already in the boat. He and Koa joined them. They stood at a
window, watching the Connie's trail.

The trail dwindled. Koa said, "Something's up!" Suddenly new fire shot
from one side of the cruiser and it spun. Balancing fire came from the
other side, and for an instant the three exhausts formed a cross with the
darkness of the Connie's hull in the center. Then they could see only the
exhausts from the sides. The stern flame was out of sight.

"He's made a full turn to come back this way," Rip stated tensely. "Dowst,
get ready."

The Connie was perhaps 20 miles away. It grew larger, and the side jets
winked out. A few seconds later fire spurted from the nose.

Rip figured rapidly. The cruiser had gone away far enough to make a turn.
It had straightened out, heading right for them. Now the nose tube was
blasting, slowing the cruiser down.

He sighted, holding out one glove and gauging the Connie's distance above
the horizon, and his heart speeded. The Connie was right on the horizon!

"Ram it!" Rip called. "Around the asteroid. Quick!"

Acceleration jammed him back against his men as Dowst blasted. No sooner
had he recovered than acceleration in a different direction shoved him up
to the ceiling so hard that his bubble rang. He clawed his way to the
window as the Connie cruiser flashed by, bathing the asteroid in glowing
flame.

There was a chorus of gasps from the men, as they saw the thing Rip had
realized a moment before. The Consops cruiser was playing it safe, using
its rocket exhaust as a great blowtorch to burn the surface of the
asteroid clean!

The sheer inhumanity of the thing made Rip's stomach tighten into a knot.
No asking for surrender, no taking of prisoners. Not even a clean fight.
The Connie was doing its arguing with fire, knowing that the exhaust would
char every man on the asteroid's surface.

The Planeteers watched as the Connie sped away, blasted with its side jets
and turned to come back. Dowst tensed over the controls, trying to
anticipate the next move. He touched the firing levers delicately, letting
out just enough flame to maneuver. He slid the craft over the asteroid's
surface to the side away from the Connie, going slowly enough so they
could watch the enemy's every move.

"Here he comes," Rip snapped, and braced for acceleration. The landing
craft shot to safety as the cruiser's nose jet flamed. Dowst was just in
time. Tiny sparks from the edge of the fiery column brushed past the boat.

Rip realized that the Connie couldn't know the Federation men were in a
boat, dodging. The cruiser would make about two more runs, just enough to
allow for hitting every bit of the asteroid. Then it would assume that
anything on it was finished and send a landing party.

"He'll be back," he stated. "About twice more. Three at most." He suddenly
remembered the landing boat radio. "Dowst, where is the radio connection?"

The pilot handed him a wire with a jack plug on the end of it. Rip plugged
it into his belt. Now his voice would be heard on the _Scorpius_.

"Calling _Scorpius_! Calling _Scorpius_! Foster reporting. We are under
attack. Repeat, we are under attack. Over to you."

The answer rang in his helmet. "_Scorpius_ to Foster. Hold 'em,
Planeteers. We're on our way!"

"Here comes the Connie," Koa yelled.

Rip braced. The landing boat shot forward, then piled the Planeteers in a
heap on the bottom as Dowst accelerated upward.

There was a sudden wrenching crash that sent the Planeteers in a jumbled
mass into the front of the boat. It whirled crazily, then stopped.

Rip was not hurt. He shoved at someone whose bubble was in his stomach and
cleared the way. "Turn on belt lights," he called. "Quick!"

Lights flared on. He searched quickly, swinging his light. The Planeteers
were getting to their feet. His light focused on Private Bradshaw and he
gasped.

Bradshaw's face was scarlet, and his skin was flecked with drops of blood.
His eyes were closed, and bulging terribly.

Rip jumped forward, but big Koa was even faster. The Hawaiian jerked a
repair strip from a belt pouch, slapped it on the crack in Bradshaw's
bubble.

Rip wasted no time, either. By the time Koa had the strip in place he had
