"Why should the Gone Ones want to return to this poor world that they
have gladly left?" he asked. "Have they not a better place in the middle
of the Sky Fire, where it is always cool? And why should you want them
to come back to this world? Will not each one of you pass, sooner or
later, to the middle of the Sky Fire; will you not there be given new
bodies and join the Gone Ones? There is the Always-Cool; there the crops
grow without planting and without the work of women; there the game come
into the villages to be killed in the gathering-places, without hunting.
There you will talk with the other Gone Ones, your fathers and your
fathers' fathers, as I talk with you. Why do you think this must come to
the World of People? Can you not wait to join the Gone Ones in the Sky
Fire?"

Then he sat down and folded his arms. They were looking at him in
amazement; evidently they all saw the logic, but none of them had ever
thought of it before. Now they would have to turn it over in their minds
and accustom themselves to the new viewpoint. They began whooshing among
themselves. At length, old Shatresh, who had seen the Hot Time before,
spoke:

"Mailsh Heelbare, we trust you," he said. "You have told us of wonders,
and you have shown us that they were real. But do you know this for
real?"

"Do you tell me that you do not?" he demanded in surprise. "You have had
fathers, and fathers' fathers. They have gone to join the Gone Ones. Why
should you not, also? And why should the Gone Ones come back and destroy
the World of People? Then your children will have no more children, and
your children's children will never be. It is in the World of People
that the People are born; it is in the World that they grow and gain
wisdom to fit themselves to live in the Place of the Gone Ones when they
are through with the bodies they use in the World. You should be happy
that there will be no Last Hot Time, and that the line of your
begettings will go on and not be cut short."

There were murmurs of agreement with this. Most of them were beginning
to be relieved that there wouldn't be a Last Hot Time, after all. Then
one of the class asked:

"Do the Terrans also go to the Place of the Gone Ones, or have they a
place of their own?"

He was silent for a long time, looking down at the floor. Then he raised
his head.

"I had hoped that I would not have to speak of this," he said. "But,
since you have asked, it is right that I should tell you." He hesitated
again, until the Kwanns in front of him had begun to fidget. Then he
asked old Shatresh: "Speak of the beliefs of the People about how the
World was made."

"The great Spirit made the world." He held up his carven obscenity. "He
made the World out of himself. This is a make-like to show it."

"The Great Spirit made many worlds. The stars which you see in dark-time
are all worlds, each with many smaller worlds around it. The Great
Spirit made them all at one time, and made people on many of them. The
Great Spirit made the World of People, and made the Always-Same and the
Sky Fire, and inside the Sky Fire he made the Place of the Gone Ones.
And when he made the Place of the Gone Ones, he put an Oomphel-Mother
inside it, to bring forth oomphel."


This created a brief sensation. An Oomphel-Mother was something they had
never thought of before, but now they were wondering why they hadn't. Of
course there'd be an Oomphel-Mother; how else would there be oomphel?

"The World of the Terrans is far away from the World of People, as we
have always told you. When the Great Spirit made it He gave it only an
Always-Same, and no Sky Fire. Since there was no Sky Fire, there was no
place to put a Place of the Gone Ones, so the Great Spirit made the
Terrans so that they would not die, but live forever in their own
bodies. The Oomphel-Mother for the World of the Terrans the Great Spirit
hid in a cave under a great mountain.

"The Terrans whom the Great Spirit made lived for a long time, and then,
one day, a man and a woman found a crack in a rock, and went inside, and
they found the cave of the Oomphel-Mother, and the Oomphel-Mother in it.
So they called all the other Terrans, and they brought the
Oomphel-Mother out, and the Oomphel-Mother began to bring forth Oomphel.
The Oomphel-Mother brought forth metal, and cloth, and glass, and
plastic; knives, and axes and guns and clothing--" He went on,
cataloguing the products of human technology, the shoonoon staring more
and more wide-eyed at him. "And oomphel to make oomphel, and oomphel to
teach wisdom," he finished. "They became very wise and very rich.

"Then the Great Spirit saw what the Terrans had done, and became angry,
for it was not meant for the Terrans to do this, and the Great Spirit
cursed the Terrans with a curse of death. It was not death as you know
it. Because the Terrans had sinned by laying hands on the
Oomphel-Mother, not only their bodies must die, but their spirits also.
A Terran has a short life in the body, after that no life."

"This, then, is the Oomphel Secret. The last skin of the fooshkoot has
been peeled away; behold the bitter nut, upon which we Terrans have
chewed for more time than anybody can count. Happy people! When you die
or are slain, you go to the Place of the Gone Ones, to join your fathers
and your fathers' fathers and to await your children and children's
children. When we die or are slain, that is the end of us."

[Illustration]

"But you have brought your oomphel into this world; have you not brought
the curse with it?" somebody asked, frightened.

"No. The People did not sin against the Great Spirit; they have not laid
hands on an Oomphel-Mother as we did. The oomphel we bring you will do
no harm; do you think we would be so wicked as to bring the curse upon
you? It will be good for you to learn about oomphel here; in your Place
of the Gone Ones there is much oomphel."

"Why did your people come to this world, Mailsh Heelbare?" old Shatresh
asked. "Was it to try to hide from the curse?"

"There is no hiding from the curse of the Great Spirit, but we Terrans
are not a people who submit without strife to any fate. From the time of
the Curse of Death on, we have been trying to make spirits for
ourselves."

"But how can you do that?"

"We do not know. The oomphel will not teach us that, though it teaches
everything else. We have only learned many ways in which it cannot be
done. It cannot be done with oomphel, or with anything that is in our
own world. But the Oomphel-Mother made us ships to go to other worlds,
and we have gone to many of them, this one among them, seeking things
from which we try to make spirits. We are trying to make spirits for
ourselves from the crystals that grow in the klooba plants; we may fail
with them, too. But I say this; I may die, and all the other Terrans now
living may die, and be as though they had never been, but someday we
will not fail. Someday our children, or our children's children, will
make spirits for themselves and live forever, as you do."

[Illustration]

"Why were we not told this before, Mailsh Heelbare?"

"We were ashamed to have you know it. We are ashamed to be people
without spirits."

"Can we help you and your people? Maybe our magic might help."

"It well might. It would be worth trying. But first, you must help
yourselves. You and your people are sinning against the Great Spirit as
grievously as did the Terrans of old. Be warned in time, lest you answer
it as grievously."

"What do you mean, Mailsh Heelbare?" Old Shatresh was frightened.

"You are making magic to bring the Sky Fire to the World. Do you know
what will happen? The World of People will pass whole into the place of
the Gone Ones, and both will be destroyed. The World of People is a
world of death; everything that lives on it must die. The Place of the
Gone Ones is a world of life; everything in it lives forever. The two
will strive against each other, and will destroy one another, and there
will be nothing in the Sky Fire or the World but fire. This is wisdom
which our oomphel teaches us. We know this secret, and with it we make
weapons of great destruction." He looked over the seated shoonoon,
picking out those who wore the flame-colored cloaks of the fire-dance.
"You--and you--and you," he said. "You have been making this dreadful
magic, and leading your people in it. And which among the rest of you
have not been guilty?"

"We did not know," one of them said. "Mailsh Heelbare, have we yet time
to keep this from happening?"

"Yes. There is only a little time, but there is time. You have until
the Always-Same passes across the face of the Sky-Fire." That would be
seven hundred and fifty hours. "If this happens, all is safe. If the Sky
Fire blots Out the Always Same, we are all lost together. You must go
among your people and tell them what madness they are doing, and command
them to stop. You must command them to lay down their arms and cease
fighting. And you must tell them of the awful curse that was put upon
the Terrans in the long-ago time, for a lesser sin than they are now
committing."

"If we say that Mailsh Heelbare told us this, the people may not believe
us. He is not known to all, and some would take no Terran's word, not
even his."

"Would anybody tell a secret of this sort, about his own people, if it
were not real?"

"We had better say nothing about Mailsh Heelbare. We will say that the
Gone Ones told us in dreams."

"Let us say that the Great Spirit sent a dream of warning to each of
us," another shoonoo said. "There has been too much talk about dreams
from the Gone Ones already."

"But the Great Spirit has never sent a dream--"

"Nothing like this has ever happened before, either."

He rose, and they were silent. "Go to your living-place, now," he told
them. "Talk of how best you may warn your people." He pointed to the
clock. "You have an oomphel like that in your living-place; when the
shorter spear has moved three places, I will speak with you again, and
then you will be sent in air cars to your people to speak to them."

They went up the escalator and down the hall to Miles' office on the
third floor without talking. Foxx Travis was singing softly, almost
inaudibly:

    _"You will eeeeat ... in the sweeeet ... bye-and-bye,
    You'll get oooom ... phel in the sky ... when you die!"_

Inside, Edith Shaw slumped dispiritedly in a chair. Foxx Travis went to
the coffee-maker and started it. Miles snapped on the communication
screen and punched the combination of General Maith's headquarters. As
soon as the uniformed girl who appeared in it saw him, her hands moved
quickly; the screen flickered, and the general appeared in it.

"We have it made, general. They're sold; we're ready to start them out
in three hours."

Maith's thin, weary face suddenly lighted. "You mean they are going to
co-operate?"

He shook his head. "They think they're saving the world; they think
we're co-operating with them."

The general laughed. "That's even better! How do you want them sent
out?"

"The ones in the Bluelake area first. Better have some picked K.N.I. in
native costume, with pistols, to go with them. They'll need protection,
till they're able to get a hearing for themselves. After they're all
out, the ones from Gonzales' area can be started." He thought for a
moment. "I'll want four or five of them left here to help me when you
start bringing more shoonoon in from other areas. How soon do you think
you'll have another class for me?"

"Two or three days, if everything goes all right. We have the villages
and plantations in the south under pretty tight control now; we can
start gathering them up right away. As soon as we get things stabilized
here, we can send reinforcements to the north. We'll have transport for
you in three hours."

The general blanked out. He turned from the screen. Travis was laughing
happily.

"Miles, did anybody ever tell you you were a genius?" he asked. "That
