
IX


Below the ship lay the unfamiliar panorama of an unknown world that
circled, frozen, around a dim, unknown sun, far out in space. Cold and
bleak, the low, rolling hills below were black, bare rock, coated in
spots with a white sheen of what appeared to be snow, though each of the
men realized it must be frozen air. Here and there ran strange rivers
of deep blue which poured into great lakes and seas of blue liquid.
There were mighty mountains of deep blue crystal looming high, and in
the hollows and cracks of these crystal mountains lay silent, motionless
seas of deep blue, unruffled by any breeze in this airless world. It was
a world that lay frozen under a dim, dead sun.

They continued over the broad sweep of the level, crystalline plain as
the bleak rock disappeared behind them. This world was about ten
thousand miles in diameter, and its surface gravity about a quarter
greater than that of Earth.

On and on they swept, swinging over the planet at an altitude of less
than a thousand feet, viewing the unutterably desolate scene of the
cold, dead world.

Then, ahead of them loomed a bleak, dark mass of rock again. They had
crossed the frozen ocean and were coming to land again--a land no more
solid than the sea.

Everywhere lay the deep drifts of snow, and here and there, through
valleys, ran the streams of bright blue.

"Look!" cried Morey in sudden surprise. Far ahead and to their left
loomed a strange formation of jutting vertical columns, covered with the
white burden of snow. Arcot turned a powerful searchlight on it, and it
stood out brightly against the vast snowfield. It was a dead, frozen
city.

As they looked at it, Arcot turned the ship and headed for it without a
word.

It was hard to realize the enormity of the catastrophe that had brought
a cold, bleak death to the population of this world--death to an
intelligent race.

Arcot finally spoke. "I'll land the ship. I think it will be safe for us
all to leave. Get out the suits and make sure all the tanks are charged
and the heaters working. It will be colder here than in space. Out
there, we were only cooled by radiation, but those streams are probably
liquid nitrogen, oxygen, and argon, and there's a slight atmosphere of
hydrogen, helium and neon cooled to about fifty degrees Absolute. We'll
be cooled by conduction and convection."

As the others got the suits ready, he lowered the ship gently to the
snowy ground. It sank into nearly ten feet of snow. He turned on the
powerful searchlight, and swept it around the ship. Under the warm
beams, the frozen gasses evaporated, and in a few moments he had cleared
the area around the ship.

Morey and the others came back with their suits. Arcot donned his, and
adjusted his weight to ten pounds with the molecular power unit.

A short time later, they stepped out of the airlock onto the ice field
of the frozen world. High above them glowed the dim, blue-white disc of
the tiny sun, looking like little more than a bright star.

Adjusting the controls on the suits, the four men lifted into the
tenuous air and headed toward the city, moving easily about ten feet
above the frozen wastes of the snow field.

"The thing I don't understand," Morey said as they shot toward the city,
"is why this planet is here at all. The intense radiation from the sun
when it went supernova should have vaporized it!"

Arcot pointed toward a tall, oddly-shaped antenna that rose from the
highest building of the city. "There's your answer. That antenna is
similar to those we found on the planets of the Black Star; it's a heat
screen. They probably had such antennas all over the planet.

"Unfortunately, the screen's efficiency goes up as the fourth power of
the temperature. It could keep out the terrific heat of a supernova, but
couldn't keep in the heat of the planet after the supernova had died.
The planet was too cool to make the screen work efficiently!"

At last they came to the outskirts of the dead city. The vertical walls
of the buildings were free of snow, and they could see the blank,
staring eyes of the windows, and within, the bleak, empty rooms. They
swept on through the frozen streets until they came to one huge building
in the center. The doors of bronze had been closed, and through the
windows they could see that the room had been piled high with some sort
of insulating material, evidently used as a last-ditch attempt to keep
out the freezing cold.

"Shall we break in?" asked Arcot.

"We may as well," Morey's voice answered over the radio. "There may be
some records we could take back to Earth and have deciphered. In a time
like this, I imagine they would leave some records, hoping that some
race _might_ come and find them."

They worked with molecular ray pistols for fifteen minutes tearing a way
through. It was slow work because they had to use the heat ray pistols
to supply the necessary energy for the molecular motion.

When they finally broke through, they found they had entered on the
second floor; the deep snow had buried the first. Before them stretched
a long, richly decorated hall, painted with great colored murals.

The paintings displayed a people dressed in a suit of some soft, white
cloth, with blond hair that reached to their shoulders. They were
shorter and more heavily built than Earthmen, perhaps, but there was a
grace to them that denied the greater gravity of their planet. The
murals portrayed a world of warm sunlight, green plants, and tall trees
waving in a breeze--a breeze of air that now lay frozen on the stone
floors of their buildings.

Scene after scene they saw--then they came to a great hall. Here they
saw hundreds of bodies; people wrapped in heavy cloth blankets. And over
the floor of the room lay little crystals of green.

Wade looked at the little crystals for a long time, and then at the
people who lay there, perfectly preserved by the utter cold. They seemed
only sleeping--men, women, and children, sleeping under a blanket of
soft snow that evaporated and disappeared as the energy of the lights
fell on it. There was one little group the men looked at before they
left the room of death. There were three in it--a young man, a fair,
blonde young woman who seemed scarcely more than a girl, and between
them, a little child. They were sleeping, arms about each other, warm in
the arms of Death, the kindly Reliever of Pain.

Arcot turned and rose, flying swiftly down the long corridor toward the
door.

"That was not meant for us," he said. "Let's leave."

The others followed.

"But let's see what records they left," he went on. "It may be that they
wanted us to know their tragic story. Let's see what sort of
civilization they had."

"Their chemistry was good, at least," said Wade. "Did you notice those
green crystals? A quick, painless poison gas to relieve them of the
struggle against the cold."

They went down to the first floor level, where there was a single great
court. There were no pillars, only a vast, smooth floor.

"They had good architecture," said Morey. "No pillars under all the vast
load of that building."

"And the load is even greater under this gravity," remarked Arcot.

In the center of the room was a great, golden bronze globe resting on a
platform of marble. It must have been new when this world froze, for
there was no sign of corrosion or oxidation. The men flew over to it and
stood beside it, looking at the great sphere, nearly fifteen feet in
diameter.

"A globe of their world," said Fuller, looking at it with interest.

"Yes," agreed Arcot, "and it was set up after they were sure the cold
would come, from the looks of it. Let's take a look at it." He flew up
to the top of it and viewed it from above. The whole globe was a
carefully chiseled relief map, showing seas, mountains, and continents.

"Arcot--come here a minute," called Morey. Arcot dropped down to where
Morey was looking at the globe. On the edge of one of the continents was
a small raised globe, and around the globe, a circle had been etched.

"I think this is meant to represent this globe," Morey said. "I'm almost
certain it represents this very spot. Now look over here." He pointed to
a spot which, according to the scale of the globe, was about five
thousand miles away. Projecting from the surface of the bronze globe
was a little silver tower.

"They want us to go there," continued Morey. "This was erected only
shortly before the catastrophe; they must have put relics there that
they want us to get. They must have guessed that eventually intelligent
beings would cross space; I imagine they have other maps like this in
every large city.

"I think it's our duty to visit that cairn."

"I quite agree," assented Arcot. "The chance of other men visiting this
world is infinitely small."

"Then let's leave this City of the Dead!" said Wade.

It gave them a sense of depression greater than that inspired by the
vast loneliness of space. One is never so lonely as when he is with the
dead, and the men began to realize that the original _Ancient Mariner_
had been more lonely with strange companions than they had been in the
depths of ten million light years of space.

They went back to the ship, floating through the last remnants of this
world's atmosphere, back through the chill of the frozen gases to the
cheering, warm interior of the ship.

It was a contrast that made each of them appreciate more fully the gift
that a hot, blazing sun really is. Perhaps that was what made Fuller
ask: "If this happened to a star so much like our sun, why couldn't it
happen to Sol?"

"Perhaps it may," said Morey softly. "But the eternal optimism of man
keeps us saying: 'It can't happen here.' And besides--" He put a hand on
the wall of the ship, "--we don't ever have to worry about anything like
that now. Not with ships like this to take us to a new sun--a new
planet."

Arcot lifted the ship and flew over the cold, frozen ground beneath
them, following the route indicated on the great globe in the dead city.
Mile after mile of frozen ice fields flew by as they shot over it at
three miles per second.

Suddenly, the bleak bulk of a huge mountain loomed gigantic before them.
Arcot reversed the power and brought the ship to a stop. With the
powerful searchlight, he swept the area, looking for the tower he knew
should be here. At last, he made it out, a pyramid rather than a tower,
and coated over with ice. They soon thawed out the frozen gasses by
playing the energy of three powerful searchlights upon them, and in a
few minutes the glint of gold showed through the melting ice and show.

"It looks," said Wade, "as though they have an outer wall of gold over a
strong wall of iron or steel to protect it from corrosion. Certainly
gold doesn't have enough tensile strength to hold itself up under this
gravity--not in such masses as that."

Arcot brought the ship down beside the tower and the men once more went
out through the airlock into the cold of the almost airless world. They
flew across to the pyramid and looked for some means of entrance. In
several places, they noticed hieroglyphics carved in great, foot-high
characters. They searched in vain for a door until they noticed that the
pyramid was not perfect, but truncated, leaving a flat area on top. The
only joint in the walls seemed to be there, but there was no handle or
visible methods of opening the door.

Arcot turned his powerful light on the surface and searched carefully
for some opening device. He found a bas-relief engraving of a hand
pointing to a corner of the door. He looked more closely and found a
small jewel-like lens set in the metal.

Suddenly the men felt a vibration! There was a heavy click, and the door
panel began to drop slowly.

"Get on it!" Arcot cried. "We can always break our way out if we're
trapped!"

The four men leaped on it and sank slowly with it. The massive walls of
the tower were nearly five feet thick, and made of some tough, white
metal.

"Pure iron!" diagnosed Wade. "Or perhaps a silicon-iron alloy. Not as
strong as steel, but very resistant to corrosion."

When the elevator stopped, they found themselves in a great chamber that
was obviously a museum of the lost race. All around the walls were
arranged models, books, and diagrams.

"We can never hope to take all this in our ship!" said Arcot, looking at
the great collection. "Look--there's an old winged airplane! And a steam
engine--and that's an electric motor! And that thing looks like some
kind of an electric battery."

"But we can't take all that stuff," objected Fuller.

"No," Morey agreed. "I think our best bet would be to take all the books
we can--making sure we get the introductory ones, so we can read the
language.

"See--over there--they have marked those shelves with a single vertical
mark. The ones next to them have two vertical marks, and next ones
three. I suggest we load up with those books and take them to the ship."

The rest agreed, and they began carrying armloads of books, flying out
through the top of the pyramid to the ship and back for more.

Instead of flying back to the pyramid for the last load, Arcot announced
that he was going to leave a note for anyone who might come here later.
While the others went back for the last load, he worked at drawing the
"note".

"Let's see your masterpiece," said Morey as the three men returned to
the ship with the last of the books.

Arcot had used a piece of tough, heavy plastic which would resist any
corrosion the cold, almost airless world might have to offer.

Near the top, he had drawn a representation of their ship, and beneath
it a representation of the route they had taken from universe to
universe. The galaxy they were in was represented by a cloud of gas, its
main identifying feature. Underneath the dotted line of their route
through space, he had printed "200,000,000,000, _u_".

Then followed a little table. The numeral "1" followed by a straight
bar, then "2" followed by two bars, and so on up to ten. Ten was
represented by ten bars and, in addition, an S-shaped sign. Twenty was
next, followed by twenty bars and two S-shaped signs. Thus he had
worked up to "100".

The system he used would make it clear to any reasoning creature that he
had used a decimal system and that the zeroes meant ten times.

Next below, he had drawn the planetary system of the frozen world, and
the distance from the planet they were on to the central sun he labeled
"_u_". Thus, the finders could reason that they had come a distance of
two hundred billion units, where a distance of three hundred million
miles was taken as the unit; they had, then, come from another galaxy.
Certainly any creature with enough intelligence to reach this frozen
world would understand this!

"Since the year of this planet is approximately eight times our own,"
Arcot continued, "I am indicating that we came here approximately five
hundred years after the catastrophe." He pointed at several of the other
drawings.

They left the message in the tower, and Arcot closed the door, leaving
the pyramid exactly as it had been before they had come.

"Say!" Morey commented, "how did you open and close that door, anyway?"

Arcot grinned. "Didn't you notice the jewel at the corner? It was the
lens of a photoelectric cell. My flashlight opened the door. I didn't
figure it out; it just worked accidentally."

Morey raised an eyebrow. "But if the darned thing is so simple, any
creature, intelligent or not, might be able to get in and destroy the
records!"

Arcot looked at him. "And where are your savages going to come from?
There are none on this planet, and anyone intelligent enough to build a
spaceship isn't going to destroy the contents of the tower."

"Oh." Morey looked a little sheepish.

They went into the airlock and took off their suits. Then they began
packing the precious books in specimen cases that had been brought for
the purpose of preserving such things.

When the last of them was carefully stowed, they returned to the
control room. They looked silently out across this strange, dead world,
thinking how much it must have been like Earth. It was dead now, and
frozen forever. The low hills that stretched out beneath them were dimly
lighted by the weak rays of a shrunken sun. Three hundred million miles
away, it glowed so weakly that this world received only a little more
heat than it might have received from a small coal fire a mile away.

So weakly it flared that in this thin atmosphere of hydrogen and helium,
its little corona glowed about it plainly, and even the stars around it
shone brilliantly. The men could see one constellation that grouped
itself in the outlines of a dragon, with the sun of this system as its
cold, baleful eye.

Gradually, Arcot lifted the ship, and, as they headed out into space,
they could see the dim frozen plains fall behind. It was as if a load of
oppressing loneliness parted from them as they flew out into the vast
spaces of the eternal stars.




X


Arcot looked speculatively at the star field in the great broad window
before him. "We'll want to find another G-0 sun, naturally, but I don't
think we ought to go directly from here. If we did, we'd have to do a
lot of backtracking to get back to this dead star. I suggest we go back
to the edge of this galaxy, taking pictures on the way out, so that any
future investigators can come in directly. It'll only take a few hours."

"I think you're right," agreed Morey. "Besides, that will give us a
wider choice of stars to pick our next G-0 from. Let's get going."

Arcot moved the red switch, and the ship shot away at half speed. They
watched the green image of the white dwarf fade and then suddenly flare
up and become bright again as they outraced the light that had left it
five centuries before.

They stopped and took more photographs so that the path could be marked.
They stopped every light century until they reached a point where the
star was merely a dim point, almost lost in the myriad of stars around
it.

Then out to the edge of the galaxy they went, out toward their own
universe.

"Arcot," Morey called, "let's go out, say one million light years into
space, at an angle to this galaxy, and see if we can get both galaxies
on one plate. It will make navigation between them easier."

"Good idea. We can get out and back in one day--and this 'time' won't
count back on Earth, anyway." Since they would travel in the
space-strain all the time, it would not count as Earth time.

Arcot pushed the red control all the way forward, and the ship began to
move at its top velocity of twenty-four light years per second. The
hours dragged heavily, as they had when they were coming in, and Arcot
remained alone on watch while the others went to their rooms for some
sleep, strapping their weightless bodies securely in the bunks.

It was hours later when Morey awoke with a sudden premonition of
trouble. He looked at the chronometer on the wall--he had slept twelve
hours! They had gone beyond the million light year mark! It didn't
matter, except it showed that something had happened to Arcot.

