"That's so," said the Banker, looking relieved. "I never thought of
that."

"One of us should stay at least," said the Doctor. "We cannot take any
outsider into our confidence. One of us must watch the others go, and
then take the ring back to its place in the Museum. We will be gone too
long a time for one person to watch it here."

The Very Young Man suddenly went to one of the doors and locked it.

"We don't want any one coming in," he explained as he crossed the room
and locked the others.

"And another thing," he went on, coming back to the table. "When I saw
the ring at the Biological Society the other day, I happened to think,
suppose Rogers was to come out on the underneath side? It was lying
flat, you know, just as it is now." He pointed to where the ring lay on
the handkerchief before them. "I meant to speak to you about it," he
added.

"I thought of that," said the Doctor. "When I had that case built to
bring the ring here, you notice I raised it above the bottom a little,
holding it suspended in that wire frame."

"We'd better fix up something like that at the Museum, too," said the
Very Young Man, and went back to his walk.

The Big Business Man had been busily jotting down figures on the back of
an envelope. "I can be in shape to go in three weeks," he said suddenly.

"Bully for you," said the Very Young Man. "Then it's all settled." The
Big Business Man went back to his notes.

"I knew what your answer would be," said the Doctor. "My patients can go
to the devil. This is too big a thing."

The Very Young Man picked up one of the tin boxes. "Tell us how you made
the powders," he suggested.

The Doctor took the two boxes and opened them. Inside each were a number
of tiny glass vials. Those in one box were of blue glass; those in the
other were red.

"These vials," said the Doctor, "contain tiny pellets of the completed
drug. That for diminishing size I have put in the red vials; those of
blue are the other drug.

"I had rather a difficult time making them--that is, compared to what I
anticipated. Most of the chemicals I bought without difficulty. But when
I came to compound those two myself"--the Doctor smiled--"I used to
think I was a fair chemist in my student days. But now--well, at least I
got the results, but only because I have been working almost night and
day for the past month. And I found myself with a remarkably complete
experimental laboratory when I finished," he added. "That was yesterday;
I spent nearly all last night destroying the apparatus, as soon as I
found that the drugs had been properly made."

"They do work?" said the Very Young Man anxiously.

"They work," answered the Doctor. "I tried them both very carefully."

"On yourself?" said the Big Business Man.

"No, I didn't think that necessary. I used several insects."

"Let's try them now," suggested the Very Young Man eagerly.

"Not the big one," said the Banker. "Once was enough for that."

"All right," the Doctor laughed. "We'll try the other if you like."

The Big Business Man looked around the room. "There's a few flies around
here if we can catch one," he suggested.

"I'll bet there's a cockroach in the kitchen," said the Very Young Man,
jumping up.

The Doctor took a brass check from his pocket. "I thought probably you'd
want to try them out. Will you get that box from the check-room?" He
handed the check to the Very Young Man, who hurried out of the room. He
returned in a moment, gingerly carrying a cardboard box with holes
perforated in the top. The Doctor took the box and lifted the lid
carefully. Inside, the box was partitioned into two compartments. In one
compartment were three little lizards about four inches long; in the
other were two brown sparrows. The Doctor took out one of the sparrows
and replaced the cover.

"Fine," said the Very Young Man with enthusiasm.

The Doctor reached for the boxes of chemicals.

"Not the big one," said the Banker again, apprehensively.

"Hold him, will you," the Doctor said.

The Very Young Man took the sparrow in his hands.

"Now," continued the Doctor, "what we need is a plate and a little
water."

"There's a tray," said the Very Young Man, pointing with his hands
holding the sparrow.

The Doctor took a spoon from the tray and put a little water in it. Then
he took one of the tiny pellets from a red vial and crushing it in his
fingers, sprinkled a few grains into that water.

"Hold that a moment, please." The Big Business Man took the proffered
spoon.

Then the Doctor produced from his pocket a magnifying glass and a tiny
pair of silver callipers such as are used by jewelers for handling small
objects.

"What's the idea?" the Very Young Man wanted to know.

"I thought I'd try and put him on the ring," explained the Doctor. "Now,
then hold open his beak."

The Very Young Man did so, and the Doctor poured the water down the
bird's throat. Most of it spilled; the sparrow twisted its head
violently, but evidently some of the liquid had gone down the bird's
throat.

Silence followed, broken after a moment by the scared voice of the Very
Young Man. "He's getting smaller, I can feel him. He's getting smaller."

"Hold on to him," cautioned the Doctor. "Bring him over here." They went
over to the table by the ring, the Banker and the Big Business Man
standing close beside them.

"Suppose he tries to fly when we let go of him," suggested the Very
Young Man almost in a whisper.

"He'll probably be too confused," answered the Doctor. "Have you got
him?" The sparrow was hardly bigger than a large horse-fly now, and the
Very Young Man was holding it between his thumb and forefinger.

"Better give him to me," said the Doctor. "Set him down."

"He might fly away," remonstrated the Very Young Man.

"No, he won't."

The Very Young Man put the sparrow on the handkerchief beside the ring
and the Doctor immediately picked it up with the callipers.

"Don't squeeze him," cautioned the Very Young Man.

The sparrow grew steadily smaller, and in a moment the Doctor set it
carefully on the rim of the ring.

"Get him up by the scratch," whispered the Very Young Man.

The men bent closer over the table, as the Doctor looking through his
magnifying glass shoved the sparrow slowly along the top of the ring.

"I can't see him," said the Banker.

"I can," said the Very Young Man, "right by the scratch." Then after a
moment, "he's gone."

"I've got him right over the scratch," said the Doctor, leaning farther
down. Then he raised his head and laid the magnifying glass and the
callipers on the table. "He's gone now."

"Gosh," said the Very Young Man, drawing a long breath.

The Banker flung himself into a chair as though exhausted from a great
physical effort.

"Well, it certainly does work," said the Big Business Man, "there's no
question about that."

The Very Young Man was shaking the cardboard box in his hands and
lifting its cover cautiously to see inside. "Let's try a lizard," he
suggested.

"Oh, what's the use," the Banker protested wearily, "we know it works."

"Well, it can't hurt anything to try it, can it?" the Very Young Man
urged. "Besides, the more we try it, the more sure we are it will work
with us when the time comes. You don't want to try it on yourself, now,
do you?" he added with a grin.

"No, thank you," retorted the Banker with emphasis.

"I think we might as well try it again," said the Big Business Man.

The Very Young Man took one of the tiny lizards from the box, and in a
moment they had dropped some water containing the drug down its throat.
"Try to put him on the scratch, too," said the Very Young Man.

When the lizard was small enough the Doctor held it with the callipers
and then laid it on the ring.

"Look at him walk; look at him walk," whispered the Very Young Man
excitedly. The lizard, hardly more than an eighth of an inch long now,
but still plainly visible, was wriggling along the top of the ring.
"Shove him up by the scratch," he added.

In a moment more the reptile was too small for any but the Doctor with
his glass to see. "I guess he got there," he said finally with a smile,
as he straightened up. "He was going fast."

"Well, _that's_ all right," said the Very Young Man with a sigh of
relief.

The four men again seated themselves; the Big Business Man went back to
his figures.

"When do you start?" asked the Banker after a moment.

"November 4th--8 P. M.," answered the Doctor. "Three weeks from
to-night."

"We've a lot to do," said the Banker.

"What will this cost, do you figure?" asked the Big Business Man,
looking up from his notes.

The Doctor considered a moment.

"We can't take much with us, you know," he said slowly. Then he
took a sheet of memoranda from his pockets. "I have already spent
for apparatus and chemicals to prepare the drugs"--he consulted his
figures--"seventeen hundred and forty dollars, total. What we have still
to spend will be very little, I should think. I propose we divide it
three ways as we have been doing with the Museum?"

"Four ways," said the Very Young Man. "I'm no kid any more. I got a good
job--that is," he added with a rueful air, "I had a good job. To-morrow
I quit."

"Four ways," the Doctor corrected himself gravely. "I guess we can
manage that."

"What can we take with us, do you think?" asked the Big Business Man.

"I think we should try strapping a belt around our waists, with pouches
in it," said the Doctor. "I doubt if it would contract with our bodies,
but still it might. If it didn't there would be no harm done; we could
leave it behind."

"You want food and water," said the Banker. "Remember that barren
country you are going through."

"And something on our feet," the Big Business Man put in.

"I'd like to take a revolver, too," said the Very Young Man. "It might
come in awful handy."

"As I remember Rogers's description," said the Doctor thoughtfully, "the
trip out is more difficult than going down. We mustn't overlook
preparations for that; it is most imperative we should be careful."

"Say, talking about getting back," burst out the Very Young Man. "I'd
like to see that other drug work first. It would be pretty rotten to get
in there and have it go back on us, wouldn't it? Oh, golly!" The Very
Young Man sank back in his chair overcome by the picture he had conjured
up.

"I tried it," said the Doctor. "It works."

"I'd like to see it again with something different," said the Big
Business Man. "It can't do any harm." The Banker looked his protest, but
said nothing.

"What shall we try, a lizard?" suggested the Very Young Man. The Doctor
shrugged his shoulders.

"What'll we kill it with? Oh, I know." The Very Young Man picked up a
heavy metal paper-weight from the desk. "This'll do the trick, fine," he
added.

Then, laying the paper-weight carefully aside, he dipped up a spoonful
of water and offered it to the Doctor.

"Not that water this time," said the Doctor, shaking his head with a
smile.

The Very Young Man looked blank.

"Organisms in it," the Doctor explained briefly. "All right for them to
get small from the other chemical, but we don't want them to get large
and come out at us, do we?"

"Holy Smoke, I should say not," said the Very Young Man, gasping; and
the Banker growled:

"Something's going to happen to us, playing with fire like this."

The Doctor produced a little bottle. "I boiled this water," he said. "We
can use this."

It took but a moment to give the other drug to one of the remaining
lizards, although they spilled more of the water than went down its
throat.

"Don't forget to hit him, and don't you wait very long," said the Banker
warningly, moving nearer the door.

"Oh, I'll hit him all right, don't worry," said the Very Young Man,
brandishing the paper-weight.

The Doctor knelt down, and held the reptile pinned to the floor; the
Very Young Man knelt beside him. Slowly the lizard began to increase in
size.

"He's growing," said the Banker. "Hit him, boy, what's the use of
waiting; he's growing."

The lizard was nearly a foot long now, and struggling violently between
the Doctor's fingers.

"You'd better kill him," said the Doctor, "he might get away from me."
The Very Young Man obediently brought his weapon down with a thump upon
the reptile's head.

"Keep on," said the Banker. "Be sure he's dead."

The Very Young Man pounded the quivering body for a moment. The Big
Business Man handed him a napkin from the tray and the Very Young Man
wrapped up the lizard and threw it into the waste-basket.

Then he rose to his feet and tossed the paper-weight on to the desk with
a crash.

"Well, gentlemen," he said, turning back to them with flushed face,
"those drugs sure do work. We're going into the ring all right, three
weeks from to-night, and nothing on earth can stop us."




CHAPTER XI

THE ESCAPE OF THE DRUG


For the next hour the four friends busily planned their preparations for
the journey. When they began to discuss the details of the trip, and
found themselves face to face with so hazardous an adventure, each
discovered a hundred things in his private life that needed attention.

The Doctor's phrase, "My patients can go to the devil," seemed to
relieve his mind of all further responsibility towards his personal
affairs.

"That's all very well for you," said the Big Business Man, "I've too
many irons in the fire just to drop everything--there are too many other
people concerned. And I've got to plan as though I were never coming
back, you know."

"Your troubles are easy," said the Very Young Man. "I've got a girl. I
wonder what she'll say. Oh, gosh, I can't tell her where I'm going, can
I? I never thought of that." He scratched his head with a perplexed air.
"That's tough on her. Well, I'm glad I'm an orphan, anyway."

The actual necessities of the trip needed a little discussion, for what
they could take with them amounted to practically nothing.

"As I understand it," said the Banker, "all I have to do is watch you
start, and then take the ring back to the Museum."

"Take it carefully," continued the Very Young Man. "Remember what it's
got in it."

"You will give us about two hours to get well started down," said the
Doctor. "After that it will be quite safe to move the ring. You can take
it back to the Society in that case I brought it here in."

"Be sure you take it yourself," put in the Very Young Man. "Don't trust
it to anybody else. And how about having that wire rack fixed for it at
the Museum," he added. "Don't forget that."

"I'll have that done myself this week," said the Doctor.

They had been talking for perhaps an hour when the Banker got up from
his chair to get a fresh cigar from a box that lay upon the desk. He
happened to glance across the room and on the floor in the corner by the
closed door he saw a long, flat object that had not been there before.
It was out of the circle of light and being brown against the polished
hardwood floor, he could not make it out clearly. But something about it
frightened him.

"What's that over there?" he asked, standing still and pointing.

The Big Business Man rose from his seat and took a few steps in the
direction of the Banker's outstretched hand. Then with a muttered oath
he jumped to the desk in a panic and picking up the heavy paper-weight
flung it violently across the room. It struck the panelled wall with a
crash and bounded back towards him. At the same instant there came a
scuttling sound from the floor, and a brown shape slid down the edge of
the room and stopped in the other corner.

All four men were on their feet in an instant, white-faced and
trembling.

"Good God," said the Big Business Man huskily, "that thing over
there--that----"
