
Retief reversed the needler, held it out.

"I'm a gambler too, Zorn. I'm gambling you'll listen to what I have to
say."

Zorn snatched the gun, stepped back. He looked at Retief.

"That wasn't the smartest bet you ever made, Mister; but go ahead.
You've got maybe ten seconds."

"Nobody doublecrossed you, Zorn. Magnan put his foot in it. Too bad. Is
that a reason to kill yourself and a lot of other people who've bet
their lives on you?"

"They gambled and lost. Tough."

"Maybe you haven't lost yet--if you don't quit."

"Get to the point!"

Retief spoke earnestly for a minute and a half. Zorn stood, gun aimed,
listening. Then both men turned as footsteps approached along the
terrace. A fat man in a yellow sarong padded up to Zorn.

Zorn tucked the needler in his waistband.

"Hold everything, Shoke," he said. "Tell the boys to put the knives
away. Spread the word fast. It's all off."

       *      *       *        *        *

"I want to commend you, Retief," Ambassador Crodfoller said expansively.
"You mixed very well at last night's affair. Actually, I was hardly
aware of your presence."

"I've been studying Mr. Magnan's work," Retief said.

"A good man, Magnan. In a crowd, he's virtually invisible."

"He knows when to disappear all right."

"This has been in many ways a model operation, Retief." The Ambassador
patted his paunch contentedly. "By observing local social customs and
blending harmoniously with the court, I've succeeded in establishing a
fine, friendly, working relationship with the Potentate."

"I understand the agreement has been postponed."

The Ambassador chuckled. "The Potentate's a crafty one. Through ... ah
... a special study I have been conducting, I learned last night that he
had hoped to, shall I say, 'put one over' on the Corps."

"Great heavens," Retief said.

"Naturally, this placed me in a difficult position. It was my task to
quash this gambit, without giving any indication that I was aware of its
existence."

"A hairy position indeed," Retief said.

"Quite casually, I informed the Potentate that certain items which had
been included in the terms of the agreement had been deleted and others
substituted. I admired him at that moment, Retief. He took it
coolly--appearing completely indifferent--perfectly dissembling his very
serious disappointment."

"I noticed him dancing with three girls wearing a bunch of grapes
apiece. He's very agile for a man of his bulk."

"You mustn't discount the Potentate! Remember, beneath that mask of
frivolity, he had absorbed a bitter blow."

"He had me fooled," Retief said.

"Don't feel badly; I confess at first I failed to sense his shrewdness."
The Ambassador nodded and moved off along the corridor.

Retief turned and went into an office. Magnan looked up from his desk.

"Ah," he said. "Retief. I've been meaning to ask you. About the ... ah
... blasters. Are you--?"

Retief leaned on Magnan's desk, looked at him.

"I thought that was to be our little secret."

"Well, naturally I--" Magnan closed his mouth, swallowed. "How is it,
Retief," he said sharply, "that you were aware of this blaster business,
when the Ambassador himself wasn't?"

"Easy," Retief said. "I made it up."

"You what!" Magnan looked wild. "But the agreement--it's been revised!
Ambassador Crodfoller has gone on record...."

"Too bad. Glad _I_ didn't tell him about it."

       *       *       *       *       *

Magnan leaned back and closed his eyes.

"It was big of you to take all the ... blame," Retief said, "when the
Ambassador was talking about knighting people."

Magnan opened his eyes.

"What about that gambler, Zorn? Won't he be upset?"

"It's all right," Retief said, "I made another arrangement. The business
about making blasters out of common components wasn't completely
imaginary. You can actually do it, using parts from an old-fashioned
disposal unit."

"What good will that do him?" Magnan whispered, looking nervous. "We're
not shipping in any old-fashioned disposal units."

"We don't need to," Retief said. "They're already installed in the
palace kitchen--and in a few thousand other places, Zorn tells me."

"If this ever leaks...." Magnan put a hand to his forehead.

"I have his word on it that the Nenni slaughter is out. This place is
ripe for a change. Maybe Zorn is what it needs."

"But how can we _know?_" Magnan yelped. "How can we be sure?"

"We can't," Retief said. "But it's not up to the Corps to meddle in
Petreacs' internal affairs." He leaned over, picked up Magnan's desk
lighter and lit a cigar. He blew a cloud of smoke toward the ceiling.
"Right?"

Magnan looked at him, nodded weakly. "Right."

"I'd better be getting along to my desk," Retief said. "Now that the
Ambassador feels that I'm settling down at last--"

"Retief," Magnan said, "tonight, I implore you. Stay out of the
kitchen--no matter what."

Retief raised his eyebrows.

"I know," Magnan said. "If you hadn't interfered, we'd all have had our
throats cut. But at least," he added, "we'd have died in accordance with
regulations!"


END





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Gambler's World, by John Keith Laumer

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK GAMBLER'S WORLD ***

***** This file should be named 21627.txt or 21627.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/2/1/6/2/21627/

Produced by Robert Cicconetti, V. L. Simpson and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
