"That's not what I mean, sir," said the doctor. "There are limits to
pain beyond which further treatment simply doesn't register. Also, I'm a
little suspicious about this man's heart. It has a murmur, and
questioning puts a terrific strain on it. You wouldn't want him to die
on your hands, would you, sir?"

"Mmmm--no. What do you advise?"

"Just a few days in the hospital, with treatment and rest. It'll also
have a psychological effect as he thinks of what's waiting for him."

Harris considered for a moment. "All right. I've got enough other things
to do anyway."

"Very good, sir. You won't regret this."

Lancaster heard the footsteps retreat into silence. Presently the doctor
came around to stand facing him. He was a short, curly-haired man of
undistinguished appearance. For a moment they locked eyes, then
Lancaster closed his. He wanted to tell the doctor to go away, but it
wasn't worth the trouble.

Later he was put on a stretcher and carried down endless halls to
another cell. This one had a hospital look about it, somehow, and the
air was sharp with the smell of antiseptics. The doctor came when he was
installed in bed and took his arm and slipped a needle into it. "Sleepy
time," he said.

Lancaster drifted away again.

       *       *       *       *       *

When he woke up, he felt darkness and movement. He looked around,
wondering if he had gone blind, and the breath moaned out between his
bruised lips. A hand was laid on his shoulder and a voice spoke out of
the black.

"It's okay, fella. Take it easy. There'll be no more questions."

It was the doctor's voice, and the doctor looked nothing at all like
Charon, but still Lancaster wondered if he weren't being ferried over
the river of death. There was a thrumming all about him, and he heard a
low keening of wind. "Where are we going?" he mumbled.

"Away. You're in a stratorocket now. Just take it easy."

Lancaster fell asleep after awhile.

Beyond that there was a drugged, confused period where he was only dimly
aware of moving and trying to talk. Shadows floated across his vision,
shadows telling him something he couldn't quite grasp. He followed
obediently enough. Full clarity came eventually, and he was lying in a
bunk looking up at a metal ceiling. The shivering pulse of rockets
trembled in his body. A spaceship?

A spaceship!

He sat up, heart thudding, and looked wildly around. "Hey!" he cried.

The remembered figure of Berg came through the door. "Hullo, Allen," he
said. "How're you feeling?"

"I--you--" Lancaster sank weakly back to his pillow. He grew aware that
he was thoroughly bandaged, splinted, and braced, and that there was no
more pain. Not much, anyway.

"I feel fine," he said.

"Good, good. The doc says you'll be okay." Berg sat down on the edge of
the bunk. "I can't stay here long, but the hell with it. We'll be at the
station soon. You deserve to know some things, such as that you've been
rescued."

"Well, that's obvious," said Lancaster.

"By us. The rebels. The underground. Subversive characters."

"That's obvious too. And thanks--" The word was so ridiculously
inadequate that Lancaster had to laugh.

       *       *       *       *       *

"I suppose you've guessed most of it already," said Berg. "We needed a
scientist of your caliber for our project. One thing we're desperately
short of is technical personnel, since the only real education in such
lines is to be had on Earth and most graduates find comfortable berths
in the existing society. Like you, for instance. So we played a trick on
you. We used part of our organization--yes, we have a big one, and it's
pretty smart and powerful too--to convince you this was a government job
of top secrecy. More damn things can be done in the name of Security--"
Berg clicked his tongue. "Everybody you saw at the station was more or
less play-acting, of course. The whole thing was set up to fool you. We
might not have gotten away with it if we'd used some other person, more
shrewd about such things, but we'd studied you and knew you for an
amiable, unsuspicious guy, too wrapped up in your own work to go
witch-smelling."

"I guessed that much," admitted Lancaster. "After I'd been in the cells
for awhile. Your way of living and thinking was so different from
anything like--"

"Yeah. I'm sorry as hell about that, Allen. We thought you could just
return to ordinary life, but somehow--through one of those accidents or
malices inevitable in a state where every man spies on his
neighbor--you were hauled in. We knew of it at once--yes, we've even
infiltrated the secret police--and decided to do something about it.
Quite apart from the danger of your betraying what you knew--we could
have eliminated that by quietly murdering you--there was the fact that
we'd gotten you into this and did owe you something. We managed to get
Dr. Pappas transferred to the inquisitory where you were being held. He
drugged you, producing a remarkably corpse-like figure, and smuggled you
out as simply another one who'd died under questioning. I used my
Security papers to get the body for special autopsy instead of the usual
immediate cremation. Then we simply drove till we reached the
stratorocket we'd arranged to have ready, and you were flown to our
spaceboat, and now you're on the way back to the station. You were kept
under drugs most of the way to help you rest--they'd knocked you around
quite a bit in the inquisitory. So--" Berg shrugged. "Pappas can't go
back to Earth now, of course, but we can always use a medic in space,
and it was well worth the trouble to rescue you."

"I'm honored," said Lancaster.

"I still feel like hell about what happened to you, though."

"It's all right. I can't say I enjoyed it, but now that I've learned
some hard facts--oh, well, forget the painful nature of the lesson. I'll
be okay. And I'm going home!"

       *       *       *       *       *

Jessup supported Lancaster as they entered the space station. His old
crew was there waiting to greet him. They were all immensely pleased to
have him back, though Karen wept bitterly on his shoulder.

"It's all right," he told her. "I'm not in such bad shape as I look.
Honest, Karen, I'm all right. And now that I have gotten back, and know
where I really belong--damn, but it was worth it!"

She looked at him with eyes as gray as a rainy dawn. "And you are with
us?" she whispered. "You're one of us? Of your own will?"

"Of course I am. Give me a week or two to rest, and I'll be back in the
lab bossing all of you like a Simon Legree. Hell, we've just begun on
that super-dielectricity. And there are a lot of other things I want to
try out, too."

"It means exile," she said. "No more blue skies and green valleys and
ocean winds. No more going back to Earth."

"Well, there are other planets, aren't there? And we'll go back to Earth
in the next decade, I bet. Back to start a new American Revolution and
write the Bill of Rights in the sky for all to see." Lancaster grinned
shyly. "I'm not much at making speeches, and I certainly don't like to
listen to them. But I've learned the truth and I want to say it out
loud. The right of man to be free is the most basic one he's got, and
when he gives that up he finishes by surrendering everything else too.
You people are fighting to bring back honesty and liberty and the
possibility of progress. I hope nobody here is a fanatic, because
fanaticism is exactly what we're fighting against. I say we, because
from now on I'm one of you. That is, if you're sure you want me."

He stopped, clumsily. "Okay. Speech ended."

Karen drew a shivering breath and smiled at him. "And everything else
just begun, Allen," she said. He nodded, feeling too much for words.

"Get to bed with you," ordered Pappas.

       *       *       *       *       *

Jessup led Lancaster off, and one by one the others drifted back to
their jobs. Finally only Karen and Berg stood by the airlock.

"You keep your beautiful mouth shut, my dear," said the man.

"Oh, sure." Karen sighed unhappily. "I wish I'd never learned your
scheme. When you explained it to me I wanted to shoot you."

"You insisted on an explanation," said Berg defensively. "When Allen was
due to go back to Earth, you wanted us to tell him who we were and keep
him. But it wouldn't have worked. I've studied his dossier, and he's not
the kind of man to switch loyalties that easily. If we were to have him
at all, it could only be with his full consent. And now we've got him."

"It was still a lousy trick," she said.

"Of course it was. But we had no choice. We _had_ to have a first-rate
physicist."

"You know," she said, "you're a rat from way back."
