greatly added to the number of their patients.

I avail myself also of this opportunity to enter my protest against the
ill-judged and mischievous practice of those patients who confide upon
many occasions in the opinion of their nurse, rather than that of their
medical attendant, and who, in consequence, often injure themselves
essentially by deceiving the latter. With respect to this mistaken
preference, Dr. Dewes has well observed--'Let it not be hastily assumed
that there is more safety in following the directions of a nurse than
those of the physician, because she may have had some experience; for it
must be quickly perceived that the calculation is much in favour of the
latter, since the nurse can attend but twelve patients per annum, while
the physician may visit many hundreds in the same period--besides, his
knowledge of the laws of the human system gives him a very decided
superiority.'

In conclusion, it is right to observe, that protracted suckling being a
custom much more prevalent among females of the lower orders than those
of a superior rank, it must follow as a necessary consequence, that
_Meningitis, and other disorders resulting from this cause, are
proportionably less frequent in private than in public practice_. This
remark, it is evident, should be remembered, in order to obviate
apparent discrepancies which otherwise might appear irreconcilable with
the opinions I have expressed. In the truth of those opinions I feel the
most perfect confidence, and cannot but hope that their promulgation
will hereafter prove extensively beneficial, since precautionary, and
even therapeutical measures may be founded upon them, which, if
uniformly adopted, will not only prevent much ill-health and suffering
to mothers, but will also afford the means of saving many children from
perishing by one of the most painful and fatal diseases to which they
are subject.




POSTSCRIPT.


Being anxious to obtain additional evidence with respect to the
production of Meningitis in children by protracted suckling, rather from
the experience of others than my own, I shall feel greatly obliged to
any practitioners who will favour me (free of postage) with either facts
or cases tending to corroborate the truth of the doctrine contained in
the preceding pages; and should I be enabled publicly to avail myself of
such communications, it is, perhaps, unnecessary to say, I shall not
neglect the opportunity of expressing my acknowledgments to their
respective authors. The intelligence and liberality characterising the
members of the medical profession generally, preclude all apprehension
on my part that the above appeal will be made in vain.




NOTES


Note A (page 1).

A dark-green substance of variable consistence, contained in the bowels
of infants at birth.


B (page 4).

I beg leave to observe that I make these statements with some confidence
as the result of personal inquiries instituted a few years ago among the
patients of two of the Lying-in Establishments of this metropolis.


C (page 8).

Since the above was written, a friend who lectures on Chemistry in the
metropolis has kindly promised me his valuable assistance in making the
experiments here suggested.


D (page 10).

In two cases where suckling was protracted to _three years_, the
subjects of this baneful practice did not equal in size an ordinary
child of half their age. One of them became idiotic, and afterwards died
of Hydrencephalus, under my care; the other was affected with Tabes
Mesenterica,--the result I did not witness--but believe the disease
terminated fatally.


E (page 25).

Vide Medical and Physical Journal for August 1827.


F (page 25).

That is, any period beyond nine or ten months.


G (page 25).

_Meningitis_,--I use this term as being more pathologically correct than
_Cephalitis_, which I formerly adopted.


H (page 26).

See the above conditional sense in which I employ this term.


I (page 26).

It is a curious fact, which I believe has not been noticed by any other
writer, that female children labouring under attacks of Meningitis are
sometimes affected with leucorrh[oe]al discharges. I have met with
several cases of this description: the children also of women subject to
leucorrh[oe]a will often, at an early age, be found affected with the
same disease. Hence it would appear that leucorrh[oe]a is occasionally
hereditary.


K (page 37).

It is unquestionable, notwithstanding the scepticism of some
practitioners on the subject, (whose opinions are entitled to
deference,) that _recovery may take place, under appropriate treatment,
in cases of Meningitis, even after effusion has unequivocally occurred_.
Preceding authors have noticed this fact, which I can confirm by my own
experience. Practitioners cannot be too frequently reminded of it, and
warned not to despair of success even in the last stage of
Hydrencephalus.


L (page 42).

For the information of the _unprofessional_ reader, I beg to observe,
that the membranes of the brain are _serous membranes_.


M (page 48).

It will be observed hereafter, that Mr. North has experienced similar
beneficial effects from the course above recommended, in cases where
_convulsions_ have been caused by _diseased milk_;--a strong
corroborative coincidence.


N (page 52).

I believe that where the milk is greatly diminished in quantity, it will
also be found deteriorated in quality.


O (page 53).

In the communication above referred to from Mr. Griffith is the
following:--'Mrs. A. has a family of four children, all of whom she
suckled for a period varying from _seventeen_ to _twenty-two
months_:--_not one of the four is healthy_.'




BY THE SAME AUTHOR,


Preparing for publication, in one small volume, 8vo.

OUTLINES of INFANTILE SEMEIOLOGY; or, an Arrangement of the Principal
Symptoms of DISEASE in INFANTS and CHILDREN, with the best modes of
detecting them;--interspersed with Practical Observations, and intended
as a clinical guide to Students, &c. &c.


Also, in 2 vols. 8vo.

The EIGHT BOOKS of ARETAEUS of CAPPADOCIA on the Causes, Symptoms, and
Treatment of ACUTE and CHRONIC DISEASES. Translated literally from the
original Greek, and supplied with critical and explanatory Notes, Tables
of the Weights and Measures, &c. &c.


       *       *       *       *       *


By the same Author,

Recently published by Longman and Co. in 8vo., boards, price 14_s._

