On the other hand, the two leading sources of information as to the life of
Gerbert reveal practically nothing to show that he came within the Moorish
sphere of influence during his sojourn in Spain. These sources {115} are
his letters and the history written by Richer. Gerbert was a master of the
epistolary art, and his exalted position led to the preservation of his
letters to a degree that would not have been vouchsafed even by their
classic excellence.[453] Richer was a monk at St. Remi de Rheims, and was
doubtless a pupil of Gerbert. The latter, when archbishop of Rheims, asked
Richer to write a history of his times, and this was done. The work lay in
manuscript, entirely forgotten until Pertz discovered it at Bamberg in
1833.[454] The work is dedicated to Gerbert as archbishop of Rheims,[455]
and would assuredly have testified to such efforts as he may have made to
secure the learning of the Moors.

Now it is a fact that neither the letters nor this history makes any
statement as to Gerbert's contact with the Saracens. The letters do not
speak of the Moors, of the Arab numerals, nor of Cordova. Spain is not
referred to by that name, and only one Spanish scholar is mentioned. In one
of his letters he speaks of Joseph Ispanus,[456] or Joseph Sapiens, but who
this Joseph the Wise of Spain may have been we do not know. Possibly {116}
it was he who contributed the morsel of knowledge so imperfectly
assimilated by the young French monk.[457] Within a few years after
Gerbert's visit two young Spanish monks of lesser fame, and doubtless with
not that keen interest in mathematical matters which Gerbert had, regarded
the apparently slight knowledge which they had of the Hindu numeral forms
as worthy of somewhat permanent record[458] in manuscripts which they were
transcribing. The fact that such knowledge had penetrated to their modest
cloisters in northern Spain--the one Albelda or Albaida--indicates that it
was rather widely diffused.

Gerbert's treatise _Libellus de numerorum divisione_[459] is characterized
by Chasles as "one of the most obscure documents in the history of
science."[460] The most complete information in regard to this and the
other mathematical works of Gerbert is given by Bubnov,[461] who considers
this work to be genuine.[462]

{117}

So little did Gerbert appreciate these numerals that in his works known as
the _Regula de abaco computi_ and the _Libellus_ he makes no use of them at
all, employing only the Roman forms.[463] Nevertheless Bernelinus[464]
refers to the nine [.g]ob[=a]r characters.[465] These Gerbert had marked on
a thousand _jetons_ or counters,[466] using the latter on an abacus which
he had a sign-maker prepare for him.[467] Instead of putting eight counters
in say the tens' column, Gerbert would put a single counter marked 8, and
so for the other places, leaving the column empty where we would place a
zero, but where he, lacking the zero, had no counter to place. These
counters he possibly called _caracteres_, a name which adhered also to the
figures themselves. It is an interesting speculation to consider whether
these _apices_, as they are called in the Boethius interpolations, were in
any way suggested by those Roman jetons generally known in numismatics as
_tesserae_, and bearing the figures I-XVI, the sixteen referring to the
number of _assi_ in a _sestertius_.[468] The {118} name _apices_ adhered to
the Hindu-Arabic numerals until the sixteenth century.[469]

To the figures on the _apices_ were given the names Igin, andras, ormis,
arbas, quimas, calctis or caltis, zenis, temenias, celentis, sipos,[470]
the origin and meaning of which still remain a mystery. The Semitic origin
of several of the words seems probable. _Wahud_, _thaneine_, {119}
_thalata_, _arba_, _kumsa_, _setta_, _sebba_, _timinia_, _taseud_ are given
by the Rev. R. Patrick[471] as the names, in an Arabic dialect used in
Morocco, for the numerals from one to nine. Of these the words for four,
five, and eight are strikingly like those given above.

The name _apices_ was not, however, a common one in later times. _Notae_
was more often used, and it finally gave the name to notation.[472] Still
more common were the names _figures_, _ciphers_, _signs_, _elements_, and
_characters_.[473]

So little effect did the teachings of Gerbert have in making known the new
numerals, that O'Creat, who lived a century later, a friend and pupil of
Adelhard {120} of Bath, used the zero with the Roman characters, in
contrast to Gerbert's use of the [.g]ob[=a]r forms without the zero.[474]
O'Creat uses three forms for zero, o, [=o], and [Greek: t], as in Maximus
Planudes. With this use of the zero goes, naturally, a place value, for he
writes III III for 33, ICCOO and I. II. [tau]. [tau] for 1200,
I. O. VIII. IX for 1089, and I. IIII. IIII. [tau][tau][tau][tau] for the
square of 1200.

The period from the time of Gerbert until after the appearance of
Leonardo's monumental work may be called the period of the abacists. Even
for many years after the appearance early in the twelfth century of the
books explaining the Hindu art of reckoning, there was strife between the
abacists, the advocates of the abacus, and the algorists, those who favored
the new numerals. The words _cifra_ and _algorismus cifra_ were used with a
somewhat derisive significance, indicative of absolute uselessness, as
indeed the zero is useless on an abacus in which the value of any unit is
given by the column which it occupies.[475] So Gautier de Coincy
(1177-1236) in a work on the miracles of Mary says:

  A horned beast, a sheep,
  An algorismus-cipher,
  Is a priest, who on such a feast day
  Does not celebrate the holy Mother.[476]

So the abacus held the field for a long time, even against the new algorism
employing the new numerals. {121} Geoffrey Chaucer[477] describes in _The
Miller's Tale_ the clerk with

 "His Almageste and bokes grete and smale,
  His astrelabie, longinge for his art,
  His augrim-stones layen faire apart
  On shelves couched at his beddes heed."

So, too, in Chaucer's explanation of the astrolabe,[478] written for his
son Lewis, the number of degrees is expressed on the instrument in
Hindu-Arabic numerals: "Over the whiche degrees ther ben noumbres of
augrim, that devyden thilke same degrees fro fyve to fyve," and "... the
nombres ... ben writen in augrim," meaning in the way of the algorism.
Thomas Usk about 1387 writes:[479] "a sypher in augrim have no might in
signification of it-selve, yet he yeveth power in signification to other."
So slow and so painful is the assimilation of new ideas.

Bernelinus[480] states that the abacus is a well-polished board (or table),
which is covered with blue sand and used by geometers in drawing
geometrical figures. We have previously mentioned the fact that the Hindus
also performed mathematical computations in the sand, although there is no
evidence to show that they had any column abacus.[481] For the purposes of
computation, Bernelinus continues, the board is divided into thirty
vertical columns, three of which are reserved for fractions. Beginning with
the units columns, each set of {122} three columns (_lineae_ is the word
which Bernelinus uses) is grouped together by a semicircular arc placed
above them, while a smaller arc is placed over the units column and another
joins the tens and hundreds columns. Thus arose the designation _arcus
pictagore_[482] or sometimes simply _arcus_.[483] The operations of
addition, subtraction, and multiplication upon this form of the abacus
required little explanation, although they were rather extensively treated,
especially the multiplication of different orders of numbers. But the
operation of division was effected with some difficulty. For the
explanation of the method of division by the use of the complementary
difference,[484] long the stumbling-block in the way of the medieval
arithmetician, the reader is referred to works on the history of
mathematics[485] and to works relating particularly to the abacus.[486]

Among the writers on the subject may be mentioned Abbo[487] of Fleury (c.
970), Heriger[488] of Lobbes or Laubach {123} (c. 950-1007), and Hermannus
Contractus[489] (1013-1054), all of whom employed only the Roman numerals.
Similarly Adelhard of Bath (c. 1130), in his work _Regulae Abaci_,[490]
gives no reference to the new numerals, although it is certain that he knew
them. Other writers on the abacus who used some form of Hindu numerals were
Gerland[491] (first half of twelfth century) and Turchill[492] (c. 1200).
For the forms used at this period the reader is referred to the plate on
page 88.

After Gerbert's death, little by little the scholars of Europe came to know
the new figures, chiefly through the introduction of Arab learning. The
Dark Ages had passed, although arithmetic did not find another advocate as
prominent as Gerbert for two centuries. Speaking of this great revival,
Raoul Glaber[493] (985-c. 1046), a monk of the great Benedictine abbey of
Cluny, of the eleventh century, says: "It was as though the world had
arisen and tossed aside the worn-out garments of ancient time, and wished
to apparel itself in a white robe of churches." And with this activity in
religion came a corresponding interest in other lines. Algorisms began to
appear, and knowledge from the outside world found {124} interested
listeners. Another Raoul, or Radulph, to whom we have referred as Radulph
of Laon,[494] a teacher in the cloister school of his city, and the brother
of Anselm of Laon[495] the celebrated theologian, wrote a treatise on
music, extant but unpublished, and an arithmetic which Nagl first published
in 1890.[496] The latter work, preserved to us in a parchment manuscript of
seventy-seven leaves, contains a curious mixture of Roman and [.g]ob[=a]r
numerals, the former for expressing large results, the latter for practical
calculation. These [.g]ob[=a]r "caracteres" include the sipos (zero),
[Symbol], of which, however, Radulph did not know the full significance;
showing that at the opening of the twelfth century the system was still
uncertain in its status in the church schools of central France.

At the same time the words _algorismus_ and _cifra_ were coming into
general use even in non-mathematical literature. Jordan [497] cites
numerous instances of such use from the works of Alanus ab Insulis[498]
(Alain de Lille), Gautier de Coincy (1177-1236), and others.

Another contributor to arithmetic during this interesting period was a
prominent Spanish Jew called variously John of Luna, John of Seville,
Johannes Hispalensis, Johannes Toletanus, and Johannes Hispanensis de
Luna.[499] {125} His date is rather closely fixed by the fact that he
dedicated a work to Raimund who was archbishop of Toledo between 1130 and
1150.[500] His interests were chiefly in the translation of Arabic works,
especially such as bore upon the Aristotelian philosophy. From the
standpoint of arithmetic, however, the chief interest centers about a
manuscript entitled _Joannis Hispalensis liber Algorismi de Practica
Arismetrice_ which Boncompagni found in what is now the _Bibliotheque
nationale_ at Paris. Although this distinctly lays claim to being
Al-Khow[=a]razm[=i]'s work,[501] the evidence is altogether against the
statement,[502] but the book is quite as valuable, since it represents the
knowledge of the time in which it was written. It relates to the operations
with integers and sexagesimal fractions, including roots, and contains no
applications.[503]

Contemporary with John of Luna, and also living in Toledo, was Gherard of
Cremona,[504] who has sometimes been identified, but erroneously, with
Gernardus,[505] the {126} author of a work on algorism. He was a physician,
an astronomer, and a mathematician, translating from the Arabic both in
Italy and in Spain. In arithmetic he was influential in spreading the ideas
of algorism.

Four Englishmen--Adelhard of Bath (c. 1130), Robert of Chester (Robertus
Cestrensis, c. 1143), William Shelley, and Daniel Morley (1180)--are
known[506] to have journeyed to Spain in the twelfth century for the
purpose of studying mathematics and Arabic. Adelhard of Bath made
translations from Arabic into Latin of Al-Khow[=a]razm[=i]'s astronomical
tables[507] and of Euclid's Elements,[508] while Robert of Chester is known
as the translator of Al-Khow[=a]razm[=i]'s algebra.[509] There is no reason
to doubt that all of these men, and others, were familiar with the numerals
which the Arabs were using.

The earliest trace we have of computation with Hindu numerals in Germany is
in an Algorismus of 1143, now in the Hofbibliothek in Vienna.[510] It is
bound in with a {127} _Computus_ by the same author and bearing the date
given. It contains chapters "De additione," "De diminutione," "De
mediatione," "De divisione," and part of a chapter on multiplication. The
numerals are in the usual medieval forms except the 2 which, as will be
seen from the illustration,[511] is somewhat different, and the 3, which
takes the peculiar shape [Symbol], a form characteristic of the twelfth
century.

It was about the same time that the _Sefer ha-Mispar_,[512] the Book of
Number, appeared in the Hebrew language. The author, Rabbi Abraham ibn Meir
ibn Ezra,[513] was born in Toledo (c. 1092). In 1139 he went to Egypt,
Palestine, and the Orient, spending also some years in Italy. Later he
lived in southern France and in England. He died in 1167. The probability
is that he acquired his knowledge of the Hindu arithmetic[514] in his
native town of Toledo, but it is also likely that the knowledge of other
systems which he acquired on travels increased his appreciation of this
one. We have mentioned the fact that he used the first letters of the
Hebrew alphabet, [Hebrew: A B G D H W Z CH T`], for the numerals 9 8 7 6 5
4 3 2 1, and a circle for the zero. The quotation in the note given below
shows that he knew of the Hindu origin; but in his manuscript, although he
set down the Hindu forms, he used the above nine Hebrew letters with place
value for all computations.

       *       *       *       *       *


{128}

CHAPTER VIII

THE SPREAD OF THE NUMERALS IN EUROPE

Of all the medieval writers, probably the one most influential in
introducing the new numerals to the scholars of Europe was Leonardo
Fibonacci, of Pisa.[515] This remarkable man, the most noteworthy
mathematical genius of the Middle Ages, was born at Pisa about 1175.[516]

The traveler of to-day may cross the Via Fibonacci on his way to the Campo
Santo, and there he may see at the end of the long corridor, across the
quadrangle, the statue of Leonardo in scholars garb. Few towns have honored
a mathematician more, and few mathematicians have so distinctly honored
their birthplace. Leonardo was born in the golden age of this city, the
period of its commercial, religious, and intellectual prosperity.[517]
{129} Situated practically at the mouth of the Arno, Pisa formed with Genoa
and Venice the trio of the greatest commercial centers of Italy at the
opening of the thirteenth century. Even before Venice had captured the
Levantine trade, Pisa had close relations with the East. An old Latin
chronicle relates that in 1005 "Pisa was captured by the Saracens," that in
the following year "the Pisans overthrew the Saracens at Reggio," and that
in 1012 "the Saracens came to Pisa and destroyed it." The city soon
recovered, however, sending no fewer than a hundred and twenty ships to
Syria in 1099,[518] founding a merchant colony in Constantinople a few
years later,[519] and meanwhile carrying on an interurban warfare in Italy
that seemed to stimulate it to great activity.[520] A writer of 1114 tells
us that at that time there were many heathen people--Turks, Libyans,
Parthians, and Chaldeans--to be found in Pisa. It was in the midst of such
wars, in a cosmopolitan and commercial town, in a center where literary
work was not appreciated,[521] that the genius of Leonardo appears as one
of the surprises of history, warning us again that "we should draw no
horoscope; that we should expect little, for what we expect will not come
to pass."[522]

Leonardo's father was one William,[523] and he had a brother named
Bonaccingus,[524] but nothing further is {130} known of his family. As to
Fibonacci, most writers[525] have assumed that his father's name was
Bonaccio,[526] whence _filius Bonaccii_, or Fibonacci. Others[527] believe
that the name, even in the Latin form of _filius Bonaccii_ as used in
Leonardo's work, was simply a general one, like our Johnson or Bronson
(Brown's son); and the only contemporary evidence that we have bears out
this view. As to the name Bigollo, used by Leonardo, some have thought it a
self-assumed one meaning blockhead, a term that had been applied to him by
the commercial world or possibly by the university circle, and taken by him
that he might prove what a blockhead could do. Milanesi,[528] however, has
shown that the word Bigollo (or Pigollo) was used in Tuscany to mean a
traveler, and was naturally assumed by one who had studied, as Leonardo
had, in foreign lands.

Leonardo's father was a commercial agent at Bugia, the modern Bougie,[529]
the ancient Saldae on the coast of Barbary,[530] a royal capital under the
Vandals and again, a century before Leonardo, under the Beni Hammad. It had
one of the best harbors on the coast, sheltered as it is by Mt. Lalla
Guraia,[531] and at the close of the twelfth century it was a center of
African commerce. It was here that Leonardo was taken as a child, and here
he went to school to a Moorish master. When he reached the years of young
manhood he started on a tour of the Mediterranean Sea, and visited Egypt,
Syria, Greece, Sicily, and Provence, meeting with scholars as well as with
{131} merchants, and imbibing a knowledge of the various systems of numbers
in use in the centers of trade. All these systems, however, he says he
counted almost as errors compared with that of the Hindus.[532] Returning
to Pisa, he wrote his _Liber Abaci_[533] in 1202, rewriting it in
1228.[534] In this work the numerals are explained and are used in the
usual computations of business. Such a treatise was not destined to be
popular, however, because it was too advanced for the mercantile class, and
too novel for the conservative university circles. Indeed, at this time
mathematics had only slight place in the newly established universities, as
witness the oldest known statute of the Sorbonne at Paris, dated 1215,
where the subject is referred to only in an incidental way.[535] The period
was one of great commercial activity, and on this very {132} account such a
book would attract even less attention than usual.[536]

It would now be thought that the western world would at once adopt the new
numerals which Leonardo had made known, and which were so much superior to
anything that had been in use in Christian Europe. The antagonism of the
universities would avail but little, it would seem, against such an
improvement. It must be remembered, however, that there was great
difficulty in spreading knowledge at this time, some two hundred and fifty
years before printing was invented. "Popes and princes and even great
religious institutions possessed far fewer books than many farmers of the
present age. The library belonging to the Cathedral Church of San Martino
at Lucca in the ninth century contained only nineteen volumes of
abridgments from ecclesiastical commentaries."[537] Indeed, it was not
until the early part of the fifteenth century that Palla degli Strozzi took
steps to carry out the project that had been in the mind of Petrarch, the
founding of a public library. It was largely by word of mouth, therefore,
that this early knowledge had to be transmitted. Fortunately the presence
of foreign students in Italy at this time made this transmission feasible.
(If human nature was the same then as now, it is not impossible that the
very opposition of the faculties to the works of Leonardo led the students
to investigate {133} them the more zealously.) At Vicenza in 1209, for
example, there were Bohemians, Poles, Frenchmen, Burgundians, Germans, and
Spaniards, not to speak of representatives of divers towns of Italy; and
what was true there was also true of other intellectual centers. The
knowledge could not fail to spread, therefore, and as a matter of fact we
find numerous bits of evidence that this was the case. Although the bankers
of Florence were forbidden to use these numerals in 1299, and the statutes
of the university of Padua required stationers to keep the price lists of
books "non per cifras, sed per literas claros,"[538] the numerals really
made much headway from about 1275 on.

It was, however, rather exceptional for the common people of Germany to use
the Arabic numerals before the sixteenth century, a good witness to this
fact being the popular almanacs. Calendars of 1457-1496[539] have generally
the Roman numerals, while Koebel's calendar of 1518 gives the Arabic forms
as subordinate to the Roman. In the register of the Kreuzschule at Dresden
the Roman forms were used even until 1539.

While not minimizing the importance of the scientific work of Leonardo of
Pisa, we may note that the more popular treatises by Alexander de Villa Dei
(c. 1240 A.D.) and John of Halifax (Sacrobosco, c. 1250 A.D.) were much
more widely used, and doubtless contributed more to the spread of the
numerals among the common people.

{134}

