The cab driver gasped: "What the hell." His throat was so dry he could
scarcely talk. He turned around to his fare, and the passenger, a young
man, was pale and trembling.

"You seeing things, too?" the driver asked.

"I sure am," the fare said unsteadily. "What a thing to do."

       *       *       *       *       *

For fifteen minutes, over the northwest quadrant of Earth, the words and
the pictures went out, and thirteen billion people knew suddenly what
lay in the hearts and minds of nineteen robots.

       *       *       *       *       *

A housewife in San Rafael was at the moment in a butcher shop buying
meat for her family. As the thoughts and images started pouring into her
mind, she remained stock-still, her package of meat forgotten on the
counter. The butcher, wiping his bloodied hands on his apron froze in
that position, an expression of horror and incredulity on his face.

When the thoughts stopped coming in, the butcher was the first to come
out of the trancelike state.

"Boy," he said, "that's sure some way of sending messages. Sure beats
the teledepths."

The housewife snatched her meat off the counter. "Is that all you think
of," she demanded angrily.

"That's a terrible thing that those barbarians on Grismet are doing to
those ... those people. Why didn't they tell us that they were human."
She stalked out of the shop, not certain what she would do, but
determined to do something.

       *       *       *       *       *

In the ship Hall reluctantly broke off the connection and replaced the
trap door. Then he went back to his cell and locked himself in. He had
accomplished his mission; its results now lay in the opinions of men.

       *       *       *       *       *

Jordan left the ship immediately on landing, and took a copter over to
the agency building. His conversation with his superior was something he
wanted to get over with as soon as possible.

The young woman at the secretary's desk looked at him coldly and led him
directly into the inner office. The chief was standing up in front of
the map of the galaxy, his hands in his pockets, his eyes an icy blue.

"I've been hearing about you," he said without a greeting.

Jordan sat down. He was tense and jumpy but tried not to show it. "I
suppose you have," he said, adding, after a moment, "Sir."

"How did that robot manage to break out of his cell and get to the power
source on the ship in the first place?"

"He didn't break out," Jordan said slowly. "I let him out."

"I see," the chief said, nodding. "You let him out. I see. No doubt you
had your reasons."

"Yes, I did. Look--" Jordan wanted to explain, but he could not find the
words. It would have been different if the robots' messages had reached
Grismet; he would not have had to justify himself then. But they had
not, and he could not find a way to tell this cold old man of what he
had learned about the robots and their unity with men. "I did it because
it was the only decent thing to do."

"I see," the chief said. "You did it because you have a heart." He
leaned suddenly forward, both hands on his desk. "It's good for a man to
have a heart and be compassionate. He's not worth anything if he isn't.
But"--and he shook his finger at Jordan as he spoke--"that man is going
to be compassionate at his own expense, not at the expense of the
agency. Do you understand that?"

"I certainly do," Jordan answered, "but you have me wrong if you think
I'm here to make excuses or to apologize. Now, if you will get on with
my firing, sir, I'll go home and have my supper."

The chief looked at him for a long minute. "Don't you care about your
position in the agency?" he asked quietly.

"Sure I do," Jordan said almost roughly. "It's the work I wanted to do
all my life. But, as you said, what I did, I did at my own expense.
Look, sir, I don't like this any better than you do. Why don't you fire
me and let me go home? Your prisoner's safely locked up in the ship."

For answer the chief tossed him a stellogram. Jordan glanced at the
first few words and saw that it was from Galactic Headquarters on Earth.
He put it back on the desk without reading it through.

"I know that I must have kicked up a fuss. You don't have to spell it
out for me."

"Read it," the chief said impatiently.

Jordan took back the stellogram and examined it. It read.

  To: Captain Lawrence Macrae Detection Agency, Grismet.

  From: Prantal Aminopterin Delegate from Casseiopeia Chairman, Grismet
    Peace Committee of the Galactic Senate.

  Message: You are hereby notified that the committee by a vote of 17-0
    has decided to rescind its order of January 18, 2214, directing the
    disposal of the permallium robots of Grismet. Instead, the committee
    directs that you remove from their confinement all the robots and
    put them in some safe place where they will be afforded reasonable
    and humane treatment.

  The committee will arrive in Grismet some time during the next month
    to decide on permanent disposition.

Jordan's heart swelled as he read the gram. "It worked," he said. "They
have changed their minds. It won't be so bad being discharged now." He
put the paper back on the desk and arose to go.

The chief smiled and it was like sunlight suddenly flooding over an
arctic glacier. "Discharged? Now who's discharging you? I'd sooner do
without my right arm."

He reached in a desk drawer and pulled out a bottle of old Earth bourbon
and two glasses. He carefully poured out a shot into each glass, and
handed one to Jordan.

"I like a man with a heart, and if you get away with it, why then you
get away with it. And that's just what you've done."

He sat down and started sipping his whisky. Jordan stood uncertainly
above him, his glass in his hand.

"Sit down, son," the old man said. "Sit down and tell me about your
adventures on Earth."

Jordan sat down, put his feet on the desk and took a sizable swallow of
his whisky.

"Well, Larry," he started, "I got into Earth atmosphere about 2:40
o'clock--"


THE END




Transcriber's Note:

This etext was produced from _Astounding Science Fiction_ April 1955.
Extensive research did not uncover any evidence that the U.S. copyright
on this publication was renewed. Minor spelling and typographical errors
have been corrected without note.





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of The Stutterer, by R.R. Merliss

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE STUTTERER ***

***** This file should be named 22512.txt or 22512.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/2/2/5/1/22512/

Produced by Greg Weeks, Stephen Blundell and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net


