
     Chardonnet      33.70
     Lehner          26.56
     Pauly            1.61

18. _Inorganic constituents._--Determinations of the total ash gave for
the first five of the above, numbers varying from 1.0 to 1.7 p.ct. The
only noteworthy point in the comparison was the exceptionally small ash
of the Pauly product, viz. 0.096 p.ct.

19. _Total nitrogen._--The natural silks contain the 16-17 p.ct. N
characteristic of the proteids. The lustra-celluloses contain 0.05-0.15
p.ct. N which in those spun from collodion is present in the form of
nitric groups.

The points of chemical differentiation which are established by the
above scheme of comparative investigation are summed up in tabular form.

_Methods of dyeing._--The lustra-celluloses are briefly discussed. The
specific relationship of these forms of cellulose to the colouring
matters are in the main those of cotton, but they manifest in the
dye-bath the somewhat intensified attraction which characterises
mercerised cotton, or more generally the cellulose hydrates.

_Industrial applications_ of the lustra-celluloses are briefly noticed
in the concluding section of the book.

FOOTNOTES:

[3] With these products it is easy to observe that they have a definite
fusion point 5 deg.-10 deg. below the temperature of explosion.




SECTION III. DECOMPOSITIONS OF CELLULOSE SUCH AS THROW LIGHT ON THE
PROBLEM OF ITS CONSTITUTION


UEBER CELLULOSE.

G. BUMCKE und R. WOLFFENSTEIN (Berl. Ber., 1899, 2493).

(p. 54) _Theoretical Preface._--The purpose of these investigations is
the closer characterisation of the products known as 'oxycellulose' and
'hydracellulose,' which are empirical aggregates obtained by various
processes of oxidation and hydrolysis; these processes act concurrently
in the production of the oxycelluloses. The action of hydrogen peroxide
was specially investigated. An oxycellulose resulted possessing strongly
marked aldehydic characteristics. The authors commit themselves to an
explanation of this paradoxical result, i.e. the production of a body
of strongly 'reducing' properties by the action of an oxidising agent
upon the inert cellulose molecule (? aggregate) as due to the
_hydrolytic_ action of the peroxide: following Wurster (Ber. 22, 145),
who similarly explained the production of reducing sugars from cane
sugar by the action of the peroxide.

The product in question is accordingly termed _hydralcellulose_. By the
action of alkalis this is resolved into two bodies of alcoholic
(cellulose) and acid ('acid cellulose') characteristics respectively.
The latter in drying passes into a lactone. The acid product is also
obtained from cellulose by the action of alkaline lye (boiling 30 p.ct.
NaOH) and by solution in Schweizer's reagent.

It is considered probable that the cellulose nitrates are hydrocellulose
derivatives, and experimental evidence in favour of this conclusion is
supplied by the results of 'nitrating' the celluloses and their oxy- and
hydro- derivatives. Identical products were obtained.

_Experimental investigations._--The filter paper employed as 'original
cellulose,' giving the following numbers on analysis:

     C   44.56    44.29    44.53    44.56
     H    6.39     6.31     6.46     6.42

was exposed to the action of pure distilled H_{2}O_{2} at 4-60 p.ct.
strength, at ordinary temperatures until disintegrated: a result
requiring from nineteen to thirty days. The series of products gave the
following analytical results:

     C   43.61   43.61   43.46   43.89   44.0   43.87   43.92   43.81
     H    6.00    6.29    6.28    6.26    6.13   6.27    6.24    6.27

results lying between the requirements of the formulae:

     5 C_{6}H_{10}O_{5}.H_{2}O  and  8 C_{6}H_{10}O_{5}.H_{2}O.

Hydrazones were obtained with 1.7-1.8 p.ct. N. Treated with caustic soda
solution the hydrazones were dissolved in part: on reprecipitation a
hydrazone of unaltered composition was obtained. The original product
shows therefore a uniform distribution of the reactive CO- groups.

The hydralcellulose boiled with Fehling's solution reduced 1/12 of the
amount required for an equal weight of glucose.

Digested with caustic soda solution it yielded 33 p.ct. of its weight of
the soluble 'acid cellulose.' This product was purified and analysed
with the following result: C 43.35 H 6.5. For the direct production of
the 'acid' derivative, cellulose was boiled with successive quantities
of 30 p.ct. NaOH until _dissolved_. It required eight treatments of one
hour's duration. On adding sulphuric acid to the solutions the product
was precipitated. Yield 40 p.ct. Analyses:

     C    43.8     43.8     43.7
     H     6.2      6.2      6.3

The cellulose reprecipitated from solution in Schweizer's reagent gave
similar analytical results:

     C    43.9    43.8    44.0
     H     6.5     6.3     6.4

_Conversion into nitrates._--The original cellulose, hydral- and acid
cellulose were each treated with 10 times their weight of HNO_{3} of
1.48 sp.gr. and heated at 85 deg. until the solution lost its initial
viscosity.

The products were precipitated by water and purified by solution in
acetone from which two fractions were recovered, the one being
relatively insoluble in ethyl alcohol. The various nitrates from the
several original products proved to be of almost identical composition,

     C 32.0   H 4.2    N 8.8

with a molecular weight approximately 1350. The conclusion is that
these products are all derivatives of a 'hydralcellulose'
6C_{6}H_{10}O_{5}H_{2}O.


FORMATION OF FURFURALDEHYDE FROM CELLULOSE, OXYCELLULOSE, AND
HYDROCELLULOSE.

By LEO VIGNON (Compt. rend., 1898, 126, 1355-1358).

(p. 54) Hydrocellulose, oxycellulose, and 'reduced' cellulose, the last
named being apparently identical with hydrocellulose, were obtained by
heating carefully purified cotton wool (10 grams) in water (1,000 c.c.),
with (1) 65 c.c. of hydrochloric acid (1.2 sp.gr.), (2) 65 c.c. of
hydrochloric acid and 80 grams of potassium chlorate, (3) 65 c.c. of
hydrochloric acid and 50 grams of stannous chloride. From these and some
other substances, the following percentage yields of furfuraldehyde were
obtained: Hydrocellulose, 0.854; oxycellulose, 2.113; reduced cellulose,
0.860; starch, 0.800; bleached cotton, 1.800; oxycellulose, prepared by
means of chromic acid, 3.500. Two specimens of oxycellulose were
prepared by treating cotton wool with hydrochloric acid and potassium
chlorate (A), and with sulphuric acid and potassium dichromate (B), and
25 grams of each product digested with aqueous potash. Of the product A,
16.20 grams were insoluble in potash, 2.45 grams were precipitated on
neutralisation of the alkaline solution, and 6.35 grams remained in
solution, whilst B yielded 11.16 grams of insoluble matter, 1.42 grams
were precipitated by acid, and 12.42 grams remained in solution. The
percentage yields of furfuraldehyde obtained from these fractions were
as follows: A, insoluble, 0.86; precipitated, 4.35; dissolved, 1.10. B,
insoluble, 0.76; precipitated, 5.11; dissolved, 1.54. It appears, from
the foregoing results, that the cellulose molecule, after oxidation, is
easily decomposed by potash, the insoluble and larger portion having all
the characters of the original cellulose, whilst the soluble portion is
of an aldehydic nature, and contains a substance, precipitable by acids,
which yields a relatively large amount of furfuraldehyde.


UNTERSUCHUNGEN UeBER DIE OXYCELLULOSE.

O. V. FABER und B. TOLLENS (Berl. Ber., 1899, 2589).

~Investigations of Oxycellulose.~

(p. 61) The author's results are tersely summed up in the following
conclusions set forth at the end of the paper: The oxycelluloses are
mixtures of cellulose and a derivative oxidised compound which contains
one more atom O than cellulose (cellulose = C_{6}H_{10}O_{5}), and for
which the special designation _Celloxin_ is proposed.

Celloxin may be formulated C_{8}H_{6}O_{6} or C_{6}H_{10}O_{6}, of which
the former is the more probable.

The various oxycelluloses may be regarded as containing one celloxin
group to 1-4 cellulose groups, according to the nature of the original
cellulose, and the degree of oxidation to which subjected. These groups
are in chemical union.

Celloxin has not been isolated. On boiling the oxycelluloses with
lime-milk it is converted into isosaccharinic and dioxybutyric acids.
The insoluble residue from the treatment is cellulose.

The following oxycelluloses were investigated:

A. _Product of action of nitric acid upon pine wood_ (Lindsey and
Tollens, Ann. 267, 366).--The oxycelluloses contained

1 mol celloxin:  {2 mol. cellulose on 6 hours' heating
                 {3 mol. cellulose on 3 hours' heating

with a ratio H : O = 1 : 9 and 1 : 8.7 respectively: they yielded 7
p.ct. furfural.

B. _By action of bromine in presence of water and_ CaCO_{3} _upon
cotton_.--Yield, (air-dry) 85 p.ct. Empirical composition
C_{12}H_{20}O_{11} = C_{6}H_{10}O_{5}.C_{6}H_{10}O_{6}: yielded furfural
1.7 p.ct.

C. _Cotton and nitric acid at_ 100 deg., two and a half hours (Cross and
Bevan).--Yield, 70 p.ct. Composition

     4 C_{6}H_{10}O_{5}.C_{6}H_{8}O_{6}

yielded furfural 2.3 p.ct.

D. _Cotton and nitric acid at_ 100 deg. (four hours).--A more highly
oxidised product resulted, viz. 3 C_{6}H_{10}O_{5}.C_{6}H_{8}O_{6}:
yielded furfural 3.2 p.ct.

_By-products of oxidation._--The liquors from B were found to contain
saccharic acid: the acid from C and B contained a dibasic acid which
appeared to be tartaric acid.

The isolation of (1) isosaccharinic and (2) dioxybutyric acid from the
products of digestion of the oxycelluloses with lime-milk at 100 deg. was
effected by the separation of their respective calcium salts, (1) by
direct crystallisation, (2) by precipitation alcohol after separation of
the former.


CELLULOSES, HYDRO- AND OXYCELLULOSES, AND CELLULOSE ESTERS.

L. VIGNON (Bull. Soc. Chim., 1901 [3], 25, 130).

(a) _Oxycelluloses from cotton, hemp, flax, and ramie._--The
comparative oxidation of these celluloses, by treatment with HClO_{3}
at 100 deg., gave remarkably uniform results, as shown by the following
numbers, showing extreme variations: yields, 68-70 p.ct.; hydrazine
reaction, N fixed 1.58-1.69; fixation of basic colouring matters
(relative numbers), saffranine, 100-200, methylene blue, 100-106. The
only points of difference noted were (1) hemp is somewhat more resistant
to the acid oxidation; (2) the cotton oxycellulose shows a somewhat
higher (25 p.ct.) cupric reduction.

(b) _'Saccharification' of cellulose, cellulose hydrates, and
hydrocellulose._--The products were digested with dilute hydrochloric
acid six hours at 100 deg., and the cupric reduction of the soluble products
determined and calculated to dextrose.

  100 grms. of                   gave reducing products equal to Dextrose

Purified cotton                                                      3.29
  "      Hydrocellulose                                              9.70
Cotton mercerised (NaOH 30 deg. B.)                                      4.39
Cotton mercerised (NaOH 40 deg. B.)                                      3.51
Cellulose reprecipitated from cuprammonium                           4.39
Oxycellulose                                                        14.70
Starch                                                              98.6

These numbers show that cellulose may be hydrated both by mercerisation
and solution, without affecting the constitutional relationships of the
CO groups. The results also differentiate the cellulose series from
starch in regard to hydrolysis.

(c) _Cellulose and oxycellulose nitrates._--The nitric esters of
cellulose have a strong reducting action on alkaline copper solutions.
The author has studied this reaction quantitatively for the esters both
of cellulose and oxycellulose, at two stages of 'nitration,' represented
by 8.2-8.6 p.ct. and 13.5-13.9 p.ct. total nitrogen in the
ester-products, respectively. The results are expressed in terms (c.c.)
of the cupric reagent (Pasteur) reduced per 100 grs. compared with
dextrose (=17767).

    Cellulose maximum nitration (13.5 p.ct. N)             3640
    Oxycellulose maximum nitration (13.9 p.ct. N)          3600
    Cellulose minimum nitration (8.19 p.ct. N)             3700
    Oxycellulose minimum nitration (8.56 p.ct. N)          3620

The author concludes that, since the reducing action is independent of
the degree of nitration, and is the same for cellulose and the
oxycelluloses, the ester reaction in the case of the normal cellulose is
accompanied by oxidation, the product being an oxycellulose ester.

_Products of 'denitration'._--The esters were treated with ferrous
chloride in boiling aqueous solution. The products were oxycelluloses,
with a cupric reduction equal to that of an oxycellulose directly
prepared by the action of HClO_{3}. On the other hand, by treatment with
ammonium sulphide at 35 deg.-40 deg. 'denitrated' products were obtained without
action on alkaline copper solutions.


OXYCELLULOSES AND THE MOLECULAR WEIGHT OF CELLULOSE.

H. NASTUKOFF (Berl. Ber. 33 [13] 2237).

(p. 61) The author continues his investigations of the oxidation of
cellulose. [Compare Bull. Mulhouse, 1892.] The products described were
obtained by the action of hypochlorites and permanganates upon Swedish
filter paper (Schleicher and Schuell).

4. _Oxidation by hypochlorites._--(1) The cellulose was digested 24 hrs.
with 35 times its weight of a filtered solution of bleaching power of
4 deg.B.; afterwards drained and exposed for 24 hrs. to the atmosphere.
These treatments were then repeated. After washing, treatment with
dilute acetic acid and again washing, the product was treated with a 10
p.ct. NaOH solution. The oxycellulose was precipitated from the
filtered solution: yield 45 p.ct. The residue when purified amounted to
30 p.ct. of the original cellulose, with which it was identical in all
essential properties.

The oxycellulose, after purification, dried at 110 deg., gave the following
analytical numbers:

     C    43.64     43.78    43.32    43.13
     H     6.17      6.21     5.98     6.08

Its compound with phenylhydrazine (_loc. cit._) gave the following
analytical numbers:

     N      0.78     0.96    0.84

(2) The reagents were as in (1), but the conditions varied by passing a
stream of carbonic acid gas through the solution contained in a flask,
until Cl compounds ceased to be given off. The analysis of the purified
oxycellulose gave C 43.53, H 6.13.

(3) The conditions were as in (2), but a much stronger hypochlorite
solution--viz. 12 deg.B.--was employed. The yield of oxycellulose
precipitated from solution in soda lye (10 p.ct. NaOH) was 45 p.ct.
There was only a slight residue of unattacked cellulose. The analytical
numbers obtained were:

    Oxycellulose              C  43.31   43.74   43.69
        "                     H   6.47    6.42    6.51
                              ________________________

    Phenylhydrazine compound  N           0.62    0.81

B. _Oxidation by permanganate_ (KMnO_{4}). (1) The cellulose 16 grms.
was treated with 1100 c.c. of a 1 p.ct. solution of KMnO_{4} in
successive portions. The MnO_{2} was removed from time to time by
digesting the product with a dilute sulphuric acid (10 p.ct.
H_{2}SO_{4}). The oxycellulose was purified as before, yield 40 p.ct.
Analytical numbers:

    Oxycellulose              C          42.12    42.9
        "                     H           6.20     6.11
                              ________________________

    Phenylhydrazine compound  N   1.35    1.08     1.21

(2) The cellulose (16 grms.) was digested 14 days with 2500 c.c. of 1
p.ct. KMnO_{4} solution. The purified oxycellulose was identical in all
respects with the above: yield 40 p.ct. C 42.66, H 6.19.

(3) The cellulose (16 grms.) was heated in the water-bath with 1600 c.c.
of 15 p.ct. H_{2}SO_{4} to which were added 18 grms. KMnO_{4}. The yield
and composition of the oxycellulose was identical with the above. It
appears from these results that the oxidation with hypochlorites acids 1
atom of O to 4-6 of the unit groups C_{6}H_{10}O_{5}; and the oxidation
with permanganate 2 atoms O per 4-6 units of C_{6}H_{10}O_{5}. The
molecular proportion of N in the phenylhydrazine residue combining is
fractional, representing 1 atom O, i.e. 1 CO group reacting per 4
C_{36}H_{60}O_{31} and 6 C_{24}H_{49}O_{21} respectively, assuming the
reaction to be a hydrazone reaction.

Further investigations of the oxycelluloses by treatment with (a)
sodium amalgam, (b) bromine (water), and (c) dilute nitric acid at
110 deg., led to no positive results.

By treatment with alcoholic soda (NaOH) the products were resolved into
a soluble and insoluble portion, the properties of the latter being
those of a cellulose (hydrate).

_Molecular weight of cellulose and oxycellulose._--The author endeavours
