painful.

"You will receive instructions in the use of certain powers," Venus
said. "These will enable you to perform your new duties."

Duties.

The word carried a strange connotation. Dionysus/Bacchus was the God of
wine, among other things, and women and song had been thrown in as an
afterthought. The duties of a stand-in for a God like that sounded just
a little bit overwhelming.

"These--duties," he said. "Will they be temporary or permanent?"

"Well," Venus said, "that depends." She smiled at him sweetly.

"Depends?"

"So far," Venus said, "our testing shows that you are capable of
handling certain of the duties to be entrusted to you. But, for the
rest, everything depends on your own talents and devotion."

"Ah," Forrester said, and then: "Testing?"

"You don't suppose that we would pick a mortal for an important job like
this without making certain that he was capable of doing the job, do
you?"

"Frankly," Forrester said, "I haven't got around to supposing anything
yet."

Venus smiled again. "We have tested you," she said, "and so far you
appear perfectly capable of exercising your powers."

Forrester blinked. "Exercising?"

"Exactly. As a street brawler, for instance, you do exceptionally well."

"As a--"

"How does your face feel?" she asked.

"My what?" Forrester said. "Oh. Face. Fine. Street brawls, you said?"

"I did," Venus said. "My goodness, the way you bashed that one bruiser
with your drink--that was really excellent. As a matter of fact, I feel
it incumbent on me to tell you that I haven't enjoyed a fight so much in
years."

Wondering whether he should be complimented or just a little ashamed of
himself, Forrester said nothing at all. The idea that he had been under
the personal supervision of Aphrodite herself bothered him more than he
could say. The brawl was the first thing that came to mind. It didn't
seem like the sort of thing a Goddess of Love ought to have been
watching.

And then he thought of the High Priestess.

He felt a blush creeping up around his collar, and was thankful only
that it was not visible under the tan of his skin. He remembered who had
ordered the sacrificial rites, and thought bitterly and guiltily about
spectator sports.

But his face remained perfectly calm.

"So far," Venus said, "I must say that you have come through with flying
colors. You should be proud of yourself."

Forrester didn't feel exactly proud. He wanted to crawl into a hole and
die there.

"Well," he said, "I--"

"But there is more," Aphrodite said.

"More?"

The idea didn't sound attractive. In spite of what one of the tests had
involved, the notion of any more tests was just a little fatiguing.
Besides, Forrester was not at all sure that he would be at his best,
when he knew that dispassionate observers were chronicling his technique
and his every movement.

How much more, he wondered, could he take?

And, he reflected, how much more of _what_?

"We must be certain," Aphrodite said, "that you can prove yourself
worthy of the dignity of a Godling."

"Ah," Forrester said cleverly. "So there are going to be more tests?"

"There are," Venus said. "After all, you will be expected to act as the
_alter persona_ of Dionysus. That involves responsibilities almost
beyond the ken of a mortal."

Wine, Forrester thought wildly, women and song.

He wondered if he were going to be asked to sing something. He couldn't
remember anything except the _Star Spangled Banner_ and an exceptionally
silly rhyme from his childhood. Neither of them seemed just right for
the occasion.

"You must learn to behave as a true God," Venus said. "And we must know
whether you are fitted for the part."

Forrester nodded. The one thing keeping him sane, he reflected, was the
hope of insanity. But the room was still there, and Venus was standing
near him, talking quietly away.

"Thus," she said, "there must be further tests, so that we may be sure
of your capacities."

Capacities? Just what was _that_ supposed to mean? "I see," he lied.
"And suppose I fail?"

"Fail?"

"Suppose I don't live up to expectations," Forrester said.

"Well, then," Venus declared, "I'm afraid the Gods might be angry with
you."

Forrester had no doubt whatever as to the meaning of the words. Either
he lived up to expectations or he didn't live at all. The Gods' anger
was not a small affair, and it seldom satisfied itself with small
results. When a God got angry with you, you simply hoped the result
would be quick. You didn't really dare hope it would also be temporary.

Forrester passed a hand over his forehead. If he had been doing his own
picking, he thought a little sadly, the job of tryout stand-in for
Dionysus was not the job he would have chosen. But then, the choice
wasn't his, and it never had been. It was the Gods who had picked him.

Unfortunately, if he failed, the mistake wouldn't be laid at the door of
the Gods. It would be laid at the door of William Forrester, together
with a nice, big, black funeral wreath.

But it didn't sound too bad at that, he told himself hopefully. After
all, it wasn't every day that a man was offered the job of stand-in for
a God, not every day that a man was offered the chance of passing a lot
of strenuous and embarrassing tests, and dying if he failed.

He told himself sternly to look on the positive side, but all he could
think of was the succession of tests still to come. What would they be
like? How could he ever pass them all? What would be thought necessary
to establish a man as a first-rate double for Dionysus?

Looks, he thought, were obviously the first thing, and he certainly had
those. For a second he almost wished he could see Ed Symes and apologize
for getting mad when Ed had told him he looked like Bacchus.

But then, he reflected, he didn't want to go too far. The idea of
apologizing to Ed Symes, no matter who his sister was, made Forrester's
gorge rise about five and a half feet.

"However," Aphrodite went on, as if she had just thought of something
too unimportant to bother mentioning, "don't worry about it. My father's
thunderbolt needn't concern you. I have every confidence that you will
prove yourself."

She smiled radiantly at him.

The idea occurred to Forrester that she just didn't think that a
mortal's mortality was important. But the idea didn't stay long. Being
reassured by a Goddess, he told himself confusedly, was very reassuring.

Venus was looking him up and down speculatively, and Forrester suddenly
thought a new test was coming. A little gentle sweat began to break out
on his forehead again, but his face stayed calm. He took a deep breath
and tried to concentrate on gathering strength. The High Priestess had
been something special but, Forrester thought, she had not really called
out his _all_. Venus was clearly another matter.

But Venus said only: "Those clothes," in a considering sort of tone.

"Clothes?" Forrester said, trying to readjust in a hurry.

"You certainly can't go in those clothes. Hera would object quite
violently, I'm afraid. She's awfully stuffy about such things."

The intimate details about the Gods intrigued Forrester. "Stuffy? Hera?"

"Confidentially," Venus said, "at times, the All-Mother can be an
absolute bitch."

She went over to one of the light-swirled walls, and a part of the light
seemed to fade as she did so. Of course, she did nothing so crude as
opening a door. When she started for the wall there was no closet
apparent there, but when she arrived it was there, solid, and open.

It was just that simple.

She took out a white robe and started back. Forrester took his eyes from
her with an effort and watched the closet disappear again. By the time
she had reached him, it was only a part of the swirling wall again.

And the hospital attendants were nowhere in sight.

She handed Forrester the robe. He took it warily, but it seemed real
enough. At any rate, it was as real as anything else that was happening
to him, he thought.

It was a simple tunic, cut in the style of the ancient Greek _chiton_,
and open at one side instead of the front. Forrester turned it in his
hands. At the waist and shoulder there was a golden clasp to hold it in
place. The clasp wasn't figured in any special way. The material itself
was odd: it was an almost fluorescent white and, though it was perfectly
opaque, it was thinner than any paper Forrester had ever seen in public.
It almost didn't seem to be there when he rubbed it between his thumb
and forefinger.

"Well, don't just stand there," Venus said. "Get started."

"Started?" Forrester said.

"Get dressed. The others are waiting for you."

"Others?"

But she didn't answer. Forrester looked frantically around the room for
anything that looked even remotely like a dressing room. As a last
resort, he was willing to settle for a screen. No room, no screen. He
was willing to settle for a chair he could crouch behind. There was
none.

He looked hopefully at the Goddess. Perhaps, he thought, she would leave
while he dressed. She showed no sign of doing so. He cleared his throat
and jerked at his collar nervously.

"Now, now," Venus said sternly. "Don't tell me the presence of your
Goddess embarrasses you." She raised her head imperiously. "Hurry it
up."

Very slowly, he began taking off his clothes. There was, after all,
nothing to be ashamed of, he told himself. As a matter of fact, Venus
ought to be getting used to the sight of him undressing by this time.

Somehow, he finally managed to get the _chiton_ on straight. Venus
looked him over and nodded her approval.

"Come along now," she said. "They're waiting for us. And one thing:
don't get nervous, for Hera's sake. You're all right."

"Oh," Forrester said. "Sure. Perfectly all right. Right as rain."

"Well, you are. As a matter of fact, I think you'll make a fine
Dionysus."

She led him toward a wall opposite where the closet had been. As they
approached it, a section of it became bluer and bluer. With a sinking
feeling, Forrester told himself that he knew what was coming.

He did. The wall dissolved into the shimmering blue haze of a Veil of
Heaven, just like the one that had transported him from New York to his
present position. Where that was, he wasn't entirely sure, but
remembering his one look out the window, he suspected it was Mount
Olympus.

But there wasn't any time for thinking. Venus took his hand coolly as
they reached the blue haze. Then both of them stepped through.




CHAPTER SIX


The room into which they stepped seemed even larger than the one they
had left. The distances were just as hard to measure, and why Forrester
had the feeling, he couldn't have said, but it did feel larger. The
sense of enormous space hung over it.

The wall colors were just the same, however, dripping and changing in a
continuous flow of patterns, with the little sunbursts and rainbows
appearing here and there without any visible reason.

But the room itself was comparatively unimportant, Forrester knew. It
was what went on in the room that sent shivers up his spine, and
instructed one knee to start knocking against other one. He had heard of
the Court of the Gods, though as far as he knew no mortal had ever seen
it. There were certainly no photographs of it, even in the most
exhaustive travel books.

Forrester knew without question that he was standing in that Courtroom.
The knowledge did not make him calm. And the beings sitting and
reclining on couches along the shimmering walls made him feel even
worse. He recognized every one of them, and every one sent a new shock
of awe running through his nerves. His stomach felt like a hard rubber
handball.

There was Zeus All-Father, with his great, silvery, ringleted beard. His
hands were combing through it and he was frowning majestically into the
distance. Next to him was the imperious Hera, Mother of the Gods. She
sat with her hands folded in her lap, as if she were waiting for the end
of the world to be announced. There was Mars, tough and hairy-chested,
scratching his side with one hand and scowling horribly. His fierce,
bearded face looked somehow out of place without the battle helmet that
usually topped it. The horned and goat-legged Pan was there, and Vulcan,
crippled and ugly with his squat body and giant arms, reclining like an
ape on a couch all alone, and motherly looking Ceres using one hand to
pat her hair as if she, not Forrester, were the nervous one.

Athena was there, too, lovely and gray-eyed. She seemed to be smiling at
him with special favor, and Forrester felt grateful.

He needed all the help he could get.

But the other Gods were absent. Where were they? Pluto and Phoebus
Apollo were missing, and so were Mercury, Neptune, Dionysus and Diana.

And ...

"Ah," the great voice of Zeus boomed, as Forrester and Venus stepped
through the Veil. Forrester heard the voice and shuddered. "The mortal
is here," Zeus went on in his awe-inspiring roar. "Welcome, Mortal!"

Forrester opened his mouth, but Hera got in ahead of him.

She leaned over to her divine husband and hissed, in a tone audible to
everyone in the room: "Don't belabor the obvious, dear. Enough's
enough."
