again reduc'd into such a Metal as it was before, which shews: that it
retain'd its Nature, notwithstanding its being mixt _per Minima_ with
the other: We likewise see, that though one part of pure Silver be
mingled with eight or ten Parts, or more, of Lead, yet the Fire will
upon the Cuppel easily and perfectly separate them again. And that
which I would have you peculiarly Consider on this Occasion is, that
not only in Chymicall Anatomies there is a Separation made of the
Elementary Ingredients, but that some Mixt Bodies afford a very much
greater Quantity of this or that Element or Principle than of another;
as we see, that Turpentine and Amber yield much more Oyl and Sulphur
than they do Water, whereas Wine, which is confess'd to be a perfectly
mixt Bodie, yields but a little Inflamable Spirit, or Sulphur, and not
much more Earth; but affords a vast proportion of Phlegm or water:
which could not be, if as the Peripateticks suppose, every, even of
the minutest Particles, were of the same nature with the whole, and
consequently did contain both Earth and Water, and Aire, and Fire;
Wherefore as to what _Aristotle_ principally, and almost only Objects,
that unless his Opinion be admitted, there would be no true and
perfect Mistion, but onely Aggregates or Heaps of contiguous
Corpuscles, which, though the Eye of Man cannot discerne, yet the Eye
of a _Lynx_ might perceive not to be of the same Nature with one
another and with their _Totum_, as the Nature of Mistion requires, if
he do not beg the Question, and make Mistion to consist in what other
Naturalists deny to be requisite to it, yet He at least objects That
as a great Inconvenience which I cannot take for such, till he have
brought as Considerable Arguments as I have propos'd to prove the
contrary, to evince that Nature makes other Mistions than such as I
have allowed, wherein the _Miscibilia_ are reduc'd into minute Parts,
and United as farr as sense can discerne: which if You will not grant
to be sufficient for a true Mistion, he must have the same Quarrel
with Nature her self, as with his Adversaries.

Wherefore (Continues _Eleutherius_) I cannot but somewhat marvail that
_Carneades_ should oppose the Doctrine of the Chymist in a Particular,
wherein they do as well agree with his old Mistress, Nature, as
dissent from his old Adversary, _Aristotle_.

I must not (replies _Carneades_) engage my self at present to examine
thorowly the Controversies concerning Mistion: And if there were no
third thing, but that I were reduc'd to embrace absolutely and
unreservedly either the Opinion of _Aristotle_, or that of the
Philosophers that went before him, I should look upon the latter,
which the Chymists have adopted, as the more defensible Opinion: But
because differing in the Opinions about the Elements from both
Parties, I think I can take a middle Course, and Discourse to you of
Mistion after a way that does neither perfectly agree, nor perfectly
disagree with either, as I will not peremptorily define, whether there
be not Cases wherein some _Phaenomena_ of Mistion seem to favour the
Opinion that the Chymists Patrons borrow'd of the Antients, I shall
only endeavour to shew You that there are some cases which may keep
the Doubt, which makes up my second General Consideration from being
unreasonable.

I shall then freely acknowledge to You (sayes _Carneades_) that I am
not over well satisfi'd with the Doctrine that is ascribed to
_Aristotle_, concerning Mistion, especially since it teaches that the
four Elements may again be separated from the mixt Body; whereas if
they continu'd not in it, it would not be so much a Separation as a
Production. And I think the Ancient Philosophers that Preceded
_Aristotle_, and Chymists who have since receiv'd the same Opinion, do
speak of this matter more intelligibly, if not more probably, then the
Peripateticks: but though they speak Congruously enough, to their
believing, that there are a certain Number of Primogeneal Bodies, by
whose Concourse all those we call Mixts are Generated, and which in
the Destruction of mixt Bodies do barely part company, and recede from
one another, just such as they were when they came together; yet I,
who meet with very few Opinions that I can entirely Acquiesce in,
must confess to You that I am inclin'd to differ not only from the
_Aristotelians_, but from the old Philosophers and the Chymists, about
the Nature of Mistion: And if You will give me leave, I shall Briefly
propose to you my present Notion of it, provided you will look upon
it, not so much as an Assertion as an _Hypothesis_; in talking of
which I do not now pretend to propose and debate the whole Doctrine of
Mistion, but to shew that 'tis not Improbable, that sometimes mingl'd
substances may be so strictly united, that it doth not by the usuall
Operations of the Fire, by which Chymists are wont to suppose
themselves to have made the _Analyses_ of mixt Bodies, sufficiently
appear, that in such Bodies the _Miscibilia_ that concurr'd to make
them up do each of them retain its own peculiar Nature: and by the
_Spagyrists_ Fires may be more easily extricated and Recover'd, than
Alter'd, either by a Change of Texture in the Parts of the same
Ingredient, or by an Association with some parts of another Ingredient
more strict than was that of the parts of this or that _Miscibile_
among themselves. At these words _Eleu._ having press'd him to do
what he propos'd, and promis'd to do what he desir'd;

I consider then (resumes _Carneades_) that, not to mention those
improper Kinds of mistion, wherein _Homogeneous_ Bodies are Joyn'd, as
when Water is mingl'd with water, or two Vessels full of the same kind
of Wine with one another, the mistion I am now to Discourse of seems,
Generally speaking, to be but an Union _per Minima_ of any two or more
Bodies of differing Denominations; as when Ashes and Sand are
Colliquated into Glass or Antimony, and Iron into _Regulus Martis_, or
Wine and Water are mingl'd, and Sugar is dissolv'd in the Mixture. Now
in this general notion of Mistion it does not appear clearly
comprehended, that the _Miscibilia_ or Ingredients do in their small
Parts so retain their Nature and remain distinct in the Compound, that
they may thence by the Fire be again taken asunder: For though I deny
not that in some Mistions of certain permanent Bodies this Recovery of
the same Ingredients may be made, yet I am not convinc'd that it will
hold in all or even in most, or that it is necessarily deducible from
Chymicall Experiments, and the true Notion of Mistion. To explain
this a little, I assume, that Bodies may be mingl'd, and that very
durably, that are not Elementary or resolv'd [Errata: nor have been
resolved] into Elements or Principles that they may be mingl'd; as is
evident in the _Regulus_ of Colliquated Antimony, and Iron newly
mention'd; and in Gold Coyne, which lasts so many ages; wherein
generally the Gold is alloy'd by the mixture of a quantity, greater or
lesser, (in our Mints they use about a 12th. part) of either silver,
or Copper, or both. Next, I consider, that there being but one
Universal matter of things, as 'tis known that the _Aristotelians_
themselves acknowledge, who call it _Materia Prima_ (about which
nevertheless I like not all their Opinions,) the Portions of this
matter seem to differ from One Another, but in certain Qualities or
Accidents, fewer or more; upon whose Account the Corporeal Substance
they belong to receives its Denomination, and is referr'd to this or
that particular sort of Bodies; so that if it come to lose, or be
depriv'd of those Qualities, though it ceases not to be a body, yet it
ceases from being that kind of Body as a Plant, or Animal; or Red,
Green, Sweet, Sowre, or the like. I consider that it very often
happens that the small parts of Bodies cohere together but by
immediate Contact and Rest; and that however, there are few Bodies
whose minute Parts stick so close together, to what cause soever their
Combination be ascrib'd, but that it is possible to meet with some
other Body, whose small Parts may get between them, and so dis-joyn
them; or may be fitted to cohere more strongly with some of them, then
those some do with the rest; or at least may be combin'd so closely
with them, as that neither the Fire, nor the other usual Instruments
of Chymical Anatomies will separate them. These things being promis'd,
I will not peremptorily deny, but that there may be some Clusters of
Particles, wherein the Particles are so minute, and the Coherence so
strict, or both, that when Bodies of Differing Denominations, and
consisting of such durable Clusters, happen to be mingl'd, though the
Compound Body made up of them may be very Differing from either of
the Ingredients, yet each of the little Masses or Clusters may so
retain its own Nature, as to be again separable, such as it was
before. As when Gold and Silver being melted together in a Due
Proportion (for in every Proportion, the Refiners will tell You that
the Experiment will not succeed) _Aqua Fortis_ will dissolve the
Silver, and leave the Gold untoucht; by which means, as you lately
noted, both the Metalls may be recover'd from the mixed Mass. But
(Continues _Carneades_) there are other Clusters wherein the Particles
stick not so close together, but that they may meet with Corpuscles of
another Denomination, which are dispos'd to be more closely United
with some of them, then they were among themselves. And in such case,
two thus combining Corpuscles losing that Shape, or Size, or Motion,
or other Accident, upon whose Account they were endow'd with such a
Determinate Quality or Nature, each of them really ceases to be a
Corpuscle of the same Denomination it was before; and from the
Coalition of these there may emerge a new Body, as really one, as
either of the Corpuscles was before they were mingl'd, or, if you
please, Confounded: Since this Concretion is really endow'd with its
own Distinct qualities, and can no more by the Fire, or any other
known way of _Analysis_, be divided again into the Corpuscles that at
first concurr'd to make it, than either of them could by the same
means be subdivided into other Particles. But (sayes _Eleutherius_) to
make this more intelligible by particular examples; If you dissolve
Copper in _Aqua Fortis_, or Spirit of Nitre, (for I remember not which
I us'd, nor do I think it much Material) You may by Crystalizing the
Solution Obtain a goodly Vitriol; which though by Virtue of the
Composition it have manifestly diverse Qualities, not to be met with
in either of the Ingredients, yet it seems that the Nitrous Spirits,
or at least many of them, may in this Compounded Mass retain their
former Nature; for having for tryal sake Distill'd this Vitrioll
Spirit, there came over store of Red Fumes, which by that Colour, by
their peculiar stinke, and by their Sourness, manifested themselves to
be, Nitrous Spirits; and that the remaining Calx continu'd Copper, I
suppose you'l easily beleeve. But if you dissolve _Minium_, which is
but Lead Powder'd by the Fire, in good Spirit of Vinager, and
Crystalize the Solution, you shall not only have a Saccharine Salt
exceedingly differing from both its Ingredients; but the Union of some
Parts of the _Menstruum_ with some of those of the Metal is so strict,
that the Spirit of Vinager seems to be, as such, destroy'd, since the
Saline Corpuscles have quite lost that acidity, upon whose Account the
Liquor was call'd Spirit of Vinager; nor can any such Acid Parts as
were put to the _Minium_ be Separated by any known way from the
_Saccharum Saturni_ resulting from them both; for not only there is no
Sowrness at all, but an admirable Sweetness to be tasted in the
Concretion; and not only I found not that Spirit of Wine, which
otherwise will immediately hiss when mingl'd with strong Spirit of
Vinager, would hiss being pour'd upon _Saccharum Saturni_, wherein yet
the Acid Salt of Vinager, did it Survive, may seem to be concentrated;
but upon the Distillation of _Saccharum Saturni_ by its Self I found
indeed a Liquor very Penetrant, but not at all Acid, and differing as
well in smell and other Qualities, as in tast, from the Spirit of
Vinager; which likewise seem'd to have left some of its Parts very
firmly united to the _Caput Mortuum_, which though of a Leaden Nature
was in smell, Colour, &c. differing from _Minium_; which brings into
my mind, that though two Powders, the one Blew, and the other Yellow,
may appear a Green mixture, without either of them losing its own
Colour, as a good Microscope has sometimes inform'd me; yet having
mingl'd _Minium_ and _Sal Armoniack_ in a requisite Proportion, and
expos'd them in a Glass Vessel to the Fire, the whole Mass became
White, and the Red Corpuscles were destroy'd; for though the Calcin'd
Lead was separable from the Salt, yet you'l easily beleeve it did not
part from it in the Forme of a Red Powder, such as was the _Minium_,
when it was put to the _Sal Armoniack_. I leave it also to be
consider'd, whether in Blood, and divers other Bodies, it be probable,
that each of the Corpuscles that concurr to make a Compound Body doth,
though some of them in some Cases may, retain its own Nature in it,
so that Chymsts [Transcriber's Note: Chymists] may Extricate each sort
of them from all the others, wherewith it concurr'd to make a Body of
one Denomination.

I know there may be a Distinction betwixt Matter _Immanent_, when the
material Parts remain and retain their own Nature in the things
materiated, as some of the Schoolmen speak, (in which sence Wood,
Stones and Lime are the matter of a House,) and _Transient_, which in
the materiated thing is so alter'd, as to receive a new Forme, without
being capable of re-admitting again the Old. In which sence the
Friends of this Distinction say, that _Chyle_ is the matter of Blood,
and Blood that of a Humane Body, of all whose Parts 'tis presum'd to
be the Aliment. I know also that it may be said, that of material
Principles, some are _common_ to all mixt Bodies, as _Aristotles_ four
Elements, or the Chymists _Tria Prima_; others _Peculiar_, which
belong to this or that sort of Bodies; as Butter and a kind of whey
may be said to be the Proper Principles of Cream: and I deny not, but
that these Distinctions may in some Cases be of Use; but partly by
what I have said already, and partly by what I am to say, You may
easily enough guess in what sence I admit them, and discerne that in
such a sence they will either illustrate some of my Opinions, or at
least will not overthrow any of them.

To prosecute then what I was saying before, I will add to this
purpose, That since the Major part of Chymists Credit, what those they
call Philosophers affirme of their Stone, I may represent to them,
that though when Common Gold and Lead are mingled Together, the Lead
may be sever'd almost un-alter'd from the Gold; yet if instead of Gold
a _Tantillum_ of the Red _Elixir_ be mingled with the Saturn, their
Union will be so indissoluble in the perfect Gold that will be
produc'd by it, that there is no known, nor perhaps no possible way of
separating the diffus'd _Elixir_ from the fixed Lead, but they both
Constitute a most permanent Body, wherein the Saturne seems to have
quite lost its Properties that made it be call'd Lead, and to have
been rather transmuted by the _Elixir_, then barely associated to it.
So that it seems not alwayes necessary, that the Bodies that are put
together _per minima_, should each retain its own Nature; So as when
the Mass it Self is dissipated by the Fire, to be more dispos'd to
re-appear in its Pristine Forme, then in any new one, which by a
stricter association of its Parts with those of some of the other
Ingredients of the _Compositum_, then with one another, it may have
acquired.

And if it be objected, that unless the _Hypothesis_ I oppose be
admitted, in such Cases as I have proposed there would not be an Union
but a Destruction of mingled Bodies, which seems all one as to say,
that of such Bodies there is no mistion at all; I answer, that
_though_ the Substances that are mingl'd remain, only their Accidents
are Destroy'd, and _though_ we may with tollerable Congruity call them
_Miscibilia_, because they are Distinct Bodies before they are put
together, however afterwards they are so Confounded that I should
rather call them Concretions, or Resulting Bodies, than mixt ones; and
_though_, perhaps, some other and better Account may be propos'd, upon
which the name of mistion may remain; yet if what I have said be
thought Reason, I shall not wrangle about Words, though I think it
fitter to alter a Terme of Art, then reject a new Truth, because it
suits not with it. If it be also Objected that this Notion of mine,
concerning mixtion, though it may be allow'd, when Bodies already
Compounded are put to be mingl'd, yet it is not applicable to those
mixtions that are immediately made of the Elements, or Principles
themselves; I Answer in the first place, that I here Consider the
Nature of mixtion somewhat more Generally, then the Chymists, who yet
cannot deny that there are oftentimes Mixtures, and those very durable
ones, made of Bodies that are not Elementary. And in the next place,
that though it may be probably pretended that in those Mixtures that
are made immediately of the Bodies that are call'd Principles or
Elements, the mingl'd Ingredients may better retain their own Nature
in the Compounded Mass, and be more easily separated from thence; yet,
besides that it may be doubted, whether there be any such Primary
Bodies, I see not why the reason I alleadg'd, of the destructibility
of the Ingredients of Bodies in General, may not sometimes be
Applicable to Salt Sulphur or Mercury; 'till it be shewn upon what
account we are to believe them Priviledged. And however, (if you
please but to recall to mind, to what purpose I told you at First, I
meant to speak of Mistion at this Time) you will perhaps allow that
what I have hitherto Discoursed about it may not only give some Light
to the Nature of it in general (especially when I shall have an
Opportunity to Declare to you my thoughts on that subject more fully)
but may on some Occasions also be Serviceable to me in the Insuing
Part of this Discourse.

But, to look back Now to that part of our Discourse, whence this
Excursion concerning Mistion has so long diverted us, though we there
Deduc'd, from the differing Substances obtained from a Plant nourished
only with Water, and from some other things, that it was not necessary
that nature should alwaies compound a Body at first of all such
differing bodies as the fire could afterwards make it afford; yet this
is not all that may be collected from those Experiments. For from
them there seems also Deducible something that Subverts an other
Foundation of the Chymical Doctrine. For since that (as we have seen)
out of fair Water alone, not only Spirit, but Oyle, and Salt, and
Earth may be Produced; It will follow that Salt and Sulphur are not
Primogeneal Bodies, and principles, since they are every Day made out
of plain Water by the Texture which the Seed or Seminal principle of
plants puts it into. And this would not perhaps seem so strange, if
through pride, or negligence, We were not Wont to Overlook the Obvious
and Familiar Workings of Nature; For if We consider what slight
Qualities they are that serve to denominate one of the _Tria Prima_,
We shall find that Nature do's frequently enough work as great
Alterations in divers parcells of matter: For to be readily dissoluble
in water, is enough to make the body that is so, passe for a Salt. And
yet I see not why from a new shufling and Disposition of the Component
Particles of a body, it should be much harder for Nature to compose a
body dissoluble in Water, of a portion of Water that was not so
before, then of the Liquid substance of an Egg, which will easily mix
with Water, to produce by the bare warmth of a hatching Hen, Membrans,
Feathers, Tendons, and other parts, that are not dissoluble in Water
as that Liquid Substance was: Nor is the Hardness and Brittleness of
Salt more difficult for Nature to introduce into such a yielding body
as Water, then it is for her to make the Bones of a Chick out of the
tender Substance of the Liquors of an Egg. But instead of prosecuting
this consideration, as I easily might, I will proceed, as soon as I
have taken notice of an objection that lies in my Way. For I easily
foresee it will be alledged, that the above mentioned Examples are all
taken from Plants, and Animals, in whom the Matter is Fashioned by the
Plastick power of the seed, or something analogous thereunto. Whereas
the Fire do's not act like any of the Seminal Principles, but
destroyes them all, when they come within its Reach. But to this I
shall need at present to make but this easy Answer, That whether it be
a Seminal Principle, or any other which fashions that Matter after
those various manners I have mentioned to You, yet 'tis Evident, that
either by the Plastick principle Alone, or that and Heat Together, or
by some Other cause capable to contex the matter, it is yet possible
that the matter may be Anew contriv'd into such Bodies. And 'tis only
for the Possibility of this that I am now contending.




THE

SCEPTICAL CHYMIST.

_The Third Part._


What I have hitherto Discours'd, _Eleutherius_, (sayes his Friend to
Him) has, I presume, shew'n You, that a Considering Man may very well
question the Truth of those very Suppositions which Chymists as well
as Peripateticks, without proving, take for granted; and upon which
Depends the Validity of the Inferences they draw from their
Experiments. Wherefore having dispach't that, which though a Chymist
Perhaps will not, yet I do, look upon as the most Important, as well
as Difficult, part of my Task, it will now be Seasonable for me to
proceed to the Consideration of the Experiments themselves, wherein
they are wont so much to Triumph and Glory. And these will the rather
deserve a serious Examination, because those that Alledge them are
wont to do it with so much Confidence and Ostentation, that they have
hitherto impos'd upon almost all Persons, without excepting
Philosophers and Physitians themselves, who have read their Books, or
heard them talk. For some learned Men have been content rather to
beleeve what they so boldly Affirm, then be at the trouble and charge,
to try whether or no it be True. Others again, who have Curiosity
enough to Examine the Truth of what is Averr'd, want Skill and
Opportunity to do what they Desire. And the Generality even of Learned
Men, seeing the Chymists (not contenting themselves with the Schools
to amuse the World with empty words) Actually Perform'd divers strange
things, and, among those Resolve Compound Bodies into several
Substances not known by former Philosophers to be contain'd in them:
Men I say, seeing these Things, and Hearing with what Confidence
Chymists Averr the Substances Obtain'd from Compound Bodies by the
Fire to be the True Elements, or, (as they speak) Hypostaticall
Principles of them, are forward to think it but Just as well as
Modest, that according to the _Logicians_ Rule, the Skilfull _Artists_
should be Credited in their own Art; Especially when those things
whose Nature they so Confidently take upon them to teach others are
not only Productions of their own Skill, but such as others Know not
else what to make of.

But though (Continues _Carneades_) the Chymists have been able upon
some or other of the mention'd Acounts, not only to Delight but Amaze,
and almost to bewitch even Learned Men; yet such as You and I, who are
not unpractis'd in the Trade, must not suffer our Selves to be impos'd
upon by hard Names, or bold Assertions; nor to be dazl'd by that Light
which should but assist us to discern things the more clearly. It is
one thing to be able to help Nature to produce things, and another
thing to Understand well the Nature of the things produc'd. As we
see, that many Persons that can beget Children, are for all that as
Ignorant of the Number and Nature of the parts, especially the
internal ones, that Constitute a Childs Body, as they that never were
Parents. Nor do I Doubt, but you'l excuse me, if as I thank the
Chymists for the things their _Analysis_ shews me, so I take the
Liberty to consider how many, and what they are, without being
astonish'd at them; as if, whosoever hath Skill enough to shew men
some new thing of his own making, had the Right to make them believe
whatsoever he pleases to tell them concerning it.

Wherefore I will now proceed to my Third General Consideration, which
is, That it does not appear, that _Three_ is precisely and Universally
the Number of the Distinct Substances or Elements, whereinto mixt
Bodies are resoluble by the Fire; I mean that 'tis not prov'd by
Chymists, that all the Compound Bodies, which are granted to be
perfectly mixt, are upon their Chymical _Analysis_ divisible each of
them into just Three Distinct Substances, neither more nor less,
which are wont to be lookt upon as Elementary, or may as well be
reputed so as those that are so reputed. Which last Clause I subjoyne,
to prevent your Objecting, that some of the Substances I may have
occasion to mention by and by, are not perfectly Homogeneous, nor
Consequently worthy of the name of Principles. For that which I am now
to consider, is, into how many Differing Substances, that may
plausibly pass for the Elementary Ingredients of a mix'd Body, it may
be Analyz'd by the Fire; but whether each of these be un-compounded, I
reserve to examine, when I shall come to the next General
Consideration; where I hope to evince, that the Substances which the
Chymists not only allow, but assert to be the Component Principles of
the Body resolv'd into them, are not wont to be uncompounded.

Now there are two Kind of Arguments (pursues _Carneades_) which may be
brought to make my Third Proposition seem probable; one sort of them
being of a more Speculative Nature, and the other drawn from
Experience. To begin then with the first of these.

But as _Carneades_ was going to do as he had said, _Eleutherius_
interrupted him, by saying with a somewhat smiling countenance;

If you have no mind I should think, that the Proverb, _That Good Wits
have bad Memories_, is Rational and Applicable to You, You must not
Forget now you are upon the Speculative Considerations, that may
relate to the Number of the Elements; that your Self did not long
since Deliver and Concede some Propositions in Favour of the Chymical
Doctrine, which I may without disparagement to you think it uneasie,
even for _Carneades_ to answer.

I have not, replies he, Forgot the Concessions you mean; but I hope
too, that you have not forgot neither with what Cautions they were
made, when I had not yet assumed the Person I am now sustaining. But
however, I shall to content You, so discourse of my Third general
