said, it'll make the Brinks job look like peanuts. They lock up the
place and leave, see? O.K., about two o'clock in the morning, when the
city's dead, Larry and the boys drive up into an alley, behind. I go
around, one by one, and sock the four guards on the back of the head.
Then I open up for Larry and they take their time and clear the place
out. From then on, we got all the dough we need to start pyramiding it
up on the Stock Exchange and like that."

Patricia had drawn on rubber gloves, pulled a lab apron around her. She
began reaching for test tubes, measuring devices. She murmured softly,
"What keeps you from telling yourself you're nothing but a crook, Don?
When we first met you--it seems a terribly long time ago, back there in
Far Cry--you didn't seem to be such a bad egg."

"We didn't know, then, he was a cracked egg," Ross muttered. He looked
to where Crowley slouched, his eyes narrow as though considering his
chances of rushing the other. Crowley grinned and shook his head. "Don't
try it, Buster."

Crowley looked at Patricia. "You don't get it, sister. It's like
somebody or other said. The ends, uh, justify the means. That means...."

"I know what it means," Patricia said impatiently.

Dr. Braun, who rather hopelessly was also beginning to work at the
equipment their captor had provided, said reasonably, "Don, the greater
number of the thinkers of the world have rejected that maxim. If you
will, umah, analyze it, you will find that the end and the means are
one."

"Yeah, yeah, a lot of complicated egghead gas. What I'm saying, Pat, is
that what I'm eventually heading for is good for everybody. At least
it's good for all real hundred per cent Americans. Everybody's going to
go to college and guaranteed to come out with what you three got, a
doctor's degree. Everybody's going to get a guaranteed annual wage,
like, whether or not they can do any work. It's not a guy's fault if he
gets sick or unemployed or something. Everybody...."

"Shades of all the social-reformers who ever lived," Ross muttered.

"By Caesar," Braun said in despair, "I have an idea you'll get the vote
of every halfwit in the country."

Crowley came to his feet. "I don't like that kind of talk, Doc. Maybe
I'm just a country boy, but I know what the common man wants and what
I'm going to do is give it to him."

Patricia looked up from her work long enough to frown at him. "What
special are you going to get out of this, Don?"

That took him back for a moment and he scowled at her.

"Come, come," she said. "You've already admitted to we three just what
you think and are going to do. Now, how do you picture yourself, after
all this has been accomplished?"

His face suddenly broke into its grin, a somewhat sly element in it now.
"You know, when I get this all worked out, the folks are going to be
pretty thankful."

"I'll bet," Ross muttered. He, too, was working at his element of
compounding the serum.

"Yeah, they will, Buster," Crowley said truculently. "And they're going
to want to show it. You ever seen one of those movies like 'Ben Hur'
back in Roman days? Can you imagine everybody in the whole country
thinking you were the best guy ever lived? You know, like an Emperor."

"Like Caligula," Dr. Braun said softly.

"I don't know any of their names, but they really had it made. Snap your
fingers and there's a big banquet with the best floor show in the world.
Snap your fingers and here comes the sexiest dames in Hollywood. Snap
your fingers and some big entertainment like a chariot race, or
something. Once I put this over, the Common Man Party, that's the way
people are going to feel about me and want to treat me."

"And if they don't, you'll make them?" Ross said sarcastically.

"You're too smart for your own britches, egghead," Crowley snarled. He
looked at his watch. "Let's get this rolling. I got to get on down to
the city and start this caper going."

Ross handed a test tube to Dr. Braun and began stripping the gloves from
his hands. "That's my contribution," he said.

Patricia had already delivered hers. Dr. Braun combined them, then
heated the compound, adding a distillate of his own. He said, "When this
cools...."

Crowley crossed the room to the door and said something to the guard
there. He returned in a moment with an anthropoid ape in a cage. He sat
it on the table and looked at them.

"O.K.," he said to Braun, his voice dangerous. "Let's see you inject the
monk with this new batch of serum."

Braun raised his eyebrows.

The other watched him narrowly, saying nothing further.

Dr. Braun shrugged, located a hypodermic needle and prepared it. In a
matter of moments, the animal was injected.

Ross Wooley said sourly, "Don't you trust your fellow man, Don?"

"No, I don't, and stop calling me Don. It's Dan. Daniel Crowley."

The three of them looked at him in bewilderment.

The ape was beginning to shimmer as though he was being seen through a
window wet with driving rain.

"Don's my goody-goody brother. Used to live in the same house with me,
but ever since we were kids and I got picked up on a juvenile delinquent
rap for swiping a car, he's been snotty. Anyway, now he's moved out to
Frisco."

Patricia blurted, "But ... but you let us believe you were Donald...."

He brushed it off with a flick of his hand. "You said you had some deal
where I could make me some money. O.K., I was between jobs."

The ape was invisible now. Crowley peered in at him. "Seems to work, all
right."

Dr. Braun sighed. "I am not a Borgia, Daniel Crowley."

"You're not a what?"

"Never mind. I wouldn't poison even you, if that is what you feared."

Daniel Crowley took up the new container of serum and put a lid on it.
He said, "I got to get going. The guy out in front will get you back to
your rooms. No tricks with him, Buster"--he was talking directly to
Ross--"he's already beat a couple of homicide raps."

       *       *       *       *       *

Back in their cell-rooms, they found that there was but one guard.
Evidently, the all-out robbery attempt to be held this night involved
practically all of Larry Morazzoni's forces. Beyond that, this guard did
not seem particularly interested in keeping them from talking back and
forth to each other through the peepholes that centered their doors.

After a couple of hours during which time they largely held silence,
immersed in their own thoughts, Dr. Braun called out, "Patricia, Ross, I
should tender my apologies. It was my less than brilliant idea to find
the average man and use him as a guinea pig."

"No apology necessary," Patricia said impatiently. "We all went into it
with open eyes."

"But you were correct, Pat," the doctor said unhappily. "Our common man
turned out to be a Frankenstein monster."

Ross growled, "That's the trouble. It turned out he wasn't our common
man but his brother, whose petty criminal record evidently goes back to
juvenile days."

"Even that doesn't matter," Patricia said testily. "I've about come to
the conclusion that it wouldn't have made any difference _who_ we'd put
in Don's ... I mean Daniel Crowley's position. Man is too near the
animal, as yet at least, to be trusted with such power. Any man."

"Why, Pat," Dr. Braun said doggedly, "I don't quite believe you correct.
For instance, do you feel the same about me? Would I have reacted like
our friend Dan?" He chuckled in deprecation.

"That's my point," she said. "I think you would ... ultimately. Once
again look at the Caesars, they held godlike power."

"You're thinking of such as Tiberius, Caligula, Nero, Commodus...."

"I'm also thinking of such as Claudius, the scholar who was practically
forced to take the Imperial mantle. And Marcus Aurelius, the philosopher
who although bound up in learning himself allowed his family free rein
in their vices and finally turned the Empire over to his son Commodus,
one of the most vicious men of all time. But take Caligula and Nero if
you will. Both of them stepped into power comparatively clean and with
the best of prospects. Well approved, well loved. What happened to them
when given power without restraint?"

Ross grumbled, "I admit I missed the boat, but not for the reasons Pat
presents. In a sane society, our serum would be a valuable contribution.
But in a dog eat dog world, where it's each man for himself, then it
becomes a criminal tool."

Patricia said sarcastically, "And can you point out a sane society?"

Ross grunted. "No," he said. After a moment he added, "You know, in a
way Crowley was right. We three eggheads didn't do so well up against
what he called his common sense. I tried to slug him, with negative
results. Dr. Braun, you tried sweet reason on him. Forgive me if I
laugh. Pat, you tried your womanly wiles, but he saw through that, too."

"The chickens have not all come home to roost," Patricia said
mysteriously. "What time is it?"

Ross told her.

She called to the guard, "See here, you."

"Shut up. You ain't supposed to be talking at all. Go to sleep."

"I want to speak to Mr. Morazzoni. It's very important and you are going
to be dreadfully sorry if you don't bring him."

"Larry can't be bothered. He's getting ready to go on down to the city."

"I know what he's doing, but if he doesn't listen to me, he's going to
be very unhappy and probably full of bullet holes."

The guard came over to her door and stared at her for a long moment. He
checked the lock on her door and then those of Dr. Braun and Ross
Wooley. "We'll see who's going to be sorry," he grunted. He turned and
left.

       *       *       *

When he returned it was with both Larry Morazzoni and Paul Teeter, Dan
Crowley's political adviser. Morazzoni growled, "What goes on? You
squares looking for trouble?"

Patricia said testily, "I suggest you let us out of here, Mr. Morazzoni.
If you do, we pledge not to press kidnaping charges against you. I
believe you are aware of the penalty in this State."

"You trying to be funny?"

"Definitely not, Mr. Morazzoni," Patricia said icily. "Daniel Crowley
bragged to us of your plans for tonight."

The hoodlum muttered a contemptuous obscenity under his breath.

Paul Teeter, the heavy-set southerner said jovially, "But what has this
