the Enemy seemed to be determination and practice.

The Buick spun into a flat sideskid, swiveled on its wheels and slammed
into the ditch at the side of the road, turning over and over, making a
horrible noise, as it broke up.

Boyd slowed the car again, just as there was a sudden blast of fire. The
Buick had burst into flame and was spitting heat and smoke and fire in
all directions. Malone sent one more bullet after it in a last flurry of
action--saving his last one for possible later emergencies.

Boyd jammed on the brakes and the Lincoln came to a screaming halt. In
silence he and Malone watched the burning Buick roll over and over into
the desert beyond the shoulder.

"My God," Boyd said. "My ears!"

Malone understood at once. The blast from his own still-smoking .44 had
roared past Boyd's head during the gun battle. No wonder the man's ears
hurt. It was a wonder he wasn't altogether deaf.

But Boyd shook off the pain and brought out his own .44 as he stepped
out of the car. Malone followed him, his gun trained.

From the rear, Her Majesty said: "It's safe to rise now, isn't it?"

"You ought to know," Malone said. "You can tell if they're still alive."

There was silence while Queen Elizabeth frowned for a moment in
concentration. A look of pain crossed her face, and then, as her
expression smoothed again, she said: "The traitors are dead. All except
one, and he's--" She paused. "He's dying," she finished. "He can't hurt
you."

There was no need for further battle. Malone reholstered his .44 and
turned to Boyd. "Tom, call the State Police," he said. "Get 'em down
here fast."

He waited while Boyd climbed back under the wheel and began punching
buttons on the dashboard. Then Malone went toward the burning Buick.

He tried to drag the men out, but it wasn't any use. The first two, in
the front seat, had the kind of holes in them people talked about
throwing elephants through. Head and chest had been hit.

Malone couldn't get close enough to the fiercely blazing automobile to
make even a try for the men in the back seat.

       *       *       *       *       *

He was sitting quietly on the edge of the rear seat when the Nevada
Highway Patrol cars drove up next to them. Barbara Wilson had stopped
screaming, but she was still sobbing on Malone's shoulder. "It's all
right," he told her, feeling ineffectual.

"I never saw anybody killed before," she said.

"It's all right," Malone said. "Nothing's going to hurt you. I'll
protect you."

He wondered if he meant it, and found, to his surprise, that he did.
Barbara Wilson sniffled and looked up at him. "Mr. Malone--"

"Ken," he said.

"I'm sorry," she said. "Ken--I'm so afraid. I saw the hole in one of the
men's heads, when you fired ... it was--"

"Don't think about it," Malone said. To him, the job had been an
unpleasant occurrence, but a job, that was all. He could see, though,
how it might affect people who were new to it.

"You're so brave," she said.

Malone tightened his arm around the girl's shoulder. "Just depend on
me," he said. "You'll be all right if you--"

The State Trooper walked up then, and looked at them. "Mr. Malone?" he
said. He seemed to be taken slightly aback at the costuming.

"That's right," Malone said. He pulled out his ID card and the little
golden badge. The State Patrolman looked at them, and looked back at
Malone.

"What's with the getup?" he said.

"FBI," Malone said, hoping his voice carried conviction. "Official
business."

"In costume?"

"Never mind about the details," Malone snapped.

"He's an FBI agent, sir," Barbara said.

"And what are you?" the Patrolman said. "Lady Jane Grey?"

"I'm a nurse," Barbara said. "A psychiatric nurse."

"For nuts?"

"For disturbed patients."

The patrolman thought that over. "You've got the identity cards and
stuff," he said at last. "Maybe you've got a reason to dress up. How
would I know? I'm only a State Patrolman."

"Let's cut the monologue," Malone said savagely, "and get to business."

The patrolman stared. Then he said: "All right, sir. Yes, sir. I'm
Lieutenant Adams, Mr. Malone. Suppose you tell me what happened?"

Carefully and concisely, Malone told him the story of the Buick that had
pulled up beside them, and what had happened afterward.

Meanwhile, the other cops had been looking over the wreck. When Malone
had finished his story, Lieutenant Adams flipped his notebook shut and
looked over toward them. "I guess it's O.K., sir," he said. "As far as
I'm concerned, it's justifiable homicide. Self-defense. Any reason why
they'd want to kill you?"

Malone thought about the Golden Palace. That might be a reason--but it
might not. And why burden an innocent State Patrolman with the facts of
FBI life?

"Official," he said. "Your chief will get the report."

The patrolman nodded. "I'll have to take a deposition tomorrow, but--"

"I know," Malone said. "Thanks. Can we go on to our hotel now?"

"I guess," the patrolman said. "Go ahead. We'll take care of the rest of
this. You'll be getting a call later."

"Fine," Malone said. "Trace those hoods, and any connections they might
have had. Get the information to me as soon as possible."

Lieutenant Adams nodded. "You won't have to leave the state, will you?"
he asked. "I don't mean that you _can't_, exactly ... hell, you're FBI.
But it'd be easier--"

"Call Burris in Washington," Malone said. "He can get hold of me--and if
the Governor wants to know where we are, or the State's Attorney, put
them in touch with Burris, too. O.K.?"

"O.K.," Lieutenant Adams said. "Sure." He blinked at Malone. "Listen,"
he said. "About those costumes--"

"We're trying to catch Henry VIII for the murder of Anne Boleyn," Malone
said with a polite smile. "O.K.?"

"I was only asking," Lieutenant Adams said. "Can't blame a man for
asking, now, can you?"

Malone climbed into his front seat. "Call me later," he said. The car
started. "Back to the hotel, Sir Thomas," Malone said, and the car
roared off.




VII


Yucca Flats, Malone thought, certainly deserved its name. It was about
as flat as land could get, and it contained millions upon millions of
useless yuccas. Perhaps they were good for something, Malone thought,
but they weren't good for _him_.

The place might, of course, have been called Cactus Flats, but the cacti
were neither as big nor as impressive as the yuccas.

[Illustration: "I knight thee Sir Andrew...."]

Or was that yucci?

Possibly, Malone mused, it was simply yucks.

And whatever it was, there were millions of it. Malone felt he couldn't
stand the sight of another yucca. He was grateful for only one thing.

It wasn't summer. If the Elizabethans had been forced to drive in closed
cars through the Nevada desert in the summertime, they might have
started a cult of nudity, Malone felt. It was bad enough now, in what
was supposed to be winter.

The sun was certainly bright enough, for one thing. It glared through
the cloudless sky and glanced with blinding force off the road. Sir
Thomas Boyd squinted at it through the rather incongruous sunglasses he
was wearing, while Malone wondered idly if it was the sunglasses, or the
rest of the world, that was an anachronism. But Sir Thomas kept his eyes
grimly on the road as he gunned the powerful Lincoln toward the Yucca
Flats Labs at eighty miles an hour.

Malone twisted himself around and faced the women in the back seat. Past
them, through the rear window of the Lincoln, he could see the second
car. It followed them gamely, carrying the newest addition to Sir
Kenneth Malone's Collection of Bats.

"Bats?" Her Majesty said suddenly, but gently. "Shame on you, Sir
Kenneth. These are poor, sick people. We must do our best to help
them--not to think up silly names for them. For shame!"

"I suppose so," Malone said wearily. He sighed and, for the fifth time
that day, he asked: "Does Your Majesty have any idea where our spy is
now?"

"Well, really, Sir Kenneth," the Queen said with the slightest of
hesitations, "it isn't easy, you know. Telepathy has certain laws, just
like everything else. After all, even a game has laws. Being telepathic
did not help me to play poker--I still had to learn the rules. And
telepathy has rules, too. A telepath can easily confuse another telepath
by using some of those rules."

"Oh, fine," Malone said. "Well, have you got into contact with his mind
yet?"

"Oh, yes," Her Majesty said happily. "And my goodness, he's certainly
digging up a lot of information, isn't he?"

Malone moaned softly. "But who _is_ he?" he asked after a second.

The Queen stared at the roof of the car in what looked like
concentration. "He hasn't thought of his name yet," she said. "I mean,
at least if he has, he hasn't mentioned it to me. Really, Sir Kenneth,
you have no idea how difficult all this is."

Malone swallowed with difficulty. "_Where_ is he, then?" he said. "Can
you tell me that, at least? His location?"

Her Majesty looked positively desolated with sadness. "I can't be sure,"
she said. "I really can't be exactly sure just where he is. He does keep
moving around, I know that. But you have to remember that he doesn't
want me to find him. He certainly doesn't want to be found by the FBI
... would you?"

"Your Majesty," Malone said, "I _am_ the FBI."

"Yes," the Queen said, "but suppose you weren't? He's doing his best to
hide himself, even from me. It's sort of a game he's playing."

"A game!"

Her Majesty looked contrite. "Believe me, Sir Kenneth, the minute I
know exactly where he is, I'll tell you. I promise. Cross my heart and
hope to die--which I can't, of course, being immortal." Nevertheless,
she made an X-mark over her left breast. "All right?"

"All right," Malone said, out of sheer necessity. "O.K. But don't waste
any time telling me. Do it right away. We've _got_ to find that spy and
isolate him somehow."

"Please don't worry yourself, Sir Kenneth," Her Majesty said. "Your
Queen is doing everything she can."

"I know that, Your Majesty," Malone said. "I'm sure of it." Privately,
he wondered just how much even she could do. Then he realized--for
perhaps the ten-thousandth time--that there was no such thing as
wondering privately any more.

"That's quite right, Sir Kenneth," the Queen said sweetly. "And it's
about time you got used to it."

"What's going on?" Boyd said. "More reading minds back there?"

"That's right, Sir Thomas," the Queen said.

"I've about gotten used to it," Boyd said almost cheerfully. "Pretty
soon they'll come and take me away, but I don't mind at all." He whipped
the car around a bend in the road savagely. "Pretty soon they'll put me
with the other sane people and let the bats inherit the world. But I
don't mind at all."

"Sir Thomas!" Her Majesty said in shocked tones.

"Please," Boyd said with a deceptive calmness. "Just Mr. Boyd. Not even
Lieutenant Boyd, or Sergeant Boyd. Just Mr. Boyd. Or, if you prefer,
Tom."

"Sir Thomas," Her Majesty said, "I really can't understand this
sudden--"

"Then don't understand it," Boyd said. "All I know is everybody's nuts,
and I'm sick and tired of it."

A pall of silence fell over the company.

"Look, Tom," Malone began at last.

"Don't you try smoothing me down," Boyd snapped.

Malone's eyebrows rose. "O.K.," he said. "I won't smooth you down. I'll
just tell you to shut up, to keep driving--and to show some respect to
Her Majesty."

"I--" Boyd stopped. There was a second of silence.

"_That's_ better," Her Majesty said with satisfaction.

Lady Barbara stretched in the back seat, next to Her Majesty. "This is
certainly a long drive," she said. "Have we got much farther to go?"

"Not too far," Malone said. "We ought to be there soon."

"I ... I'm sorry for the way I acted," Barbara said.

"What do you mean, the way you acted?"

"Crying like that," Barbara said with some hesitation. "Making
an--absolute idiot of myself. When that other car--tried to get us."

"Don't worry about it," Malone said. "It was nothing."

"I just--made trouble for you," Barbara said.

Her Majesty touched the girl on the shoulder. "He's not thinking about
the trouble you cause him," she said quietly.

"Of course I'm not," Malone told her.

"But I--"

"My dear girl," Her Majesty said, "I believe that Sir Kenneth is, at
least partly, in love with you."

Malone blinked. It was perfectly true--even if he hadn't quite known it
himself until now. Telepaths, he was discovering, were occasionally
handy things to have around.

"In ... love--" Barbara said.

"And you, my dear--" Her Majesty began.

"Please, Your Majesty," Lady Barbara said. "No more. Not just now."

The Queen smiled, almost to herself. "Certainly, dear," she said.

       *       *       *       *       *

The car sped on. In the distance, Malone could see the blot on the
desert that indicated the broad expanse of Yucca Flats Labs. Just the
fact that it could be seen, he knew, didn't mean an awful lot. Malone
had been able to see it for the past fifteen minutes, and it didn't look
as if they'd gained an inch on it. Desert distances are deceptive.

At long last, however, the main gate of the laboratories hove into view.
Boyd made a left turn off the highway and drove a full seven miles along
the restricted road, right up to the big gate that marked the entrance
of the laboratories themselves. Once again, they were faced with the
army of suspicious guards and security officers.

This time, suspicion was somewhat heightened by the dress of the
visitors. Malone had to explain about six times that the costumes were
part of an FBI arrangement, that he had not stolen his identity cards,
that Boyd's cards were Boyd's, too, and in general that the four of them
were not insane, not spies, and not jokesters out for a lark in the
sunshine.

Malone had expected all of that. He went through the rigmarole wearily
but without any sense of surprise. The one thing he hadn't been
expecting was the man who was waiting for him on the other side of the
gate.

When he'd finished identifying everybody for the fifth or sixth time, he
began to climb back into the car. A familiar voice stopped him cold.

"Just a minute, Malone," Andrew J. Burris said. He erupted from the
guardhouse like an avenging angel, followed closely by a thin man, about
five feet ten inches in height, with brush-cut brown hair, round
horn-rimmed spectacles, large hands and a small Sir Francis Drake beard.
Malone looked at the two figures blankly.

"Something wrong, chief?" he said.

Burris came toward the car. The thin gentleman followed him, walking
with an odd bouncing step that must have been acquired, Malone thought,
over years of treading on rubber eggs. "I don't know," Burris said when
he'd reached the door. "When I was in Washington, I seemed to know--but
when I get out here in this desert, everything just goes haywire." He
rubbed at his forehead.

Then he looked into the car. "Hello, Boyd," he said pleasantly.

"Hello, chief," Boyd said.

Burris blinked. "Boyd, you look like Henry VIII," he said with only the
faintest trace of surprise.

"Doesn't he, though?" Her Majesty said from the rear seat. "I've noticed
that resemblance myself."

Burris gave her a tiny smile. "Oh," he said. "Hello, Your Majesty.
I'm--"

"Andrew J. Burris, Director of the FBI," the Queen finished for him.
"Yes, I know. It's very nice to meet you at last. I've seen you on
television, and over the video phone. You photograph badly, you know."

"I do?" Burris said pleasantly. It was obvious that he was keeping
himself under very tight control.

Malone felt remotely sorry for the man--but only remotely. Burris might
as well know, he thought, what they had all been going through the past
several days.

Her Majesty was saying something about the honorable estate of
knighthood, and the Queen's List. Malone began paying attention when she
came to: "... And I hereby dub thee--" She stopped suddenly, turned and
said: "Sir Kenneth, give me your weapon."

Malone hesitated for a long, long second. But Burris' eye was on him,
and he could interpret the look without much trouble. There was only one
thing for him to do. He pulled out his .44, ejected the remaining
cartridge in his palm--and reminded himself to reload the gun as soon as
he got it back--and handed the weapon to the Queen, butt foremost.

She took the butt of the revolver in her right hand, leaned out the
window of the car, and said in a fine, distinct voice: "Kneel, Andrew."

Malone watched with wide, astonished eyes as Andrew J. Burris, Director
of the FBI, went to one knee in a low and solemn genuflection. Queen
Elizabeth Thompson nodded her satisfaction.

She tapped Burris gently on each shoulder with the muzzle of the gun. "I
knight thee Sir Andrew," she said. She cleared her throat. "My, this
desert air is dry--Rise, Sir Andrew, and know that you are henceforth
Knight Commander of the Queen's Own FBI."

"Thank you, Your Majesty," Burris said humbly.

He rose to his feet silently. The Queen withdrew into the car again and
handed the gun back to Malone. He thumbed cartridges into the chambers
of the cylinder and listened dumbly.

"Your Majesty," Burris said, "this is Dr. Harry Gamble, the head of
Project Isle. Dr. Gamble, this is Her Majesty the Queen; Lady Barbara
Wilson, her ... uh ... her lady in waiting; Sir Kenneth Malone; and King
... I mean Sir Thomas Boyd." He gave the four a single bright impartial
smile. Then he tore his eyes away from the others, and bent his gaze on
Sir Kenneth Malone. "Come over here a minute, Malone," he said, jerking
his thumb over his shoulder. "I want to talk to you."

       *       *       *       *       *

Malone climbed out of the car and went around to meet Burris. He felt
just a little worried as he followed the Director away from the car.
True, he had sent Burris a long telegram the night before, in code. But
he hadn't expected the man to show up at Yucca Flats. There didn't seem
to be any reason for it.

And when there isn't any reason, Malone told himself sagely, it's a bad
one.

"What's the trouble, chief?" he asked.

Burris sighed. "None so far," he said quietly. "I got a report from the
Nevada State Patrol, and ran it through R&I. They identified the men you
killed, all right--but it didn't do us any good. They're hired hoods."

"Who hired them?" Malone said.

Burris shrugged. "Somebody with money," he said. "Hell, men like that
would kill their own grandmothers if the price were right--you know
that. We can't trace them back any farther."

Malone nodded. That was, he had to admit, bad news. But then, when had
he last had any good news?

"We're nowhere near our telepathic spy," Burris said. "We haven't come
any closer than we were when we started. Have you got anything? Anything
at all, no matter how small?"

"Not that I know of, sir," Malone said.

"What about the little old lady ... what's her name? Thompson. Anything
from her?"

Malone hesitated. "She has a close fix on the spy, sir," he said slowly,
"but she doesn't seem able to identify him right away."

"What else does she want?" Burris said. "We've made her Queen and given
her a full retinue in costume; we've let her play roulette and poker
with Government money. Does she want to hold a mass execution? If she
does, I can supply some congressmen, Malone. I'm sure it could be
arranged." He looked at the agent narrowly. "I might even be able to
supply an FBI man or two," he added.

Malone swallowed hard. "I'm trying the best I can, sir," he said. "What
about the others?"

Burris looked even unhappier than usual. "Come along," he said. "I'll
show you."

When they got back to the car, Dr. Gamble was talking spiritedly with
Her Majesty about Roger Bacon. "Before my time, of course," the Queen
was saying, "but I'm sure he was a most interesting man. Now when dear
old Marlowe wrote his 'Faust,' he and I had several long discussions
about such matters. Alchemy--"

Burris interrupted with: "I beg your pardon, Your Majesty, but we must
get on. Perhaps you'll be able to continue your ... ah ... audience
later." He turned to Boyd. "Sir Thomas," he said with an effort, "drive
directly to the Westinghouse buildings. Over that way." He pointed. "Dr.
Gamble will ride with you, and the rest of us will follow in the second
car. Let's move."

He stepped back as the project head got into the car, and watched it
roar off. Then he and Malone went to the second car, another FBI
Lincoln. Two agents were sitting in the back seat, with a still figure
between them.

With a shock, Malone recognized William Logan and the agents he'd
detailed to watch the telepath. Logan's face did not seem to have
changed expression since Malone had seen it last, and he wondered wildly
if perhaps it had to be dusted once a week.

He got in behind the wheel and Burris slid in next to him.

"Westinghouse." Burris said. "And let's get there in a hurry."

"Right," Malone said, and started the car.

"We just haven't had a single lead," Burris said. "I was hoping you'd
come up with something. Your telegram detailed the fight, of course, and
the rest of what's been happening--but I hoped there'd be something
more."

"There isn't," Malone was forced to admit. "All we can do is try to
persuade Her Majesty to tell us--"

"Oh, I know it isn't easy," Burris said. "But it seems to me--"

By the time they'd arrived at the administrative offices of
Westinghouse's psionics research area, Malone found himself wishing that
something would happen. Possibly, he thought, lightning might strike, or
an earthquake swallow everything up. He was, suddenly, profoundly tired
of the entire affair.




VIII


Four days later, he was more than tired. He was exhausted. The six
psychopaths--including Her Majesty Queen Elizabeth I--had been housed in
a converted dormitory in the Westinghouse area, together with four
highly nervous and even more highly trained and investigated
psychiatrists from St. Elizabeths in Washington. The Convention of Nuts,
as Malone called it privately, was in full swing. And it was every bit
as strange as he'd thought it was going to be. Unfortunately, five of
the six--Her Majesty being the only exception--were completely out of
contact with the world. The psychiatrists referred to them in worried
