
       *       *       *       *       *

There were nearly twenty people at dinner, all, presumably, friends of
the Viceroy. At least, it is certain that they were friends in so far as
they had no part in the assassination plot. It was a gay party; the
Viceroy's friends were doing their best to cheer him up, and were
succeeding pretty well. One of the nobles, known for his wit, had just
essayed a somewhat off-color jest, and the others were roaring with
laughter at the punch line when a shout rang out.

There was a sudden silence around the table.

"What was that?" asked someone. "What did--"

"_Help!_" There was the sound of footsteps pounding up the stairway from
the lower floor.

"_Help! The Southerners have come to kill the Viceroy!_"

From the sounds, there was no doubt in any of the minds of the people
seated around the table that the shout was true. For a moment, there was
shock. Then panic took over.

There were only a dozen or so men in the attacking party; if the
"friends" of the Viceroy had stuck by him, they could have held off the
assassins with ease.

But no one ran to lock the doors that stood between the Viceroy and his
enemies, and only a few drew their weapons to defend him. The others
fled. Getting out of a window from the second floor of a building isn't
easy, but fear can lend wings, and, although none of them actually flew
down, the retreat went fast enough.

Characteristically, the Viceroy headed, not for the window, but for his
own room, where his armor--long unused, except for state
functions--hung waiting in the closet. With him went Sir Martin.

But there wasn't even an opportunity to get into the armor. The rebel
band charged into the hallway that led to the bedroom, screaming:
"_Death to the Tyrant! Long live the Emperor!_"

It was personal anger, then, not rebellion against the Empire which had
appointed the ex-commander to his post as Viceroy.

"Where is the Viceroy? Death to the Tyrant!" The assassins moved in.

Swords in hand, and cloaks wrapped around their left arms, Sir Martin
and the Viceroy moved to meet the oncoming attackers.

"Traitors!" bellowed the Viceroy. "Cowards! Have you come to kill me in
my own house?"

Parry, thrust! Parry, thrust! Two of the attackers fell before the
snake-tongue blade of the fighting Viceroy. Sir Martin accounted for two
more before he fell in a flood of his own blood.

The Viceroy was alone, now. His blade flickered as though inspired, and
two more died under its tireless onslaught. Even more would have died if
the head of the conspiracy, a supporter of Young Jim named Rada, hadn't
pulled a trick that not even the Viceroy would have pulled.

Rada grabbed one of his own men and shoved him toward the Viceroy's
sword, impaling the hapless man upon that deadly blade.

And, in the moment while the Viceroy's weapon was buried to the hilt in
an enemy's body, the others leaped around the dying man and ran their
blades through the Viceroy.

He dropped to the floor, blood gushing from half a dozen wounds.

Even so, his fighting heart still had seconds more to beat. As he
propped himself up on one arm, the assassins stood back; even they
recognized that they had killed something bigger and stronger than they.
A better man than any of them lay dying at their feet.

He clawed with one hand at the river of red that flowed from his pierced
throat and then fell forward across the stone floor. With his crimson
hand, he traced the great symbol of his Faith on the stone--the Sign of
the Cross. He bent his head to kiss it, and, with a final cry of
"_Jesus!_" he died. At the age of seventy, it had taken a dozen men to
kill him with treachery, something all the hell of nine years of
conquest and rule had been unable to do.

And thus died Francisco Pizarro, the Conqueror of Peru.


THE END




TO BE READ AFTER YOU HAVE FINISHED "DESPOILERS OF THE GOLDEN EMPIRE."


Dear John,

It has been brought to my attention, by those who have read the story,
that "Despoilers of the Golden Empire" might conceivably be charged with
being a "reader cheater"--_i.e._, that it does not play fair with the
reader, but leads him astray by means of false statements. Naturally, I
feel it me bounden duty to refute such scurrilous and untrue affronts,
and thus save meself from opprobrium.

Therefore, I address what follows to the interested reader:

It cannot be denied that you must have been misled when you read the
story; indeed, I'd be the last to deny it, since I _intended_ that you
should be misled. What I most certainly _do_ deny is any implication
that such misleading was accomplished by the telling of untruths. A
fiction writer is, _by definition_, a professional liar; he makes his
living by telling interesting lies on paper and selling the results to
the highest bidder for publication. Since fiction writing is my
livelihood, I cannot and will not deny that I am an accomplished
liar--indeed, almost an habitual one. Therefore, I feel some small pique
when, on the one occasion on which I stick strictly to the truth, I am
accused of fraud. _Pfui!_ say I; I refute you. "I deny the allegation,
and I defy the alligator!"

To prove my case, I shall take several examples from "Despoilers" and
show that the statements made are perfectly valid. (Please note that I
do not claim any absolute accuracy for such details as quoted dialogue,
except that none of the characters lies. I simply contend that the story
is as accurate as any other good historical novelette. I also might say
here that any resemblance between "Despoilers" and any story picked at
random from the late lamented _Planet Stories_ is purely intentional and
carefully contrived.)

Take the first sentence:

"In the seven centuries that had elapsed since the Second Empire had
been founded on the shattered remnants of the First, the nobles of the
Imperium had come slowly to realize that the empire was not to be judged
by the examples of its predecessor."

Perfectly true. By the time of the Renaissance, the nobles of the Holy
Roman Empire knew that their empire was not just a continuation of the
Roman Empire, but a new entity. The old Roman Empire had collapsed in
the Sixth Century, and the _Holy_ Roman Empire, which was actually a
loose confederation of Germanic states, did not come into being until A.
D. 800, when Karl der Grosse (Charlemagne) was crowned emperor by the
Pope.

Anyone who wishes to quibble that the date should be postponed for a
century and a half, until the time of the German prince, Otto, may do
so; I will ignore him.

A few paragraphs later, I said:

"Without power, neither Civilization nor the Empire could hold itself
together, and His Universal Majesty, the Emperor Carl, well knew it. And
power was linked solidly to one element, one metal ..."

The metal, as I said later on, was Gold-197.

By "power," of course, I meant political and economic power. In the
Sixteenth Century, that's what almost anyone would have meant. If you
chose to interpret it as meaning "energy per unit time," why, that's
real tough.

Why nail the "power metal" down to an isotope of gold with an atomic
weight of 197? Because that's the only naturally occurring isotope of
gold.

The "Emperor Carl" was, of course, Charles V, who also happened to be
King of Spain, and therefore Pizarro's sovereign. I Germanicized his
name, as I did the others--Francisco Pizarro becomes "Frank," et
cetera--but this is perfectly legitimate. After all, the king's name in
Latin, which was used in all state papers, was _Carolus_; the Spanish
called him _Carlos_, and history books in English call him _Charles_.
Either _Karl_ or _Carl_ is just as legitimate as _Charles_, certainly,
and the same applies to the other names in the story.

As to the title "His Universal Majesty," that's exactly what he _was_
called. It is usually translated as "His Catholic Majesty," but the word
_Catholic_ comes from the Greek _katholikos_, meaning "universal." And,
further on in the story, when the term "Universal Assembly" is used, it
is a direct translation of the Greek term, _Ekklesia Katholikos_, and is
actually a better translation than "Catholic Church," since the English
word _church_ comes from the Greek _kyriakon_, meaning "the house of the
Lord"--in other words, a church _building_, not the organization as a
whole.

Toward the end of Chapter One, I wrote:

"Throughout the Empire, research laboratories worked tirelessly at the
problem of transmuting commoner elements into Gold-197, but thus far
none of the processes was commercially feasible."

I think you will admit that the alchemists never found a method of
transmuting the elements--certainly none which was commercially
feasible.

In Chapter Three, the statement that Pizarro left his home--Spain--with
undermanned ships, and had to sneak off illegally before the King's
inspectors checked up on him, is historically accurate. And who can
argue with the statement that "there wasn't a scientist worthy of the
name in the whole outfit"?

At the beginning of Chapter Four, you'll find:

"Due to atmospheric disturbances, the ship's landing was several hundred
miles from the point the commander had originally picked ..." and "...
the ship simply wasn't built for atmospheric navigation."

The adverse winds which drove Pizarro's ships off course were certainly
"atmospheric disturbances," and I defy anyone to prove that a Sixteenth
Century Spanish galleon was built for atmospheric navigation.

And I insist that using the term "carrier" instead of "horse," while
misleading, is not inaccurate. However, I _would_ like to know just what
sort of picture the term conjured up in the reader's mind. In Chapter
Ten, in the battle scene, you'll find the following:

"The combination [of attackers from both sides], plus the fact that the
heavy armor was a little unwieldy, overbalanced him [the commander]. He
toppled to the ground with a clash of steel as he and the carrier parted
company.

"Without a human hand at its controls, the carrier automatically moved
away from the mass of struggling fighters and came to a halt well away
from the battle."

To be perfectly honest, it's somewhat of a strain on my mind to imagine
anyone building a robot-controlled machine as good as all that, and then
giving the drive such poor protection that he can fall off of it.

One of the great screams from my critics has been occasioned by the
fact that I referred several times to the Spaniards as "Earthmen." I
can't see why. In order not to confuse the reader, I invariably referred
to them as the "_invading_ Earthmen," so as to make a clear distinction
between them and the _native_ Earthmen, or Incas, who were native to
Peru. If this be treachery, then make the most of it.

In other words, I contend that I simply did what any other good
detective story writer tries to do--mislead the reader without lying to
him. Agatha Christie's "The Murder of Roger Ackroyd," for instance, uses
the device of telling the story from the murderer's viewpoint, in the
first person, without revealing that he _is_ the murderer. Likewise,
John Dickson Carr, in his "Nine Wrong Answers" finds himself forced to
deny that he has lied to the reader, although he admits that one of his
characters certainly lied. Both Carr and Christie told the absolute
truth--within the framework of the story--and left it to the reader to
delude himself.

It all depends on the viewpoint. The statement, "We all liked Father
Goodheart very much" means one thing when said by a member of his old
parish in the United States, which he left to become a missionary. It
means something else again when uttered by a member of the tribe of
cannibals which the good Father attempted unsuccessfully to convert.

Similarly, such terms as "the gulf between the worlds," "the new world,"
