
"And that was the same day that the hens laid the first golden egg too,
wasn't it?" Peterson asked.

"Why it sure was, Doc," Barney chimed in. "I remember, cause Miz
Thompson was so mad that the milk was bad and the eggs went wrong both
in the same day."

"That's what we know. Now listen to this, Johnny," the scientist
continued. "During the night of May 8th, we fired an entirely new kind
of test shot on the range. I can't tell you what it was, only to say
that it was a special atomic device that even we didn't know too much
about. That's why we fired it from a cave in the side of a hill down
there.

"Since then, our people have been working on the pretty good assumption
that something happened to that cow and those chickens not too long
before they started giving the Eggnog ingredients. Someone remembered
the experimental test shot, checked the date and then went out and had
a look at the cave. We already had some earlier suspicions that this
device produced a new type of beam ray. We took sightings from the
cave, found them to be in a direct, unbroken line with the Circle T. We
set up the device again and using a very small model, tried it out on
some chick embryos. Sure enough, we got a mutation. But not the right
kind.

"So we're going to recreate the entire situation right here, only this
time, we're going to expose not only Sally but a dozen other Guernseys
from as close to her blood line as we can get.

"And we already knew that you had a young rooster sired by Solomon."

"But, Doc," Johnny protested. "Sally had a calf early that morning.
Isn't that going to make a difference?"

"Of course it is," Peterson exclaimed. "And she's going to have another
one the same way. And so are all the other cows. You're the one that
told me she had her calf by artificial insemination, didn't you?"

Johnny nodded.

"Well, then she's going to have another calf from the same bull and so
will the other cows."

"Pore Sally," Barney said sorrowfully. "They're sure takin' the romance
outta motherhood for you."

                     *      *      *      *      *

The next day the guards were back on the gate. By midafternoon twelve
fine young Guernseys arrived, together with a corps of veterinarians,
biologists and security police. By nightfall, Sally and her companions
were all once again in a "delicate condition."

A mile from the ranch house, a dormitory was built for the
veterinarians and biologists and a barracks thrown up for the security
guards. A thirty-five thousand dollar, twelve-foot high chain link
fence, topped by barbed wire, was constructed around the pasture and
armored cars patrolled the fence by day and kept guard over the
pregnant bovines by night in the barn.

Through the fall, into the long winter and back to budding spring
again, the host of experts and guards watched and cared for the new
calf-bloated herd.

The fact that Sally had gone dry had been kept a carefully guarded
national secret. To keep up the pretense and show to the world that
America still controlled the only proven method of manned space travel,
the Joint Chiefs of Staff voted to expend two hundred gallons of the
precious, small store of milk on hand for another interplanetary
junket, this time to inspect the rings around Saturn.

Piloting a smaller and more sophisticated but equally-well protected
version of _Icarus_, Major Quartermain abandoned the fleshpots of earth
and the adulation of his coast-to-coast collection of worshiping
females to again hurtle into the unknown.

"It was strictly a milk run," Major Quartermain was quoted as saying as
he emerged from his ship after an uneventful but propaganda-loaded
trip.

By the middle of May, it was the consensus of the veterinarians that
Delivery Day would be July 4th. Plans were drafted for the repeat
atomic cave shot at 9:00 p.m., July 3rd. The pregnant herd was to be
given labor-inducing shots at midnight, and, if all went well,
deliveries would start within a few hours. Just to be sure that nothing
would shield the cows from the rays of the explosion, they were put in
a corral on the south side of the barn until 9:30 p.m., on the night of
the firing.

Solomon's successor and a new bevy of hens were already roosting in the
same old chicken house and egg production was normal.

On the night of July 3rd, at precisely 9:00 p.m., a sheet of light
erupted from the Nevada hillside cave and the ground shook and rumbled
for a few miles. It wasn't a powerful blast, nor had been the original
shot. Sixty miles away, thirteen Guernsey cows munched at a rick of
fresh hay and chewed contentedly in the moonlight.

At 3:11 a.m., the following morning the first calf arrived, followed in
rapid order by a dozen more.

Sally's Cloverdale Marathon III dropped her calf at 4:08 a.m. on
Independence Day.

At 7:00 a.m., she was milked and produced two and a half gallons of
absolutely clear, odorless, tasteless and non-ignitable fluid. Eleven
other Guernseys gave forth gushing, foaming, creamy rich gallon after
gallon of Grade A milk.

The thirteenth cow filled two buckets with something that looked like
weak cocoa and smelled like stale tea.

But when a white-smocked University of California poultry specialist
entered the chicken house later in the morning, he found nothing but
normal, white fresh eggs in the nests. He finally arrived at the
conclusion that Solomon's old harem had known for some time; whatever
it was that Solomon had been gifted with, this new rooster just didn't
have it.

A rush call went out for a dozen of the precious store of golden eggs
to be sent to the testing labs down range.

Two hours later, Dr. Peterson, surrounded by fellow scientists, stood
before a bank of closed circuit television monitors in the Frenchman's
Flat headquarters building. The scene on the screens was the interior
of a massive steel-and-concrete test building several miles up range.
Resting on the floor of the building was an open, gallon-sized glass
beaker filled with the new version of Sally's milk.

Poised directly above the opened beaker was a funnel-shaped vessel
containing the contents of one golden egg.

Dr. Peterson reached for a small lever. By remote control, the lever
would gradually open the bottom of the funnel. He squeezed gently,
slowly applying pressure. An involuntary gasp arose from the spectators
as a tiny trickle of egg fluid fell from the funnel towards the open
beaker.

Instinctively, everyone in the room clamped their eyes shut in
anticipation of a blast. A second later, Peterson peered cautiously at
the screen. The beaker of milk had turned a cloudy pale blue. It
neither fizzed nor exploded. It just sat.

He levered another drop from the funnel. The stringy, glutenous mass
plopped into the beaker and the liquid swirled briefly and turned more
opaque, taking on more of a bluish tinge.

A babble of voices broke through the room when it was apparent that no
explosion was forthcoming.

Peterson slumped into a nearby chair and stared at the screen.

"Now what?" he moaned.

                     *      *      *      *      *

The "what" developed twelve hectic hours later after time lost
initially in shaking, bouncing and beaming the new substance on the
outside chance it might develop a latent tendency towards demolition.

Satisfied that whatever it was in the beaker wasn't explosive, the
liquid was quickly poured off into sixteen small half-pint beakers and
speeded to as many different laboratories for possible analysis.

"What about the other stuff?" Peterson was asked, referring to the
brownish "milk" subsequently identified as coming from a dainty young
cow known as Melody Buttercup Greenbrier IV.

"One thing at a time," replied Peterson. "Let's find out what we have
here before we got involved in the second problem."

At 9:00 p.m., that night, Peterson was called to the radiation labs. He
was met at the door by a glazed-eyed physicist who led him back to his
office.

He motioned Peterson to a seat and then handed him a sheaf of
photographic papers and other charts. Each of the photo sheets had a
clear, white outline of a test beaker surrounded by a solid field of
black. Two of the papers were all white.

"I don't believe it, Floyd," the physicist said, running his hands
through his hair. "I've seen it, I've done it, I've tested it, proven
it, and I still don't believe it."

Peterson riffled the sheaf of papers and waited expectantly.

"You don't believe what, Fred?" he asked.

The physicist leaned over and tapped the papers in Peterson's hands.
"We've subjected that crazy stuff to every source and kind of high and
low energy radiation we can produce here and that means just about
everything short of triggering an H-device on it. We fired alphas,
gammas, betas, the works, in wide dispersion, concentrated beam and
just plain exposure.

"Not so much as one neutron of any of them went beyond the glass
surrounding that forsaken slop.

"They curved around it, Floyd. They curved around it."

The physicist leaned his head on the desk. "Nothing should react like
that," he sobbed. He struggled for composure as Peterson stared dazedly
at the test sheets.

"That's not the whole story," the physicist continued. He walked to
Peterson's side and extracted the two all-white sheets.

"This," he said brokenly, "represents a sheet of photographic paper
dipped in that crud and then allowed to dry before being bombarded with
radiation. And this," he waved the other sheet, "is a piece of photo
paper in the center of a panel protected by another sheet of ordinary
typing paper coated with that stuff."

Peterson looked up at him. "A radiation-proof liquid," he said in awed
tones.

The other man nodded dumbly.

"Eight years of university," the physicist whispered to himself. "Six
years in summer schools. Four fellowships. Ten years in research.

"All shot to hell," he screamed, "by a stinking, hayburning cow."

Peterson patted him gently on the shoulder. "It's all right, Fred.
Don't take it so hard. It could be worse."

"How?" he asked hollowly. "Have this stuff milked from a kangaroo?"

                     *      *      *      *      *

Back in his office, Peterson waved off a dozen calls while he gave
orders for fresh quantities of the blue milk to be rushed to the
Argonne laboratories for further radiation tests and confirmation of
the Nevada results. He ordered a test set up for the brown fluid for
the following morning and then took a call from the AEC commissioner.

"Yes, John," he said, "we've got something."

Operation Milkmaid was in full swing!

The following morning observers again clustered about the monitoring
room as Peterson prepared to duplicate the tests, using a sample of the
Melody's brownish milk.

There was the same involuntary remote cringing as the first drop of egg
fell towards the beaker, but this time, Peterson forced himself to
watch. Again the gentle plop was heard through the amplifiers and
nothing more. A similar clouding spread through the already murky fluid
and when the entire contents of one egg had been added, the beaker took
on a solid, brown and totally opaque appearance. The scientists watched
