twenty-five miles an hour can kill quickly if the other guy is coming
at you at the same velocity. There were times when I didn't dare break
the law, because some guard was around, and, even if he didn't catch
me, he might report in and arouse Brock's interest in a way I wouldn't
like.

I finally got to a tubeway, but it stopped at every station, and it
took me nearly an hour and a half to get to Viking Test Area Four.

At the main door, I considered--for all of five seconds--the idea of
simply telling the guard I had to go in. But I knew that, by now, Jack
was there ahead of me. No. I couldn't just bull my way in. Too crude.
Too many clues.

Hell's fire and damnation! I'd have to waste more time.

I looked up at the ceiling. The surface wasn't more than a hundred
feet overhead, but it felt as though it were a hundred light-years.

If I could get that guard away from that door for five seconds, all
would be gravy from then on in. But how? I couldn't have the diversion
connected with me. Or--

Sometimes, I'm amazed at my own stupidity.

I beetled it down to the nearest phone and got hold of my BANning
number.

"Jack already inside?" I snapped.

"Hell, yes! What happened to you?"

"Never mind. Got to make the best of it. I'm a corner away from Area
Four. Where's your nearest man?"

"At the corner near the freight office."

"I'll go to him. What's he look like?"

"Five-nine. Black, curly hair. Your age. Fat. Name's Peter Quilp. He
knows you."

"Peter Quilp?"

"Right."

"Good. Circulate a report that Jack has been seen in the vicinity of
the main gate to Area Four. Put it out that there's a reward of five
thousand for the person who finds her. I'm going to have Quilp gather
a crowd."

He didn't ask a one of the million questions that must have popped
into his mind. "Right. Anything else?"

"No." I hung up.

       *       *       *       *       *

Within ten minutes, there was a mob milling through the corridor.
Everybody in the neighborhood was looking for Jaqueline Ravenhurst.
Then Peter Quilp yelled.

"I've got her! I've got her! Guard!"

With a scene like that going on, the guard couldn't help but step out
of his cubicle to see what was going on.

I used the key I was carrying, stepped inside, and relocked the door.
No one in the crowd paid any attention.

From then on up, it was simply a matter of evading patrolling
guards--a relatively easy job. Finally, I put on my vac suit and went
out through the air lock.

McGuire was still sitting there, a bright blue needle that reflected
the distant sun as it moved across the ebon sky. Ceres' rotation took
it from horizon to horizon in less than two hours, and you could see
it and the stars move against the spire of the ship.

I made it to the air lock in one long jump.

Jack Ravenhurst had gone into the ship through the tube that led to
the passenger lock. She might or might not have her vac suit on; I
knew she had several of them on Ceres. It was probable that she was
wearing it without the fishbowl.

I used the cargo lock.

It took a few minutes for the pumps to cycle, wasting more precious
time. I was fairly certain that she would be in the control cabin,
talking, but I was thankful that the pumps were silent.

Finally, I took off my fishbowl and stepped into the companionway.

And something about the size of Luna came out of nowhere and clobbered
me on the occiput. I had time to yell, "Get away!" Then I was as one
with intergalactic space.

       *       *       *       *       *

_Please!_ said the voice. _Please! Stop the drive! Go back! McGuire!
I_ demand _that you stop! I_ order _you to stop! Please! PLEASE!_

It went on and on. A voice that shifted around every possible mode of
emotion. Fear. Demand. Pleading. Anger. Cajoling. Hate. Threat.

Around and around and around.

_Can't you speak, McGuire? Say something to me!_ A shrill, soft,
throaty, harsh, murmuring, screaming voice that had one basic
characteristic. It was a female voice.

And then another voice.

_I am sorry, Jack. I can speak with you. I can record your data. But I
cannot accept your orders. I can take orders from only One. And he has
given me his orders._

And the feminine voice again: _Who was it? What orders? You keep
saying that it was the man on the couch. That doesn't make sense!_

I didn't hear the reply, because it suddenly occurred to me that
Daniel Oak was the man on the couch, and that I was Daniel Oak.

My head was throbbing with every beat of my heart, and it felt as if
my blood pressure was varying between zero and fifteen hundred pounds
per square inch in the veins and arteries and capillaries that fed my
brain.

I sat up, and the pain began to lessen. The blood seemed to drain away
from my aching head and go elsewhere.

I soon figured out the reason for that; I could tell by the feel that
the gravity pull was somewhere between one point five and two gees. I
wasn't at all used to it, but my head felt less painful and rather
more hazy. If possible.

I concentrated, and the girl's voice came back again.

"... I knew you when you were McGuire One, and Two, and Three, and
Four, and Five, and Six. And you were always good to me and
understanding. Don't you remember?"

And then McGuire's voice--human, masculine, and not distorted at all
by the reproduction system, but sounding rather stilted and terribly
logical: "I remember, Jack. The memory banks of my previous
activations are available."

"_All_ of them? Can you remember everything?"

"I can remember everything that is in my memory banks."

The girl's voice rose to a wail. "But you _don't_ remember! You
_always_ forgot things! They took things out each time you were
reactivated, don't you remember?"

"I cannot remember that which is not contained in my memory banks,
Jack. That is a contradiction in terms."

"But I was always able to _fix_ it before!" The tears in her eyes were
audible in her voice. "I'd tell you to remember, and I'd tell you
_what_ to remember, and you'd _remember_ it! Tell me what's happened
to you this time!"

"I cannot tell you. The information is not in my data banks."

Slowly, I got to my feet. Two gees isn't much, once you get used to
it. The headache had subsided to a dull, bearable throb.

I was on a couch in a room just below the control chamber, and Jack
Ravenhurst's voice was coming down from above. McGuire's voice was all
around me, coming from the hidden speakers that were everywhere in
the ship.

"But why won't you obey me any more, McGuire?" she asked.

"I'll answer that, McGuire," I said.

Jack's voice came weakly from the room above. "Mr. Oak? Dan? Thank
heaven you're all right!"

"No thanks to you, though," I said. I was trying to climb the ladder
to the control room, and my voice sounded strained.

"You've got to do something!" she said with a touch of hysteria.
"McGuire is taking us straight toward Cygnus at two gees and won't
stop."

My thinking circuits began to take over again. "Cut the thrust to half
a gee, McGuire. Ease it down. Take a minute to do it."

"Yes, sir."

The gravity pull of acceleration let up slowly as I clung to the
ladder. After a minute, I climbed on up to the control room.

Jack Ravenhurst was lying on the acceleration couch, looking
swollen-faced and ill. I sat down on the other couch.

"I'm sorry I hit you," she said. "Really."

"I believe you. How long have we been moving, McGuire?"

"Three hours, twelve minutes, seven seconds, sir," said McGuire.

"I didn't want anyone to know," Jack said. "Not anyone. That's why I
hit you. I didn't know McGuire was going to go crazy."

"He's not crazy, Jack," I said carefully. "This time, he has a good
chance of remaining sane."

"But he's not McGuire any more!" she wailed. "He's different!
Terrible!"

"Sure he's different. You should be thankful."

"But what happened?"

I leaned back on the couch. "Listen to me, Jack, and listen carefully.
You think you're pretty grown up, and, in a lot of ways you are. But
no human being, no matter how intelligent, can store enough experience
into seventeen years to make him or her wise. A wise choice requires
data, and gathering enough data requires time." That wasn't exactly
accurate, but I had to convince her.

"You're pretty good at controlling people, aren't you, Jack. A real
powerhouse. Individuals, or mobs, you can usually get your own way. It
was your idea to send you to Luna, not your father's. It was your idea
to appoint yourself my assistant in this operation. It was you who
planted the idea that the failure of the McGuire series was due to
Thurston's activities.

"You used to get quite a kick out of controlling people. And then you
were introduced to McGuire One. I got all the information on that. You
were fifteen, and, for the first time in your life, you found an
intelligent mind that couldn't be affected at all by that emotional
field you project so well. Nothing affected McGuire but data. If you
told him something, he believed it. Right, McGuire?"

"I do not recall that, sir."

"Fine. And, by the way, McGuire--the data you have been picking up in
the last few hours, since your activation, is to be regarded as
unique data. It applies only to Jaqueline Ravenhurst, and is not to be
assumed relevant to any other person unless I tell you otherwise."

"Yes, sir."

"That's what I don't understand!" Jack said unhappily. "I stole the
two keys that were supposed to activate McGuire. He was supposed to
obey the first person who activated him. But _I_ activated him, and he
