death.

I could picture Moya and the crew speculating that I'd taken complete
leave of my senses.

But sometimes you have to play the game blindly--"by the seat of your
pressure suit," as the pioneers stated it.

I went to the shuttler's locker, located a canteen in a survival kit,
filled it and left the ship.

I started where I'd found the largest collection of remains.

Moya's memory had failed to particularize the plant, but I had enough
evidence to negate indiscriminate baptism.

I felt supremely foolish--for a while.

My thoughts began to focus, and I recalled the little plant that had
grown up through the hole in the pelvis.

Casting about, I located adult specimens. They seemed to fit the
requirements. Again it struck me that they bore a familial kinship to a
variety that occurred on the plain.

I couldn't place the difference.

Finally I selected one about two feet tall.

It was bulbous, thick skinned, terminating in broad members that were
clustered to form a rough funnel. Their inner surfaces were coated with
a glutinous substance. The main body of the plant was studded with warty
projections about the size of walnut halves. And just below the terminal
funnel was a corona of tapering members like leaves beneath a bizarre
blossom. They ended in sharp points, bore flimsy surface bristles, and
seemed to serve as protection for the trap.

I prodded the green-and-yellow mottled skin of the thing. It was tough,
resistant, almost pneumatic--

I had this sudden, strong feeling.

About ten feet away was a tree with dull-reddish, overlapping bark
segments on its trunk. There was a branch close enough to the ground to
be reached if my leg would support the necessary spring. I tested the
leg for leap and the branch for support. They held.

I uncapped the canteen and sprinkled the remaining water over the plant,
making sure that some reached both the funnel and the corona.

I ran.

Seconds later, perched monkey-see, monkey-do on the branch, I lost any
lingering feeling of foolishness.

I sat there for quite a while, sickened. I thought about the crew of
231, and the other pieces of the puzzle. One of them had to be
arrogance--the natural arrogance of picked people that leads to a belief
in corporeal immortality: _Nothing can happen to me; you, maybe, but not
me._

       *       *       *       *       *

Even though I knew exactly what to expect, it was impossible not to jerk
back involuntarily with the others.

We were in the star ship, clustered around a bell jar. The jar contained
a small specimen of the killer that I'd dug up gingerly and brought back
for evidence.

I'd introduced water into the jar, and the first reaction had just taken
place.

"Watch closely," I cautioned.

Again it happened--innocently at first and then too swiftly for the eye
to follow. One of the little protuberances seemed to swell
slightly--_Ping._ Something struck the wall of the bell jar hard enough
to evoke a clear, sharp, resonant note.

"I don't know the exact range of a mature specimen," I said, grimly,
"but I saw leaves shake a good twenty yards away."

"A seed," one of the crewmen breathed. "Nothing but a tiny,
insignificant _seed_."

Moya shook his head.

"A deadly missile, son, wearing or containing a virulent poison. And
people used to blather about curare."

I began to draw concentric arcs on the chart.

"I kept fetching water and testing and retreating all the way back to
the plain. Pretty soon there's not going to be any place safe within
miles of where these mutants can take root. Near the plain's camp,
they're still innocuous--the original species. The propagation response
is triggered by rain, all right, but the seeds just pop out, and, of
course, the poison is undoubtedly weak--a bother only to insects."

"But they weren't a problem--" Moya interjected.

"Time," I said. "Five years. Look here on the chart. I figured this to
be the center: the first team's permanent camp on the hill. Now what
happened there? Heaters to destroy immediate vegetation, and
_Radio-Frequency_ beams to kill insects and their larvae over a wider
area. R-F--don't you see? Cells react to certain portions of the radio
spectrum. Some are destroyed, depending upon intensity. Some behave
strangely--the 'marching protozoa,' the 'dancing amoeba.' In others,
chromosomal aberrations occur, resulting in mutations. Remember the
experiments with yeasts, garlic, grains? The growth of some
microorganisms is stimulated by R-F irradiation."

"Then these glorified flytraps got mad at what was happening to their
innards and decided to fight even harder for survival?"

"You're anthropomorphizing," I told Moya, "but that's the way I see it.
They just responded along already established lines."

I paused and noted the expressions on the faces of the crew. Maybe it
was that, and maybe it was the fact that my leg hadn't held up very well
under the beating I'd given it. And maybe it was twelve good
men--Anyway, I spent the next half hour pulling no punches. When I'd
finished, Interstel had regained its reputation. Nobody--neither
short-timer nor veteran--likes to hear dead comrades characterized as
"stupid." But I figured the crew would remember.

Moya seemed unfazed, as if he'd paid scant attention to my speech; he
rubbed his chin reflectively.

"The bug suits--"

"Were they any protection? At long range, probably. But up close--"

Moya apparently could think of nothing more to say.

We radiated the danger area, left 231 for a pick-up team, and headed
for home.

       *       *       *       *       *

Moya walked with me from Quarantine to the Terra Ramp. The leg still
wasn't right.

"Did you mention me kindly in your report?"

"Of course not," I told him.

He chuckled and put his hand on my shoulder.

"About Ben Stuart--"

"It's a nasty job," I said.

"Did he rate getting cashiered?"

"He did, Tony."

"Well, take care of yourself, Ivy."

The redhead again was on duty at the outbound desk. She ignored me.

_Xanadu!_

It was night, and there was a heavy fog. Standing alone on the open
promenade outside the dome, I was grateful that I couldn't see the
sky--and the ominous stars that were not so far away.

A couple of months later, I heard that Epsilon-Terra had received its
official name: _Atri-Terra_. _Atri_ from attrition. I've wondered ever
since whether GS based the choice upon the secular or the theological
definition.


THE END




Transcriber's Note:

    This etext was produced from _Analog_ November 1961. Extensive
    research did not uncover any evidence that the U.S. copyright on
