
The case may be illustrated by supposing that a rich man and a poor
man combine together to achieve some common purpose to which both are
to contribute. The ethical notion that Dives shall contribute
largely, according to his large means, and Lazarus according to his
slender means, is quite antagonistic to the scale which dynamics has
imposed. Dynamics declares that the rich man need only give a penny to
every pound that has to be extorted from the poor man. Now this is
precisely the case with regard to the sun and Jupiter, and it involves
a somewhat curious consequence. As long as Jupiter possesses available
moment of momentum, we may be certain that no large contribution of
moment of momentum has been obtained from the sun. For, returning to
our illustration, if we find that Lazarus still has something left in
his pocket, we are of course assured that Dives cannot have expended
much, because, as Lazarus had but little to begin with, and as Dives
only puts in a penny for every pound that Lazarus spends, it is
obvious that no large amount can have been devoted to the common
object. Hence it follows that whatever transfer of moment of momentum
has taken place in the sun-Jupiter system has been almost entirely
obtained at the expense of Jupiter. Now in the solar system at
present, the orbital moment of momentum of Jupiter is nearly fifty
thousand times as great as his present store of rotational moment of
momentum. If, therefore, the departure of Jupiter from the sun had
been the consequence of tidal evolution, it would follow that Jupiter
must once have contained many thousands of times the moment of
momentum that he has at present. This seems utterly incredible, for
even were Jupiter dilated into an enormously large mass of vaporous
matter, spinning round with the utmost conceivable speed, it is
impossible that he should ever have possessed enough moment of
momentum. We are therefore forced to the conclusion that the tides
alone do not provide sufficient explanation for the retreat of Jupiter
from the sun.

There is rather a subtle point in the considerations now brought
forward, on which it will be necessary for us to ponder. In the
illustration of Dives and Lazarus, the contributions of Lazarus of
course ceased when his pockets were exhausted, but those of Dives will
continue, and in the lapse of time may attain any amount within the
utmost limits of Dives' resources. The essential point to notice is,
that so long as Lazarus retains anything in _his_ pocket, we know for
certain that Dives has not given much; if Lazarus, however, has his
pocket absolutely empty, and if we do not know how long they may have
been in that condition, we have no means of knowing how large a
portion of wealth Dives may not have actually expended. The
turning-point of the theory thus involves the fact that Jupiter still
retains available moment of momentum in his rotation; and this was our
sole method of proving that the sun, which in this case was Dives, had
never given much. But our argument must have taken an entirely
different line had it so happened that Jupiter constantly turned the
same face to the sun, and that therefore his pockets were entirely
empty in so far as available moment of momentum is concerned. It would
be apparently impossible for us to say to what extent the resources of
the sun may not have been drawn upon; we can, however, calculate
whether in any case the sun could possibly have supplied enough moment
of momentum to account for the recession of Jupiter. Speaking in round
numbers, the revolutional moment of momentum of Jupiter is about
thirty times as great as the rotational moment of momentum at present
possessed by the sun. I do not know that there is anything impossible
in the supposition that the sun might, by an augmented volume and an
augmented velocity of rotation, contain many times the moment of
momentum that it has at this moment. It therefore follows that if it
had happened that Jupiter constantly bent the same face to the sun,
there would apparently be nothing impossible in the fact that Jupiter
had been born of the sun, just as the moon was born of the earth.
These same considerations should also lead us to observe with still
more special attention the development of the earth-moon system. Let
us restate the matter of the earth and moon in the light which the
argument with respect to Jupiter has given us. At present the
rotational moment of momentum of the earth is about a fifth part of
the revolutional moment of momentum of the moon. Owing to the fact
that the moon keeps the same face to us, she has now no available
moment of momentum, and all the moment of momentum required to account
for her retreat has of late come from the rotation of the earth; but
suppose that the moon still had some liquid on its surface which could
be agitated by tides, suppose further that it did not always bend the
same face towards us, that it therefore had some available moment of
momentum due to its rotation on which the tides could operate, then
see how the argument would have been altered. The gradual increase of
the moon's distance could be provided for by a transfer of moment of
momentum from two sources, due of course to the rotational velocities
of the two bodies. Here again the moon and the earth will contribute
according to that dynamical but very iniquitous principle which
regulated the appropriations from the purses of Dives and Lazarus. The
moon must give not according to her abundance, but in the inverse
ratio thereof--because she has little she must give largely. Nor shall
we make an erroneous estimate if we say that nine-tenths of the whole
moment of momentum necessary for the enlargement of the orbit would
have been exacted from the moon; that means that the moon must once
have had about five or six times as much moment of momentum as the
earth possesses at this moment. Considering the small size of the
moon, this could only have arisen by terrific velocity of rotation,
which it is inconceivable that its materials could ever have
possessed.

This presents the demonstration of tidal evolution in a fresh light.
If the moon now departed to any considerable extent from showing the
constant face to the earth, it would seem that its retreat could not
have been caused by tides. Some other agent for producing the present
configuration would be necessary, just as we found that some other
agent than the tides has been necessary in the case of Jupiter.

But I must say a few words as to the attitude of this question with
regard to the entire solar system. This system consists of the sun
presiding at the centre, and of the planets and their satellites in
revolution around their respective primaries, and each also animated
by a rotation on its axis. I shall in so far depart from the actual
configuration of the system as to transform it into an ideal system,
whereof the masses, the dimensions, and the velocities shall all be
preserved; but that the several planes of revolution shall be all
flattened into one plane, instead of being inclined at small angles as
they are at present; nor will it be unreasonable for us at the same
time to bring into parallelism all the axes of rotation, and to
arrange that their common directions shall be perpendicular to the
plane of their common orbits. For the purpose of our present research
this ideal system may pass for the real system.

In its original state, whatever that state may have been, a
magnificent endowment was conferred upon the system. Perhaps I may,
without derogation from the dignity of my subject, speak of the
endowment as partly personal and partly entailed. The system had of
course different powers with regard to the disposal of the two
portions; the personal estate could be squandered. It consisted
entirely of what we call energy; and considering how frequently we use
the expression conservation of energy, it may seem strange to say now
that this portion of the endowment has been found capable of
alienation, nay, further, that our system has been squandering it
persistently from the first moment until now. Although the doctrine of
the conservation of energy is, we have every reason to believe, a
fundamental law affecting the whole universe, yet it would be wholly
inaccurate to say that any particular system such as our solar system
shall invariably preserve precisely the same quantity of energy
without alteration. The circumstance that heat is a form of energy
indeed negatives this supposition. For our system possesses energy of
all the different kinds: there is energy due to the motions both of
rotation and of revolution; there is energy due to the fact that the
mutually attracting bodies of our system are separated by distances of
enormous magnitude; and there is also energy in the form of heat; and
the laws of heat permit that this form of energy shall be radiated off
into space, and thus disappear entirely, in so far as our system is
concerned. On the other hand, there may no doubt be some small amount
of energy accruing to our system from the other systems in space,
which like ours are radiating forth energy. Any gain from this source,
however, is necessarily so very small in comparison to the loss to
which we have referred, that it is quite impossible that the one
should balance the other. Though it is undoubtedly true that the
total quantity of energy in the universe is constant, yet the share of
that energy belonging to any particular system such as ours declines
steadily from age to age.

I may indeed remark, that the question as to what becomes of all the
radiant energy which the millions of suns in the universe are daily
discharging offers a problem apparently not easy to solve; but we need
not discuss the matter at present, we are only going to trace out the
vicissitudes of our own system; and whatever other changes that system
may exhibit, the fact is certain that the total quantity of energy it
contains is declining.

Of the two endowments of energy and of moment of momentum originally
conferred on our system the moment of momentum is the entailed estate.
No matter how the bodies may move, no matter how their actions may
interfere with one another, no matter how this body is pulled one way
and the other body that way, the conservation of moment of momentum is
not imperilled, nor, no matter what losses of heat may be experienced
by radiation, could the store of moment of momentum be affected. The
only conceivable way in which the quantity of moment of momentum in
the solar system could be tampered with is by the interference of some
external attracting body. We know, however, that the stars are all
situated at such enormous distances, that the influences they can
exert in the perturbation of the solar system are absolutely
insensible; they are beyond the reach of the most delicate
astronomical measurements. Hence we see how the endowment of the
system with moment of momentum has conferred upon that system a
something which is absolutely inalienable, even to the smallest
portion.

Before going any further it would be necessary for me to explain more
fully than I have hitherto done the true nature of the method of
estimating moment of momentum. The moment of momentum consists of two
parts: there is first that due to the revolution of the bodies around
the sun; there is secondly the rotation of these bodies on their axes.
Let us first think simply of a single planet revolving in a circular
orbit around the sun. The momentum of that planet at any moment may be
regarded as the product of its mass and its velocity; then the moment
of momentum of the planet in the case mentioned is found by
multiplying the momentum by the radius of the path pursued. In a more
general case, where the planet does not revolve in a circle, but
pursued an elliptic path, the moment of momentum is to be found by
multiplying the planet's velocity and its mass into the perpendicular
from the sun on the direction in which the planet is moving.

These rules provide the methods for estimating all the moments of
momentum, so far as the revolutions in our system are concerned. For
the rotations somewhat more elaborate processes are required. Let us
think of a sphere rotating round a fixed axis. Every particle of that
sphere will of course describe a circle around the axis, and all these
circles will lie in parallel planes. We may for our present purpose
regard each atom of the body as a little planet revolving in a
circular orbit, and therefore the moment of momentum of the entire
sphere will be found by simply adding together the moments of momentum
of all the different atoms of which the sphere is composed. To perform
this addition the use of an elaborate mathematical method is required.
I do not propose to enter into the matter any further, except to say
that the total moment of momentum is the product of two factors--one
the angular velocity with which the sphere is turning round, while the
other involves the sphere's mass and dimensions.

To illustrate the principles of the computation we shall take one or
two examples. Suppose that two circles be drawn, one of which is
double the diameter of the other. Let two planets be taken of equal
mass, and one of these be put to revolve in one circle, and the other
to revolve in the other circle, in such a way that the periods of both
revolutions shall be equal. It is required to find the moments of
momentum in the two cases. In the larger of the two circles it is
plain that the planet must be moving twice as rapidly as in the
smaller, therefore its momentum is twice as great; and as the radius
is also double, it follows that the moment of momentum in the large
orbit will be four times that in the small orbit. We thus see that the
moment of momentum increases in the proportion of the squares of the
radii. If, however, the two planets were revolving about the same sun,
one of these orbits being double the other, the periodic times could
not be equal, for Kepler's law tells us that the square of the
periodic time is proportional to the cube of the mean distance.
Suppose, then, that the distance of the first planet is 1, and that of
the second planet is 2, the cubes of those numbers are 1 and 8, and
therefore the periodic times of the two bodies will be as 1 to the
square root of 8. We can thus see that the velocity of the outer body
must be less than that of the inner one, for while the length of the
path is only double as large, the time taken to describe that path is
the square root of eight times as great; in fact, the velocity of the
outer body will be only the square root of twice that of the inner
one. As, however, its distance from the sun is twice as great, it
follows that the moment of momentum of the outer body will be the
square root of twice that of the inner body. We may state this result
a little more generally as follows--

In comparing the moments of momentum of the several planets which
revolve around the sun, that of each planet is proportional to the
product of its mass with the square root of its distance from the
sun.

Let us now compare two spheres together, the diameter of one sphere
being double that of the other, while the times of rotation of the two
are identical. And let us now compare together the moments of momentum
in these two cases. It can be shown by reasoning, into which I need
not now enter, that the moment of momentum of the large sphere will be
thirty-two times that of the small one. In general we may state that
if a sphere of homogeneous material be rotating about an axis, its
moment of momentum is to be expressed by the product of its angular
velocity by the fifth power of its radius.

We can now take stock, as it were, of the constituents of moments of
momentum in our system. We may omit the satellites for the present,
while such unsubstantial bodies as comets and such small bodies as
meteors need not concern us. The present investment of the moment of
momentum of our system is to be found by multiplying the mass of each
planet by the square root of its distance from the sun; these products
for all the several planets form the total revolutional moment of
momentum. The remainder of the investment is in rotational moment of
momentum, the collective amount of which is to be estimated by
multiplying the angular velocity of each planet into its density, and
the fifth power of its radius if the planet be regarded as
homogeneous, or into such other power as may be necessary when the
planet is not homogeneous. Indeed, as the denser parts of the planet
necessarily lie in its interior, and have therefore neither the
velocity nor the radius of the more superficial portions, it seems
necessary to admit that the moments of momentum of the planets will be
proportional to some lower power of the radius than the fifth. The
total moment of momentum of the planets by rotation, when multiplied
by a constant factor, and added to the revolutional moment of
momentum, will remain absolutely constant.

It may be interesting to note the present disposition of this vast
inheritance among the different bodies of our system. The biggest item
of all is the moment of momentum of Jupiter, due to its revolution
around the sun; in fact, in this single investment nearly sixty per
cent. of the total moment of momentum of the solar system is found.
The next heaviest item is the moment of momentum of Saturn's
revolution, which is twenty-four per cent. Then come the similar
contributions of Uranus and Neptune, which are six and eight per cent.
respectively. Only one more item is worth mentioning, as far as
magnitude is concerned, and that is the nearly two per cent. that the
sun contains in virtue of its _rotation_. In fact, all the other
moments of momentum are comparatively insignificant in this method of
viewing the subject. Jupiter from his rotation has not the fifty
thousandth part of his revolutional moment of momentum, while the
earth's rotational share is not one ten thousandth part of that of
Jupiter, and therefore is without importance in the general aspect of
the system. The revolution of the earth contributes about one eight
hundredth part of that of Jupiter.

These facts as here stated will suffice for us to make a forecast of
the utmost the tides can effect in the future transformation of our
system. We have already explained that the general tendency of tidal
friction is to augment revolutional moment of momentum at the expense
of rotational. The total, however, of the rotational moment of
momentum of the system barely reaches two per cent. of the whole
amount; this is of course almost entirely contributed by the sun, for
all the planets together have not a thousandth part of the sun's
rotational moment. The utmost therefore that tidal evolution can
effect in the system is to distribute the two per cent. in augmenting
the revolutionary moment of momentum. It does not seem that this can
produce much appreciable derangement in the configuration of the
system. No doubt if it were all applied to one of the smaller planets
it would produce very considerable effect. Our earth, for instance,
would have to be driven out to a distance many hundreds of times
further than it is at present were the sun's disposable moment of
momentum ultimately to be transferred to the earth alone. On the other
hand, Jupiter could absorb the whole of the sun's share by quite an
insignificant enlargement of its present path. It does not seem likely
that the distribution that must ultimately take place can much affect
the present configuration of the system.

We thus see that the tides do not appear to have exercised anything
like the same influence in the affairs of our solar system generally
which they have done in that very small part of the solar system which
consists of the earth and moon. This is, as I have endeavoured to show
in these lectures, the scene of supremely interesting tidal phenomena;
but how small it is in comparison with the whole magnitude of our
system may be inferred from the following illustration. I represent
the whole moment of momentum of our system by L1,000,000,000, the bulk
of which is composed of the revolutional moments of momentum of the
great planets, and the rotational moment of momentum of the sun. On
this scale the rotational share which has fallen to our earth and moon
does not even rise to the dignity of a single pound, it can only be
represented by the very modest figure of 19_s._ 5_d._ This is divided
into two parts--the earth by its rotation accounts for 3_s._ 4_d._,
leaving 16_s._ 1_d._ as the equivalent of the revolution of the moon.
The other inferior planets have still less to show than the earth.
Venus can barely have more than 2_s._ 6_d._; even Mars' two satellites
cannot bring his figure up beyond the slender value of 1-1/2_d._;
while Mercury will be amply represented by the smallest coin known at
her Majesty's mint.

The same illustration will bring out the contrast between the Jovian
system and our earth system. The rotational share of the former would
be totally represented by a sum of nearly L12,000; of this, however,
Jupiter's satellites only contribute about L89, notwithstanding that
there are four of them. Thus Jupiter's satellites have not one
hundredth part of the moment of momentum which the rotation of Jupiter
exhibits. How wide is the contrast between this state of things and
the earth-moon system, for the earth does not contain in its rotation
one-fifth of the moment of momentum that the moon has in its
revolution; in fact, the moon has gradually robbed the earth, which
originally possessed 19_s._ 5_d._, of which the moon has carried off
all but 3_s._ 4_d._

And this process is still going on, so that ultimately the earth will
be left very poor, though not absolutely penniless, at least if the
retention of a halfpenny can be regarded as justifying that assertion.
Saturn, revolving as it does with great rapidity, and having a very
large mass, possesses about L2700, while Uranus and Neptune taken
together would figure for about the same amount.

In conclusion, let us revert again to the two critical conditions of
the earth-moon system. As to what happened before the first critical
period, the tides tell us nothing, and every other line of reasoning
very little; we can to some extent foresee what may happen after the
second critical epoch is reached, at a time so remote that I do not
venture even to express the number of ciphers which ought to follow
the significant digit in the expression for the number of years. I
mentioned, however, that at this time the sun tides will produce the
effect of applying a still further brake to the rotation of the earth,
so that ultimately the month will have become a shorter period than
the day. It is therefore interesting for us to trace out the tidal
history of a system in which the satellite revolves around the primary
in less time than the primary takes to go round on its own axis--such
a system, in fact, as Mars would present at this moment were the outer
satellite to be abstracted. The effect of the tides on the planet
raised by its satellite would then be to accelerate its rotation; for
as the planet, so to speak, lags behind the tides, friction would now
manifest itself by the continuous endeavour to drag the primary round
faster. The gain of speed, however, thus attained would involve the
primary in performing more than its original share of the moment of
momentum; less moment of momentum would therefore remain to be done by
the satellite, and the only way to accomplish this would be for the
satellite to come inwards and revolve in a smaller orbit.

We might indeed have inferred this from the considerations of energy
alone, for whatever happens in the deformation of the orbit, heat is
produced by the friction, and this heat is lost, and the total energy
of the system must consequently decline. Now if it be a consequence of
the tides that the velocity of the primary is accelerated, the energy
corresponding to that velocity is also increased. Hence the primary
has more energy than it had before; this energy must have been
obtained at the expense of the satellite; the satellite must therefore
draw inwards until it has yielded up enough of energy not alone to
account for the increased energy of the primary, but also for the
absolute loss of energy by which the whole operation is characterized.

It therefore appears that in the excessively remote future the retreat
of the moon will not only be checked, but that the moon may actually
return to a point to be determined by the changes in the earth's
rotation. It is, however, extremely difficult to follow up the study
of a case where the problem of three bodies has become even more
complicated than usual.

The importance of tidal evolution in our solar system has also to be
viewed in connection with the celebrated nebular hypothesis of the
origin of the solar system. Of course it would be understood that
tidal evolution is in no sense a rival doctrine to that of the nebular
theory. The nebular origin of the sun and the planets sculptured out
the main features of our system; tidal evolution has merely come into
play as a subsidiary agent, by which a detail here or a feature there
has been chiselled into perfect form. In the nebular theory it is
believed that the planets and the sun have all originated from the
cooling and the contraction of a mighty heated mass of vapours. Of
