specimens and equipment moved from her kitchen in time, had been ousted
from the peeling stucco and joined those who were finding shelter (with
some difficulty) in other parts of the city.

The southernmost runners crept down toward Hollywood Boulevard where
every effort was being marshaled to combat them, and the northernmost
wandered around and seemingly lost themselves in the desert of sagebrush
and greasewood about Hollywood Bowl. Traffic through Cahuenga Pass, the
great artery between Los Angeles and its tributary valley, was
threatened with disruption.

But while the parent body was spreading out, its offspring, as Miss
Francis foresaw, had come into existence. Dozens of nuclei were
reported, some close at hand, others far away as the Sunset Strip and
Hollywoodland. These smaller bodies were vigorously attacked as soon as
discovered but of course they had in every case made progress too great
to be countered, for they were at first naturally indistinguishable
from ordinary devilgrass and by the time their true character was
determined so rapid was their growth they were already beyond all
possibility of control.

The grass was now everyone's primary thought, replacing the moon (among
lovers), the incometax (among individuals of importance), the weather
(among strangers), and illness (among ladies no longer interested in the
moon), as topics of conversation. Old friends meeting casually after
many years' lapse greeted each other with "What's the latest on the
grass?" Radiocomedians fired gagmen with weeks of service behind them
for failure to provide botanical quips, or, conversely, hired raw
writers who had inhabited the fringes of Hollywood since Mack Sennett
days on the strength of a single agrostological illusion. Newspapers ran
long articles on _Cynodon dactylon_ and the editors of their garden
sections were roused from the somnolence into which they had sunk upon
receiving their appointment and shoved into doubleleaded boldfaced
position.

Textbooks on botany began outselling popular novels and a mere work of
fiction having the accidental title _Greener Than You Think_ was
catapulted onto the bestseller list before anyone realized it wasnt an
academic discussion of the family Gramineae. Contributors to
scientifiction magazines burst bloodvessels happily turning out ten
thousand words a day describing their heroes' adventures amid the red
grass of Mars or the blue grass of Venus after they had
singlehanded--with the help of a deathray and the heroine's pure
love--conquered the green grass of Tellus.

Professors, shy and otherwise, were lured from their classrooms to
lecture before ladies' clubs hitherto sacred to the accents of
transoceanic celebrities and Eleanor Roosevelt. There they competed on
alternate forums with literate gardeners and stuttering horticultural
amateurs. Stolon, rhizome and culm became words replacing crankshaft and
piston in the popular vocabulary; the puerile reports Gootes fabricated
under my name as the man responsible for the phenomenon were syndicated
in newspapers from coast to coast, and a query as to rates was received
from the _Daily Mail_.

Brother Paul's exhortations on the radio increased in both length and
intensity as the grass spread. Pastors of other churches and conductors
of similar programs denounced him as misled; realestate operators,
fearful of all this talk about the grass bringing doom and so
depreciating the value of their properties, complained to the Federal
Communications Commission; Sundayschools voted him the Man of the Year
and hundreds of motherly ladies stored the studio with cakes baked by
their own hands. Brother Paul's answer to indorser and detractor alike
was to buy up more radiotime.

No one doubted the government would at length awaken from its apathy and
counter the menace swiftly and efficiently, as always before in crises
when the country was threatened. The nation with the highest rate of
production per manhour, the greatest efficiency per machine, the
greatest wealth per capita, and the greatest vision per mindseye was not
going to be defeated by a mere weed, however overgrown. While waiting
the inevitable action and equally inevitable solution the public had all
the excitement of war without suffering the accompanying privations and
bereavements. The grass was a nuisance, but a nuisance with titillating
compensations; most people felt like children whose schoolhouse had
burned down; they were sorry, they knew there'd be a new one, they were
quite ready to help build it--but in the meantime it was fun.

The _Daily Intelligencer_ was gorged with letters from its readers on
the subject of the grass. Many of them wanted to know what a newspaper
of its standing meant by devoting so much space to an ephemeral
happening, while many more asked indignantly why more space wasnt given
to something affecting their very lives and fortunes. Communist
partymembers, using improbable pennames, asked passionately if this was
not a direct result of the country's failure to come to a thorough
understanding with the Soviet Union? Terrified propertyholders irately
demanded that something, SOMETHING be done before realestate became as
valueless in Southern California as it already was in Red Russia.

Technocrats demanded the government be immediately turned over to a
committee of engineers and competent agronomists who would deal with the
situation as it deserved after harnessing the wasted energy of the
populace. Nationalists hinted darkly that the whole thing was the result
of a plot by the Elders of Zion and that Kaplan's Delicatessen--in
conspiracy with A Cohen, Notions--was at the bottom of the grass.
Brother Paul wrote--and his letter was printed, for he now advertised
his radioprograms in the columns of the _Intelligencer_--that
Caesar--presumably the state of California--had been chastened for
arrogating to itself things not to be rendered unto Caesar and the
tankmen had deservedly perished for their sacrilege. The letter aroused
fury--the followers of Brother Paul either didnt read the _Intelligencer_
or were satisfied their leader needed no championing, if they did--and
other letters poured in calling for various expressions of popular
disapproval, from simple boycott up through tarring and feathering to
plain and elaborated--with gasoline and castration--lynching. The grass
was a hot topic.

With its acute perception of the popular taste Le ffacase's paper
printed not only most of the communications--the unprintable ones were
circulated among the staff till they wore out or disappeared
mysteriously in the Gents Room--but maps showing the daily progress of
the weed, guesses as to the duration of the plague by local prophets,
learned articles by scientists, opinions of statesmen, views of
prominent entertainers, in fact anything having any remote connection
with the topic of the day. The paper even went further and offered a
reward of ten thousand dollars to anyone advancing a suggestion leading
to the destruction of the intruder. Its circulation jumped at the
expense of less perspicacious rivals and the incoming mail, already many
times normal, swelled to staggering proportions.

The contest was taken with deadly seriousness, for the livelihood of
many of the paper's readers was suddenly threatened by its subject and
from a new quarter. In the same issue as the offered reward there
appeared an interview with the accredited head of the organized
motionpicture producers. This retiring gentleman was rumored to be
completely illiterate, an unquestionable slander, for he had written
checks to support every cause dedicated to keeping wages where they
belonged and seeing the wage earners didnt waste the money so
benevolently supplied by their employers.

I got the details of the interview from the interviewer himself. The
magnate--he had no objection to the description--had been irritable and
minced no words. The grass was bad alike for production and boxoffice,
taking everyone's mind off the prime business of making and viewing
motionpictures. It was injuring The Industry and he couldnt conceal the
fact that The Industry, speaking through his mouth and with his
vocabulary, was annoyed.

"Unless this disgraceful episode ends within ten days," he had said
sternly, "the Motion Picture Industry will move to Florida."

It was an ultimatum; Southern Californians heard and trembled. The last
time this dread interdiction had been invoked--in the midst of a bitter
election fight--it had sent them scurrying to the polls to do their
benefactor's bidding. Now indeed the grass menace would be taken
seriously.

The next day's paper had news of more immediate concern to me. The
governor had appointed a special committee to investigate the situation
and the first two witnesses to be called were Josephine Spencer Francis
and Albert Weener.


_20._ William Rufus Le ffacase was as enthusiastic as his phlegmatic
nature permitted. He called me into his office and half raised the
snuffbox off the desk as though to offer me an unwelcome pinch. "Youre a
made man now, Weener," he said, thinking better of his generosity and
putting the snuffbox back. "Your name will be in headlines from Alabama
to Alberta--and all due to the _Intelligencer_."

I would have resented this as a gross misappropriation of credit--for
surely all obligation was on the other side--had I not been deeply
disturbed by the prospect of being haled before this committee like a
criminal before the bar of justice.

"I'd much rather avoid this unpleasant notoriety, Mr. Le ffacase," I
protested. "Since the _Intelligencer_, for reasons best known to itself,
chooses not to avail itself of my contributions, but prints my name over
words I have not written, there could be no possible objection to my
slipping away to Nevada until this investigation ends."

His face became a pretty shade of plum. "Weener, youre a thief, a petty,
cadging, sly, larcenous, pilfering, bloody thief. You take the _Daily
Intelligencer_'s honest dollars without a qualm, aye, with a smirk on
your imbecile face, proposing with the cool impudence of the born
embezzler to return no value for them. Weener, you forget yourself. The
_Intelligencer_ picked you out of a gutter, a nauseous, dungspattered
and thoroughly fitting gutter, and pays you well, mark that, you
feebleminded counterfeit of a confidenceman, pays you well, not for your
futile, lecherous pawings at the chastity of the English language, but
out of the boundless generosity which only a newspaper with a great soul
can have. And what do you propose to do in gratitude? To run, to flee,
to hide from the expression of authority, to bring disgrace upon the
very newspaper whose munificence pumps life into your boneless,
soulless, gutless carcass. Not another word, not a sound, not a ghoulish
syllable from your ineffective vocabulary. Out of my presence before I
lose my temper. Get down to whatever smokefilled and tastelessly
decorated room that committee is meeting in and do not leave while it is
in session, neither to eat, sleep, nor move those bowels whose
possession I gravely doubt. You hear me, Weener?"

For some reason the committee was not attempting to get the story of the
grass in chronological order. When I arrived, the six distinguished
gentlemen were trying to find out all about the crudeoil poured,
apparently without effect, in what now seemed so long ago, but which
actually had been less than two weeks before.

Flanked on either side by his colleagues, the little black plug of his
hearingaid sticking out like a misplaced unicorn's horn, was the
chairman, Senator Jones, his looseskinned old fingers resting lightly on
the bright table, the nails square and ridged, the flesh brownspotted.
He adjusted a pair of goldrimmed spectacles, quickly found the
improvement in his vision unpleasant, and rumbled, "What did it cost the
taxpayers?"

On the stand, the chief of police was settled in great discomfort, so
far forward on the rounded edge of his chair that his balance was a
source of fascinated speculation to the gallery. He squirmed a perilous
half inch forward, but before he had time to reply, old Judge Robinson
of the State Supreme Court, who scorned any palliation of his deafness
such as Senator Jones condescended to, cupped his left ear with his hand
and shrieked, "Ay? Ay? What's that? Speak up, can't you? Don't sit there
mumbling."

Assemblyman Brown, head of the legislature's antiracketeering committee,
intense concentration expressed in the forward push of his vigorous
shoulders and the creased lines on his youthful forehead, asked if it
were not true that the oil had been held up by a union jurisdictional
dispute? There was a spattering of applause from the listeners at this
adroit question and one man in the back of the room cried "Sha--" and
then sat down quickly.

Attorney General Smith wanted to know just who had ordered the oil in
the first place and whether the propertyowners had given their consent
to its application. The attorney general's square face, softened and
rounded by fat, shone on the wriggling chief like a klieglight; his
lips, irresistibly suggesting twin slices of underdone steak, parting
into a pleasant smile when his question had concluded. The other two
members of the committee seemed about to inquire further when the chief
managed to stammer, he was awfully sorry, gentlemen, but he had been
out of town and hadnt even heard of the oil till this moment.

He was instantly dismissed from the stand and a new witness, from the
mayor's office, was called, with no happier results. He, too, was about
to be excused when Dr Johnson, who represented Science on the committee,
descended from Himalayan abstraction to demand what effect the oil had
had on the grass.

There were excited whisperings and craning of feminine heads as Dr
Johnson propounded his question. The interest he excited was, however,
largely vicarious. For he was famous, not so much in his own right, as
in being the husband of the _Intelligencer_'s widely read society
columnist whose malapropisms caused more wry enjoyment and fearsome
anticipation than an elopement to Nevada.

"And what effect did the oil have on the grass?" he repeated.

The query caused confusion, for it seemed the committee could not
proceed until this fact had been ascertained. Various technicians were
sent for, and the doctor, tall, solemn and benign, looked over his
stiff, turned-down collar and the black string tie drooping around it,
as though searching for some profound truth which would be readily
apparent to him alone.

The experts discoursed at some length in esoteric terms--one even
bringing a portable blackboard on which he demonstrated, with diagrams,
the chemical, geologic and mathematical aspects of the problem--but no
pertinent information was forthcoming till some minor clerk in the
Department of Water and Power, who had only got to the stand through a
confusion of names, said boldly, "No effect whatever."

"Why not?" asked Judge Robinson. "Was the oil adulterated? Speak up,
speak up; don't mumble."

Henry Miller, the Southland's bestknown realtor ("Los Angeles First in
Population by Nineteen Ninety Nine"), who had connections in the oil
industry, as well as in citrus and walnut packing, frowned
disapprovingly. The clerk said he didnt know, but he might venture a
guess--

Senator Jones informed him majestically that the committee was concerned
with facts, not speculations. This created an impasse until Attorney
General Smith tactfully suggested the clerk might be permitted to guess,
entirely off the record. After the official stenographer had been
commanded sternly not to take down a single word of conjecture, the
witness was allowed to advance the opinion that the oil hadnt killed the
plant because it had never reached the roots.

"Ay?" questioned the learned judge, looking as though neither his lunch
nor breakfast nor, for that matter, any nourishment absorbed since the
Taft administration, had agreed with him.

"I'm a bit of a gardener myself, gentlemen," the witness assured them
confidentially, settling back comfortably. "I putter around my own place
Saturdays and Sundays and I know what devilgrass is like. I can well
imagine a bunch of it twenty or twentyfive feet high could be coated
with many, many gallons of oil without a drop seeping down into the
ground."

Mr Miller said magisterially, "Not really good American oil," but no one
paid attention, knowing that he was commenting, not as a member of the
committee, but in his other capacity as the head of an organization to
promote Brotherhood and Democracy by deporting all foreignborn and the
descendants of foreignborn to their original countries. Everyone was
only too happy to have the oil matter concluded at any cost; and after
the stenographer was ordered to resume his labors, the next witness was
called.

"Albert Weener!"

I hope I may never again have to submit to the scrutiny of twelve such
merciless eyes. I cast my own down at the brown linoleum until every
stain and inkspot was impressed ineradicably on my mind. Senator Jones
finally broke the tension by asking, "What is your name?"

Judge Robinson enjoined, "Speak up, speak up. Don't mumble."

"Albert Weener," I replied.

There was a faint sigh through the room. Everyone who read the _Daily
Intelligencer_ had heard of me.

"And what is your occupation, Mr Weener?" asked Henry Miller.

"Salesman, sir," I answered automatically, forgetting my present
connection with the newspaper, and he smiled at me sympathetically.

"You belong to a socalled tradesunion?" inquired Assemblyman Brown.

"I will ask the honorable Mr Brown to modify his question by having the
word 'socalled' struck from it."

"I will inform the honorable attorney general that my question stands
exactly as I phrased it," rejoined Assemblyman Brown sharply. "I'll
remind the attorney general I myself am a member in good standing of a
legitimate union, namely the International Brotherhood of Embalmers,
Morticians, Gravediggers and Helpers, and when I asked the witness if he
belonged to a socalled tradesunion I was referring to any one of those
groups of Red conspirators who attempt to strangle the economic body by
interfering with the normal course of business and mulcting honest
citizens of tributary dues before they can pursue their livelihoods."

Judge Robinson cupped his ear again and glared at me. "Speak up man;
stop mumbling."

"I don't belong to any union," I answered as soon as there was a chance
for my words to be heard. Senator Jones took a notebook from his pocket,
consulted it, put it back, scribbled something on the pad in front of
him, tore it up, looked at his notebook again and asked, "What is your
connection with this ... um ... grass?"

"I applied Miss Francis' Metamorphizer to it, sir," I answered.

"Nonsense," said Judge Robinson sharply.

"Explain yourself," demanded Attorney General Smith.

"Tell us just what this stuff is and how you applied it," suggested
Henry Miller.

"Don't mumble," ordered Judge Robinson.

"I'm sorry, gentlemen, I don't know exactly what it is. Youll have to
ask Miss Francis that. But--"

Senator Jones interrupted me. "You mean to say you applied a chemical to
someone's lawn, a piece of valuable property, without knowing its
contents?" he asked sternly.

"Well, Senator----" I began.

"Do you habitually act in this irresponsible manner?"

"Senator, I----"

"Don't you understand, sir, that consequences necessarily follow
actions? What sort of world would this be if everyone rushed around
blindly using things of whose nature they were completely unaware?"

"Don't mumble," warned Judge Robinson.

I began to feel very low indeed and could only say haltingly, "I acted
in good faith, gentlemen," when Mr Miller kindly recommended that I be
excused since I had evidently given all the information at my command.

"Subject to recall," growled Attorney General Smith.

"Oh, certainly, sir, certainly," agreed Mr Miller, and I was thankfully
released from my ordeal.

"Josephine Spencer Francis."

I cannot say Miss Francis had made any concessions in her appearance in
deference to the committee, for she looked as though she had come
straight from her kitchen, a suspicion strengthened by the strand of
grass she carried in her fingers and played with absently throughout.
She appeared quite at home as she settled herself in the chair, scanning
with the greatest interest the faces of the committeemen as if she were
memorizing each feature for future reference.

The honorable body returned her scrutiny with sharply individual
emphasis. The attorney general smiled pleasantly at her; Judge Robinson
looked more sour than ever and grunted, "Woman; mistake"; Senator Jones
bowed toward her with courtesy; Assemblyman Brown gave her a sharp
onceover; Mr Miller pursed his lips in amusement; and Dr Johnson gazed
at her in horrified fascination.

Senator Jones bowed for a second time and inquired her name. He
received the information and chewed it meditatively. Miss Francis took
out her gold toothpick, considered the etiquette of using it and
regretfully put it away in time to hear the attorney general's question,
"Mrs or Miss Francis?"

"Miss," she replied gruffly. "_Virgo intacta._"

Senator Jones drew back as if attacked by a wasp. Attorney General Smith
said, "Hum," very loudly and looked at Assemblyman Brown who looked
blank. Dr Johnson's nose raised itself a perceptible inch and Judge
Robinson, sensing a sensation among his colleagues, shouted, "Speak up,
madam, don't mumble."

Mr. Miller, who hadnt been affected, inquired, "What is your occupation,
Miss Francis?"

"Agrostological engineer, specializing in chemical research."

"How's that again?" Judge Robinson managed to put into the simple
gesture of cupping his ear a devastating condemnation of Miss Francis,
women in general, science and presentday society. She politely repeated
herself.

"Astrology--what's that got to do with the grass? Do you cast
horoscopes?"

"Agrostology," Dr Johnson murmured to the ceiling.

"Will you explain please in simpler terms, just what you do?" requested
Attorney General Smith.

"Local statutes against fortunetelling," burst out Judge Robinson.

"I have spent my life studying reactions of plants to the lighter
elements and the effects of certain compounds on their growth,
reproduction, and metabolism."

Judge Robinson removed his hand from behind his ear and rubbed his skull
irritably. Assemblyman Brown complained, "There's entirely too much talk
about reaction." Dr Johnson inspected a paneled wall with no interest
whatever and Senator Jones stated pontifically, "You are an agricultural
chemist."

Miss Francis smiled at him amiably. "Agriculture is a broad field and I
farm one small corner of it."

Attorney General Smith leaned forward with interest. "From what
university did you obtain your degrees, Miss Francis?"

She slouched back comfortably, to look more cylindrical than ever.
"None," she stated baldly.

"Hay? ... mumble!"

Senator Jones said, "I'm afraid I did not quite understand your reply,
madam."

"I hold no degrees, honors, or diplomas whatever, and I have not wasted
one second of my life in any college, university, academy, or other
alleged institution of learning. The degrees good enough for Roger
Bacon, Erasmus Darwin, Lavoisier, Linnaeus and Lamarck are good enough
for me. I am a questioner, gentlemen, a learner, not a collector of
alphabetical letters which, strung together in any form your fancy
pleases, continue eternally to spell nothing whatever."

