units, there had been no action. The ruined farm house had been a victim
of an earlier fracas in this reservation which had seen in its
comparatively brief time more combat than Belgium, that cockpit of
Europe.

There was a sheen of oily moisture on the Baron's bulletlike head and
his officers weren't particularly happy about it. Malcolm Haer
characteristically went into a fracas with confidence, an aggressive
confidence so strong that it often carried the day. In battles past, it
had become a tradition that Haer's morale was worth a thousand men; the
energy he expended was the despair of his doctors who had been warning
him for a decade. But now, something was missing.

A forefinger traced over the military chart before them. "So far as we
know, Marshal Cogswell has established his command here in Saugerties.
Anybody have any suggestions as to why?"

A major grumbled, "It doesn't make much sense, sir. You know the
marshal. It's probably a fake. If we have any superiority at all, it's
our artillery."

"And the old fox wouldn't want to join the issue on the plains, down
near the river," a colonel added. "It's his game to keep up into the
mountains with his cavalry and light infantry. He's got Jack Alshuler's
cavalry. Most experienced veterans in the field."

"I know who he's got," Haer growled in irritation. "Stop reminding me.
Where in the devil is Balt?"

"Coming up, sir," Balt Haer said. He had entered only moments ago, a
sheaf of signals in his hand. "Why didn't they make that date 1910,
instead of 1900? With radio, we could speed up communications--"

His father interrupted testily. "Better still, why not make it 1945?
Then we could speed up to the point where we could polish ourselves off.
What have you got?"

Balt Haer said, his face in sulk, "Some of my lads based in West Hurley
report concentrations of Cogswell's infantry and artillery near Ashokan
reservoir."

"Nonsense," somebody snapped. "We'd have him."

The younger Haer slapped his swagger stick against his bare leg and
kilt. "Possibly it's a feint," he admitted.

"How much were they able to observe?" his father demanded.

"Not much. They were driven off by a superior squadron. The Hovercraft
forces are screening everything they do with heavy cavalry units. I told
you we needed more--"

"I don't need your advice at this point," his father snapped. The older
Haer went back to the map, scowling still. "I don't see what he expects
to do, working out of Saugerties."

A voice behind them said, "Sir, may I have your permission--"

Half of the assembled officers turned to look at the newcomer.

Balt Haer snapped, "Captain Mauser. Why aren't you with your lads?"

"Turned them over to my second in command, sir," Joe Mauser said. He was
standing to attention, looking at Baron Haer.

The Baron glowered at him. "What is the meaning of this cavalier
intrusion, captain? Certainly, you must have your orders. Are you under
the illusion that you are part of my staff?"

"No, sir," Joe Mauser clipped. "I came to report that I am ready to put
into execution--"

"The great plan!" Balt Haer ejaculated. He laughed brittlely. "The
second day of the fracas, and nobody really knows where old Cogswell is,
or what he plans to do. And here comes the captain with his secret
plan."

Joe looked at him. He said, evenly, "Yes, sir."

The Baron's face had gone dark, as much in anger at his son, as with the
upstart cavalry captain. He began to growl ominously, "Captain Mauser,
rejoin your command and obey your orders."

Joe Mauser's facial expression indicated that he had expected this. He
kept his voice level however, even under the chuckling scorn of his
immediate superior, Balt Haer.

He said, "Sir, I will be able to tell you where Marshal Cogswell is, and
every troop at his command."

For a moment there was silence, all but a stunned silence. Then the
major who had suggested the Saugerties field command headquarters were a
fake, blurted a curt laugh.

"This is no time for levity, captain," Balt Haer clipped. "Get to your
command."

A colonel said, "Just a moment, sir. I've fought with Joe Mauser before.
He's a good man."

"Not that good," someone else huffed. "Does he claim to be clairvoyant?"

Joe Mauser said flatly. "Have a semaphore man posted here this
afternoon. I'll be back at that time." He spun on his heel and left
them.

Balt Haer rushed to the door after him, shouting, "Captain! That's an
order! Return--"

But the other was obviously gone. Enraged, the younger Haer began to
shrill commands to a noncom in the way of organizing a pursuit.

His father called wearily, "That's enough, Balt. Mauser has evidently
taken leave of his senses. We made the initial mistake of encouraging
this idea he had, or thought he had."

"_We?_" his son snapped in return. "I had nothing to do with it."

"All right, all right. Let's tighten up, here. Now, what other
information have your scouts come up with?"




IX


At the Kingston airport, Joe Mauser rejoined Max Mainz, his face drawn
now.

"Everything go all right?" the little man said anxiously.

"I don't know," Joe said. "I still couldn't tell them the story. Old
Cogswell is as quick as a coyote. We pull this little caper today, and
he'll be ready to meet it tomorrow."

He looked at the two-place sailplane which sat on the tarmac.
"Everything all set?"

"Far as I know," Max said. He looked at the motorless aircraft. "You
sure you been checked out on these things, captain?"

"Yes," Joe said. "I bought this particular soaring glider more than a
year ago, and I've put almost a thousand hours in it. Now, where's the
pilot of that light plane?"

A single-engined sports plane was attached to the glider by a fifty-foot
nylon rope. Even as Joe spoke, a youngster poked his head from the
plane's window and grinned back at them. "Ready?" he yelled.

"Come on, Max," Joe said. "Let's pull the canopy off this thing. We
don't want it in the way while you're semaphoring."

A figure was approaching them from the Administration Building. A
uniformed man, and somehow familiar.

"A moment, Captain Mauser!"

Joe placed him now. The Sov-world representative he'd met at Balt Haer's
table in the Upper bar a couple of days ago. What was his name? Colonel
Arpad. Lajos Arpad.

The Hungarian approached and looked at the sailplane in interest. "As a
representative of my government, a military attache checking upon
possible violations of the Universal Disarmament Pact, may I request
what you are about to do, captain?"

Joe Mauser looked at him emptily. "How did you know I was here and what
I was doing?"

The Sov colonel smiled gently. "It was by suggestion of Marshal
Cogswell. He is a great man for detail. It disturbed him that an ...
what did he call it? ... an _old pro_ like yourself should join with
Vacuum Tube Transport, rather than Continental Hovercraft. He didn't
think it made sense and suggested that possibly you had in mind some
scheme that would utilize weapons of a post 1900 period in your efforts
to bring success to Baron Haer's forces. So I have investigated, Captain
Mauser."

"And the marshal knows about this sail plane?" Joe Mauser's face was
blank.

"I didn't say that. So far as I know, he doesn't."

"Then, Colonel Arpad, with your permission, I'll be taking off."

The Hungarian said, "With what end in mind, captain?"

"Using this glider as a reconnaissance aircraft."

"Captain, I warn you! Aircraft were not in use in warfare until--"

But Joe Mauser cut him off, equally briskly. "Aircraft were first used
in combat by Pancho Villa's forces a few years previous to World War I.
They were also used in the Balkan Wars of about the same period. But
those were powered craft. This is a glider, invented and in use before
the year 1900 and hence open to utilization."

The Hungarian clipped, "But the Wright Brothers didn't fly even gliders
until--"

Joe looked him full in the face. "But you of the Sov-world do not admit
that the Wrights were the first to fly, do you?"

The Hungarian closed his mouth, abruptly.

Joe said evenly, "But even if Ivan Ivanovitch, or whatever you claim his
name was, didn't invent flight of heavier than air craft, the glider was
flown variously before 1900, including Otto Lilienthal in the 1890s, and
was designed as far back as Leonardo da Vinci."

The Sov-world colonel stared at him for a long moment, then gave an
inane giggle. He stepped back and flicked Joe Mauser a salute. "Very
well, captain. As a matter of routine, I shall report this use of an
aircraft for reconnaissance purposes, and undoubtedly a commission will
meet to investigate the propriety of the departure. Meanwhile, good
luck!"

       *       *       *       *       *

Joe returned the salute and swung a leg over the cockpit's side. Max was
already in the front seat, his semaphore flags, maps and binoculars on
his lap. He had been staring in dismay at the Sov officer, now was
relieved that Joe had evidently pulled it off.

Joe waved to the plane ahead. Two mechanics had come up to steady the
wings for the initial ten or fifteen feet of the motorless craft's
passage over the ground behind the towing craft.

Joe said to Max, "did you explain to the pilot that under no
circumstances was he to pass over the line of the military reservation,
that we'd cut before we reached that point?"

"Yes, sir," Max said nervously. He'd flown before, on the commercial
lines, but he'd never been in a glider.

They began lurching across the field, slowly, then gathering speed. And
as the sailplane took speed, it took grace. After it had been pulled a
hundred feet or so, Joe eased back the stick and it slipped gently into
the air, four or five feet off the ground. The towing airplane was
still taxiing, but with its tow airborne it picked up speed quickly.
Another two hundred feet and it, too, was in the air and beginning to
climb. The glider behind held it to a speed of sixty miles or so.

At ten thousand feet, the plane leveled off and the pilot's head
swiveled to look back at them. Joe Mauser waved to him and dropped the
release lever which ejected the nylon rope from the glider's nose. The
plane dove away, trailing the rope behind it. Joe knew that the plane
pilot would later drop it over the airport where it could easily be
retrieved.

In the direction of Mount Overlook he could see cumulus clouds and the
dark turbulence which meant strong updraft. He headed in that direction.

Except for the whistling of wind, there is complete silence in a soaring
glider. Max Mainz began to call back to his superior, was taken back by
the volume, and dropped his voice. He said, "Look, captain. What keeps
it up?"

Joe grinned. He liked the buoyance of glider flying, the nearest
approach of man to the bird, and thus far everything was going well. He
told Max, "An airplane plows through the air currents, a glider rides on
top of them."

"Yeah, but suppose the current is going down?"

"Then we avoid it. This sailplane only has a gliding angle ratio of one
to twenty-five, but it's a workhorse with a payload of some four hundred
pounds. A really high performance glider can have a ratio of as much as
one to forty."

Joe had found a strong updraft where a wind ran up the side of a
mountain. He banked, went into a circling turn. The gauge indicated they
were climbing at the rate of eight meters per second, nearly fifteen
hundred feet a minute.

Max hadn't got the rundown on the theory of the glider. That was obvious
in his expression.

Joe Mauser, even while searching the ground below keenly, went into it
further. "A wind up against a mountain will give an updraft, storm
clouds will, even a newly plowed field in a bright sun. So you go from
one of these to the next."

"Yeah, great, but when you're between," Max protested.

"Then, when you have a one to twenty-five ratio, you go twenty-five feet
forward for each one you drop. If you started a mile high, you could go
twenty-five miles before you touched ground." He cut himself off
quickly. "Look, what's that, down there? Get your glasses on it."

Max caught his excitement. His binoculars were tight to his eyes.
"Sojers. Cavalry. They sure ain't ours. They must be Hovercraft lads.
And look, field artillery."

Joe Mauser was piloting with his left hand, his right smoothing out a
chart on his lap. He growled, "What are they doing there? That's at
least a full brigade of cavalry. Here, let me have those glasses."

With his knees gripping the stick, he went into a slow circle, as he
stared down at the column of men. "Jack Alshuler," he whistled in
surprise. "The marshal's crack heavy cavalry. And several batteries of
artillery." He swung the glasses in a wider scope and the whistle turned
into a hiss of comprehension. "They're doing a complete circle of the
reservation. They're going to hit the Baron from the direction of
Phoenicia."




X
