
"Why for?" she asked.

"Somehow, I have offended their _fadommt_ Mum-god," Aaron said. "The
Sarki has granted us a week to make ready to go into the wilderness." He
sat on a coffee-colored kitchen chair, his head bowed and his big hands
limp between his knees.

"Stoltz, where can we go?" Martha asked. "We have no _Freindschaft_, no
kin, in all this place."

Aaron tightened his hands into fists. "We will not go!" he vowed. "I
will find a way for us to stay." He broke open the box of cigars that
had been meant as a gift for Musa and clamped one of the black stogies
between his teeth. "What is their _heidisch_ secret?" he demanded. "What
does the Mother want of me?"

"Aaron Stoltz," Martha said vigorously, "I'll have no man of mine
offering dignity to a heathen god. The _Schrift_ orders us to cut down
the groves of the alien gods, to smash their false images; not to bow
before them. Will you make a golden calf here, as did your namesake
Aaron of Egypt, for whose sin the Children of Israel were plagued?"

"Woman, I'll not have you preach to me like a servant of the Book,"
Aaron said. "It is not for you to cite Scripture." He stared through the
window. "What does the Mother want of me?"

"As you shout, do not forget that I am a mother, too," Martha said. She
dabbed a finger at her eye.

"_Fagep mir_, Liebling," Aaron said. He walked behind the chair where
his wife sat. Tenderly, he kneaded the muscles at the back of her neck.
"I am trying to get inside Musa's head, and Kazunzumi's; I am trying to
see their world through their eyes. It is not an easy thing to do,
Martha. Though I lived for a spell among the 'English,' my head is still
House-Amish; a fat, Dutch cheese."

"It is a good head," Martha said, relaxing under his massage, "and if
there be cheese-heads hereabouts, it's these blackfolk that wear them,
and not my man."

"If I knew what the die-hinker our neighbors mean by their Mother-talk,
it might be I could see myself through Murnan eyes, as I can hear a bit
with Hausa ears," Aaron said. "_Iss sell nix so_, Martha?"

"We should have stood at home, and thought with our own good heads," she
said.

"Let me think," Aaron said. "If I were to strike you, wife," he mused,
"it could do you great hurt, and harm our unborn child, _Nee?_"

"Aaron!" Martha scooted out from under her husbands kneading hands.

"_Druuvel dich net!_" he said. "I am only thinking. These blackfolk now,
these neighbors who were before last night our friends, speak of Light
as our bishop at home speaks of Grace. To have it is to have all, to be
one with the congregation. If I can find this Light, we and the Sarki
and his people can again be friends." Aaron sat down. "I must learn what
I have done wrong," he said.

       *       *       *       *       *

"Other than drink a glass of cider now and then, and make worldly music
with a guitar, you've done no wrong," Martha said stubbornly. "You're a
good man."

"In the Old Order, I am a good man, so long as no _Diener_ makes trouble
over a bit of singing or cider," Aaron said. "As a guest on Murna, I
have done some deed that has hurt this Mother-god, whom our neighbors
hold dear."

"Heathenish superstition!"

"Martha, love, I am older than you, and a man," Aaron said. "Give me
room to think! If the goddess-Mother is heathen as Baal, it matters not;
these folk who worship her hold our future in their hands. Besides, we
owe them the courtesy not to dance in their churches nor to laugh at
their prayers; even the 'English' have more grace than that." Aaron
pondered. "Something in the springtime is the Murnan Mother's gift, her
greatest gift. What?"

"Blaspheme not," Martha said. "Remember Him who _causeth the grass to
grow for the cattle, and herb for the service of man: that he may bring
forth food out of the earth_."

"Wife, is the True God less, if these people call Him Mother?" Aaron
demanded.

"We are too far from home," the woman sighed. "Such heavy talk is
wearisome; it is for bishops to discourse so, not ordinary folk like
us."

"If I can't find the light," Aaron said, "this farm we live on, and
hoped to leave to our children, isn't worth the water in a dish of
soup." He slapped his hands together and stood to pace. "Martha, hear me
out," he said. "If a woman be with child, and a man takes her with lust
and against her will, is not that man accursed?"

"Aaron!" she said. "_Haagott_, such wicked talk you make!"

"Seen with Murnan eyes, have I not done just such a cursed thing?" Aaron
demanded. "The Mother-god of this world is _mit Kinndt_, fat with the
bounty of springtime. So tender is the swollen belly of the earth that
the people here, simple folk with no more subtle God, strip the iron
from the hoofs of their horses not to bruise her. They bare their feet
in her honor, treat her with the tenderness I treat my beloved Martha.
And to this Goddess, swollen earth, I took the plow! Martha, we are
fortunate indeed that our neighbors are gentle people, or I would be
hanged now, or stoned to death like the wicked in the old days. _Ich hot
iere Gotterin awgepockt_: I raped their Goddess!"

       *       *       *       *       *

Martha burst into tears. When Aaron stepped forward to comfort her, she
struck his chest with her balled fists. "Stoltz, I wed you despite your
beer-drinking from cans at the Singing, though you play a worldly guitar
and sing the English songs, though people told me you drove your gay
Uncle Amos' black-bumpered Ford before you membered to the district;
still, house-Amish pure Old Order though my people are, I married you,
from love and youngness and girlish ignorance. But I do not care, even
in this wilderness you've brought us to in that big English ship, to
hear such vileness spoke out boldly. Leave me alone."

"I'll not."

"You'd best," she said. "I'm sore offended in the lad I'm wifed to."

"Love, _Ich bin sorry_," Aaron said. "The Book, though, says just what
our neighbors told me: Ye shall know the truth, and the truth shall set
you free. I have found the truth, the truth of our dark-skinned friends.
I did not want to wound the ears of _da Oppel fuun mein Awk_,
apple-of-mine-eye sweet Martha; but I must speak out the truth."

"It is not good enough," Martha sobbed, "that you accept this
brown-skinned, jewel-bedizzened woman-god; but you must make love to
her; and I, wed to you by the Book, nine months gone with _Kinndt_, am
to make no fuss."

"I loved the Mother-god with the plow, and accidentally," Aaron
bellowed. "_Haagott!_ woman; have you no funny?"

"I will birth our child in my lap from laughing," Martha said, weeping.
"Aaron, do what you will. I can hardly walk home to my Mem to bear a son
in my girlhood bedroom. We are like _Awduum uuu Ayf_, like you said; but
the serpent in this Eden pleases me not."

"When I spoke of colts, and the borning of them," Aaron said, "I forgot
me that mares are more sensible than human women. Martha, _liebe_
Martha, you wed a man when you married me. All your vapors are naught
against my having seen the light. If to stay here, on this land already
watered with my hard sweat, I had to slaughter cattle in sacrifice to
the Mother, I'd pick up the knife gladly, and feel it no blasphemy
against our God."

"Aaron Stoltz," Martha said, "I forbid you to lend honor to this god!"

Aaron sat. He unlaced his shoes and tugged them off. "Woman," he asked
softly, "you forbid me? Martha, for all the love I bear you, there is
one rule of our folk that's as holy as worship; and that's that the man
is master in his house." He pulled off his black stockings and stood,
barefoot, with callouses won on the black earth of his father's farm;
dressed otherwise meetly as a deacon. "I will walk to Datura on my naked
feet to show our friends I know my wrong-doing, that I have hurt the
belly of the pregnant earth. I will tell Sarki Kazunzumi that I have
seen his light; that my horses will be unshod as I am, that the Mother
will not feel my plow again until the grasses spring, when her time will
be accomplished."

Martha crossed her hands about her middle. "Ach, Stoltz," she said. "Our
_Buu iss reddi far geh_, I think. Today will be his birthday. Don't let
your tenderness to the earth keep you from walking swiftly to Datura;
and when you return, come in a wagon with the Sarki's ladies, who
understand midwifery. I think they will find work here."

"I will hurry, Mother," Aaron promised.


The End.


