most comfortable posture and the most hygienic one is to lie upon the
side. The right side is to be preferred to the left because in this
position, the heart being on the upper side, is not embarrassed in its
free movement by the superincumbent lung tissue. Furthermore, this
position facilitates the passage of digesting foods from the stomach.
To maintain comfortably this side position, requires that the knees
be at least moderately drawn up. This posture when asleep is
practically identical with that of nearly all higher animals, and is
unquestionably the most hygienic one for man. No animal but man ever
lies upon its back unless it is dead. Furthermore, the dorsal position
puts tendons, nerves and muscles on a stretch, while the flexed
lateral position puts these in a more or less relaxed position, which
is most favorable to rest.

It goes without saying that sleeping rooms should always be thoroughly
ventilated. The occupant should take care that he does not lie in a
direct draught from a window or door, because it has been found by
experience that one is less likely to catch cold if he sleeps out of
doors than he is if he sleeps in a direct draught from a window or
door. Just why this is has not been satisfactorily accounted for, but
the fact remains. So if you must sleep in the house, secure perfect
ventilation without direct draughts.


5. THE CONTROL OF THE THOUGHTS.

There is no more effective safeguard for the man who wishes to lead a
continent life than the control of the thoughts. It goes without
saying that the man who thinks about sexual matters, especially the
one whose imagination runs wild upon all kinds of sexually
stimulating images, is only inviting temptation to relax his
continence. If he controls his thoughts during those times when he is
less amenable to temptation, he is far more likely to be able to
control his acts at those times when his physical condition makes him
most amenable to temptation.

The most effective way to control the thoughts is so to plan one's
work as to insure the complete occupation of the mind with affairs
that are wholly independent of sexual experiences or considerations.
One should set a mark for himself so high above his present position
that he is compelled to put forth strenuous and unremitting efforts in
order to accomplish his aim. The old saying that, "Satan finds work
for idle hands to do" is all too true. Anyone may observe the
influence of idleness or even the influence of a partially occupied
program upon the habits of the youth and young man. Beard and
Rockwell, in their valuable work on this subject say: "Go to work;
develop your muscles and brain; resolve to become at least useful if
not famous. The activity which will be necessary in carrying out these
ambitions will divert the mind from imaginary evils, if they are
imaginary, and will be one of the best means to cure the real ones."




CHAPTER VI.

DEVELOPMENT.




DEVELOPMENT.


The development of the child within the uterus of the mother
represents a chapter in the life history of every individual so
important in its relations to maternity and paternity that every young
man should be acquainted with at least its general features.

As stated in the chapter on Reproduction, every living organism begins
life as a single cell, or globule of protoplasm. In the case of the
human subject, the cell from which each child begins its development
is formed by the fusion of two cells or globules of protoplasm, one
furnished by the mother, and called the ovum, or egg; the other
furnished by the father, and called the spermatozoon. The egg is very
much larger than the spermatozoon, and contains enough yolk material
to afford nourishment for the embryo for a number of days.

When the ovum reaches the finished state, which is called "maturity,"
it leaves the ovary, and is carried along the fallopian tube (see
accompanying figure) into the uterus, where it usually finds a
lodgment in the upper part, as shown in Figure I. Once the minute ovum
has been caught in the projections of the velvety inner surface of the
uterus, this thick velvety lining of the uterus in the neighborhood of
the ovum begins a rapid growth, gradually enveloping the rapidly
expanding ovum, as shown in Figures I and II of the accompanying
plate.

Within the ovum there are taking place some of the most marvelous
changes in the whole life history of the individual. The nucleus of
the fertilized egg, and the protoplasm which surrounds it, divide into
two cells, then into four, eight, sixteen, etc. These divisions follow
each other in such rapid succession that there are many hundreds of
cells by the end of the first twenty-four hours. These cells soon
begin to arrange themselves into layers and groups, which, step by
step, develop the different tissues and organs of the body.

By the end of thirty days the little embryo, about as large as one
inch of the end of a lead pencil, would be recognized as the embryo of
some mammalian animal, but it would be quite impossible to say whether
it would develop into a human being or some other animal, if it were
seen quite apart from its immediate surroundings. By the end of
another thirty days, however, the little embryo has multiplied its
size several times, and has reached a form instantly recognizable as
the young of the human kind, as shown in Figure IV. It still, however,
retains the vestige of a little tail, which within the next thirty
days will have been completely absorbed.

    [Illustration: THE FEMALE ORGANS OF GENERATION]

Note that the little two months embryo has projecting from its abdomen
a large structure which is labeled "cord." This cord is a part of what
is called the umbilical cord, and it is this that joins the embryo
to the mother. Note in Figure III the large stalk of this cord passing
upward from the body of the embryo and merging into the structures in
the top of the uterus. Note further that there are little branching
structures passing from the base of this stalk up into the base of the
uterus. These branching structures are loops of blood-vessels, and
they form part of the placenta, or "afterbirth." Through this cord the
embryo receives its nourishment from the mother. The blood of the
mother bathes these loops of blood-vessels, and the embryo absorbs
from the mother's blood the nourishment which builds its bones,
muscles, brain, spinal-cord, and glands. From the same source the
embryo receives the oxygen necessary for the maintenance of its life.

From the third month on to the end of the nine months, the amount of
material which the mother must provide for the development of the
child within her womb amounts to no small draft on her physical
resources. It is not at all uncommon for a mother in the later months
of pregnancy to become quite pale, her blood having been impoverished
to provide material for the development of her child.


MATERNITY.

What has been said above regarding the contributions which the
maternal organism must make toward the development of the offspring
must have impressed on the mind of the reader that _maternity means,
first of all, sacrifice_.

This sacrifice begins when the girl first enters upon womanhood.

With the expulsion of the ripened ovum comes, each month, a week of
special physical drain, when work must be lightened and vigorous
exercise curtailed, when exposure to cold or dampness may mean loss of
health.

Under these circumstances a woman should at this time deny herself the
pleasure of dancing; of skating or swimming; of sleigh-rides or
cross-country walks and the young man should make it less difficult
for her by acquiescing without question or demur in her request to be
excused from such recreation.

It is a fact that more sacrifice is involved in maternity among the
more highly cultivated nations of the human race than is true of
aboriginal peoples, or among the lower animals. Conditions of modern
life, and particularly urban life, leave the female organism less able
to endure the drafts made upon the system by maternity, so that to
bear a child may mean not only the sacrifice of comfort, but even the
sacrifice of health.

The highly sensitive, delicately adjusted nervous system of the woman
is perhaps more profoundly influenced than any other part of her
being. This manifests itself particularly in a heightened degree of
sensitiveness. It goes without saying that the pregnant woman
deserves at the hands of all who come in contact with her, and
particularly at the hands of her husband, most considerate and
sympathetic treatment. Her little whims and vagaries, however
unreasonable, must always be treated seriously, and with delicate and
tactful consideration. The members of her family, particularly the
husband, owe it to her and to her child to keep her in as happy a
frame of mind as possible.

When we consider the real significance of maternity to the race, to
society, and to the family, we must feel that, of all human relations,
maternity is the most sacred, and that no condition should be allowed
to mar it, and no consideration to take precedence of it.


PATERNITY.

After the husband had contributed the male sexual cells, or
spermatozoa, in this wonderful process above outlined, it might seem
that there is little he can do, except to wait, while nature carries
on the process. The reader will remember, however, from the chapter on
Reproduction, that the contribution of the spermatozoa only initiates
the sacrifices that the paternal organism must make in this process.
Are there any demands on paternity between the time of conception of
the new life and its birth?

As already mentioned under the preceding topic, the pregnant mother
needs gentle and loving care. She needs to have her little whims and
foibles overlooked. She needs to be protected, so far as possible,
from every influence that might depress or make her unhappy. She needs
to be guarded against any unusual physical exertion, and above all,
she needs at this time more than at any other time, the manifested
affection and sympathy of her husband.

There is another sacrifice, if it may be so called, which the husband
is called upon to make during the pregnancy of his wife, namely, _to
abstain absolutely from sexual intercourse during the period of
pregnancy and for two or three months following_. This means
practically one year of continent living. All other animals observe
this period of continence. Nature demands that man observe it in
common with other animals. Man is the only animal that has
transgressed this fundamental law of nature. The retribution which
nature metes out to the transgression of this law is various.
Sometimes, but rarely, the sexual excitement on the part of the woman
may cause an abortion, or a miscarriage. The more usual result makes
itself manifest in the drain on the nervous energy of the woman. When
we consider that maternity in the human race involves greater
sacrifice than in any other animal, it would seem that the addition of
this last demand, namely, of satisfying the sexual desires of the
husband during the period of pregnancy, might prove "the straw that
breaks the camel's back," and result in the more or less complete
nervous breakdown of the woman. The author submits this question to
all fair-minded men: Is it not due to the wife that she be not asked
to satisfy the recurring sexual desires of the husband during the
period when her life and its energies are so sacred to the race, to
society, and to the family?

The author submits this question because some men are known to
transgress this law of nature. Fortunately the proportion of men who
thus transgress is not large.

Let us stand for these things: (1) _An equal standard of purity for
men and women_, (2) _A strenuous, virile, continent manhood_, (3)
_Sexual temperance in wedlock_.




APPENDIX




APPENDIX.


Personal conferences and correspondence with young men regarding the
solution of their problems have brought out several questions that are
so frequently repeated as to make it evident that the answering of
them would serve the purpose of clearing up certain questions or
doubts, more or less important in the minds of many young men. It has
been decided to group these answers in an appendix rather than to
incorporate them in the body of the book, as many of them seem not
quite relevant to the topics outlined under the several chapters.

1. _How do we know that during the nocturnal emission the products of
the testes are not present?_

The spermatozoa found in the nocturnal emission, if present at all,
are found to be very much less active than the spermatozoa of semen
secreted during sexual excitement. The seminal vesicles are not
receptacles for the testicular secretion. The ampullae seem to serve
that purpose in a limited degree.

Considering all these facts, it seems to be a tenable conclusion that
the few and sluggish spermatozoa seen in the product of the nocturnal
emission are those that have, from time to time, collected in the
ampullae, and that during the time immediately preceding the nocturnal
emission the testes are not actively releasing nascent spermatozoa.
This function of the testes seems to be reserved for periods of
conscious sexual stimulation.

2. _How may one control too frequent emissions?_

If emissions are too frequent for the individual case, they are
followed by depletion and malaise. Even if they occur as infrequently
as once in two weeks and are followed by the above symptoms, they must
be considered as too frequent, or abnormal in that case. On the other
hand, they may occur as frequently as twice a week in plethoric robust
individuals, and especially in men who have had frequent sexual
intercourse, and who have for some reason discontinued it. And even
though they occur as frequently as twice a week, if they are followed
by a feeling of relief and wellbeing, they must not be considered as
too frequent for that individual under the conditions.

So the frequency limit of nocturnal emissions is more or less
independent of the time and quite dependent upon the reaction of the
individual to the emission. If, following the criterion above
outlined, one finds that his emissions are too frequent, because of
accompanying depletion and malaise, this frequency may be modified
either by changes of the diet or by changes of hygiene.

For a more extended discussion, see text above on nocturnal emissions.

3. _Do the organs of reproduction actually develop after the age of
seventeen or nineteen or even to the twenty-fifth year as is the
case with the physical and mental powers?_

The brain of an individual adds no nerve cells after a very early age.
The brain increases only very slightly in size and weight after the
age of puberty, and then only under special conditions and this
increase in weight and size is not due to the addition of any new
cells, but simply to a slight increase in the bulk of those cells
already present. In a similar way the sexual apparatus undergoes,
during the period of puberty (fifteen to seventeen) a very rapid
growth, reaching by the end of the period of puberty (seventeenth or
nineteenth year) their full size.

4. _Are enlarged veins in the scrotum dangerous?_

Enlarged veins of the scrotum represent dilatation of the veins of the
epididymis. These are thin walled vessels that respond to any
increased internal blood pressure, perhaps showing a special tendency
in this direction during that period of rapid growth of the sexual
apparatus in the early part of the adolescent period. If the
enlargement is only moderate, it may disappear, or at least become
spontaneously arrested in its growth, in which case it need cause no
concern. If these veins, however, dilate until they form a
considerable mass, known as VARICOCELE, they may affect the sexual
apparatus deleteriously in two ways: (1) The increased weight in the
scrotal sac may cause the sac to become elongated and to annoy the
subject by its traction on the spermatic cord. This lengthened scrotum
with its contents may also be exposed to mechanical pressure or even
to injury from the clothing, etc., which would not occur if the
scrotal sac were short, holding the testes close to the body. (2) Of
far more importance is the danger of the varicocele gradually
encroaching by pressure upon the testis, perhaps to cause a partial
atrophy of that gland. This condition is a comparatively rare one, and
inasmuch as it seldom occurs in both testes, the possibility of
causing sterility on the part of a man is remote.

The extension of the scrotum and the "bearing-down" sensation may be
relieved through the wearing of a suspensory bandage. Such a bandage
may be obtained at any drug store or surgical instrument house, and if
properly fitted, will usually relieve any such discomfort as described
above. If the varicocele is quite large, the subject will do well to
consult a competent surgeon and to take his advice.

5. _Is the emptying of the seminal vesicles thru nocturnal emission a
universal phenomenon among continent men?_

The nocturnal emission is not a universal method of emptying the
seminal vesicles. Some continent men never have nocturnal emissions.
The reason may be sought in one of two directions: (1) The usual cause
of absence of nocturnal emissions is to be found in the fact that in
the man in question the seminal vesicles are periodically drained by
_involuntary diurnal emissions_, occurring usually when the
individual is at stool. These emissions are likely to occur once in
two to four weeks and take the place of the nocturnal emission. (2)
Rarely we find virile, continent men whose vesicular secretion is so
scanty that they are never conscious of its emission.

6. (a) _Should a man who for three to six years of his boyhood
practiced masturbation think of wedlock?_

(b) _If one has not lived a pure life but has reformed, may he ask a
pure woman to be his wife?_

Such questions as these are very frequently asked and with most
serious motives. A vast majority of boys and young men who practice
self-abuse, do so either wholly ignorant of the fact that it is wrong
or cognizant only in a vague way of the evil of the practice.

To consign a man to the Hades of homelessness and the sorrow of
childlessness because through ignorance he lapsed from purity during a
few months or years of his life, would be meting out a retribution far
in excess of the sin. If nature intended such a retribution to be
meted out she would have led the way by causing an atrophy or some
other form of disease in the subject who had abused his sexual organs.
But nature does not do that. If the young man who, from his twelfth to
his eighteenth year, has practiced masturbation, is shown the error of
his way and breaks the habit absolutely, nature quickly comes to his
rescue and rehabilitates his virility completely, unless he has been
guilty of extreme excess in the habit. This rehabilitation of virility
after self-abuse is usually experienced in from one to three years,
according to the case and the extent of the practice.

The complete mastery of a habit after it has through years been
forging its chains about the youth, is in itself no small victory and
should go a long way towards extenuating his lapse. The young man who
can conquer himself and learn to lead a pure life, free from his early
habit and above reproach not only in his acts toward womankind but
also in all his thoughts of woman deserves his well-earned reward. He
deserves the respect of all pure women and should be able to win the
love of one whom he may with clear conscience ask to be his wife, and
with whom he may confidently expect to build a typical home.

7. _Should a man have intercourse for any purpose other than for
procreation?_

In the normal course of events, if intercourse is indulged in for
procreation only, it would come as often as once, perhaps twice in a
month; that is, either just before the menstrual period of the woman
or just after, the woman being most easily impregnated at these two
periods.

A man who has led a continent life before marriage should have no
