do anything more for us--that is, if they hadn't been sieged in, I
mean--they'd sure as anything have pulled us in. Pull the plane in, I
mean, and picked us out of it--with a big pair of tweezers, likely as
not. And contrary to your flattering opinion of my preaching (which by
the way none of the religious boys in my outfit share--they call me
'that misguided old atheist'), I don't think none of us would go over
big at Atla-Hi."

       *       *       *       *       *

We had to agree with him there. I couldn't imagine Pop or Alice or even
me cutting much of a figure (even if we weren't murder-pariahs) with the
pack of geniuses that seemed to make up the Atla-Alamos crowd. The
Double-A Republics, to give them a name, might have their small-brain
types, but somehow I didn't think so. There must be more than one
Edison-Einstein, it seemed to me, back of antigravity and all the
wonders in this plane and the other things we'd gotten hints of. Also,
Grayl had seemed bred for brains as well as size, even if us small
mammals had cooked his goose. And none of the modern "countries" had
more than a few thousand population yet, I was pretty sure, and that
hardly left room for a dumbbell class. Finally, too, I got hold of a
memory I'd been reaching for the last hour--how when I was a kid I'd
read about some scientists who learned to talk Mandarin just for kicks.
I told Alice and Pop.

"And if _that's_ the average Atla-Alamoser's idea of mental recreation,"
I said, "well, you can see what I mean."

"I'll grant you they got a monopoly of brains," Pop agreed. "Not sense,
though," he added doggedly.

"Intellectual snobs," was Alice's comment. "I know the type and I detest
it." ("You _are_ sort of intellectual, aren't you?" Pop told her, which
fortunately didn't start a riot.)

Still, I guess all three of us found it fun to chew over a bit the new
slant we'd gotten on two (in a way, three) of the great "countries" of
the modern world. (And as long as we thought of it as fun, we didn't
have to admit the envy and wistfulness that was behind our wisecracks.)

I said, "We've always figured in a general way that Alamos was the
remains of a community of scientists and technicians. Now we know the
same's true of the Atla-Hi group. They're the Brookhaven survivors."

"Manhattan Project, don't you mean?" Alice corrected.

"Nope, that was in Colorado Springs," Pop said with finality.

       *       *       *       *       *

I also pointed out that a community of scientists would educate for
technical intelligence, maybe breed for it too. And being a group picked
for high I. Q. to begin with, they might make startlingly fast progress.
You could easily imagine such folk, unimpeded by the boobs, creating a
wonder world in a couple of generations.

"They got their troubles though," Pop reminded me and that led us to
speculating about the war we'd dipped into. Savannah Fortress, we knew,
was supposed to be based on some big atomic plants on the river down
that way, but its culture seemed to have a fiercer ingredient than
Atla-Alamos. Before we knew it we were, musing almost romantically about
the plight of Atla-Hi, besieged by superior and (it was easy to suppose)
barbaric forces, and maybe distant Los Alamos in a similar
predicament--Alice reminded me how the voice had asked if they were
still dying out there. For a moment I found myself fiercely proud that I
had been able to strike a blow against evil aggressors. At once, of
course, then, the revulsion came.

"This is a hell of a way," I said, "for three so-called realists to be
mooning about things."

"Yes, especially when your heroes kicked us out," Alice agreed.

Pop chuckled. "Yep," he said, "they even took Ray's artillery away from
him."

"You're wrong there, Pop," I said, sitting up. "I still got one of the
grenades--the one the pilot had in his fist." To tell the truth I'd
forgotten all about it and it bothered me a little now to feel it
snugged up in my pocket against my hip bone where the skin is thin.

"You believe what that old Dutchman said about the steel cubes being
atomic grenades?" Pop asked me.

"I don't know," I said, "He sure didn't sound enthusiastic about telling
us the truth about anything. But for that matter he sounded mean enough
to tell the truth figuring we'd think it was a lie. Maybe this _is_ some
sort of baby A-bomb with a fuse timed like a grenade." I got it out and
hefted it. "How about I press the button and drop it out the door? Then
we'll know." I really felt like doing it--restless, I guess.

"Don't be a fool, Ray," Alice said.

"Don't tense up, I won't," I told her. At the same time I made myself
the little promise that if I ever got to feeling restless, that is,
restless and _bad_, I'd just go ahead and punch the button and see what
happened--sort of leave my future up to the gods of the Deathlands, you
might say.

"What makes you so sure it's a weapon?" Pop asked.

"What else would it be," I asked him, "that they'd be so hot on getting
them in the middle of a war?"

"I don't know for sure," Pop said. "I've made a guess, but I don't want
to tell it now. What I'm getting at, Ray, is that your first thought
about anything you find--in the world outside or in your own mind--is
that it's a weapon."

"Anything worthwhile in your mind is a weapon!" Alice interjected with
surprising intensity.

"You see?" Pop said. "That's what I mean about the both of you. That
sort of thinking's been going on a long time. Cave man picks up a rock
and right away asks himself, 'Who can I brain with this?' Doesn't occur
to him for several hundred thousand years to use it to start building a
hospital."

"You know, Pop," I said, carefully tucking the cube back in my pocket,
"you _are_ sort of preachy at times."

"Guess I am," he said. "How about some grub?"

       *       *       *       *       *

It was a good idea. Another few minutes and we wouldn't have been able
to see to eat, though with the cans shaped to tell their contents I
guess we'd have managed. It was a funny circumstance that in this wonder
plane we didn't even know how to turn on the light--and a good measure
of our general helplessness.

       *       *       *       *       *

We had our little feed and lit up again and settled ourselves. I judged
it would be an overnight trip, at least to the cracking plant--we
weren't making anything like the speed we had been going east. Pop was
sitting in back again and Alice and I lay half hitched around on the
kneeling seats, which allowed us to watch each other. Pretty soon it got
so dark we couldn't see anything of each other but the glowing tips of
the cigarettes and a bit of face around the mouth when the person took a
deep drag. They were a good idea, those cigarettes--kept us from having
ideas about the other person starting to creep around with a knife in
his hand.

The North America screen still glowed dimly and we could watch our green
dot trying to make progress. The viewport was dead black at first, then
there came the faintest sort of bronze blotch that very slowly shifted
forward and down. The Old Moon, of course, going west ahead of us.

After a while I realized what it was like--an old Pullman car (I'd
traveled in one once as a kid) or especially the smoker of an old
Pullman, very late at night. Our crippled antigravity, working on the
irregularities of the ground as they came along below, made the ride
rhythmically bumpy, you see. I remembered how lonely and strange that
old sleeping car had seemed to me as a kid. This felt the same. I kept
waiting for a hoot or a whistle. It was the sort of loneliness that
settles in your bones and keeps working at you.

"I recall the first man I ever killed--" Pop started to reminisce
softly.

"Shut up!" Alice told him. "Don't you ever talk about anything but
murder, Pop?"

"Guess not," he said. "After all, it's the only really interesting topic
there is. Do you know of another?"

It was silent in the cabin for a long time after that. Then Alice said,
"It was the afternoon before my twelfth birthday when they came into the
kitchen and killed my father. He'd been wise, in a way, and had us
living at a spot where the bombs didn't touch us or the worst fallout.
But he hadn't counted on the local werewolf gang. He'd just been slicing
some bread--homemade from our own wheat (Dad was great on back to nature
and all)--but he laid down the knife.

"Dad couldn't see any object or idea as a weapon, you see--that was his
great weakness. Dad couldn't even see weapons as weapons. Dad had a
philosophy of cooperation, that was his name for it, that he was going
to explain to people. Sometimes I think he was glad of the Last War,
because he believed it would give him his chance.

"But the werewolves weren't interested in philosophy and although their
knives weren't as sharp as Dad's they didn't lay them down. Afterwards
they had themselves a meal, with me for dessert. I remember one of them
used a slice of bread to sop up blood like gravy. And another washed his
hands and face in the cold coffee ..."

She didn't say anything else for a bit. Pop said softly, "That was the
afternoon, wasn't it, that the fallen angels ..." and then just said,
"My big mouth."

"You were going to say 'the afternoon they killed God?'" Alice asked
him. "You're right, it was. They killed God in the kitchen that
afternoon. That's how I know he's dead. Afterwards they would have
killed me too, eventually, except--"

       *       *       *       *       *

Again she broke off, this time to say, "Pop, do you suppose I can have
been thinking about myself as the Daughter of God all these years? That
that's why everything seems so intense?"

"I don't know," Pop said. "The religious boys say we're all children of
God. I don't put much stock in it--or else God sure has some lousy
children. Go on with your story."

"Well, they would have killed me too, except the leader took a fancy to
me and got the idea of training me up for a Weregirl or She-wolf Deb or
whatever they called it."

"That was my first experience of ideas as weapons. He got an idea about
me and I used it to kill him. I had to wait three months for my
opportunity. I got him so lazy he let me shave him. He bled to death the
same way as Dad."

"Hum," Pop commented after a bit, "that was a chiller, all right. I got
to remember to tell it to Bill--it was somebody killing his mother that
got _him_ started. Alice, you had about as good a justification for your
first murder as any I remember hearing."

"Yet," Alice said after another pause, with just a trace of the old
sarcasm creeping back into her voice, "I don't suppose you think I was
right to do it?"

"Right? Wrong? Who knows?" Pop said almost blusteringly. "Sure you were
justified in a whole pack of ways. Anybody'd sympathize with you. A man
often has fine justification for the first murder he commits. But as you
must know, it's not that the first murder's always so bad in itself as
that it's apt to start you on a killing spree. Your sense of values gets
shifted a tiny bit and never shifts back. But you know all that and who
am I to tell you anything, anyway? I've killed men because I didn't like
the way they spit. And may very well do it again if I don't keep
watching myself and my mind ventilated."

"Well, Pop," Alice said, "I didn't always have such dandy justification
for my killings. Last one was a moony old physicist--he fixed me the
Geiger counter I carry. A silly old geek--I don't know how he survived
so long. Maybe an exile or a runaway. You know, I often attach myself
to the elderly do-gooder type like my father was. Or like you, Pop."

Pop nodded. "It's good to know yourself," he said.

       *       *       *       *       *

There was a third pause and then, although I hadn't exactly been
intending to, I said, "Alice had justification for her first murder,
personal justification that an ape would understand. I had no personal
justification at all for mine, yet I killed about a million people at a
modest estimate. You see, I was the boss of the crew that took care of
the hydrogen missile ticketed for Moscow, and when the ticket was
finally taken up I was the one to punch it. My finger on the firing
button, I mean."

I went on, "Yeah, Pop, I was one of the button-pushers. There were
really quite a few of us, of course--that's why I get such a laugh out
of stories about being or rubbing out the _one_ guy who pushed all the
buttons."

"That so?" Pop said with only mild-sounding interest. "In that case you
ought to know--"

We didn't get to hear right then who I ought to know because I had a fit
of coughing and we realized the cigarette smoke was getting just too
thick. Pop fixed the door so it was open a crack and after a while the
atmosphere got reasonably okay though we had to put up with a low lonely
whistling sound.

"Yeah," I continued, "I was the boss of the missile crew and I wore a
very handsome uniform with impressive insignia--not the bully old
stripes I got on my chest now--and I was very young and handsome myself.
We were all very young in that line of service, though a few of the men
under me were a little older. Young and dedicated. I remember feeling a
very deep and grim--and _clean_--responsibility. But I wonder sometimes
just how deep it went or how clean it really was.

"I had an uncle flew in the war they fought to lick fascism, bombardier
on a Flying Fortress or something, and once when he got drunk he told me
how some days it didn't bother him at all to drop the eggs on Germany;
the buildings and people down there seemed just like toys that a kid
sets up to kick over, and the whole business about as naive fun as
poking an anthill.

"_I_ didn't even have to fly over at seven miles what I was going to be
aiming at. Only I remember sometimes getting out a map and looking at a
certain large dot on it and smiling a little and softly saying,
'Pow!'--and then giving a little conventional shudder and folding up the
map quick.

"Naturally we told ourselves we'd never have to do it, fire the thing, I
mean, we joked about how after twenty years or so we'd all be given jobs
as museum attendants of this same bomb, deactivated at last. But
naturally it didn't work out that way. There came the day when our side
of the world got hit and the orders started cascading down from Defense
Coordinator Bigelow--"

"Bigelow?" Pop interrupted. "Not Joe Bigelow?"

"Joseph A., I believe," I told him, a little annoyed.

"Why he's my boy then, the one I was telling you about--the skinny runt
had this horn-handle! Can you beat that?" Pop sounded startlingly happy.
"Him and you'll have a lot to talk about when you get together."

I wasn't so sure of that myself, in fact my first reaction was that the
opposite would be true. To be honest I was for the first moment more
than a little annoyed at Pop interrupting my story of my Big Grief--for
it was that to me, make no mistake. Here my story had finally been
teased out of me, against all expectation, after decades of repression
and in spite of dozens of assorted psychological blocks--and here was
Pop interrupting it for the sake of a lot of trivial organizational
gossip about Joes and Bills and Georges we'd never heard of and what
they'd say or think!

But then all of a sudden I realized that I didn't really care, that it
didn't feel like a Big Grief any more, that just starting to tell about
it after hearing Pop and Alice tell their stories had purged it of that
unnecessary weight of feeling that had made it a millstone around my
neck. It seemed to me now that I could look down at Ray Baker from a
considerable height (but not an angelic or contemptuously superior
height) and ask myself _not_ why he had grieved so much--that was
understandable and even desirable--but why he had grieved so _uselessly_
in such a stuffy little private hell.

And it _would_ be interesting to find out how Joseph A. Bigelow had
felt.

"How does it feel, Ray, to kill a million people?"

       *       *       *       *       *

I realized that Alice had asked me the question several seconds back and
it was hanging in the air.

"That's just what I've been trying to tell you," I told her and started
to explain it all over again--the words poured out of me now. I won't
put them down here--it would take too long--but they were honest words
as far as I knew and they eased me.

I couldn't get over it: here were us three murderers feeling a trust and
understanding and sharing a communion that I wouldn't have believed
possible between _any_ two or three people in the Age of the Deaders--or
in _any_ age, to tell the truth. It was against everything I knew of
Deathland psychology, but it was happening just the same. Oh, our
strange isolation had something to do with it, I knew, and that
Pullman-car memory hypnotizing my mind, and our reactions to the voices
and violence of Atla-Alamos, but in spite of all that I ranked it as a
wonder. I felt an inward freedom and easiness that I never would have
believed possible. Pop's little disorganized organization had really
got hold of something, I couldn't deny it.

       *       *       *       *       *

Three treacherous killers talking from the bottoms of their hearts and
believing each other!--for it never occurred to me to doubt that Pop and
Alice were feeling exactly like I was. In fact, we were all so sure of
it that we didn't even mention our communion to each other. Perhaps we
were a little afraid we would rub off the bloom. We just enjoyed it.

We must have talked about a thousand things that night and smoked a
couple of hundred cigarettes. After a while we started taking little
catnaps--we'd gotten too much off our chests and come to feel too
tranquil for even our excitement to keep us awake. I remember the first
time I dozed waking up with a cold start and grabbing for Mother--and
then hearing Pop and Alice gabbing in the dark, and remembering what had
happened, and relaxing again with a smile.

Of all things, Pop was saying, "Yep, I imagine Ray must be good to make
love to, murderers almost always are, they got the fire. It reminds me
of what a guy named Fred told me, one of our boys ..."

Mostly we took turns going to sleep, though I think there were times
when all three of us were snoozing. About the fifth time I woke up,
after some tighter shut-eye, the orange soup was back again outside and
Alice was snoring gently in the next seat and Pop was up and had one of
his knives out.

He was looking at his reflection in the viewport. His face gleamed. He
was rubbing butter into it.

"Another day, another pack of troubles," he said cheerfully.

The tone of his remark jangled my nerves, as that tone generally does
early in the morning. I squeezed my eyes. "Where are we?" I asked.

He poked his elbow toward the North America screen. The two green dots
were almost one.

"My God, we're practically there," Alice said for me. She'd waked fast,
Deathlands style.

"I know," Pop said, concentrating on what he was doing, "but I aim to be
shaved before they commence landing maneuvers."

"You think automatic will land us?" Alice asked. "What if we just start
circling around?"

"We can figure out what to do when it happens," Pop said, whittling away
at his chin. "Until then, I'm not interested. There's still a couple of
bottles of coffee in the sack. I've had mine."

I didn't join in this chit-chat because the green dots and Alice's first
remark had reminded me of a lot deeper reason for my jangled nerves than
Pop's cheerfulness. Night was gone, with its shielding cloak and its
