
One corner of the roof was covered with thatch--a little nest where one
might be sheltered from the rain, and in which I could see a bed of palm
fiber. At one side of the house a tremendous cluster of bamboo curved
upward and over the roof. A path of chopped coconut husks led from the
street to a short flight of steps in the terrace at the front entrance.

We passed along this path and entered through the open doorway directly
into what I judged was the living room of the dwelling. It was some thirty
feet long and half as broad, with a high ceiling and stone floor. Its
three windows fronted the garden we had just left; in its farther wall a
low archway led into an adjoining room. The furniture consisted only of
two or three small tables and several low, wide couches, all of bamboo.

A woman and the girl Anina rose as we entered. Anina ran toward us
eagerly; the elder woman stood, quietly waiting. She was about forty years
of age, as tall as Miela, but heavier of build. She was dressed in loose
silk trousers, gathered at waist and ankle; and a wide sash that covered
her breast. Her hair was iron gray, cut short at the base of the neck.
From her shoulders I saw hanging a cloak that entirely covered her wings.

As she turned toward us I saw a serious, dignified, wholly patrician face,
with large, kindly dark eyes, a high, intellectual forehead, and a firm
yet sensitive mouth. She was the type of woman one would instinctively
mark for leader.

Miela ran forward to greet her mother, falling upon her knees and touching
her forehead to the elder woman's sandaled feet. As she rose I could see
there were tears in the eyes of them both. Then Miela presented me. I
stood for an instant, confused, not knowing quite what I should do.

Miela laughed her gay little laugh.

"Bow low, Alan--as I did--to our mother."

I knelt to her respectfully, and she put her hands lightly upon my head,
speaking low words of greeting. Then, as I stood up again, I met her eyes
and smiled an answer to the gentle smile on her lips. From that moment I
felt almost as though she were my own mother, and I am sure she took me
then into her heart as her son.

The introduction over, I turned toward one of the windows, leaving Miela
to talk with her mother. Anina followed me, standing timidly by my side,
with her big, curious eyes looking up into my face.

"You're a sweet, dear little sister," I said, "and I _am_ going to love
you very much."

I put my arm about her shoulders, and she smiled as though she understood
me, yielding to my embrace with the ready friendship of a child. For some
moments we stood together, looking out of the window and talking to each
other with words that were quite unintelligible to us both. Then Miela
suddenly called me.

"We shall eat now, Alan," she said, "for you are hungry, I know. And above
there is water, that we may wash." Her face clouded as she went on: "Our
mother has told me a little that has happened. It is very serious, Alan,
as you shall hear. Tao, with his great news of your wonderful world, is
very fast winning over our men to his cause. A revolt, there may be, here
in our own city--a revolution against our government, our king. We can
only look to you now, my husband, to save our country from Tao as well as
your own."

The situation as I found it in the Light Country was, as Miela said,
alarmingly serious. During the two years Tao had been in the Twilight
Country, preparing for his attack upon the earth, his project had caused
little stir among the Light Country people.

Its women were, at first, perturbed at this wanton attack upon the
humanity of another world, but since the earth was such an unknown
quantity, and the fact of its being inhabited at all was problematical,
interest in the affair soon lagged. The government of the Light Country
concerned itself not at all.

But now, upon Tao's return, the news of his venture, as told by the
emissaries he sent to the Light Country, struck its people like a
bombshell. These emissaries--all men--had come to the Great City, and,
finding their presence tolerated by the authorities, had immediately
started haranguing the people.

The men were inclined to listen, and many of them openly declared their
sympathy with Tao. These, however, were for the most part of the poorer,
more ignorant classes, or those more adventurous, less scrupulous
individuals to whom the prospect of sudden riches appealed.

"Why doesn't your government just throw Tao's men out if they're causing
so much trouble?" I asked. "They never should have been allowed in the
country at all."

Miela smiled sadly.

"That is so, my husband. That should have been done; but now it is too
late. Our men would protect them now, declaring their right to stay here
and speak. There might be bloodshed among our people, and that must not
be."

"Are they armed?" I asked.

She shook her head. "No one is armed with the light-ray. To carry it is a
crime punishable by death, for the light is too destructive."

"But Tao has it?"

"Tao has it, indeed, but he is not so great a monster that he would use it
against us."

I was not so sure of that, and I said so. "You don't mean to tell me,
Miela, that your government has allowed Tao to prepare all this
destructive armament without itself arming?"

Again she shook her head. "We have been preparing, too, and all our young
men can be called if occasion comes. But that must never be. It would be
too terrible."

       *       *       *       *       *

Miela and I occupied, that first night on Mercury, a broad wooden bed
built low to the floor, with a mattress of palm fiber. At first I could
not sleep, but lay thinking over the many things she had told me. The
light in the room, too, was strange. Lattice covered the windows, but it
was like trying to sleep at midday; and the heat and heaviness of the air
oppressed me. I dropped off finally, to be awakened by Miela's voice
calling me to breakfast.

We sat down to the morning meal at a low table set with shining plates and
goblets of copper, or whatever the metal was, and napery of silk. The rice
formed our main article of food, with sugar, milk, and a beverage not
unlike coffee. There was also a meat like beef, although more highly
flavored, and a number of sickish sweet fruits of a kind entirely new to
me, which I could do no more than taste.

We were served by a little maid whose darker skin and heavier features
proclaimed her of another race--a native of the Fire Country, Miela told
me. She was dressed in a brown tunic of heavy silk, reaching from waist to
knee. Her thick black hair was cut to her shoulders.

On her left arm above the elbow was welded a broad band of copper
inscribed with a mark to identify Lua as her owner, for she was a slave.
Her torso was bare, except for a cloak like Lua's which hung from her
shoulders in the back to cover her wings. By this I knew she could not
fly.

It was not until some time afterward that I learned the reason for this
covering of the clipped wings. The wing joints were severed just above the
waist line. The feathers on the remaining upper portions were clipped, but
through disuse these feathers gradually dropped out entirely.

The flesh and muscle underneath was repulsive in appearance--for which
reason it was always kept covered. Lua showed me her wings once--mere
shrunken stumps of what had once been her most glorious possession. I did
not wonder then that the women were ready to fight, almost, rather than
part with them.

Difficulties of language made our conversation during the meal somewhat
halting, although Miela acted as interpreter. Lua and Anina both expressed
their immediate determination to learn English, and, with the same
persistence that Miela had shown, they set aside nearly everything else to
accomplish it.

We decided that we should see the king and arrange our future course of
action. Whatever was to be done should be done at once--that we all
agreed--for Tao's men were steadily gaining favor with a portion of the
people, and we had no means of knowing what they would attempt to do.

"What will your people think of me?" I suddenly asked Miela.

"We have sent our king word that you are here," she answered, "and we have
asked that he send a guard to take you to the castle this morning."

"A guard?"

She smiled. "It is better that the people see you first as a man of
importance. You will go to the king under guard. Few will notice you. Then
will he, our ruler, arrange that you are shown to the people as a great
man--one who has come here to help us--one who is trusted and respected by
our king. You see, my husband, the difference?"

I did, indeed, though I wondered a little how I should justify this
exalted position which was being thrust upon me. After breakfast Lua and
Anina busied themselves about the house, while Miela and I went to the
rooftop to wait for the king's summons. From here I had my first really
good view of the city at close range.

Miela's home sat upon a terrace, leveled off on the steep hillside; all
the houses in the vicinity were similarly situated. Behind us the mountain
rose steeply; in front it dropped away, affording an extended view of the
level, palm-dotted country below.

The slope of hillside rising abruptly behind us held another house just
above the level of the rooftop we were on. As I sat there looking idly
about I thought I saw a figure lurking near this higher building. I called
Miela's attention to it--the obscure figure of a man standing against a
huge palm trunk.

As we watched the figure stepped into plainer view. I saw then it _was_ a
man, evidently looking down at us. I stood up. There was no one else in
sight except a woman on the roof of the other house holding an infant.

Something about the man's figure seemed vaguely familiar; my heart leaped
suddenly.

"Miela," I whispered, "surely that--that is no one of your world."

Her hand clutched my arm tightly as the man stepped forward again and
waved at us. I crossed the rooftop, Miela following. At my sudden motion
the man hesitated, then seemed about to run. I hardly know what thoughts
impelled me, but suddenly I shouted: "Wait!"

At the sound of my voice he whirled around, stopped dead an instant, and
then, with an answering call, came running down the hillside.

"The earth-man!" cried Miela. "The earth-man of Tao it must be."

We hurried down through the house and arrived at its back entrance. Coming
toward us at a run across the garden was the man--unmistakably one of my
own world.

My hurried glance showed me he was younger than I--a short, stocky,
red-headed chap, dressed in dirty white duck trousers and a torn white
linen shirt.

He came on at full speed.

"Hello!" I called.

He stopped abruptly. For an instant we stared at each other; then he
grinned broadly.

"Well, I don't know who _you_ are," he ejaculated, "but I want to say it
certainly does me good to see you."



CHAPTER XIV.


THE RULER OF THE LIGHT COUNTRY.


However pleased the newcomer was to see me, I had no difficulty in
assuring him with equal truth that my feelings matched his. The first
surprise of the meeting over, we took him to the living room, where Lua
greeted him with dignified courtesy, and we all gathered around to hear
his story.

He was, I saw now, not more than twenty years old, rather short--perhaps
five feet six or seven inches--and powerfully built, with a shock of
tousled red hair and a handsome, rough-hewn face essentially masculine.

He seemed to be an extraordinarily good-humored chap, with the ready wit
of an Irishman. I liked him at once--I think we all did.

He began, characteristically, near the end rather than the beginning of
the events I knew he must have to tell us.

"I got away," he chuckled, grinning more broadly than ever. "But where I
was going to, search me. And who the deuce are _you_, if you don't mind my
asking? How did you ever get to this God-forsaken place?"

I smiled. "You tell us about yourself first; then I'll tell you about
myself. You are the earth-man we've been hearing about, aren't you--the
man Tao captured in Wyoming and brought here with him?"

"They caught me in Wyoming all right. Who's Tao?"

"He's the leader of them all."

"Oh. Well, they brought me here, as you say, and I guess they've had me
about all over this little earth since. They stuck me in a boat, and Lord
knows how far we went. We got here last night, and when my guard went to
sleep I beat it." He scratched his head lugubriously. "Though what good I
thought it was going to do me I don't know. That's about all, I guess.
Who the deuce are you?"

I laughed.

"Wait a minute--don't go so fast. Start at the beginning. What's your
name?"

"Oliver Mercer."

His face grew suddenly grave. "My brother was killed up there in
Wyoming--that's how I happened to go there in the first place."

"Mercer!" I exclaimed.

He started. "Yes--why? You don't think you know me, by any chance, do
you?"

"No, but I knew your brother--that is, I know Bob Trevor, who was with him
when he was killed. He's one of my best friends."

The young fellow extended his hand. "A friend of Bob Trevor's--away off
here! Don't it get you, just?"

Miela interrupted us here to translate to her mother and Anina what he
said.

Mercer went on: "The assumption is, you people here are not working with
this gang of crooks I got away from--this Tao? Am I right in thinking so?"

"You're certainly right, that far," I laughed.

I felt, more than I can say, a great sense of relief, a lessening of the
tension, the unconscious strain I had been under, at this swift, jovial
conversation with another human of my own kind.

"Yes, you're right on that. This Tao and I are not exactly on the same
side. I'll tell you all about it in a minute."

"Then, we're working together?"

"Yes."

"Well, all I'm working for is to get back home where I came from."

"You won't be when you hear all I've got to say."

He started at that; then, with sudden change of thought, his eyes turned
to Anina. The girl blushed under his admiring gaze.

"Say, she's a little beauty, isn't she? Who is she?"

"She's my sister," I said, smiling.

For once he was too dumfounded to reply.

Miela had finished her translation now, and, as she turned back to us,
spoke in English for the first time during the conversation.

"Do you know why it is they brought you here from the Twilight Country?"
she asked Mercer.

This gave him another shock. "Why, I--no. That is--say, how do you happen
to talk English? Is it one of your languages here, by any chance?"

Miela laughed gayly.

"Only we three, in all this world, speak English. I know it because--"

I interrupted her.

"Suppose I tell him our whole story, Miela? Then--"

"That's certainly what I want to hear," said Mercer emphatically. "And
especially why it is that I'm not supposed to want to get back to where I
belong."

My explanation must have lasted nearly an hour, punctuated by many
questions and exclamations of wonder from young Mercer. I told him the
whole affair in detail, and ended with a statement of exactly how matters
stood now on Mercury.

"Do you want to hurry back home to earth now?" I finished.

"Duck out of this? I should say not. Why, we've got a million things to do
here."

His eyes turned again toward Anina.

"And, say--about letting those girls keep their wings. I'm strong for
that. Let's be sure and fix that up before we leave."

It was not more than half an hour later when the king's guards arrived to
conduct us to the castle. Meanwhile young Mercer had discovered he was
hungry and thirsty. As soon as he had finished eating we started off--he
and I, with Lua and Miela. The guards led us away as though we were
prisoners, forming a hollow square--there were some thirty of them--with
us in the center. We attracted little attention from passersby; the few
who stopped to stare at us, or who attempted to follow, were briskly
ordered away.

Occasionally a few girls would hover overhead, but when the guards shouted
up at them they flew away obediently.

The king's castle was constructed of metal and stone--a long, low,
rambling structure, flanked by two spires or minarets, giving it somewhat
an Oriental appearance. Each of these minarets was girdled, halfway up, by
a narrow balcony.

The first room into which we passed was small, seemingly an antechamber.
From it, announced by two other guards who stood at the entrance, we
entered directly into the main hall of the building. At one end of it
there was a raised platform. On this, seated about a large table, were
some ten or twelve dignitaries--the king's advisers. They were, I saw, all
aged men, with beardless, seamed faces, long snowy-white hair to their
shoulders, and dressed in flowing silk robes.

The king was a man of seventy-odd, kindly faced, gentle in demeanor. He
bore himself with the dignity of a born ruler, and yet his very kindliness
of aspect and the doddering gravity of his aged councilors, seemed to
explain at once most of the trouble that now confronted him.

We stood beside this table--they courteously made way for Lua to sit among
them--and all its occupants immediately turned to face us.

Our audience lasted perhaps an hour and a half altogether. I need not go
into details. I was right in assuming that the king desired to help us
prevent Tao from his attempted conquest of the earth. This was so, but
only in so far as his actions would not jeopardize the peace of his own
nation. He sadly admitted his error in allowing Tao's emissaries into the
Light Country. But now they were there, he did not see how to get them
out.

His people were daily listening to them more eagerly; and, what was worse,
the police guards themselves seemed rather more in sympathy with them than
otherwise. A slight disturbance had occurred in the streets the day
before, and the guards had stood apathetically by, taking no part. Above
all else, the king stoutly protested, he would have no bloodshed in his
country if he could prevent it.

In the neighboring towns of the Light Country--the nearest of which was
some forty miles away from the Great City--the situation was almost the
same. Reports brought by young women flying between the cities said that
