"Yet I knew who you were and that you were here. I must have had
something to do with it, don't you think?"

"What?"

"I forced you to come by deception, so that no one knows you are
here--except the old man whose name you used. Who will believe him that
you came on the Martian Princess? Our records will show that a Jake
Norton will be there on Earth. No one can ever prove that Mel Hastings
ever came aboard."

       *       *       *       *       *

Mel let his breath out slowly. His fear suddenly swallowed caution. He
took a crouching step forward. Then he stopped, frozen. James Connemorra
tilted the small pistol resting in his lap. Mel did not know how it came
to be there. He had not seen it a moment ago.

"What are you going to do?" Mel demanded. "What are you going to do with
all of us?"

"You know too much," said Connemorra, shrugging in mock helplessness.
"What _can_ I do with you?"

"Explain what I don't understand about the things you say I know."

"Explain to you?" The idea seemed to amuse Connemorra greatly, as if it
had some utterly ridiculous aspect. "Yes, I might as well explain," he
said. "I haven't had anyone interested enough to listen for a long time.

"Men have never been alone in space. We have been watched, inspected,
and studied periodically since Neanderthal times by races in the galaxy
who have preceded us in development by hundreds of thousands of years.
These observers have been pleasantly excited by some of the things we
have done, appalled by others.

"There is a galactic organization that has existed for at least a
hundred thousand years. This organization exists for the purpose of
mutual development of the worlds and races of the galaxy. It also exists
to maintain peace, for there were ages before its organization when
interstellar war took place, and more than one great world was wiped out
in such senseless wars.

"When men of Earth were ready to step into space, the Galactic Council
had to decide, as it had decided on so many other occasions, whether the
new world was to be admitted as a member. The choice is not one which a
new world is invited to make; the choice is made for it. A world which
begins to send its ships through space becomes a member of the Council,
or its ships cease to travel. The world itself may cease to exist."

"You mean this dictatorial Council determines whether a world is fit to
survive and actually wipes out those it decides against?" gasped Mel in
horror. "They set themselves up as judges in the Universe?"

"That's about the way they operate, to put it bluntly," said Connemorra.
"You can call them a thousand unpleasant names, but you can't change the
fact of their existence, nor the fact of their successful operation for
a period as long as the age of the human race.

"They would never have made their existence known to us if we had not
begun sending our ships into space. But once we did that we were
entering territory staked out by races that were there when we crawled
out of our caves. Who can say what their rights are?"

"But to pass judgment on entire worlds--"

"We have no choice but to accept that such judgment is passed."

"And their judgment of Earth--?"

"Was that Earth was not ready for Council membership. Earthmen are still
making too many blunders to join creatures that could cross the galaxy
at the speed of light when we were learning how to chip flint."

"But they didn't wipe us out!"

       *       *       *       *       *

James Connemorra looked out at the stars. "I wonder," he said. "I
wonder--"

"What do you mean?" Mel said in a tight voice.

"We have defects which are not quite like any they have encountered
before. We have developed skills in the manufacture of artifacts, but we
have no capacity for using them. For example, we have developed vast
systems of communication, but these systems have not improved our
communications they have actually blocked communication."

"That's crazy!" said Mel. "Do they suppose smoke signals are superior to
the 3-d screens in our homes?"

"As a matter of fact, they do. And so do I. When a man must resort to
smoke signals he is very certain that he has something to say before he
goes to the trouble of putting the message in the air. But our fabulous
screens prevent us from communicating with each other by throwing up a
wall of pseudo-communication that we can't get through. We subject
ourselves to a barrage of sound and light that has a communication
content of almost zero.

"The same is true of our inventions in transportation. We have efficient
means of travel to all parts of the world and now to the Universe
itself. But we don't travel. We use our machines to block traveling."

"I can understand the first argument, but not this one!" said Mel.

"We move our bodies to new locations with our machines, but our minds
remain at home. We take our rutted thoughts, our predispositions, our
cultural concepts wherever we go. We do not touch, even with a fragment
of our minds, that which our machines give us contact with. We do not
travel. We move in space, but we do not travel.

"This is their accusation. And they're right. We are still doing what we
have always done. We are using space flight for the boring, the trivial,
the stupid; using genius for a toy, like a child banging an atomic watch
on the floor. It happened with all our great discoveries and inventions:
the gasoline engine, the telephone, the wireless. We've built
civilizations of monumental stupidity on the wonders of nature. One race
of the Galactics has a phrase they apply to people like us: 'If there is
a God in Heaven He has wept for ten thousand years.'

       *       *       *       *       *

"But all this is not the worst. A race that is merely stupid seldom gets
out to space. But ours has something else they fear: destructiveness.
They have plotted our history and extrapolated our future. If they let
us come out, war and conflict will follow."

"They can't know that!"

"They say they can. We are in no position to argue."

"So they plan to destroy us--"

"No. They want to try an experiment that has been carried out just a few
times previously. They are going to reduce us from what they term the
critical mass which we have achieved."

"Critical mass? That's a nuclear term."

"Right. Meaning ready to blow up. That's where we are. Two not-so-minor
nuclear wars in fifty years. They see us carrying our destructiveness
into space, fighting each other there, infecting other races with our
hostility. But if we are broken down into smaller groups, have the tools
of war removed, and are forced to take another line of development--well,
they have hopes of salvaging us."

"But they can't do a thing like that to us! What do they intend? Taking
groups of Earthmen, deporting them to other worlds--breaking them apart
from each other forever--?"

The coldness found its resting place in Mel's chest. He stared at James
Connemorra. Then his eyes moved slowly over the walls of the room in the
black ship and out to the stars. The black ship.

"This ship--! You transfer your passengers to this Galactic ship for
deportation to other worlds! But they come back--"

"They are sent to colonies on other worlds where conditions are like
those on Earth--with significant exceptions. The colonies are small,
the largest are only a few thousand. The problems there are different
than on Earth--and they are tough. The natural resources are not the
same. The development of the resulting cultures will be vastly different
from that of Earth. The Galactic Council is very interested in the
outcome--which will not be known with certainty for a thousand years or
so."

"But they come back," Mel repeated. "You bring them back!"

"For each Earthman who goes out, a replacement is sent back. The
replacement is an android supplied by the Council."

"Android!" Mel felt his reason slipping. He knew he was shouting. "Then
Alice--the Alice that died was an android, she was not my wife! My Alice
is still alive! You can take me to her--"

Connemorra nodded. "Alice is still alive, and well. No harm has come to
her."

"Take me to her!" Mel knew he was pleading, but in his anguish he had no
pride.

Connemorra seemed to ignore his plea. "Earth's population is slowly
being diluted by the removal of top people. The androids behave in every
way like the individuals they replace, but they are preconditioned
against the inherent destructiveness of Earthmen."

Blind anger seemed to rise within Mel. "You have no right to separate
me from Alice. Take me to her!"

His rage ignited and he leaped forward.

The small gun in Connemorra's hand spurted twice. Mel felt a double
impact in a moment of great wonder. It couldn't end like this, he
thought. It couldn't end without his seeing Alice once more. Just once
more--

       *       *       *       *       *

He sank to the floor. The pain was not great, but he knew he was dying.
He looked down at his hand that covered the great wound in his
mid-section. There was something wrong.

He felt the stickiness, but the red blood was not welling out. Instead,
a thick bubble of green ooze moved from the wound and spread over his
clothes and his hand. An alien greenness that was like nothing human.

