great service. We would consider it an honor if you allowed us to enter
your planet in our records under the name of Holliday."

He kept his eyes away from Mead.

Martin Holliday's eyes were shining. "Thank you, Mr. Marlowe," he said
huskily.

Marlowe could think of no reply. Finally, he simply nodded. "It's been a
pleasure meeting you, Mr. Holliday. We've arranged transportation, and
your shuttle will be taking off very shortly."

Holliday's face began to bead with fresh perspiration at the thought of
bulkheads enclosing him once more, but he managed to smile, and then
ask, hesitantly: "May I ... may I wait for the shuttle out here, sir?"

"Certainly. We'll arrange for that. Well, good-by, Mr. Holliday."

"Good-by, Mr. Marlowe. Good-by, Mr. Bussard. And good-by, Mr. Mead. I
don't suppose you'll be seeing me again."

"Good luck, Mr. Holliday," Mead said.

       *       *       *       *       *

Marlowe twisted awkwardly on the car's back seat, wiping futilely at the
long smear of chocolate on his trouser pocket.

Well, he thought, at least he'd given the old man his name on the star
maps until Earthmen stopped roving.

At least he'd given him that.

Mead was looking at him. "I don't suppose we've got time to let him die
in peace, have we?" he asked.

Marlowe shook his head.

"I suppose we'll have to start breaking him immediately, won't we?"

Marlowe nodded.

"I'll get at it right away, sir."

_Dave!_ Does everyone have to hate me? Can't anyone understand? Even
you, uh--Creed. Even you, Mead?


IX.

Dalish ud Klavan, stooped and withered, sat hopelessly, opposite
Marlowe, who sat behind his desk like a grizzled polar bear, his
thinning mane of white hair unkempt and straggling.

"Marlowe, my people are strangling," the old Dovenilid said.

Marlowe looked at him silently.

"The Holliday Republic has signed treaty after treaty with us, and still
their citizens raid our mining planets, driving away our own people,
stealing the resources we must have if we are to live."

Marlowe sighed. "There's nothing I can do."

"We have gone to the Holliday government repeatedly," ud Klavan pleaded.
"They tell us the raiders are criminals, that they are doing their best
to stop them. But they still buy the metal the raiders bring them."

"They have to," Marlowe said. "There are no available resources
anywhere within practicable distances. If they're to have any
civilization at all, they've _got_ to buy from the outlaws."

"But they are members of the Union!" ud Klavan protested. "_Why_ won't
you do anything to stop them?"

"We can't," Marlowe said again. "They're members of the Union, yes, but
they're also a free republic. We have no administrative jurisdiction
over them, and if we attempted to establish one our citizens would rise
in protest all over our territory."

"Then we're finished. Dovenil is a dead world."

Marlowe nodded slowly. "I am very sorry. If there is anything I can do,
or that the Ministry can do, we will do it. But we cannot save the
Dovenilid state."

Ud Klavan looked at him bitterly. "Thank you," he said. "Thank you for
your generous offer of a gracious funeral.

"I don't understand you!" he burst out suddenly. "I don't understand you
people! Diplomatic lies, yes. Expediency, yes! But this ... this
madness, this fanatical, illogical devotion of the state in the cause of
a people who will tolerate no state! This ... no, this I cannot
understand."

Marlowe looked at him, his eyes full of years.

"Ud Klavan," he said, "you are quite right. We are a race of maniacs.
And that is why Earthmen rule the galaxy. For our treaties are not
binding, and our promises are worthless. Our government does _not_
represent our people. It represents our people as they once were. The
delay in the democratic process is such that the treaty signed today
fulfills the promise of yesterday--but today the Body Politic has formed
a new opinion, is following a new logic which is completely at variance
with that of yesterday. An Earthman's promise--expressed in words or
deeds--is good _only at the instant he makes it_. A second later, new
factors have entered into the total circumstances, and a new chain of
logic has formed in his head--to be altered again, a few seconds later."

He thought, suddenly, of that poor claustrophobic devil, Holliday,
harried from planet to planet, never given a moment's rest--and
civilizing, civilizing, spreading the race of humankind wherever he was
driven. Civilizing with a fervor no hired dummy could have accomplished,
driven by his fear to sell with all the real estate agent's talent that
had been born in him, selling for the sake of money with which to buy
that land he needed for his peace--and always being forced to sell a
little too much.

Ud Klavan rose from his chair. "You are also right, Marlowe. You are a
race of maniacs, gibbering across the stars. And know, Marlowe, that the
other races of the universe hate you."

Marlowe with a tremendous effort heaved himself out of his chair.

"Hate us?" He lumbered around the desk and advanced on the frightened
Dovenilid, who was retreating backwards before his path.

"Can't you see it? Don't you understand that, if we are to pursue any
course of action over a long time--if we are ever going to achieve a
galaxy in which an Earthman can some day live at peace with himself--we
must each day violate all the moral codes and creeds which we held
inviolate the day before? That we must fight against every ideal, every
principle which our fathers taught us, because they no longer apply to
our new logic?

"_You_ hate us!" He thrust his fat hand, its nails bitten down to the
quick and beyond, in front of the cringing alien's eyes.

"You poor, weak, single-minded, ineffectual thing! We hate ourselves!"


THE END




Transcriber's Note:

    This etext was produced from _Astounding Science Fiction_ February
    1955. Extensive research did not uncover any evidence that the U.S.
    copyright on this publication was renewed. Minor spelling and
    typographical errors have been corrected without note.





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Citadel, by Algirdas Jonas Budrys

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK CITADEL ***

***** This file should be named 26191.txt or 26191.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/2/6/1/9/26191/

Produced by Greg Weeks, Stephen Blundell and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
