
"What?"

"No announcement has been made. But a Mars-bound ship was launched
almost a month ago, containing seven members of the space commission.
Our last radio contact with Captain Wright leads us to expect--"

"_Who?_" Tom was on his feet.

"Captain Gary Wright, the commander of the ship." His brow knitted.
"Why? Do you know him?"

"I'm not sure," Tom said weakly. "But if he's the same man--then that
flight's in danger."

"What are you talking about?"

       *       *       *       *       *

Tom concluded his story about the death of the Homelovers treasurer,
down to the last detail of the framed photograph on Wright's desk. The
tale brought Colonel Mordigan into immediate action. He buzzed for his
orderly, and in another minute, was fumbling through a folder marked
Classified.

"Yes," he said numbly. "It's the same man. Father's named Benjamin
Wright, and he's vice-president and treasurer of Homelovers,
Incorporated. I never connected the two ..." He looked up, his eyes
heavy. "If your story is true, Mr. Blacker, then Captain Wright is one
of these so-called Antamundans. And if their mission is what you say it
is--"

Tom clenched his fists on the blotter. "Please, sir! Let me stay here
until the flight is concluded. After that, you can do what you like."

"All right," Mordigan said wearily. "I'll fix you up with something in
the officer's quarters. But I'm sure you're wrong, Mr. Blacker. You
_have_ to be."

Twenty-four hours later, radio contact with the Mars expeditionary ship
ceased abruptly.

From Mt. Wilson observatory, a hurried message arrived, reporting a
small, brief nova in the orbital vicinity of the planet Mars.

Tom Blacker, dozing fitfully on a cot in the quarters of a grumpy
Lieutenant-Colonel, was awakened suddenly, and summoned to the office of
Colonel Grady Mordigan.

"Very well, Mr. Blacker," the colonel said stiffly. "I'm willing to
help. Just tell me what you want me to do."

       *       *       *       *       *

The receptionist smiled icily at Tom, and then the smile vanished like a
Martian polar cap.

"Why--Mr. Blacker!"

"Hi, Stella," he grinned. "Mr. Andrusco in his office?"

"Why, I don't know. Suppose I give him a ring--"

He stopped the hand that was reaching for the telephone. "No need of
that. I think I'll just surprise him. After all, it's been some time."

He turned the knob of John Andrusco's door slowly.

Livia was with him. When he entered, they both stood up hastily, their
eyes wide and their mouths unhinged.

Livia reacted first. She cried out his name, and then sat down heavily,
as if the words had been a physical force.

"Hi, Livia," Tom said casually. "Good to see you again, Mr. Andrusco.
Sorry that I haven't been around--but things have been pretty hectic for
me lately."

"How did you get here?" Andrusco's voice was choked.

"I've been here all weekend, if you want to know." Tom seated himself
blithely. "As a matter of fact, the Homelovers Building has had quite a
lot of visitors this weekend."

"What do you mean?"

"You know the staff of cleaning personnel that invades this place every
Saturday? Well, there were some changes made this particular weekend.
I'm sure you'll be interested in hearing about them."

Livia said: "Shall I call the police, John?"

"The police were represented," Tom said. "Don't worry about that. In
fact, the top technicians from three government agencies were doing the
housework around here this weekend, Mr. Andrusco. They probably didn't
get the building much cleaner--but they swept up a lot of other things.
Yes, they certainly uncovered other things."

       *       *       *       *       *

Andrusco walked over to Livia, and touched her shoulder in a comforting
gesture. The sight of them made Tom scowl.

"All right!" he said roughly. "I'm not blaming you for what you're
doing. But things were getting out of hand, Mr. Andrusco. That's why we
had to put a stop to it."

"And have you?" Andrusco asked politely.

"I'm afraid so. It was quite a shock, let me tell you. We didn't know
what to expect when we dissected this building of yours. But the last
thing we expected to find was--a spaceship."

Andrusco smiled. "It was cleverly done. You'll have to admit that."

"I do," Tom said fervently. "You've got those space flight experts
absolutely insane with curiosity. They'll want to hear the whole story.
Will you give it to them?"

The man shrugged. "It doesn't matter, I suppose. I presume the engines
have been dismantled?"

"Made inoperable, yes. It would have been a great trick, if you could
have done it."

Livia spoke sadly. "It was the only thing we could have done. There's no
place on this Earth where we could have erected a spaceship without
being observed. So we created this building. In time, we would have
perfected the mechanism and left this silly planet of yours."

"That's what I don't understand," Tom said. "What about Antamunda--and
the survivors--"

"There's no longer an Antamunda," John Andrusco said hollowly. "The
story we told you was true in its essence, but not, I'm afraid complete.
You see, the exodus that took place five hundred years ago was a total
exodus. The entire population of our world--a handful, a pitiful ragged
thousand--left Antamunda for this planet. We thought to make it our new
home, for all eternity. But in time, we learned that we had emigrated to
an extinction just as certain."

"What do you mean?"

"This world is cursed to us, Mr. Blacker. I can't tell you why. We breed
slowly, infrequently--you might even say, thoughtfully. And on your
planet, but one child in a thousand has survived the rigors of
childbirth on Earth." He looked at Livia, and the woman lowered her eyes
in remembered sorrow.

"That's why we had to leave," Andrusco said. "To repopulate elsewhere.
We chose the planet Mars, and we were determined to make it our home
before your world claimed it. Our scientists and technicians have worked
on nothing else but this flight since the beginning of the last century.
This building--this vessel--was the culmination of our plans. In another
few years, we would have been ready. The dream would have been
realized."

       *       *       *       *       *

Tom walked to the window of the office, and looked out at a bank of
swift-moving clouds drifting past the spire of the Homelovers Building.

"I'm afraid that's the saddest part," he said. "The atomic engines in
the basement have been examined, Mr. Andrusco. The best opinions say
that they're pitifully inadequate. The men who studied them say that you
would never have made the journey in safety."

"That can't be true! In time--"

"In time, perhaps. But since your landing here, your scientists have
forgotten a great deal about space flight. I'm afraid you would have
never reached that Promised Land ..."

Andrusco said: "Then we must die ..."

"No!" Tom said.

Livia looked at him.

"I said no!" he repeated. "The Antamundans can live. Don't you see
that?"

"No," Andrusco said, shaking his head. "On Earth, we shall die. If Mars
is closed to us ..."

"Can't you see? If Mars can be opened for Earth, then it can be opened
for you, too. For all Antamundans! Your people can make the journey,
too, once space has been cleared for Earth ships. You can still have
your new home!"

"Perhaps," Livia said dreamily. "Perhaps that is the only way. But by
then, Tom, it will be already too late. There has been no living child
born to us in the last ten years. By the time the Earth people reach
Mars and establish regular passageway--we will be too old to keep the
race alive."

       *       *       *       *       *

"Then let's speed it up!" he said. "Let's make _sure_ that the space
lanes open! Let's do everything to make Space the most important project
