In terror, Mal Shaff looked for the source of the light. Just above the
horizon hung a great green orb, which moved up the ladder of the sky
even as he watched.

A moon! A huge green satellite hurtling swiftly around this cursed
world!

A great, overwhelming fear sat upon Mal Shaff and with a high, shrill
scream of anger he raced forward, forgetful of aching body and outraged
lungs.

His scream was answered from far off, and out of the shadows of the
cliffs toward the far end of the moor a black figure hurled itself.
Ouglat was on the trail!

Mal Shaff tore madly up the slope, topped the crest, and threw himself
flat on the ground, almost exhausted.

       *       *       *       *       *

A queer feeling stole over him, a queer feeling of well-being. New
strength was flowing into him, the old thrill of battle was pounding
through his blood once more.

Not only were queer things happening to his body, but also to his brain.
The world about him looked queer, held a sort of an intangible mystery
he could not understand. A half question formed in the back of his
brain. Who and what was he? Queer thoughts to be thinking! He was Mal
Shaff, but had he always been Mal Shaff?

He remembered a brittle column of light, creatures with bodies unlike
his body, walking into it. He had been one of those creatures. There was
something about dimensions, about different planes, a plan for one plane
to attack another!

He scrambled to his bowed legs and beat his great chest with mighty,
long-nailed hands. He flung back his head and from his throat broke a
sound to curdle the blood of even the bravest.

On the moor below Ouglat heard the cry and answered it with one equally
ferocious.

Mal Shaff took a step forward, then stopped stock-still. Through his
brain went a sharp command to return to the spot where he had stood, to
wait there until attacked. He stepped back, shifting his feet
impatiently.

He was growing larger; every second fresh vitality was pouring into him.
Before his eyes danced a red curtain of hate and his tongue roared forth
a series of insulting challenges to the figure that was even now
approaching the foot of the hill.

As Ouglat climbed the hill, the night became an insane bedlam. The
challenging roars beat like surf against the black cliffs.

Ouglat's lips were flecked with foam, his red eyes were mere slits, his
mouth worked convulsively.

They were only a few feet apart when Ouglat charged.

       *       *       *       *       *

Mal Shaff was ready for him. There was no longer any difference in their
size and they met like the two forward walls of contending football
teams.

Mal Shaff felt the soft throat of the other under his fingers and his
grip tightened. Maddened, Ouglat shot terrific blow after terrific blow
into Mal Shaff's body.

Try as he might, however, he could not shake the other's grip.

It was silent now. The night seemed brooding, watching the struggle on
the hilltop.

Larger and larger grew Mal Shaff, until he overtopped Ouglat like a
giant.

Then he loosened his grip and, as Ouglat tried to scuttle away, reached
down to grasp him by the nape of his neck.

High above his head he lifted his enemy and dashed him to the ground.
With a leap he was on the prostrate figure, trampling it apart, smashing
it into the ground. With wild cries he stamped the earth, treading out
the last of Ouglat, the Black Horror.

When no trace of the thing that had been Ouglat remained, he moved away
and viewed the trampled ground.

Then, for the first time he noticed that the crest of the hill was
crowded with other monstrous figures. He glared at them, half in
surprise, half in anger. He had not noticed their silent approach.

"It is Mal Shaff!" cried one.

"Yes, I am Mal Shaff. What do you want?"

"But, Mal Shaff, Ouglat destroyed you once long ago!"

"And I, just now," replied Mal Shaff, "have destroyed Ouglat."

The figures were silent, shifting uneasily. Then one stepped forward.

"Mal Shaff," it said, "we thought you were dead. Apparently it was not
so. We welcome you to our land again. Ouglat, who once tried to kill you
and apparently failed, you have killed, which is right and proper. Come
and live with us again in peace. We welcome you."

Mal Shaff bowed.

Gone was all thought of the third dimension. Through Mal Shaff's mind
raced strange, haunting memories of a red desert scattered with scarlet
boulders, of silver cliffs of gleaming metallic stone, of huge seas
battering against towering headlands. There were other things, too.
Great palaces of shining jewels, and weird nights of inhuman joy where
hellish flames lit deep, black caverns.

He bowed again.

"I thank you, Bathazar," he said.

Without a backward look he shambled down the hill with the others.

       *       *       *       *       *

"Yes?" said the editor. "What's that you say? Doctor White is dead! A
suicide! Yeah, I understand. Worry, hey! Here, Roberts, take this
story."

He handed over the phone.

"When you write it," he said, "play up the fact he was worried about not
being able to bring the men back to the third dimension. Give him plenty
of praise for ending the Black Horror. It's a big story."

"Sure," said Roberts, then spoke into the phone: "All right, Bill, shoot
the works."




Transcriber's Note:

    This etext was produced from _Astounding Stories_ June 1932.
    Extensive research did not uncover any evidence that the U.S.
    copyright on this publication was renewed. Minor spelling and
    typographical errors have been corrected without note.





End of Project Gutenberg's Hellhounds of the Cosmos, by Clifford Donald Simak

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK HELLHOUNDS OF THE COSMOS ***

***** This file should be named 27013.txt or 27013.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/2/7/0/1/27013/

Produced by Greg Weeks, Stephen Blundell and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
