
Open the gateway to hell and see what comes out. Meta and Poli stood
shoulder to shoulder firing into the mass of loathsomeness that boiled
through the door. Jason jumped to one side and picked off the occasional
animal that came his way. The destruction seemed to go on forever.

Long minutes passed before the last clawed beast made its death rush.
Meta and Poli waited expectantly for more, they were happily excited by
this chance to deal destruction. Jason felt a little sick after the
silent ferocious attack. A ferocity that the Pyrrans reflected. He saw a
scratch on Meta's face where one of the beasts had caught her. She
seemed oblivious to it.

Pulling out his medikit, Jason circled the piled bodies. Something
stirred in their midst and a crashing shot ploughed into it. Then he
reached the girl and pushed the analyzer probes against the scratch. The
machine clicked and Meta jumped as the antitoxin needle stabbed down.
She realized for the first time what Jason was doing.

"Thank you," she said.

Poli had a powerful battery lamp and, by unspoken agreement, Jason
carried it. Crippled though he was, the old man was still a Pyrran when
it came to handling a gun. They slowly made their way down the
refuse-laden stairs.

"What a stench," Jason grimaced.

At the foot of the stairs they looked around. There _had_ been books and
records there at one time. They had been systematically chewed, eaten
and destroyed for decades.

"I like the care you take with your old books," Jason said disgustedly.

"They could have been of no importance," Meta said coolly, "or they
would be filed correctly in the library upstairs."

Jason wandered gloomily through the rooms. Nothing remained of any
value. Fragments and scraps of writing and printing. Never enough in one
spot to bother collecting. With the toe of one armored boot, he kicked
angrily at a pile of debris, ready to give up the search. There was a
glint of rusty metal under the dirt.

"Hold this!" He gave the light to Meta and began scratching aside the
rubble. A flat metal box with a dial lock built into it, was revealed.

"Why that's a log box!" Meta said, surprised.

"That's what I thought," Jason said.

[Illustration]




XI.


Resealing the cellar, they carried the box back to Jason's new office.
Only after spraying with decontaminant, did they examine it closely.
Meta picked out engraved letters on the lid.

"S. T. POLLUX VICTORY--that must be the name of the spacer this log came
from. But I don't recognize the class, or whatever it is the initials
_S. T._ stand for."

"Stellar Transport," Jason told her, as he tried the lock mechanism.
"I've heard of them but I've never seen one. They were built during the
last wave of galactic expansion. Really nothing more than gigantic metal
containers, put together in space. After they were loaded with people,
machinery and supplies, they would be towed to whatever planetary system
had been chosen. These same tugs and one-shot rockets would brake the
S. T.'s in for a landing. Then leave them there. The hull was a ready
source of metal and the colonists could start right in building their
new world. And they were _big_. All of them held at least fifty thousand
people ..."

Only after he said it, did he realize the significance of his words.
Meta's deadly stare drove it home. There were now less people on Pyrrus
than had been in the original settlement.

And human population, without rigid birth controls, usually increased
geometrically. Jason dinAlt suddenly remembered Meta's itchy trigger
finger.

"But we can't be sure how many people were aboard this one," he said
hurriedly. "Or even if this is the log of the ship that settled Pyrrus.
Can you find something to pry this open with? The lock is corroded into
a single lump."

Meta took her anger out on the box. Her fingers managed to force a gap
between lid and bottom. She wrenched at it. Rusty metal screeched and
tore. The lid came off in her hands and a heavy book thudded to the
table.

The cover legend destroyed all doubt.

    LOG OF S. T. POLLUX VICTORY. OUTWARD BOUND--SETANI TO PYRRUS. 55,000
    SETTLERS ABOARD.

Meta couldn't argue now. She stood behind Jason with tight-clenched
fists and read over his shoulder as he turned the brittle, yellowed
pages. He quickly skipped through the opening part that covered the
sailing preparations and trip out. Only when he had reached the actual
landing did he start reading slowly. The impact of the ancient words
leaped out at him.

"Here it is," Jason shouted. "Proof positive that we're on the right
trail. Even _you_ will have to admit that. Read it, right here."

    _... Second day since the tugs left, we are completely on our own
    now. The settlers still haven't grown used to this planet, though we
    have orientation talks every night. As well as the morale agents who
    I have working twenty hours a day. I suppose I really can't blame
    the people, they all lived in the underways of Setani and I doubt if
    they saw the sun once a year. This planet has weather with a
    vengeance, worse than anything I've seen on a hundred other planets.
    Was I wrong during the original planning stages not to insist on
    settlers from one of the agrarian worlds? People who could handle
    the outdoors._

    _These citified Setanians are afraid to go out in the rain. But of
    course they have adapted completely to their native 1.5 gravity so
    the two gee here doesn't bother them much. That was the factor that
    decided us. Anyway--too late now to do anything about it. Or about
    the unending cycle of rain, snow, hail, hurricanes and such. Answer
    will be to start the mines going, sell the metals and build
    completely enclosed cities._

    _The only thing on this forsaken planet that isn't actually against
    us are the animals. A few large predators at first, but the guards
    made short work of them. The rest of the wild life leaves us alone.
    Glad of that! They have been fighting for existence so long that I
    have never seen a more deadly looking collection. Even the little
    rodents no bigger than a man's hand are armored like tanks ..._

"I don't believe a word of it," Meta broke in. "That can't be Pyrrus
he's writing about ..." Her words died away as Jason wordlessly pointed
to the title on the cover.

He continued scanning the pages, flipping them quickly. A sentence
caught his eye and he stopped. Jamming his finger against the place, he
read aloud.

"'... And troubles keep piling up. First Har Palo with his theory that
the vulcanism is so close to the surface that the ground keeps warm and
the crops grow so well. Even if he is right--what can we do? We must be
self-dependent if we intend to survive. And now this other thing. It
seems that the forest fire drove a lot of new species our way. Animals,
insects and even birds have attacked the people. (Note for Har: check if
possible seasonal migration might explain attacks.) There have been
fourteen deaths from wounds and poisoning. We'll have to enforce the
rules for insect lotion at all times. And I suppose build some kind of
perimeter defense to keep the larger beasts out of the camp.'

"This is a beginning," Jason said. "At least now we are aware of the
real nature of the battle we're engaged in. It doesn't make Pyrrus any
easier to handle, or make the life forms less dangerous, to know that
they were once better disposed towards mankind. All this does is point
the way. Something took the peaceful life forms, shook them up, and
turned this planet into one big deathtrap for mankind. That _something_
is what I want to uncover."




XII.


Further reading of the log produced no new evidence. There was a good
deal more information about the early animal and plant life and how
deadly they were, as well as the first defenses against them.
Interesting historically, but of no use whatsoever in countering the
menace. The captain apparently never thought that life forms were
altering on Pyrrus, believing instead that dangerous beasts were being
discovered. He never lived to change his mind. The last entry in the
log, less than two months after the first attack, was very brief. And
in a different handwriting.

    _Captain Kurkowski died today, of poisoning following an insect
    bite. His death is greatly mourned._

The "why" of the planetary revulsion had yet to be uncovered.

"Kerk must see this book," Jason said. "He should have some idea of the
progress being made. Can we get transportation--or do we walk to city
hall?"

"Walk, of course," Meta said.

"Then you bring the book. At two G's I find it very hard to be a
gentleman and carry the packages."

They had just entered Kerk's outer office when a shrill screaming burst
out of the phone-screen. It took Jason a moment to realize that it was a
mechanical signal, not a human voice.

"What is it?" he asked.

Kerk burst through the door and headed for the street entrance. Everyone
else in the office was going the same way. Meta looked confused, leaning
towards the door, then looking back at Jason.

"What does it mean? Can't you tell me?" He shook her arm.

"Sector alarm. A major breakthrough of some kind at the perimeter.
Everyone but other perimeter guards has to answer."

"Well, go then," he said. "Don't worry about me. I'll be all right."

His words acted like a trigger release. Meta's gun was in her hand and
she was gone before he had finished speaking. Jason sat down wearily in
the deserted office.

The unnatural silence in the building began to get on his nerves. He
shifted his chair over to the phone-screen and switched it on to
_receive_. The screen exploded with color and sound. At first Jason
could make no sense of it at all. Just a confused jumble of faces and
voices. It was a multi-channel set designed for military use. A number
of images were carried on the screen at one time, rows of heads or hazy
backgrounds where the user had left the field of view. Many of the heads
were talking at the same time and the babble of their voices made no
sense whatsoever.

After examining the controls and making a few experiments, Jason began
to understand the operation. Though all stations were on the screen at
all times, their audio channels could be controlled. In that way two,
three or more stations could be hooked together in a link-up. They would
be in round-robin communication with each other, yet never out of
contact with the other stations.

Identification between voice and sound was automatic. Whenever one of
the pictured images spoke, the image would glow red. By trial and error
Jason brought in the audio for the stations he wanted and tried to
follow the course of the attack.

Very quickly he realized this was something out of the ordinary. In some
way, no one made it clear, a section of the perimeter had been broken
through and emergency defenses had to be thrown up to encapsulate it.
Kerk seemed to be in charge, at least he was the only one with an
override transmitter. He used it for general commands. The many, tiny
images faded and his face appeared on top of them, filling the entire
screen.

"All perimeter stations send twenty-five per cent of your complement to
Area Twelve."

The small images reappeared and the babble increased, red lights
flickering from face to face.

"... Abandon the first floor, acid bombs can't reach."

"If we hold we'll be cut off, but salient is past us on the west flank.
Request support."

"DON'T MERVV ... IT'S USELESS!"

"... And the napalm tanks are almost gone. Orders?"

"The truck is still there, get it to the supply warehouse, you'll find
replacements ..."

       *       *       *       *       *

Out of the welter of talk, only the last two fragments made any sense.
Jason had noticed the signs below when he came in. The first two floors
of the building below him were jammed with military supplies. This was
his chance to get into the act.

Just sitting and watching was frustrating. Particularly when it was a
desperate emergency. He didn't overvalue his worth, but he was sure
there was always room for another gun.

By the time he had dragged himself down to the street level a
turbo-truck had slammed to a stop in front of the loading platform. Two
Pyrrans were rolling out drums of napalm with reckless disregard for
their own safety. Jason didn't dare enter that maelstrom of rolling
metal. He found he could be of use tugging the heavy drums into position
on the truck while the others rolled them up. They accepted his aid
without acknowledgment.

It was exhausting, sweaty work, hauling the leaden drums into place
against the heavy gravity. After a minute Jason worked by touch through
a red haze of hammering blood. He realized the job was done only when
the truck suddenly leaped forward and he was thrown to the floor. He lay
there, his chest heaving. As the driver hurled the heavy vehicle along,
all Jason could do was bounce around in the bottom. He could see well
enough, but was still gasping for breath when they braked at the
fighting zone.

To Jason, it was a scene of incredible confusion. Guns firing, flames,
men and women running on all sides. The napalm drums were unloaded
without his help and the truck vanished for more. Jason leaned against a
wall of a half-destroyed building and tried to get his bearings. It was
impossible. There seemed to be a great number of small animals: he
killed two that attacked him. Other than that he couldn't determine the
nature of the battle.

A Pyrran, tan face white with pain and exertion, stumbled up. His right
arm, wet with raw flesh and dripping blood, hung limply at his side. It
was covered with freshly applied surgical foam. He held his gun in his
left hand, a stump of control cable dangling from it. Jason thought the
man was looking for medical aid. He couldn't have been more wrong.

Clenching the gun in his teeth, the Pyrran clutched a barrel of napalm
with his good hand and hurled it over on its side. Then, with the gun
once more in his hand, he began to roll the drum along the ground with
his feet. It was slow, cumbersome work, but he was still in the fight.

Jason pushed through the hurrying crowd and bent over the drum. "Let me
do it," he said. "You can cover us both with your gun."

The man wiped the sweat from his eyes with the back of his arm and
blinked at Jason. He seemed to recognize him. When he smiled it was a
grimace of pain, empty of humor. "Do that. I can still shoot. Two half
men--maybe we equal one whole." Jason was laboring too hard to even
notice the insult.

       *       *       *       *       *

An explosion had blasted a raw pit in the street ahead. Two people were
at the bottom, digging it even deeper with shovels. The whole thing
seemed meaningless. Just as Jason and the wounded man rolled up the drum
the diggers leaped out of the excavation and began shooting down into
its depths. One of them turned, a young girl, barely in her teens.

"Praise Perimeter!" she breathed. "They found the napalm. One of the new
horrors is breaking through towards Thirteen, we just found it." Even as
she talked she swiveled the drum around, kicked the easy-off plug, and
began dumping the gelid contents into the hole. When half of it had
gurgled down, she kicked the drum itself in. Her companion pulled a
flare from his belt, lit it, and threw it after the drum.

[Illustration]

"Back quick. They don't like heat," he said.

This was putting it very mildly. The napalm caught, tongues of flame and
roiling, greasy smoke climbed up to the sky. Under Jason's feet the
earth shifted and moved. _Something_ black and long stirred in the heart
of the flame, then arched up into the sky over their heads. In the midst
of the searing heat it still moved with alien, jolting motions. It was
immense, at least two meters thick and with no indication of its length.
The flames didn't stop it at all, just annoyed it.

Jason had some idea of the thing's length as the street cracked and
buckled for fifty meters on each side of the pit. Great loops of the
creature began to emerge from the ground. He fired his gun, as did the
others. Not that it seemed to have any effect. More and more people were
appearing, armed with a variety of weapons. Flame-throwers and grenades
seemed to be the most effective.

"_Clear the area ... we're going to saturate it. Fall back._"

The voice was so loud it jarred Jason's ear. He turned and recognized
Kerk, who had arrived with truckloads of equipment. He had a power
speaker on his back, the mike hung in front of his lips. His amplified
