It should not take more than a drop to burn away everything you have
there." D'Ucello feinted at Daoud's face with the flask, and Daoud
flinched back and cried out. He strained desperately against the chains
that held him.

Greek Fire--what a cruel turn of fate that a thing invented by Sophia's
people should destroy him. Grief swelled in his throat as he mourned the
end of those hours of delight they had passed together.

But, Daoud thought, d'Ucello did not need Greek Fire to destroy his
manhood. He could burn it with oil and a torch, or he could order
Erculio to slash it away with a knife. The podesta had chosen Greek Fire
because it was strange, hinted of magic--maligno. Daoud remembered what
d'Ucello had said, an eon ago, when they were talking upstairs: that he
would prefer picking a lock to forcing it. Even now the podesta was
trying to use fear rather than pain to make Daoud tell him what he
wanted to know. D'Ucello himself did not really relish inflicting
physical pain; he preferred to work on men's emotions.

D'Ucello peered at him. "Under the appearance of a helpless and
terrified merchant, there is bravado. But now you know what a terrible
thing is going to happen to you if you persist. I will give that
understanding time to ripen."

He drew away and turned to Erculio. "I will return at midday, after my
morning audiences. See that he thinks about what is going to happen to
him."

Erculio bowed. "Signore."

The podesta left the dungeon, still holding the silver flask.

_He has to put off carrying out his threat_, Daoud thought. _Once he has
poured that Greek Fire on my loins, he has done his worst. If the fear
does not force me to speak, the deed is pointless. After it is done I
will have little more to lose. If he were a true torturer, he would have
begun with my toes._

Even so, Daoud was sure d'Ucello would carry out his threat.

_Therefore, I must prepare myself for death._

If d'Ucello used the Greek Fire on him, Daoud would want Erculio to kill
him. And he was sure Erculio would do it.

He turned his mind again to thoughts of God. Soon he would be
face-to-face with God in paradise.

He heard Erculio talking to the guards, making preparations for some new
torment. Rather than wallow in fear, Daoud visualized a fresh flood of
Soma coursing through his heart and mind and limbs. Saadi had explained
that there was no limit to how much of a spiritual drug a man could
take.

This time, as Soma detached his spirit from his body, something happened
to him unlike anything he had never known before. He was looking down at
himself. He saw himself lying facedown, nearly nude on the rack, his
blond hair darkened and plastered down with sweat. He saw the bloody
slashes across his back, the blackened burn mark on his leg.

He was floating near the ceiling of the dungeon. He looked down at the
spider shape of Erculio, talking with the guards and the clerk. Amazing
that they did not look up here and see him. They thought he was still on
the rack.

He rose through solid stone, a space of lightlessness. Then he was
moving over tiled floors through the upper levels of the Palazzo del
Podesta, and he was out through its iron-sheathed oak door.

The vault of the sky over him was as black and heavy as the stones of
the dungeon where his body lay. It must be the final hour of night. Even
though he was a spirit, he sensed that the air was hot and damp.

He rose higher and higher over Orvieto, and amazingly he was able to see
despite the absence of light. He could see the entire oval shape of the
city from end to end, and the deep valleys that surrounded it. There at
the west end was the cathedral of San Giovenale, with the great piazza
where public events took place. There was Cardinal Ugolini's mansion,
near the palace where the pope had lived. On the north side of the town,
the Palazzo Monaldeschi, where he had hoped to end the threat to Islam
with swift blows of his dagger. And there--

From such a height--and since it was not yet dawn--he should not have
been able to recognize her, but he saw and knew at once the small figure
of a cloaked and hooded woman striding purposefully through a twisting
street. She was walking through the eastern side of the town, in the
direction of Tilia's house, which he could see from up here, with the
dovecote on its roof and its crenellated balconies, though Sophia could
not. Beside Sophia, a hulking figure carried a torch to light their way.
Ugolini's man-at-arms Riccardo.

Without knowing how he did it, Daoud was down from the sky in an instant
and walking invisibly beside her. Her black brows were drawn together in
a frown, her nose and mouth covered by a silk scarf. She looked almost
like a Muslim woman. She was full of fear for him, he knew. He wanted to
tell her not to be afraid, but how could he, knowing he was going to
die?

He thanked God for letting him see Sophia one last time.

_I love you, Sophia. Remember our joy._




LII


Fighting billows of terror that threatened to engulf her, Sophia pulled
her veil aside so that Tilia's servant Cassio could recognize her.
Yawning, Cassio led Sophia and Riccardo into the large, column-lined
reception room and left them. Ugolini's man threw himself down on a
padded bench. Sophia, too agitated to sit still, unpinned her hooded
cloak and dropped it beside Riccardo. Even though she had just walked
halfway across town, she paced the carpeted floor, twisting her fingers.

Would Tilia be able to help, or would she be as powerless as Ugolini?
This journey across the city might be utterly futile, but Sophia, unable
to sleep and tormented by demon-inspired visions of what was happening
to Daoud, had to do something.

Tilia quickly appeared on the landing of the second floor gallery,
followed by Cassio, who held a candle. Despite her bulk, she seemed to
flow down the stairs in her trailing red silk gown.

"Quickly, tell me what has happened," she said. "For you to come this
late it must be disastroso." Her voice was calm but hoarse. Her face was
puffy and creased with deep wrinkles. She wore one piece of jewelry, her
bishop's cross.

"We had better talk alone," Sophia said. Tilia nodded. Riccardo was
already sitting on a couch in the entry hall with his eyes shut. Cassio
looked inquiringly at Tilia. His shoulder-length black hair, usually
well-combed and glossy, was a nest of unruly locks pointing every which
way.

"Give me the candle, Cassio," said Tilia. "Come up to my room, Sophia.
Your escort can wait here." She sighed. "A few weeks ago there would
have been clients waiting in this room even at this hour. Since the pope
left--" She waved a hand at the emptiness of the great chamber.

Sophia felt herself wanting to cling to Tilia, as if the short, fat
woman were her mother. A few months before she had felt nothing but
hatred for the brothel keeper because she had introduced Rachel into
whoredom. Now she prayed only that Tilia could help her.

Her bedroom was cool, the shutters of a large double window having been
swung open to let in the night air. Tilia sat on her wide bed, which was
covered with embroidered cushions and silk sheets that draped over the
four posts. Sophia went to the window and drew back the curtain to look
out. The street outside was dark and empty.

What was happening to Daoud in the Palazzo del Podesta? Were they
crippling his beautiful body? Was he dying? Dead? She felt like crying
at the thought of how they might be hurting him. But she could not help
him unless she kept her head.

Sophia quickly told Tilia about Daoud's arrest. Tilia lay back on the
bed, her beady eyes fixed on Sophia, and fingered the cross on her ample
bosom. Every so often she nodded, as if this were just what she had
expected.

She covered her eyes momentarily with her hand. "May God be kind to
Daoud ibn Abdallah. He is worth ten of any ordinary men."

_She knows Daoud's Muslim name!_

But Sophia had no time to pursue the thought. Tilia had quickly wiped
her tears away and turned to Sophia expectantly.

"With Lorenzo away you are the only one who might be able to do
something," Sophia said.

"What do you expect of me, if David lets himself be taken away and the
cardinal does nothing?" Tilia asked. "Have I more power than they?"
Clearly her use of "Daoud" was a momentary indiscretion.

"We need someone who can think," Sophia said, realizing how vague she
sounded in her desperation.

"How is Adelberto taking it?" Tilia asked.

"He is almost speechless with terror. He just moans and weeps and wrings
his hands. I am afraid he may try to run away, or confess everything or
do something equally foolish."

Tilia nodded again, grimly. "He is picturing all the things they will do
to him if he is found guilty of conspiring with the enemies of
Christendom." She looked at Sophia keenly. "What about you? Are you not
afraid for yourself?"

"I am dying of fear."

Tilia reached over and squeezed her hand. "I am frightened too. Who
would not be? But you're right--giving way to panic just leaves us
helpless. Let us go back to Adelberto's mansion. He is a changeable man.
I may be able to get him to think sensibly. I will see what I can do
with him."

A wave of relief swept over Sophia. At least she was no longer
struggling alone.

Sophia could see a bluish light on the tile roofs of the houses across
from Tilia's window. It would soon be morning.

_God, they have had Daoud for a whole night! What have they done to
him?_

"D'Ucello has men watching the cardinal's mansion," Sophia said.
"Riccardo and I slipped out through the tunnel that leads under the
street to the potterymaker's shop, but we cannot get back in that way."

"Getting there is the easiest part of it," said Tilia. "Cassio will hire
a covered cart for us. The hard part will be deciding what to do once we
have arrived." She smiled and patted her breasts, accentuated by the
gossamer fabric of her sleeping gown. "I must put some clothes on."

"While you dress, can I see Rachel?" Sophia asked. She noticed three
ironbound chests, ornamented with circular enameled medallions, standing
in a row against the wall beside Tilia's bed. Each was secured with a
padlock. They must hold the gold Tilia's customers brought to her.

"I will take you to Rachel," said Tilia. "She is as well and happy as
when you saw her last. But do not tell her what has happened to David."

"There is no point in frightening her," Sophia agreed. "But when we
leave Orvieto, I want to take her with us."

"Whether you believe it or not, I am looking after her welfare," Tilia
said. "Just yesterday, John the Tartar offered me five thousand florins
to let him take her to Perugia with him when he follows the pope there.
He flew into a rage when I refused him. So, you see, I have even braved
the fury of the Tartars for Rachel's sake. Perhaps you will begin to
judge me a little more kindly."

Turning to leave the room, Sophia froze momentarily. It had not occurred
to her that Tilia would know that she had once hated her. The woman
_was_ penetrating. She felt a little more confident that Tilia would
have the wisdom to help her in this calamity.

Tilia, holding a candle, opened Rachel's door for Sophia. More
glittering gold had been added to the girl's bedroom since Sophia had
last visited her, and when the candle flame illuminated it, the room
seemed to blaze. Sophia blinked at the gold curtains before the windows
and the heavy cloth-of-gold draperies surrounding the bed.

All this, she thought, was to impress that horrible Tartar who came
here to lie with Rachel. How lucky Sophia had been to be able to share
her bed with a man she loved.

But thoughts of happiness with Daoud--memories--were like a knife in her
heart, now that he had been taken from her.

Tilia pulled the drape aside, and there was Rachel, curled up nude on
top of yellow silk sheets. Her skinny arms and legs made her look even
younger than she was. Sophia felt heartsick as Rachel's eyes opened wide
at the sudden light. She sat up in bed, dragging the sheet across her
body, then drew back against the wall. She looked terrified. Sophia
wondered what sort of awakenings Rachel was used to in this place, and a
sudden return of her rage at Tilia made her tremble.

_Well and happy, is she?_

But she dared not be angry with Tilia now. Tilia was the only person who
could help her.

Rachel's black eyes fell on Sophia, and the fear went out of her face.
It was replaced by a glad smile that hurt Sophia's heart all the more.

_I abandoned her to this, and yet she is happy to see me._

"I will leave you two to talk," Tilia said.

Sophia sat on the gold sheets and took Rachel's hand when Tilia was
gone. For a moment she forgot her own grief and fear, as an urge to
comfort Rachel pushed to the fore.

"All of us are going to be leaving Orvieto soon, and when we do we will
take you with us," she said. Rachel's dark eyes glowed.

Sophia went on. "Wherever we go, you will not have to stay with Tilia
anymore and do--what Tilia expects of you. We will find a home for you."

She was not sure how she was going to keep such a promise, but she
decided that Daoud would have to kill her before she would let him put
Rachel in another brothel.

Again the knife in her breast as she remembered she might never see
Daoud again.

Rachel shrugged. "I may be better off doing this than I would be as some
man's wife." She looked down at her hands, and Sophia saw that her
fingers were long and slender and quite beautiful. "John Chagan has made
me very rich, you know."

Sophia thought of the three locked chests in Tilia's room. She would
have to make sure that Rachel, when she left this place of shame, got
all the gold that was rightfully hers. And how outrageous, that Tilia
had been filling Rachel's head with lies about how lucky she was.

"Tilia and the others here have to believe that this is the right life
for them. But there is not a woman here who would not trade whatever
riches she has earned for a real home, with a husband and children."

Rachel was silent a moment. Her face was all straight lines, Sophia saw,
yet delicate and feminine at the same time.

_As a woman, she will be much more beautiful than I._

"Even you?" Rachel said suddenly.

Sophia was surprised. "We are not talking about me. I am not--a
courtesan."

"What are you?" Rachel asked softly, shyly.

_What word is there to describe me?_

She had thought often about other women and how different their lives
were from hers. Sometimes, to survive, she had to give her body to men
when she did not want to. She had been in danger of death. She had known
love and wealth and power. She had lived this way since her parents and
the boy she had loved were killed, and she could not imagine living any
other way.

"I am just a person who does whatever she needs to," said Sophia. How
could she sit here and talk like this, when Daoud might be dying? A
chill went over her, as if she were in the grip of a fever, and she
almost cried aloud.

"Something is wrong," Rachel said. "Why are you here so early in the
morning?" That look of terror was coming back into her face.

The door opened, and Tilia was there, dressed in a long green silk tunic
and a yellow satin surcoat. Light was beginning to show through Rachel's
windows. Sophia held Rachel's hand for a moment and then let go of it
and stood up to leave.

"Take me with you," Rachel said, seizing Sophia's wrist.

"Not now," said Sophia quickly. "We will all be together when we leave
Orvieto."

Rachel's eyes overflowed with tears. "I do not want to stay here. I want
to go with you now."

"What have you been saying to her?" Tilia said angrily.

"Nothing," said Sophia. She turned to Rachel. "See, Madama will be angry
with me. She thinks I have been frightening you. Now show her that you
are calm and are willing to stay here."

Rachel's thin shoulders slumped. "As you wish, Signora."

In the midst of her fear for Daoud, a pang of guilt shot through Sophia.
She had upset Rachel and then spoken gruffly to her. She rushed to her
and hugged the thin body against hers.

She kissed Rachel quickly and followed Tilia out.

       *       *       *       *       *

Sophia followed Tilia through the door of Ugolini's cabinet after Tilia
thrust it open without even knocking. Ugolini's eyes bulged at the sight
of Tilia, and he threw down his pen.

He was still in a panic, Sophia saw, heartsick. Even if they could come
up with a plan to rescue Daoud, would he be willing to do anything?

"Now, of all times, you should not be here," he cried at Tilia.

Without a word Tilia marched across the Syrian carpet, her broad hips
swinging under her green gown. She went around Ugolini's desk and held
out her arms to him. With a slightly embarrassed glance at Sophia, he
stood up--he was the same height as Tilia--and let her take him into her
arms. He leaned his head on her shoulder for a moment, then handed her
into his chair.

_They really are lovers_, thought Sophia, seeing the little cardinal's
sudden wistful smile. The sight of that smile gave her new hope. Perhaps
Tilia could restore his courage. Only Ugolini had the power and
authority to do anything about Daoud's imprisonment. Tilia had to bring
him back to himself.

"Did you not want me to know, Adelberto, what happened to David?" she
demanded, looking down at the parchment he had been writing on. "What is
this?"

"I am calculating my horoscope for this day. The stars are telling me I
have overreached myself and have only myself to blame for my downfall."

"For your downfall? Dear God, Adelberto, have you given up hope
already?"

His words dimmed Sophia's hopes. He believed in his stars.

Ugolini, dressed in a white gown tied at the waist with a cord, walked
to the half-open windows and pulled the violet drapes across them,
darkening the room. A breeze made the drapes billow inward and blew out
the flame of the candle on his desk, plunging the room into a deeper
darkness. Unbidden, Sophia picked up a wax taper from Ugolini's
worktable, igniting it from the fat, hour-marked candle in the corner
away from the window, and went lighting candles in the candelabra around
the room. Talking in the dark would only drive their spirits lower.

_If only Lorenzo were here. He would have a plan by now, and be doing
something about it._

Ugolini held out his hands to Tilia. "I am doomed, and I do not want you
dragged down with me." He turned to Sophia, whiskers bristling over his
grimace. "You should have left her out of this."

_If I had left her out of it, there would be no hope at all_, Sophia
thought, sitting on the small chair facing Ugolini's worktable. She
looked with appeal at Tilia, who nodded reassuringly.

"Tilia needs just as much as any of us to know what is happening," said
Sophia. "And you need to talk to her." Ugolini's hands were trembling,
she saw. She, too, was afraid, both for herself and Daoud. Fear was a
black hollow eating away at her insides.

_Oh, Daoud, what are they doing to you?_

He might come out of the Palazzo del Podesta blind, or with arms or legs
cut off, or mad, she thought. When she saw him again, she might wish him
dead--and herself along with him.

She wiped the cold sweat from her brow with the hem of her silk cloak.
In the heavy, hot air, the scent of Tilia's rose-petal sachet filled the
room.

"Only a miracle can save us," said Ugolini, pacing and waving his hands.
"I have been praying to God that He take the soul of David of Trebizond
before he breaks under torture and dooms us all."

Sophia reeled with the pain his words brought her. She wanted to claw
Ugolini's eyes out. She sprang up from her chair, fists clenched.

"May God take _your_ soul!" she screamed at him. "And send you straight
to hell!"

Ugolini turned and stared at her as if she had struck him.

"Be still, Sophia," said Tilia quietly. "That will not help."

Panting heavily, Sophia sat down again. They needed Ugolini so badly,
and he was so _useless_. She wanted to weep with frustration.

"Of course God will damn me," Ugolini cried, throwing his arms into the
air as he paced the room, his white gown rippling. "Why should He spare
me or any of us, when we have been working against His Church?"

_It is not my Church_, thought Sophia resentfully. _It is the schismatic
Latin Church he speaks of._ Remembering that she was probably the only
person of her faith in Orvieto, she felt terribly alone.

_Almost as alone as Daoud must feel._

"It seems that you no longer know who you are," said Tilia sourly to
Ugolini.

"Eh? What do you mean?" He turned quickly and peered at her.

_She talks to him as if she were his nursemaid_, Sophia thought. _And
that is what he needs._

"You are one of twenty-two men who _rule_ the Church," said Tilia
firmly. "You will elect the next pope, and very soon, by all signs. You
are not a citizen of Orvieto, subject to this podesta." She spat the
word. "You are one of the most powerful men in Italy."

"I am the creature of the Sultan of Egypt, and soon the whole world will
know it," Ugolini moaned. "Oh, God, how I wish you had never come to me
with his bribes."

So it was Tilia who had recruited Ugolini for this work. There were
depths to this woman. If anyone could have an effect on Ugolini now, she
could. But Sophia wondered if even Tilia could reach the cardinal in his
present state.

"Are you sorry you met me, Adelberto?" said Tilia softly.

"No, no!" said Ugolini hastily.

He rushed over to where she sat at his table and put his hands on her
shoulders.

"Without you," he said earnestly, "my life would have been flat and
empty."

_Love_, thought Sophia. _He loves her. That might make the difference._

"And I helped you become wealthier than you ever dreamed possible. I
helped you buy the red hat."

"True," said Ugolini. "But Fortune raises men high only so they may fall
farther when she casts them down."

Tilia brought her large hand down hard on Ugolini's marble-topped table.
"Enough of this talk of the stars and Fortune. Look here, Adelberto, for
this little cimice, this bedbug of a man, d'Ucello, to walk into the
house of Cardinal Ugolini and arrest one of his guests--it is
insufferable! You must not permit it."

Sophia did not dare to breathe as she watched Ugolini's face for a sign
of returning strength.

"No doubt you are right," said Ugolini, nodding slowly like a boy being
taught his lessons.

"You must bring pressure to bear on this man," Tilia went on. "With most
of the cardinals following the pope to Perugia, you are now even more
important in Orvieto."

_Thank God for Tilia._ At this moment Sophia was willing to forgive
Tilia even the corrupting of Rachel.

Ugolini said, "Yes, but if last night I could not stop him from taking
David, what can I do now?" He spread his empty hands.

Another gust of wind lifted the purple drapes and sent scraps of
parchment from Ugolini's table to the carpet. Sophia saw circles and
triangles and whole constellations flying across the room.

They would have to enlist the aid of someone who had influence over the
podesta, Sophia thought, someone who was friendly enough to Ugolini to
be willing to speak on his behalf. With the pope gone, the most powerful
person in the city was--

As soon as the thought came to her, she spoke. "The Contessa di
Monaldeschi. Cardinal, you must go to her and ask her help."

Her heart rose to her throat, choking her. Tilia and Ugolini stared at
her. Would they listen? Would they spurn her idea?

"Why should _she_ help me?" said Ugolini.

"She admires you," said Sophia. "She told me so the night of the
reception she gave for the Tartars. Now that the pope has left Orvieto,
she probably feels neglected."

Wide-eyed, Ugolini shook his head. "But David is accused of involvement
in the attack on her palace. Just yesterday I saw her cackling like a
strega while her men chopped off Marco di Filippeschi's head and
murdered half his family. They even impaled a baby on a spear, and she
shouted with glee."

"That has nothing to do with us," said Sophia, though the image revolted
her. "She has no reason to connect David with the Filippeschi."

Tilia nodded vigorously, shaking her body and the chair she was sitting
in. "Sophia has an excellent idea, Adelberto. If the Contessa di
Monaldeschi pleads for David, if _she_, the injured party, is convinced
of his innocence, the podesta must yield."

Sophia felt more confident as she saw that Tilia was on her side. She
pressed the attack.

"Again and again d'Ucello has shown that he does whatever the
Monaldeschi expect of him," she urged.

"He used to do whatever _either_ family expected of him," said Ugolini.
"Until so many Filippeschi perished that they ceased to matter."

Ugolini went to the window. A blast of hot, damp wind roared into the
room, and he raised his hand protectively in front of his face.

"It will storm soon," said Tilia. "It cannot be soon enough to suit me.
A storm will break this terrible heat. As soon as the storm passes, you
must go to her."

Ugolini nodded slowly. "If I fail to convince her, I will be no worse
off than I am now."

"You will convince her," said Tilia. "You might as well start to put on
your red robes."

Real hope sailed across the sea of terror to Sophia now, and it was a
galley, a galley with sails painted a cardinal's red. She felt it
bearing her up over her dread for Daoud and for herself.

"I will go to the contessa with you," said Sophia. If he gave way to
panic again, she could stop him from doing too much damage.

"And I will return to my house," said Tilia, standing up.

"No," said Ugolini. "It was dangerous enough for you to come here. We
know this mansion is being watched. Stay here until nightfall."

Tilia smiled, went to him, and held his small, pointed face between her
hands. "I will stay. And if you succeed in persuading the contessa to
have David freed, we will have something to celebrate, you and I."

To celebrate! What a wonderful thought. Sophia had begun to feel she
would never celebrate anything again.

But moving Ugolini to act was only the first step, she reminded herself.
The contessa might prove to be against them, and Daoud might still be
doomed.

       *       *       *       *       *

Sophia watched, eaten up by anxiety, as the Contessa di Monaldeschi
advanced slowly into her smaller audience chamber, leaning on her
grandnephew, a plump boy in red velvet.

"I hope you have not come to scold me, Cardinal Ugolini," the contessa
rasped.

Could this old woman really have laughed to see a baby impaled on a
spear, Sophia wondered as she and Ugolini bowed.

"Dear Contessa, scold you?" Ugolini said with a chuckle. "Whatever for?"
Sophia was delighted to see how completely he had, to all outward
appearances, cast off the terror that gripped him a short time before.

_Like all of us, when terror strikes, he needs to feel he can do
something._

"Ah, Cardinal. Surely you know." When she reached Ugolini, the tall,
bony old woman clutched at the boy's arm with both clawlike hands and
began, with an effort that made her compress her withered lips, to lower
herself to the floor. It hurt Sophia just to watch her struggle to
genuflect before the cardinal.

The contessa had aged a great deal, Sophia thought, since she first saw
her, over a year ago. She was thinner, more bent, moved with much
greater difficulty. Ugolini reached out to try to stop her from
kneeling.

"Please, Dona Elvira!" he cried. "Do not trouble yourself so."
