The water, the cubistic cliffs, the vast space full of balls, all
curiously blurred, appeared in succession. There were blank spaces and
then blurred sights of things which they did not recognize, never
having seen them before. Then the dizziness and the nausea abated, and
ahead of them was a vast yellow blue, a huge nebula, and in it were
double-colored suns and ringed planets with swarms of moons; this
glorious sight remained for many seconds, as they gazed at it in
panting astonishment, half reclining on the concrete; and then it
faded. Again the nausea came on; again the succession of blurred
views. Eventually the myriad spheres, the water with the leviathans,
the forest of vines, each succeeding scene grew more blurred. Their
nausea was correspondingly increased, till they were forced to lie
down on the ground from illness.

When their giddiness abated, there were blurring views again. There
was an impression as though the speed of a train were decreasing as
one looks out of the window. And how one view held for several
seconds, a vast and wild mountain-range with glaciers and snow peaks
by moonlight. When this faded gradually, the scenes began to flick by,
more and more rapidly, and grew blurred. Phil and Ione were attacked
by nausea until, again, they had to lie down. After that came the
familiar succession: the wooden animals, the tangle of vines, the vast
sea, the spheres, and more blurred scenes. Then came a pause, with
the nebula and the glorious suns swinging into view once again.

"Oh, I understand!" Ione exclaimed; "We're swinging. The safe was so
heavy that we swung too violently, too far, and back again--"

"And we keep going till it knocks us out, or till the old cat dies,"
added Phil.

       *       *       *       *       *

However, they found that after a number of repetitions of the same
program, their giddiness was becoming less; and instead of lying down
in the middle of the swing, they could look about. Then it occurred to
Phil to time the interval between the nebula and the mountain-range.
When the exact halfway point was determined, and after several more
swings, they could see dimly the windows and machinery of Tony's
laboratory flash by when they passed the middle.

"I don't mean to be a crepe-hanger, but how do you know we will stop
at the right point?" Phil asked.

"I don't," replied Ione cheerfully. "But mathematics says so. A freely
oscillating segment of space would naturally come to equilibrium in a
position parallel to the rest of its own space, would it not?"

There came a swing when they did not reach the nebula on the one hand
and the mountain-range on the other. After that, views dropped off
from either end of the swing quite rapidly, and before many minutes,
they looked into Tony's laboratory a large portion of the time. For
many seconds the laboratory held; then it would gradually fade, and
reappear again, only to fade into empty nothingness all around.

"The old cat's dead," Phil finally announced.

They sat and stared about them as the laboratory held steady and no
further intervening periods of blankness intervened. They both sighed
deeply and slumped over on the ground to rest.

"Bang! bang! bang!"

       *       *       *       *       *

Some sort of hammering woke them up. They looked about them in a daze.
It was broad daylight, and things looked queer in the laboratory.
There was a smell of scorched rubber and hot oil. Great loops of wire
sagged down from above. Several nondescript heaps stood about that
might once have been machinery, but now suggested melting snow-men,
all fused into heaps. At a table sprawled a queer, misshapen figure
that suggested human origin. Both of its hands were burned to cinders
to the elbows. Great holes were scorched into the clothes. But the
face was recognizable. Tony's playthings had got him at last.

"Looks like something's happened in here!" Phil gasped, in amazement.

"I'll bet it has, too," Ione exclaimed. "This is the first time it
occurred to me that our recoil from throwing the safe overboard and
the oscillation of our space-segment must have created a tremendous
electrical field in the tetra-ordinate apparatus. The reaction is
reversible, you see. The field swings the space-segment, or the
swinging of the space-segment creates the field. And the field was too
much for Tony."

At this point the door fell under the blows of the police, and the
raiding squad rushed into the room.

       *       *       *       *       *







End of Project Gutenberg's The Einstein See-Saw, by Miles John Breuer

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE EINSTEIN SEE-SAW ***

***** This file should be named 29060.txt or 29060.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/2/9/0/6/29060/

Produced by Sankar Viswanathan, Greg Weeks, and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.net/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
