professor from the cabin.

"Joan!" he gasped.

"Present!" she replied.

"But, my daughter!" the professor's voice broke in. "My dear child!" A
sob shook him. "Why, why, this is--"

"Please don't let's talk about it!" she begged, giving his arm a
little pat. "I'm here and it can't be helped now. I was only afraid
you'd find me before it was too late and take me back."

Then, edging over to Jim and slipping her arm in his, she murmured:

"Oh, my dear! Don't you see I couldn't stay behind? I had to be with
you at the end, Jimmy, if--"

"It won't be!" he cried, pressing her cold hand. "It can't be!"

Then he turned to give his attention to her father, who had already
mounted to the cockpit and was working absorbedly over his mechanism
in the pale light of the coming day.

Any moment, Jim knew, those flaming termites might discover them, and
come swooping down. With keen eyes he scanned the horizon. No sign of
them yet.

"How are you up there?" he called.

"About ready," was the reply. "But I shall want more light than this
for my mirrors."

Tensely, counting the seconds, they waited for the sunrise....

       *       *       *       *       *

And now, as they waited, suddenly a sinister tinge of orange suffused
the rosy hues of the east.

"The Fire Ants!" cried Joan, shrinking. "They've seen us! They're
coming!"

It was true, Jim saw with a heavy heart.

Turning to Professor Wentworth, he gasped out:

"Quick! We've got to do something! You've no idea how fast they move!"

"Very well." The professor's voice was strangely calm. "You may start
your motor. I shall do what I can. Though if we only had the sun--"

Jim leaped for the cabin.

A touch of the starter and the powerful engine came in. Braking his
wheels hard, to hold the plane on the ground, he advanced the throttle
as much as he dared, and sent a high-tension current surging through
the wires the professor had connected with his tube above.

Soon came that high, whining hum they had heard in the laboratory--a
thousand times magnified now--and the nib of the big tube glowed a
livid, eery green in the lemon dawn.

"Joan!" called her father sharply. "Get in the cabin with Jim!"

She did so, her eyes still fixed in horrified fascination on the
eastern horizon; and in that tense instant, she saw two things. First,
a great orange arc of fiery termites, bearing down on them; and
second, another arc, far greater--the vast saffron rim of the rising
sun.

Those two things Joan saw--and so did Jim--as their eardrums almost
burst with the stupendous vibration that came from the gun in the
cockpit. Then they saw a third, something that left them mute with
awe.

As Professor Wentworth swung his cannon ray upon that advancing horde,
it melted, vanished, leaving only the clear yellow of the morning
sunlight before their bewildered eyes.

       *       *       *       *       *

But the professor did not cease. For five minutes--ten, fifteen--he
swung that mighty ray around, stepping up its power, lengthening its
range, as it reached its invisible, annihilating arm farther and
farther out....

Meanwhile Jim was radio-phoning frantically. The air seemed strangely
full of static.

At last he got Overton of _The New York Press_.

"Carter speaking, out in Arizona," he said. "Getting any reports on
the ray?"

And back came the tremendous news:

"Results! Man, the world's crazy! They're gone--everywhere! Tell the
professor to lay off, before he sends us scooting too."

"Right!" said Jim, cutting his motor. "More later!"

And to Professor Wentworth he called:

"All right, that's enough! That ray was stronger than you knew!"

But there came no answer, and mounting to the wing-tip, Joan
following, Jim saw a sight that froze him with horror. They beheld the
professor, slumped against the tube, his whole body glowing a pale,
fluorescent green.

"Father!" screamed Joan, rushing to his side. "Oh, Father!"

The man stirred, motioned her away, gasped weakly:

"Do not touch me, child--until the luminosity goes. I am highly
radio-active. I had no time to--insulate the tube. No time to find out
how. Had to--hurry--"

His voice waned off and they knew he was dead. The two stood there
stunned by the realization of his great sacrifice.

He and Joan had set forth on this venture knowing they stood at least
a chance, thought Jim, but Professor Wentworth had known from the
start that it was sure death for him.

       *       *       *       *       *

The sun stood out above the eastern horizon like a huge gold coin,
bright with the promise of life to spend, when Jim and Joan took off
at last for the return home; but the radiance of the morning was
dimmed by the knowledge of the tragic burden they bore.

For some moments, as they winged on, both were silent.

"Look!" said Jim at length. "Look ahead, Joan!"

She looked, brightened somewhat.

"Yes, I see."

And after a moment, lifting her hazel eyes to his, she said. "Oh,
Jimmy, I'm sure it means happiness for us."

"Yes, I'm sure!"

She stirred, moved closer.

"Jimmy, you--you're all I have now."

He made no reply, save to press her trembling hand. But it was enough.

Silently, understandingly, they winged onward into the morning light.





End of Project Gutenberg's Spawn of the Comet, by Harold Thompson Rich

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK SPAWN OF THE COMET ***

***** This file should be named 29027.txt or 29027.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/2/9/0/2/29027/

Produced by Greg Weeks, Barbara Tozier and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.
