
Our trebly resilient heavy kit is the _ne plus ultra_ of comfort and
safety.

Gas-buoyed, waterproof, hail-proof, non-conducting Flickers with pipe
and nozzle fitting all types of generator. Graduated tap on left hip.

   =Hansen's Flickers Lead the Aerial Flight=
   =197 Oxford Street=

    The new weighted Flicker with tweed or cheviot surface cannot
    be distinguished from the ordinary suit till inflated.

   Flickers!    Flickers!    Flickers!




APPLIANCES FOR AIR PLANES


What

"SKID"

was to our forefathers on the ground,

"PITCH"

is to their sons in the air.

The popularity of the large, unwieldy, slow, expensive Dirigible over
the light, swift Plane is mainly due to the former's immunity from
pitch.

Collison's forward-socketed Air Van renders it impossible for any plane
to pitch. The C. F. S. is automatic, simple as a shutter, certain as a
power hammer, safe as oxygen. Fitted to any make of plane.

   COLLISON
   186 Brompton Road
   _Workshops_, _Chiswick_

   LUNDIE & MATHERS
   Sole Agts for East'n Hemisphere

       *       *       *       *       *

Starters and Guides

Hotel, club, and private house plane-starters, slips and guides affixed
by skilled workmen in accordance with local building laws.

Rackstraw's forty-foot collapsible steel starters with automatic release
at end of travel--prices per foot run, clamps and crampons included. The
safest on the market.

   _Weaver & Denison
   Middleboro_




AIR PLANES AND DIRIGIBLE GOODS


_=Remember=_

   =Planes are swift--so is Death=
   =Planes are cheap--so is Life=

_Why_ does the 'plane builder insist on the safety of his machines?

Methinks the gentleman protests too much.

The Standard Dig Construction Company do not build kites.

They build, equip and guarantee dirigibles.

=_Standard Dig Construction Co._=

Millwall _and_ Buenos Ayres

       *       *       *       *       *

Remember

We shall always be pleased to see you.

We build and test and guarantee our dirigibles for all purposes. They go
up when you please and they do not come down till you please.

You can please yourself, but--you might as well choose a dirigible.

=STANDARD DIRIGIBLE CONSTRUCTION CO.=

Millwall _and_ Buenos Ayres

       *       *       *       *       *

HOVERS

   POWELL'S
   Wind Hovers

for 'planes tying-to in heavy weather, save the motor and strain on the
forebody. Will not send to leeward. "Albatross" wind-hovers,
rigid-ribbed; according to h. p. and weight.

     _We fit and test free to 40 deg. east of Greenwich_

   L. & W. POWELL
   196 Victoria Street, W

       *       *       *       *       *

Gayer & Hutt

   Birmingham AND Birmingham
      Eng.           Ala.

   Towers, Landing Stages,
   Slips and Lifts
   public and private

Contractors to the A. B. C., South-Western European Postal Construction
Dept.

Sole patentees and owners of the Collison anti-quake diagonal tower-tie.
Only gold medal Kyoto Exhibition of Aerial Appliances, 1997.




AIR PLANES AND DIRIGIBLES


C. M. C.

   Our Synthetical Mineral
   BEARINGS

are chemically and crystallogically identical with the minerals whose
names they bear. Any size, any surface. Diamond, Rock-Crystal, Agate and
Ruby Bearings--cups, caps and collars for the higher speeds.

For tractor bearings and spindles--Imperative.

For rear propellers--Indispensable.

For all working parts--Advisable.

   Commercial Minerals Co.
   107 Minories

       *       *       *       *       *

Resurgam!

IF YOU HAVE NOT CLOTHED YOURSELF IN A

   Normandie
   Resurgam

YOU WILL PROBABLY NOT BE INTERESTED IN OUR NEXT WEEK'S LIST OF AIR-KIT.

Resurgam Air-Kit Emporium

HYMANS & GRAHAM

   1198
   Lower Broadway, New York

       *       *       *       *       *

Remember!

¶ It is now nearly a century since the Plane was to supersede the
Dirigible for all purposes.

¶ TO-DAY _none_ of the Planet's freight is carried _en plane_.

¶ Less than two per cent. of the Planet's passengers are carried _en
plane_.

_We design, equip and guarantee Dirigibles for all purposes._

Standard Dig Construction Company

MILLWALL and BUENOS AYRES




BAT-BOATS


[Illustration]

Flint & Mantel

Southampton

FOR SALE

at the end of Season the following Bat-Boats:

=GRISELDA=, 65 knt., 42 ft., 430 (nom.) Maginnis Motor, under-rake rudder.

=MABELLE=, 50 knt., 40 ft., 310 Hargreaves Motor, Douglas' lock-steering
gear.

=IVEMONA=, 50 knt., 35 ft., 300 Hargreaves (Radium accelerator), Miller
keel and rudder.

The above are well known on the South Coast as sound, wholesome
knockabout boats, with ample cruising accommodation. _Griselda_ carries
spare set of Hofman racing vans and can be lifted three foot clear in
smooth water with ballast-tank swung aft. The others do not lift clear
of water, and are recommended for beginners.

Also, by private treaty, racing B. B. _Tarpon_ (76 winning flags) 137
knt., 60 ft.; Long-Davidson double under-rake rudder, new this season
and unstrained. 850 nom. Maginnis motor, Radium relays and Pond
generator. Bronze breakwater forward, and treble reinforced forefoot and
entry. Talfourd rockered keel. Triple set of Hofman vans, giving maximum
lifting surface of 5327 sq. ft.

_Tarpon_ has been lifted _and held_ seven feet for two miles between
touch and touch.

_Our Autumn List of racing and family Bats ready on the 9th January._




AIR PLANES AND STARTERS


