Darkness came. Dusk swallowed the wheeling machine-monsters. All night
Larry and Agnes waited silently, together on the great anvil,
listening to the hissing of steam from above, which was slowly
becoming a shrill monotonous scream; monotonous, always higher,
shriller.

The "sun" rose again. Still the green-winged monsters wheeled about.
They came in glittering swarms, thousands of them. They came nearer
the machine now, and flew about more swiftly, is if excited.

       *       *       *       *       *

Then it happened.

There was a roar like thunder, and a colossal, bellowing explosion.
The air was filled suddenly with scalding steam, and with screaming
fragments of the bursting steam chest. In the midst of it all, Larry
felt a crushing blow upon the head. And a blanket of darkness fell
upon him....

"The monsters are all gone, darling," Agnes' voice reached him. "As
though they were very much frightened. And a piece of the old hammer
hit the fence and knocked a hole in it. You must go. Leave me--"

"Leave you?" Larry groaned, struggling to sit up. "Not a bit of it!"
He touched his head gingerly, felt a swollen bruise.

Collecting a few fragments of the wrecked machine, to serve as tools,
he fell to work again upon Agnes' remaining chain. Already he had cut
a deep groove in it. Two hours later, it was broken.

Carrying the metal urn of brownish liquid, they crept out through the
hole in the fence, which had been torn by the flying fragment of a
broken casting of green metal. They left the wreck of the machine
which a strange race had worshiped as a bloody god and hurried
furtively into the desert of red sand.

Making a wide circuit about the fantastic city of green metal, which
Larry had seen from the air, they struck out eastward across the
desolate ocherous waste. The food in the urn, eaten sparingly, lasted
until the end of the eighth day.

On the morning of the ninth, they came in view of the green line of
the ancient canal. It was hours later that they staggered weakly over
its wall of crumbling masonry, clambered down into the muddy,
weed-grown channel, and drank thirstily of green, tepid water.

Larry found his old trail, beyond the canal. They followed it back. In
the middle of the afternoon they stumbled up to the thicket of spiky
desert growth, in which Larry had hidden the plane.

The machine was undamaged.

       *       *       *       *       *

Before sunset, Larry had removed the stake ropes, slipped the canvas
cover from the motor, turned the plane around, inspected it, and
examined the strip of smooth, hard red sand upon which he had landed.

Agnes pointed out the dim band of crimson across the sky, from north
to south, slowly rising toward the zenith.

"That's the red ray," she said. "We fly into it."

"And a happy moment when we do," Larry rejoined.

He roused the motor to life.

As the bar of crimson light neared the zenith, the plane rolled
forward across the sand and took off. Climbing steeply, Larry
anxiously watched the approach of the red band. The gravitation of the
Pygmy Planet seemed to diminish as he gained altitude, until presently
he could fly vertically from it, without circling at all. He set the
bow toward the scarlet bar across the sky before him.

And suddenly he was flying through ruby flame.

His eyes went to the little scale at the corner of the instrument
board. He saw the little ebon needle waver, leave the mark designated
"Pygmy Planet Normal" and start toward "Earth Normal."

For what seemed a long time, he was wheeling down the crimson ray. A
few times he looked back at Agnes, in the rear seat. She had gone to
sleep.

Then a vast, circular field was below--the crystal platform.

Larry landed the plane upon it, taxied to the center and stopped
there, with the motor idling. The laboratory, taking shape in the blue
abyss about him, seemed to contract swiftly.

       *       *       *       *       *

Presently the plane covered most of the crystal disk. He taxied
quickly off, stopped on the floor nearby, and cut the ignition. Agnes
woke. Together they clambered from the plane's cabin and walked back
into the crimson ray.

Once more the vast spaces of the room seemed to shrink, until it
looked familiar once more. The Pygmy Planet, and the huge machine
looming ever them, dwindled to natural size.

Agnes, watching a scale on the frame of the mechanism, which Larry had
not noticed, leaped suddenly from the red ray, drawing him with her.

"We don't want to be giants!" she laughed.

Larry drew a deep breath, and looked about him. Once more he was in
his own world, and surveying it in his normal size. He became aware of
Agnes standing close against him. He suddenly took her in his arms and
kissed her.

"Wait a minute," she objected, slipping quickly from his arms. "What
are we going to do about the Pygmy Planet? Those monsters might come
again, even if you did wreck their god. And Dr. Whiting, poor
fellow--But we mustn't let those monsters come back!"

Larry doubled up a brown fist and drove it with all his strength
against the little globe that spun so steadily between the twin,
upright cylinders of crimson and of violet flame. His hand went deep
into it. And it swung from its position, hung unsteadily a moment, and
then crashed to the laboratory floor. It was crushed like a ball of
soft brown mud. It spattered.

"Now I guess they won't come back," Agnes said. "A pity to spoil all
Dr. Whiting's work, though."

Larry was standing motionless, holding up his fist and looking at it
oddly. "I smashed a planet! Think of it. I smashed a planet! Just the
other--why it was just this evening, at the office, I was wishing for
something to happen!"

       *       *       *       *       *






End of Project Gutenberg's The Pygmy Planet, by John Stewart Williamson

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE PYGMY PLANET ***

***** This file should be named 29177.txt or 29177.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/2/9/1/7/29177/

Produced by Sankar Viswanathan, Greg Weeks, and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
