"That's right, it's entirely in ECAIAC's lap. You wouldn't want to
deprive her of the chance, now would you?"

"But--but what are you going to _do_?"

"Me? I'm going to watch. I'm going to watch one of the epic events of
our time--" For a moment Beardsley was solemn, almost shocked, as a
thought struck him. "In a way it will be sad. Yes, it will! ECAIAC is
about to lose her first case."

Now that was strange. Why should he have said such a thing? _Why ... now
that the game was over which had had to be played, and he felt the
bitter-sweet surge of victory that lay throbbing at his grasp!_ About to
lose her first case....

He shrugged in remote annoyance and strode away from Pederson. It would
be fast now! Already the rejects were falling, the irrelevants, as
ECAIAC with blithe unconcern brought the final equate toward conclusion.
He observed Jeff Arnold, standing silent and alert but so devoid of all
emotion that somehow it wasn't real ... and Mandleco, half crouched,
teeth gnawing away at the cigar, his heavy face rapacious and eager as
he awaited the final tape; that was all that mattered now; the
MATHEMATICS would register, CODE would add synaptic approval, and proof
indisputable would be on that tape in clean translated print--the name
of Carmack's killer.

Indisputable? Bowing his head, Beardsley smiled, and listened to the
smooth rhythmic control. Nothing sinister now! No snapping malevolence!
All those other times ... his unreasoning panic, the askance remarks
from Arnold, the humiliation ... the very thought of it now was gibing
and obscene. How could he ever have been caught up in such a thrall of
terror?

It wasn't terror he felt now. Something.... His smile turned to a giggle
as he felt a sudden compelling impulse to pat ECAIAC on the head!

       *       *       *       *       *

Now how would one do THAT? Never mind. Never mind, never mind, never
again are you going to snap at _me_, Ekky. We were introduced, remember?
We're really great friends now.

For a moment Beardsley was suspended in astonishment, aware that he had
almost crooned the thought. He glanced around in embarrassment--

Pederson was watching him. Pederson was at his side again, perplexed and
frowning. "Beardsley--this business of Sheila and Arnold. It wouldn't
happen that way, it couldn't! There's another answer, there's _got_ to
be--"

Beardsley stood unmoving, oblivious. Almost, he seemed suspended in
another dimension; almost, he caught the quivering of a mind but could
not separate it from the sudden tremor that rose in his own....

He couldn't avoid it. It came unbidden, it battered through his reason,
it towered there and blotted out his thoughts until all that was left
was a tremulous regret, an attrite compassion.

About to lose her first case ... _but one loses! And one survives it,
you know, one survives it! For twelve years now...._

       *       *       *       *       *

More than a tremor now. More than compassion now. A sense of betrayal
almost, illogical and nameless and yet palpable as the scent of fear.
There was a pulse of red darkness in Beardsley's brain as all the mental
and emotional equations of his being sang a sharp alarm. For subtly,
ever so subtly ECAIAC's deep-throated tone had changed ... nothing like
those other times, rather it was a halting stutter of puzzlement,
erratic and querulous, with overtones of immediacy as if some formless
presence were on the verge of unleashing.

Beardsley looked down at his hands, and they were trembling. He could
not stop the trembling. A tightness took him about the heart, and behind
his eyes that pulse of red darkness presaged the beginning of a violent
headache.

Even the others noticed it now, something amiss. Jeff Arnold especially.
He looked up in quick alarm at the equate-panel where the mathematics
seemed to have gone a little fitful, a little frantic, with stuttery
lapses in progression as if ECAIAC were unable or unwilling to confront.

The flux of pattern dimmed, then hesitated; blanked out and heroically
began anew.

It happened suddenly, then. It happened as the techs came crowding
around. There came a quivering, a sort of shudder, and ECAIAC subsided
with a final weary gasp. It was for all the world as if she were saying,
"This is it, boys. I've had it!"

But it was there, it was there! All at once every symbol was constant,
static and livid upon the screen, enhanced by the words
EQUATE--COMPLETE--EQUATE--COMPLETE. In that moment every tech in the
room must have felt a touch of pride.

A click, a whirr, and it was done. The fateful tape ejected.

Both Mandleco and Arnold leaped for it, but Arnold was there first. He
ripped the tape clear and then paused, hand outflung, as if he could not
resist this final bit of drama.

"Well? Well, Arnold?" Mandleco was hopping ludicrously about in an agony
of impatience.

Arnold nodded. He brought the tape to his scrutiny. His mouth opened,
then shut again as a shudder seized him. Once more he read it, a look of
wild disbelief on his face ... he staggered, and seemed about to cry or
go hysterical or both.

Mandleco gave a snort as he pounced, recovered the tape and with blunt
assurance read the words aloud:

"SOLUTION : UNTENABLE : SOLUTION : UNTENABLE : SUB-CIRCUIT REFERRAL :
ELLERY SHERLOCK : SUB-CIRCUIT REFERRAL: ELLERY SHERLOCK--"

He sounded like a well-grooved parrot. Mandleco turned east, then south,
then south-by-east, like a compass on a binge; he looked as if he wanted
to roar, but his voice came out as a frantic bleat: "Why, this is crazy!
Goddam it, it's crazy! Do you realize what this will--" He confronted
Arnold wildly. "What the hell does it MEAN, I say! Untenable? And who
the hell is _Ellery Sherlock...!_"

He got no response; Jeff Arnold was oblivious to the moment, a man
utterly defeated, beyond solace or action or answer ... but already a
few of his techs were huddled about the panel, consulting, viewing the
Equate Constant and frantically taking notes. Mandleco shoved his way
through them. "I demand to know the meaning of this!" he yelped.

       *       *       *       *       *

It was Sheila Carmack who answered, her voice on the high edge of
hysteria. "_Meaning?_ I think it might mean," she said, "that ECAIAC has
also had a recent indulgence for the _whodunits_. But with a smattering
of confusion, wouldn't you say? Or would you say a distortion of the
detectival? Perhaps a disenchantment," she murmured ... this was too
absurd, too delicious. "Ellery Sherlock!" she choked, and the thought of
it seemed to break her up.

In the general hysteria they paid no heed to Raoul Beardsley. He had
regained his composure, and far down in his eyes something leaped into
rapt expression; he adjusted his glasses and peered around cautiously,
beaming. He beamed at them all, and had to suppress an inane glee....

Not glee as he observed Pederson, who stood there scowling into space
as though at some incredible absurdity. Suddenly Pederson straightened,
and there was something strangely different ... his gaze as it met
Beardsley's was neither shocked nor accusing but held an expression of
boundless sadness.

_So Pederson knew. At last the poor fellow had found that other
answer...._ Beardsley had been expecting it. He could almost sense the
man's thoughts going to and fro, like a shuttle, weaving all the facts
into fabric....

And Pederson's voice, ineffably sad now, regretful now: "So I was right
the first time. The tapes. It _was_ the tapes. But even without that I
ought to have known! The answer was there, you handed it to us, but it
was like looking straight into the sun--"

He paused. Did he expect Beardsley to say something? Beardsley looked up
at him and blinked.

       *       *       *       *       *

"_Motives_," Pederson said accusingly. "There was your theme from the
first! You were relentless, you pursued it to perfection, you laid our
motives bare and you beat them raw, each and every one. Oh, I grant you
it was masterful! It was the Beardsley of old! You managed to keep us
off balance every moment--" He wet his lips. "What was it, Beardsley? A
compulsion, some grotesque need to squeeze us all down to microscopic
size first? Oh, you enjoyed doing that! I watched you. You enjoyed it in
a way that--" He shook his head, glanced sorrowfully at the
equate-panel. "And this ... was it all for this? An achievement--an
absurdity. Ellery Sherlock!" he said with a shudder. "In Heaven's name,
WHY? You didn't really expect to carry it off? No, don't answer! It's
not important now--"

Beardsley shrugged in remote annoyance. Must the man use such puerile
methods?

"Not important," Pederson repeated, and stood caught in a startled
wonderment. "Because you see, Beardsley, I just happen to remember
something from the _whodunits_! That surprises you? So long ago, I can't
quite recall who said it; but it was a rather good exposition of logic,
something to the effect that when you've exhausted the possible, all the
possible--that which remains--_no matter how impossible it may
seem_--must be the truth!"

His head lifted; his gaze bored into Beardsley's and his voice was
tight with meaning. "And I'd say we have come full circle, wouldn't you?
You will have to admit, you did a _real good job of eliminating_!"

Beardsley managed to smile, even as his mind jarred a little. Even as he
met Pederson's gaze and saw the compassion there, the acceptance there,
the understanding and boundless regret. For a split second something
leaped unspoken between them, as if doors in both their minds had opened
and closed again.

He turned away wordlessly. Close as Pederson had come, even he was an
irrelevance now. _But ECAIAC didn't_ know. Poor Ekky! Her first real
failure, a fiasco--she really deserved a better fate. Beardsley's heart
went out to her, as he observed Arnold in his defeat and Mandleco in his
frustration and the huddle of techs in their futile efforts.

Suddenly then--"Code!" he heard one of them say, gesturing excitedly.
"Post-subjective synapse!" another tech yelled, and there was a sudden
scurry of activity about the screen. Without warning or appreciable
reason those symbols had begun to shift ... wild and elusive, ghost
patterns without semblance or sense, but so unmistakable that even Jeff
Arnold was jarred alert; Arnold stared, then suddenly was white as chalk
as he ploughed into the midst of his techs.

Beardsley stood frozen, a fatuous smile about his lips; there was only
silence now, a silence that had a pulse in it--the beating of his heart.
Seconds only ... suddenly there was another pulse, from another heart.
ECAIAC wasn't quite finished! Unerring and resolute the sound came up,
slowly at first and then faster, gathering strength into a steady drone
as if every synapse were dredging, dredging deep into the sensitized
structure ... and even before the panel attained flux again, a tech was
waving his notes and yelling, "It's true! Post-subjective synapse!
Unbelievable ... Jeff, we now have a Constant!"

But ECAIAC was telling them that. The sound went on, and on, wild and
lone and constant, ascending to the confines of the room, transcending
the confines of reason. It was crescendo incarnate; it was purpose gone
rife; it was human and more than human, with all the fears and hopes and
hates, as it attained a high-pitched scream with wailing overtones such
as even Arnold had never heard. There was sentience in it, there was
awareness in it, there was fury in it and who could say if there was
grief...? There might have been.

Only Beardsley knew. He felt suddenly packed in ice, from his lips to
the pit of his belly; he revolved slowly away, took a few steps and
caught the edge of the panel. His whole body began to shake
uncontrollably and his lips moved in a soundless whisper that seemed to
say, "No, no ... don't you understand? ... we're friends now!"

But no one heard; no one would have understood. Arnold handled the tape
as it came looping out. The words fell slowly at first, then faster and
faster in constant repeat: CANCEL LAST EQUATE--SOLUTION TENABLE--CANCEL
LAST EQUATE--SOLUTION TENABLE--

Another word came, a single word. Arnold stiffened. One of the techs was
so indiscreet as to exclaim: "_Murderer?_ Where did it pick up that
word! 'Final Equate' is proper...."

A space, a whirr, and the rest of it came in a clicking rush against the
high-pitched scream: MURDERER--RAOUL BEARDSLEY--MURDERER--RAOUL
BEARDSLEY--MURDERER--RAOUL--MURDERER--MURDERER--incessant, untiring.

       *       *       *       *       *

There was no trial. Trial presupposes a modicum of doubt, and Beardsley
dispelled that readily enough. Once more the pathetic figure, it was as
if he were impelled by a dull and pitiless logic; he waived all defense;
his confession to the murder of Amos Carmack was straightforward and
factual, unvarying to the point of boredom, insistent with
repetition--and in the socio-legal aspect there was the rub! Whether it
was true psychic shock or mere cunning, there seemed to be a blind spot
in Beardsley's responses, a stumbling reticence to elaborative detail
that left the Citizen's Disposition Council with a problem on its hands
baffling as it was unprecedented. Judicially they were safe. There would
not even be need of null-censor. But actually, the problem here was of
far more vital consequence than murder and indeed more frightening; it
had to do with Beardsley _vs._ ECAIAC, the encompassing _modus operendi_
and all the implications of that grotesque denouement.

At whatever cost, _these things had to be answered_.

Oh, there was amusement, too. The fact that Minister-of-Justice
Mandleco had begged off, far from gracefully, and retired to the
isolation of his ten-thousand-acre Alaskan ranch (for an unspecified
time) had brought snickers from those in the know.

The Chief-Counselor of Disposition looked as if he'd like to retire,
too. For the third time in as many days he took his place in the Private
Sessions chamber, glanced at Beardsley with shuddering disbelief and
then bent his head in pontifical guise as he leafed through his notes;
it wasn't as if he were unversed in the matter by now, but who was there
to question if his lips moved fretfully across the words "Ellery
Sherlock?" He was thinking: _yesterday wasted--covert regression, myself
included--no more of that_! And with that bolstering thought he brought
his head up sharply.

COUNSELOR: Our task for today--(_voice quavering, he saved it from the
upper registers_). Our task for today is to get at the aggregate
pattern. And I assure you, gentlemen, we are going to do that! Now. Mr.
Pederson, if you please....

PEDERSON: Yes, sir?

COUNSELOR: I see that Mr. Beardsley made certain statements to you, and
to you alone, immediately after the--uh--ECAIAC incident--

PEDERSON: You saw that three days ago! Must we go through it again?

COUNSELOR: We must and we shall! Due to the unnatural tenor of the case,
