
Sime, watching indifferently, caught his breath. It seemed to him that
he knew this girl, who appeared to be walking toward him up a stately
garden alley. She came steadily forward with a queenly, effortless
stride. And now it seemed as if she had seen him, for she turned and
looked straight into his eyes. It seemed that her expression changed
from laughing to pleading. And he recognized the girl with the
stiletto whom he had caught in his hotel room.

He said nothing, however. He could hardly explain the feeling of
sadness that came over him. He stood silent, while the others
commented excitedly over the overshadowing war news.

"It's all in the box," Tuman said gloomily. "Many times I've helped
cook up something like this. The boys in the central offices are
laughing, or swearing, as the cast may be. The poor devils don't own
their own souls, if they're equipped with any. I'd rather be here,
expecting to be thrown into a cell by daylight!" He shivered in the
night chill.

They ran into a little luck when they needed it most. A roving taxi
swooped down upon them, hailed them for fares. They flew the rest of
the way in. Their luck held. A city policeman, noting their stumbling
walk as they lurched into a cheap hotel, did not trouble them for
their passes. He had seen many such men that night, soldier and
civilian, with clothes bloody and torn. The excitement of the day,
coupled with the fact that nearly everyone carried arms, had led to
numerous fights, not a few of which ended fatally.

"Merclite!" grinned the policeman, suppressing a hiccup of his own.
"And besides, that big 'un would make two of me."




CHAPTER X

_One Thousand to One_


The scheme that Sira had imparted to Wasil was simple--simple and
direct. Moreover, it was sure, provided it succeeded. Its execution
was something else again. Its chances were, mathematically expressed,
about as follows:

If every single detail worked as expected, a great and smashing
success. Ratio: 1:1,000.

If one single detail failed, immediate and certain death for Wasil.
Ratio: 1,000:1.

The princess knew that the power of Wilcox, his supporting oligarchy
and the interplanetary bankers, was all based on the skilful use of
propaganda. If the people of Mars and of Earth knew the forces that
were influencing them, their revulsion would be swift and terrible.
There would be no war. There would be events painful and disastrous to
their present rulers, but a great betterment of humanity's condition.

The key to the situation was the news monopoly, the complete control
of all broadcasting--of the stereo-screens, the teletabloids--that
colored all events to suit the ends of the ruling group. The people of
Mars as well as of Earth were capable of intelligent decision, of
straight thinking, but they rarely had an opportunity to learn the
truth.

They had now, by a knowing play on their emotions, directed by
psychologists, been wrought to a point of frenzy where they demanded
war. Their motives were of the highest in many individuals--pure
patriotism, the desire to make the solar system safe for civilization.
The bright, flaming spirit of self-sacrifice burned clear above the
haze and smoke of passion.

What would happen if all these eager millions of two neighboring
planets were to learn the true state of affairs? Sira knew what
transpired in those secret conventions, when double guards stood at
all doors and at the infrequent windows; when all communication was
cut off and the twin lenses of the telestereos and the microphones
were dead. Prince Joro had told her, with weary cynicism. But Joro had
also told her that the oligarchs guarded this vital and vulnerable
point with painstaking care.

       *       *       *       *       *

Sira had reached inside their first defense, however. Wasil was loyal
to his salt, but he had both loyalty and affection for Princess Sira.
As the day of the interplanetary financial conference leaped into
being, he was on his way to the executive hall that lay resplendently
on the south canal bank, ready to lay down his life.

The hall proper was really only the west wing of the magnificent,
high-arched building. Its brilliant, polished metal facade reflected
the light of the rising Sun redly. The east wing, besides housing
various minor executive offices, also contained the complicated
apparatus for handling the propaganda broadcastings. On the roof,
towering high into the air, was a huge, globular structure, divided
into numerous zones, from which were sent various wave bands to the
news screens both on Mars and on Earth. The planetary rulers had taken
no chances of tampering with their propaganda. The central offices,
where news and propaganda were dramatized, were in another building,
but as everything from that source had to pass the reviewing officer,
a trusted member of the oligarchy himself, in his locked and guarded
office, this did not introduce any danger of the wrong information
going out to the public.

When Wasil reached the broadcasting plant, he was admitted by four
armed guards. He locked the door behind him, to find his associates
already busy, testing circuits and apparatus. Stimson, the chief
engineer, was sitting at his desk studying orders.

       *       *       *       *       *

A few minutes later he called the men to him. There were three others
besides Wasil: young Martians, keen, efficient, and, like most
technies, loyal to the government that employed them.

"Sure are careful to-day," Stimson grunted, scratching his snow-white
hair, which was stiffly upstanding and showed a coral tinge from his
scalp. "Must be mighty important to get this out right. Wilcox
personally wrote the order. If any man fumbles to-day, it's the polar
penal colony for him!" The Sun-loving old Martian shivered.

"And here's another bright idea. Only one man's to be allowed in the
plant after the circuits are all tested! How'n the name of Pluto will
he handle things if a fuse blows? But what do they care about that!
We're technies! We're supposed to know everything, and never have
anything go wrong!"

"But why only one man?" cried Scarba, one of the associate engineers.
"It's asking too much! I'll not take it on, far as I'm concerned. My
resignation will be ready soon's I can get a blank!"

"I too! I'm with you, Scarba!" "We work like dogs to get everything in
first-line condition, and then--" The hard-working and uncomplaining
technies were outspoken in their resentment.

"Oh, I see your point," Stimson agreed. "I could stand Balta, but
Wilcox is just one too many for me. But do you boys think for one
minute we could get away with a strike?" He laughed angrily. "I can
remember when the technies were able to demand their guild rights. But
you boys weren't even born then. Now, let's get this straight:

"We are going to do just as we are told. Wilcox, of course, never
explains an order, but the reason for having only one operator on the
job is simply to concentrate responsibility on that one man. There
will be no excuse if he fails. Before the convention starts, and after
it is over, there will be a message to send out. The convention itself
will be secret, as usual. During the convention, there will be some
kind of filler stuff from the central office."

"Yeh!" snorted one of the men. "That's the dope, all right. One of us
is stuck, but if it's me I'll walk out and head for the desert."

       *       *       *       *       *

Stimson looked at him with a sardonic smile. "I forgot to mention: the
doors will be locked and barred, and of course there's no such thing
as windows."

Wasil whistled. "They're sure careful. Well, Stimson. I haven't a
thing to do all day. I'll take it on."

They all looked at him, not sure that they had heard him right.

"What's the matter, sonny?" Stimson said slowly. "Too much Merclite
last night? You're shaking!"

"It's an opening!" Wasil insisted.

"An opening to tramp ice at the pole for the rest of your life!"

"All right. I'll chance it!"

They consented, without very much argument, to let Wasil have the
dangerous responsibility. At 2:30, two and a half hours after sunrise
by the Martian reckoning, he signed a release acknowledging all
circuits to be in proper order, and was locked behind the heavy doors,
alone with a maze of complicated apparatus and cables that filled the
large room from floor to ceiling.

Now it was done! Chance had thrown Wasil into a position where he
could, without great danger of failure, carry out his plan. But at the
same time things had so fallen that he, Wasil, must now die,
regardless of the outcome!

If he succeeded in broadcasting the proceedings of the convention, and
if they had the effect of arousing the public against Wilcox, there
would still be no escape for Wasil. Wilcox, or Scar Balta, would come
straight for this prison, neuro-pistol or needle-ray in hand!

Even if he should fail, death would be his portion for the attempt.

       *       *       *       *       *

So thinking, Wasil sat down and carefully re-checked the circuits. The
filler broadcast from central office must be sent to the twin cities
of Tarog. Otherwise the convention would learn too soon what was
happening, and would interrupt its business. The thousands who waited
outside on the broad terraces must be regaled with entertainment, as
had been originally planned.

But as for the rest of Mars, and Earth, they would get the truth for
once. Those bankers would speak frankly, in the snug isolation of the
hall. No supervision here. Conventions, empty politeness, would be
forgotten. Sharp tirades, biting facts, threats, veiled and open,
would pass across the table between these masters of money and men.

But this time they would be pitilessly bared to the worlds!

Feverishly, Wasil inspected the repeater. It was a little-used device
that would, an hour or two later, as desired, give out the words and
pictures fed into it. Although Tarog would not learn the convention's
secrets as quickly as the rest of Mars, or Earth, Tarog would learn.
Wasil threw over the links and clamped down the bolts with a grunt of
satisfaction. When a man is about to die, he wants to do his last job
well.

Suddenly a red light glowed, and a voice spoke.

"Special broadcast. Tarog circuit only!"

"Mornin', Lennings," Wasil remarked to the face in the screen. "All
set? Go ahead."

The central office man held up a thick bundle of I. P. scrip, smiled
pleasantly, saying:

"Somebody in North or South Tarog, or in the surrounding territory, is
going to be 100,000 I. P. dollars richer by to-morrow. How would you
like to have 100,000 dollars? You all would like this reward. It
represents the price of a snug little space cruiser for your family; a
new home on the canal; maybe an island of your own. It would take you
on a trip to the baths of Venus and leave you some money over. Of
course you all want this reward!

"Now, if you'll excuse me a moment--"

       *       *       *       *       *

The man's picture faded, and the screen glowed with the life and
beauty of Princess Sira--Sira, smiling and alluring.

"You all know this young lady," the announcer's voice went on. "The
beloved and lovable Sweetheart of Mars, the bride of Scar Balta--"

The Martian's sleek and well-groomed head appeared beside that of the
girl.

"--Scar Balta, whose services to Mars have been great beyond his
years; who, in the threatening war with Earth, would be one of our
greatest bulwarks of security."

The announcer's face appeared again, stern and sorrowful.

"A great disaster has befallen these lovers--and all the world loves a
lover, you know. Some thugs, believed by the police to be terrestrial
spies, have kidnapped the princess from the palace of her uncle,
Prince Joro of Hanlon. It is believed that they had drugged her and
hypnotized her, so that she has forgotten her duty to her lover and
her country."

The green light flashed, and Wasil broke the circuit. The central man
lingered a moment, favoring Wasil with a long wink.

"What a liar you're getting to be!" Wasil remarked coldly. But the
central man, not offended, laughed.

So they were offering a reward! And urging further treachery as an act
of patriotism! Wasil was not too much excited, however. The disguise
the princess had chosen would probably serve her well. Besides, she
had promised to keep in retirement as much as possible.

_Clack! Clack!_ The electrically controlled lock of the door was
opening. Only Wilcox knew the wave combination. Wasil felt a chill of
apprehension as the door opened and Scar Balta strode in. He was fully
armed, dressed in the military uniform; but the former colonel was now
wearing on his shoulder straps the concentric rings denoting a
general's rank.




CHAPTER XI

_Giant Against Giant_


Although Princess Sira had promised to keep out of the way, she could
not resist the powerful attraction of the executive hall, in which, on
this day, the fate of two planets was to be decided. As the crowds of
people began to drift toward the hall, she joined them, still dressed
in her laboring man's shapeless garments, the broad sun-helmet hiding
her face effectively. Her long, black hair was concealed under the
clothing. Having nearly been drawn into a brawl the day before, she
now carried a stained but still very serviceable short sword that she
had purloined from a merclite-drunken reveler in a gutter.

Thousands were already on the terraces surrounding the government
buildings. They were milling about, for it was still too soon after
the night's chill to sit down or lie on the rubbery red sward. Taxis
were bringing swarms over the canal from North Tarog, and water
vehicles were crossing over in almost unbroken lines.

Already the merclite vendors were busy, making their surreptitious way
from group to group, selling the highly intoxicating and legally
proscribed gum that would lift the users from the sordid, miserable
plane of their daily existence to exalted, reckless heights.

War vessels now began to course overhead, their solid, heavily plated
hulls glinting dully in the sun. Their levitator helices moaned
dismally, and as their long, slanting shadows slid over the assembled
thousands, it seemed that they cast a prophetic pall; that there was a
hush of foreboding.

But the psychological expert high in a nearby tower immediately noted
the slump in the psycho-radiation meter whose trumpet-shaped antenna
pointed downward. At the turn of the dial the air was filled with
throbbing martial music, and the expert noted with contemptuous
satisfaction that the needle now stood even higher than before.

Sira, caught like all the rest of the people in that stirring flood of
music, felt her own pulse leap. But she thought:

"This is the day! Wasil, could I only be with you!"

She thought sadly of Joro, whose shrewd observations and counsel she
missed more than she had ever thought possible.

"Poor, dear Joro! You would be a better king than any man you could
ever find! I wish I could have done as you wished me to."

       *       *       *       *       *

There was a stir near the main entrance of the hall. A large private
yacht was slowly descending. She was bedecked with the green and gold
bunting of the terrestrial government, the green and orange of Mars.
Her hull glittered goldenly.

"Back!" shouted the captain of a Martian guard detail, the soldiers
running with pennant-decked ropes looping after them. The crowd surged
against the barrier, but more guards were sent out as reinforcements,
until they had cleared a space for the ship and a lane to the hall
entrance.

"Mars greets the distinguished guests from our sister planet!" boomed
the giant loudspeaker in the tower. Immediately afterward came the
strains of the song--"Terrestria--Fair Green Terrestria"--in a rushing
torrent of sound. But the frank and fluent melody was strangely
distorted, with unpleasant minor turns and harsh whisperings of
menace, and the tower psychologist noted a further rise of the needle.

There was a diversion of interest now. The mob of first arrivals, as
well as the ever-freshening stream of newcomers, was moving toward the
teletabloids and the more conservative stereo-screens. On this
occasion they were both carrying the same message, however. Sira heard
the propaganda division's latest fabrication about her alleged
kidnaping by terrestrial agents. She needed no radiation meter to tell
her of the intense wave of hatred for the Earth that swept over the
densely packed area. And this was followed by another emotion--a wave
of cupidity--set up by the offer of 100,000 I. P. dollars reward for
her return. She saw about her faces greedy, faces wistful, even
compassionate faces. But outnumbering them by far were faces set in
truculent mold.

       *       *       *       *       *

Sira moved restlessly from place to place, feeling more deeply
depressed with every moment. She felt as if she had been left entirely
out of life, friendless, alone. Among all these thousands she had no
friend. It seemed to her that never before had there been such a
paucity of monarchists. Sharp-featured, with a wire-drawn manner of
efficiency and resolution about them, they had constituted almost
another race among this practically enslaved people, maintaining for
themselves a tolerable position despite the opposition of the
oligarchy. Now, however, they seemed to have vanished. All that
morning Sira had not seen one. She would not have disclosed her
identity, but it would have been comforting to see one of those
friends of old.

She was stopped by a jam. Looking between the bodies of two large and
sweaty men, she realized that someone was standing on a surveyor's
marking block, delivering a speech.

"The great Pantheus has so decreed it," the speaker was shouting in a
cracked voice that at times dribbled into a whine. "We must shake off
forever this menace from the green planet--this planet dominated by
wicked women.

"Oh, my friends, last night they came to me in dreams, these pale
women of the green star. They tempted me and they mocked me. They laid
their cold hands on my throbbing brow, and their cold hands burned me!

"Oh great Pantheus! How I have suffered! The creatress who in her
malice created this wicked world beyond the gulf--"

The Martians were entertained by the quavering denunciation. Some
grinned broadly at one another; others placed their thumbs in their
ears and wiggled their fingers. But the old man continued. Finally,
two of the foremost spectators, sensing the tiny body crowded between
them, stepped aside.

"Don't miss this, my little man. Listen, and maybe you will laugh
yourself a little bigger." He gave Sira a gentle shove, so that she
almost stumbled over the block on which the speaker was standing.

       *       *       *       *       *

And that old man suddenly stopped talking, so that his toothless mouth
sucked in, then stood agape. The rheumy eyes rolled, and a wisp of
dirty gray hair strayed across his gnarled face. He lifted a shaking
hand, pointed a knotty finger.
