meadow-gift; but we find the flower less frequently in grassy
places than those who have waded into its favorite haunts could
wish.

Owing to the crested lip being oddly situated on the upper part
of the flower, which appears to be growing upside down in
consequence, one might suppose a visiting insect would not choose
to alight on it. The pretty club-shaped, vari-colored hairs,
which he may mistake for stamens, and which keep his feet from
slipping, irresistibly invite him there, however, when, presto!
down drops the fringed lip with startling suddenness. Of course,
the bee strikes his back against the column when he falls. Now,
there are two slightly upturned little wings on either side of
the column, which keep his body from slipping off at either side
and necessitate its exit from the end where the stigma smears it
with viscid matter. The pressure of the insect on this part
starts the pollen masses from their pocket just below; and as the
bee slides off the end of the column, the exposed, cobwebby
threads to which the pollen grains are attached cling to his
sticky body. The sticky substance instantly hardening, the pollen
masses, which are drawn out from their pocket as he escapes, are
cemented to his abdomen in the precise spot where they must
strike against the stigma of the next calopogon he tumbles in;
hence cross-fertilization results. What recompense does the bee
get for such rough handling? None at all, so far as is known. The
flower, which secretes no nectar, is doubtless one of those gay
deceivers that Sprengel named "Scheinsaftblumen," only it leads
its visitors to look for pollen instead of nectar, on the
supposition that the club-shaped hairs on the crests are stamens.
The wonder is that the intelligent little bees (a species of
Andrenidae), which chiefly are its Victims, have not yet learned
to boycott it.

"Calopogon," says Professor Robertson, who knows more about the
fertilization of American wild flowers by insects than most
writers, "is one of a few flowers which move the insect toward
the stigma.... There is no expenditure in keeping up a supply of
nectar, and the flower, although requiring a smooth insect of a
certain size and weight, suffers nothing from the visits of those
it cannot utilize. Then, there is no delay caused by the insect
waiting to suck; but as soon as it alights it is thrown down
against the stigma. This occurs so quickly that, while standing
net in hand, I have seen insects effect pollination and escape
before I could catch them. So many orchids fasten their pollinia
upon the faces and tongues of insects that it is interesting to
find one which applies them regularly to the first abdominal
segment. Mr. Darwin has observed that absence of hair on the
tongues of Lepidoptera (butterflies and moths) and on the faces
of Hymenoptera (bees; wasps, etc.) has led to the more usual
adaptations, and sparseness of hair has its influence in this
case. Species of Augochlora are the only insects on which I found
pollinia. These bees are very smooth, depending for ornament on
the metallic sheen of their bodies. An Halictus repeatedly pulled
down the labella (lips) of flowers from which pollinia had not
been removed; and the only reason I can assign for its failure to
extract pollinia is that it is more hairy than the Augochlora.


COMMON PERSICARIA, PINK KNOTWEED, or JOINT-WEED; SMARTWEED
  (Polygonum Pennsylvanicum)  Buckwheat family

Flowers - Very small, pink, collected in terminal, dense, narrow,
obtuse spikes, 1 to 2 in. long. Calyx pink or greenish, 5-parted,
like petals; no corolla; stamens 8 or less; style 2-parted. Stem:
1 to 3 ft. high, simple or branched, often partly red, the joints
swollen and sheathed; the branches above, and peduncles
glandular. Leaves: Oblong, lance-shaped, entire edged, 2 to 11
in. long, with stout midrib, sharply tapering at tip, rounded
into short petioles below.
Preferred Habitat - Waste places, roadsides, moist soil.
Flowering Season - July-October.
Distribution - Nova Scotia to the Gulf of Mexico; westward to
Texas and Minnesota.

Everywhere we meet this commonest of plants or some of its
similar kin, the erect pink spikes brightening roadsides, rubbish
heaps, fields, and waste places, from midsummer to frost. The
little flowers, which open without method anywhere on the spike
they choose, attract many insects, the smaller bees (Andrena)
conspicuous among the host. As the spreading divisions of the
perianth make nectar-stealing all too easy for ants and other
crawlers that would not come in contact with anthers and stigma
where they enter a flower near its base, most buckwheat plants
whose blossoms secrete sweets protect themselves from theft by
coating the upper stems with glandular hairs that effectually
discourage the pilferers. Shortly after fertilization, the little
rounded, flat-sided fruit begins to form inside the persistent
pink calyx. At any time the spike-like racemes contain more
bright pink buds and shining seeds than flowers. Familiarity
alone breeds contempt for this plant, that certainly possesses
much beauty.

The LADY'S THUMB (P. Persicaria), often a troublesome weed, roams
over the whole of North America, except at the extreme north -
another illustration of the riotous profusion of European floral
immigrants rejoicing in the easier struggle for existence here.
Its pink spikes are shorter and less slender than those of the
preceding taller, but similar species, and its leaves, which are
nearly seated on the stem, have dark triangular or lunar marks
near the center in the majority of cases.

An insignificant little plant, found all over our continent,
Europe, and Asia, is the familiar KNOT-GRASS or DOORWEED (P.
aviculare), often trailing its leafy, jointed stems over the
ground, but at times weakly erect, to display its tiny greenish
or white pink-edged flowers, clustered in the axils of oblong,
bluish-green leaves that are considerably less than an inch long.
Although in bloom from June to October, insects seldom visit it,
for it secretes very little, if any, nectar. As might be expected
in such a case, its stem is smooth.

When the amphibious WATER PERSICARIA (P. amphibium) lifts its
short, dense, rose-colored ovoid or oblong club of bloom above
ponds and lakes, it is sufficiently protected from crawling
pilferers, of course, by the water in which it grows. But suppose
the pond dries up and the plant is left on dry ground, what then?
Now, a remarkable thing happens: protective glandular, sticky
hairs appear on the epidermis of the leaves and stems, which were
perfectly smooth when the flowers grew in water. Such small
wingless insects as might pilfer nectar without bringing to their
hostess any pollen from other blossoms are held as fast as on
bird-lime. The stem, which sometimes floats, sometimes is
immersed, may attain a length of twenty feet; the rounded,
elliptic, petioled leaves may be four inches long or only half
that size. From Quebec to New Jersey, and westward to the
Pacific, the solitary, showy inflorescence, which does well to
attain a height of an inch, may be found during July and August.

Throughout the summer, narrow, terminal, erect, spike-like
racemes of small, pale pink, flesh-colored, or greenish flowers
are sent upward by the MILD WATER PEPPER (P. hydropiperoides). It
is like a slender, pale variety of the common pink persicaria.
One finds its inconspicuous, but very common, flowers from June
to September. The plant, which grows in shallow water, swamps,
and moist places throughout the Union and considerably north and
south of it, rises three feet or less. The cylindric sheaths
around the swollen joints of the stem are fringed with long
bristles - a clue to identification. Another similar WATER PEPPER
or SMARTWEED (P. hydropiper) is so called because of its acrid,
biting juice.

The CLIMBING FALSE BUCKWHEAT (P. scandens) straggles over bushes
in woods, thickets, and by the waysides throughout a very wide
range; yet its small, dull, greenish-yellow and pinkish flowers,
loosely clustered in long pedicelled racemes, are so
inconspicuous during August and September, when the showy
composites are in their glory, that we give them scarcely a
glance. The alternate leaves, which are heart-shaped at the base
and pointed at the lip, suggesting those of the morning glory,
are on petioles arising from sheaths over the enlarged joints
which, in this family, are always a most prominent characteristic
- (Poly = many, gonum = a knee). The three outer sepals, keeled
when in flower, are irregularly winged when the three-angled,
smooth achene hangs from the matured blossom in autumn, the
season at which the vine assumes its greatest attractiveness.

The ARROW-LEAVED TEAR THUMB (P. sagittatum), found in ditches and
swampy wet soil, weakly leans on other plants, or climbs over
them with the help of the many sharp, recurved prickles which arm
its four-angled stem. Even the petioles and underside of the
leaf's midrib are set with prickles. The light green leaves, that
combine the lance and the arrow shapes, take on a beautiful
russet-red tint in autumn. The little, five-parted rose-colored
or greenish-white flowers grow in small, close terminal heads
from July to September from Nova Scotia to the Gulf and far
westward.

SEASIDE or COAST JOINTWEED or KNOT-GRASS (Polygonella articulata;
Polygonum articulatum of Gray) a low, slender, wiry, diffusely
spreading little plant, with thread-like leaves seated on its
much-jointed stem, rises cleanly from out the sand of the coast
from Maine to Florida, and the shores of the Great Lakes. Very
slender racemes of tiny, nodding, rose-tinted white flowers, with
a dark midrib to each of the five calyx segments, are
insignificant of themselves; but when seen in masses, from July
to October, they tinge the upper beaches and sandy meadows with a
pink blush that not a few artists have transferred to the
foreground of their marine pictures.


CORN COCKLE; CORN ROSE; CORN or RED CAMPION; CROWN-OF-THE-FIELD
  (Agrostemma Githago; Lychnis Githago of Gray)  Pink family

Flowers - Magenta or bright purplish crimson, to 3 in. broad,
solitary at end of long, stout footstem; 5 lobes of calyx
leaf-like, very long and narrow, exceeding petals. Corolla of 5
broad, rounded petals; 10 stamens; 5 styles alternating with
calyx lobes, opposite petals. Stem: 1 to 3 ft. high, erect, with
few or no branches, leafy, the plant covered with fine white
hairs. Leaves: Opposite, seated on stem, long, narrow, pointed,
erect. Fruit: a 1-celled, many-seeded capsule.
Preferred Habitat - Wheat and other grain fields; dry, waste
places.
Flowering Season - July-September.
Distribution - United States at large; most common in Central and
Western States. Also in Europe and Asia.

"Allons! allons! sow'd cockle, reap'd no corn," exclaims Biron in
"Love's Labor Lost." Evidently the farmers even in Shakespeare's
day counted this brilliant blossom the pest it has become in many
of our own grain fields just as it was in ancient times, when
Job, after solemnly protesting his righteousness, called on his
own land to bear record against him if his words were false. "Let
thistles grow instead of wheat, and cockle instead of barley," he
cried, according to James the First's translators; but the
"noisome weeds" of the original text seem to indicate that these
good men were more anxious to give the English people an adequate
conception of Job's willingness to suffer for his honor's sake
than to translate literally. Possibly the cockle grew in Southern
Asia in Job's time : today its range is north.

Like many another immigrant to our hospitable shores, this
vigorous invader shows a tendency to outstrip native blossoms in
life's race. Having won in the struggle for survival in the old
country, where the contest has been most fiercely waged for
centuries, it finds life here easy, enjoyable. What are its
methods for insuring an abundance of fertile seed? We see that
the tube of the flower is so nearly closed by the stamens and
five-styled pistil as to be adapted only to the long, slender
tongues of moths and butterflies, for which benefactors it became
narrow and deep to reserve the nectar. "A certain night-flying
moth (one of the Dianthaecia) fertilizes flowers of this genus
exclusively, and its larvae feed on their unripe seeds as a
staple. Bees and some long-tongued flies seen about the corn
cockle doubtless get pollen only; but there are few flowers so
deep that the longest-tongued bees cannot sip them. Butterflies,
attracted by the bright color of the flower - and to them color
is the most catchy of advertisements - are guided by a few dark
lines on the petals to the nectary.

Soon after the blossom opens, five of the stamens emerge from the
tube and shed their pollen on the early visitor. Later, the five
other stamens empty the contents of their anthers on more tardy
comers. Finally, when all danger of self-fertilization is past,
the styles stretch upward, and the butterfly, whose head is
dusted with pollen brought from earlier flowers, necessarily
leaves some on their sticky surfaces as he takes the leavings in
the nectary.

So much cross-fertilized seed as the plant now produces and
scatters through the grain fields may well fill the farmer's
prosaic mind with despair. To him there is no glory in the
scarlet of the poppy comparable with the glitter of a silver
dollar; no charm in the heavenly blue of the corn-flower, that
likewise preys upon the fertility of his soil; the vivid flecks
of color with which the cockle lights up his fields mean only
loss of productiveness in the earth that would yield him greater
profit without them. Moreover, seeds of this so-called weed not
only darken his wheat when they are threshed out together, but
are positively injurious if swallowed in any quantity. Emerson
said every plant is called a weed until its usefulness is
discovered. Linnaeus called this flower Agrostemma = the
crown-of-the-field. Agriculturalists never realize that beauty is
in itself a sufficient plea for respected existence. Not a few of
the cockle's relatives adorn men's gardens.


WILD PINK or CATCHFLY
  (Silene Caroliniana; S. Pennsylvanica of Gray)  Pink family

Flowers - Rose pink, deep or very pale; about inch broad, on
slender footstalks, in terminal clusters. Calyx tubular,
5-toothed, much enlarged in fruit, sticky; 5  petals with claws
enclosed in calyx, wedged-shaped above, slightly notched. Stamens
10; pistil with 3 styles. Stem: 4 to 10 in. high, hairy, sticky
above, growing in tufts. Leaves: Basal ones spatulate; 2 or 3
pairs of lance-shaped, smaller leaves seated on stem.
Preferred Habitat - Dry, gravelly, sandy, or rocky soil.
Flowering Season - April-June.
Distribution - New England, south to Georgia, westward to
Kentucky.

Fresh, dainty, and innocent-looking as Spring herself are these
bright flowers. Alas, for the tiny creatures that try to climb up
the rosy tufts to pilfer nectar, they and their relatives are not
so innocent as they appear! While the little crawlers are almost
within reach of the cup of sweets, their feet are gummed to the
viscid matter that coats it, and here their struggles end as
flies' do on sticky fly-paper, or birds' on limed twigs. A
naturalist counted sixty-two little corpses on the sticky stem of
a single pink. All this tragedy to protect a little nectar for
the butterflies which, in sipping it, transfer the pollen from
one flower to another, and so help them to produce the most
beautiful and robust offspring.

The pink, which has two sets of stamens of five each, elevates
first one set, then the other, for economy's sake and to run less
risk of failure to get its pollen transferred in case of rain
when its friends are not flying. After all the golden dust has
been shed, however, up come the three recurved styles from the
depth of the tube to receive pollen brought by butterflies from
younger flowers. There are few cups so deep that the largest
bumblebees cannot suck them. Flies which feed on the pink's
pollen only, sometimes come by mistake to older blossoms in the
stigmatic stage, and doubtless cross-fertilize them once in a
while.

In waste places and woods farther southward and westward, and
throughout the range of the Wild Pink as well, clusters of the
SLEEPY CATCHFLY (S. antirrhina) open their tiny pink flowers for
a short time only in the sunshine. At any stage they are mostly
calyx, but in fruit this part is much expanded. Swollen, sticky
joints are the plant's means of defense from crawlers. Season:
Summer.

When moths begin their rounds at dusk, the NIGHT-FLOWERING
CATCHFLY (S. noctiflora) opens its pinkish or white flowers to
emit a fragrance that guides them to a feast prepared for them
alone. Day-blooming catchflies have no perfume, nor do they need
it; their color and markings are a sufficient guide to the
butterflies. Sticky hairs along the stems of this plant
ruthlessly destroy, not flies, but ants chiefly, that would
pilfer nectar without being able to render the flower any
service. Yet the calyx is beautifully veined, as if to tantalize
the crawlers by indicating the path to a banquet hail they may
never reach. Only a very few flowers, an inch across or less, are
clustered at the top of the plant, which blooms from July to
September in waste places east of the Mississippi and in Canada.


SOAPWORT; BOUNCING BET; HEDGE PINK; BRUISEWORT; OLD MAID'S PINK;
FULLER'S HERB
  (Saponaria officinalis)  Pink family

Flowers - Pink or whitish, fragrant, about 1 inch broad, loosely
clustered at end of stem, also sparingly from axils of upper
leaves. Calyx tubular, 5-toothed, about 3/4 in. long; 5 petals,
the claws inserted in deep tube. Stamens 10, in 2 sets; 1 pistil
with 2 styles. Flowers frequently double. Stem: to 2 ft. high,
erect, stout, sparingly branched, leafy. Leaves: Opposite,
acutely oval, 2 to 3 in. long, about 1 in. wide, 3 to 5 ribbed.
Fruit: An oblong capsule, shorter than calyx, opening at top by 4
short teeth or valves.
Preferred Habitat - Roadsides, banks, and waste places.
Flowering Season - June-September.
Distribution - Generally common. Naturalized from Europe.

A stout, buxom, exuberantly healthy lassie among flowers is
bouncing Bet, who long ago escaped from gardens whither she was
brought from Europe, and ran wild beyond colonial farms to
roadsides, along which she has traveled over nearly our entire
area. Underground runners and abundant seed soon form thrifty
colonies. This plant, to which our grandmothers ascribed healing
virtues, makes a cleansing, soap-like lather when its bruised
leaves are agitated in water.

Butterflies, which delight in bright colors and distinct
markings, find little to charm them here; but the pale shade of
pink or white, easily distinguished in the dark, and the
fragrance, strongest after sunset, effectively advertise the
flower at dusk when its benefactors begin to fly. The sphinx
moth, a frequent visitor, works as rapidly in extracting nectar
from the deep tube as any hawk moth, so frequently mistaken for a
hummingbird. The little cliff-dwelling bees (Halictus), among
others, visit the flowers by day for pollen only. At first five
outer stamens protrude slightly from the flower and shed their
pollen on the visitor, immediately over the entrance. Afterward,
having spread apart to leave the entrance free, the path is clear
for the five inner stamens to follow the same course. Now the
styles are still enclosed in the tube but when there is no longer
fear of self-fertilization - that is to say, when the pollen has
all been carried off, and the stamens have withered - up they
come and spread apart to expose their rough upper surfaces to
pollen brought from younger flowers by the moths.


DEPTFORD PINK
  (Dianthus Armeria)  Pink family

Flowers - Pink, with whitish dots, small, borne in small clusters
at end of stem. Calyx tubular, 5-toothed, with several bract-like
leaves at base; 5 petals with toothed edges, clawed at base
within deep calyx; 10 stamens; 1 pistil with 2 styles. Stem: 6 to
18 in. high, stiff, erect, finely hairy, few branches. Leaves:
Opposite, blade-shaped, or lower ones rounded at end.
Preferred Habitat - Fields, roadsides.
Flowering Season - June-September.
Distribution - Southern Ontario, New England, south to Maryland,
west to Michigan.

The true pinks of Europe, among which are the SWEET WILLIAM or
BUNCH PINK (D. barbatus) of our gardens, occasionally wild here,
and the deliciously spicy CLOVE PINK (D. Carophyllus), ancestor
of the superb carnations of the present day, that have reached a
climax in the Lawson pink of newspaper fame, were once held
sacred to Jupiter, hence Dianthus = Jove's own flower. The
Deptford pink, a rather insignificant little European immigrant,
without fragrance, has a decided charm, nevertheless, when seen
in bright patches among the dry grass of early autumn, with small
butterflies, that are its devoted admirers, hovering above.


PINK OR PALE CORYDALIS
  (Capnoides sempervirens; Corydalis glauca of Gray)  Poppy
family

Flowers - Pink, with yellow tip, about 1/2 in. long, a few borne
in a loose, terminal raceme. Calyx of 2 small sepals; corolla
irregular, of 4 erect, closed, and flattened petals joined, 1 of
outer pair with short rounded spur at base, the interior ones
narrow and keeled on back. Stamens 6, in 2 sets, Opposite outer
petals; 1 pistil. Stem: Smooth, curved, branched, 1 to 2 feet
high. Leaves: Pale grayish green, delicate, divided into
variously and finely cut leaflets. Fruit: Very narrow, erect pod,
1 to 2 in. long.
Preferred Habitat - Rocky, rich, cool woods.
Flowering Season - April-September.
Distribution - Nova Scotia westward to Alaska, south to Minnesota
and North Carolina.

Dainty little pink sacs, yellow at the mouth, hang upside down
along a graceful stem, and instantly suggest the Dutchman's
breeches, squirrel corn, bleeding heart, and climbing fumitory,
to which the plant is next of kin. Because the lark (Korydalos)
has a spur, the flower, which boasts a small one also, borrows
its Greek name.

Hildebrand proved by patient experiments that some flowers of
this genus have not only lost the power of self-fertilization,
but that they produce fertile seed only when pollen from another
plant is carried to them. Yet how difficult they make dining for
their benefactors! The bumblebee, which can reach the nectar, but
not lap it conveniently, often "gets square" with the secretive
blossom by nipping holes through its spur, to which the hive bees
and others hasten for refreshment. We frequently find these
punctured flowers. But hive and other bees visiting the blossom
for pollen, some rubs off against their breast when they depress
the two middle petals, a sort of sheath that contains pistil and
stamens.


HARDHACK; STEEPLE BUSH
  (Spiraea tomentosa)  Rose family

Flowers - Pink or magenta, rarely white, very small, in dense,
pyramidal clusters. Calyx of 5 sepals; corolla of 5 rounded
petals; stamens, 20 to 60; usually 5 pistils, downy. Stem: 2 to 3
ft. high, erect, shrubby, simple, downy. Leaves: Dark green
above, covered with whitish woolly hairs beneath; oval,
saw-edged, 1 to 2 in. long.
Preferred Habitat - Low moist ground, roadside ditches, swamps.
Flowering Season - July-September.
Distribution - Nova Scotia westward, and southward to Georgia and
Kansas.

These bright spires of pink bloom attract our attention no less
than the countless eyes of flies, beetles, and bees, ever on the
lookout for food to be eaten on the spot or stored up for future
progeny. Pollen-feeding insects such as these, delight in the
spireas, most of which secrete little or no nectar, but yield an
abundance of pollen, which they can gather from the crowded
panicles with little loss of time, transferring some of it to the
pistils, of course, as they move over the tiny blossoms. But most
spireas are also able to fertilize themselves, insects failing
them.

An instant's comparison shows the steeple bush to be closely
related to the fleecy, white meadow-sweet, often found growing
near. The pink spires, which bloom from the top downward, have
pale brown tips where the withered flowers are, toward the end of
summer.

Why is the under side of the leaves so woolly? Not as a
protection against wingless insects crawling upward, that is
certain; for such could only benefit these tiny clustered
flowers. Not against the sun's rays, for it is only the under
surface that is coated. When the upper leaf surface is hairy, we
know that the plant is protected in this way from perspiring too
freely. Doubtless these leaves of the steeple bush, like those of
other plants that choose a similar habitat, have woolly hairs
beneath as an absorbent to protect their pores from clogging with
the vapors that must rise from the damp ground where the plant
grows. If these pores were filled with moisture from without, how
could they possibly throw off the waste of the plant? All plants
are largely dependent upon free perspiration for health, but
especially those whose roots, struck in wet ground, are
constantly sending up moisture through the stem and leaves.


PURPLE-FLOWERING OR VIRGINIA RASPBERRY
  (Rubus odoratus)  Rose family

Flowers - Royal purple or bluish pink, showy, fragrant, 1 to 2
in. broad, loosely clustered at top of stem. Calyx sticky-hairy,
deeply 5-parted, with long pointed tips; corolla of 5 rounded
petals; stamens and pistils very numerous. Stem: 3 to 5 ft. high,
erect, branched, shrubby, bristly, not prickly. Leaves:
Alternate, petioled, 3 to 5 lobed, middle lobe largest, and all
pointed; saw-edged lower leaves immense. Fruit: A depressed red
berry, scarcely edible.
Preferred Habitat - Rocky woods, dells, shady roadsides.
Flowering Season - June-August.
Distribution - Northern Canada south to Georgia, westward to
Michigan and Tennessee.

To be an unappreciated, unloved relative of the exquisite wild
rose, with which this flower is so often likened, must be a
similar misfortune to being the untalented son of a great man, or
the unhappy author of a successful first book never equaled in
later attempts. But where the bright blossoms of the Virginia
raspberry burst forth above the roadside tangle and shady
woodland dells, even those who despise magenta see beauty in them
where abundant green tones all discordant notes into harmony.
Purple, as we of today understand the color, the flower is not;
but rather the purple of ancient Orientals. On cool, cloudy days
the petals are a deep, clear purplish rose, that soon fades and
dulls with age, or changes into pale, bluish pink when the sun is
hot.

Many yellow stamens help conceal the nectar secreted in a narrow
ring between the filaments and the base of the receptacle.
Bumblebees, the principal and most efficient visitors, which can
reach sweets more readily than most insects, although numerous
others help to self-fertilize the flower, bring to the mature
stigmas of a newly opened blossom pollen carried on their
undersides from the anthers of a flower a day or two older. When
the inner row of anthers shed their pollen, some doubtless falls
on the stigmas below them, and so spontaneous self-fertilization
may occur. Fruit sets quickly; nevertheless the shrub keeps on
flowering nearly all summer. Children often fold the lower
leaves, which sometimes measure a foot across, to make
drinking-cups.


QUEEN-OF-THE-PRAIRIE
  (Ulmaria rubra; Spirea lobata of Gray)  Rose family

Flowers - Deep pink, like the peach blossom, fragrant, about 1/3
in. across, clustered in large cymose panicles on a long
footstalk. Calyx 5-lobed; 5-clawed, rose-like petals; stamens
numerous; pistils 5 to 15, usually 10. Stem: 2 to 8 ft. tall,
smooth, grooved, branched. Leaves: Mostly near the ground, large,
rarely measuring 3 ft. long, compounded of from 3 to 7 leaflets;
end leaflet, of 7 to 9 divisions, much the largest; side leaflets
opposite, seated on stem, 3 to 5 lobed or parted; all lobes
acute, and edges unequally incised. Prominent kidney-shaped
stipules.
Preferred Habitat - Moist meadows and prairies.
Flowering Season - June-July.
Distribution - Western Pennsylvania to Michigan and Iowa, and
southward.

A stately, beautiful native plant, seen to perfection where it
rears bright panicles of bloom above the ranker growth in the low
moist meadows of the Ohio Valley. When we find it in the East, it
has only recently escaped from man's gardens into Nature's.
Butterflies and bees pay grateful homage to this queen. Indeed,
butterflies appear to have a special fondness for pink, as bees
have for blue flowers. Cattle delight to chew the leaves, which,
when crushed, give out a fragrance like sweet birch.


WILD ROSES
  (Rosa)  Rose family

Just as many members of the lily tribe show a preference for the
rule of three in the arrangements of their floral parts, so the
wild roses cling to the quinary method of some primitive
ancestor, a favorite one also with the buttercup and many of its
kin, the geraniums, mallows, and various others. Most of our
fruit trees and bushes are near relatives of the rose. Five
petals and five sepals, then, we always find on roses in a state
of nature; and although the progressive gardener of today has
nowhere shown his skill more than in the development of a
multitude of petals from stamens in the magnificent roses of
fashionable society, the most highly cultivated darling of the
greenhouses quickly reverts to the original wild type, setting
his work of years at naught, if once it regain its natural
liberties through neglect.

To protect its foliage from being eaten by hungry cattle, the
rose goes armed into the battle of life with curved, sharp
prickles, not true thorns or modified branches, but merely
surface appliances which peel off with the bark. To destroy
crawling pilferers of pollen, several species coat their calices,
at least, with fine hairs or sticky gum; and to insure wide
distribution of offspring, the seeds are packed in the
attractive, bright red calyx tube or hip, a favorite food of many
birds, which drop them miles away. When shall we ever learn that
not even a hair has been added to or taken from a blossom without
a lawful cause, and study it accordingly? Fragrance, abundant
pollen, and bright-colored petals naturally attract many insects;
but roses secrete no nectar. Some species of bees, and a common
beetle (Trichius piger) for example, seem to depend upon certain
wild roses exclusively for pollen to feed themselves and their
larvae. Bumblebees, to which roses are adapted, require a firmer
support than the petals would give, and so alight on the center
of the flower, where the pistil receives pollen carried by them
from other roses. Although the numerous stamens and the pistils
mature simultaneously, the former are usually turned outward,
that the incoming pollen-laden insect may strike the stigma
first. When the large bees cease their visits as they may in
long-continued dull or rainy weather, the rose, turning toward
the sun, stands more or less obliquely, and some of the pollen
must fall on its stigma. Occasional self-fertilization matters
little.

If plants have insect benefactors, they have their foes as well
and hordes of tiny aphids, commonly known as green flies or plant
lice, moored by their sucking tubes to the tender sprays of
roses, wild and cultivated, live by extracting their juices. A
curious relationship exists between these little creatures and
the ants, which "milk" them by stroking and caressing them with
their antennae until they emit a tiny drop of sweet, white fluid.
The yellow ant, that lives an almost subterranean life, actually
domesticates flocks and herds of root-feeding aphids; the brown
ant appropriates those that live among the bark of trees; and the
common black garden ant (Lasius niger), devoting itself to the
aphis of the rose bushes, protects it in extraordinary ways,
delightfully described by the author of "Ants, Bees, and Wasps."

In literature, ancient and modern, sacred and profane, no flower
figures so conspicuously as the rose. To the Romans it was most
significant when placed over the door of a public or private
banquet hall. Each who passed beneath it bound himself thereby
not to disclose anything said or done within; hence the
expression sub rosa, common to this day.

The PRAIRIE, CLIMBING, or MICHIGAN ROSE (R. setigera) lifts
clusters of deep, bright pink flowers, that after a while fade
almost white, above the thickets and rich prairie soil, from
southern Ontario and Wisconsin to the Gulf, as far eastward as
Florida. Its distinguishing characteristics are: Stout, widely
separated prickles along the stem, that grows several feet long;
leaves compounded of three, rarely five, oval leaflets, acute or
obtuse at the apex; stalks and calyx often glandular; odorless
flowers that, opening in June and July, measure about two and a
half inches across, their styles cohering in a smooth column on
which bees are tempted to alight; and a round hip, or seed
vessel, formed by the fruiting calyx, which is more or less
glandular. From this parent stock several valuable
double-flowering roses have been derived, among others the Queen
and the Gem of the Prairies, but it is our only native rose that
has ever passed into cultivation.

The SMOOTH, EARLY, or MEADOW ROSE (R. blanda), found blooming in
June and July in moist, rocky places from Newfoundland to New
Jersey and a thousand miles westward, has a trifle larger and
slightly fragrant flowers, at first pink, later pure white. Their
styles are separate, not cohering in a column nor projecting as
in the climbing rose. This is a leafy, low bush mostly less than
three feet high; it is either entirely unarmed, or else provided
with only a few weak prickles; the stipules are rather broad, and
the leaf is compounded of from five to seven oval, blunt, and
pale green leaflets, often hoary below.

In swamps and low wet ground from Quebec to Florida, and westward
to the Mississippi, the SWAMP ROSE (R. Carolina) blooms late in
