
The priests were close now, their pasty faces leering with fierce
anticipation of their revenge, when suddenly, from down the gallery
outside that guarded door, came the sharp crash of an explosion,
followed by shouts and the rush of feet.

At the sound, the priests trembled, fled backward into the room and
fell moaning before their idols, while the quaking guards strove
frantically to close the door.

       *       *       *       *       *

But before they could do so, in burst a half dozen brawny sailors in
foreign uniform, bearing in their hands little black bulbs that looked
suspiciously like grenades. Shouting in a tongue Larry could not
distinguish above the uproar, they advanced upon the retreating guards
and priests.

Then, when all were herded in the far corner of the room, the sailors
backed toward the door. Motioning for Larry and Diane to clear out,
they raised those sinister little missiles, prepared to fling them.

"Wait!" cried Larry, thinking of Professor Stevens.

And releasing Diane, who had revived, he rushed forward, seized the
prostrate savant from amid the unresisting Cabiri, and bore him to
safety.

"Daddy!" sobbed Diane, swaying to meet them.

"Back!" shouted one of the sailors, shoving them through the door.

The last glimpse Larry had of that fateful room was the horde of
priests and guards huddled before their altar, voices lifted in
supplication to that hideous dragon god.

Then issued a series of blinding flashes followed by deafening
explosions, mingled with shrieks of anguish.

Sickened, he stood there, as the reverberations died away.

       *       *       *       *       *

Presently, when it was plain no further menace would come from that
blasted temple, their rescuers led the trio back down those winding
galleries, and through that long, straight tunnel to the smaller
pyramid.

Professor Stevens had recovered consciousness by now and was able to
walk, with Larry's aid, though a matted clot of blood above his left
ear showed the force of the blow he had received.

The way, after reaching the smaller pyramid, led up those other
galleries they had mounted the night before.

This time, undoubtedly, they were to be taken before that mysterious
usurping emperor. And what would be the result of that audience? Would
it but plunge them from the frying pan into the fire, wondered Larry,
or would it mean their salvation?

Anyway, he concluded, no fate could be worse than the hideous one they
had just escaped. But if only Diane could be spared further anguish!

He glanced at her fondly, as they walked along, and she returned him a
warm smile.

Now the way led into a short, level passage ending in a door guarded
by two sailors with rifles. They presented arms, as their comrades
came up, and flung open the door.

As he stepped inside, Larry blinked in amazement, for he was greeted
by electric lights in ornate clusters, richly carpeted floors, walls
hung with modern paintings--and there at the far end, beside a massive
desk, stood an imposing personage in foreign naval uniform of high
rank, strangely familiar, strangely reminiscent of war days.

Even before the man spoke, in his guttural English, the suspicion
those sailors had aroused crystallized itself.

A German! A U-boat commander!

       *       *       *       *       *

"Greetings, gentlemen--and the little lady," boomed their host, with
heavy affability. "I see that my men were in time. These swine of
Antillians are a tricky lot. I must apologize for them--my subjects."

The last word was pronounced with scathing contempt.

"We return greetings!" said Professor Stevens. "To whom, might I ask,
do we owe our lives, and the honor of this interview?"

Larry smiled. The old graybeard was up to his form, all right!

"You are addressing Herr Rolf von Ullrich," the flattered German
replied, adding genially: "commander of one of His Imperial Majesty's
super-submarines during the late war and at present Emperor of
Antillia."

To which the professor replied with dignity that he was greatly
honored to make the acquaintance of so exalted a personage, and
proceeded in turn to introduce himself and party. But Von Ullrich
checked him with a smile.

"The distinguished Professor Stevens and his charming daughter need no
introduction, as they are already familiar to me through the American
press and radio," he said. "While as for Mr. Hunter, your Captain
Petersen has already made me acquainted with his name."

At the mention of the commander of the _Nereid_, all three of them
gave a start.

"Then--then my captain and crew are safe?" asked the professor,
eagerly.

"Quite," Von Ullrich assured him. "You will be taken to them
presently. But first there are one or two little things you would like
explained--yes? Then I shall put to you a proposal, which if
acceptable will guarantee your safe departure from my adopted
country."

Whereupon the German traced briefly the events leading up to the
present.

       *       *       *       *       *

During the last months of the war, he had been placed in command of a
special U-boat known as the "mystery ship"--designed to resist
depth-charges and embodying many other innovations, most of them
growing out of his own experience with earlier submarines.

One day, while cruising off the West Indies, in wait for some luckless
sugar boat, he had been surprised by a destroyer and forced to
submerge so suddenly that his diving gear had jammed and they had gone
to the bottom. But the craft had managed to withstand the pressure and
they had been able to repair the damage, limping home with a bad leak
but otherwise none the worse for the experience.

The leak repaired and the hull further strengthened, he had set out
again. But when in mid-Atlantic the Armistice had come, and rather
than return to a defeated country, subject possibly to Allied revenge,
he had persuaded his crew to remain out and let their craft be
reported missing.

What followed then, though Von Ullrich masked it in polite words, was
a story of piracy, until they found by degrees that there was more
gold on the bottom of the ocean than the top; and from this to the
discovery of the sunken empire where he now held reign was but a step.

They had thought at first they were looting only empty temples--but,
finding people there, had easily conquered them, though ruling them,
he admitted, was another matter. As, for instance, yesterday, when the
priests had interfered with his orders and carried his three chief
captives off to sacrifice.

"Where now, but for me, you would be food for their gods!" he ended.
"And if you do not find my hospitality altogether to your liking,
friends, remember that you came uninvited. In fact, if you will
recall, you came despite my explicit warning!"

       *       *       *       *       *

But since they were here, he told them, they might be willing to repay
his good turn with another.

Whereupon Von Ullrich launched into his proposal, which was that
Professor Stevens place the _Nereid_ at his disposal for visiting the
depths at the foot of the plateau, where lay the capital of the
empire, he said--a magnificent metropolis known as the City of the Sun
and modeled after the great Atlantean capital, the City of the Golden
Gates, and the depository of a treasure, the greedy German believed,
that was the ransom of the world.

The professor frowned, and for a moment Larry thought he was going to
remind their host that this was not a treasure hunt.

"Why," he asked instead, "do you not use your own submarine for the
purpose?"

"Because for one thing, she will not stand the pressure, nor will our
suits," was the reply. "And for another, she is already laden with
treasure, ready for an--er--forced abdication!" with a sardonic laugh.

"Then have you not enough gold already?"

"For myself, yes. But there are my men, you see--and men who have
glimpsed the treasures of the earth are not easily satisfied,
Professor. But have no fear. You shall accompany us, and, by your aid,
shall pay your own ransom."

       *       *       *       *       *

Von Ullrich made no mention of the alternative, in case the aid was
refused, but the ominous light Larry caught in his cold gray eyes
spoke as clearly as words.

So, since there was nothing else to do, Professor Stevens agreed.

Whereupon the audience terminated and they were led from the presence
of this arrogant German to another apartment, where they were to meet
Captain Petersen and the crew of the _Nereid._

As they proceeded toward it, under guard, Larry wondered why Von
Ullrich had even troubled to make the request, when he held it in his
power to take the craft anyway.

But after the first joyful moment of reunion, it was a mystery no
longer, for Captain Petersen reported that immediately upon their
capture, the commander of the U-boat had tried to force him to reveal
the operation of the _Nereid_, but that he had steadfastly refused,
even though threatened with torture.

And to think, it came to Larry with a new twinge of shame, that he had
suspected this gallant man of mutiny!

       *       *       *       *       *

That very morning, while Professor Stevens and his party were still
exchanging experiences with Captain Petersen and the members of the
crew, Von Ullrich sent for them and they gathered with his own men in
the small lock-chamber at the base of the pyramid.

There they were provided with temporary suits by their host, since
their own--which they brought along--could be inflated only from the
_Nereid_.

Beside her, they noted as they emerged in relays, the U-boat was now
moored.

Entering their own craft, they got under way at once and headed
swiftly westward toward the brink of the plateau. Most of Von
Ullrich's crew were with them, though a few had been left behind to
guard against any treachery, on the part of the now sullen and aroused
populace.

Slipping out over the edge of that precipitous tableland, they tilted
her rudders and dove to the abysm below.

Presently the central square of the illuminated panel in the
navigating room showed three great concentric circles, enclosed by a
quadrangle that must have been miles on a side--and within this vast
sunken fortress lay a city of innumerable pyramids and temples and
palaces.

The German's eyes flashed greedily as he peered upon this vision.

"There you are!" he exclaimed, quivering with excitement. "Those
circles, that square: what would you judge they were, Professor?"

"I would judge that originally they were the canals bearing the
municipal water supply," Martin Stevens told him quietly, suppressing
his own excitement, "for such was said to be the construction of the
City of the Golden Gates; but now I judge they are walls raised on
those original foundations by the frantic populace, when the
submergence first began, in a vain effort to hold back the tides that
engulfed them."

"And do you think they are of gold?"

"Frankly, no; though I have no doubt you will find plenty of that
element down there."

Nor was the prediction wrong, for modern eyes had never seen such a
treasure house as they beheld when presently the _Nereid_ came to rest
outside that ancient four-walled city and they forced their way
inside.

       *       *       *       *       *

Though the walls were not of gold, the inner gates were, and the
temples were fairly bursting with the precious metal, as well as rare
jewels, the eyes of a thousand idols gleaming with rubies and
emeralds.

But where was the populace, amid all this prodigious wealth? Was there
no life down here?

Von Ullrich declared through the vibrator of his pressure-suit that he
had heard there was. And as though in substantiation, many of the
temples showed the same bell-jar construction as the pyramids above,
though even stouter, revealing evidences of having been occupied very
recently; but all were flooded and empty. The city was as a city of
the dead.

This ominous sign did not deter the "emperor," however. Ruthlessly he
and his men looted those flooded temples, forcing Professor Stevens
and his party to lend aid in the orgy of pillage.

And all the time, Larry had an uneasy feeling of gathering furtive
hosts about them, waiting--waiting for what?

He confided his fears to no one, though he noted with relief that Von
Ullrich seemed to sense these unseen presences too, for he proceeded
with caution and always kept a strong guard outside.

       *       *       *       *       *

By early afternoon, the _Nereid_ was one great coffer-chest.

But still the rapacious U-boat commander was unsatisfied, though
Professor Stevens began to have doubts if his craft could lift that
massive weight of plunder to the top of the plateau.

"One more load and we go," he soothed. "A few more pretties for the
little lady!"

Larry writhed, and should have suspected then and there--but as it
was, the blow fell unexpected, stunning.

Filing from the lock, they failed to notice that Von Ullrich and his
crew hung back, until there came a sudden, guttural command, whereupon
Diane was seized and the massive door flung shut in their faces.

Appalled by this overwhelming disaster, the party stood for a moment
motionless, speechless. Then, as one, Larry and the professor rushed
forward and beat upon that barred hatch, calling upon Von Ullrich to
open it.

From within the submarine, through their vibrators, they heard him
laugh.

"_Auf Wiedersehen!_" he toasted them. "I now have all the treasure I
want! The rest I leave to you! Help yourselves!"

Even as he spoke, the _Nereid's_ auxiliary propellers started churning
the water. Slowly, sluggishly, like some great gorged fish, the sturdy
craft moved off, lifted her snout, headed upward.

       *       *       *       *       *

Professor Stevens bowed his head, and Larry could well picture the
grief that distorted the graybeard's face, inside that owl-eyed
helmet.

"Cheer up!" he said, though his own face was twisted with anguish.
"Perhaps--"

Then he paused--for how could he say that perhaps the situation wasn't
as bad as it seemed, when it was obviously hopeless?

"My poor Diane!" moaned the professor. "Poor child. Poor child!"

As for Captain Petersen and the crew, they said nothing. Perhaps they
were thinking of Diane, perhaps of themselves. At least, they knew it
was over.

Or so they thought. But to Larry, suddenly, occurred a gleam of hope.
That strange sense of unseen presences! It was bizarre, of course, but
doesn't a drowning person catch at straws? And Lord knows they were
drowning, if ever anyone was!

He turned and confided to Professor Stevens his idea, which was to
retrace their steps within the city gates, seek out the populace and
throw themselves on their mercy.

The stricken savant, too, grasped at the straw.

"It seems fantastic, but after all it is a chance," he admitted.

