
       *       *       *       *       *

"Do you remember Manny the Moog? The little fellow who was brought in
yesterday?"

"Distinctly. I thought it was odd at the time that you should release
a man who has a record of such activities as car-stealing and reckless
driving, especially when the witness against him turned out to be a
perfectly respectable person. I took it for granted that he was one of
your ... ah ... 'tame zanies', I think you called them. But I did not
and still don't understand how you can be so positive."

"I let Manny go because he's incapable of driving a car. The very
thought of being in control of a machine so much more powerful than he
is would give him chills. Did you ever see what happens when you lock
a claustrophobe up in a dark closet--the mad, unreasoning,
uncontrollable panic of absolute terror? That's what would happen to
Manny if you put him behind the wheel of a running automobile. It's
worse than fear; fear is controllable. Blind terror isn't.

"Manny had one little twist, in his mind. He liked to get into a
car--_any_ car, whether it was his or not--and drive. He became king
of the road. He wasn't a little man any more. He was God, and lesser
beings had better look out.

"We got to him before he actually killed anyone, but there is a woman
in Queens today who will never walk again because of Manny the Moog.
But there won't be any more like her. We took the instrument of
destruction away from him; we 'cut off his hands'. Now he's leading a
reasonably useful life. We don't need to sacrifice another's life
before we neutralize the danger."

"What about Joey Partridge?" His Grace asked. "He's one of your
zanies, too, isn't he?

"That's right. He couldn't keep from using his fists. He liked the
feel of solid flesh and bone giving under the impact of those big
fists of his. Boxing wasn't enough; he had to be able to feel
flesh-to-flesh contact, with no padded glove between. He almost killed
a couple of men before we got to him."

"What did you do to his hands?"

"Nothing. Not a thing. There's nothing at all wrong with his hands.
But he _thinks_ there is. He's firmly convinced that the bones are as
brittle as chalk, that if he uses those fists, _he_ will be the one
who will break and shatter. It even bothers him to shake hands, as you
saw last night. It took a lot of guts to do what he did last
night--walk over to those two thugs knowing he couldn't defend
himself. He's no coward. But he's as terrified of having his hands
hurt as Manny is of driving a car."

"I see" the Duke said thoughtfully.

       *       *       *       *       *

"There are other cases, plenty of them," I went on. "We have
pyromaniacs who are perfectly harmless now because they have a deathly
terror of flame. We have one fellow who used to be very nasty with a
knife; he grows a beard now because the very thought of having a sharp
edge that close to him is unnerving. The reality would send him
screaming. We have a girl who had the weird idea that it was fun to
drop things out of windows or off the tops of high buildings. Aside
from the chance of people below being hurt, there was another danger.
Two cops grabbed her just as she was about to drop her baby brother
off the roof of her apartment house.

"But we don't worry about her any more. People with acute acrophobia
are in no condition to pull stunts like that."

"What will you do to this Hammerlock Smith, then?" His Grace asked.

"Actually, he's one of the simpler cases. A large percentage of our
zanies lose control when they're under the influence of alcohol or
drugs. Alcohol is by far the more common. Under the influence, they do
things they would never do when sober.

"As long as they remain sober, they have control. But, give them a few
drinks and the control slips and then vanishes completely. One of our
others was a little like Manny the Moog; he drove like a madman--which
he was when he was drunk. Sober, he was as careful and cautious a
driver as you'd want--a perfectly reliable citizen. But, after losing
his license and the right to own a car, he'd still get drunk and steal
cars.

"He has his license back now, but we know we can trust him with it. He
will never be able to take another drink.

"Smith is of that type. So, apparently, is Nestor. When we get through
with Smith, he'll be sober, and he'll stay that way to his grave."

       *       *       *       *       *

"Astounding." The Duke looked at me again. "I can see the results, of
course. I'm going to see that some sort of similar program is started
in England, even if I have to stand up in the House of Lords to do it.
But, I still don't understand how it can be done so rapidly--a matter
of hours. What is the technique used?"

"It all depends on the therapist," I said. "Brownlee is one of the
best, but there are others who are almost as good. Some of the
officers have started calling them _hexperts_ because, in effect,
that's exactly what they do--put a hex on the patient."

"A _geas_, in other words."

I'd never heard the word before. "A what?"

"A _geas_. A magical spell that causes a person to do or to refrain
from doing some act, whether he will or no. He has no choice, once the
_geas_ has been put on him."

"That's it exactly."

"But, man, it isn't magic we're discussing, is it?"

"I don't know," I admitted frankly. "You tell me. Was it magic this
morning when both you and I had a hunch that little Shirley was _not_
in the park, in spite of the way it looked? Was it magic when we
eliminated, without even searching, every spot but the place where she
actually was?"

"Well, no, I shouldn't say so. I think every good policeman gets
hunches like that every so often. He gets a feel for his work and for
the types he's dealing with."

"Well, then, call it hunch or telepathy or extra-sensory perception or
thingummybob or whatever. Brownlee has just what you say a good cop
should have--a feel for his work and for the types he's dealing with.
Within a very short time, Dr. Brownlee can actually get the feel of
being inside his patient's mind--deep enough, at least, so that he can
spot just what has to be done to put a compensating twist in a twisted
mind.

"He says the genuine zanies are very simple to operate on. They have
already got the raw materials in them for him to work with. A normally
sane, normally well integrated person would require almost as much
work to put a permanent quirk in as removing such a quirk would be in
a zany. The brainwashing techniques and hypnotism can introduce such
quirks temporarily, but as soon as a normally sane person regains his
balance, the quirks tend to fade away.

"But a system that is off balance and unstable doesn't require much
work to push it slightly in another direction. When Brownlee finds out
what will do the job, he does it, and we have a tame zany on our
hands."

"It sounds as though men of Brownlee's type are rather rare," His
Grace said.

"They are. Rarer than psychiatrists as a whole. On the other hand,
they can take care of a great many more cases."

"One thing, though," the Duke said thoughtfully. "You mentioned the
amputation of a pickpocket's hands. It seems to me that this technique
is just as drastic, just as crippling to the person to whom it is
done."

"Of course it is! No one has ever denied that. God help us if it's the
final answer to the problem! A man who can't drive a car, or use a
razor, or punch an enemy in the teeth when it's necessary is certainly
handicapped. He's more crippled than he was before. The only
compensation for society is that now he's less dangerous.

"There are certain compensations for the individual, too. He stands
less chance of going to prison, or to a death cell. But he's still
hemmed in; he's not a free man. Of course, in most instances, he's not
aware of what has been done to him; his mind compensates and
rationalizes and gives him a reason for what he's undergoing. Joey
Partridge thinks his condition is due to the fractures he suffered the
last time he beat up a man; Manny the Moog thinks that he's afraid to
drive a car because of the last wreck he was in. And, partly, maybe
they're both right. But they have still been deprived of a part of
their free will, their right of choice.

"Oh, no; this isn't the final answer by a long shot! It's a stopgap--a
_necessary_ stopgap. But, by using it, we can learn more about how the
human mind works, and maybe one of these days we'll evolve a science
of the mind that can take those twists _out_ instead of compensating
for them.

[Illustration]

"On the other hand, we can save lives by using the technique we have
now. We don't dare _not_ use it.

"When they chopped off those hands, centuries ago, the stumps were
cauterized by putting them in boiling oil. It looked like another
injury piled on top of the first, but the chirurgeons, not knowing
_why_ it worked, still knew that a lot more ex-pickpockets lived
through their ordeal if the boiling oil was used afterward.

"And that's what we're doing with this technique right here and now.
We're using it because it saves lives, lives that may potentially or
actually be a great deal more valuable than the warped personality
that might have taken such a life.

"But the one thing that I am working for right now and will continue
to work for is a _real_ cure, if that's possible. A real, genuine,
usable kind of psychotherapy; one which is at least on a par with the
science of cake-baking when it comes to the percentages of successes
and failures."

       *       *       *       *       *

His Grace thought that over for a minute. Then he leaned back and
looked at me through narrowed eyes. There was a half smile on his lips
"Royall, old man, let's admit one thing, just between ourselves," His
voice became very slow and very deliberate. "Both you and I know that
this process, whatever it is, is _not_ psychotherapy."

"Why do you say that?" I wasn't trying to deny anything; I just
wanted to know the reasoning behind his conclusions.

"Because I know what psychotherapy can and can't do. And I know that
psychotherapy can _not_ do the sort of thing we've been discussing.

"It's as if you'd taken me out on a rifle range, to a target two
thousand yards from the shooter and let me watch that marksman put
fifty shots out of fifty into a six-inch bull's-eye. I might not know
what the shooter is using, but I would know beyond any shadow of doubt
that it was _not_ an ordinary revolver. More, I would know that it
could not be any possible improvement upon the revolver. It simply
would have to be an instrument of an entirely different order.

"If, in 1945, any intelligent military man had been told that the
Japanese city of Hiroshima had been totally destroyed by a bomber
dropping a single bomb, he would be certain that the bomb was a new
and different kind from any ever known before. He would know that, mind
you, without necessarily knowing a great deal about chemistry.

"I don't need to know a devil of a lot about psychotherapy to know
that the process you've been describing is as far beyond the limits of
psychotherapy as the Hiroshima bomb was beyond the limits of
chemistry. Ditto for hypnosis and/or Pavlov's 'conditioned reflex', by
the way.

"Now, just to clear the air, what _is_ it?"

"It has no official name yet," I told him. "To keep within the law, we
have been calling it psychotherapy. If we called it something else,
and admitted that it _isn't_ psychotherapy, the courts couldn't turn
the zanies over to us. But you're right--it is as impossible to
produce the effect by psychotherapy as it is to produce an atomic
explosion by a chemical reaction.

"I've got a hunch that, just as chemistry and nucleonics are both
really branches of physics, so psychotherapy and Brownlee's process
are branches of some higher, more inclusive science--but that doesn't
have a name, either."

