"No, thanks, Lusine." He scratched her with the dream-snake needle. As
her eyes closed he said, "You don't understand. All I want to do is
voyage to the stars. Being King means nothing to me. The only person
I'd trade places with would be the Earthman the Amphibs hold
prisoner."

He left her sleeping in the locked cabin.

Noon found them loafing on the great square in front of the Palace of
the Two Kings of the Sea and the Islands. All were disguised as
Waterfolk. Before they'd left the castle, they had grafted webs
between their fingers and toes--just as Amphib-changelings who weren't
born with them, did--and they wore the special Amphib Skins that
Mapfarity had grown in his fleshforge. These were able to tune in on
the Amphibs' wavelengths, but they lacked their shock mechanism.

Rastignac had to locate the Earthman, rescue him, and get him to the
spaceship that lay anchored between two wharfs, its sharp nose
pointing outwards. A wooden bridge had been built from one of the
wharfs to a place halfway up its towering side.

Rastignac could not make out any breaks in the smooth metal that would
indicate a port, but reason told him there must be some sort of
entrance to the ship at that point.

A guard of twenty Amphibs repulsed any attempt on the crowd's part to
get on the bridge.

Rastignac had contacted the harbor-master and made arrangements for
workmen to unload his cargo of wine. His freehandedness with the gold
eggs got him immediate service even on this general holiday. Once in
the square, he and his men uncrated the wine but left the two heavy
chests on the wagon which was hitched to a powerful little six-legged
Jeep.

They stacked the bottles of wine in a huge pile while the curious
crowd in the square encircled them to watch. Rastignac then stood on a
chest to survey the scene, so that he could best judge the time to
start. There were perhaps seven or eight thousand of all three races
there--the Ssassarors, the Amphibs, the Humans--with an unequal
portioning of each.

Rastignac, looking for just such a thing, noticed that every non-human
Amphib had at least two Humans tagging at his heels.

It would take two Humans to handle an Amphib or a Ssassaror. The
Amphibs stood upon their seal-like hind flippers at least six and a
half feet tall and weighed about three hundred pounds. The Giant
Ssassarors, being fisheaters, had reached the same enormous height as
Mapfarity. The Giants were in the minority, as the Amphibs had always
preferred stealing Human babies from the Terrans. These were marked
for death as much as the Amphibs.

Rastignac watched for signs of uneasiness or hostility between the
three groups. Soon he saw the signs. They were not plentiful, but they
were enough to indicate an uneasy undercurrent. Three times the guards
had to intervene to break up quarrels. The Humans eyed the non-human
quarrelers, but made no move to help their Amphib fellows against the
Giants. Not only that, they took them aside afterwards and seemed to
be reprimanding them. Evidently the order was that everyone was to be
on his behavior until the time to revolt. Rastignac glanced at the
great tower-clock. "It's an hour before the ceremonies begin," he said
to his men. "Let's go."


XI

Mapfarity, who had been loitering in the crowd some distance away,
caught Archambaud's signal and slowly, as befit a Giant whose feet
hurt, limped towards them. He stopped, scrutinized the pile of
bottles, then, in his lion's-roar-at-the-bottom-of-a-well voice said,
"Say, what's in these bottles?"

Rastignac shouted back, "A drink which the new Kings will enjoy very
much."

"What's that?" replied Mapfarity. "Sea-water?"

The crowd laughed.

"No, it's not water," Rastignac said, "as anybody but a lumbering
Giant should know. It is a delicious drink that brings a rare ecstacy
upon the drinker. I got the formula for it from an old witch who lives
on the shores of far off Apfelabvidanahyew. He told me it had been in
his family since the coming of Man to L'Bawpfey. He parted with the
formula on condition I make it only for the Kings."

"Will only Their Majesties get to taste this exquisite drink?"
bellowed Mapfarity.

"That depends upon whether it pleases Their Majesties to give some to
their subjects to celebrate the result of the elections."

Archambaud, also planted in the crowd, shrilled, "I suppose if they
do, the big-paunched Amphibs and Giants will get twice as much as us
Humans. They always do, it seems."

There was a mutter from the crowd; approbation from the Amphibs,
protest from the others.

"That will make no difference," said Rastignac, smiling. "The
fascinating thing about this is that an Amphib can drink no more than
a Human. That may be why the old man who revealed his secret to me
called the drink Old Equalizer."

"Ah, you're skinless," scoffed Mapfarity, throwing the most deadly
insult known. "I can out-drink, out-eat, and out-swim any Human here.
Here, Amphib, give me a bottle, and we'll see if I'm bragging."

An Amphib captain pushed himself through the throng, waddling clumsily
on his flippers like an upright seal.

"No, you don't!" he barked. "Those bottles are intended for the Kings.
No commoner touches them, least of all a Human and a Giant."

Rastignac mentally hugged himself. He couldn't have planned a better
intervention himself! "Why can't I?" he replied. "Until I make an
official presentation, these bottles are mine, not the Kings'. I'll do
what I want with them."

"Yeah," said the Amphibs. "That's telling him!"

The Amphib's big brown eyes narrowed and his animal-like face
wrinkled, but he couldn't think of a retort. Rastignac at once handed
a bottle apiece to each of his comrades. They uncorked and drank and
then assumed an ecstatic expression which was a tribute to their
acting, for these three bottles held only fruit juice.

"Look here, captain," said Rastignac, "why don't you try a swig
yourself? Go ahead. There's plenty. And I'm sure Their Majesties would
be pleased to contribute some of it on this joyous occasion. Besides,
I can always make more for the Kings.

"As a matter of fact," he added, winking, "I expect to get a pension
from the courts as the Kings' Old Equalizer-maker."

The crowd laughed. The Amphib, afraid of losing face, took the
bottle--which contained wine rather than fruit juice. After a few long
swallows the Amphib's eyes became red and a silly grin curved his
thin, black-edged lips. Finally, in a thickening voice, he asked for
another bottle.

Rastignac, in a sudden burst of generosity, not only gave him one, but
began passing out bottles to the many eager reaching hands. Mapfarity
and the two egg-thieves helped him. In a short time, the pile of
bottles had dwindled to a fourth of its former height. When a mixed
group of guards strode up and demanded to know what the commotion was
about, Rastignac gave them some of the bottles.

Meanwhile, Archambaud slipped off into the mob. He lurched into an
Amphib, said something nasty about his ancestors, and pulled his
knife. When the Amphib lunged for the little man, Archambaud jumped
back and shoved a Human-Amphib into the giant flipper-like arms.

Within a minute the square had erupted into a fighting mob.
Staggering, red-eyed, slur-tongued, their long-repressed hostility
against each other, released by the liquor which their bodies were
unaccustomed to, Human, Ssassaror and Amphib fell to with the utmost
will, slashing, slugging, fighting with everything they had.

None of them noticed that every one who had drunk from the bottles had
lost his Skin. The Skins had fallen off one by one and lay motionless
on the pavement where they were kicked or stepped upon. Not one Skin
tried to crawl back to its owner because they were all nerve-numbed by
the wine.

Rastignac, seated behind the wheel of the Jeep, began driving as best
he could through the battling mob. After frequent stops he halted
before the broad marble steps that ran like a stairway to heaven, up
and up before it ended on the Porpoise Porch of the Palace. He and his
gang were about to take the two heavy chests off the wagon when they
were transfixed by a scene before them.

A score of dead Humans and Amphibs lay on the steps, evidence of the
fierce struggle that had taken place between the guards of the two
monarchs. Evidently the King had heard of the riot and hastened
outside. There the Amphib-changeling King had apparently realized that
the rebellion was way ahead of schedule, but he had attacked the
Amphib King anyway.

And he had won, for his guardsmen held the struggling flipper-footed
Amphib ruler down while two others bent his head back over a step. The
Changeling-King himself, still clad in the coronation robes, was about
to draw his long ceremonial knife across the exposed and palpitating
throat of the Amphib King.

This in itself was enough to freeze the onlookers. But the sight of
Lusine running up the stairway towards the rulers added to their
paralysis. She had a knife in her hand and was holding it high as she
ran toward her foster-father, the Amphib King.

Mapfarity groaned, but Rastignac said, "It doesn't matter that she has
escaped. We'll go ahead with our original plan."

They began unloading the chests while Rastignac kept an eye on
Lusine. He saw her run up, stop, say a few words to the Amphib King,
then kneel and stab him, burying the knife in his jugular vein. Then,
before anybody could stop her she had applied her mouth to the cut in
his neck.

The Human-King kicked her in the ribs and sent her rolling down the
steps. Rastignac saw correctly that it was not her murderous deed that
caused his reaction. It was because she had dared to commit it without
his permission and had also drunk the royal blood first.

He further noted with grim satisfaction that when Lusine recovered
from the blow and ran back up to talk to the King, he ignored her. She
pointed at the group around the wagon but he dismissed her with a wave
of his hand. He was too busy gloating over his vanquished rival lying
at his feet.

The plotters hoisted the two chests and staggered up the steps. The
King passed them as he went down with no more than a curious glance.
Gifts had been coming up those steps all day for the King, so he
undoubtedly thought of them only as more gifts. So Rastignac and his
men walked past the knives of the guards as if they had nothing to
fear.

Lusine stood alone at the top of the steps. She was in a half-crouch,
knife ready. "I'll kill the King and I'll drink from his throat!" she
cried hoarsely. "No man kicks me except for love. Has he forgotten
that I am the foster-daughter of the Amphib King?"

Rastignac felt revulsion but he had learned by now that those who deal
in violence and rebellion must march with strange steppers.

"Bear a hand here," he said, ignoring her threat.

Meekly she grabbed hold of a chest's corner. To his further
questioning, she replied that the Earthman who had landed in the ship
was held in a suite of rooms in the west wing. Their trip thereafter
was fast and direct. Unopposed, they carted the chests to the huge
room where the Master Skin was kept.

There they found ten frantic bio-technicians excitedly trying to
determine why the great extraderm--the Master Skin through which all
individual Skins were controlled--was not broadcasting properly. They
had no way as yet of knowing that it was operating perfectly but that
the little Skins upon the Amphibs and their hostage Humans were not
shocking them into submission because they were lying in a wine-stupor
on the ground. No one had told them that the Skins, which fed off the
bloodstream of their hosts, had become anesthetized from the alcohol
and failed any longer to react to their Master Skin.

That, of course, applied only to those Skins in the square that were
drunk from the wine. Elsewhere all over the kingdom, Amphibs writhed
in agony and Ssassarors and Terrans were taking advantage of their
helplessness to cut their throats. But not here, where the crux of the
matter was.


XII

The Landsmen rushed the techs and pushed them into the great chemical
vat in which the twenty-five hundred foot square Master Skin floated.
Then they uncrated the lead-leaf-lined bags filled with stolen geese
and emptied them into the nutrient fluid. According to Mapfarity's
calculations, the radio-activity from the silicon-carbon geese should
kill the big Skin within a few days. When a new one was grown, that,
too, would die. Unless the Amphib guessed what was wrong and located
the geese on the bottom of the ten-foot deep tank, they would not be
able to stop the process. That did not seem likely.

In either case, it was necessary that the Master Skin be put out of
temporary commission, at least, so the Amphibs over the Kingdom could
have a fighting chance. Mapfarity plunged a hollow harpoon into the
isle of floating protoplasm and through a tube connected to that
poured into the Skin three gallons of the dream-snake venom. That was
enough to knock it out for an hour or two. Meanwhile, if the Amphibs
had any sense at all, they'd have rid themselves of their extraderms.

They left the lab and entered the west wing. As they trotted up the
